Anno secundo and Tertio Philippl and Mariae.

ACTS made at a Parliament, begone and holde^ at Westminster, the.xxi. day of
October, in the second and third year of the reign of our soueraygne Lord,
and Lady Philip and Mary, by the grace of God, king and Queen of England,
France, Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland, defendours of the faith, Princes of
Spain and Cycilie, Anchedukes of Austria, dukes of Myllayn, Burgondie, and
Braband, counties of Haspurge, Flanders and Tyroll, and there continued and
kept to the dissolution of the same, being the.ix. day of December then next
ensuynge, were enacted as follows.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

decorative border incorporating the royal English blazon or coat of arms

The Table.
AN act for the reedifiynge of Castles and Fortes, and for the enclofyng of
grounds upon the borders toward Scotland. Cap. i. An act for the
reedefiynge of decade howses of husbandrye, and for the increase of tillage.
Cap. ii An act for the keeping of mylche kine, and for the breading and rearyng
of calves ca. iii An act for the extinguishement of the first fruits, and
touching order and disposition of the ten these, of spirytuall and
ecclesiastical promosions, and of rectoryes and personages impropriate
remaining in the Queen's majesty's hands. cap. iiii. An act for the relief
of the poor. cap. v. An act against the excessive taking of the King and
Queen's maiestyes purueyours. cap. vi. An act against the bying of stolen
borses. cap. vii. An act for the amendyge of high ways. cap. viii. An act to
make void diverse lycences of howses where in unlawful games be used. cap. ix.
An act to take examynation of prisoners suspected of any manflaughter or
fellonye. cap. x. An act touching weauers. cap. xi An act for the vieuyng
and sellyng of oaths commonly called Brydgewaters. cap. xii. An act for the
inhabitauntes of Hallifaxe touching the bying of woles. cap. xiii. An act for
the reedifiyng of four mylles nere the city of Hereford. cap. xiiii. An act
that purueyours shall not take victuals within.v. miles of Cambridge and
Oxforde. ca. xv An act touching watermen and bargemen upon the river of
Thamyse. cap. xvi An act to take away the benefit of clergy from Benet Smith
for the murder of Rufford. ca. xvii. An act touching commyssions of the peace
and jail delyuerye in towns corporate not being counties. cap. xviii. An
act touching Powdike in marshelande. ca.p. xix. An act for the enlargyng of
the duchy of Lancaster. cap xx. An act for the continuatyon of ceriayne
statutes. cap. xxi. An act for the confirmation of a Subsidy granted by the
clergy. cap. xxii. An act of a Subsydie granted to the King and Queen's
majesty's by the temporaltie. ca. xxiii.
An act for the reedifyinge of Castelles and fortes, and for the enclosynge of
grounds, upon the borders toward Scotland.
The first Chapter.
FOR the better habytatyon, restorynge, and reedyfyinge of the Castelles,
fortresses and fortelettes, vyllages, and houses that be decayed within the
Counties of Northumber land, Cumberlande, Westmereland, and the Bishoprike of
Durham. And for the better manuring, and imployinge the grounds within the
same, and for the more encrece of of tillage.

Be it enacted by the King and Queen's maiestyes, the Lords spiritual and
temporal and the commons of this present parliament assembled, and by
authority of the same, that from and after the first day of December next
ensuing, commission under the great Seal of England, shall be directed from time
to time, as need shall require to such persons as shall be there unto named and
appointed by the king and Queen's Majesty's, and theyres and Successors of the
queen, by their bill or bylles signed with their sign manuel to be directed to
the Chaunceloure of England for the time being, which commyssions shall be
according to the manner, form, tenoure and effect hereafter ensuing. Philyp
and Mary. etc. Know ye that we have assigned you or any number of you being
Six at the least of the which we will that.A. B. and C. shall be three to be our
Commisioners, to surueye our Countyes of Northumberland Cumberland
Westmerland and the Bysshypryke of Durham or as much thereof as to you or six of
you whereof.A. B. and C. shall be three shall be thought conuenyent and by such ways
and means as you best can to inquire what and how many castles, fortresses,
and forttelletes, vyllages, howses, and habitations have been decayed within the
same, and by whom and by what occasions and how many of them are mete to be
reedified, and also how many castelles, fortresses, and fortelettes, villages,
howses and habitations were mete to be made of new within the said Counties and
Bishopryke, and in what places the same were most mete to be situate, and what
parts of the said Countyes and Byshopryke be most apt for to be enclosed and
converted to Tyllage or other necessary manuraunce mete and convenient for
those countries, and the people of the same, and also to enquire what persons
be owners Lords, Propryetaryes, Fermoures, and possessoures of the same or
claim any interest in the same, and what estate or estates, terms or
interestes, they, or any of them have of and in the same. And thereupon to take
such order for the reedifiyng of such ye Castelles, Fortresses and Fortelettes,
Villages, houses, and habitations heretofore decayed, and for the new erectyng
and making of others, and the scituations of the same and for the enclosyng and
converting to tillage or other necessary manuraunce, such parts and portions
of the said countyes and Byshopryke as to you, or six of you whereof.A. B. and
C. shall be three, shall be thought most mete and convenient.

Provided always that by color or virtue of this commission you do not
reedifye, new make, or enclose, or cause to be reedifyed new made and
enclosed, as above said in any place or places, in any of the said countyes or
Byshopryckes being in distaunce and lyynge above twenty miles from the known
parts of the borders of Scotland. And we do give unto you, or unto any number
of you being six at the least whereof.A. B. and C. shall be three, full power and
authority, to inquire by the oaths of the honest and laweful men of the
countyes of Northumberlande, Cumberlande, Westmerelande, and the countye
palentine of Durham before said, as well within the libertyes as without, by whom
the truth may be best known, who has or holds any Lands, or tenementes,
or uses or perceyuethe any common of pasture, or other proffyt aprender in the
said cou^ties or bishopryke throughout the hole parts of the same, and all
those persons and every of them, or such of them, to tax, assease, charge,
dystrain, and pain after the quantity of their lands, tenementes and rentes,
by the number of acres and perches after the rate of every persons profytte,
rent or tenure or after the quantity of their common of pasture or proffit,
aprender or other commodities there, by such ways and means, and in such
manner and form, as to you, or six of you whereof A. B. C. to be three shall
seem most conuenyente to be ordained and done for the reedefyinge, making
new, and enclosyng as is aforsayde. And also to depute and assygne diligente
faithful and true kepers, Baylyffes, Surueyours, Collectours, Expenditours, and
other ministers and officers, such as you our said commissioners that shall
appoynte them, will answer for, for the reedefyinge new making and enclosyng,
as is aforesaid, and finyshyng of the premysses and every of them. And to
hear the accomptes of the Collectours, and other ministers of and for the
receipt and laying out of the monye that shall be leuyed and paid in and about
the said reedifynge, new making, enclosynge and finyshynge of the premysses
and of every percel thereof, and to distrayn for the arrerages of every such
collection, tax or assessement, as often as shall be expedient, or otherwise to
punyshe the deptours and deteynours of the same, by fines, amerciamentes,
pains, and other like means after your good discretions. And also to arrest,
and take as many carts, oxen, beasts, and other instruments necessary, and
as many workmen and laborers as for the doing, making, and finishinge of the
premises, shall suffice, paying for the same competent wages, salary and
stipend And also to take such and as many trees, woods, vnderwooddes,
quicksettes, stone, and timber, and other necessaryes, as for the same works,
and reparations shall be sufficient at a reasonable price by you or six of you,
of the which we will that A. B. C. shall be three, to be assessed or limited
as well within the limittes and bounds aforesaid, as in any other place and
places, within the said county, counties or countye palentine. And to make and
ordain statutes, ordinances, and provisions, from time to time as the case
shall require for the safe guard, conservation, redress, correction, and
reformation of the premises, and of every of them after the laws and customs
of Rumneye mershe in the countye of kent, or otherwise by any ways or means
after your own wisdoms and discretions, and to hear and determyne al and
singular the premises, as well at our sewte as at the seute of any other
whatsoever complaining before you, or six of you, whereof.A. B. C. shall be
three after the laws and customs aforesaid, or otherwise, by any other ways
or menes, after your discretions. And also to make and direct wryttes,
precepts, warrauntes, and other commandments, by virtue of these presents
to al Sheriffs, Baylyffes and all other ministers, officers and other persons,
as well with in the libertyes as without before you or six of you whereof the
said A. B. C. to be three at certain days, terms and places, to be prefixed to
be returned and receued and further to continue ye process of the same. And
finally we do give unto you or to any number of you, being six at the least
whereof A. B. C. shall be three full power and authority to do all and every
thing and things which shall be requysite for the due execution of the
premises, by all ways and means after your discretions. And therefore we
command you that at certain days and places, when and where you, or six of
you whereof the said A. B. C. to be three shall think expedyent, ye shall mete
together and surueye the said Countyes and Byshopryke, as is aforesaid, and
accomplish, fulfill, here, and determyne, all and singular the premises in
due form, and to the effect aforesaid after your good discretions And al
such, as ye shall find neglygente, gainsaying, or resystynge your doings and
procedinges, in and for the due execution of this out Commyssion, that ye do
compel them by dystresse, fynes, or amerciaments, or by other reasonable
punyshmentes, ways, or menes, which to you, or six of you, whereof.A. B. C.
shall be three, shall seem most expedient for the spedye remedy and redress
thereof.

And all such things as by you shall be made and ordained in this behalf,
as well within the lybertyes as without, that ye do cause the same fyrmely to be
observed, doing therein as to our Justices apperteyneth after the form and
effect of this present commyssyon, and the act of parliament concerning the
premises made and provided and according to your wisdoms, and discretions,
Saving always to us such fynes and amerciamentes as to us thereof shall belong.
And we also command as well our sheryfe or sheryffes of our said countyes of
Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland, and ye byshopryke of Durham and every
of them, as all and every other baylyffes ministers, and officers within the
said countyes and county palentine, that they and every of them shall cause to
come before you and six of you, of the which A. B. C. shall be three, at
such days and places, as ye shall appoint unto them, such and as many honest
men, of his or their baliwyke or rowmes, as well within the libertyes, as
without by whom the truth may be best known, to enquire of the premises or
any part thereof, commaundyng also all the said sheryffes, minysters and
officers, as well within the liberties as without, that they and every of them
shall be attendaunt to you in and about the dew execution of this our
commission. In witness whereof we have caused these our letters to be made
patentes, Witness our self at the day of in the years of our reygnes.

And it is also enacted, that every such person, as shall be named co^missioner
in the said commissyon, after that he shall have knowledge thereof, shall
effectually, put his dilygence, and attendaunce in and about the execution, of
the said commyssion. And he shall take a corporal oath before the Lord
Chaunceloure or before such to whom the said Lord Chaunceloure, shall direct
the Kings writ of Dedimies potestatem, to take the same, or before the
Justices of the Peace, in the quarter Sessions holden in the shere where such
Commission shall be dyrected. The tenoure of which oath hereafter ensues. Ye
shall swear that you to your conning, wit, and power, shall truly and
indifferently execute the aucthoritye to you given by this commission, without
any favor affection, corruption, dread, or malice, to be borne to any manner
person or persons, and as the case shall require you shall consent and endeavor
your self for your part, to the best of your knowledge, and power to the
making of such wholesome, Just, equal, and indifferent laws, and
ordinances, as shall be made and divised by the most discrete and indifferent
number of your fellows, being in Commyssion with you, for the making, erectyon,
and preservation, of all and every such things, as are contained and specifyed
in the said Commyssion. And the same Laws, and Ordinances to your conninge,
wit, and power, cause to be put in dew execution without favor, mede, dread,
malice, or affection, as God you help, and all Saynctes.

And over that be it enacted, that the Commyssioners, hereafter to be named in
any of the said commissions, according to the purport and effect of the same
Commissyons, shall have full power and authority, to make constitute and
ordain Laws, Ordinances, and decrees, concerning the premysses, and further
to do all and every thing, mentioned in the said Commyssion, according to the
purport effect, words, and true meaning of the same, and the same Laws,
decrees, and ordinances, so made to reform, repel and amend and make new
from time to time, as the cases necessary shall require.

Provided always and be it enacted that if any person or persons being
assessed, or taxed, to any Lotte, tax, or chardge, for any Lands, Tenementes,
or Hereditamentes, within the Lymyttes of any Commyssion hereafter to be
directed by virtue of this act, do not pay the said lotte, tax, and charge
according to the ordinance and assignement of the Commisioners, having power,
of thexecution of the said Commyssion by reason whereof it shall happen, the
said Commyssioners having power of the execution of such commyssion for lack
of paymente of such lotte, tax, and chardge, to decree and ordeyne the same
Lands, Tenementes, and hereditamentes from the owner, or owners thereof, and
their heirs, and theyres, executors, and assigns, of every of them, to any
person or persons, for term of years term of life, in fee simple, or fee
tail, for paymentes of the same lotte tax, and charge, That then every such
decre, and ordinance, so by them made, engrossed in parchemente, and
certyfyed under their Seals, into the Court of Chauncerye, with the Kings
or ye Queen's, her heirs or Successors, royal assent, had to the same,
shall bind all and every person and persons, that at the making of the same
decre had any right and interest in the same, their heirs, and Successors for
ever.

Provided always and be it enacted, that no order, or decre to be made by the
said Commyssioners or any of them, shall bind, or conclude, any right or
Interest of any person or persons, nor the breach of any decre or order,
shall be cause of forfeyture, of the right or interest, of any person or
persons, except the same decre, and or dynaunce, so made by the said
Commyssioners, and Six of them, whereof.A. B. C. shall be three, be engrossed in
perchment, and certified under their Seals in to the Court of chauncery, and
that the royal assent of the king and Queen her heirs and successors, be
first had to the same.

Provided also and be it enacted that every decre and ordinance so had, made
certifyed and assented unto shall bynd all and every person and persons, that
at the making of the same decre had any interest, in the lands, tenementes, or
hereditamentes so decreed, in use possession, reuertion, or remaynder their
heirs and feoffes, and every of them. And not to be in any wise reformed
onles it be by authority of parliament hereafter to be summoned and holde^
within this Realm. Saving to all and every person and persons bodies
polityke and corporate their heirs and successors, other then such as shall
forfeytte by this Estatute their Intereste in the same Lands tenementes, or
hereditamentes, in possession reuertion or remainder all such interest, and
titel, as they or any of them shall have at ye time of the same forfeytures.

And also it is provided by aucthorytye aforesaid that the same Laws,
ordinances, and decrees, to be made and ordained by the said Commyssioners or
six of them by aucthorytye of the said Commission, shall bind as well the
Lands, tenementes, and hereditamentes of the Queen our Soueraygne Lady her
heirs, and Successoures as al and every other person and persons, and their
heirs for such their interest as they shall fortune to have or may have in any
lands tenementes, or hereditamentes, or other casual proffit, advantage, or
commoditye whatsoever they be whereunto the said laws ordinances, and decrees
shall in any wise extend according to the true purporte, meaning and intent of
the same laws.

And it is furthermore by thaucthoritye aforesaid established and enacted, that
if any manner person or persons of what estate or degree soever he or they be
that from henceforthe does take upon him or them to sit by virtue of any of
the said Commyssions, not being before sworn, in form as is aforesaid and
according to the tenor of ye oath before specifyed. Or if any person so named
and sworn, do sytte as is aforesaid, dwelling within the said twenty miles, or
not having Lands, and Tenementes, or other hereditaments, in fee simple, fee
tail, or for term of life to the clear yearly vallewe of forty pou^ds above
all charges, to his own use except he be learned in the laws of this realm,
that is to say, admitted in one of the four pryncypall Innes of Court, for an
utter barrester and not dwelling within the said.xx. miles, shall forfeyt
forty pounds for every time that he shall attempt so to do, the one half
thereof to be to our soueraign Lord and Lady, the king and the queen her
heirs and successors the other half thereof to thuse of him or them that
wylsue therefore by action of debte byl playnte or information in any of the
Queen's courts, in which action or suite no wager of law shall be admytted, nor
any essoyne or protection shall be allowed. And if any action of trespass or other
suyt shall happen to be attempted against any person or persons, for taking of
any distress, or any other atte^d^ing by authority of the said Commission, or
by authority of any laws or ordinances made by virtue of the said
commission, the defondaunt or defendauntes in any such action shall and may make
auoury, conysaunce, or justification for the taking of ye same distress, or
other act doing touching ye premises or any of them alleging in such auouri,
conifau^ce or justification, that the said distress, trespass, or other
act, whereof the plaintiff complayneth was done by authority of the
commyssion, for the surueyinge of the countyes of Northumberlande, Cumberland,
Westmerland, and the Byshopryke of Durham, made and provided, or for such act
or cause as the said defendaunt did by authority of the said Commission, and
according to the tenor purport, and effect of this present act, made the
second and third years of the reygue of our soueraygne lord and Lady king
Phisyp and Queen Mary, without any expressing, or rehearsal of any other
matter or circumstaunce couteined in this present act, or any commission laws
estatutes or ordinances thereupon to be made, whereupon the plaintiff, shall be
admitted to replye that the de^fendaunt did take the said dystaesse or do any
other act or trespass supposed in his declaration of his own wrong without
any such cause alleged by the said defendaunt whereupon the issue in every such
action shall be joined to be tried by verdite of.xii. men, and none otherwise, as
is accustomed in other personal actions, and upon the trial of that issue the
hole matter to be given on both parties in evidence according to ye very truth
of the same. And after such issue tried for the defendaunt or nonsuit of the
playntife after apearaunce the same defendaunt to recover treble damages by
reason of his wrongefull vexation in that behalf with his costs also in that
part sustained, and that to be assessed by the same Iurye or writ to inquire
of damages, as the cause shall require.

And it is also enacted that every of the said Commissioners shall have and
perceive four shyllinges, for every day that they shall take pain in
thexecution of this Commyssyon, and one Clarke, by them to be assygned two
shyllynges for every day of the rates, taxes, lottes and Sums of money that
shall be assessed, or lost by authority of the said Commission, and to be
levied, and paid by their dyscretions. And that the said commissioners, or
six of them shall have power and authority to lymite, and assygne such
reasonable su^mes of money to the said Clarke, for writing of books, and
process concerning the premises, and to the Collectours, expenditors, and
such other as shall take pain in the dew execution of the said commission,
the same to be leuyed by distress or otherwise out of the lands, so surueyed
as by the dyscretions of the said commissioners, or Six of them, whereof A. B.
C. to be three, shall be thought reasonable.

Provided always that whenever and as often as such commyssyon, as is before
limited, shall be made and dyrected, to any person or persons for the
information and amendment of orin^^aye of the premysses, specifyed in the said
commyssion within the fees liberties or possession of the Duchy of Lancaster,
that then such Commissioners, as shall execute any such commyssion, shall be
always named and appointed as is above said. And that in every such case, two
co^myssions shall be awarded and made according to the tenor of the Commyssion
above expressed, one thereof under the great Seal of England and the other
under the Seal of the same Duchy as before time has been accustomed. Any
thing before rehearsed in this present act, to the contrary thereof not
wythstandyng.

And it is further enacted, that the said commyssion from time to time, as the
case shall require shall be had and obtained without any monye or other charge,
to be paid for the Seals or writing of the same.

And it is further enacted, that every Commyssion to be made by authority of
this act shall endure and continue for the tearine of seuon years next after
the test of the commyssion. Nevertheless after any Commyssion made and
delivered out of the Court of Chauncerye, the king and Queen's hyghnesses and
theyres and successoures of the Queen, shall always at their pleasures by
write of supersedeas out of the said Court of Chauncerye, at any time
dyschardge as well every such commyssion as every commissioner that shall be made
or named, by aucthoritye of this act, after which discharge the said
Commissioners, so discharged, shall have no power nor aucthoritye, to proceed
in thexecution of their commission, nor in any thing by authority of this act.

Provided always that whenever and as often as such commyssion as is before
limited, shall be made and directed to any person or persons, for the reformation
and amendment, of or in any of the premises, specified in the said
Commission, within the fees, liberties, and possessions of the Byshopryke of
Durham, or within the fees, liberties and possessions of any other place, where
there is liberty, and jurisdiction of Countye Palentine that in every such
case two commissions shall be awarded, and made according to the tenor of the
co^myssion above expressed, one thereof under the great Seal of England, and
the other under the Seal of the Countye Palentyne in manner and form as is
above provided, for the Duchye of Lancaster, any thing before rehearsed in this
present act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And nevertheless be it enacted, that if the officers of the said Duchye, or
of the said Byshopryche, or countye palentine, do not deliver the commission by
them or one of them to be made within six days after the request shall be
made for the same, that then the commission under the great seal only shall
proceed in the said county palentyne, without any other commyssion.

And it is provided and also enacted, that the royal assent limited to be had
unto the laws and ordinances to be made by the said co^myssioners, as is
addnesayde, shall be certified into the said court of Chauncery under the
pryuie seal, and that there shall not any sum of money be paid for the same
pryuie seal.

Provided always, that the Chauncellours and such other as shall have the
custodye of the seals of the said Byshopriche of Durham, or within the fees,
liberties, and possessions of any other place, where there is lybertye and
jurisdiction, of the county palentine upon reasonable request, and upon the
syghte of the commission, under the great Seal of England, shall without
delay, make out an other commission under the seal of the said county
palentyne according to the tenor of the commission to them showed, under the
great seal, and to those commyssyoners named in the same commission and to
none other, nor in other mauer.

And be it further enacted and establysshed by thauctorytie aforesaid, that al
charges and sums of money hereafter to be rated and taxed by virtue of such
commission upon any of the lands teneme^tes or hereditamentes of our
soueraygne Lady the queen, her heirs or successors, for any manner of thing
or things concerning the articles of this commission, shall be gathered and
leuyed by distress, or otherwise in like manner and form, as shall or may be
done in ye lands, tene^me^tes, and hereditamentes, of any other person or
persons, and that all bylles of acquitaunce, signed with the hand or hands of
such Collector or receiuour, as shall have the collection thereof by the
appointment of the said Commissioners, or six of the^, shall be as well a
sufficient discharge, to the tenauntes, fermors, and occupiers of the same
grounds so to be charged for the said sum wherewith their grounds shall be so
charged, as also a sufficient warrant to al and every ye receuers, auditers,
and other whatsoever officer or officers, of our said soueraygne lord and lady
the king and queen, her heirs and successors for the alowaunce to such
tenant, fermor, or occupier of the same. Provided also and be it enacted, yt
the said commisioners shall not let nor set any part or percel of ye premises,
nor shall not meddle with the rating, re^ting or valuing of any part or percel of
ye premises, but ye same shall remain and be at the disposition of the lords
and owners of the same, as they were be(...) the making of this act, except it
be for the causes of forfeiture above specified, any thing hertofore me^cioned
to the contrary notwestanding

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that all
issues and forfeyture, fynes, and amerciamentes, which shall rise, happen, and
grow, by any occasion whatsoever by virtue or color of this act or any
commission to be made by authority of the same, as well within the liberties
and counties palentyne as without whither they shall seem to be due to the king
and queen's majesty's, her heirs and successors or to any other person or
persons, or bodies polityke or corporate, shall be levied, employed and
converted, in and about the charges and expenses concerning the execution of
this act, in such sort, manner, and form, as by the said commisioners or six
of them, whereof three to be of the Quorum, shall be ordered, adjudged, or
decreed. Any thing in this act, or in any commission aforesaid to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always that this estatute shall only continue for ten years next
after the end of the session of this parliament. And further to the end of
the next parliament then next following.

An act for the reedefying of decayed houses of husbandrye and for the
increase of tyllage.
The second Chapter.
WHere as by an estatute made in the fourth year of the reygne of king Heury
the seventh, it was ordained, enacted, and establyshed, that no person of what
estate, degree, or condition that he were, that then had any house, or houses,
that within any time within three years then passed, had been or that then
were or after should be letten to ferme with twenty acres of land at least or
more lying in tyllage and husbandrye, that the owner or owners of every such
house or houses and land, should be bound to keep, sustain, and maynteyne
houses and buyldynges upon the said ground, and land, convenient and necessary
for the mainteinyng and upholding of the said tyllage and husbandrye. And if
any such owner or owners of any such house or houses, and land, did take,
keep, and occupy any such house, or houses, and land, in his or their own
hands, that the said owner or owners by the same aucthorytie, should be bound
in likewise to keep and maintain houses and buyldings upon the said grounds
and land convenient and necessary for the mayntaynyng and vpholdinge of the
said tyllage and husbandrye. And if any man did contrary to the premises or
any of them, that then it should be lawful to the king (if any such lands
or houses were holden of him immediately) or to the lords of the fees, if any
such lands were holden of them, immediately to receive yearly half the value
of thissues and profyttes of any such lands, whereof the house or houses,
were not so maynteined or sustained, and the same halfendele of thissues and
profyttes to have hold and keep, to his or their own use, without any thing
therefore to be paid or given to such time as the same house or houses should
be sufficiently builded or repaired again. And that no manner of fre hold
should be in the king ne in any such lord or lords by the taking of any
such profyttes of or in any such lands in no manner of form but only the
king and the said lord or lords, should have power to take receive and
have the said issues and profyttes as is abouesayde, and therefore the king or
the said lord or lords to have power to distreine for the same issues and
profyttes to be had and perceived by them in form aforesaid by the
authority of the said act. As by the said act more at large it does and may
appear.

For as much as the said act is good and profitable to the common wealth, it
is therefore ordained that the said act and every branch therein shall be from
henceforth put in due execution, and remayn and continue in force for evermore.

And where as the provision in the said act does only extend to house or
houses, having twenty acres of land at least, or more lyinge in tyllage and
husbandrye, upon the interpretation of which words some doubt has risen. Be
it enacted by thauctorytie of this present Parliament, that the said estatute
and the penalty and pur ueyance of the same, shall from henceforth extend to
houses to be decayed that have or hereafter shall have twentye acres of ground
or more to them lying or belongyng, whether the same or any part thereof be,
has been, or shall be used or put in tyllage or not, the said twenty acres to be
accounted and measured, after the quantitye, rate, and measure of the Statute
or ordinance, called the Statute treatise or ordinance de terris mesurandis,
and not otherwise, any usage or custom or other thing whatsoever to the
contrary thereof not withstanding.

And for a further provision for reedefying of houses decayed and restorynge of
pasture ground to tyllage and for increase of corn. Be it ordained and
enacted by thaucthoritie of this present parliament that the king and Queen's
highness and theyres and successors of the Queens Majesty, shall and may at
all times hereafter as often as to them shall seem needful, and conuenyente;
awarde their hyghnes Commyssion or Commyssyons under the great Seal of
England to be dyrected to such persons as to them shall seem mete, hable and
convenient, whereof three at the least shall be of the Quorum, aucthorisyng them
thereby, or four of the^ at the least, whereof two to be of the Quorum, to
execute and see executed this present act according to the true intent,
effect, and meaning of the same, the which commissioners or four of them at
the least, whereof two to be of the Quorum, by virtue of the said Commyssion,
and of this present act, shall have full power and aucthority to inquire, hear,
and determyne by the oaths of twelve men, or by information or other lawful
ways and means, used in other cases, in any of the king and queen's hyghnes
ordenary courts of record, all and singular defaultes and offenses, committed
or done, since ye feast of Saint George, the martyr, in the.xx. year of the
raygne of the late king of famous memory king Henry the eight, or hereafter to
be committed or done, as well contrary to the tenor and effect of the said
former act, as contrary to one other act made in the parlyament holden in the
seventh year of the raygne of the said late king Henry the eight, entitled,
an act to avoid lettyng down of towns. And also to inquire, here, order, and
determine by the said ways and means, all grounds whatsoever converted, from
tyllage to pasture, since the said feast of S. George the martyr, in the said
twenty year of the said raygne of the said king Henry the eyghte, or
hereafter to be converted from tyllage to pasture, and also of all ground in
or nere any corn field newly used or employed sythence the said feast, or
hereafter newly to be used employed or converted to the keeping of Connyes, not
being lawful warren, and whereby any corn of any person or persons, other
then the owner of the same Connyes, sythence the said feast, has been or
hereafter shall be decayed, distroyed or consumed, and the said commisioners, or
four of them, whereof two to be of the Quorum, shall and may take order and
direction, for the reformation of such offenses, decays and defaultes in manner
and form following, that is to say, they or four of them at the least,
whereof two to be of the Quorum shall and may bind by recognysaunce, in good
sums of money, to be knowleged to the use and behoof of our Soueraygne lord
the king and our Soueraygne. Lady the Queen, her Heirs and Successors,
which recognysaunce by this Act, they shall be enhabled to take the person
or persons, first offendynge and gyltye, in any of the foresaid decays or
defaultes, and then being or continuynge owner in Fee Simple, Fee Tail, for
term of life, for term of years, or by Coppye of Court Roll, in
possession, or in reuersion, or remaynder after any estate or estates, for
term of years or for term of life of such decayed house or houses, and
ground thereunto lyinge or of ten acres percell thereof, or of such ground
converted from tyllage to pasture, or of such ground which is or shall be used or
employed to the keeping of connyes as is aforesaid, or any of the^ in such
sums of money as to such commissioners shall seem reasonable for the
reedifying of such decayed houses, and for the conuertyng of such ground so
converted from tyllage to pasture into tyllage again, and for the diminishing
and destroying of connies, within such conueniente time and in such manner and
form, as to the same commyssyoners or four of them whereof two to be of the
Quorum, shall seem mete and convenient and by their discretions shall be set
lymitted and appointed. And if the offender or offenders do dwell in any other
Shyre, or can not be gotten to be bounden by recognisaunce before the said
Commissioners as is aforesaid. That then the say Commissioners or four of
them whereof two to be of the Quorum, shall take such other order for the
reedifying of the houses and conuertyng the grounds to tillage and destroying
of connyes, according to this estatute as shall be thought mete by their
discretions, and shall cause the same their order to be entered of record within
one month after their said order made, and shall within the same month deliver
or cause to be delivered, the copye of their said order, sygned and sealed by
them or four of them to the tenant fermor or servant, keeping resydyng or
inhabiting the ground or place for the which the order shall be made, to the
intent the same may be delivered over or declared to the said owner or
owners, that shall or ought to be charged, by or with the same. And if the
place, in which any such decayed house or houses, has been, or shall be
situate, shall be found in the hands of any person or persons, other then such
person or persons as first did suffer or make the said decay, then the said
Commisioners or four of them whereof two to be of the Quorum, shall and may
order and enjoin all and every person and persons having the immediate and
present inheritance in the said grounds and places wherein any of the
aforesaid decaies shall be found as is aforesaid, to reedefye, and buyld again
the same decaid house either in the said place where it was decayed or nere
unto the same, within the same town, paryshe, or hamlet, within such time, and
in such sort as to the said Commissioners or four of them, whereof two to be
of the Quorum, shall seem reasonable and convenient. And shall further assesse
and tax all and every person and persons, having any particular estate in
the said grounds, belongyng to any such house decayed, for term of life,
years, or by Coppye of Court Roll, to be Contrybutorye toward the said
Reedyfycation, and buyldyng in such Sum or Sums of money to be paid to the
foresaid person having the immediate and present inheritance, and being
ordered and enjoined to reedifye the same, as to the said Commyssioners, or
four of them whereof two to be of the Quorum, shall seem mete and reasonable,
having respect and regard to the several estate, and terms of all and
every the said particular tenauntes, and to the commodities, profyttes, and
emolumentes, thereto seuerallye and respectively belongyng, and also having
respect to such couenauntes, grauntes, agreamentes and conditions as be, or
shall be contained in any lawefull writing made concerning the estate of any of
the persons to be charged for the said reedification, or for the contribution
of any thing to wards the same freholde, estate remainder or reuertion as is
aforesaid, according to their several intereste, estates, commodities and
profyttes.

And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid that all and every person and
persons bodies polytyke and corporate, that shall have any estate or interest,
i^ any of the said houses, places or grounds, wherein any of the aforesaid
decays shall be committed and found, or presented as is beforesayd from or by
any person or persons so ordered and enjoined as is aforesaid, shall be charged
and chargeable according to his or their estate, or estates, commodities and
profyttes, in the same, in like sort and manner as he or they from whom or by
whom the same estate or estates, shall be by any means deryued, or conveyed,
should or ought to have been by force of the said commandment and iniunction.
And also that the person or persons that shall be appointed or charged by the
said orders and injunctions, or by this estatute, to reedifye any of the
decayed houses before said and to have any contribution, rate or sum of
money, or other thing of any others, toward the same, shall and may by
virtue hereof have one action of debte for the same against the party or
parties, appointed to pay the same, and against their heirs executours or
assigns in any of the king and Queen's Majesty's, ordinarye Courts of record,
or shall sue for the same by information before the said Commissioners or four
of them, whereof two to be of the Quorum, in which suit no iniunction wager of
law protection nor essoigne shall be allowed, for the defendaunt. And if any
party or parties that should or ought to pay or give any Sum of money, or
other thing in contribution as is aforesaid, shall upon a reasonable request
thereof to be made wylfully refuse or delay to pay or give the same. That
then ye playntyfe upon his suite to have and recover treble damages against
the said defendaunt.

And further be it enacted that if the said ground or grounds so converted
from tyllage to pasture, or used or employed to the keeping of connyes, to the
destruction of corn as is above said, shall be found in the hands or
possession of any person or persons, other then such as did convert the said
grounds from tyllage to pasture, or use or employe the said grounds with
connyes as is aforesaid, that then the said Commyssioners or four of them
whereof two to be of the Quorum, shall and may order and enjoin the occupyers
of the said ground or grounds so converted from tyllage to pasture, or so
used or employed to the keeping of connyes as is aforesaid to turn the same
again into tyllage, or to destroy or dymynyshe the said connyes kept upon
the same ground within such time and upon such pains as by them shall be
limited and appointed.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritye aforesaid, that every such order
and iniunction above mentioned, shall be entered of record and the copy thereof
written in parchement and signed and sealed by the said Commyssioners or four
of them whereof two to be of the Quorum, and delivered to the occupyer or
occupyers of the ground or place wherein any of the foresaid offenses, decays,
or defaultes, shall be found as is aforesaid, to the intent the same may be
delivered over or declared to al such other persons as shall or ought to be
bounden or charged by the same.

And further be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that the said
Commyssioners or four of them whereof two to be of the Quorum shall and may
have power and aucthority by force of the said Commission and of this act, to
commytte every person refusing to be bound by recognisaunce as is
aforesaid, and every the said particular tenauntes refusyng to declare to the
said commissioners or four of them whereof two to be of the Quorum, how long
or what his said particular estate is to prison into the next Jail in the
said countye there to remain without bail or maynepryce until he shall be
bound in recognisaunce as is aforesaid or show or declare his or their
particular estate, or estates in the premysses to the said commissioners or
four of them whereof two to be of the Quorum, as is aforesaid.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that the Sheriffs and
all other ministers, within the counties where such Session shall be appointed,
shall be attendaunt upon the said commissioners and shall return before them al
such process and precepts as they shall have in commandment to do, and be
obedient unto them as they are bound to be to the Justices of peace or of
Oyer, and determiner at all times and places for the execution of the said
Commyssion and of this Act. And the same Commyssioners or four of them whereof
two to be of the Quorum, shall have power and authority to inquire here and
determyn as is aforesaid, of, for and upon al forfeitures recognisaunces, and
breches of orders, and Injunctions that shall be taken, knowledged or made before
the said commyssioners, or four of them, and to assesse such fines and
amerciamentes as to the^ shall seem mete and conueniente, upon the sheriff and
other officers, and persons, whatsoever making defaulte, and for contemptes
and other misdemeanors before them. And shall have authority to reform all
impanalles to be returned before them as the Justices of peace may do.

And further be it enacted by thaucthoritye aforesaid, that every of the
Commissioners shall have for every day he shall sit to execute this commission
ten shillinges, and to the clerk that shall serve and write all process and
other records before the said Commissyoners, for every day he shall attend
upon the said Commyssyoners, three shillinges and four pence, the same to be
paid by the Sheryffe or clerk of the court of the fynes, forfetures and
amerciamentes, that shall aryle or be cessed for any matter or defaulte before
the said Commyssioners, and the Sheriff, to be allowed upon his account for
the same. So that the same be noted and specifyed in the estreate, sygned by
the said Commissioners or four of them, whereof two to be of the Quorum.

Provided always and be it enacted by thaucthoritye aforesaid, that the said
Commissyoners or any of them by virtue of this act shall not have power or
authority to do any thing touching the offenses or defaultes aforesaid
contrary to the ordinance or purueyaunce of any estatute, heretofore made or
to the exclusio^ or taking away of any benefit or liberti permitted or saved to
any manner of person by any provision in any of the said statutes or contrari to
theffect of any license heretofore granted by the king and queen's highness, or
the Queen's highness or any of the ancestors or predecessors of the Queen's
hyghnes, so that the same license be showed to them, or four of them, under
seal before conviction of the offense or defaults aforesaid. Any thing
aforesaid to the contrary thereof in any wise not withstandyng.

And forasmuch as it is like to be that some houses having twentye acres of
ground or more, to them lying or belongyug, be decayed without any wyllyng
defaulte in them that had the inheritance or possession thereof, as by fire,
breaches, and surroundyng of waters, or by destruction of enemies, or rebels,
or of such as had particular estates therein without impechement of waste,
or by such other like means or ways, and that they who by the ordinance
aforesaid, should reedifie the same, are of such pouertye that they can not
by all entendement reedifye or build up all the same houses again.

And forasmuch also as some perchance have erect and builded up new houses in
some other places upon the same lands lying to ye said houses, or upon some
other land nere thereunto in lewe and place of the houses decayed, which are
as auayleable to the common wealth as the new reedefying of the decaid houses
in the old places should be, in which cases equitye requires, they should
not be punished for the said decay.

And forasmuch as it is like to be that some ground converted from tyllage
into pasture is divided into diverse small percelles remaynyng and being in
diverse and several men's hands, so that any one part will not be sufficient to
keep a plowe upon. And for that some grounds have been tylled for dystroyinge
of moss busshes, brom, fyrres heath, and not only to be continued in tyllage
and such like. And that also some demeanes in the absence of the owners have been divided to sundry occupyers, who has tylled the same, not being commonly
used to tyllage before the said feast of S. George, and for that diverse other
particular cases may fortune to be which the general purueyance of this
estatute can not remedy without greater hurt then good to be don by the same.
And for that also that in some places of this realm it is not necessary the
purueyen of this estatute to extend and to be fully executed, but in some
places and upon some occasions or causes, it may more conveniently be spared
then put in ure, and is therefore necessary to refer such things with all
other circumstaunces, to the discresions of the commissioners who may more
perfectly understand the same.

Be it therefore ordained and enacted by authority of this present parliament
that the said commissioners or four of them at the least, whereof two to be
of the Quorum, shall and may consider the said cases and such other like,
and use their discretions in temporynge and qualefying of the said general
purueyaunce of this or any of the foresaid former estatutes, and in ordering
the said cases and such other like, and to omit the execution and penaltye of
this act, and of the other former acts accordynglye, as to the wysedomes and
discretiones of them or four of them at the least, whereof two to be of the
Quorum, shall be thought most necessary. This act or the aforesaid former
acts in any wise notwithstanding. And shall have power and aucthorytie to
cancel recognysaunces taken before them, and not appearyuge to them forfeyted,
if it shall seem to them or four of them, whereof two to be of the Quorum,
meet and conuenyente.

And it is further ordered and enacted by authority of this present
parliament, that where as any ground by means of this act shall fortune
hereafter to be converted from pasture int tillage according to the intent of
this act, which ground is chargeable with any rent reserved since the time the
same ground was converted from tillage to pasture, and which was reserved and
made the greater, in consideration that the same was so converted from tillage
into pasture or stored with connyes, that al such rentes if they be greater
then the ground turned into tyllage, or the ground by reason of the
destruction of conneyes is worth, shall be abated and apportioned by the said
Commissioners, or four of them, whereof two to be of the Quorum, according to
their discretions, if they shall think the same so mete.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid that the
retaynyng or none paymente of any such part or portion of any rentes that
shall be abated or deducted by the Commyssyoners as is aforesaid, shall be no
breach or forfeyture of any bond, penalty couenaunte, grant, or condition
to be contained in any Indenture, bond, obligatorie, or other writing,
agreement, or promise what soever to the contrary notwithstanding.

And further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said
Commissioners or four of them, whereof two to be of the Quorum, shall have power
and authority by virtue hereof, to make and direct forth precepts and
processes, as well to the Sheriff of the county, as to all other freholdes and
persons that ought to attend or appear before the said Commyssioners for
the trial answering or proving of any offense against this estatute or
against any of the aforesaid former estatutes, to appear before them at any
day and time that the said Commissioners or four of them whereof two to be of
the Quorum, shall lymytte or appoint, and upon the appearaunce of the said
persons to give day over from time to time, as they shall think mete.

And be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if any such person or
persons as presentlye have, or hereafter shall have any houses builded, or
reedified, or to be reedified, or any grounds to be converted to tyllage,
according to the tenoure and effect of this estatute, or of any of the
aforesaid estatutes, that then the said person or persons, their heirs
or assygnes shall within three years next after the end of this Session of
this Parliamente, dimise, or let to ferme the houses already builded or
reedified with the twenty acres of ground, which before time did appertain
and lie to the same, or ten acres percell thereof, if there be now no more
of the same lands in their hands that has the houses builded or reedefyed,
or ought to reedefye the same, or with so much other lands lyinge conueniente
for the said house, and shall dymyse, and let to ferme the houses hereafter
to be reedefyed within two years after the same, shall be so reedefyed with
the twentye acres of lands, or the ten acres percel thereof or the like
number of acres as is before said. And if any of the said houses, and lands,
shall not be so dimised or letten to ferme as is aforesaid, That then the said
commyssioners or four of them at the least, whereof two to be of the Quorum,
shall have power and aucthoritye, by virtue of this act, to dimise and let the
said house and lands to any person or persons, having no other ferme or
tenementes, within the same paryshe, nor having any accion, or suit at that
parlyamente against the owner, and requirynge the same for vii. years, at the
most for such reasonable rent and upon such reasonable couenauntes, as the
said Commissioners, shall think meet for both parties. So that they take
good assurance for the paymente of the rentes and perfourmynge of couenauntes,
to the owner of the same as they shall think conuement, upon which lease the
owners of the house and lands, so letten, their executours and assigns and
every of them for the time being, and also every such lease, their
executours, and assygnes, and every of them, shall have such remedy and
actions the one against the other, as they should or might have had if they
them selves, had only ben preuye and parties, to the said leases.

And be it enacted by thaucthoritye aforesaid, that if any person or persons
shall be condemned or charged with or for any offense that he or they ought not
to be charged withal, by this act or by any of ye aforesaid former estatutes,
that then the said party and parties shall and may have his or their trauers,
and remedy therefore in the sterre Chamber, before the Council there.

And be it enacted by thaucthoritye aforesaid, that this statute shall at the
pleasures of the king and Queen's majesty's her heirs and Successors, be put
in execution, either by Commissioners to be appointed according to the tenoure
of this act, or else by the Commyssioners to be appointed by their maiestyes
for thexecution of certain statutes thereof made in this Session of this
present parlyamente.

Provided always and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid that this act
nor any thing therein contained shall extend to any house, or buildynge made
or to be made by any tenauntes in dowere or other particular tenaunte without
thassent of him or them in reuercion or remaynder of estate of enherytaunce,
onles the same house or building be or shall be made and erected according to
the intent and purueye of this estate. Any thing in this estatute to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, shall be convicted or condemned of or for any offense or forfeyture,
of any recognisaunce, or other matter contained and specified in this act, upon
any information at the suyte of any party or parties, that then the one moyte
of all such forfeytures, and Sums of money as shall be due for thoffence or
forfeyture contained in the information shall be to the party or parties, that
shall exhibit and prosecute the same. Any thing in this act or in any of the
aforesaid acts to the contrary not withstanding.

And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid that the said commissioners or
four of them at the least, whereof two of them to be of the Quorum, shall
inroll, or cause to be enrolled, of record all such orders provisions pains
penalties forfeytures fines, amerciamentes, condempnations and conuictions, as
shall be had, made, set, taxed, lost, or forfeyted by reason or occasion of any
matter or thing contained in this act or in any of the aforesaid former
acts, and the same Records to be well observed and kept, in such sort and
order as the said Commyssioners or four of them, whereof two of them to be of
the Quorum shall think mete and convenient.

And be it further enacted by thauctorytie aforesaid that the said
Commyssioners or four of them at the least, shall by virtue hereof have
aucthoryty to make or cause to be made process for the leuiyng of all such
amerciamentes, fines, sums of money, and forfeytures, that shall be due to be
paid by reason of any presentment, judgment, recognisaunce order, inumction
assessement, default, or other matter, whatsoever had, made, given or done,
according to the purport and intent of this estatute, as Justices of peace may
do for any fynes or forfeytures before them. And the said Commissioners or
four of them whereof two to be of the Quorum, shall yearly at the feast of
Sayncte Mighel tharchangel make or cause to be made estreates, indented of all
such forfeytures penalties fynes amerciamentes, and Sums of money as shall be
due in the year next before the said feast upon the forfeyture of any
recognisance or for any of the causes or offenses abouesayde, the same estretes
to be subscribed and sealed by the said Commissioners or four of them whereof
two to be of the Quorum, the one part thereof to be sent into the court of
Exchequer, at Westminster, within.xl. days after Myghelmas. And the other part
thereof to be delivered to the Sheriff of the Shyre, which shall be a sufficient
warraunte to him and his deputye, to leuye the same in such sort as he ought
or may leuye the sums contained in the streets, to the shyryffes, directed
forth of the Court of Exchequer, and the Sheryffe to discharge therwyth his
account.

And be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if any offender, shall once
be condemned, and pay his fine or forfeyture for any of the offenses
aforesaid in any court before any Justices or Commissioner, having authority
for that purpose, that then the said offen dour or offenders, shall not
eftsoon be charged again for that offense being passed, but shall and may
plead his former payment, in bar thereof.

And be it further enacted by thauctority aforesaid, that the clerk or
clerks, that shall write the matters and records before the said
commyssioners, shall take for the entry of pleas and other his doings such fees
and none other as shall be appointed by the said commissioners, or four of them
whereof two to be of the Quorum, and written in a table that shall be fixed openly
in the place where the Sessions shall be kept upon pain that the said clerk so
offendyng shall lose and forfeyte to the party grieved, treble the value of that
which was so taken and he or they that shall embesel any recognisaunce or record
shall for every such offense lose and forfeit.v.li. and be committed to
prisonne until he shall pay the said sum of.v.li. and also make such other
recompense and satisfaction, as the said commissioners, or four of them whereof
two to be of the Quorum, shall think convenient.

Provided always and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that this act
nor any thing therein contained shall extend to charge any person or persons
that shall keep any ground in pasture for the keeping of his or their own
horses, kyne, or other cattle, for thonely victual to be spent in his or
their house or houses.

And be it further enacted by thauctority aforesaid, that this act nor any
thing therein contained shall in any wise extend to reedifie any chief manor
place nor any other houses or buyldynges, but such as shall be mete and
convenient for the fermours or tenauntes, of any other fermeholdes, or
tenauntes for the maintenance of the grou^des that be or shall be assigned or
laid to be occupied with the said houses builded and to be builded according to
the intent of this estatute, by the discretion of the said commissioners or
four of the^ whereof two to be of the Quorum, nor shall extend to convert to
tyllage any ground not exceeding five acres, which is or shall be used and
enclosed for any garden orcharde hopyarde rapesede or for connies, for thonely
provision of any man's house and to be spente in the same, and not being
hurtful to the corn of any person or persons, other then the owners of the
said connies so that the said garden, orchard, hopyard or co^ny garth shall
lie adioyninge or nygh within one mile to the dwelling house of the owner
thereof, nor shall extend to convert any ground to tyllage, which is or
shall be left untilled and not sown with corn by reason of the euylnes barenes
or barrenes of the same until such time as the said ground shall be apt and mete
for tyllage and to bear corn again, as by the said Commissioners or four
of them, whereof two to be of the Quorum, shall be thought convenient, this
estatute or any other estatute to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid that if any person or
persons at any time after the Session of this present parliament, shall convert
or turn to pasture any ground now being eareable and kept most commonly in
tyllage for the space of twenty years last past before the Session of this
present parliament, and shall not ear and break up to tyllage as much other
ground now being pasture within the said lorshyp or parysh where the said
ground so converted does lie, within one year next after any such co^uercion,
and shall not keep the said new eared ground continually in tillage after any
such conversion, onles that for barrenes thereof he or they shall convert the
same to pasture upon the like order of earyng so much other ground being
pasture within the said lordshyppe where such conversion shall be made, shall
lose and forfeyt for every acre converted into pasture contrary to the form
of this act yearly.v.s. the one half thereof to the king and queens majesty's,
and the other to him or them that will sue for the same by byl playnt or
information, in any court of record, wherein no essoygne protection or wager
of law, shall be allowed for the defendaunt. This act to endure to the last day
of the next parlyament.

An Act for the keeping of mylche kyne, and for the breding and rearynge of
Calves.
The.iii. Chapter.
FOr as much as of late years a great number of persons within this realm
have laid their lands farms, and pastures, to feeding of sheep, oxen,
runtes, schrubbes, steres, and hekfers, and such other like catell having no
regard or care to bread and rear up young beasts and catel, whereby is grown
great scarcity of cattle and victual necessary for the sustenaunce of
diverse sorts of people within this realm, and more is like to be, if spedy
remedy be not provided.

It is therefore by thaucthoritie of this present parliament enacted that every
person, which from the feast of the Purification of our lady next ensuyng shall
keep or feed above the number of six score shere sheep for the most part of
the year upon his or her several pastures, lands, fedynges, or fermes, apt
or mete for mylche kyne and wherein no other person has at the making of this
present act, common for any cattle of any time of the year, shall by
authority of this act, yearly so long as he shall keep or feed the said
number of six score shere sheep, for every threscore shere sheep so kept or
fed, keep one mylch cow, and shall bread and rear up yearly for every six
skore shere sheep so kept as is aforesaid one Calfe upon pain of forfeiture
for every month that any such person, shall not for every three skore shere
sheep as is aforesaid, keep or feed one mylche Cow, twentye shyllynges for
every Cow so not kept. And for lack of rearynge and bredyng of one calfe for
every six score shere sheep, to forfeyt likewise twenty shyllynges for every
calfe so not reared and fed, and that every person which after the foresaid
feast of the Purification of our lady, upon his or her several pastures as
before is said, shall keep or feed above the number of twentye oxen, runtes,
Scrubbes, Steres, hekfayres, or kyne, shall by thaucthoritie of this act, for
every ten beasts of the said sorts so kept or fed, keep and nowrishe one
mylch cow, and breed rear and waine yeareliand keep for one whole year one
Calfe for every two mylche kyne so charged to be kept upon the several pains
and forfetures before rehearsed, except the said Calfe, or Calfes shall
chance to dye within the said years, without couin or fraud thereto added,
the one half of which saud forfetures shall be to the use of our said Soueraygne
Lord and Lady the king and Queen's Maiestyes and the other half to thuse of the
party, that within one year after thoffence committid will sue for the same in
any of the king and Queen's Majesty's Courts of Record, or before the Justices
of peace, in the same Shyre, where any such cause of forfeyture shall be had at
the geuerall Sessions (who by aucthoritye of this act shall have power to
hear and determyne the said offenses) by byll information presentment, action
of debt, or detinue, in which action or suyte no essoigne, protection, wager
of law or license to the contrary shall be allowed.

Provided always, that this act nor any clause thereof shall be extended to
bind any person to keep mylche kyne, ne yet to bread or rear calves, as before
is expressedde for such sheep or other beasts, as the same person shall keep
and feed to the intent only to be spente in his or their house or houses,
without fraud or couin. This act to endure only unto the end of seven years
next following the feast of the Purification of our lady aforesaid, and from
thence to the end of the parliament then next following.

An act for the extynguyshement of the first fruits and touching order and
disposition of the tenthes of spiritual and ecclesiastical promotions, and of
rectoryes, and personages impropryate, remaynyng in the Queens maiestyes
hands.
The.iiij. Chapyter.
WHere at a parliament holden at Westminster the third day of Noue^ber in
the.xxi. year of the raygne of our late Soueraygne Lord king Henry the.viii.
and upon prorogatio^ there holden the third day of November, in the.xxvi. year
of the said late king, for the mayntenau^ce of his royal estate then being
recognyfed the only supreme head in earth, next and immediately under god, of
the church of England. It was enacted by the aucthorytye of the said
parliament, that the said king his heirs and successors kings of this
realm, should have and enjoy from time to time to endure for ever, of every
such person and persons, which at any time after the first day of January, then
next coming, should be nominated, elected, prefected, presented, collated, or
by any other means appointed to have any arch byshoppryche, byshoppryche,
abbey, monasterye, pryorye, college, hospytall, archedeaconrye, deanerye,
Prouosteshyppe, Prebende, Parsonage, Vicarege, Chaunterye, Frechapell or other
dignity, Benefyce, office, or promotion spiritual, within this realm, or else
where within any of the kings dominions of what name, nature, or quality
soever they were, or to, or of whose foundation, patronage or gift soever they
belonged, the first fruytes, revenues, and profyttes, for one year of every
such Archebyshopryche, Byshopryche, Abbey, Monastery, Pryory, College,
Hospital, Archedeaconry, Deanery, Prouostshype, Prebende, Parsonage, Vicarege,
Chauntery, Frechappell or other dignity, Benefyce, office, or promotion
spiritual aforenamed, whereunto any such person or persons, should after the
said first day of Ianuarye be nominated elected prefected, presented, collated
or by any other means appointed, and that every such person and persons,
before any actual or real possession or medlyng with the profyttes of any such
Archbyshopryche, Bysshoprych, Abbay, Monastery, Pryorye, College, Hospital,
Deanery Prouostshyp, Prebende, Parsonage, Vycarege, Chaunterye, Frechappell or
other dignity, benefice, office, or promotion spyritual should satysfye,
content and pay, or compounde or agree to pay to the kings use at reasonable
days upon good suerties the said first fruits and profyttes, for one year.

And where further in the said parliament it was enacted by authority
aforesaid, that the said king his heirs and successoures, kings of this
realm, for more augmentation and mayntenaunce of the royal estate of
thimperiall crown and dignity of supreme head, should yearly have take
retain and enjoy, united and knytte to his imperyall crown for ever one
yearly rent or pention amountyng to the value of the tenthe part of all the
revenues, rentes, fermes, tithes ofspringes emolumentes and of al other
profits, as well called spiritual as temporal then apertayning or belonging, or
that from thence forth should belong to any archebyshopperyche byshopryche,
abbey, monasterye, pryorye, archedeacourye, deanerye, hospital, college,
house collegyate, prebende, cathedral Church, collegyate Church, conuentual
Church, personage, vicarege, chaunterye, frechappel, or other benefice or
promotial spiritual of what name nature or quality soever they were or be
within any dioces of this realm, or in Wales the said pention or annual rent
to be yearly paid for ever to the said late king his heirs and successors
kings of this realm, at the feast of the Natiuitye of our Lord God. And that
the first payment thereof should begin at the feast of the Natiuitye of our
Lord God which then should be in the year of our Lord God a thousand, five
hundredth thyrtye and five, and to be paid yearly by such as should be
appointed, to have the collection thereof by the same act in such manner and
form, as should after that time be lymytted by the said act before the first
day of Apryll, next following after the said feast of the Natiuitye of our
Lord, as in the said at amongst other things, more plainly appears.

The king and the queen's most excellent Maiestyes for diverse urgent
considerations them their honors and consciences specially mouyng, will that
it be enacted, and therefore be it enacted by aucthoritye of this present
parlyament, that all paymentes of the said first fruits shall from hence
forth cease and be clearly extinct and deter mined for ever. And that as well
all and singular archbishopperiches, byshopryches, and other benefyces,
dignities and promotions spyritual before charged and chargeable to and with the
paimentes of the first fruits, as all and every possessor, owner and incumbent
of the same, and their successors shall from and after the.viii. day of August
last past, and so from thence forth at al times for ever be clereli exonerate
acquitted and discharged against our said soueraygne lord and lady and against
the heirs and successors of our said soueraygne lady of and from the payment
and paimentes of al and every the said first fruits in as ample and large
manner and form, as they were before the making of the said act. And as
though the same act had never been had ne made.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid that this act
or any thing therein contained shall not in any wise extend to extynguyshe or
dyscharge any recognisaunce or other bond obligatorie, or any pain penaltye
debt or forfeture had made or due to the Queen's highness her heirs and
successors, at any time before the said eight day of Auguste, last past for
and concerning the said first fruits.

And where as since the said.xxvi. year of the said late king Henry the eight,
his Majesty, and the late king Edward the syxt, and our said soueraygne Lord
and Lady, the king and the Queen's Majesty's, or any of them have before this
time by their several and sundry letters patentes, given granted and assured
as well unto sondrye Bysshoppes and their Successoures, as to diverse Cathedral
Churches, Deanes, and Chapyters, collegys and other ecclesiastical and
spirytuall persons and corporations and their Successors diverse Manoures,
Lands, Teneme^tes, Rectories, personages, tithes gleblandes and other
hereditamentes, to hold in pure and frank al moyne or by any other tenure, and
to pay yearly unto their majesty's their heirs and successors one yearly
rent in the name of a tenthe, or the tenthe part of the yearly value of the
same, as by the said several patentes more at large does appear.

Our said soueraygne Lord and Lady, the King and Queen's Maiestyes that now
are, further wyllen that it be enacted, and be it enacted by thaucthority of
this present parliament, that the said perpetual pention, annual, rent or
tenthe, mentioned and contained in the said act, made in the said.xxvi. year
of the raygne of the said late king henry the eight, and the said several
rentes and tenthes reserved upon the said letters patentes for and in the name
of a tenthe or any of them from and after the feast of S. Michel tharchangell
last past shall not be paid or payable unto their Majesty's, her heirs or
successors, and that as well all and synguler the Archbyshoprykes Byshoprickes,
and other the benefices, dignities, Deanes, and Chapters, Colleges,
Corporatio^s and spiritual promotions, aforesaid as al and every possessoure
Owner, propryetories and incumbent of the same and their successors and every
of them from and after the said feast of Saint Michel tharchaungel last past
shall be clearly exonerate acquitted and discharged of and for the payment of the
said perpetual pention, annual rent or tenthes aforesaid, and of the said
tenthes reserved upon the said letters pattentes, and of every of them
against our said sovereign lord and lady, and the heirs and successors of the
Queen, to the intent that the same shall be ordered used and disposed in manner and
form as hereafter in this act shall be expressed. And for the better
declaration of their Majesty's good and godlidispositions in the premises,
their highness does by aucthority of this present parliament clearly give over
renounce and relinquish from them, and the heirs and Successoures of the
Queens hyghnes, the said perpetual pentyon, annual rent, and tenthe, and
the said rentes reserved nomine decimae upon the said several letters patentes
and al their. right, titel, and interest, which they or the said heirs or
successors of oursayd sovereign lady the queen have, or may have in or to the
same. And where diverse and sundry rectories personages and benefices
impropryat, glebe lands, tithes, oblations, pencions, porcions, and other
proftes, and emolumentes ecclesiastical and spiritual to the same, or any of
them belonging, and the reuersion and reuersions of diverse of them, since
the.xx. year of the reign of the said late king Henry the.viii. came unto the
hands and possession of the said late king. And likewise since his death unto
the hands of the said late king Edward the sixth, and after unto the hands and
possession of the king and queen's majesty's that now are, as in the right of
her hyghnes of an estatute of enherytaunce. Their majesty's like good catholyke
and christen princes earnestly tendering the instruction of their people in
trwe and sincere doctrine, and therwithal waying the pouerte and skarsenesse of
living of many and sondrye benefyces and cures within this realm, and other
their dominyons, by reason where of sufficient and hable curates can not be
gotten to serve the same, likewise wyllen that it be enacted.

And therefore be it enacted by thaucthoritye of this present parliament that
their majesty's and the heirs and successors of the queen's highness, shall not
from the feast of S. Michel tharchaungel last paste receive, perceive, take
or inioye, any the issues, revenues, profits, or commodities, of the said
rectoryes, personages, benefices, glebe lands tithes, oblations, pencions,
porcions, and other profittes, and emolumentes, ecclesiastical and spiritual
aforesaid, or any of them or of the rencrtion or reuertions of them or any of
them, but does from and after the said feast, clearly give over, renounce, and
relinquishe by the aucthoritye aforesaid, the said rectories, personages
benefices, glebe lands, tithes, oblations, pentions portions, and other
profittes and emolumentes ecclesiastical and spiritual aforesaid, and every of
them and the reuertion and reuertions of them and of every of them, and all
their xyght, title, use, intereste, and demand of in or to the same, from
them and the heirs and successors of the queen's majesty for ever to be used
employed, ordered, and disposed, in manner and form as in this act hereafter
is expressed and declared.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctoritye of this present
parlinment, that this act or any thing therein contained shall not in any wise
exte^d to extinguish, discharge, or give a way any of thissues, teneme^tes, or
profits of the said rectories, personages, and benefices impropryat, globe
lands, tithes, oblatio^s, pentio^s, and portio^s, aforsaid or any arrerages of
re^tes of ye same, or the arrerages of any of yt said se ueralten(...) tenthes
before specified or of any part or percel thereof, dew unto their maiestyes her
heirs and successors at the said feast of S. Michell the archaungell last
past, or any time before the said feast, but that their hyghnesses, her
heirs and successors shall have, receive, and enjoy, all and synguler the
said arrerages of the said rentes, and several tenthes, de we at or before
the said feast, in like manner and form as if this act had not been made,
any thing before mentioned, law, use, or custom, to the contrary not
withstanding.

Provided also and be it enacted by the aucthoritye aforesaid that this act or
any thing therein contained shall not in any wise extend to extynguyshe,
discharge, or give away any yearelye rent, teserued for and in the name of a
tenthe, upon any letters, patentes, heretofore made and granted by our said
Soueraygne lord king Henry the eight, king Edward the syxte, and by our
Soueraygne Lord and Lady the king and Queen's Majesty's, or by any of them to
any person or persons and to their heirs, or in fee tail general or
special, or for term of life, lives or years, or to any bodies polytyke or
corporate, and to their successors other then to spiritual and ecclesiastical
corporations and to their successors, but that the king and queen's majesty's,
her heirs and successors, shall have, perceive and enjoy, all and synguler the
said rentes so reserved upon any of the said letters patentes, not being made
and granted to any spyrituall or ecclesiastical persons and corporations, and
to their successors as is aforesaid, in like manner and form as if this act
had never been made.

And where the king and the queens Majesty's stand charged for the payment
of sundry rentes pencions, annuities, corrodyes, fees, and other yearly
paymentes severally grannted as well by diverse and sundry late abbotes, pryors,
masters of colleges, masters of hospytals, chauntery preystes, and other
ecclesiastical and spiritual persons before the dissolution of their houses,
to diverse and so^dry persons, severally or jointly for term of life, life's,
or years, as also by her said father king Henry the eyghte, and by her said
brother king Edward the syxt, and by her majesty, or by any of them to
diverse and sundry religious persons and others severally or jointly for term
of life life's or years, the names of al which persons together with their
several yearly rentes pencions annuities corrodies fees and yerelye paymentes
and prosytes, shall be specially and perticulerlye set fourth and contained in a
certain book indented, whereof the one connterpayne to be sygned by our said
Sovereign lady the q^uene and the other with the sign manuel of the most
reuereud father in God Reignold Poole Cardinal and Legate de latere, of the
Popes holmes and of the Sea apostolyque, specially sent unto their maiestyes,
and to their kingdoms, and dominyons, to the intent our said Soueraygne Lord
and Lady the king and Queen's Majesty's, their heirs and successors should be
from the said feast of Saynct Michell the archeaungell last past, and at all
times from henceforth, clearly exonorated, acquitted, discharged, or saved
harmeles, of and from the payment of the said rentes, pentions, annuityes,
corrodies, fees and yearly paimentes aforesaid. Our said Sovereign Lord and
Lady the king and the queen's maiestyes are pleased, and contented that it be
enacted.

And therefore be it enacted by thaucthoritye of this present parliament that
such, and so many of the clargye of this realm, as the said Lord Legates
grace shall from time to time name and apoint and the successors of them and
every of them (if it shall so please the said Lord Legates grace to name
appointe and assygne them) shall from the said feast of Saynct Mychell last
past, and so from thence furthe from time to time until the said rectoryes,
personnages, and benefyces impropriate, and other the said spiritual profyttes,
shall be other wise ordered used and employed by the assygnessient of the said
Lord Legates grace, as hereafter is expressed and declared, have, take,
perceive, and receive, as well all and synguler the said perpetual pencion,
annual rentes, or tenthes, and every of them at such days and time, and by
all such ways and means, as the same is limited and appointed to be paid
either by the said several letters pattentes or by the said former estatute
made in the said.xxvi. year of king Henry the.viii. or by any other estatute
made for and concerning the true payment of the said tenthes or any of them,
as also al and synguler the issues, revenues, profittes, and commodities, of
and in all and singular the said rectoryes, personages, and benefyces
impropryate, glebe lands, tithes, oblations, pencyons, porcyons, and other
profyttes, and emolumentes, ecclesiastical and spiritual aforesaid, and of the
reuertion and reuertions thereof, when they shall fall by all such ways
remedies and means, for the leuying and recovery of the rentes and profyttes
of the said premysses, as our said Soueraygne Lord and Lady her hyghnes heirs
and successors should or might have done if the said premysses had still
continued in their Maiestyes hands and possession, to this use and intent,
and purpose following that is to say, that such and as many of the clargye of
this realm and their successors, as the said most reverend father the Lord
Legates Grace, shall name and apoynte, as is aforesaid, shall therewyth
satystye, content, and pay, or cause to be satysfyed, contented, and paid,
to all and every the said relygyous persons and others named within the
said book indented which at this time have or ought to have any pention,
corrodye, annuitye, yerelye rent, profyt, or fee, for term of life, lives or
years, as is aforesaid, al and singular their said pentions, corrodies,
annuities, rentes, or fees at such days and times as is limited and appointed
by several letters patentes, or other wrytinges or grauntes to them made. And
in such manner and form as our said Soueraygne Lord and Lady the king and
queen's hyghnesses her heirs and successors should or ought to have paid
the same, if this act had never been had ne made, any thing before mentioned
to the contrary not wythstandyng. And that they shall exonorate acquit, and
discharge, or save harmless the said king and queen's majesty's, and her
heirs and successors kings of this realm, of and for the payment of all and
singular the said pentions, annuities, corrodies, and fees, and shall be further
bound for the assurance thereof, as shall be devised by their maiestyes, with the
assent of the said lord Legate. Any thing before mentioned to the contrary
not withstandyng. And to the intent the poor benefyces and cures of this
Realm, and other the dominions thereto belongyng may be hereafter furnyshed
with good and hable curates to instruct the people with good and sincere
doctrine, and to be hable to maintain hospitalitye and for and to other godly
ententes and purposes to be done within this realm. Our said soueraygne lord
and lady the king and Queen's maiestyes of their most gracious dispositions, are
pleased and contented and wyllen that it be enacted.

And be it enacted by thaucthority aforesaid, that the said Lord Legate shall
and may dispose, order, imploye, and convert the said rectoryes, personages,
and benefices impropriate, glebe lands, tithes oblations, pencions, porcions,
and other the said profittes, and emolumentes, ecclesiastical and spiritual, to
and for thencrease and augmentation of liuinges of the incumbentes of the said,
or other pore cures and benefices, or otherwise for ye finding of preachers or
the exhibitio^ of scollers within this realm and dominyons of the same, as by
the godly wisdom and discretion of the said lord Legate shall be thought most
mere and conueuyent, saving to al and every person and persons, bodies politic
and corporate, and their heirs assigns and successors and every of the^,
other then our said soueraygne lord and lady the king and queen's majesty's, and
the heirs and successors of the queen's highness al such personages,
nominations, presentatio^s, aduouso^s, right, title, possession, interest,
reuertion, remainder, enter, condition, fees, offices, rentes, annuities,
commons, leases, liberties, and al other commodities thing and things,
profittes and hereditamentes whatsoever in like manner and form to al intentes
constructions and purposes as they or any of them should might or ought to have
had in or out of any of the said tenthes, personages, rectoryes, benefyces,
vycareges, tithes pencions, portions, oblations, obuentions, or in or to any ye
premysses or any part thereof in as ample and large manner as if this act had
never ben had ne made.

Provided always and be it further enacted by the aucthority of this present
parliament that immediately after the decease of the said persons named in the
said book to be indented, and the determination of their senerall estatutes and
rightes, and to the said annuities fees rentes, and corrodies, the said payment
of the said perpetual pencion annual paime^t or tenth, and of the said tenthes
and rentes reserved nomine decimae upon any letters pate^tes, made unto
ecclesiastical and spiritual persons aforesaid, shall utterly cease and be
determined for ever, any thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise not
wythstandyng.

And be it further enacted by the aucthoritye of this present parley ament, that
all and synguler person and persons bodies politic and corporate, being
spiritual and ecclesiastical and their successors and every of them, which
shall hereafter have and enjoy any of the said rectoryes personages, and
benefyces impropryat, glebe lands, tithes, oblations, pentions, portions, and
other profits, and emoluments ecclesiastical and spirytuall before said shall
and may have and enjoy, by aucthoritye of this act like aduauntages, means,
benefyces, actions and remedies against the lesses and grauntes their
executours administratours, or assygnes, and every of them, by enter for none
payment of rent from he^ceforth to be due, or for any wast hereafter to be
done, or for breach or not performing of any condition or covenant or
agreement from henceforth to be performed, fulfilled or done contained and
expressed in the inde^tures of the said leases or grauntes against al and
every the said lesees, fermers and grauntees and their executours
administratours and assigns and every of them as if the said person and
persons bodies polityke and corporate spiritual and ecclesiastical, their
successors and every of them should and might have had if they had been perty
or pryuy to the said indentures lesses and grau^tes, and likewise that al and
every the said fermors lessees and grantees, their executors, administratours
and assygnes and every of them shall and may have and enjoy such part of the
premises as is contained in their lease and leases, grant or grauntes, during
such time as is mentioned and limited in any such lease or leases, grant or
grauntes, yeldyng and paying the yearly rentes and seruyces reserved upon the
same lease or leases, and performing al and singular couenauntes and
agrementes, specified in every such lease and grant the which on the leasees
part are to be observed and kept, and further shall have like action
advantage benefit, and remedy against all and every the said person and
persons bodies polytyke and corporate Spiritual and ecclesiastical, and their
successors and every of them which shall have and enjoy any part of the
premysses for any condition couenaunte grant or agreement hereafter broken or
not performed contained and expressed in their several indentures of their
leases and grauntes, or any of the^ the which on the part and behalf of the
lessours ar to be observed and kept, as the same leasses or grauntes or their
executours admynistratoures and assygnes, or any of them might or should have
had against the said person or persons bodies politic and corporate,
ecclesiastical and spiritual, and their successors or any of them, if they
had been both perty and priui to the said indentures leases and grauntes.

Provided also and be it enacted by thaucthoritye aforesaid that this act or
any thing therein contained, shall not extend to take away from our said
soueraygne Lady the Queen, her heirs and Successors, the Patronages of any
vicarege belongyng to any of the foresaid personages and rectoryes impropryat,
but that her highness her heirs and successors shall continue and remain
patroness, and patrons of the said vycareges in manner and form as if this
act had never been had ne made. Any thing before mentioned to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if it happen any
of the said rectoryes and personages impropryate, whereof there is no vicar, or
that has vicareges endowed, and the patronage of the same appertains unto
the Queen's Majesty, her heirs and successoures, to be here after
dysapropryate and made presentable or otherwise employed as is aforsayd, that
then her highues her heirs and successors shall by virtue of this act be
judged and demed very and undoubted patrones of every such rectorie and
personage disapropriated, and made presentable. This act or any other law,
use, or custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie of this present parlyament, that if
it fortune any of the said rectoryes and personages impropriate the patronages
of the vycarege, whereof does or shall apper tayne unto any person or persons
bodies polytyke and corporate other then to our said Soueraygne lady the
queen, her heirs and successors to be hereafter disapropriated and made
presentable, that then in every such case the said person and persons, bodies
politic and corporate, the which then shall be patrones of the said vicareges,
shall be patrones of the said personage so disapropriated in like estate degree
and condition as they were of the patronage of the vicarege before ye said
disapropriatio^ of the said rectorie or rectories impropriated, any thing in
this act or any law, or custom to ye contrary notwithstanding

Provided also, and be enacted by the aucthoritye aforesaid, That when and as
often as any person or persons, to whom ye said pentions annuities, Corrodies
or fees aforesaid, or any of them do be long shall be paid thereof, by
thauctoritie of this act or otherwise satisfied by any order that shall be taken
upon the same by any other then the Queen's majesty's her heirs or
successors, that then such person or persons or any of them so paid or
otherwise satisfied, shall not demand the same again of the king or Queens
majesty's her heirs or successors, nor shall be double paid of the same, the
provision and order of payment thereof before specified, or any other thing
herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if
it fortune the said Lord legate, to decease before such time as the contents
of this act, limited and appointed to his grace to be done, be fullye
accomplyshed and executed, that the^ it shall be laufull unto the Archbysshoppes
of Canterbury and Work, for the time being, and to the eldest Byshope of this
realm by consecration, and in the time of the vacation of the said
Archbyshoprykes, or of either of them, then to the Deane and Chapter of the
seas, or sea so void, during the said time of vacation and to the said eldest
bishop, for the time being, to do execute and accomply she all and every
thing and things touching the order and disposition of the premises, as yt
said most reverend father the Lord Legate shall in his life time lymytte
assign and prescribe unto them, and as his grace should or might have done.
And that the said Archebysshops and Bishop, or the said Deanes and
Chapiters in the time of vacation, and the said eldeste bishop as is
aforesaid shall from time to time after the discease of the said Lord Legate
have full power and authority by virtue of this act, to do and execute all
and every thing and things touching thorder and disposition of the said
premises accordynglye as it shall be prescribed unto them by the said Lord
legate: And as the said Lord Legates grace, should or might have done if he
had lived. Any thing before mentioned to the contrary notwythstandynge.

And where as diverse and sundry of the said rectoryes, personages and benefyces
impropriate, glebe Lands, tithes, oblations, pentions, portions, and other
profyttes and emolumentes, Ecclesiastical and spiritual have been heretofore
dimised and granted to sondrye persons for term of lyse, lives, or years,
as well by diverse and sundry late Abbotes, Priors, Master of Hospitals, and
Colleges, and other Relygyous and Spyrytuall persons, and Gouernoures, before
the Dissolution of their several Houses, and Places, as since, by the said
late King Henrye the Eyghte, King Edward the the Syxt, and by our Soueraygne
Lord and Lady, the king and the queen's majesty's, or by any of them, and in
and by the said leases and geauntes, there is also comprehended and dimised to
gethers with the said premises; or with some part of the same, diverse and
so^dlye manours, lands, tenementes, and other hereditamentes, and upon some of
the said leases and grauntes, is one hose and entire yearly rent, reserved for
the said spiritual possessions, and for the said other mannours, lands,
tenementes, and hereditamentes, there with also granted and letten, as by the
said several leasses and grauntes, it may appear or be duly proved. And
where also diverse of the said rectoryes, personages, benefices impropriate and
other the spiritual possessions aforesyd, have been heretofore of so long
continuance and time, dimised, letten, and occupied together, with manours,
lands, tenementes, and other hereditamentes, and so ioyntlye occupied and
used, that it is to be doubted that some ambiguitie, question, and controuersye
may hereafter rise and grow, as well for the division, and seueraunce of the
glebe lands, and other possessions of diverse of the said rectories, and
personages, from other the said manours, lands, tenementes, and
hereditamentes, which have been royned with the same, in lease, and occupation,
as for the apporcionyng and ratynge, of the said hole and entyre yearly rentes
reserved upon such leases as is aforesaid. For the avoiding of which
ambiguities, questions and coutrouersies, and to the intent a good indifferent
rate and apporeyament of the said entier rent may be made according to the
quantity of the said spiritual possessions so letten, and that the glebe
lands of the said rectories and personages, and other the said spiritual
possessions, so letten, with other lands and possessions as is aforesaid, may
hereafter be known divided and used in seueralty from the other te^porall
possessions where with they be letten, so that such spiritual persons as shall be
incumbentes or owners of the said spiritual possessions may have enjoy and
receive the same and other profits and rentes thereof in seueraltye from the
other temporal possessions aforesaid, without any interruption or question
according to the king and queen's Majesty's most godly intent and meaning. Be
it therefore enacted by thaucthority of this present parlyament that in all
cases where the said rectoryes, glebe lands, and spiritual possessions, or
any part thereof is let dimised or granted with any of the said mannouts,
lands tenementes or hereditamentes temporal, under one rent vndeuyded, or
where the said glebe lands and spyrituall possessions are not certaynlye
known divided or severed from the other temporal possessions there withal
also letten, granted and occupied several Cominissions shall be from time to
time awarded out of the Court of thexchequer to six indifferent persons,
whereof three to be of the spiritually and three to be of the temporaltye, geuyng
them authority by bertue of the same, to call before them twelve good and
indifferente men inhabyting within the country, whereof every of them shall have
lands, tenementes, or hereditamentes, of estate of frehold, to the yearly
value of five pound at the least, where the said rectories, glebe lands, and
spiritual possessions do lie, and the same twelve upon their oaths, shall
indifferently deuyde and sever by sufficient metes and bonds, the said glebe
lands of the said rectories and other spiritual possessions, from the other
lands and possessions with the same letten, and to rate and apporcion how
much yearly rent shall be yearly paid for the said rectoryes and other
spiritual possessions so letten, and how much yearelye rent shall be paid
for the said Manours Lands, Tenementes, or other temporal Hereditamentes
therewythall letten and granted, as the same twelve shall upon their oaths and
consciences think and judge to be according to the quantity and valewe of the
things so letten and granted, and the ratyng division and apporcioning of the
said entie^ rent, and the seneraunce and division as well of the said glebe
lands and spiritual possessions from the other manours lands, tenementes, and
hereditamentes temporal, as also of the said manours lands tenements, and
hereditamentes temporal, from the said glebe lands and spiritual
possessions being certified under their seals and the seals of the said
commissioners into the said court of Exchequer, shall be as good and effectual
in the law as if the said rate or apporciament of the said rent or the
division and seueraunce of the said manours lands tenementes and
hereditamentes, had been made, and done by thauctoritie of this present
parliament, any law, use, or custom, to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for the releife of the pore.
The.v. Chapyter.
TO the intent that idle and loyteryng persons and valiant beggars may be
avoided, and the impotent, feeble and lame, which are the pore in very deed,
should be hereafter well provided for.

Be it enacted by the king and queen our Soueraygne Lord and Lady, with the
assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal and the commons in this present
parlyame^t assembled, and by thaucthoritie of the same, yt the statute made in
ye xxii. year of the late king of famous memory king Henry the.viii. and also
yt estatute made in ye.iii. and.iiii. years of ye reign of ye famous king
Edward the syxte, concerning beggars vagaboundes, and idle persons, and every
article, clause, branch, sentence, and other things contained in them, and
in either of them other then such things as shall be by this present act
otherwise ordained and pronided for, shall stand, remain, and be in there
full force and effect and shall be also from henceforth justly and truly put in
execution according to the true meaning of the said several statutes and
either of the.

And further be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that yerelye on some
one holydaye in the Chrystmas in every city, borough and town, corporate, the
Mayor, Baylyffes, or other head officers for the time being, and in every
other Paryshe of the country the person, vycar, or curate, and the
Churchewardens, having in a regester or book as well all the names of the
inhabytauntes and house holders, as also the names of all such impotente,
aged, and nedye persons as being within their City, Boroughe town corporate,
or paryshe, are not hable to live of them selves, nor with their own labor,
shall openly in the church and quietly after divine service, call the said
houshoulders and inhabytauntes together, among whom the Mayre or other head
officers, and two of the cheyfe inhabytauntes in every such city, Boroughes,
and Towns corporate, such as the Mayor or other head offycer shall think
mete, and the person vicar or curate and Churchewardens in every other
Paryshe, shall elect nominate and appoynte yerelye two hable persons or moo,
to be Gatherers and Collectoures of the charytable almose of all the resydue of
the people inhabytynge within the Paryshe whereof they be chosen Colectours for
the releyfe of the poor, which Collectoures the Sunday next after their
election, or the Sunday following if need require, when the people are at the
Church at dyuyne service, shall gently ask and demand of every man and
woman, what they of their charity wylbe rontented to give wekelye toward the
releyfe of the pore, and the same to be written in the said regester or book,
and the said gatherers so being elected and chosen shall justly gather and
truly distribute the same charitable almose wekely by them selves or their
assygnes, to the said pore and impote^t persons of the said cytyes,
boroughes, towns corporate, and parishes, without fraud, or couen, favor or
affection, and after such sort that the more impotent may have the more
help, and such as can get part of their living to have the less, and by the
disscretio^ of the Collectoures to be put in such labor as they be sit and
hable to do but none to go or sit openly a beggynge upon pain lymytted in the
aforesaid estatutes.

Be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that no person or persons so
elected nominated, and appointed to be gatherer or gatherers as is aforesaid,
shall refuse the said office, but shall justly and truly execute the same, by
the space of one hole year next ensuynge upon pain to forfeyte fortye
shillinges to the almose box of the pore, to be leuyed by the churchewardens,
where they or he dwells of the goods of the said gatherer or gatherers so
refusyng by distress.

And further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said
gatherers or collectours, shall make their just account, quarter lie to the
Maiours or chief officers, of the said cities, boroughes, and towns
corporate, and in every parysh of the country, to the person, bicare, or
curate, and churchewardens of the parysh, at which account such of the parysh
as will may be present, and when they go out of their office, they shall
deliver, or cause to be delivered forthwith upon thend of their accomptes all
such superplusage of money as then shall remain of their collection
vndistributed, to be put in the common chest of the Church, or in some other
safe place, to the use of the poor at the ouersyght and discretion of the
Maiours, officers, and other before mentioned. And if the said collectours or
any of them do refuse to make their said account within eight days, then the
bishop of the dioces or the ordenary of the place, shall have aucthorytye, by
virtue of this act, to compel the said person or persons, by censures of the
Church, to make their said accomptes before such persons as the said
Bishop or ordenary shall appoint, and to make immediate payment of the sums
wherewyth by determination of the said account they shall be charged.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons being hable to further this charitable work do obstinately and
frowardly refuse to give toward the help of the pore, or do wylfully
discourage other from so charitable a deed, the person, vicar or curate, and
Churchwardens of the paryshe wherein he dwells, shall then gentlye exhort him
or them toward the relief of the pore, and if he or they will not so be
persuaded, then upon the certificat of the person, vicar or curate of the
paryshe to the Bishop of the Dyoces or Ordinarye of the place, the same
Bishop or Ordynarye shall send for him or them to induce or persuade him or
them, by charitable means and ways, to extend their charity as in this
act is well meant and intended, and so according to discretion to take order for
the charitable reformation of every such obstinat person, and for the better
mayntenaunce of this charitable work, it is ordained and establyshed by
authority aforesaid, that where as the late king of famous memory king Henry
the eyghte, by his several erections and foundations has ordained and
appointed any sum or sums of money to thuse of ye pore, not being taken
away otherwise by act of parliament, whether the same be in any Cathedral
Church. College, orels where the Bishop of the dyoces for the time being
shall from time to time examyne how and after what manner ye said money is
bestowed, and calto account the parties which retain the said money so that it
may appear that the same is distributed to the pore, according to the good
intent and purpose of the said noble king that granted the same.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, if it shall chance
any paryshe to have in it mo pore and impotente folks not hable to labor, then
the said paryshe is hable to releue, that then in every such paryshe not
standing in any City or town corporate, two or three of the chief
inhabitauntes of the same paryshe, and in every city and town, corporate,
the mayor or chief officers of ye same city or town corporate, calling to
them two or three of the cheyfe parishioners of the same parish such as ye
said mayor or head officer shall think mete, shall certifye unto the Justices
of peace of the Countye where the same paryshe is the number and names of the
persons, with which they be succharged, and upon such certificat, the said
Justices of the peace in the same cou^tie or two of the^ whereof one to be of ye
Quorum, shall consider and examyne the said certificat, and findinge the same
true, shall then grant unto such, and as many of the said poor folks as by
their discretion they shall think good, a sufficient license under the seal
appointed for the limitte, to go abroad to beg get and receive the charitable
alms of the inhabytaunts of the country out of the said parishes, cities and
towns so surcharged in which license the places towns and paryshes to which
such pore folks are by that license licensed to resort, shall in the same
license be named limited and appointed, be it one hundred or moo, in the said
countye at the said discretion of the same Justices, and if any of the said
pore folks so licensed shall transgress the lymyttes to them appointed and
resort to beg at other places, than is in the said license named, the party
so transgressynge and offendynge to be taken for a valiant beggar, and
punyshed according to the statute made in the said.xxii. year of king
Henrye the eight, and his or their license to be taken from them.

And be it further enacted, that where any of the said cities, boroughes
towns corporate or paryshe so surcharged, is situate and standing in one
Countye or two Countyes of this realm, or situate and standing in one, and
immediatelye adioynynge to another County of the realm, as the city of Bristol
and towns of Ludloo, and Stanford Stond, that in that cities the said Mayer,
head officers and inhabitauntes of every such City Borough, Town corporate,
and Paryshe, shall make certificate unto the Justices of the said Countyes
adioynynge to the same Cities, Boroughes. Towns porate, and paryshes, and the
same Justices of the said adioynyng Countye or Countyes to do, give license,
and follow the order above remembered, according as other Justices of the
Countyes, in which the Paryshe surcharged stands, is lymytted and auctorised
to do.

And be it also enacted that in all Cities Borowes and Towns corporate, within
which be diverse paryshes, the Mayor, and head officers of every the same
Cities, borowes and towns corporate, shall consider the state and ability of
every such paryshe, and if the same Mayor and officers, shall understand by
their discretion that the parishioners of any one of the said paryshes is of
such wealth and honor that they have no poverty among them or be hable
sufficiently to releue the poverty of the paryshe where they inhabit and
dwell, and also to help and succor poverty else where further, that then the
said Mayor and officers with the assent of two of the most honest and
substancial inhabytauntes of every such welthy paryshe, shall consider the
nedenesse of thinhabytants of the other parish, or paryshes within ye same
city or town corporate, and move enduce and persuade the parishioners of the
welthyer parish charitably to contribute somewhat according to their ability
toward the wekely releife succor and consolation of the pore and nedy within
the other paryshe or parishes aforesaid, where need is.

And be it also enacted that all and every such pore folks as by any such
license are to be licensed and aucthorysed to resort out of the lymyttes
liberties and frauncheses of all and every such city boroughe and town
corporate, into any the said countyes to beg, get and gather the charitable
alms of good people, shall at all times when the same goes abroad to beg,
wear openly upon him or the^ both on the breast and the back of his or their
vttermooste garmente some notable badge or token to be assigned unto him by the
Mayor or head officers of the same City Borough and town Corporate or
paryshe, with the assent of the Justices of the peace that shall grant the
same license upon pain to be taken for a valiant beggar, and to be punished
as before is remembered, and shall also carye his license with him upon like
pain. This act to endure to the latter end of the first sessyon of the next
parlyament.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by the aucthorytie aforesaid,
that this present Act nor any thing therein contained, shall not extend or
be preiudicyall unto the Mayor Sheryffes, and Cytezens of the City of
Chester, for or concerning any gift or grant of any annuitie or yearelye
rent, heretofore, made, given, or granted, by the said famous king Edward
the syxt, unto the said Mayor, Sheryffes, and Cytezens of the said city, going
out of any manours, lands, tenementes, and hereditamentes of the Cathedral
church of Christ and our Lady within the city of Chester, but that the same
Mayor, Shyryffes, and citezens shall and may from henceforth, receive, use, and
imploye the same aucthorities, yerelye rentes, or profytes, to such uses, and
ententes, and according to the said gift of the said famous King any
thing in this present Act to the contrary notwythstandyng.

Provided always and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and
every sum and sums of monye from henceforth to be collected or gathered
within the city of London or the lyberties of the same by virtue of this act,
shall be paid over to the go uernours of the hospital called the hospital of
Christ's church within the said city of London for the time being and shall be
by them from time to time distributed and bestowed for the releife of the poor
of the said City, according to their wysedomes and discretions, any thing
in this act mentioned to the contrary notwythstandynge.

An Act against the excessyue taking of the king and the Queen's Majesty's
purueyours.
The syxt Chapyter.
FOr the auoydyng of the great annoyaunce and hyndraunce commonly done to the
Subjects of this realm, by purueyours and takers of beues, wethers Lambs,
Calves, all kinds of grain Butter, Chease bakon, all kinds of pullayne, and
to exchewe hereafter not only the great deceypte ministered and done daily by
the said purueyours and takers, but also hereby to auaunce the king and queen's
majesty's better service in the premysses, with the contentation of all their
hyghnes faithful and most obedyent subjects.

Be it therefore enacted by our said Soueraygne Lord and Lady with the assent
of the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present
Parlyament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that after the feast
of the birth of our Lord next ensewyng, every such commission as shall be
made, granted, and dyrected, to any person or persons, whatsoever whereby the
same person or persons, or their deputies shall have authority to take any
Beues, Wethers, Lambs, Calves, or any kind of salt fyshe, or any kind or
kinds of grain, or any butter in barrelles or other vessels Chease, Baken,
Connies, Pigges, Gese, Capons, or Hens, that the same commission or
commissions, shall not extend or continue above the space of six months at
the farthest next ensewyng the date of any of the said commissions. And after
the end of the said six months every of the said commissions to be void
and of no force nor effect, whatsoever words matter or sentences shall be
contained or expressed in any of the same commissions.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that in all and every
such commission or commissions to be granted after the said feast of the birth
of our lord, shall be plainly as well contained and expressed such countye or
countyes, as any of the said beues, wethers, lambs, calfes, hogs or swyne,
or any kind of salt fyshe, or any kind or kinds of grain, butter, chease,
bakon, connyes, pigs, gese, capons, or henes, or any of the^, is to be
leuyed, purueyed or taken in, by any of the person or persons or their deputy
or deputies so aucthorised by the virtue of the said commission or commissyons,
as also the just, true, and full proporcion and number of al and every such
beues, wethers, lambs, calves, swyne, any kind of salt fish, or any kind or
kinds of grain, butter in barelles or other vessels, chease, bakon,
connies, pigges, gese, capons and hens, or any of the^ as the said person or
persons their deputye or deputies or any of them shall be by force and virtue
of the said commission or co^missions auctorised to leuye take or puruey within
any of the said countye or countyes.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that to every such
commission or commissions after the said birth of our lord to be made
granted and directed as is aforesaid, shall be annexed so many blanckes in
parchement as there shall be several countyes expressed named and contained
within the said commyssyon or commissions or any of them, in the which
blanckes shall be fair and legeable written all and every such beues, wethers,
lambs, calfes, swyne, any kind of salt fyshe, or any kind or kinds of grain
butter chease bakon, connyes, pigs, gese, capons and hens, with the true
and several prices of the same, and every of the^ as shall be levied gathered
and purueyed, by any person or persons their deputy or deputies, or any of
them, as shall be thereunto aucthorised by any such commission or commissions
aforesaid within any particular town paryshe or hamblet, set, lying, and
being, within any those countye or counties, as shall be named, contained, and
expressed, within the said commission or commssyons, or any of them whereunto
shall be subscribed the name or fygne manuell of all and every such high
constable or constables, petie constable or constables, headborow or head
borowes as shall be by any precept to him or them directed, by any person or
persons, their deputye or deputies, or any of them, auctorised thereunto by
such commission or commissyons to be granted, as is aforesaid, privy or
knowledgyng to the delyuerye of the said beues, wethers, lambs, calves, any
kind of saltefyshe, or any kind or kinds of grain, butter, chease, bako^,
connies, pigges, gese, capo^s and hens, or any of them.

And be it further enacted by authority aforesaid, that every person or
persons their deputy or deputies or any of them which shall be by commission or
commissons, hereafter to be granted as is before said, aucthorised to leuye
take or purueye, any beues, wethers, lambs, calves, swyne, saltefyshe, or any
kind or kinds of grain, butter in barels or other vessels, chease, bakon
connyes, pigs, gese capons, and hens, or any of them, as is beforesayde,
shall make a doket or brefe in writing, subscribed with his or their name or
names, containing al and every such beues wethers lambs calves swine kind of
salt fyshe, kind or kinds of grain, butter in barelles, or other vessels,
chease, bakon connyes pigs gese caponnes, and hens or any of them, as he
or they shall by virtue of the said commission or commissions leuye, take, or
purueye, within any particular town paryshe or hamlet, set lyinge and
being within any such county or counties, as shall be named contained and
expressed within the said commission or commissions or any of them, and the
same doket or doketes, brefe or brefes, fair and legyablye written and
subscribed as is aforesaid, shall well and truly deliver to the said high
constable petie constable, or hedborow or one of them, at such present time as
the said beues, wethers, lambs, calves, swyne, salt fyshe kind or kinds of
grain butter, chease, bakon, connyes, pigs, gese, capons, and henes, or any
of them shall be delivered to them or any of them upon pain of forfeyture
of.C.marks, of lawefull monye and one years imprysonment as often as he shall
so offend. The one moyte of which forfeyture to be to the king and queens
majesty's, and the other moyte to him that will sue therefore in any of the king
and queen's court of Record, by byll playnte write information or otherwise,
wherein no wager of law protection or essoygne to be allowed. All which
doketes or brefes the said high constable or constables, petie constable or
constables, headborowe or headborowes, shall deliver over to the Justices of
peace at the next general sessions to be holden within any of the said
counties. And that the same justices or two of them may and shall from time to
time certify the whole number and content of all and every the said dokets and
brefes, to the Lord Steward of the king and Queen's most honorable household,
for the time being, or to the treasurer and Comtroller of the same, or any of
them, or to the tresurer and Comptroller of the king and Queen's ships, if
provision of any ye things aforementioned be provided or taken, for the
victailing of the navy, or any of the king or Queen's Majesty's ships,
whereby the serving of any of the foresaid Commission or Commissions, and true
answeringe of the same shall fully appear.

Provided always and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that it shall
not be lawful to any person or persons, their deputy or deputyes or any of
them, which shall be aucthorised by such commission or commissions hereafter to
be granted as is aforesaid, to leuy, take or puruey any beues, wethers,
lambs, calves, any kind of saitfyshe kind or kinds of grain butter in
barrelles or other vesseles, chese bakon, connies, pigs, gese, capons, and
hens, or any of the^ other wise, or in any other sort and manner, then is in
several estatuts heretofore for purueyours made ordained provided appointed
limmitted and expressed, upon such pain and pains, as in the said several
estatutes is contained and expressed.

And forasmuch as the good and necessary laws heretofore made and provided
against the abuses and evil doings of purueiours are not taken to extend to
the under takers deputies, and servants of any such purueyours, by whom
therefore the people of this realm be oftentimes very vncharytablye and
unlawfully used and oppressed.

Be it therefore enacted by thaucthoritie of this present parliament that all
and every such laws statutes and provisions as heretofore have been made and
ordained against purueiours, and al and every the pains penalties forfeyture
and loss, contained mencyoned, or appointed, in any of the same laws or
statutes against purueyours and takers or any of them, shall also be extended
and executed upon every of their undertakers, deputies, and servants. And al
other which by color shall after the first day of January next coming, take
any victual or any other thing, by virtue or force of any such commission from
any the king and Queen's Majesty's Subjects contrary to the tenor and effect of
any of the said laws or estatutes, in like manner and form to al intentes and
purposes, as the same laws and Estatutes, or any of them, and the pains and
forfeytures therein contained, should, might, or ought to be executed and
extended against Purueyours and Takers them selves or any of them. And as stron
gelye and amplye, as if the said undertakers, deputies, and servants were
specially and perticulerly recited and named in every of the same estatutes.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid for the better
execution of this act, and all other acts concerning pnrueyours, that all
and every commission and commyssions that from hencefourth shall be made and
granted unto any purueiour or purneyours shall be written and set fourth from
time to time in the English toungue and not otherwise.

An Act against the bying of stolen horses.
The seventh Chapyter.
FOR as much as stolen horses, Mares, and geldings by thenes and their
confederates be, for the most part sold exchaunged given or put away in
houses stables, backesydes and other secret and priuye places. of marketes and
faires, and the toll also pryuelye paid for the same, whereby the true owners
thereof, being not hable to try the falshed and couyne betwixt the byer and
seller of such horse, mare, or geldynge, is by the common laws of this realm
without remedy.

Be it therefore enacted by the authority of this present parliament that the
owner, governor, ruler, fermour, steward, baylyffe or chief keeper of every
fair and market ouerte within this realm, and other the queen's dominions shall
before the feast of Easter next, and so yearly appoint and lymyt out one
certain and special open place within the town, place, field, or circute,
where horses, mares, geldynges and Coltes, has been and shall be used to be
sold, in any fair or market ouert in which said certain and open place as is
aforesaid, there shall be by the said ruler or keeper of the said fair or
markette, put in and appointed one sufficient person, or more to take toll and
keep the same place from ten of the clock before none until son set of every
day of the foresaid fair and market, upon pain to lose and forfeyte for
every default, fortye shyllynges, and that every toll gatherer his deputye or
deputies, shall during the time of every the said faires and marketes, take
their due and lawefull toles, for every such horse, mare, geldyng, or colte, at
the said open place to be appointed as is beforesayde and betwyxt the hours of
ten of the cloak in the morning, and the sun set of the same day, yfit be
tedered and not at any other time or place, and shall have presently before him
or them at the taking of the same tole the parties to the bargayne exchange,
gift, contract, or puttyng away of every such horse mare, geldyng or colte,
and also the same horse, mare, geldyng and colte, so sold exchaunged or put
away, and shall then write or cause to be written in a book to be kept for
that purpose, the names, surnames, and dwelling places of all the said parties,
and the color with one special mark at the least, of every such horse, mare,
geldyng or colte, in pain to forfeyte at and for every defaulte, contrary to
the tenor hereof fortye shyllynges. And the said toll gatherer or keeper of
the said book, shall within one day next after every such fair, or market,
bring and deliver his said book to the owner, governor, ruler, steward,
baylyffe, or chief keeper of the said fair or market, who shall then cause a
note to be made of the true number of all horses, mares, geldynges, and coltes,
sold at the said market or fair, and shall there subscrybe his name or set his
mark thereunto, upon pain to him that shall make default therein to lose and
forfeyte for every defaulte forty shillynges, and also to answer the party
grieved, by reason of the same his uegly gence in every behalf.

And be it further enacted by the aucthorstie aforesaid, that the sale gift
exchange or putting away after the last day of February now next coming
in any fair or markette ouerte of any horse, mare, geldynge, colte, that is
or shall be theuyshelye stolen or feloniously taken away from any person or
persons, shall not alter take away nor exchange the property of any person
or persons to, or from any such horse, mare, geldynge, or colte, unless the
same horse, mare, geldyng, or colte, shall be in the time of the said fair, or
markette, wherein the same shall be sold given exchaunged or put away,
openly rydden led walked driven or kept standing, by the space of one hour
together at the least, betwyxte ten of the cloak in the morning and the
sun setting, in the open place of the fair or market wherein commonly horses
are commonly used to be sold and not with in any house, yard, back side, or
other priuye or secret place, and unless all the parts to the bargayne
contracte, gift, or exchange, present in the said fair or market, shall
also come together and bring the horse, mare, geldyng or colte, so sold,
exchaunged, given or put away to the open place appointed, for the toll
taker or for the book keeper, where no toll is due, and there enter, or cause
to be entered their names and dwelling places, in manner as is aforesaid, with
the color or colors and one special mark at ye lease of every the same
horses mares, geldynges or coltes in the tollers book, or in the kepers book
for that purpose, where no tol is due as is aforesaid, and also pay him their
tole, if they ought to pay any, and if not, then the byer to give one penny
for the entery of their names, and executyng the other circumstaunces before
rehearsed, to him that shall write the same in the said book, and if any horse,
mare geldyng or colte, that is or shall be theuyshelye stolen or taken away,
shall after the said last day of Februarye next coming, be sold given,
exchaunged or put away, in any fair or market, and not used in all points
according to the tenor and intent of this estatute that then the owner of every
such horse, mare, geldyng, or colte, shall and may by force of this estatute
sease or take again the said horse, mare, gelding, or colt, or have any action
of detinue or repliuin for the same, any sale gift exchange or putting
away, of any such horse mare, geldyng, or colte, other then according to this
estatute in any wise not wythstandynge, the one half of all which forfetures
to be to the King and Queen's Maiestyes, her heirs and successors, and the
other to him or them that will sue for the same before the Justices of peace,
or in any of the king and queen's majesty's ordinarye courts of Record, by
byll playnte, action of debt, or information, in which suits no protection,
essoyne or wager of law, shall be allowed.

And be it enacted by thaucthoritye aforesaid that the Justices of peace of
every place and countye as well within libertyes as with out, shall have
authority in their sessions within the limittes of their authority and
commission, to enquire here and determine, all offenses against this estatute,
as they may do any other matter triable before them.

Provided always, that in every such fair and markette where any tole is
nor shall be due ne leuiable by reason of the fredome liberty or pryueledge of
the said fair or market, the keeper or kepers of the book touching the
executyon of this present act, shall take nor exact but one penye upon and
for every contracte, for his labor in writing the enterie, concerning the
premysses in manner and form as is before declared.

An Act for the amendyng of high ways.
The eight Chapyter.
FOR amendynge of high ways being now both very noisome and tedious to
travel in, and dangerous to all passengers and cariages.

Be it enacted by the authority of this present Parlyament, that the
Constables and Church wardens of every Paryshe within this Realm, shall
yerelye upon the Twesoaye or Wednesdaye in Easter weke, call together a number
of the Parochians, and shall then elect and choose two honest persons of the
paryshe, to be surueyours and orderers for one year, of the works for
amendment of the high ways in their paryshe, leadynge to any market town,
the which persons shall have aucthorytye by virtue hereof, to order and
dyrecte the persons and cariages that shall be appointed for those works by
their dyscretions, and the said persons so named shall take upon them the
execution of their said offices upon pain every of them making default to
forfeyte twenty shyllynges. And the said constables and church wardens shall
then also name and appoint four days, for the amendynge of the said ways
before the feast of the natiuytye of S. John Baptyste then next following. And
shall openly in ye church the next sunday after Easter give knowledge of ye
same four days, and upon the said days the parochyans shall endeavor them
selves to thamending of the said ways, and shall be chargeable thereunto as
follows that is to say, every person for every plowlande in tyllage or
pasture that he or she shall occupye in the same parish and every other person
keeping there a draught or plowe, shall find and send at every day and place to
be appointed for thamending of the ways in that parysh as is aforesaid, one
wayne or carte furnished after the custo^e of the country. with oxen, horses,
or other cattle, and all other necessaryes mete to cari things conuenyent for
that purpose, and also two hable men with the same, upon pain of every draught
making defaulte ten shyllynges and every other householder and also every
cotiger and labourer of that parish hable to labor and being no hired
servant by the year, shall by them selves or one sufficient labourer for
every of them upon every of the said four days, work and travel in
thamendement of the said high ways upon pain of every person making default
to lose for every day.xii. pence. And if the cariages of the paryshe or any of
them shall not be thought needful by the superuisours to be occupied upon any
of the said days, that then every such person that should have sent any such
caryage, shall send to the said work for every caryage so spared two hable
men there to labor for that day upon pain to lose for every man not so sent
to yt said work twelve pence. And every person and caryage above said, shall
have and bring with them such shouels, spades, pyckes, matockes, and other
toles, and instruments, as they do make their own dyches and fences wythal
and such as be necessary for their said work. And all the said persons and
caryages shall do and keep their work as they shall be appointed by the said
superuisours, or one of them, eyghte hours of every the said days, vniesse
they shall be otherwise lycensed by the said superuysours or one of them.

And be it enacted by the aucthorytye aforesaid that the Steward and Stewardes
of every let or lawedaye shall therein have full power and aucthorytye, to
inquire by the oaths of the suitors of al and every thoffences that shall be
committed within the let or law day, against every point, and article of
this estatute, and to assesse such reasonable fynes, and amercyamentes for the
same, as shall be thought mete by the said steward. And in default of such
enquiry or presentment, the Justices of peace of every place or county shall
have aucthoritye to inquire of the same offenses, which shall be committed within
the limits of their commission at every their quarter sessions and to assesse
such fynes therefore, as they or two of them, whereof one to be of the Quorum,
shall think mete. And ye steward of every let and law day shall make estretes
endented of all the fynes forfeytures, and amerciamentes, for the defaultes
presented before him and shall deliver the one part thereof sealed and sygned by
him to the balyfe or high constable of every hundred, rape, lath, or wapentake,
wherein the defaultes shall be presented and the other half to the constable and
church warde^s of the paryshe, wherein the defaultes was made, the same to be ye
rely delivered within six wekes after the feast of S. Mychel tharchaungel,
and the clarke of the peace shall make the like estretes ende^ted of the fynes
forfeytures and amerciamentes for the defaultes presented before the Justices
of peace and shall seal subscrybe and deliver the same, in like sort as is
aforesaid the which estreates and every of them shall be a sufficient warrant to
the said bailife or chief constable to leuye the said amerciame^tes, fines, and
forfeytures, by way of distress And if no suffycient distress can be found by
the said bailyffe or head constable, or if the said offender shall obstinatlye
refuse to pay the said amerciament, fine, or forfeyture, and do not pay the
same within twentye days after a lawefull demand of the same by the said
officer, that then every such person to forfeyt the double sum that he
should before have paid.

And be it further enacted, that every of the said baylifes and head
constables shall at the least once every year betwixt the first day of March
and the last day of Apryl, make a true account and payment of al such sommes of
money (to the constable and churchwarde^s of every paryshe wherein the
offenses was committed or to two of them) as he shall have collected upon any
of the aforesaid estreates, upon pain to forfeyte for every time he shall
not so do.xl. shyllynges.

And be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that all fynes amerciamentes and
forfeytures which shall be dew for any offense against the puruey of this
estatute, shall be to the churchwardens of every parish wherein thoffences shall be
committed to be bestowed of the high ways in the said paryshes, and the said
churchewardens shall have authority to call the said baylyfe and
headconstable to account be fore the Justices of peace or two of them whereof
one to be of yt Quorum by byl, information or otherwise. The which Justices
shall have authority to take the said account, and to commit the said
bailife or head constable to prison, there to remain until he shall pay al such
arrerages as shall be adjudged by the said Justices, and every of the said
baylyfes, and head constables upon their accomptes shall have allowed for every
pound he shall collect and pay.viii. pence for his own pains and.xii. pence
for the fees of the clerk of the peace or steward of the late for thestrates
endented of every several paryshe that they shall deliver as is aforesaid, and
the successors of every churchwardens shall have the like action of account
against their predecessoures as is before appointed against the baylyffes. This
act to continue for seven years next after the beginning of this parliament.
And to ye end of the next parlyament then next following.

An Act to avoid diverse licenies of houses wherein unlawful games be used.
The.ix. Chapyter.
Most humblye besecheth the Queen's most excellent hyghnes your loving and
obedyente Subjects, the commons in this your present parliament assembled that
where by reason of diverse sundry licenses heretofore granted to diverse
persons, as well within the city of London, and the Suburbs of the same as
also in diverse other places, within your hyghnes realm, for the having,
mayteyning, and keeping of houses, gardens, and places for bowlynge, tenyse,
disyng, white, and black, making and marryng, and other unlawful games,
prohibited by the laws and statuts of this realm, diverse and many unlawful
assembles, conuenticles sedicions, and conspiracies, have and been daily,
secretlye practiced, by idle and misruled persons, repayryng to such places,
of the which robberyes and many other misoemeanours, have ensued to the brech
of your hyghnes peace. For remedy whereof it may please your highness that it
may be enacted by your hyghnes the Lords spyrytuall and temporal, and the
commons in this present parliament assembled that from and after the feast of
the birth of our lord God then next coming, every lycense, placard, or
grant, made to any person or persons, for the having maintenance, or keeping
of any bowling all is disinge houses, or any other unlawful games,
prohibyted by ye laws and estatutes of this realm, shall be from the said
feast utterly void and of none effect.

An act to take examination of prysonners suspected of any man slaughter or
felonye. Chapy.x.
WHere in the last Parlyament holden at Westminster amongst other things it
was enacted, that such Justices of the peace as have authority, to bail any
prsoner brought before them for any manslaughter or felony, before any
bailement or maineprice should take ye examination of the said prisoner and
information of the^ that bring him of the fact and circumstaunces thereof, and
the same or as much thereof as shall be material to prove the felony, shall put in
writing before they make the same bailement, which said examination together
with the said baylement the said justices should certify at the next general
goal delivery, to be holden within the limits of their commission, as by ye
same actmore plainly is contained and may appear.

And forasmuch as the laid act does not extend to such prisoners as shall be
brought before any justice of peace for manslaughter or felony and by such
justice shall be committed to ward for ye suspision of such ma^slaughter or
felonye, and not bailed, in which case examination of such prisoner and of
such as shall bring him, in as necessary or rather more the^ where such prisoner
shall be fet to bail or mainpryce. Be it therefore enacted by thaucthoritie of
this present parliament, that from hence forth such justices or justice before
who^ any person shall be brought for ma^slaughter or felonye, or for suspicion
thereof, before he or they shall commit or send such prisoner to ward shall take
thexamination of such prisoner and informatio^ of those that bring him of the
fact and circumstance thereof, and the same or as much thereof as shall be
material to prone ye felony, shall put in writing within.ii. days after the
said examination and the same shall certify in such manner and form and at such
time as theishould and ought to do if such prisoner so committed or sent to
ward had been bayled or let to mainepryse, upon such pain as in the said
former act is limited and appointed for not taking, or not certifying such
examinations as in the said former act is expressed. And be it further enacted
that the said justices shall have authority by this act to bind al such by
recognisau^ce or obligation, as do declare any thing material to prove the
said ma^slaughter or felony against such prisoner as shall be so committed to
ward to appear at the next general gole delivery to be holden within the
cou^tie, city, or town corporate, where the trial of the said ma^slaughter or
felony shall be, then and there to give evidence against the party, and that the
said justices shall certifi ye said bands taken before the^ in like manner, as
they should and ought to certifye the bands mentioned in ye said former act,
upon the pain as in the said former act is mentioned for not certifying such
bands, as by the said former act is limited and appointed to be certified.

An Act touching weauers.
The eleventh Chapyter.
FOrasmuch as the weauers of this realm, have as well at this present
parlyament, as at diverse other times, complained that the rych and welthy
clothyers do many ways oppress them, some by setting up and keeping in their
houses, diverse lomes, and keeping and mayntening them by Journey men and
persons unskillful, to the decay of a great number of artificers, which were
brought up in the said science of weauyng, their famylyes and houseshould, some
by ingrossyng of loomes into their hands, and possession, and lettyng them out
at such unreasonable rents, as the pore artificers are not hable to maintain
them selves, much less their wives famylye and children, some also by geuynge
much less wages and hyer, for the weauyng and workemanshype of clothe, the^
in times past they did, wherebye they are enforced utterly to forsake their
art and occupation wherein they have been brought up.

It is therefore for remedy of the premises, and for thaduoidinge of a great
number of inconveniences which may grow (if in time it be not forsene)
ordained establyshed and enacted, by authority of this present parlyament,
that no person using the feate or mystery of cloth making and dwelling out of a
city, borough, market town or corporate town, shall from the feast of Saint
Michel tharchaungel, now next ensewyng, keep retain or have in his or their
house or possession any more or above one woollen lome at one time, nor shall
by any means directly or indirectly receive or take any manner proffit gain or
commodity by lettynge or setting any lome, or any house wherein any lome is
or shall be used and occupied, which shall be togithers by him set or let upon
pain of forfeyture for every weke that any person shall do contrary to the
tenor and true meaning hereof.xx. s.

And be it further ordained and enacted by like authority, that no woollen
weauer using or exercisyng the feate or mystery of weuing and dwelling out of
ciiie borough market town or town corporat shall after the said feast have,
or keep at any one time above ye number of two woollen lomes, or receive any
poffyt gain or commodity be directly or indirectly as is aforesaid by any
more then two lomes at one time upon pain to forfeyte for every weke that any
person shall offend or do to the contrary.xx. s. And it is further ordained
and enacted by like authority that no person which shall after the said
feast use exercise or occupye only the feate or mysterye of a weuer and not
clothmakyng shall during the time that he shall use the feate or mystery of a
weauer, keep or have any tuckyng myll, or shall use or exercise the feate or
mystery of a tuckinge mill, or dier upon pain to forfeyt for every weke that
he shall so do, xx. s.

And it is further ordained and enacted by like authority that no person
which after the said feast shall use exercise or occupye the feate or mystery
of a tucker, or fuller, shall during the time that he shall so use yt said feate
or mysterye, keep or have any lome in his house or possession or shall dyrectly
or indyrectly take any proffyt or commodity by the same, upon pain to
forfeyte for every weke twentye shyllynges. And it is further ordained and
enacted by like authority, ye no person whatsoever which heretofore has not
used or exercised ye feate mystery or art of cloth making, shall after the
said feast make or weaue or cause to be made or wouen any kind of broad white
wolen clothes, but only in a city borough town corporate or market town, or
else in such place or places where such clothes have been used to be commonly
made, by the space of ten years next before the making of this act, upon
pain of forfeyture for every cloth otherwise made five pounds.

Provided always and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
it shall not be lawefull to any person or persons being a weauer, or that
does or shall use the act or misterye of a weaner or weauing, dwelling out of a
city, borough town corporate or market town, to have in his and their
service any more or above the number of two apprentyces at one time, upon
pain to forfeyte for every time that he shall offend or do contrary to this
branch, or article, ye su^me of ten pou^des. And further be it enacted by
thauctoritie aforesaid that it shall not be laweful to or for any person or
persons, to set up the art or mystery of weauyng after the said feast of
Sayut Mychel unless the same person or persons so setting up the same art or
mystery of weauyng have been apprentyce to ye same art or mystery or exercised
the same by the space of Seven years at the least upon pain of twenty
pounds, to be forfeyted to the king and Queen's Majesty's her graces heirs or
successors, The one moite of all which forfeytures shall be to the king and
Queens highness her heirs and Successors. And the other moyte to him or
the^ that will sue for the same in any court of record, by action of debte,
byll playnt or information, wherein no wager of law essoigne or protection
shall be admitted or allowed for the defendaunt.

Provided always and be it enacted by the authority alore said, that this
act nor any thing therein contained, shall in any wise extend or be prejudicial
to any person or persons, that does or shall dwell in the counties of Porke
Cumberland Northumberlande and Westmerland, but that they and every of them
shall and may have and keep lomes in their howses, and do and exercise al and
every thing and things, for or concerning spynnyng, weauyng, cloth workyng,
and clothmakyng in the said county as they or any of them might have done, or
exercised laufully before ye making of this estatute, any thing contained in
this estatute to the contrary in any wise notwista^ding

An act for the viewing and sealyng of clothes commonly called bridge waters.
The twelft Chapyter.
WHere before this time, the borowes and towns of Brydgewater Taunton and
Charde in the county of Sommersetshere have been well and substancially
inhabited occupied maintained and vpholden, for the most part by reason of the
making of woollen cloths commonly called Brydgewater Taunton and Charde Clothes
which in times past were much desired as well beyond the Seas, as in this realm
of England, and thereby the inhabytaunts and pore people of the said borowes
and towns, and of the country there aboutes were daily set on work and had
sufficient living by the same, and where also the said towns in times past
were of gretforce and strength, to serve the king and queen's hyghnes
progenytoures and auncesters, kings of this realm. Forasmuch as of late diverse
persons inhabiting and dwelling in the villages hamelettes and small towns of
husbandry in the said couutie of Sommersete which were never prentises or
skylfull in making of the said cloths as well for their pryuate welths and
commodities, as also because they would be out of de we search of their clothes
to be made according to the statute therefore provided, not regardyng the
maintenance of the said borowe and towns, nor the commonwealth of the handye
crafts men and other pore people, which cheifely had there living and
sustenaunce by making of the said clothes, have of late days exercised used
and occupied the misteryes of cloth making weauing fullynge and sheryng within
their houses, and have so deceiptfully made wrought and stretched the said
clothes, to the infamy and slander of cloth making, in such sort and manner
that not only the same sorts of clothes are grown out of estimation, but
also the said towns are in great decay ruin and depopulation.

For remedy whereof be it enacted by authority of this present parlyament,
that no person whatsoever inhabytyng, or which shall hereafter inhabyte within
the said County shall after the feast of the Purification of our Lady next
coming commonly called Candel mas put to sale any kind of such clothes as is
aforesaid, or cloths of like nature making and sort, made or to be made
within the said county, except such cloth be first viewed serched and seen in
one of ye boroughes or towns aforesaid, whether the same be perfectly and
truly made according to the statute, and also that the same be sealed with the
Seal of one of the said boroughes or towns in such sort manner and form, as
in the statute made in the.v. year of the reign of our late soueraygne Lord
king Edward the.vi. entitled an act for the true making of woollen cloth, is
for sealing of clothes, provided and enacted upon pain that every person
offendyng or doing co^tra rye to the true meaning of this act, shall forfeyte
the cloth sold or ye balew thereof, the moyte of all which forfeytures shall be
to our soueraygne Lord and Lady the king and Queen's Majesty's, the heirs and
Successors of the queen's Majesty, and the other half to him or them that
will sue for the same in any of the king and Quenees Majesty's court of
record, her heirs and Successors, wherein no essoygne protection or wager of
law shall be admitted or allowed.

An act for the inhabytauntes of Halyfaxe touching the bying of woulles.
The.xiii. Chapyter.
Forasmuch as the paryshe of Halyfaxe and other places thereunto adioynyng
being planted in the great wastes and mores where the fertility of ground is,
not apt to bring forth any corn, nor good grass, but in rare places, and by
exceadyng and great industrye of thinhabytauntes. And the same inhabitauntes
altogether do live by clothmakyng, and the great part of them neither gets
corn, nor is hable to keep a horse to carry woles, nor yet to bie much wolle at
once, but has ever used only to repair to the town of Halyfaxe and some
other nigh thereunto, and there to by unto the woldryuer some a stone, some two
and sum three or four, according to their ability, and to carry the same to
their houses some three, four.v. and six miles of, upon their heddes and
backs, and so to make and convert the same either into yarne, or cloth, and
to sell the same, and so to buy more wolle of the woldryuer, by means of which
industry the barreyne grounds in those parties be no we much inhabyted and
above five hundredth householdes there newly increased within these forty years
past, which now are like to be undone and driven to beggary, by reason of the
late estatute made, that takes away ye wol dryuer, so that they can not now
have their woll by such small porcions as they were wont to have, and that also
they are not hable to keep any horses whereupon to ride or fette their wolles
further from them in other places, onles some remedy may be provided. For the
remedy whereof be it enacted by the king and Quenees Majesty's by the lords
spiritual and temporal, and commons in this present parliament, and by
thaucthorite of the same, that from henceforth, it shall be law full to any
person or persons inhabiting within the parysh of Halifax to bye any wolle or
wolles, at such times as the clothiers may by the same, otherwise then by
engrossing and forstalling, so that the persons so bying the same, do carry or
cause to be carried yt said wolles so boughte by them, to the town of Halifaxe,
and there to sell the same to such poor folks of that and other paryshes
adioyninge, as shall work the same in cloth or yarne (to their knowledge) and
not to the rich and welthy clothier nor to any other to sell again, and if
either the said woldriuer shall sell his said wolles at any other place forth of
the said town of Halifax or if any such shall by their wolles at Halyfaxe,
shall selle their wolles that they bought again unwrought in yarne or cloth,
that then every such offender to lose and forfeyt the double value of the wolle
so sold or uttered, ye one moyte thereof to be to the king and queen's
majesty's, her heirs and successors kings of this realm, and the other moyte
to him or them that will sue for the same in any of the king and queen's
majesty's courts of record, or before the justices of peace in their
sessions, who by virtue hereof in their open sessions shall have authority upon
information, to hear and determyne the same and to make process against the
offenders as in any other case to be determined before them.

An act for the reedefyinge of four mylles nere the city of Herforde.
Cap.xiiii.
SHe wen unto your majesty's your humble supplyantes, the deane and chapter of
the cathedral church in the cirie of Herforde, and also the mayor and
comminalty of the said city, that where until the.xix. year of the raygne
of the late king of famous memory king Henry the.viii. the deane and chapyter
of the said cathedral church the^ being were seized in their demean as offee,
as in the right of the said church of and in two corn milles and two fulling
milles set upon the river of Wie, wtin one quarter of a mile of the said city,
with the water coming to and going from the said milles and also with a wear upon
the same river the^ belonging to the said milles, which milles time out of
mind were and have been so beneficial for thinhabytants of ye said city that
thereby clothmakyng was there greatly increased, and very much people there
inhabyting set on work, as weauers, fullers, walkers, spynners and carders,
whereby the said city was well occupied, and the inhabitants thereof the^ very
welthy and rich, and so continued until the said, xix. year of the said late
king Henry the.viii. at which time by wrongful suggestion made to the said late
king, upon malice born to ye said deane and chapter, and by a private letter
from the said late king by sinister means opteyned, all the said four milles
were throwe^ down and destroyed, by reason whereof ye clothmaking in ye said city
utterly cessed And thereby the same city has run in such extreme ruin
and de caye, that the people there inhabitynge (who before that time were there
well occupied in the mysteries aforesaid) are now not able for lack of work
to get their own living to their utter impouerishing and defacing of the said
city, which is no we so filled with such number of poor, as may not be
releiued there, unless clothemakynge be there set furthe and maynteyned as it
was before, which greatelye should increase again, if the said four
mylles, or other for them, were reedified and builded.

It may therefore please your majesty's that it may be enacted by your
majesty's, the lords spiritual and temporal, and the co^mo^s in this present
parliament assembled, and by thauctoritie of the same, that at any time
hereafter, it shall be lawefull to the said dean and chapy ter of the said
cathedral church of Hereforde for the time being, or their fermoures or
assygnes, to build, reedify, and set up, or cause to be buylte, reedifyed, and
set up of new, in the places where the said mylles were builded, or as nere
to the said places as conuenientlye may be, so it be upon the soil or ground
of the said deane and chapter, four other sufficient milles, that is to say
two corn milles, and two fullyng milles. And that from the time that the said
four milles in form aforesaid, shall be sufficiently builded and set up, the
said deane and chapter and their successors, shall and may be seized of the
said milles, and of the water coming to and going from the said mylles, and
of the fyshinge in the same water, and the ways and paths leadyng to the same
mylles, and of the said wear of such estate as the said deane and chapter then
being, at the time that the said milles or any of them, were thrown down or
destroyed, were seized of the said other milles and of the said waters,
fyshinges, ways, paths, and wear, belonging to the said four milles or
any of them.

And it may be further enacted by thauctoritye aforesaid that the said deane
and chapter of the said cathedral church for the time being their fermoures
or assigns, shall have time to buyld and set up or cause to be buylt and set
up, the said four mylles in manner and form aforesaid, within the space of
eight years next after the first day of this present parliament. Saving unto
al and every person and persons bodies politic and corporate their heirs and
successoures, other then ye said deane and chapyter and their successors, all
such ryghtes, states tytles, and interestes, which they or any of them had or
ought to have of and in the premises, or any of them, before the said milles
were thrown down and destroyed, in such manner and form as though this act
had never been had or made.

An act that purueyours shall not take victuals within five miles of Cambridge
and Oxforde. The.xv. Chapt.
HVmbly sue to your maiestyes, the societyes, Colleges and companyes, of your
true and faithful subjects, and daily orators the scholars and students of
both your majesty's universities, Cambribge and Orforde that where it has been
accustomed time out of mind that both the said market towns of Cambridge and
Oxforde, wherein the said two vnyuersityes be set, and the circuit of five
miles next adioynyng, has been free from any charge or molestation of any
common takers, or purueyours for vyctuall whereby the said markettes, were more
plentifullye served with vyctual and the poor estate of a great multitude of
scholars, having very bare and small sustentation thereby releued, and now by
the means that contrary to the same laudable custom, diverse purueyors and
takers have of late excessiuely frequented the said markettes, and thereby
given occasyon to make the vyctelles both more skante and much dearer to a
notorious decay of scholars, which also daily in this great derth is like to
increase and be more lamentable, to the hinderance of gods service, the
dishoner of the realm, the discomfort of al good and holy men, loving learning
and virtue.

It may therefore please your maiestyes of your great pytye and haboundaunte
favor and love toward your said two universities, being the very two only
nourses of good learning in this realm, with the assent of the Lords
spyrytuall and temporal, and the commons in this present parliamente
assembled, and by the aucthorytye of the sanie, to enacte, ordain, and
establyshe, that from henceforthe no manner of purueyor, taker, bager, looder,
or other mynyster, may or shall take or bargayne for any kind of vyctuall or
grain, in any of the said markettes or towns of Cambrydge, and the City of
Oxforde, nor shall take or bargayne for any vyctuall within the compass of
five miles, thereto adioynynge without the consent agreement or good will of the
owner or owners, nether shall attempt to carry, take away, or bargayne for any
manner of grain, or other vyctuall, bought or provided within the said, space
of five miles by any common minyster, of any College, hostell, or hall, to
be spent within any of the said Colleges, hostels, or halles, upon pain of
the forfeyture of the quadruple value, of any such manner grain, or vyctuall
so taken or bargayned for, in any of the said markettes, or within the said
space of five miles, against the will of the owners, as is above said, or
attempted to be taken, carried away or bargayned for being provided as is
above said, for to be spent in any the Colleges, hostelles, or halles. And
further shall suffer imprysonment for the space of three Months without bail
or mamepryse and that the Chancellor or vice chancellor or his Commyssary
for the time being, in either of the said vnyuersityes, with two Justices of
peace, of the Countye, wherein the said vniuer sities be set shall have full
power by aucthoritye of this act, to inquire by the oaths of.xii. men, of and
upon the defaultes and offenses commytred contrary to the tenor thereof, and to
see due punyshement and reformatyon thereof in form aforesaid, from time to
time, the one half of which foresaid forfeytures to be to the common treasure
of either the said vuiuersityes respectiuelye to the fault committed against
this their privilege, the other half to the party that wylsue for the same by
action of debte, byll playnt or otherwise in any court of Record. or before
the foresaid Chauncelour his vice chancellor or Commyssary for the time
being, and two Justices of peace, as is before expressed.

Provided that this act shall not be put in execution at any time or times
whenever your Maiestyes, or the heirs or Successors of your maiestieour
Soueraygne Lady, shall please to come to any of both the said universities, or
within seven miles of either of the^ but shall be in suspense during that time
only and not longer.

Provided always and be it enacted by the aucthoritye aforesaid, that this
act or any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise be prejudicial or
hurtful, to the Mayre Balyffes, and Comminaltye, of the City of Oxford, nor
to the Mayre and commynaltye of the town of Cambrydge, or to their
successors, for and concerning any of their libertyes, or privileges, but that
they and every of them and their successoures, respectiuelye, may have and use
the same, in such manner and form, as they or any of them might or ought to
have don before the making of this act, any thing in this act contained to the
contrary not with standing.

An act touching watermen and bargemen upon the river of Thamyse.
The.xvi. Chapyter.
WHere as heretofore for lack of good gouernemente and dew order, amongst
whyrymen, and watermen, exercisynge, using, and occupiynge rowing upon the
river of Thamyse, there have diverse and many mysfortunes, and mischaunces,
happened and chanced of late years past, to agreat number of the king and
Queen's Subjects, as well to the nobility, as to other the common people, that
have passed and repassed, and been carried by water by reason of the rude
ignorant and unskillful number of watermen, which for the most part been
maisterlesse men, and syngle men of all kinds of occupations, and faculties,
which do work at their own hands. And many boys being of small age, and of
little skyll, and being persons out of the rule and obedience of any honest
master, and governor, and do for the most part of their time use dycyng and
cardynge, and other unlawful games, to the great and evil example of other
such like, and against the Common wealth of this Realm. And all which said
evil and ignorant persons, in the time of prestyng by commission, for the
service of the king and queen's most royal majesty's, upon the Sea, for that
they have no known place of abydyng, do for the most part absent and conueye
them selves into the Country, and other secret places, practicing there
robberyes, and felonyes, and other evil detestable factes, to the great
annoyaunce of the common wealth. And so after the said co^missyon of presting
ended, often times the said evil persons do repair again to their former
trade of rowyng, coulouryng their evil deeds, and also diverse of them being
very ignorant for lack of convenient time of learning and exercise, in yt
which they might obtain sufficient knowledge of their occupation do often times
presume and enterprice to receive diverse of of our said Soueraygne lord and
lady the king and queen's Majesty's loving subjects, into their botes and
whyryes, and do carry and convey their said Subjects, from place to place by
water upon the said river of Thamys, whereby diverse per sons have been robbed
and spoiled of their goods, and also drowned. And for and by the occasion
aforesaid, be daily put in fear and peril of their lives, the which is very
lamentable and not to be permitted or suffered in any common wealth. And by
reason also that a great number, and the most part of the whyryes, and botes,
now occupied and used, and of late time made for to wyng upon the said river,
beune made so little and small in portion, and so streighte and narowe, in the
bothome, varyinge much from the old substancial sort, and sure making of botes
and whiries which was used before the space of.xx. yers last past, in so much
as the most part of the botes and whiries used at this day been so shallowe and
tycle yt thereby great peril and danger of drowning has many times ensued and
daily is like to ensue onles some spedye remedy, be herein had and provided.

For reformation whereof, be it enacted by the king and queens Majesty's the
lords Spiritual and Temporoll, and the Commons in this present Parlyament
assembled, and by the aucthoritye of the same. That there shall be yearly
appointed, chosen, and elected, by the Mayor, and court of Aldermen, of the
city of London, for ye time being the number of eight persons, of the most
wise discret and best sort of water men being householders, and occupying as
watermen upon the said river between grauesende and windsore, which election
shall be yearly at the first court of aldermen, to be holden with in the said
city next after the first day of March, and the same eight persons so
elected shall be named and called the overseers, and rulers, of all the whyrymen
and waterme^, that from and after the said first day of March shall use
occupye or exercise any rowyng upon the said river of Thamyse, betwixt
Grauesend and Wyndsore aforesaid which said overseers and rulers, shall keep
and maintain good order and obedience, amongst the said watermen according to
the true meaning of this present act.

And also be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that after the
feast of Penticost next coming no person nor persons where two watermen and not
above the number of two shall row together in one bote or whyry, in any place or
places betwixt Grauesende, and Wyndsore aforesaid shall presume or enterprice
to receive or take any person or persons into his or their bote or whyrie, to
the intent to cari or convey him or them therein onles one of the same two
watermen have been for the most part exercised and used in rowyng upon the
said river of Thamyse by the space of two hole years, before yt time And that
also one of the same two watermen, at the least be duly admitted and allowed by
the same eight Overseers and rulers, or the most part of them by writing under
their known seal to be a sufficient and hable watermen, upon pain that every
person and persons presumyng or offending contrary to the true meaning of this
present act, shall by the said eight overseers or rulers be committed to prison
in one of the Counters of the city of London, there to remain by the space of
one month, or less as the offense shall require.

And also be it further enacted that no person nor persons being single men
not keeping houseshould and not retained, shall from and after the said feast of
Pentecost next coming use or exercise to row between Grauesend and Wyndsore
aforesaid, onles he or they be prentise or prentyses, or in service retained
with a master by the hole year at the least upon pain of like imprysonment.

And also be it further enacted that the Lord Mayor of London and the Aldermen
of the same City, and the Justices of peace, within the shyres next adioynyng
to the said river of Thamyse, every of them within their several jurisdictions
and aucthorities shall have full power and authority by virtue of this
present act, upon complaynt made to them or any of them by the said overseers
and rulers, or two of them, or the master or masters of any such servant
not only to examyne, here, and determyne al complayntes, and offenses to be
done or committed by any such person or persons, that shall offend contrary
to the true meaning of this present act, and to set at large all and every
such person and persons, as shall fortune to be impry soned by the said
overseers and rulers according to this act if just cause shall appear unto
them so to do. But also by their good discretions and wisdom to punyshe
correct, and reform, the said Overseers and Rulers, and every of them that
shall unjustly or without good cause or ground, punnyshe any person or
persons, by couloure of this present Act, or any thing therein contained.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritye aforesaid, that if any person or
persons whatsoever from hence forth do or shall make any whyrye or bote, to
the intent commonly to use rowing and carrying people upon the said river of
Thamis, which shall not be.xxii. foot and a half in length, and four foot and
a half broad in the midshyppe, or which shall not be substancially and well
hable and sufficient to carye two persons on one side tight, according to the
old quantity, scantlyng, thyckenes of board, goodness, and good proportion,
heretofore had, and used, that then the same bote or botes, so being made
contrary to the proportion and sort before expressed, shall be taken as
forfeyte, and shall be forfeyte, the one half thereof to the king and Queen's
Maiestyes, our said soueraygne lord and ladies use, and to the use of the
heirs and successors of the queen's majesty. And the other half to him
ortheym that will sue for the same, in any of the king and queen's majesty's
courts of Record, by action of detinue Byll, Playnte, Information, or
otherwise, wherein no wager of law essoygne, protection, or iniunction, shall
be allowed for the defendaunt.

And be it further enacted that if any person or persons, which from and after
the said feast, shall use and exercise the occupation of rowyng betwyxt
Grauesend and Wyndesore aforesaid, which in the time of the execution of any
Commission of prestynge, that shall be had for the service of the king and
Quenees Maiestyes, and the heirs and Successors of the queen's Majesty, in
their affairs, shall wyllynglye, voluntarylye, and obstinatelye, wythdrawe,
hyde, or conueye him or them selves, in the same time of prestynge into secret
places, and out corners, and after when such time of prestyng is ouerpassed
shall return and come again to the said river of Thamise, to row betwixt
grauesend and Wyndsore before said, and that duly proved by two indifferent
wytnes, before the said mayor and court of aldermen, or Justices of the peace
and two of the said rulers, that then he or they so doing and offendyng, shall
suffer impriso^ment by the space of two weakes, and be banyshed any more to
row from thenceforth upon the said river of Thamys, by the space of one hole
year and a day, then next folowinge.

And be it further enacted, that it shall be lawefull to the said.viii. rulers
for the time being. and their successors from time to time to co^uent and call
before them at some conuenyent place, by them to be appointed, all and every
such person and persons, which from and after the said feast of Pentecoste,
shall occupye and use the said trade and occunation of rowing betwixt
Grauesende and Wyndsore aforesaid and shall enter and regester the name and
names of them, and every of them that shall be by them allowed or admytted for
watermen, to row betwyxt Grauesende and Wyndesore aforesaid, in a book to be
made for the same intent and purpose, and to take such further order and
direction therein, with every the said parties, by the aucthoritye of this
present act, as it shall seem mete and necessary by the discretion of the said
ouer^eers, and rulers for the time being. And also that the said overseers and
rulers, shall and may by aucthority of this act, ouersee, vyewe, and surueye,
at al and every time and times hereafter, al manner botes and whyries, that shall
from and after the said feast be made, before the said bote or botes, whyrye
or whyryes, be lanched out of the yard or ground wherein the same bote or
botes, whyry or whyryes, shall fortune to be made, into the said river of
Thamyse, to the intent that they and every of the^ may be made and prepared in
such manner and form, and according to the goodness, proporci on and quantity,
in this present act before lymytted and expressed.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid that if any person or
persons, which at any time hereafter shall be elected or chosen to be a ruler or
ouerseer, as before is expressed do happen negligently to use and exercise, his
or their rowme or place, or yt will obstinately refuse to take upon him or
them, the rowme or rowmes, place or places, of any the said overseers or
rulers, that then all, and every such offender or offenders so offendyng,
shall lose and forfeyte the sum of tyue pounds of lawful money of England.
The one half whereof shall be to our said soueraygne lord and lady the king and
queen's matesties use, and to thuse of the heirs and successors of ye queens
majesty, and the other half to him or them, that will sue for the same in any
of the king and queen's majesty's courts of record, by action of debt, or by
any other the ways or means above specified, wherein no wager of law,
essoyne, protection, or miunction, shall be admitted or allowed, for the
defendaunt or defendauntes.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that the said mayor and
court of aldermen of the said city of London, for the time being, shall from
time to time at their discretions limit, set, and assesse assesse the price and
pryces, and fu^mes of money that every person or persons, so aucthorised to row
as is aforesaid betwyxt Grauesend and Wyndsore aforesaid shall take for his or
their labor, or fare from place to place perticulerly betwixt Grauesende and
Windesore aforesaid, and the same pryces and assessementes to be set, shall
bring or cause to be brought to the privy Council of our soueraygne lord and
Lady the king and queen to be viewed and seen by some of the said pryuye
council, and after that the said assessementes and pryces, shall be sygned and
subscribed with the hands of two of the said pryuy council at the least, the
said Mayor and court of Aldermen for the time being shall cause the said
pryces and assessementes to be written and set up in tables in the Guylde hall,
in the city of London, Westminster hall, and elsewhere, where the said Mayor
and court of Aldermen shall think convenient. And every person and persons
that shall take for his or their fare or labor above the pryces that shall be
assessed, viewed, written, and set up in form aforesaid, shall forfeyt for
every such offense fourtye shyllynges, and also shall suffer imprysonment by
one half year, the one moite of the said forfeyture to be to the king and
Queen's Maiestyes, their heirs and Successors, and the other moite thereof, to
him or them that will sue for the same in any of the king and Queen's majesty's
courts o^ record, by action of debte, or by any other the ways or means
above specified, wherein no wager of law, essoyne, protection, or iniunction,
shall be admitted or allowed for the defendaunt or defendauntes.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid that no person nor persons
occupiynge or using any Western barge, shall reteyne, take, or receive into
his or their service, any single person, not keeping house or household, but
only such as shall be retained with him or them by the hole year, and no
householder, but such as he or they will and shall answer for, for his or their
good behauior, upon pain of for feyture for every such offense fourtye
shyllynges, the one moyte thereof to be to the king and Queen's Majesty's, her
heirs and successors and the other moite thereof to him of them that will sue
for the same in any of the king and queen's courts of Record by action of
debte, or by any other the ways or means above specified, wherein no wager of
law essoyne, protection, or iniunction, shall be admytted or allowed for the
defendaunt or defendauntes.

An act to take away the benefyte of clergy from Benet Smith for the murder
of Rufforde.
The.xvii. Chapter.
IN most humble wise shows unto your most excellent hygnesses, and to the
lords and commons in this present parliament assembled, your true subject and
daily oratryce Margery Rufforde wydow, late the wife of Gyles Rufforde, late of
Edlesburgh in your graces cou^tye of Buckyngham esquyre, deceased, that where
one Benedict Smyth late of Edlesburgh aforesaid yoman, otherwise called Benet
Smith late of Edlesburgh in the said cou^ty of Buckingham gentleman, of his
cruel mind and deadly malice and hatred which he the said Benedict had and
did bear unto the said Gyles Rufforde, he the said Benedict in the term of
Easter in the first year of the raygne of your hyghnes our said soueraygne
lady the queen, did purchase and comence a writ of appeal of robbery
returnable in your hyghnes benche commonly called the kings benche, against
the foresaid Gyles Rufford, and other persons supposyng by the same writ, and
by the declaration thereupon made, that the said Gyles Rufforde and the other
persons named in the said writ, the seventh day of Apryll in the said first
year, at little Gaddesden, in your graces county of Hertford, did feloniousely
steal, take, and bear away from the person of the said Benedict one cloak, a
velvet purse, syxtene pounds ten shyllynges in money humbred, and other
things of the money goods and cattels of the said Benedict, whereupon the
said Gyles Rufforde and the said other persons named in the said writ, did
appear and were arrayned in the said bench and thereunto plede not gylty and
thereupon the said parties were at issue, as by the records there remaining in
the said benche plainly apeareth, the which said issue not being tried, the
said Benedict Smith, not cessyng to execute his said deuelyshe malice and
crueltye, but entendynge utterly to distroye the said Gyles Rufford, and the
said other persons named in the said writ, he the said Benedict together
with one John Godfrey of Edlesburgh aforesaid yoman, the seven and twenty day
of September in the first and second years of your hyghnesses reygnes, at
Ware in the said county of Hertford did falsely conspyre to endite the said
Gyles Rufforde and the said other persons, of the said robberye and felonye
mentioned in the said wryt of appeal whereupon they the said Benedict and John
Godfrey did then, and there, before your hyghuesses Justices of general jail
delivery, then and there holden endyte the said Gyles Rufforde, and the said
other persons, named in the said appeal, of the said robbery and felony,
upon which said mditement, the said Gyles Rufforde was afterward then, and
there, before the said Justices arraygned, and thereunto did plead not gyltye,
and put him self upon the country, whereupon he the said Eyles was
afterward then, and there, thereupon found not gyltye, as by the records
thereof plainly appears.

And yet the said Benedicte Smyth not yet leuyng his said vexation and malice,
did afterward sue forth process to have the said issue tried between him and
the said Gyles Rufforde joined in the said writ of appeal whereupon process
continued against the Iurye thereupon returned in the said county of Hertford,
until the said iutye did appear in the said benche, at a certain day, at
which day the said Benedict Smyth with his witnesses and councillors did give
in euydence to the said Jury to prove the said Gyles gilty of the said felony,
and the said Gyles in like manner with his witnesses and councillors did give
in evidence to the said Jury to prove him the said Gyles not to be gyltye of
the said felonye, whereupon the said Iurye was charged to try the said issue.
And afterward when they were agreed upon their verdite thereof, and ready to
yield up the said verditte, the said Benedicte being solempnelye called in
the said benche, did make defaulte and was nonsuyte in his said writ of
appeal, by reason whereof as well the said Gyles as the said other persons named
in the said writ were discharged of ye said suit, against the said Smyth, as
by the records thereof remayninge in the said bench plainly appears, by
reason and occasion of all which said shame, slanders, vexations, troubles
and charges, that the said Gyles Rufforde was put unto thorough the false and
sclaunderous means of the said Benedict he the said Gyles entendyng to recover
again part of his said charges, did afterward in the said bench comence and
sue a byll of conspiracye against the said Benedict Smyth, and John Godfrey for
their said false and untrue conspiracy, in procuring the said false
indytement, whereunto the said Benedict and John Godfrye pleded not gyltye,
whereupon they were at issue, and thereupon process did continue in the said
benche until a wryt of Nisiprius was a warded out of the said bench, into the
said county of Herford to try the said issue, where at the assyses holden at
Hertford in the said county of Hertford, in the.xxii. day of July in the first
and third years of your hyghuesses raygnes, it was found before the justices
of the said Nisiprius by the Jury thereupon enpanelled, that the said Benedicte
and John Godfrey were gyltye of the said conspiracy, and the said jury
assessed damages to four score and ten pounds, and ten pounds for the costs
of the said suit, as by the records of the said Nisiprius plainly may appear,
since which said verdit so given the said Benedict Smyth being led with the
instigation of the devil, and encreasynge in more mischief and malice against
the said Gyles, did move, stir, labor, hyre, and procure, one Fraunces
Coniers, late of London gentleman, and one John Spencer, late of London yoman,
to murder and kill the said Gyles Rufforde, and promised the said Fraunces
and John Spencer forty pounds to commit the said murder, and he the said
Benedict did give unto the said Fraunces and John Spencer two Iauelynges and a
dagge to commytte the same, whereupon the said Fraunces Conyers, and John
Spencer at diverse and several times, as well in your said county of Buckyngham
as in your graces countyes of Hertforde, Mydd* and Hunt* did go about to
commit the said murder, and at the last by the great labor and desire of
the said Smyth, they the said Fraunces and John Spencer afterward that is to
wit, the tenth day of September last past, at Alconburye Weston, in your
graces county of Hunt* by the procureme^t aforesaid did maliciously and
feloniously kill and murder the said Gyles Rufforde, for which murder so
committed and after relation thereof made unto the said Smyth, he the said
Benedict Smith, did afterward send to the said murderers a ring of gold, and
twenty shyllynges in money, by the forenamed John Godfrey, in part of payment
of the said forty pounds, as by the several confessions of the said
murderers, and also by the confession of the said John Godfrey, and diverse
other most manifestly may appear, which said murder was and is one of the
most detestable and heinous murders, all the cyrcumstances considered, that was
done or committed by such false practyses conspiracies and deuyses within the
time of any man's remembrance within this your Realm, to the evil and
perylous ensample of all other like offenders.

It may therefore please your most excellent hyghnesses the premysses
considered, and for the auoydyng of such detestable murders, hereafter, that it
may be enacted by your hyghnesses, the lords spiritual and temporal, and
the commons in this present parlyamente assembled, and by the aucthorytie of
the same, and be it enacted by the said aucthoryty, that if the said Benedict
Smyth otherwise called Benet Smyth, be or shall be in any manner of wise
hereafter lawfullye indicted in your said county of Buckingham, or elsewhere, or
appealed as accessory to the said murder, for the procuryng of the same, and be
hereupon found gyltye by verditte of twelve men, or shall confess the same
upon his arraynement, or shall not answer thereunto directely according to
the laws of this your realm, or shall stand wylfully or of malice muet, or
shall challenge peremptorye above the number of twenty persons, that then he the
said Benedict shall not be admitted to have or enjoy the privilege or
benefytte of his clergy, but shall be put from the same. Any law Statute or
custom in this your realm to the contrary notwithstanding.

An act touching commissions of the peace and jail delyuerye in towns
corporate not being Countyes.
The.xviii. Chapter.
WHere the king and queen's most excellent highness and their noble progenitors
kings of this realm, have heretofore granted their several commyssions
directed as well unto the majors, recorders, and other grave men, and
inhabitauntes of certain aunciente and famous Cities and to wnes corporat,
within their realm of England, not being countyes in them selves, as also
unto diverse other worshypfull and learned men dwelling out of the same cytyes
and towns corporat, as well for the keeping of their peace good ordering of
their people, and executing of their laws and statutes, within the same Cities
and towns corporat, as also for the delyuerye of their maiestyes prisoners
remainyng in the jail there, and after the graun tyng of such co^myssions
their maiestyes have granted diverse other like commyssyons unto certain
worshipful and learned men of the shyres, lathes, rapes, rydynges, and
wapentakes, of this Realm of England, for the confyrmation of their peace, and
also delyueryng of their prisoners remaynyng in their gaoles within the same
shyres, lathes, rapes, rydinges, and wapentakes, which commissions so bearing
a later date, have been a supersedeas and clear discharge unto all and
singular the said former co^missions granted unto the said cities and towns
corporat not being cou^tyes in the^ selfs, so that the said Mayor and other
grave and chefest officers of every such City and town corporate have been
charged to sue for the renewinge again of such commyssions both for the
peace and goal delyuerye, to the great expe^ces, costs, and charges, of the
said Mayor, and other thin habytauntes of such cities, and towns corporat, and
to the great protractyng and delay of justice there in the mean time. For
reformation whereof, and for the better auauncement of justice in the premises.

Be it therefore enacted by the king and queen's majesty's, the lords spiritual
and temporal and the commons in this present parliament assembled, and by
thauctoritie of the same, that al and synguler commission and co^missions
granted or to be granted, to any such City or town corporate, not being as
is aforesaid, a countye in it self for the keeping of their peace and delivery
of the prisoners remaning in the gaoles of any such city or town corporate,
not being a countye in it sefe, shall stand, remain, and be good auaylable
and effectual in the law, to al ententes, co^structions, and purposes, the
grau^ting of any like commission of peace or jail delyuery, to any
co^missioner or commissioners for the conservation of the peace, or delyuery of
the prisoners remaynyng in the jail of any shyre, lath, rape, ryding or wape^
take, within this realm of England, bearing date after the said commission or
commissions, granted as is aforesaid, to any such city or town corporate,
not being as is aforesaid, a county in it self, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An Act towchynge Powdike in Marshelande.
The.xix. Chapter.
WHere in the parliament holden at Westminster in the xxii. year of the reign
of the late king Henri the.viii. there was an act made and establyshed for the
preservation of Marsheland in the countye of Norf. entitled an act towchyng
Powdyke in Marshelande, by the which act it was provided and enacted, that if
any perverse and malycious person did cut down and break any part or parts
of the dike called the new Powdyke in Marshelande, in the countye of Norff and
the broken dike, otherwise called Oldfielde dyke by Marsheland in the Isle of
Elye in the county of Cambridge, or of any other bancke being pencel of the
rynd and vttermoste part of the said country of Marsheland aforesaid, made for
the defense and preservation of the same country of Marsheland, that every such
offense from hence forth by any person or persons committed and done otherwise
then in working upon the said bancke or dikes, for the reparing, fortefieng,
and amending, of the same, should be taken, reputed, and adjudged felony, and
that the offenders and doers of the same, and every of them, be adjudged and
reputed felons, and that the Justices of the peace of the said countyes of
Norff. and Cambrydg within the same Isle, at every of their sessions within the
same Isle and cou^ties to be kept, by thauctoritie aforesaid, should have full
power to cause enquirye to be made of every such offense so at any time after
in form before said to be committed and done, and to award like process
against every of the said offenders with like judgment and execution of the
same if they or any of them be thereof found gyltye, by verdite or otherwise as
the said justice has used and accustomed to do upon other felonyes being
felonye at the common law, as by the record of the said act more playnelye
appears. And albeit the said estatute was a very good and beneficial
statute for the defense of the said countreye of Marshelande, yet the said
Statute was and is by one act and estatute latelye made for the repeal of
treasonnes and felonyes in the first year of the raygne of our late Soueraygne
Lord king Edward the syxte, amongeste diverse other things clearelye repealed
and made void, by reason whereof, as well the said countreye of Marsheland, as
the inhabytauntes of the same and their goods and cattelles presently stand
and remain in great danger of drownyng and surroundyng, to their utter
impoueryshement and undoing.

For reformation whereof, be it enacted by authority of this present
parlyament, that the said act and estatute made in the said parliament holden
in the said.xxii. year of the raygne of the said late king Henry the eight,
entitled an act concerning Powedyke in Marshelande, and al and every branch
article penalty and sentence therein contained shall from the twenty day of
January next coming be revived and stand and be in perfect force strength and
effect in the law to all entents constructions and purposes as the same was
before the repeal thereof had and made. Any thing mentioned and contained in
the said act of repeal or any other law or statute to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An act for the enlargyng of the Duchy of Lancaster.
The twentye Chapyter.
FOR as much as the king and queen our sovereign Lord and Lady considering and
regarding the estate of the Duchye of Lancaster being one of the most famous
pryncelyest and stateliest pieces of our said soueraygne lady the Queen's
aunciente enherytaunce, do perceive and consider that the possessions and
yearly revenues of the said Duchye are and have been of late greatelye
dyminished, as well by reason of sundry gifts, graunts and seals made by the
late kings of famous memory Henry the eight, and Edward the syxt, late kings
of England father and brother to our said soueraygne lady the Queen's highness
as also by reason of sundry exchau^ges made with diverse their louinge
Subjects, of sundry Mannours, lands, tenementes, possessions, and
hereditamentes, latelye belonging to the same Duchye, and the manoures,
lands, tenementes, possessions, and hereditame^tes, being received and taken
in recompense of the said exchaunges be not annexed to the said duchy but been
in thorder survey and governance of other courts and places so by their
hyghnes taken and received in exchange.

And forasmuch also, as their majesty's do mind and intend to preserve,
auaunce, maintain, and continue, the ancient and honorable estate of the said
duchye, our said soueraygne lord and lady therefore be pleased and contented
that it be enacted ordained and esta blyshed by their majesty's, with the
assent of the lords spiritual and temporal and the commons in this present
parlyamente assembled and by thaucthoritie of the same, that all honors,
Castelles, lordeshyps, manours, lands, tenementes, possessions, and
hereditame^ts, within this realm of England which at any time since
the.xxviii day of January in the first year of the raygne of our said late
soueraygne Lord king Edward the syxt, were percell of the possessions of the
said Duchy of Lancaster or which were united and annexed to the said duchy by
authority of parliament, letters patents or otherwise. And which at any time
since ye said.xxviii. day of January have been given granted alienated
bargayned sold exchau^ged or otherwise severed from the said Duchy by our said
late soueraygn lord king Edward the syxte, or by our said Soueraygne lady the
Queen that now is, or by our Soueraygne Lord and Lady the king and quenees
Majesty's that now be, to or with any person or persons, and which said
honors, castles, lord ships, Manoures, lands, tenementes, and
hereditamentes, since such gifts, grauntes, alienations, bargayne, Sales,
Exchaunges, or seueraunce thereof so made as is aforesaid, been commen or
returned again to the hands of our said late Soueraygne lord king Edward
the syxte or to the hands of our said Soueraygne Lady the queen, or to the
hands of our said Soueraygne Lord and Lady, the king and Queen, or to the
hands of her majesty, her heirs and successoures, in possession, reuersion
remainder or otherwise by attaynder, eschete forfeyture, purchase, remaynder,
or otherwise. And which now be or remain in the hands of our said Soueraygne
lord and lady the king and queens Majesty's, of any estate of inheritance,
shall from the time the same came and reuerted again, to the hands of our
said late Soueraygne lord king Edward the syxte, or to the hands of our
said Soueraygne lady the Queen, or the hands of our said Soueraygne lord
and lady the king and queen, by authority and force of this act be united
and annexed for ever unto the said Duchy of Lancaster, and shall be adjudged
demed and taken for ever, for and as percels and members of the said Duchy of
La^caster and that all such and those of the said Manoures Lands, Tenementes
and hereditamentes, which be lying within the County palentine of Lancaster,
shall be of the same nature quality kind and condition, to all intentes
constructions and purposes, as others the ancient possessions of the said
Duchy lying and being within the said Countye palentine of Lancaster, be and
ought to be, and al those and such of the said manoures lands tenementes and
hereditaments which be lying out of the said countye palentine of Lancaster
shall be of the same nature quality kind and condition to all intentes
constructions and purposes, as other ancient possessions of the said duchy
lying and being out of the countye palentine of Lancaster, be and ought to be,
and shall be in ye letting setting order rule surueye receipt and governance of
the chauncelour, council, and officers of the said Duchy of Lancaster for the
time being, for evermore in like and the same manor and form, to all
intentes and purposes, as others the said ancient possessions, belonging to
the said Duchye, ben, have been, or owen to be.

And that all the said Honors, Castelles, Lordeshyppes, mannours, lands,
tenementes, and hereditamentes, united, and annexed to the said Duchye of
Lancaster, by authority and force of this act, and all and singular gifts,
grauntes, leases, letters patents, and wrytynges thereof, or of any percell
thereof hereafter to be made by the king and queen's hyghnes, or by the heirs
and successoures of her majesty shall for evermore pass and be made under
such of the said Duchye, as other the auncyente possessions of the said
Duchye, have used to pass, and be made, and not under any other seal or
otherwise, and with the like and the same lyuery of season attornements
ceremonies orders and circumstaunces in the law and in the same manor and
fourm, as other the ancient possessions of the said Duchy.

And the letters patentes, charters and wrytinges thereof heretofore of
ancient time made, have used and ought to be made and passed and not
otherwise nor in any other manner and form, any law estatute usage or
custom to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwythstandynge.

And be it further enacted, ordained, and established by thauctoritie
aforesaid, that our said Soueraygne Lord and Lady the king and Queen
that now been, and the heirs and successoures of her majesty, may from time
to time hereafter at their libertyes and pleasures, by their graces letters
patentes, to be sealed with the great seal of England, unite, annexe, lymyt,
assygne and appoynte any other their honors, Castles, Lordeshyppes, mannours,
lands, tenementes, and hereditamentes, lyinge and being within this their
said realm of England, unto their said Duchye of Lancaster, for the further
augmentation, honor, and estate of the said duchy at their wylles and pleasures.

And that all and every such annexynge, lymyttynge, assignemente, and
appoyntmente, made or to be made by our said soueraygne Lord and Lady the
king and Queen, or by the heirs or Successors of our said soueraygne Lady
the Queen, of any their honors, Castelles, Lordshyppes, manours, lands,
tenementes, and hereditamentes, unto the said Duchy of Lancaster, by any their
said letters patentes, under the great Seal of England, shall be as good and
auaylable as if it were done by aucthorytye of parlyament. And that all such
honors, castelles, lord shyps, mannours lands, tenementes and hereditaments
lying and being within the said cou^tie palentine of Lancaster, which shall
happen to be united and annexed to the said Duchy by force of any such letters
patentes, shall from the test of the said letters patentes, within the order,
survey, rule governance jurisdiction lettyng and setting of the said Duchy of
Lancaster, for the time being as other the possessions of the said Duchy,
lying and being within the said county palentyne of Lancaster, have used and
owen to be. And that all other honors, casteles, lordshipes manours, lands
tenementes and hereditamentes lying and being out of the said countye
paleutyne of Lancaster, which shall happen to be united, and annexed to the said
Duchy by force of any such letters patentes, shall be from the test of the said
letters patentes within thorder surueye rule governance jurisdiction, lettyng
and setting of the said Duchye of Lancaster, as others the possessions of the
said Duchye of Lancaster, lying and being out of the said county palentyne, of
Lancaster, have used and owen to be. Saving to all and every person and
persons bodies politic and corporate, their heirs successors and assygnes,
and to their heirs Successoures and assygnes, of every of the^ al such right
title interest, entries, conditions, occupations possession lease and leases,
fees, annuities offices, rentes, services commons, profytes, commodities,
casements, accions, suits, demaundes thing and things, whatsoever which they
or any of the^ should might orought to have had into or out of any the
premises before the making of this act in like and in the same manner form
and condition to al intents constructions and purposes, as if this act had
never been had or made, any thing in this act to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that this act or
any thing or things therein contained shall not in any wise extend to enhable or
give any liberty to our said sovereign lord and lady the king and queen nor to
the heirs and successors of our said soueraygne lady ye Queen to unit and
annex to the said Duchy of Lancaster, by their letters patentes any honors,
castles lordshippes, manors lands, tenements, or hereditaments, being any
part or percel of the ancient inheritance of the crown, or of ye
principality of Wales or of the duchy of Cornwall, or of the Earldom of
Chester, or any their honors, casteles, lordeshyps, manours, lands
tenementes, or hereditaments set lying or being within the counties of Chester
and Flynt, or either of them nor to give annex or assign to the said duchy of
Lancaster, any honors castles, lordshyps, manours, lands, tenementes or
hereditamentes, exceadinge and amountynge in the hole, above the yearly value
of two thousand pounds, any clause, article, or thing in this act rehearsed
contained or specified to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

An act for the continuation of certain statutes.
The.xxi. Chapter.
WHere in the parlyament begone and holden at London the third day of
November in the.xxi. year of the reign of our most dread soueraygne lord of
most famous memory king Henry the eyghte, and from thence adiourned to
Westmynster, and there holden and continued by diverse prorogations unto the
dissolution thereof, one act was made and establyshed for the restraynte of
caryage and conueyinge of horses and mares, out of this Realm, and also one
other act was there made for the true wynding of wolles, and one other act was
there made to restrain kyllyng of wain lynges, bullockes, stiers, and heyfers,
being under the age of two years, which said several acts were then made to
endure and continue unto the next Parlyamente, as by the said several acts
more plainly appears. And where also in the same parliament one other act
was made and establyshed for attayntes to be sued for the punyshmente of
periurye upon untrue verdyctes, which acts last before rehearsed were then
made and ordained to continue and endure to the last day of the next
parliament as by the same act more plain lie at large is showed and may
appear.

And where also in the parliament begone and holden at Westminster the.viii.
day of June, in.xxviii. year of the reign of our said most dread soueraygne
lord king Henry the eight, and there continued and kept until the
dyssolution thereof. It was ordained and enacted that al and singular the said
acts above remembered and every of the^ should continue and endure in their
force and strength and also be observed and kept until the last day of yt
next parlyamente, as by the same act amongst other things therein contained
more plainly appears. And where also in ye parliament begone and holden at
Westminster the.xxviii. day of April in ye xxxi. year of ye reign of our said
late most dred sovereign lord king Henry ye.viii. and there continued until
ye.xxviii day of June then next following, it was ordained and enacted by
thauctoritye of the same parlyament that al and singular the said several acts
above remembered, and every of them and al clauses, articles, and provisions in
the^ and every of them contained should continue and iudure in their force and
strength and also be observed and kept until ye last day of the next
parliament as by the same act among other things therein contained more
plainly appears. And where in ye parliament holde^ at Westminster in
the.xxxv. year of the reign of our said late sovereign lord king Henry
ye.viii. one act was made for ye preservation of wods to endure for seven years
then next following, and from thence to the end of the next parliament, as by
the same act more playnelye does and may appear.

And where also at the parlyament holden at Westminster in the xxxvii. year of
the reign of the said late king Henry the eight, and there continued and kept
until the dissolution thereof, It was ordained and enacted that all and
singular the said acts above mentioned and every of them (except the said
act made for the preservation of woods, as is aforesaid) should continue and
endure in their force and strength and also to be observed and kept until the
last day of the next parliament then next following, as by the same Act
amongeste other things therein contained more plainly appears.

And where also at a session of the parlyamente ended at Westminster the.xiiii.
day of March, in the third year of the reign of our late soueraygne lord king
Edward the syxt, one act was made for the true currying of lether which act
was made to endure to thend of the next parlyament as by the same act more
plainly appears. And where also at the session of a parlyament ended at
Westminster the first day of February in the fourth year of the raygne of our
said late soueraygne lord king Edward the fyxt, one act was then and there
made concerning the byinge of rother beasts, and also one other act was then
and there made towchyng the bying and selling of butter and chese, which said
several acts was then and there made to endure and continue to the end of
the next parliamente, as by the same several acts more at large does and may
appear.

And where also at the session of a parliament by prorogation holden at
Westmynster yt.xxiii. day of Ianuarye in the fyfte year of the raygne of our
said late soueraygne lord king Edward the syxt, one other act was then and
there made against regratoures and forestalleres to endure to the end of the
next Parlyamente, which all and synguler the said acts above mentyoned
together with the said act concerning the preservation of wooddes, at a
Parlyament holden at Westmynster the first day of march in the seventh year
of the raygne of our said soueraygne Lord King Edward the syxt, and there
continued and dissolved the last day of the same month of March, and all
clauses articles and provisions in them and every of them contained were there
revived and continued to stand in their force and strength until the last
day of the next parlyament.

And where also at the session of a parlyament holden by prorogation at
Westmynster the.xxiiii. day of October in the first year of the raygne of our
most gracious Soueraygne Lady the Queens Majesty, and there continued and
kept until the dissolution thereof, one act was there made and establyshed
against unlawful and rebellyous assembles, to endure to ye end of the next
parliament as by the same act more plainly does and may appear. And where also
at the same Session of parlyament last before mentioned, al and singular the
acts above mentioned and before that time continued at so^dry parlyamentes as
is aforesaid, and al clauses articles and provisions in them and every of them
contained, were there revived and continued to stand in their force and strength
unto the last day of yt next parlyament.

And where also at the Sessyon of a parlyament begone and holden at Westminster
the.xii. day of November in the first and second yers of the reygnes of our
most gracious Soueraygne Lord and Lady the king and Queen's Majesty's, and
there continued and kept to the dissolution of the same, being the.xvi. day of
January then next ensuing, one act was then and there made against sedicious
words and tumors to endure to the end of the next parlyame^t as by ye same
act more plainly does and may appear. And where also in ye said parlyament
last before recited, al and synguler the acts above mentioned that were before
that time continued at sundry parliamentes, as is aforesaid, and al clauses
articles and provisions in them and every of them contained were by authority
of the said parlyame^t there reuyued and continued to stand in their force and
strength unto the last day of the next parlyament.

Forasmuch as al and synguler the said several Acts above mentioned, be good
and beneficial for the common wealth of this Realm. Be it therefore enacted
ordained and establyshed by ye king and Queen's Majesty's, our Soueraygne Lord
and Lady with thassent of the lords spiritual and temporal, and the
commones of this present parlyament assembled and by thaucthoritie of the same,
that all and synguler the said several acts and estatutes above mentioned and
rehearsed, and every of them, and al clauses, articles, and prouysions in them
and every of them contained, shall be revived continued stand and endure in their
full force and strength, to al intents, constructions and purposes, and shall be
observed and kept in all thin ges until the last day of the next parliament.

An act for the confirmation of a Subsedye granted by the Clergy.
The.xxii. Chapyter.
WHere the prelates and clergy of the prouynces of Canterbury, and York have
most lovingly and liberally for certain considerations them moving given and
granted to the king and queen's Majesty's a Subsedye of six shyllynges of the
pound to be taken and levied of all and singular their spiritual promotions
within the same several prouynces within the term of three years, now next
ensuing in such certain manner and form* and with diverse exceptions and
provisions specified and contained in a certain instrument by them thereof
made and delivered unto the Queen's majesty, as in the same instrument
exhibited also in this present parliament more plainly does appear, the tenor
whereof ensues in these words.

The prelates and clergy of the prouynces of Canterburye, and York, being
lawefully congregated and assembled in a synod upon great and weyghtye causes
to them purposed and among the same well wayed and debated, considering their
most bounden duties to the king and queen's Majesty's, and how great and ample
benefits, they have received of their munificens and bou^teful goodness for an
euydent declaration of their good hearts and minds, in remembrance of the said
benefytes with one uniform agreement accord and consent, and together with
most hearty good wills have given and granted, and by these presents do give
and grant to the king and quens Majesty's one Subsedy in manner and form
following. That is to say, that every Archbyshoppe, Bishop, Deane,
Archedecon, Prebendary, Prouoste, master of Colleges, master of Hospytalles,
person, vycar and every other person and persons of whatsoever name or degree he
or they be, enjoying any spiritual promotion, or other temporal possessions of
the same spiritual promotions annexed, now not divided nor separated by act of
parliamente, or otherwise from the possession of the clergy, shall pay to the
king and queens highness, for every pound that he or they may yearly dispend
by reason of the said Spiritual promotion the sum of six shyllynges. And
for ye true and certain knowledge of the yearly valewe of the said promotions
and every of them, whereof payment shall be made, the rate taxation valuation and
estimation remaining of record in the king and queen's majesty's late Courts of
the first fruits and tenthes, and now in their court of thexchequer for the
payment of ye Disme of ye Clergy, concerning all such promotions as be in
possessyon of the Clergy, or any other not divided by act of parliament or
otherwise as is aforesaid, shall be followed and observed without making any
other valuation, rate, taxation or estimation then in the said record is
comprysed and mentioned.

Provided always, that forasmuch as the tenthe part of the said valuation
and tax before mentioned, shall be for a time upon cer tayne reasonable
considerations and respects yerelye paid by the said Clergy, so that there
remains only nine parts to the incumbent clear, this Subsedye of Six
shyllynges of the pound shall be understand and meant only of the said nine
parts, and of no more.

Also the said prelates and Clergy, further do grant, that this Subsedye of
Six shyllynges of the pound, of the yerelye value of every promotion taxed as
is aforesaid, shall be paid to the king and queen's Majesty's, within three
years next ensuing ye date here of that is to say, two shyllynges of every
pound, in every of the said three years, the first payment thereof to be due
at the first day of October next ensuing, which shall be in the year of onr Lord
God a thou said five hundredth fyfty and six, and the second payment thereof to
be due in ye first day of October, then next following, which shall be in the
year of our Lord God a thousand five hundred fyfty and seven the third and
last payment thereof to be due at the said first day of October, which shall be
in the year of our Lord God, a thousand five hundred fyfty and eight, to be
delivered and paid yerelye by such person and persons, as in this present
grant shall be appointed to have the collection thereof, to be paid into the
recept of the king and Queen's majesty's exchequer, or to such person or
persons, place or places, to whom and where it shall please their highness to
appoint for the receypte thereof, before or at the last day of January in every
of the said three years, without paying any thing to the receauor or
receyuours by their majesty's, to be assygned for any dyschardge, acquitaunce,
or quietus est, upon payment and receypte, of the same subsedye, to be given
and delivered, but only twelve pence, for their acquitaunce.

Item the said prelates and Clergy also do grant, that every priest, and all
other spiritual persons, having a pencion by reason of the dissolution of any
the late monasteryes, Colleges, fre Chapels Chaunteryes, fraternities,
guyldes and hospytalles, or of any other spiritual dignity and corporation,
now dyssolued and extinguished within any of the said prouynces, shall likewise
pay to their highness six shyllynges of every pound, of the said pencions
within the said three years, at such days and times, as is before specyfyed,
and for the sure and assartayned payment thereof, a deduction or rectention of
the said six shyllynges shall be made yearelye in the hands of the payers, of
the said pencion after the proporcion of two shillings of the pound every of
the said three years to be delivered and paid unto their majesty's use at such
time and to such persons as the said subsidye of Six shillinges of the pound
aforesaid shall be paid unto.

Item that every stipendary priest, receauynge annual stypende of eight
pounds and under, being no perpetuity within the said prouynces shall pay
unto their Majesty's use, six shyllyngs eight pence yearly during the said
three years at such time and to such persons as the said Subsedye shall be
paid, and under the same penalties, as the rest of the Clergy, do pay for
their promotions. And yt every pressed receyuyng above eight pounds and not
above ten pounds to pay likewise ten shyllynges. And that every pressed
receiving above ten pounds, and not above twenty marks to pay thyrtene
shillinges four pence, yearly during the said three years, at such time and
to such persons as the said subsedy shall be paid. And that every priest taking
stipend above twenty marks to pay likewise two shillinges of the pound every
year during the said three years, in such manner and form, as the rest of the
clergy do pay for their promotions spiritual. And for defaulte or lack of
payment thereof by the said stipendaryes, that enery person vycar and other
spiritual person hiryng any pressed to serve in any place shall be answerable for
the payment of ye said priest in that behalf after the said rates, and shall or
may make retention of his or their wages quarterlie, of so much as the said
stipedary is charged with, by this present confession and grant every of ye
said three years. Item the said prelates and Clergy further do grant ye
every archebyshoppe and Bishop, and the Sea being vacant every Deane and
Chapter of the Sea void, shall be Collectours of this subsedye within their
proper Dyocesse during the said three years.

And to the intent the king and queen's Majesty's may be surely and duly answered
and paid of the said Subsedie in manner and form aforesaid, and the
Collectours of the same, thoroughly charged and dyscharged according to the
tenor of this grant, the said prelates, and clergy do ordeyne and decre with
one assent and consent that every Collectour of the foresaid Subledy, and of
every part and percell thereof, and their lawefull deputy or deputies shall
have full power and authority by these presents toprocede against every
person and persons leyable charged and bound to pay the said Subsedye, or any
part or percel thereof denieng refusing or delaying to pay the same, or making
any defaulte in the paymente thereof, or any part thereof at the day or
days that it ought to be paid, after lawefull warning to them given
personally or at their churches or mansyons, by the censures of the Church.
That is to say by suspencion excommunication or interdiction, and also by
sequestratio^, of ye fruytes and proftytes of their benefices, or promotions
spiritual, and to make sale of the same fruytes, and al other remedies
lawefull by their discretions, thought convenient, to correct constrayne and
compel them and euerpe of them, to the full and vndelayde satysfactyon of the
said Subsedye and every part and percell thereof, and shall also have like
power and aucthoritye both to absolve them so payinge, from all the said
censures and other pains, and also to release and revoke all such processes
as shall be made against them or any of them after they shall have fullye
satisfied the said Subsedye accordynglye.

Provided always, and it is ordained and decreed that al and every person and
persons refusing or neglecting to pay the said Subsedye at time conuenyent
as is aforesaid, shall for his or their first defaulte or negligence in not
paying the Subsedye according to the purporte and tenoure of this grant bear
all the charges and reasonable expenses of the said Collectour or his deputy in
coming goinge, and demaundyng of the same, and for the second time likewise
offendyng in none payment, to pay to the said Collector or his deputye the
fourth part of the said Subsedye, over and above the said Sum upon him or
his Church, or person allotted and taxed, which he is bound to pay and
charged by this act of free grant.

Also the said prelates and clargye do further ordeyne and decre that if any
person or persons above named chargeable to this Subsedy or any part thereof,
after the said censures and process executed against him or them, yet still
obstinatly refuse neglecte or make delay, to pay the same or any part thereof
(as is beforsayd) that they after laweful monition given unto him or them, so
refusyng neglecting or delaying, by the said Collectours or their laweful
deputy or deputies personallye or at there churches, do still by the space of
thyrtye days refuse or neglecte to make payment of the said Subsedye, that
then and in every such case, it shall be lawefull to the said Collector or his
laweful deputye, every such person so refusyng, neglectyng, or delaying, and
contempnyng the said former processes, to depryue, amoue, and destitute from
his or their benefices, spiritual promotion or pencion ecclesiastical, any
appellation, or inhibytion or other remedy ordinary or extraordinarye not
withstanding, the said person so refusyng, to be and remain for ever
without hope of regresse to such the promotion as he or they shall be deprived of
for the causes aforesaid by any new presentation of him or them to be made to
the same, and that it shall be lawefull to the patron of the said benefice or
benefices or other ecclesiastical promotions, from which the said person or
persons so neglectyng to pay shall be depryned, to present unto every such
benefyce or promotion spirytuall as if the said incumbent or in cumbentes were
deceased.

Item the said Clergy further do ordeine and decre, that of so much as the
Collectoures shall be charged with, in their accomptes clearly to be paid into
the receipt of the said Exchequer, or to such person or persons, as it shall
please the king and Queen's majesty's to appoynte for the receipt of the same,
shall be allowed to the said collectour upon his said account for the same for
every pound six pence by way of reward or in liewe of his charges, collection,
portage, and conueying and paying of the said Subsedye.

Provided always, that no spiritual promotion or any lands, possessions or
revenues, annexed to the same, being charged by this grant or act of the
prouynces of Caunterburye and York, or any goods or cattels growyng, being
or renuynge of the same, or apperteynyng to the owners, of the said spiritual
promotions shall be charged or made contrybutory to any fiftene, or any other
Subsedye already granted to the king and Queen's hyghnes of the lay fee, or
hereafter to be granted during the term of the said three years.

Item the said Prelates and clergy, further grant, that every of the new
erected by shoppes, deanes, prebendaries, peticannones, and preachers shall be
charged with this Subsedye for their own portions only thereof to pay six
shyllynges of the pound, within the said three years as is above rehearsed of
other bishops and spiritual personns, and those portions of rentes and
revenues, which their hyghnes or any of their most noble progenitors have
given unto them for the mayntenaunce of pore men, scholemasters ushers
gramaryans, chorysters, and other officers or mynysters, not to be tharged with
any part of this Subsedye.

Provided also that every parson, vicar, or other spirytuall man paying any
pention whereof none allowaunce is made, in the valuation of his said benefyce
in the records of the said late court of first fruytes or Exchequer, shall
and may retain two shyllynges of every pound of every such pention every
year during the said three years, to his own releyse in consyderation that he
is charged to pay his Subsedye of six shillinges of the pound out of every
pound of the said nine parts of his promotion.

Provided also that where certain lands, tenementes, rentes tithes, pentions,
portions, fruytes, and other heredytamentes, latelye belongyng to diverse
cathedral churches, or to other places ecclesiastical within the said
prouynces of Caunterburye and York, which were given and assygned to be
bestowed and spente to and upon the finding and maynteynaunce of certain
Chaunteryes, anniuersaryes, obittes, lyghtes, lamps, and other like things,
ententes, and purposes, be of late come into the hands and possessions of the
king and Queen's Majesty's our soueraygne Lord and Lady by force of a Statute
thereof, made in the first year of the raygne of our late Soueraygne Lord
king Edward the Sixth, as by the said statute more plainly appears, that the
said cathedral churches, and the deanes or presydentes, and chapytours of the
same, and al other places and persons to whom the said lands rentes and al
other the premises, or any of the^ did lately appertain, shall not be charged
to and with any contribution or payment of this Subsedye, of and for that part
or portion whereunto the king and queen's highness be and have been entitled or
possessed of. But that this said subsedie shall be under stand to be chargeable
and dew only of all and singular Lands, tenementes rentes, tithes, pencions,
portions, fruits and other hereditamentes, which do yet still remain not
disseuered from the hands and possession of the said Cathedral churches, and
other the places and persons aforesaid, and that deduction and allowaunce be
made to the^ and every of the^ in the said paymente of the Subsedy, out of the
hole valuation taxation and estimation made for the payment of the said disme
remaynyng of record, in the king and Queen's majesty's court of thexchequer, for
that rate and portion which is come to the hands and possession of our said
late soueraygne Lord or otherwise severed from the possessions of the said
Cathedral churches, and other places and persons afoesayd, by force of the
statute promised.

Provided also that every person and vycar whose benefyce is above the
valuation of five pound and not above six pound thyrtene shyllynges four
pence, after the rate of the late perpetual tenth, shall pay every year of the
said three years only, vi. shyllyngs.viii. pence as the said stipendaryes do
and not otherwise.

And that al persons and vycares whose benefyces be of the valuation of five
pounds or under after the rate of the said late perpetual tenthe, shall not
be charged or chargeable with this subsedye or any part thereof.

Provided always that this Subsedye, granted by the clargye shall not be
demanded or leuyed out of any benefyce house of students or College situate
or set within the universities of Oxford and Cambrydge, or of any benefices or
other revenues unto any house of students, or College of Oxforde and
Cambrydge united appropriate or appertayninge, or of the College of Eton,
nyghe Wyndesoure or of the College of winchester, founded by William Wyckham
sometime Bysshope of Wynchester, or of any poor men, women or children living
of alms in any hospytalles, alms houses, alms halles, or of any gramer
scoles, or of any other Church, or benefyces or of any other revenues of the
said houses, Colleges, Hospytalles alms houses, or alms halles, or gramer
schools to any of them annexed appropryate or otherwise appertaynynge.

Provided also that every preiste and other late professed relygious persons,
having a pentio^ by reason of the dissolution of the late monasteris,
Colleges, fre chapels, Chau^teries, fraternities, guilds and hospytals, or
any other incorporations, within the prouynces of Caunterbury and York, or
any of them, and being of the sum of forty shyllynges, or under, and not
above, shall not be charged, or chargeable to the said Subsedye, or any part
thereof for any such pention of fourtye shyllynges, or under, any thing
contained in this grant to the contrary notwithstanding.

Fynallye the said prelates and clergy, being desirous that the said
subsedye may be entyrely contented and paid to thuse of ye king and queen's
majesty's, within the said three years, do grant ordeine and decre, that if it
shall happen in the end of the said three years, any arrerages of the said
subsedye to be behynd unpaid, by reason of thexilitie or decay of any benefyce
or other spiritual promotion, leyable to this subsedye, that then it shall be
lawefull to every Archbishop, and Bishop within their several dyocesse, by the
counsel of his clergy, and the sea being void, to the deane and Chapytoure
of the sea void, to assesse and tax all and singular the ecclesiastical
promotions, within their said several diocese, to become contributories to
the full satisfaction of the said subsedy, the same to be collected levied and
paid the next year immediately ensuing the said third year at the days and
under the pains form and qualities above limited Any thing in this grant
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And for the true and sure payment of this Subsedye granted by the said
prelates and clergy of the prouynces of Caunterburye, and York, according to
the tenor purport effect and true meaning of this present instrument, the said
prelates and clergy most humblye desire and require the king and the queen's
most excellent majesty's that it may be enacted by authority of this present
parliament, that the provisions contained in the foresaid grant shall stand
good and effectual to al intentes and purposes, mentioned in the said grant.
And ye all processes and penalties, and al other clauses touching the payment
of the said subsedy, and the leuying and collection of the same, and of every
percell thereof, may be by the said prelates and Clergy and their laweful
deputies put in due execution, according to the true mening thereof, without
incurring any penalties or dangers of any laws or statutes of this Realm.

And for the true and sure payment of this Subsedye granted by the said
prelates and clergy of the prouynces of Caunterburye and York, according to
the tenor purport effect and true meaning of this present instrument.

Be it therefore enacted by the king and the queen's majesty's, with thassent of
the Lords spiritual and temporal and the commons in this present parlyament
assembled and by thauctoritie of the same, that yt said gift and grant, and
every matter, sum of money, clause and sentence in the said instrument
contained be ratified established and confirmed by thaucthoritie aforesaid.

And furthermore be it enacted by thautoritie aforesaid, that every person
that shall be appointed to the collectio^ and gathering of the said subsedy,
shall have full power and authority to levy take and perceive the same
Subsedy, by authority of the censures, of ye church, in manner and form as
in the said instrument of grant is contained, without danger of the laws of
this realm, or by dystresse upon the possession of the fermours or occupiers
of the lands, and tenementes, chargeable by the said instrument, for or to the
payment of any sum or sums of money, or otherwise by the discretyon of the
Collectour thereof, and that no repleuye prohibition or supersedeas, shall be
allowed or obeyed for any person or persons making default of payment of the
said Subsedye, contrary to the tenor of the grauntes thereof until such time
as they have truly satisfied and contented al such part and portions as to
them in that behalf appertains. And that every such fermour and fermours
their executoures and assygnes that shall fortune hereafter to be charged to
and with the payment of the said Subsedye, or any part thereof, shall by
thaucthoritie aforesaid be allowed and retain in his hands as much of his
yearly rent and ferme, as the sum which he shall fortune to paifor his Lord or
Leassor shall extend unto, extept the said fermoure or fermoures their
executours and assygnes, by the leasse and grant yt they have of any part of
the lands and tenementes chargeable to this Subsedye, or by force of any
covenant or article therein contained, be bounden and charged to pay the same,
and thereof to discharge their leassor and landlord during the term mentioned
in their said lease.

Provided always and be it enacted by thauctoritie of this present parliament,
that every lay person having a spiritual promotion chargeable by this act,
and also having temporal possessions goods, Cattels, and debtes chargeable to
this subsedy granted by the temporaltie, shall be charged taxed and set for his
said spiritual promotions, with the clergy, and for his said temporal
possessions and catteles, with the temporaltie and not otherwise. Any thing
before mentioned to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that the said
Archebyshopes and Byshopes, and other persons chargeable to and with the
collection of the said Subsedye of Six shyllynges of the pound, within the
said Prouynces of Canterburye, and York shall have upon every payment thereof
made in the queens Court of thexchequer, or else where ye king and ye queen's
majesty shall appoint ye same to be paid a sufficient acquitaunce in writing of
such person or persons as their majesty's shall appoint for the receypt
thereof, the same acquytaunce wytnessing the same receypt of as much of yt same
sum of the same Subsedye as shall be by any of them so received, and every
such acquitaunce in writing, sealed and subscrybed with the name or names of
every such person or persons, that so by their high nesses appointment shall
receive any of the said sums of monye shall be as good and effectual in the
law, and also a sufficient discharg to all intentes constructions and purposes,
as if it were made by act of parlyament, and that every person and persons,
which shall have and receive any such acquitaunce, shall pay but only two pence
for every of the same acquitaunce.

An act of a Subsedye granted to the king and queen's Majesty's by the
Temporaltye.
The.xxiii. Chapter.
WE the Lords and commones in this present parliamente assembled the king
and Queen's Majesty's most loving and obedient subjects, calling to our
remembrance, the great and sondrye benefytes which we have many ways
received at their majesty's most gracious hands, and considering also
besides, the great debtes, wherewith the imperial crown of this realm was
charged, when it pleased almightye God first to call the Queen's majesty to the
governance of the same the great intolerable charges, wherewith her majesty
has been many ways burdened. For some declaration of our most bounden
duties, with one assent, and consent, by authority of this present
parliament, do give and grant to the king and queens majesty's, their heirs
and successors, kings of this realm, one entire subsedye, to be rated,
taxed, levied, and paid, at two several paiments of every person, spiritual
and temporal, of what estate, or degree he or they be, according to the tenure
of this act, in manner and form following, that is to say, as well of every
person, borne within this realm of England, Wales, or other the king and
Queen's dominyons, as of all, and every fraternity, guylde, corporation,
mysterye, brotherhed, and comminaltie, corporated, or not corporated, within
this realm of England, Wales, or other ye king and queen's dominions being
worth.v. pounds, and under ten pou^des, for every pound as well in corn, and
the value of every pound, yt every such person, fraternity, guild,
corporation, misterye, brotherhed, and cominaltie, corporate or not corporat,
has of his or their own, or any other, to his or their use, as also plate,
stock, of marcha^dizes, al manner of corn and blades household stuff and of
al other goods moveable, as well wtin the realm, as with out, and of al such
su^mes of money as to him and the^ is or shall be owing whereof he or they trust
in his or their consciences surely to be paid except and out of the premysses
deducted such sums of monye as he or they owe and in his or their conscience
truly intends to pay And except also the apparel of such persons their
wives and children belongyng to their own bodies, saving Iuelles gold Silver
stone and pearl, eight pence of and for every pound, to and for the first
payment of the said Subsedye, and to and for the second payment other eight
pence of every pound. And also of every person borne under the king and queen's
obeysaunce, and all and every corporation fraternity guyld mysterye
brotherhed, and commynaltye, corporate and not corporate, being worth ten
pounds, in goods as is before specified, and under the value of twenty pounds
shall pay to, and for the first payment of the said Subsedye twelve pence and to
and for the second payment, other twelve pence, of every pound And likewise
every person and persons, borne under the king and Queen's obeysaunce, and
every corporation fraternity guylde mystery brotherhed and comminaltye
corporate and not corporate, being worth in goods as is aforesaid, twentye
pounds, and so vpwardes in goods as is beforesayde, shall pay to and for
the first payment of the said Subsedye syxetene pence and to and for the
second payment other syxetene pence of every pound. And also of every alyen
and stranger borne out of the King and Queens obeysaunce as well denizen as
other inhabytinge within this Realm, of every pound that he or they have in
coygne, and the value of every pound in plate, corn, grain, marchandyce,
household stuff, or other gooddes, Jewels, Cattelles, moveable or immovable,
as is aforesaid as well within this realm as without, and of all sums of
money to him or them owyng, whereof he or they trust in his or their conscience
or consciences to be paid except and of the same premises deducted every
such sum or sums of monye which he or they do owe and in his or their
conscience or consciences entende truly to pay, of and for every pound, to
five pounds, to and for the first paymente of the said Subsedye, eight pence,
and to and for the second paymente of the said Subsedye other eyghte pence of
every pound. And likewise of, and for five pound, and for every pound, from
five pounds to ten pounds to and for the first payment of the said Subsedye,
twelve pence, and to and for the second payment of the said Subsedye other
twelve pence of every pound. And of and for ten pounds to twentye pounds, to
and for the first payment of the said subsedye.xviii.der. and to and for the
second payment of the said subsedye, other.xviii.der. of every pound. And of
and for twenty pounds in good as is before rehearsed, and so upward, to and
for the first payment of the said Subsedie two shillinges, and to and for the
second payment of the said Subsedye, other two shyllynges of every pound. And
also that every alyen and stranger borne out of the king and Queen's
dominions, being denizen, or not denizen, not being contributory to any of the
rates abouesayd, shall pay to and for the first payment of the said Subsedye
four pence and to and for the second payment of the said Subsedye, other four
pence for every polle. And the master, or he or she, with whom the same alyen
is, or shall be abydyng, at the time of the taxation, or taxations thereof, to be
charged with the same, for lack of payment thereof.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritye aforesaid, that every person
borne under the king and Queen's obeysaunce, and every corporation, fraternitye,
guyld, mystery, brotherhed, and comminalty corporate, or not corporate, for
every pound that every of the same person, and every corporation,
fraternitye, guilde, misterye, brotherhead, and comminaltye, corporat, or not
corporat, or any other to his or their use has in fee simple, fee tail, for
term of life, term of years, by execution, wardship or by copy of court role
of and in any honors Castles, manors, lands, tenementes, rentes, services,
heredytamentes, annuities, fees, corrodies, or other yearly proffittes, of the
yearly value of twentye shyllynges as well within aunciente demayne and other
places priuileged, as else where and so up wards, shall pay to and for the
first payment of the said Subsedye, two shillings of, and for every pound, and
to and for the second payment of the said Subsedye other two shillinges, of
and for every pound. And every alien, borne out of the king and queen's
obeisaunce, in such case to pay at either of the said paimentes.iii.
shillinges of every pound, and that al sums, presented, and chargeable by
this act, either for goods and dettes, or for lands and tenementes and other
the premises as is in this act contained and being no full pound shall be at
either of the said paymentes set and taxed after the rate and portion
according to the true meaning of this act (lands and tenementes chargeable
to the dismes of the clargy, and yerelye wages due to servants for their
yetely service (other then the king and queen's servants, taking yearly wages
of five pounds or above) only excepted, and forprysed)

And that al Plate, Coin, Iuels, Goods, Dettes, and Cattels, parsonals,
being in the rule and custody of any person and persons to thuse of any
Corporation, Fratermtie, Guylde, Mystery, Brotherhead, or any Cominalty, being
corporate or not corporate, be and shall be rated, set and charged, by reason
of this act, as the value certyfyed by the presenters of that certificat, to
be sworn of every pound in goods and dettes as is abouesayde. And of every
pound in Lands, Tenementes, Annuityes, Fees, Corrodyes, or other yearly
profyttes as is abouesayde. And the sums that are before rehearsed set and
taxed, to be leuyed and taken of them, that shall have such goods in custodye
or otherwise charged for lands as is before rehearsed.

And the same person, or persons and body corporate by thauctorytye of this
act shall be discharged against him, or them that shall or ought to have the
same at the time of the paymente, or delyuerye thereof, or at his otherwise
departure from the custodye, or possession of the same. Except and always
forprysed from the charge, and assessement of this Subsedye, all Goods,
Cattelles, Iuelles and Ornaments of Churches, and Chappelles which have been
ordained and used in Churches or Chappelles for the honor and service of
almighty God. And the first payment of the said Subsedy, shall be by thauctoritie
aforesaid taxed, assessed and rated according to this act in every Shyre
Riding, Lathe Wapentake Rape, City Boroughe, Town, and every other place
within this Realm of England and Wales, and other the kings and Queens
Dominions, before the fyfte day of January next coming. And the second
paymente of the said Subsedy, shall be by thauctoritie aforesaid taxed,
assessed, and rated before the tenthe day of March, which shall be in the year
of our Lord god a thousand five hundred fyftye and six. And the particular
sums of every Shyre, Rydyng, Borough, Town, and other places aforesaid, with
the particular names of such as are chargeable for and to the said first
payment of the said Subsedye, to be taxed and set by the Commissioners, to the
same limited, or two of the^ at the least with the names of the high
Collectours. And in the same form shall be certified in the king and queen's
Exchequer before the first day of February next coming, with the names of the
high collectoures of the same. And the pertyculer su^mes of every shire ridinge
boroughe town, and other places aforesaid with the pertyculer names of such
as are chargeable for and to the second paymente of the said Subsedye to be
taxed and set by Commyssyoners, to the same to be lymitted or two of them at
the least, with the names of the high Collectours and in the same form shall be
certified into the king and queen's Exchequer, before the syxte day of Apryll
which shall be in the year of our Lord God a thousand five hundred, fyftye
and seven with the names of the high collectors. And the said sums in manner
and form aforesaid, to be taxed for the first payment of the said Subsedye,
shall be paid into the king and Queen's Receypte of their Exchequer aforesaid,
to the use of our said Soueraygne Lord and Lady, before the first day of
March, next coming, and the said sums in manner and form aforesaid to be
taxed for the second payment of the said Subsedye, shall be paid into the
receypte aforesaid, to thuse aforesaid, before the twentye day of May which
shall be in the year of our Lord God a thousand, five hundred, fyftye and
seven. And the sums abouesayd of and for the said Subsedye shall be taxed,
set asked and demanded, taken, gathered, levied, and paid unto thuse of our
said Sovereign Lord and lady, and theyres and successors of our said
Soueraygne Lady, in form abouesaid as well within the liberties, fraunchyses,
sanctuaryes, aunciente demayne, and other whatsoever place, exempte or not
exempte, as with out except such shyres, places and persons, as shall be
forprysed in and by this present act, any grant, charter prescription use or
lybertye, by reason of any letters patentes, or other privilege,
prescription, allowance of the same, or whatsoever other matter of discharge
heretofore to the contrary made, granted, used, or obtained notwythstandynge.

And it is further enacted by thauctorytye of this present parlyament that
every such person, as well such as be borne under the king and queens
obeysaunce, as every other person stranger borne Denizen or not Denizen,
enhabitynge within this realm or within Wales, or other the king and queen's
dominions which at the time of the said assessynges or taxations, or of either
of them, to be had, or made, shall be out of this Realm, and out of Wales,
and have goods or Cattelles, lands or Tenementes, Fees, or annuities, or
other proffyttes within this Realm or in Wales, shall be charged and chargeable
for the same by the certifycate of the inhabytauntes of the parties where such
Goods, Cattelles, Lands, Tenementes, or other the premises then shall be, or
in such other place where such person or his factour deputye or attorney shall
have his most resort unto within this Realm or in Wales, in like manner as if
the said person were or had been at the time of the said assessynge, within
this realm. And that every person abiding or dwelling within this realm or
without this realm, shall be charged or chargeable to the same Subsedye
granted by this act, according and after the rate of such yearly substance
or value of lands, and tenementes, goods, Cattels, and other the premysses as
every person so to be charged shall be set at in the time of the said assessyng
or taxation upon him to be made and in none otherwise.

And furthermore be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that for the
assessynge and orderyng of the said Subsedy to be duly had the Lord
Chauncellor of England or the keeper of the great Seal the Lord treasurer of
England, the Lord Stuarde of the king and Queen's majesty's householde, the
Lord Presydent of the king and Queens honorable council and the Lord
Pryuye Seal for the time being or two of them at the least, whereof the lord
Chauncelloure of England, or keeper of the great seal, for the time being to
be one, shall and may name and appoynte, of and for every shyre and ryding,
and other places, as well within this realm, as in Wales and other the king and
queen's dominions, and also of, and for every City, and town being a Countye
in it self, and of and for the Isle of Wight, such certain number of persons
of every of the said Shyres, Rydynges, Lathes, Wapentakes, rapes, cities,
towns and Isle of Wight, and every other place and other the inhabytauntes of
the same, to be commissioners within the same, whereof they be inhabitauntes.
And also of and for the honorable householde of the king and queen's
majesty's, and the Lady Elizabethes grace, and the Lady Aune of Cleaues, in
what shyres or other places the said householde shall happen then to be, and
the Lord Chancellor, and other with him before named, in like manner may name
and appoint of every other such Boroughe and to wns Corporate, as well in
England, as in Wales, and other the king and queens dominions, as they shall
think requisyt.vi.v.iiii. three, or two of the head officers and other sad
honest inhabitauntes of every of the said cities, boroughes and towns
corporate, according to the number and multitude of people being in the same,
the which persons, if any such be thereunto named of the said inhabytauntes
of the said boroughes, and towns corporate not being counties in them selves,
shall be joined and put in, as Commissioners, with the persons named, for such
Shyres, and Rydynges as the said Boroughes and towns corporate not being
cou^ties in them selves, be set and have their being, which persons so named,
for and of the said boroughes, and towns corporate not being counties, by
reason of their dwelling in the same, shall not take upon them, ne none of them,
to put any part of their commission in execution for the premysses out of the
said boroughes, and town corporate, wherein they being so named only for the
same be dwelling, and also not to execute the said commission within the
borough or town corporate where they be so dwelling, but at such days and
times as the said other commissioners for the same shyre, and riding shall
thereunto lymytte and appoynte, within the same boroughe or town corporate,
not being county corporate, whereof they so be, and not out of such borough or
town, and in that manner to be aydynge and assystyng with the said other
commisioners in and for the good executyng of the effect of the said
commission, upon pain of every of the said commissioners so named, for every
such city, borough, and town corporate, not being a county, to make such fine
as the said other commissioners in the commission of, and for the said Shyre,
or rydyng so named or three of them at the lest, shall by their discretions, set
and certifye into the king and Queen's Excheker, there to be leuyed to the use
of the king and Queen's Majesty's, in like manner as such or like su^mes had been
set and rated, upon every such person for the said Subsedy the which
commissioners so named, of and for the said city, boroughes and towns, not
being counties and only put in the said commission by reason of their
dwelling in the same, shall not have any part of the portion of the fees, and
rewards of the commissioners, and their clerks in this act afterward
specifyed. And the lord Chauncelloure of England or keeper of the king and
queens great Seal, for the time being, shall make, and dyrecte out of the
court of chauncery, under the king and queen's great Seal, several
commissions, that is to say, to every shyre, ryding Lathe, Wapentake, Rape,
city, Town Borough, Isle, and householde unto such person, and persons, as
by his discretion, and other with him aforenamed and appointed in like manner
and form as is before rehearsed, shall be thought sufficient, for the sessyng
and leuyinge of the said Subsedye, in all shyres, and places according to the
true meaning of this act, which commission for the first payment of the said
Subsedye, shall be directed and delivered to the said commissioners, or to one of
them, before the first day of Dece^ber next coming. And the commission for the
second payment of the said Subsedy shall be directed and delivered to the said
commisioners or one of them, before the first day of February, which shall be
in the year of our lord god, a thousand five hundred fyftye and six.

And to every of the said commissions, ten cedules conteyninge in the^ the
tenor of this act shall be affyled. By the which commyssyon, the commisioners
in every such commission, named according to this act, and as many of them as
shall be appointed by the same commission shall have full power and authority, to
put the effect of the same commission in execution. And that by authority of
this act after such commission to them directed, they may by their assentes,
and agreamentes, sever them selves for thexecution of their commission in
hundredes, lathes Wards, Rapes, Wapentakes, Towns, paryshes, and other places
within the lymittes of their said commission, in such form as to the^ shall
seem expedient to be ordered and between them to be commoned and agreed,
according to the tenor and effect of the commission to them therein directed
upon which seueraunce every person of this present parliamente that shall be
commissioner shall be assigned in the hundred wherein he dwells.

Provided always, that no person be, or shall be compelled to be any
commyssioner, to and for the execution of this present act, but only in the
Shyre where he dwells and inhabyteth. And that any person being assygned to
the contrary thereof, in any wise shall not be compelled to put in execution
the effect of this act, or any part thereof.

And it is also enacted by thauctoritie of this present parliament that the
commissioners, and of every of them, which shall be named, limited and appointed
according to this act, to be commissioners in every such Shyre, Ryding, Lath,
Wapentake, Rape, City, Town, Boroughe, Isle, and the said households or any
other place, and none other, shall truly, effectually, and diligently, for their
part execute the effect of this present act, according to the tenor thereof, in
every behalf and none otherwise, by any other means, without omyssyon favor,
dread, malice, or any other thing to be attempted and done by them, or any of
them to the contrary thereof.

And the said commisioners, and as many of them as shall be appointed by the
said commission, and none other, for thexecution of the said Commission and act,
shall for the taxation of the said first paymente of the said Subsedye, before
the syxt day of December next coming and for the taxation of the said second
paymente of the said Subsedye shall before the sixth day of February, which
shall be in the year of our Lord God, a thousand, five hundred, fiftye and six,
by virtue of the commissions delivered unto them, in form abouesayde, dyrecte
their several or joint precepte, unto eight, seven, six, five, four or three,
or mo, as for the number of the inhabitauntes shall be requisite, of the most
substanciall discrete and honest persons, inhabitauntes to be named by the said
commissioners, or by as many of them as shall be appointed by the said
Commission, of and in hundredes, Lathes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Wards, Parishes,
Towns, and other places as well within liberties, Fraunchises, ancient
demaynes, places exempted, and sanctuaries, as without within the limyttes of
the shyres, Rydynges, Lathes, Wapentakes, rapes, cities, towns, boroughes, or
Isle, aforesaid, and other places within the lymyttes of their commission, and
to the Constables, Subconstables, Bailiffes, and other like officers or
ministers of every of the said Hundreds, Towns Wards, Lathes, Wapentakes,
Paryshes, and other places before said as to the said Commissioners and every
number of them, or unto three or two of them by, their discretion in division,
shall seem expedient as by the manner and use of that parties shall be requisite.

Streyghtly by the same precepte chargyng and commaundyng, the same
inhabytauntes, Constables, and other officers aforesaid, to whom such precept
shall be so directed to appear in their propre persons before the said
Commissioners, or such number of them as they shall divide them selves
according to the tenor of the said commission at certain days and places by
the said commissioners or any number of them as is aforesaid, within Cities,
Boroughes or towns corporate or without, in any other place as is aforesaid,
by their discretions shall be limited thereunto, to do and accomplish all that
to the^ on the part of the king and the queens Maiestyes, shall be enjoined
touching this art, commaundyng further by the same precepte that he to whose
hands such precepte shall come, shall show or deliver the same to the other
inhabitauntes or officers, named in the said precepte. And that none of them
fail to accomplish the same upon pain of forty shyllynges to be forfeyted
to the king and queens Majesty's.

And it is further ordained by thauctoritie of this parliament that the said
day and place prefixed and limited in the said precept every of the
Commissioners, then being in the Shyre and having no sufficient excuse for his
absence shall at the said day and place prefixed for that part whereunto ^e was
limited, appear in his proper person, and there the same commissioners being
present, or as many as shall be appointed by the king and queen's Commission,
shall call or cause to be called before them, the said inhabytauntes and
officers, to whom they have directed their said precepts. And which had in
commandment there to appear by the said precept of the said commissioners,
and if any persons so warned, make defaulte, unless he then be letten by
syckenes or lawefull excuse, and that let then be witnessed by the oaths of two
credable persons, or if any appearyng, refuse to be sworn in form following,
to forfeite to the king and queen's majesty's forty shyllinges, and so at
every time appointed by the said Commissioners for the said taxations, unto
such time the number of every such persons have appeared, and certified in
form under written, and every of the^ so making default, or refusing to be
sworn to forfeyte to the king and queen's maiestyes fourtye shillynges, and
upon the same apperaunce had, one of the most substantial inhabytauntes or
officer, so being warned and appearyng before the said Commissioners, shall be
sworn upon a book openly before the Commissioners in form following. I shall
truly enquire with my fellows that shall be charged with me of the Hundrede,
Wapentake, Ward, Town, or other place, of the best and most value of the
substance of every person dwelling and abydyng within the lymittes of the
places that I and my fellows shall be charged with, and of other which shall have
his or their most resort unto any of the said places, and chargeable with any
sum of monye by this act, of this said subsedye, and of al other articles
that I shall be charged with touching the said act, and according to the intent
of the same, and thereupon as nere as it may, or shall come to my knowledge,
truly to present and certifye before you the names, surnames, and the best
and uttermost substance, and values of every of them, as well of lands,
tenementes, and other hereditamentes, possessions, and profyttes, as of goods,
cattels, detes, and other things, chargeable by the said act, without any
concelement, favor, love affection, dread, fear, or malice, so help me god
and the holy contents of this book. And every other person, that shall appear
there yearelye by the said precepts shall make like oath, and upon the oath
so taken, as is aforesaid, by the inhabytauntes, and officers, of every
hundredes, ward, wapentake, town, or other place, the said commissioners
shall openly there read or cause to be read unto them, the said rates, and
openly declare theffect of their charge unto them, in what manner and form
they ought and should make their certificat, according to the rates, and sums
thereof abouesayd, and of al manner of persons as well of aliens, and strangers
denisens, or not denizens, inhabyting with in this realm, as of such persons
as be borne within the king and queen's obeysaunce, chargeable to this act.

And of the possessions, goods, and cattels of fraternities, guilds
corporatio^s, brotherheddes, mysteries, and comminalties, and other as is
abouesayd. And of persons, being in the parties of beyond the seas, having
goods, or catteles lands or tenementes, within this realm, as is beforesayd.
And of all goods, being in the custody of any person or persons, to thuse of
any other, as is above said, by the which information and showing the said
persons, should have such plain knowledge of the true entente of this
present act and of the manner of their certificate, that the same persons
shall have no reasonable cause to excuse them by ignorance, and after such
oaths, and the statute of the said subsedye, and the manner of the said
certificat to be made in writing, containing the names and surnames, of every
person, and whether he be borne without the kings and Queen's obeysaunce, or
within and the best value of every person, in every degree, as well of yearly
value, of lands, and tenementes, and of such like possession, and proffytes,
as the value of goods, and catteles, dettes, and every thing to their
certificate requysyte, and necessary to them declared, the said commyssyoners
there being, shall by their discretions, appoynte, and lymytte unto the said
persons, another day, and place to appear before the said commissioners, and
chargyng the said persons, that they in the mean time shall make diligent
inquirye by all ways, and menes of the premysses, and then, and there every
of them, upon pain of forfeyture of fourtye shyllings to the king and queen's
majesty's, to appear at the said new prefixed day and place, there to
certyfye, unto the said commissioners in writing, according to their said
charge, and according to the true intent of the said grant of subsedye, and as
to them in manner aforesaid, has been declared, and she wed by the
commyssyoners, at which day and place so to them prefixed, if any of the said
persons make default, or appear, and refuse to make the said certificat, that
then every of them so offendynge to forfeyte to the king and Queens
majesty's, fourtye shyllynges, except only a reasonable excuse of his
defaulte, by reason of syckenes or otherwise, by the oaths of two credible
persons, there witnessed be had, And of such as appear ready to make
certificat, as is aforesaid, the said commissioners there being, shall take
and receive the same certificat and every part thereof and the names, valewes
and substannce of every person so certified, and if the same commissyoners see
cause reasonable, they shall examine the said presenters thereof, and thereupon
the said commissioners at the said days and place, by their agreement among
them selves, shall from time to time openly there prefyxe a day, at a certain
place, or places, within the limittes of their commyssyon, by their discretion,
for their further procedyng to the said assessinge of the same subsedye, and
thereupon, at the said day of the said certificat, as is aforesaid, taken,
the same commyssioners, shall make their precept, or precepts, to the
constables, subconstables, Baylyfes, or other officers, of such hundredes,
wapentakes, towns, or other places aforesaid, as the same commissioners
shall be of, comprising and containing in the same precept, the names and
surnames of all persons presented before them in the said certificate, of
whom if the said commissioners, or as many of them, as shall be thereunto
appointed by the king and queen's commission, shall then have vehement suspect,
to be of more greater value, or substance, in lands goods, cartels, or
sums of monye owyng to them, or other substance beforesayd then upon such
person or persons shall be certified, the same commisioners shall make their
precepte or precepts directed to the Constable Baylyffes, or other officers
commanding the same Constable Baylifes, or other officers to whom such
precepte shall be dyrected, to warn such persons whose names shall be comprysed
in the said precepte at their mansions, or to their persons, that the same
persons named in such precepts, and every of them shall personally appear
before the said commissioners, at the same new prefyxed day and place, there
to be sworn, and examyned, by all ways and means, by the said
commissioners, of their greatest substance, and best value, and of al and
every sums of money owing to them, and other whatsoever matter concerning
the premysses, or any of them, according to this act, at which day and place so
prefixed, the said commisioners, then there being, or as many of them as
shall be thereunto appointed by the king and queen's commission, shall cause to be
called the said persons, whose names shall be comprised in the said precept as is
beforesayd, for their examination. And if any of those persons which should be
warned, as is beforesayd, to be examined, which at any time after the warninge,
and before the prefyxed day, shall be within such place where he may have
knowledge of his said appearaunce to be made, make default, and appear not,
unless a reasonable cause, or else a reasonable excuse, by the oaths of two
crodible persons before ye said commisioners be truly alleged for his
discharge, that then every of the^ so making defaulte, to be taxed and charged
to the king and queen's majesty's, with and at the double su^mes of the rate
that he should or ought to have been set at, for and after the best value of his
land, or substance, upon him certified if he had appeared, by the discretion
of the commissioners there being. And in like manner, if any of them suspected,
as is beforesayd, appear and refuse to be sworn in form following, then
every such offender to be taxed, and charged to the king and queens
maiestyes, with and at the double su^mes of the rate he should or ought to
have been set at, for, and after the best value of his substance upon him
certified by the said persons that made the certificat, as is beforesayde, by
the discretions shall travel with every of the persons, so then and there
appearing, whose names shall be expressed in the said precept, or precepts, and
in whom any behement suspect was or shall be had in form abouesayd, by all
such ways and means they can. And further the said commisioners or as many
of them as shall be here unto appointed by the said commission by their
discretions shall openly swear the same person in this manner and form
following.

I shall faithfully truly, and plainly according to my knowledge she we unto
you, the king and Queen's commissioners, and to other by you assigned, the best
and greatest value, or above, of all my yearly profittes, in Lands,
Tenementes, Rentes, or such other like possessions, yearly profyttes, and fee,
and the best and greatest value of all my goods and Cattels, and Sums of
money to me owing according to the grant of this act of Subsedy, and truly
answer to that I shall be examined of, touching the premises without couyn or
deceypt, so help me God, and the holy contents of this book.

And if any person that should apeare be excused in form aforesaid by wytnes
of credable persons, the same persons shabe examined by their others, of his
or their greateste and best value and substance, so lachyng and excused and
by the best of their certificat, or knowledge, or of the other first
certificate, upon him or them made, the same person so lacking, and excused of
his apearance, to be set, and rated, by the said commisioners or otherwise to
be set, and rated, in this case as shall seem best by the discretions of the
said commisioners. And if it happen to be proved by wytnes, his own
confession, or other lawefull ways, or means within one year after any such
oath made, yt the same person so taxed and sworn, was of any greater, or
better value, in lands, goods or other things above specified, at the time of
his said oath, then the same person so sworn did declare upon his oath. That
then such person so offendyng, shall lose and forfeyt to the king and queen's
majesty's, as much more in lawful money of England, as the same person so
sworue was set and taxed at, to pay for the said Subsedy. And that every
spiritual person, at either of the said taxations of the said Subsedy, shall be
rated and set accerdyng to the rate abouesayd, of and for every pound, that
the same spiritual person or any other, to his use has by descent, bargayne
or purchase, in fee simple, fee Tail, term of life, term of years, by
execution, by ward, or by Coppye of Courteroll, in any Manours, Lands,
Tenementes, Rentes, Services, Offices, Fees, Corrodies, Annuities, or
hereditamentes, after the true just and yearly value thereof, after and
according as other the king and queens Majesty's subjects, borne within this
realm, be charged in form above remembered, so that it extend to the yearly
value of twentye shyllynges, or above. And if any person certified or rated by
virtue of this act be he commissioner, or other, to any manner of value does
find him self grieved with the same presentment, sessyng, or taxyng, and
thereupon complain to the Commissioners, before whom he shall be rated, sessed,
or taxed, or before two of the^, that then the said commisioners, shall by all
ways and means, examyne perticulerlye and distinctly the persons so
complaynaunte, and other his neyghbors, by their discretion of every his Lands
and Tenementes, above specified and of every his goods, cattels, and dettes,
above mentioned and after due examination and perfytte knowledge thereof, had
and perceived by the said Commissioners, which shall have power by
thaucthoritie aforesaid. The said commissioners or two of them to whom any
such complaynte shall be made, by their discretions upon the oath of the said
person so co^playnyng, may abate, defalke, encrese, or enlarge the same
assesement, according as it shall appear to them just upon the same
examination. And the same Sum so abated, defalked, increased, or enlarged, to
be streated in form, as hereafter ensues. So that he comes before the
estreates of the same assessinge be delivered by the said Commissioners, into
the king and queen's majesty's Exchequer. And if it be proved by witness, his
own confession, or other lawful ways or means, within a year after any
such oath made that the same person so taxed and sworn, was any better or
greater value in Lands, Goods, or other things above specifyed at the time
of his said oath, then the same person so sworn did declare upon his said
oath. That then every such person so offendynge shall lose and forfeyte to the
king and queens majesty's, so much in laweful money of England, as the same
person so sworn, was ser at or taxed to pay, and all persons set rated and
taxed, as is aforesaid shall be bound and charged by the same, and the Sum or
sums upon him set to be due toward the payment of the said Subsedy and to
be levied as hereafter shall be specified.

And also it is enacted by the said authority that every person to be taxed
at either of the said taxatious as aforesaid, shall be rated taxed and set, and
the Sum on him set to be levied at such place where he and his family at the
time of the same prese^tment to be made shall keep his house or dwelling, or
where he then shall be most conversant abydyng or res^aunt or shall have his most
resort, and shall be best known at the time of the said certificat to be
made, and no where else, and that no commissioner for this Subsedy, shall be rated
or taxed for his goods or lands, but in the Shyre or other place where he
shall be Commissioner and that if any person chargeable to this act the time of
the said assessyng, happen to be out of this Realm, and out of Wales, or
far from the place where he shall be known, then he to be set where he was
last abiding in this realm or within Wales, and best known and after the
substance and value and other profytes of every person known by the
examination cerifycate and other manner of wise as is aforesaid. The said
Commissioners or as many of the^ as shall be appointed by the king and queen's
majesty's commission shall after the rate aforesaid, set and tax every person
according to the rate of the substance and value of his lands goods and other
profytes, whereby the greatest and most best sum according to his most
substance, by reason of this act might or or may be set or taxed.

Provided always, that every such person which shall be set or taxed for payment
of and to this Subsedye for and after the yerelye value of his lands
tenementes and other reail possessions, or profittes at any of the said
taxations, shall not be set and taxed for his goods and catteles or other
moveable substance, at the same taxation. And he that shall be charged or taxed
for the same Subsedye for his goods, Cateles and other moueables at any of the
said taxaons, shall not be charged, taxed, or chargeable for his lands or
other real possessions and profytes abouesayde, at the same taxation nor that
any person be double charged for the said Subsedy, neither set or taxed at
several places, by reason of this act, any thing contained in this present
act, not withstanding.

And that it be ordained by the said authority of this present parliament,
that no person having two ma^sions, or two places to resort unto or calling him
self household servant or waytyng servant to the king and Queen's majesty's,
or other Lord or Lady, master or misteresse, be excused upon his saying from
the tax of the said subsedye, in neither of the places where he may be set
unless he bring a certificate in writing from the Commissioners where that he
is so set in deed at one place. And if any other then commissioner happen to
be set in two places, upon certificate thereof made, the best and most Sum
upon him so taxed to be taken and abide, and the other to be discharged, so that
the same certificat of his assessynges and payment be made thereof in writing
under the seals of the commissyoners, or of as many of them as shall be
appointed by the king and Queen's commission, which certificate so made shall be
at all times a sufficient discharge for him and the collectoure of the same, as
well against any collectour that shall demand the same upon him rated or
taxed, as against the king and queens Maiestyes, and all other persons. And
if any person that ought to be set, by reason of his remouyng or resortyng
to two places, or by reason of his saying that he else where was taxed, or by
reason of any priuyledge by his dwelling or abydyng in any place (not being
forprysed in this act) or otherwise by his couen or craft, happen to escape
from the said taxations or either of them, and be not set, and that proved by
presentment, examination, or information, before the said commissioners, or as
many of them as shall be by the same commission appointed, or by the Barons of
the king and queen's majesty's exchequer, or two justices of the peace of the
countye where such person dwells, then every such person that by such menes
or otherwise willingly by couine, shall happen to escape from the said
taxations, or paymentes aforesaid or any of them, and not be rated, taxed, and
set shall be charged upon the knowledge and proof thereof, with and at the double
value that he should, or ought to have been set at before, according to his
behauoure. The same double value to be levied, gathered, and paid of his
goods, and cattels, lands and tenements, to wards the said Subsedy, and
further to be punished, according to the dyscretyons of the Barons, justices,
and commissioners, before whom he shall be convicted for his offense, and
deceypt in that behalf.

And further be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid that the said
Commissioners of every commission shall according to their diuisyons, and after
they be divided have full power and authority by this Act, to set, tax, and
sesse every other Commissioner joined with them in every such Commission and
division, and shall also assesse every assessour within their division, for his
and their goods, lands, and other the premises, as is abouesayd, by the
which said commyssyon, the said Commissioners shall indifferently set, tax,
and sesse them selves and the said assessours, and that as well the sums upon
every of the said Commissioners and assessours so sessed, rated, and taxed, as
the Sums made and presented by the presentors sworn as is abouesayd, shall be
written certified set and estreated. And the estreates thereof to be made, with
other the inhabitauntes of that parts, within the lymittes of the same
commission, and division so to be gathered and leuyed, in like manner as it
ought or should have been if the said Commissioner had not been in the said
Commission.

And that al persons of the estate of a Baron or barons, and every estate
above, shall be charged with their freeholde and value as is aforesaid, by the
Chauncelloure and keeper of the great Seal, Treasurour of England, Lord
president of the King and Queen's Maiestyes pryuye council, and Lord priuye
Seal for the time being, or other persons by the king and Queen's Majesty's
aucthoritye, to be limited, and they to be charged for the said several
paymentes of the said Subsedye, after the form of the said grant
according to the taxation aforesaid. And the Sums upon them set, with the
names of the Collectours appointed for the gatheryng and payinge of the same,
to be extreated delivered and certyfyed at days and places above specifyed by
the Lord Chancellor, Treasuroure, Lord President of the Council, and Lord
pryuye Seal, for the time being, or such other persons as shall be
lymytted by the king and Queen's Maiestyes, and after the taxes and assesses of
the said Sums, upon and by the said assessions and certificat, as is
aforesaid made the said Commissioners, or as many of them as shall be thereunto
appointed by the king and queen's Maiestyes commission, shall with all speed,
and without delay, by the writing extreated of the said tax thereof, under the
seal and signs manuell of the said Commissioners or of as many of them as
shall be appointed at the least to be made shall be delivered unto suffycient, and
substanciall inhabitauntes, Constables, Subconstables, bailiffes and other
officers, jointly of hundredes, towns, paryshes, and other places a foresaid,
with in their lymyttes or to other sufficient persons, inhabitauntes of the
same only, by the discretion of the same commisioners and as the place and
parties shall require, as well the particular names, as surnames, as the
remembrance of al sums of money taxed and let of and upon every person as
well man as woman chargeable to this Act, householder and all other
inhabytauntes, and dwellers whthin the said paryshes, towns, and places,
contributorye to this Act of Subsedy, by authority of which writing, or
estreate so delivered the said officers or other persons so named and deputed
seuerallye shall have full power and authority by virtue of this Act,
immedyatlye after the delyuerye of the said writing, or estreate, to
demand, leuye, and gather of every person therein specified, the sum or
sums in the same writing, or estreate comprised

And for none payment thereof, to destrayne the same person or persons, so
being dehynde by their goods and Catteles, and the distresses so taken, to
keep by the space of eight days, at the cost and charges, of the owner thereof.
And if the said owner do not pay such sum of monye as shall be taxed by
this act, within the same eight days, then the same distress to be
appraised, by four, three or two of the inhabitauntes, where such distress is
taken, and also to be sold by the said Constable, and other Collectour, for
the payment of the said monye. And the overplus coming of the sale, and
keeping thereof, if any be, to be immediately restored to the owner of the same
distress, which said officers, and other persons so deputed to ask, take,
gather, and leuye, the said sums, shall answer and be charged for the
portion only to them assigned, or limited, to be gathered, levied and
comprysed in the said writing, or estreate, to them as is beforesayde,
delyugred unto the use of our Soueraygne Lord, and Lady the King and the
Queens Maiestyes, and the heirs and successors of our said Soueraygne Lady
the Queen. And the said Sum in that writing or estreate comprysed, to pay
unto the high Collectoure, or Collectours of that place, for the collection of
the same, in manner and form under written, thereunto to be named and deputed,
and the same inhabitauntes, and officers, so gatherynge the same particular
sums for their collection thereof, shall retain for every twentye
shyllynge so by them received and paid two pence, and that to be allowed at
the paymente of their Collectyon, by them to be made, to the high
Collectoure, or Collectoures.

And further be it enacted by the said authority, that the said
Commissioners, or the more part of them, as shall take upon them the execution
and busynes of the said Commissyon, shall for either of the same paymentes of
the said Subsedye, name such suffycyente, and able persons, which then
shall have, and possede, Land, and other Hereditamentes, in their own right,
of the yearlye value of ten pound, or goods, to the value of one hundrethe
marks at the least, and the persons seuerallye by the discretions of the same
commyssioners, in Shires, Rydynges, Lathes, Wapentakes, Rapes, Cities, Towns
corporat, and other whatsoever places, as well with in places priuileged as
without, not being forprysed with in this act to be high Collectoures, and have
the Collection, and receypte of the said sums, set, and leuiable within
the precinct, lymytte, and bonds, where they shall be so limited to gather,
and receive. To every of the which collectours, so severally named, the said
Commissioners, or two of them at the least, shall with all speed, and with out
delay, after the said whole Sum of the said Subsedye, be set by all the
lymyttes of the same their Commission, or in such lymittes as the high
collectours shall be so severally assygned, shall under their seals, and signs
manuell, deliver one estreate, indented in parchement, to every of the said
high collectours, comprysyng in it the names of all such persons as were
assygned to leuye the said particular sums, and the sums of every
hundrede, Wapentake Town, or other place aforesaid, with the names, and
surnames of the persons so chargeable, according to the estreate so first
thereof made, as is aforesaid, and delivered. And the Collectour so to be
assigned, shall be charged to answer the whole sum, comprysed in the said
estreat, lymitted to his collection, as is aforesaid.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the
said Commissioners, having authority by this act to name, and nominate the
said high Collectours of the said Subsedye, shall immediatelye upon the
nomination, and electyon, take by aucthorytye of this present Parlyamente,
suffycyente recognysaunces, or oblygations, without any fee, or reward to be
paid therefore, of every person so by them to be named to be high
collectoure, to be bound to the king and Queen's majesty's, in double Sum of
the Sum of his collection, and to be endorsed and made upon such condition,
that is to say for the collection of the said first payment of the said
Subsedye, that if the said collectour his heirs or executours, do truly
content and pay to thuse of the king and queen's Majesty's, and theyres or
executonres of the Queens Majesty, in their receypt, of their Exchequer,
before the syrste day of March, next coming so much of the said Sum of
money, allotted, and appointed to his Collection, as he shall collecte and
gather. And content and pay the residue of his collection and charge within
one month next after such time as he has gathered, and collected the same
resydue. That then the said recognysaunce, or obligation, to be void or else to
stand in full strength and virtue. And for the collection of the said Second
payment, of the said Subsedy, upon condition that if the said collectour, his
heirs or executours, do truly content and pay, to thuse of the king and
Queen's majesty's, and theyres or executours of the Queen's majesty, in their
receipt of their exchequer, before the twentye day of May, which shall be in
the year of our lord God a thousand, five hundred, fyfty and seven, so much
of the said sum of money, allotted, and appointed to his collection, as he
shall collect, and gather, and content and pay the resydue of his collection
and charge, within one month next after such time, as he has gathered, and
collected the same resydue, that then the said recognysaunce, or oblygation,
to be void, or else to stand in full streng the and virtue, which said
several recognisaunces, or obligations so taken, the said Cominissyoners shall
seuerallye certifye, and deliver into the king and Queen's majesty's Exchequer,
with the several certificates of the said taxations, and rates of the paimentes
of the said subsedye, at and by the time to them prescribed and appointed by
this act, for the certificat of the said several taxations of the said
subsedye, upon pain of forfeyture of ten pounds, to the king and queen's
majesty's, for every recognisaunce or obligation not certifyed. And that every
such collectour so elected, named and chosen upon request to him made, shall
knowledge and make the said recognisaunce or obligation, upon like pain and
forfeyture of ten pounds to the king and queens Majesty's for the refusal
thereof, and every such collectour so deputed, having the said estreate in
parchement as is aforesaid, shall have authority by this act to appoint days
and places within the circuit of his collection for the paime^t of the said
Subsedye to him to be made, and thereof to give warning by proclamation or
otherwise, to all the said Constables or other persons or inhabytauntes
having the charge of the particular collection within the hundreds, parishes,
towns, or other places by him or them limited to make payment for their said
pertyculer collection of every sum, as to them shall appertain. And if at ye
said day and place so lymytted and prefixed by the said Collectoure the said
Constable, officers, or other persons or inhabytauntes as is beforesayde, for
the said particular collection appointed, and assygned within such Hundred
City, town or other place do not pay unto the said Collectours, the sum
within their several hundredes towns paryshes and other places, due and
comprised in the said estrate thereof to them delivered by the said
Commyssioners or some of them, as is beforesayd, or so much thereof as they
have by any mean received, two pence of every pound for the said perty
culer collection, as is beforesayde always to be thereof allowed excepted and
abated, that then it shall be lawful to the said high Collectours and every of
them, and to their assygnes, to distrayne every of the said Constables,
officers, and other inhabytauntes for their said several and particular
collection of the said Sums comprysed in the said estreate and writing
thereof to them, and every of them, as is before expressed, delivered, or for
as much of the same su^me as so then shall happen to be gathered and leuyed and
behind, and unpaid by the goods and Cattels of every of them so being behind
and the dystresse so taken, to be kept appraysed and sold as is aforesaid, and
thereof to take and leuy the sums, so then being behind and unpaid and the
overplus coming of the sale of the said dystresse if any be to be restored
and delivered unto the owner in form above remembered.

Provided always, that no person inhabityng in any city, borough or town
corporat shall be compelled to be an assessour or collectour of or for any part
of the said Subsedye, in any place or places out of the said city borough or
town corporat, where he dwells.

And it is also by the said aucthoritye enacted, that if any inhabytaunt or
officer, or whatsoever person or persons charged to and for the collection
or receyte of any part or portion of the said Subsedye by any manner of means
according to this act or any person or persons, for themselves, or as keeper,
Guardian, deputye, factour, or attorney, of or for any other person or persons
of any goods, and Cattels of the owner thereof, at the time of the said
assessinges to be made, being out of this realm or in any other parts not
known, or of and for the goods and cattels of any other person or persons,
of any corporation, fraternity, mystery, or other whatsoever cominal tie,
being incorporate or not incorporate, and all persons having in their rule
governance and custodye, any goods or cattels, at the time of the said
assessinge or any of them to be made or which for any cause, for and by
collection, or for him self or for any other, or by reason that he has the
rule governance or custodye of any goods or cattelles of any other person or
persons corporation, cominalty, fraternitye, guilde, or misterye, or any such
other like, or as factour, deputy, or attorney of, or for any person shall be
taxed rated valued and set to any su^me or su^mes by reason of this act, and
after the taxatio^, or assessing upon any such person or persons as shall be
charged with the receipte of the same happen to dye, or depart from the place
where he was so taxed and set, or his goods or cattels so eloyned, or in such
priuye and covert manner kept, as the said person or persons charged with the
same by extreates or other writings from the said commisioners or as many of
them as shall be thereunto appointed by the said commission as is before said, can
ne may leuye the same su^me or su^mes co^prysed within their said extreates by
distress wtin the limitts of their collectio^ as is before said, or cannot sell
such distress or distresses, as be taken for any of the said paimentes, before
the time limited to the high collector for his payment, to be made in the
king and queen's majesty's receipt, then upon relation thereof made with due
examination by the oath or examination of such person or persons, as shall be
charged with and for the recept and collection of the same before the said
commissioners, or as many of them as by the said commissyon, shall be thereunto
appointed, where such person or persons or other as is aforesaid, their goods
and catteles were set and taxed, and upon plain certificate thereof made in
the king and queen's Majesty's Exchequer, by the same commissioners as well of
the dwelling place, names and Sums of the said persons, of whom the said
Sums, can not be levied, and had as is aforesaid, then as well the constables
and other inhabitauntes, appointed for the said particular collection against
the high Collectors, as the high collector upon his account and oath, in the
said Exchequer to be discharged thereof, and process to be made for the king
and Queen's Majesty's, out of the said Exchequer by the discretion of the
Barons of the Exchequer, against such person his heirs or executours so
being behind with his paymente. And over that the same Commyssioners, to whom
any such declaration of the premysses shall be made in form aforesaid, from time
to time shall have full power and authority, to direct their precept or
precepts unto the said person or persons, charged with any Su^me of for or
upon any such person or persons, or other as is abouesayde or to any Shyreffe,
Steward, Baylyffe, or other whatsoever officer mynister person or persons, of
such place or places, where any such person or persons, so owyng such Sum
or Su^mes, shall have lands, and tenementes, or other hereditamentes, or real
possessions, goods and Cattels, whereby any such person or persons so indetted
his heirs, executours or assigns, or other having the custodye go uernaunce
or disposition of any goods cattels, Lands, tenements or other
hereditamentes, which ought or may by this act lawfullye be distrayned or
taken for the same, has and shall have goods Catteles, Lands, Tenementes and
other possessions, whereof such Sum or Sumes, which by any such person or
persons may or ought to be levied, be it within the Lymittes of such
Commyssyon where such person or persons was and were taxed, or without in any
place within this realm of England, Wales, or other the king and queen's
Majesty's Dominions, Marches, or Territoryes by which precept as well such
person or persons as shall be charged to leuye such money as the officers of the
place or places, where such distress may be taken shall have full power and
authority to destraine every such person, indetted charged and chargeable by
this act, or his executors or administratours of his goods cattelles, his
gardians factoures deputies Leasses fermours and assygnes and all other
persons by whose hands, or out of whose lands any such person should
have rent, fee, annuitie or other profytte or which at the time of the said
assessynges, shall have goods or catteles or any other thing moveable of any
such person or persons being indetted or owing such Sum. And the distresses
so taken caused to be kept appraysed and sold in like manner and form as is
aforesaid, for the dystresse to be taken bpon such person to be taxed to the
said Subsedy and being sufficient to dystrayne within the Lymyttes of the
Collectours inhabytauntes or other officers charged with or for the same
Sums, so upon them to be taxed, and any such dystresse for none payment,
happen to be taken out of the limitte of the said persons charged and assigned
to leuye the same, the persons so charged for the leuy of every such sum by
distress, shall perceive and take of the same distress, for the labor of
every person, going for thexecution thereof, for every mile that any such
person so labors for the same, two pe^ce And every fermour, tenaunte,
guardian, factour, or other whatsoever person, being distrayned, or otherwise
charged, for paymente of any such sum or sums, or any other sum, by
reason of this act, shall be of such sum or sums, of him or them so levied
and taken discharged and acquitted at his next day of payment of the same, or
at the delivery of such goods, and cattelles, as he that is so dystrained had
in his custody and governance against him or them, that shall be so taxed, and
set, any grant or writing obligatory or other whatsoever matter to the
contrary made, heretofore notwithstanding.

And if any such person that should be so distrained have no lands, or
tenementes sufficient whereby he or hystenauntes, and fermours may be
distrayned, or has eloyned, aliened, or hid his goods, and Catels, whereby
he should or might be distrayned in such manner that such goods and Cattelles
shall not be known or found, so that the Sum of or by him to be paid in
the said form, shall ne can be co^uenientlye levied, then upon relation
thereof unto the commyssyoners or to as many of them as by the said Commission
shall be thereunto appointed where such person or persons, was taxed and set by
the oaths of him or them that shall be charged with the leuye and payment of that
sum or sums, the same commissioners shall make a precepte in such manner as
is aforesaid, for to attache, take, and arrest, the body of such person or
persons that ought to pay the said sums, And by this act shall be charged
with, and for the said Sum or sums, and them so taken saufely to k^pe in
prison within the shyre or other place where any such person or persons,
shall be taken and attached, there to remain without bail or maynepryce until
he have paid the same Sum or Sums, that such persons for him self, or for
any other by this act shall be chargeable, or ought to be charged withal. And
also for the fees of every such arrest to him or them that shall execute such
precepte, twenty pence. And that every officer unto whom such precepte shall be
directed, do his true diligence and execute the same upon every person so being
indetted upon pain to forfeyte to the king and Queens Majesty's for every
defaulte in that behalf twentye shyllynges, and that no keeper of any Jail,
from his jail, suffer any such person, to go at large by lettynge to bail or
otherwise to depart out of his prison, before he have paid his said det, and
the said.xx. pence for the said arrest, upon pain to forfeyte to the king and
Queen's Majesty's, fortye shyllynges. And the same Jailer to pay unto the king
and queens Majesty's, the double value as well of the rate which the said
person so imprisoned was taxed at, as of the said twentye pence for the fees,
and like process and remedy in like form shall be granted by the said
Commissioners, or as many of them as by the said commission, shall be thereunto
appointed at like information of every person or persons, being charged with
any sum of money, for any other person or persons, by reason of the said
Subsedye, and not thereof paid, but wylfullye withdrawn, ne the same
leuyable, within the lymyttes where such person was thereunto taxed. And if the
Sum or Sums being behind unpaid by any person or persons, as is aforesaid
be leuyed and gathered by force of the said process, to be made by the said
commissioners, or if in defaulte, or for lack of paymente thereof the person
or persons, so owing the said Sum or Sums of money, by process of the
same commissioners, to be made as is aforesaid, be committed to prison, in
form above said, that then the same commissioners which shall awarde such
process, shall make certificat thereof in the said excheker of that shall be
done in the premises in the term next following after such, Su^me or Su^mes of
money, so being behind shall be levied and gathered, or such person or persons
for none payment of the same committed to prison. And if it happen any of the
said collectours, to be assygned to any mayer, sheryffe, steward, constable,
the headborowe, householder, Baylyffe, or any other offycer, or minister or
other whatsoever person or persons to disobey the said commissioners or any of
them, in the reasonable request to them made by the said commissioners for
execution of the said commission, or if any of the officers or other persons,
do refuse that to them shall appertain or belong to do by reason of any
precepte to him or them to be directed, or any reasonable commandment,
instaunce, or request touching the premises, or other default in any
apperance, or collection, to make or if any person being susperte or not, to be
indifferentlye taxed as is aforesaid, do refuse to be examined according to the
tenor of this act, before the said Commissioners, or as many of them as shall be
thereunto assygned as is aforesaid, or will not appear before the same
Commissioners, upon warning to him made, or else make resistaunce or rescons
upon any distress upon him to be taken for any percell of the said Subsedy, or
commit any misbehauour in any manner of wise contrary to this act, or commit any
wylful omission or other whatsoever wylfull, not doing, or misdoynge contrary
to the tenor of this act or grant, the same cominissioners, and every number
of them above remembered, or two of them at the least upon probable knowledge of
any such misdemeners had by information, or examination, shall and may set
upon every such offender for every such offense, in name of a fine by the same
offendour, to be forfeyted, fortye shillynges, or under by the dyscression of
the same Commisioners. And further the same commissioners and every number of
the^, to two of them at the least, shall have authority by this present act,
to punysshe every such offender by imprisonment there to remain and to be
delivered by their dyscression as shall seem to them convenient. The said fines
if any such be to be certified, by the said commissioners, that so assessed
the same into the said king and Queen's Majesty's exchequer there to be levied
and paid, by the collectours of that parts, for the said Subsedye, returned
into the said exchequer, to be therewyth charged with the payment of the said
Subsedye in such manner as if the said fynes had been set and taxed upon the
said offenders for ye said Subsedye.

It is also enacted by the said authority of this parliament, that every of
the said high collectours, which shall account for any part of the said Subsedy
in the king and Queen's Majesty's excheker upon their several said accomptes,
to be yielded, shall be allowed at every of the said paymentes of the said
Subsedye for every pound lymitted to his collection, whereof any such
collector shall be charged and yield account, six pence as percell of their
charge, that is to say, of every pound thereof for such person as then have
had the pertyculer collection in the Towns and other places, as is aforesaid
specified in his collection two pence, and other two pence of every pound
thereof every of the said cheyfe collectours there accomptaunce to receive to
their own use for their labor and charge, in and about the premysses, and two
pence of every pound, Residue to be delivered, allowed and paid, by the said
collectours, so being there of allowed to such of the commissioners, as shall
take upon them the Busynes and labor, for and about the premysses, that is to
say every collectour to pay that co^missyoner or commissioners, which had the
orderyng of the writings, of and for the said Subsedye, where the said
collectour or collectours had their collection, for expe^ces of the said
commissioners so taking upon them the said busynes and labor of their
clerks, writing the said precepte and estreates for the said collection, the
same last two pence of every pound, to be divided amongst the said
commissyoners having regard to their labor and business, taken by them or
their said clerks, in and about the premysses, for the which part so to the
said Commyssyoners attayning the said commissioners.vi.v.iiii.iii. or asmanye
of them as shall be thereunto appointed by the king and queens Maiestyes,
commyssion and every of them ioyntlye and severally for his and their said part
may have his remedy against the said Collectour, or collectoures, which
thereof ben and might have been allowed by action of debt, in which the
defendaunt shall not wage his law neither protection, nether Iniunction, or
other essoyne shall be allowed. And that no person now being of the number of the
company of this present parlyament, nor any Commissioner, shall be named or
assigned to be any collector or Subcollector or presenter of the said Subsedye
or of any part thereof, nor no Commissioner, shall be compelled to make any
presentment or certificat, other then in the king and queen's Majesty's
Exchequer, of for or concerning the said Subsedye, or any part thereof. And
likewise that none other person that shall be named or assygned to be
Commissioners in any place, to and for thexecutyon of this act or Subsedye be
or shall be assigned or named head collectoures of any of the paymentes of the
said subsedye, nether of any part thereof. And that every such person or
persons, which shall be named and appointed (as is aforesaid) to be head
collectoures in and for the first payment of this Subsedye, shall not be
compelled to be collector for the Second payment of the same subsedye, nor of
any part thereof. And the said collectours which shall be assygned for the
collection of the said Subsedye, or for any part thereof, and every of them be
and shall be acquitted and discharged of all manner fees, rewards, and of every
other charges in the king and Queens majesty's exchequer, or else where, of
them or any of them by reasonne of that collection, payment, or accomptes, or
any thing concerning the same to be asked, and that if any person receive
and take any fees, rewards or pleasures of any such accomptaunte. That then
he shall forfeite to the king and the Queen's majesty's, for every penye or
value of penny so taken twenty pence, and suffer imprisonment at the king and
queen's majesty's pleasure. And after the taxynge, and assessyng of the said.
Subsedyes, as is aforesaid, had and made, and the said estreates thereof, in
parchement unto ye collectoures, in manner and form before rehearsed, delivered,
the said commissioners which shall take upon them thexecution of this act
within limits of their commission by their agrementes shall have metynge
together, at which meting, every of the said commyssioners, which then shall
have taken upon them thexecution of any part of the said commyssion shall by
him self or by his sufficient deputy truly certify and bring forth unto
the said commissioners named in the said commission the certificat and
presentmente made before him and such other commissioners, as were lymitted
with him in one limite. So that the same certificat, may be accounted and
cast with other certificates of the other Lymittes, within the same Commyssyon
and then the said commissioners, and every number of them unto two at the
least as is aforesaid if any be in life, or their executours, or
administratours of their goods, if they be then deed, shall ioyntlye and
severally as they were divided within their Lymyttes under their Seals, by
their discression make one or several wrytynges* indented containing in it
as well the names of the said collectors by the commissioners for such
collection, and account, in the Exchequer, and payment in the said Receypte,
deputed and assygned as the gross and several Sums, written unto every
such collectour to receive the said Subsedye. And also all fynes
amercyamentes, and other forfeytures, if any such, by reasonne of this Act,
happen to be within the precyncte, and Lymytte of their commyssyon, to be
certified into the said king and Queens Maiestyes Exchequer by the said
Commyssyoners, in which writing or writings, indented so to be certified
shall be plainly declared and expressed the hole and entire Sum or Sums, of
the said Subsedye, severally lymitted, to the Collection of the said
collectours severally deputed and assygned to the Collection of the said
Sums. So that none of the said Collectours so certified in the said
exchequer, shall be compelled there to account, or to be charged, but only to
and for the Sum limited to his Collection, and not to or for any sum
lymytted to the Collection of his fellow, but that every of them shall be
seuerallye charged, for their part lymyted to their collection. And if the
said Commyssioners, joined in one Commission amongst themself in that
matter, can not agree, or if any of them be not reddye or refuse to make
Certificat with other of the same co^myssyoners. That then the same
Commissioners, may make several Indentures, in form aforesaid of their
several Lymytes or seperacions, of Collectoures within the lymytes of their
commission, upon and in the hundredes, wards, Wapentakes, Lathes Rapes, or
such other like divisions, within there said several lymyttes of there
commissyon, as the places there shall require to be severed and divided and as
to the same commissioners, shall seem good to make diuisyons, of their
lymyttes, or Collections, for the several charges of the same Collectoures, So
that always one Collector shall be charged and account for his part to him to be
lymitted only by him self, and not for any Sum lymitted to the part of any
of his fellows, and the charges of every of the Collectours, to be set and
certified seuerallye upon them and every such Collector upon his account and
payment of ye Sum of monye, limited within his collection to be severally by
him self acquitted and dyscharged in the said Exchequer without paying any
manner of fees, or rewards, to any person or persons, for the same, upon the
pain and penalty, last abouesayde, and not to be charged for any portion, of
any other Collectoure. And if any commyssyoner after he has taken certificat
of them that as is aforesaid shall before any such commyssioner be examyned
and the Sums rated and set, and the books and writings thereof, being in
his hands, or if any collectoure or other person charged with any receypte of
any part of any of the said subsedyes or any other person taxed or
otherwise by this act charged with and for any percel of the said Subsedyes,
or with any other su^mes, or fine antereiament penalty, or other forfeyture,
happen to dye before the commyssioner, Collector or other whatsoever person or
persons, have executed, accomplyshed, satisfied, or sufficientlye discharged
that which to every such person shall appertain or belong to do, according
to this act, then thexecutors and heirs of every such person, and all other
sessed of any Lands, or tenementes, that any such person being charged by
this act, and disceasynge before he be dyscharged thereof, or any other to his
use only had of estate of inherytaunce at the time that any such person was
named Commissioner, Collector, or otherwise charged with and for any manner of
thing to be done satisfied or paid by reason of this act, and all these that
have in their possessions or hands, any goods, or cattels, that were to any
such person at the time of his death, or any Lands, or Tenementes, that were
the same persons, at the time he was as is aforesaid charged by this act,
shall be by the same compelled and charged to do, and accomplish in every case
as the same person so being charged, should have done, and might have been
compelled to do, if he had been in plain life after such rate of the Lands,
and Gooddes of the said Commissioner or Collector, as the party shall have in
his hand, and if the same Commissioners for causes reasonable them mouyng, shall
think it not convenient to join in one certifycat, as is beforesayde, then
the said person or persons, that shall first join together, or he that shall
first certifye the said writing indented as is aforesaid shall certifye all the
names of the commisioners of yt co^missio^ whereupon such writings shall be
there then to be certifyed, with diuisyon of the hundredes, wapentakes, wards,
tithinges, or other places, to and among such commissioners, of the same
commissyon, with the names of the same commissioners where such seperations,
and deuisions shall be, with the gross sums of money, as well of and for the
said Subsedy, taxed or set of or within the said hundredes, wards, wape^takes,
or other places to him or them divided, or assigned, that shall so certifye the
said first writynge, as of fines, amerciamentes, penaltyes, or other
forfeytures, if any happen to be within the same limits, whereof the same
writings shall be certified, and after such writing indented which as is
aforesaid shall be certified, and not conteyne in it the hole and full Sums,
set, and taxed, within the Lymittes of the same Commission, the other
Commissioners of the same before the day of paymente of the said Subsedy,
shall certify into the said Exchequer by their writing or wrytinges indented to
be made as is before said, the gross and several sums set, and taxed within
the places to them limited for the said Subsedye, and other fynes,
amerciamentes, penalties, and forfeytures, with the names of the Hundredes,
wards, wapentakes, and other places to them assigned, or else by their said
wrytinges indented, to certifye at the said place before the said day of
payment, such reasonable causes for their excuses, why they may not make such
certificat, of and for the said Subsedy which fines, amerciamentes, and other
forfeytures, growing or set by reason of the causes of their lettes, or of
their none certifyinge as is abouesayde, or else in default thereof process to
be made out of the king and queen's majesty's Exchequer, against the said
Commissioners, and every of them, not making certificate as is aforesaid, by
the discretion of the Treasurer or Barons of the said Exchequer.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that the
inhabitauntes of the paryshe of Saint Martyn, called sta^p sord Baron, in the
Suburbs of the borowe, and town of Staunforde in the South part of the water,
there called Welland, which hereafter shall be contributory to the payment of
this present Subsedy granted to the king and queen's majesty's, their heirs
and successoures, shall be assessed, rated, and taxed for this time by such
Commissioners, which shall be appointed* for the taxinge, ratynge, and sessyng of
such Subsedy, or tax within the county of Lincoln, and shall be for this time
contributory, and pay the said Subsedy to the collector, or Collectors, which
shall be assygned and appointed, for the leuying and gatheryng of the same, with
the Aldermen and burges of the said Borough and town of Stampforde.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that all and
every person, and persons, having manours, lands, teneme^tes, and other
hereditame^tes, chargeable to the payment of the subsedy granted to the king
and queen's majesty's, by this act, and also having spiritual possessions
chargeable to their said majesty's, by yt grant made by yt clergy of this
realm in this their co^uocatio^. And over this, having substance in goods and
cattels chargeable by this said act, yt then if any of yt said person or
persons be hereafter charged, assessed, and taxed for the said Manours,
Lands, and Tenementes, and spiritual possessions, and also assessed, charged
and taxed for his or their goods, and catelles that then he or they shall be
only charged by virtue of this Act, for his and their said manours, lands,
tenementes, hereditaments, and spiritual possessions, or only for his said
goods, and catteles, the best thereof to be taken for the king and Queen's
majesty's, and not to be charged for both, or double charged for any of them,
any thing in this act contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.
Provided always, that this grant of subsedye nor any other thing therein
contained, in any wise extend to charge the inhabit auntes or dwellers within
Irelande, Callys, Hammes, Euysnes, and the marches of the same, Iernesey, and
Garnesey, or any of them, of or concerning any manours, lands, tenementes, or
other possessions goods, Catteles, or other, moveable substance, which the
said inhabitauntes, or dwellers, or any other to their use, have within
Irelande Callis Hammes, Guysnes, or other the marches of yt same, Iernsey
Garnesey, or in any of them, of for or concerning any fees, or wages which any
of the said inhabytauntes, or dwellers have, of the king and Queen's majesty's,
for their attendaunce, and doing service to our said Soueraygne Lord and Lady,
in Irelande, Callys, Hammes, Guyshes, and the marches of the same, Iernesey,
and Garnsey, or in any of them, any thing in this present Act to the contrary
not wythstanding.

Provided also that this present Act of Subsedye, ne any thing therein
contained, extend to any of the English inhabytauntes, or resiauntes in any
of the countyes of Northumberland, Cumberland Westmerlande, the town of
Barwycke, the town of Newcastell upon Tine, and the Byshopryke of Durham, nor
to any of the^ of for or consernyng any manours, lands, tenementes, or other
possessions goods, cattels, or other moveable substance, which the same
inhabytauntes or dwellers, or any other to their use, have within the said
Countyes of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerlande, or the town of Barwycke,
the town of Newecastle upon Tine, or the bishopryke of Durham, or any of them,
or of for or concerning any fees or wages which any of the said inhabytauntes,
or dwellers have of the King and Queen's majesty's for their attendaunce, and
doing service to the king and Queen's Maiestyes, for or within the said
counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland, ye town of Barwycke, the
town of Newcastell upon Tyne, and the byshoprycke of Durham, or any of them,
to or for the said taxinge, leuying, gatheryng, or payment, but that the
English inhabytauntes, and resyauntes, and every of them of the said counties,
byshoprycke and Towns, and every of them, shall be of and from the said subsedy,
and every percell thereof, and for their manours, lands, tenementes, fees
wages, goods, and cattels, lying and being in the same countyes, Towns and
byshoprycke, or any of them utterly acquitted and discharged, any thing in this
present act before rehearsed to the contrary notwythstandyng.

Provided also that all letters patentes, granted by the king and Queen's
majesty's, or any of their most noble progenitors, to any cities, Borowes, or
Towns within this realm of any manner of lyberties, privileges or exemptions
from the burden and charge of any such grauntes of Subsedyes which be at this
present time in force and vayleable shall remain good and effectual to the
said Cities, borowes, and towns hereafter, according to the purportes thereof
though the inhabytauntes of the same, shall upon the great and weightye
consideration of the grant abouesayd, be for this grant charged, and
contributory in like manner form, and sort as other cities, boroughes, and
towns which be not in any wise priuileged, be from such grant of Subsedy
excepted.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that no
Orphant, or Infant, within the age of.xxi. year, borne with in any of the
kings and Queen's majesty's dominions, shall be charged to any payment of this
Subsedye, for his goods and cattels to him left, or bequethed, any thing in
this act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also and be it enacted, that forasmuch as diverse, and so^drye the
king and Queen's majesty's tenauntes, and other inhabytauntes, and dwellers
within the cou^ties of Penbroke, Carmarthe^ Cardigan, Glamorga^, Breckenocke,
Radnour; Monnegomery, De^byghe, Flynt, Merioneth, Anglesey, Carnaruan, and of
the countye Palentine of Chester, be at this present time charged and
chargeable with the several paymentes of diverse great su^mes of money, by the
name of Myse, due to their majesty's, according to the several customs of
the said counties. For the payment whereof, diverse and sundry the gentilmen,
and other the inhabitauntes of the said cou^ties, be and stand bound to
their highness. Be it therefore ordained and enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid,
that this act of Subsedie or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to
charge, any of the queens maiestyes tenauntes, and other thinhabitauntes and
dwellers within any of the said counties of Penbroke, Carmarthen, Cardigan,
Glamorgan, Brecknocke, Radnoure, Monnegomery, Denbyghe, Flynt, Merioneth,
Anglesey, Carnaruan, and the county palantyne of Chester, being charged, or
chargeable with the said mise, for or in any of the paymentes of the said
Subsedye granted to the king and queen's majesty by this act, until the
several days and times appointed, and agreed for the paymentes of the said
myses shall be expyred. And that the first payment of the said subsedye shall be
made at the receypte of the queens exchequer, before the first day of March
then next following, after the day appointed for the latter paymente to be made
of the said myses. And the second, or last payment of the said Subsedye, to
be made by, or before the.xx. day of May, in the next year following, after
the said first paime^t of this Subsedye.

And furthermore be it enacted by thaucthoritye aforesaid, that the Cenauntes,
and dwellers of every of the said countyes in this prouyso remembered, shall
severally before the feast of Pentecoste, next ensuinge, certifye in the
said Court of Exchequer, under the seals of two justices of peace of every
of the said countyes, whereof the one to be of the Quorum, when and what day the
last payment of the said several myses now dew in any of the said counties,
shall end and expire.

Provided also, that the said grant of Subsedye, or any other thing therein
contained, do not in any manner of wise extend, to be proiudiciall, or
hurtefull to thinhabitauntes or resiauntes at this present time, within the
five ports corporate, or to any of their members incorporate, or united to
the same five ports, or to any of the same five ports, of or for any part,
or percell of the said Sums granted in this present parliament of the said
inhabitauntes now resyaunt, or any of the^, to be taxed, set asked, levied, or
paid, but the said inhabytauntes, and resiauntes in the said five ports, and
their members, be and shall be of, and from the said grant and paymente of the
said Subsedye during the resyauncye there, and no longer, clearly acquitted
and discharged, Any matter, or whatsoever thing in this present act had or made
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also that this act, nor any thing therein contained shall extend
to yt goods or lands of any college, hal, or hostel, wtin the universities
of Oxenforde and Cambrydge, or any of the^, or to ye goods or lands of ye
college of Wynto^, founded by bishop wickha^ orto the goods or lands of any
common fre gramer scole within yt realm of England, or Wales, or to the goods
of any reader, scolemaster or scoler within the said universities, and
colleges, or any of them there remaining for study, without fraud or couin,
or to the goods and lands of any hospytall, measondue, or Spyttelhouse,
prepared and used for the sustentation and releife of pore people. Any thing in
this act contained to the contrary in any wise notwythstandyng.

God save the king and the Queen.
EXCVSVM LONDINI IN AEDIBVS IOHANNIS CAVVODI TYPOGRAPHI REGIAE MAIESTATIS.

Anno. M.D.L.V.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


