An heavenly act concerning how man shall live, made by our suffraine lord
God the father, God the son, and God the holy ghost, and all the whole
clergy in heaven consenting to the same.

Make no taryeng to turn unto the Lord, and put not of from day to day: for
suddenly shall his wrath come, and in time of vengeance he shall destroy the.

Ecclesi. vi. God the father.
WHere as we perceived that after we had created man, settinge him in a place
of high pleasure, leui^g him in the council of his own hands to chose
whether that he would die or not die. And thus being a spiritual body, after
our own similitude could not for all this stand in the same state but
abusinge our celestial gifts, and fell from our precept, neglecting what
liberte to him was delivered, so chaunginge him self from heuenli liberty
unto eternal bondage, in whom we se what he was of him self nothing but
sinfulnes, refusing our liberties and fill unto the fulness of his own sin.
Whom we lamented of our mere mercy, cou^celling with our self we would not
have him whole lost, upon which consideracion we exiled him our compani, and to
live in the borders of our wast ground, taking him and his as aliantes and
strangers unto us, exempt from eternal wisdom and so brought to worldly
policies. Notwithstanding as we have said our petie and clemency provided al
manner of things and comodites for him by the which he might perceive our
potencial power, as well before toward him as then. Wherefore upon co^sideracion
of our own good will we enacted by our own council so to provide and to set
again at liberty, the dangers also to take away that man was fallen in,
which could not be done but through him that was clean and pure without sin,
for sin could not take away sin? but the time we reserved unto our own
self, and at the length to stablishe and confirm our said act and purpose we
sent down our only begotten son to proclaim our will what it was, unto the
which he set to his seals hanginge upon the cross, giuinge up his life
through most painful death, by the which the atonement was made between man
and us, and so our anger was pacified and we have also prepared eternal rest
for man so that after this he will keep covenant with us, and live in our laws
and statutes that we have set forth by our high court of parliament, both of
lords spiritual and temporal to the same consentinge.

We have enacted in our heavenly court that man shall love us above al thing
with heart, soul, and mind, and all the powers he has, and to have none other
God or gods but us, and us only to serve upon the pain of everlasting
dampnacion. We have enacted also by the auctorite aforesaid that our blessed
name be not taken in vain but most reuere^tly to be had in honor upon ye
pain before rehearsed, and vterly of us forsaken to ye co^firmacio^ whereof our
vicegere^t Jesus Christ wills man not swear at al, but yt his oath shall be
yea, yea, nay, nay, for what soever is more is sin. Also James the apostle
archbishop of al Galacia says. Let your yea be yea and your nay be nay, and
Salomo^ to whom we gave great wisedo^ so yt many regions wondered there at,
gives warni^g to great swerers and says yt our plage shall not depart from ye
house of a customable swerer. wherefore who ye offe^deth in this is utterly of
us forsaken.

Provided always if ye shall be required of your faith of any in auctorite to
who^ ye are doutful or ye obediens to your prince shall be required of you by
oath, and besides to testify for ye truth of your neibour so much as eqite and
justice does reqire ye may lawfully take us to witness for your faith, and to
take us to witness for yor obedie^s and to justify your neibour in a right cause
ye may rehearse our name for so is it not in vain the act before
notwithstanding.

Furthermore we will be worshipped ye.vii. day, ye man shall give us honor and
worship for ye beneficial kindness yt we have done to him, seasing from al
labors that day both he and al his. Provided always where as need shall reqire
as our only son and vicegerent Jesus Christ gave example in healing ye lame
man upon ye sabbath day: so ye al acts may redou^de unto our glory lawfully to
be used ye act before notwithstanding.

Further be it enacted for ye unite and concord which we would should be between
our creatures, we will one shall do unto another as he would be don to. To ye
co^firmacio^ of this said act our only son and vicegere^t says, man shall
pray unto us for the forgiveness of his sins, none otherwise then he does
forgive other Also the said Jesus Christ says: openinge this act very
plainly. If ye shall forgive those that has offended you your heavenly father
shall al so remit you your offenses he will al so that man shall forgive his
mortal enemies, and to bless where as they do curse. And although the
authority of this act be sufficient as is before spoken yet man shall
understand our lords of our perliame^t have given their voice unto it. And
first the lord secretary Ihon the evangelist set his hand and writ: Deus
caritas est. God is charity, who that abides in charity abides in God and God
in him. And Paul, the lord chau^celer says: If he could speak with tongues
of men or with tongues of angels so that he could remove mountains with his
faith. If he should give his body to be burned without he have charity it
profits nothing, so that in conclusion he does affirm and says. Caritas
no^ querit que sua sunt. Charity seeks not only his own but that that longs
to Jesus Christ our only son and Vicegerent, whose example we will man shall
follow, saying: Mandatum nouum do vobis, vt diligatis inuicem sicut dilexi vos.
To you I give a new commandment, that ye love one another even as I have
loved you. Also man shall understand, our love was unspeakable toward him as
our lord secretary John the evangelist writ. Sic deus dilexit mu^dum, vt
vnigenitum suu^ daret pro mundum. We had such love unto man, that we gave our
well-beloved son for him, that all that believe in him should not perish, but
have life everlasting. Wherefore we will by our heavenly commandment that this
act do extend to all creatures one to love another, for as our lord cha^celer
Paul says love is ye fulfilling of ye law, and ye contrary where love is not
there is not god, and where god is not there is wickedness, and where wickedness
is there is dampnacion. Also it is enacted man shall be obedient unto his father
and mother in doing their co^ma^deme^t, and in so doing we made man a promise
yt his life should be long upon ye earth to this we have co^stitute kings and
rulers to govern the earth to who^ we will have dew honor given, for we have
set them as our commisioners under us to execute our will for the which we
will they be had in reuerens, for the corboratinge of the same, our only son
obeyed them, and also gave commandment yt tribute, tol, and custom should be
given unto them. Also lord chanceler Paul says, let every soul submit them
selves unto the higher powers and not to obey the^ only for fere but for
co^scie^s sake. Moreover Peter which was ye poor fisher and took fyshe daily
with his nets we exalted him to be of ye domestical household with our only son
and vicegerent, and so boldned his heart and sprete yt we made him to take me^
in ye spu^al net whose faith confessed yt Christ was ye son of us ye living
god, to yt which al ye fellowship agreed, and for ye which confession so made
by faith he was translated to an high office there made ye superuiser of our
church spu^al, whose auctorite is no less toward us then the lord secretary
Ihon or the lord cha^celer Paul to be believed. And this act does Peter
superuiser of our buildinge confirm, saying: submit yor selves to al manner of
ordinances of me^ for ye lords sake whether it be unto ye king as unto ye
chief heed, or unto rulers, as unto them yt are sent of him for ye ponishme^t
of evil doers, but for ye praise of them yt do well, for so is the will of God
here man must obey them for our sake, for so wills Peter there help and
socour with body and goods to be at the kings commandment, therefore we will
and by the consent of our lords spiritual and temporal, that this act does
stand in full strength and virtue. Provided always so that if father or mother
command any thing contrary unto our will, or more then they have in our
commission, that then it shall be leful for man to say as Peter superuiser
answered the rulers, what time they would have put him to scilence in
confessinge and preachinge Jesus Christ and that they had cast aside the stone
as Peter laid unto their charge, which was become the head corner stone and
that there was no health in none other, nor no name wherein any salvation should
consist but only our only son and Vicegerent Jesus Christ, boldlye he said
how that he was more bound to obey God then man, so wol we have you to say,
the act before notwithstanding. Further it is enacted, thou shall not kill.
Thou shall not stele. Thou shall bear no false wytnes against thy neighbor.
Thou shall not lust after thy neighbors wife. Thou shall not lust after thy
neighbors house, land, servant, maid, ox, ass, or what so ever he has, to
this act al lords in heaven both spiritual and temporal does confirm and
agree unto the same, and unto the transgressors there longs da^pnacion. Also
we enacted, Cursed is he that makes any caruen ydol or image, which we
abhor, (for it is the owrke of man's hands) and cursed is the hands that
makes them to the intent to have them worshipped, for we will no worship
shall be given unto them. For we are God al alone and al honor lo^geth unto us,
who was honored when we were all alone in our own glory, who is worthy to have
honor, but he yt made al thing honorable. Therefore as our lord cha^celer
Paul says, Soli deo honor et gloria. Honor glory with al praise be unto us. It
reioiseth us to hear man say with a faithful heart. Tu solus dn^s, tu solus
sanctus, tu solus altissimus. Also we know that they praise us and laud us,
when they say or singe with a faithful heart. Laudamus te, vn^dicimus, te,
adoramus te. The do we laud, ye do we bliss, ye do we worship, and the do we
glorify. Gracias agimus tibi propt magna^ gliam tua^ Unto the give we thanks
for thine own great glory, so yt no creature has any glory to glory in but
we, ye which glory ca^ not be expressed with tongues nor yet with heart, yet we be
not strange thereof, but in our house there is many ma^sio^s prepared for our
loving subjects, as christ has declared, and yet notwtsta^ding when ye course
of ye tra^sitory world shall have his end and al thing concluded as we have
decreed what ca^ any of our creatures say, how they did attain to ye
inestimable joys yt they shall have of the^ selves? no no. Could they bye it
by any man^ of ways, and to say we had no need of no help but of our own
power came we hither? no no, they must confess with our ambassitor David. No^
nobis dn^e no^ nobis, sed noi^e tuo da glia^. Not of us lord, no not of us yt
we possessed these joys, but ye glory must redou^de to thy name. as christ
says, there is none good but god, so will we yt man shall know without us they ca^
do nothing: for we herd yt our children of Israel said to Moses* yt tstey would
perform and do al yt we had comanded. Nevertheless to bring the^ from their
own trust and holiness, and yt they might know and perceive yt it is we yt
works all in all things: we axed Moses who should give them such a heart.
Therefore we will have al honor we will be prayed unto, we will be trusted unto,
for there is none to match with us, for they are our creatures and we are
their God, so is there no gods that has any such virtues or graces but only
we. Wherefore we streytly command by the virtue of this our said act that no
person or persons do not take any part or parts of our honor from us, and to
give unto ydolles or image, but to give unto every creature his honor, as we
have it enacted, upon the pain of our everlasting punishment and dredful
indignacio^ without redemption. Furthermore we have enacted by our own power,
and also by the consent of our lords spiritual and temporal, that no man does
either add or take from our heavenly laws otherwise then we have enacted as we
our self have said unto Moses the speaker of our perliame^t what time he
receiuid our acts delivering those same unto the childern of Israel. Also our
vicegerent Jesus Christ says that man shall do the father of heuins will for I
come not says he to do mine own will, but his will that has sent me. Also
Ioha^ the evangelist our secretary says: Cursed is he that shall add any
thing unto that that is written in the mystery of this law, if any man shall
add any thing, God shall add unto him the plages that are contained in the
same. Moreover the said lord secretarye says, if any man come unto you and
bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your houses, neither salute him,
for he that saluteth him is partaker of his euel deeds. Furthermore Paul lord
chaunceler says. Other fou^dacion can no man lay, then that which is laid
already. The lord cha^celer co^firmith it more and says if an a^gel should come
from heaven to declare any other doctrine, he forfendeth to give no credens,
wherefore we will that our laws does stand in his full strength and virtue
without corrupcion of other doctrine.

Further be it enacted it shall be lawful for all men to have these our laws
ordinances and statutes day lie red in their houses, as our captains of our
armies had both Iosue and also Esdras, and also our speaker of parliament
Moses said. Audi filii Israel, declaring to them they should writ it upon the
posts and gates of their houses, and to have it in remembrance it should be
bound unto their hands and so whetted upon their children that none other
doctrine should take place that according as Paul lord chanceler says. He
would of one to go before another in spiritual knowledge. And David the noble
king and one of our chief ambassitours yt brought message of our godly
pleasure to come, setting forth also what profitablenes was in ye knowledge of
our law said. Lex dn^i immaculata conuertens ai^as testimoniu^ dn^i fideli
sapientiam prestans paruulos. The law of the lord is parfyte, refreshynge the
soul, the testimony of the lord is faithful ministringe wisdom unto the
unlearned, the commandments of the Lord are right making glad the heart, tho
things which God commands are plain and pure? and they lyghte^ the eyes.
The fear of the Lord is pure and holy abiding for ever, the pleasures of
the Lord are true and right in every part more worthyer to be desired then
gold and precious stones, swetter then the honye comb when it droppeth.

This ambassitour king David was in assurauns he never fell after he had our
holy and heavenly law in his heart where as he said. Lucerna pedibus meis,
verbum tuum domine, et lumen semitis meis.

O Lord thy word is a lantern unto my fete, and also a light unto my paths.
And more over he said. Iuraui et statui custodiri iudicia iusticie tue. I have
sworn even in the botome of my heart and shall perform it to keep thy just
pleasures. So that in every place this faithful David professed our law to be
of wonders efficacy strength and virtue, that in manner he did wonder at the^,
and with a great vehemence spoke. Mirabilia tua domine etc. Marvelous are thy
testimonies, wherefore my soul observes them, to come but to the door of thy
scripture lighteneth and gives understanding to the unlearned. This was he of
whom we said we have chosen a man even to our own heart. Furthermore our
secretary John the evangelist at the entringe first into his office said. In
the beginning was the word and the word was with God, and God was the word,
so that by his auctorite who so ever receives our law receives us, and the
contrary who so receives not our law, receives not us. Wherefore man shall
understand, it is our will and godly pleasure to have our most sacred word to
go forth which is the comfort for man to guide his whole life with all, and
it was full auctorised by our only son and Vicegerent Jesus Christ which
did perform the consummacion of our said law, but we will by the virtue of
this said act, that any person or persons do not only receive this our law
carnally but we will it shall be received spiritually, or else as Peter the master
of our buildinges says it should be better if they had never aknowen it.

Provided always that if any person or persons do not acco^plishe and fulfill
this our said law, that then it shall be leful for him or them to say with our
faithful ambassitour David peccaui or peccauimus cu^ patribus nr^is. Unjust
egimus iniqitatem fecimus. I have sinned or we have sinned with our fathers we
have lived and walked sinfully, and have done iniquite, so that if we shall
perceive amendment of life be had among men that then we will even fatherly
accept their hertes for the said confessions sake and spu^all minds the act
before notwithsta^dinge. Further be it enacted that every person or persons
which murmr or groge yt this our said law should prosecute for man's
consolacion, we abiecte clean our heavenly regiment to everlasting punishment,
and every person or persons that be transgressors of our said laws, and be
in mind to continue still in such rebellious life, shall have like punishment
and be wiped clean out of ye book of life. Provided always we would man should
know our pardon is incomparable so that men will be obedient and reconsiled unto
our law, when so ever our grace is offerde. For we will not the death of no
sinner, if he will convert and turn, we will turn to him again and will think
no more on his disobedie^s, his sins shall pass from our sight as corrupt
water that is put into a fair running river. So yt we will man shall lay full
hold trustyng hole to ye restitucio^ yt we have by our own son and
vicegerent provided for hi^ which is ye painful passion yt our son did suffer
in whose blood we be moved to mercy, when so ever man by faith lays the same
before us. Clerelye as we said before (of the sins that man has done) to
think no more on them, that act before notwithstanding.

Further be it enacted our Beatitude shall be upon almen, that shall with a
willing heart do or consent to observe and do all that we have commanded,
their catel, their corn, with all other their substance, shall be multiplied and
increased. And contrary every person or persons that with a grudgynge heart do
not or at the least consent unto all that we have commanded to the vttermoost
of their powers, that then let them be sure that our most godly increase
shall be withdrawn from them, for cursed shall they be, their corn, their catel,
with all other their substance. Provided always, it shall be mete for us to take
our pleasure above al other. And where as we did permyt satan to tempt our
only son and Vicegerent Jesus Christ And also in like case our faithful
servant Job, to be tried by aduersite. It shall be understand many times we be
so minded to prove our faithful, and to withdraw vain things from them to
bring them to the knowledge of more parfiter gifts. For it is our nature diverse
times to set up and after to pull down many times we exalt the wicked to drown
them hole in their lubricite. For of al creatures, we know the intent of the
creacio^, we are as the potter that may do what him list with the lump of
claye when he has it in his hands, to make it a vessel of honor or a
vessel of dishonor, and yet we will not be resoned with all for the cause, but
we will man shall aplye his hole will unto our will, and to say with our only
son and Vicegerent Jesus Christ. Fiat voluntas tua. Not our wylles, but this
thy will in all things may be done. For thy will is holy and is a will that
can not alter and change, unto the which all creatures in heaven, earth, and
hell must obey. If man shall thus obedientlye prostrate his whole heart unto
our correction. Whether it be in loss of goods sycknes or any other
adversities, what so ever it shall please us to touch man with all. That then
man shall be sure we will so use him at length, he shall not be tempted above
that he is able to bear. And as our lord chanceler Paul says. Who so ever
does put their trust in us shall not be confounded. And our ambassitour king
David says. Multi tribulationes iustorum, et de omnibus hiis liberauit eum
dominus. Unto the just happens many tribulacions, but the lord delivers
them from all. Therefore we will man shall be faithful in temptacion yea and to
give up his hole life into our hands, and to fear nothing that shall come of
us, what so ever shall be laid to his charge but to remember that in all thing
we seek his profit, yea though that we take his temporal life from him in
the which we will be glorified, and glorify him again. For as it is said.
Preciosa in conspectu domini, mors sanctorum eius. That is the death of the
faithful is precious in our sight we will man shall take no pains for our
pleasure but that we will double recompens again. For our only son and
vicegerent has said. Beati qui lugent. Beati qui persecuntur etc. Blessed are
they that mourn for they shall be comforted, blessed are they that suffer
persecucion for righteousness sake for there is is ye kingdom of god, blessed are
you when men shall revile you and persecute you, and falsely say al manner of
evil saynges against you for my names sake. Rejoice and be glad for great is
your reward in heaven. what may be more said, what thing can we more promise,
wherefore man shall understand in all things we will that man shall be obedient
and confirmable unto our will and godly pleasure, the act before
notwithstanding.

Also we have enacted that every person or persons shall understand that never
after this we shall alter or change any part or parts of that we have
inacted but as our Vicegerent says. Heaven and earth shall alter, but our word
shall not alter, for our word is our own self, and we are not chaungeable in
our self we are omnipote^t, without beginning without endinge, holiest of al
holiest, so fixed and knet in everlasting truth that all that we have said can
not alter nor be undone, but evermore to stand. Wherefore by virtue of this
said act we will that none other of our terrestrial creatures shall in their
counsel or councelles, inueye or suppress any part or parts of that that we
have said or enacted, but that every person or persons in all their councels
shall have prospect to our laws groundynge them selves on our fou^dacion that
we have laid. For we know our self to be as wise as they in all things, what
was mete and what was unmeet, whose laws also be sanctified by our laws if
they be consonant, and whose laws also be acursed by our laws, if they be
contrary, so that with what measure so ever is delivered, the same shall be
delivered again yet by our law, althinge shall be justly iuged.

Be it known therefore that this is the first and the last parliament that we
have or will to enacte our laws for evermore. And when the time shall come
(as we have it appointed) to call kings and emperors with all other potentates
before us to render account before us for the executinge of our will and laws
whether they have been done worthelye or unworthily before us it shall appear,
and those that we have found faithful and trusty we shall deliver them from
the dangers of the law to reign with us everlasting. And again the
transgressors or malefactors of the same, shall fall into everlasting curse of
the law, which is dampnacion for ever more.

Printed at Amstredam be Ian Peterson.


