The abregement of the statutes of Anno.xxxj. Henrici.viij.
Abylyte.
ALl persons professed in any relygious houses now comen or which hereafter
shall come to the Kings hands in any wise which parsones are now set or
hereafter shall happen to be set at their lyberties out of the danger of their
professyon be and shall be able to purchase al manner of hereditame^tes and thiges
whatsoever they be. And may use take and inioye al lawful things to be given
to the^ after ye time of their departing out of religion. And also be and shall
be able to pursue and be said in all manner of suytes for any matter grown after
their said departing out of relygyon in as large and ample manner as if they
had never ben professed. Provided always that no such persons shall to any
intent or co^struccion be demed heir to any person. Nor to be able to demand
or receive any heredy tamentes, or things by reason of any former title,
right, or cause growing before their departing out of relygyon. Nor such of
them as be Priests or have vowed relygyon at.xxi. years of age, and then
consented contynuyng there any while after not prouyng such vow to be made by
any unlawful cohercyon shall able to marye or take any wise.

Anno xxxi. Henrici octaui. cap. s^xto.
Augmentacyons.
ALl the religious and Ecclesiastical houses with all the lande^ and
tenementes profits and commodites to the same belonging which are comen to
the Kings hands syns the Parlyamente holden the xxvii. year of his raygne or
which hereafter shall come to his graces hands and possessyon shall be to his
grace and his heirs for ever. And all such houses and other the premysses
except only such as shall come to his graces hands by atteyndre of treason /
shall be under the surety and governance of the Court of Augmentacyons and
the mynysters of the same court. Saving to all persons and bodies polytyke
and their heirs and successors other than the governors of the said houses,
and such as pretend to be founders, patrons, or donours of such houses or
tenemetes and profytes perteynynge to the same al such right, title, interest,
rentes, charges, annuities leases, fermes, offices, fees, lyuerees, and
livings, porcyons, pencions, corrodies, commons, sinodes proxies any other
profytes as they shalde have had if this* Act had not ben made. Rentes
service, Rent secke and al of her seruyces and suytes only except. Provided
olwaye that al manner of grau^tes and seals for life or years heretofore made
by the gouernoure or gouernesse of any such house of any lands or teuemetes or
other profits late pertaynyng to such house and within one hole year next
before the coming of such house to the Kings hands which were not commonly
wont to be let to ferme but kept in thoccupacyon of such governor or
gouernesse for y^ mayntenaunce of hospitalyte / or of which any particular
interest for term of life year or years, at the time of the making of such
gran^t or lease had any co^tynuau^ce and not expyred / or else upon which
grau^tes or leasses y^ old rentes and fermes accustomed by the space of.xx.
years next before y^ first day of this parlyame^t, is not thereupon reserved,
or if any such gonernour or gouernese within the space of one year (as is
aforsayde) has made any wodsale which woddes be yet sta^dynge, Al such
grau^tes leases and sales shall be utterly void. Item al feffeme^tes fines and
recoueres suffered by any such governor or gouernesse within one year (as is
aforsayde) of any hereditame^tes which they held of y^ kings grant or
co^firmacio^ or of any of his progenitour or of y^ which houses y^ king was
fou^der or patron, or which hereditame^tes were of tholde fundacio^ or
possession of such houses without the kings license under his great seal shall be
void. Note that what grauntes sales and wodsales by this Act be made void
and what excepted (as before is said) by the governors or governesses of such
houses as be al ready comen to the kings hands, even so it is further enacted
I every point qualyte and degree of al leases and gran^tes for life or years and
wodsales which has been made within one year next before the begynynge of
this parlyament, or which heteafter shall be made by any governor or
gouernesse of any house yet standing Item al feffementes fines and recoueries
which within one year next before the beginning of this parlyamente has been
or which hereafter shall be made and suffered by the governors or governesses of
the houses yet standing without the kings license under his great seal
shall be void. So that the heredytamentes be of the kyngte grant or
co^firmacion or his progenytoures, or else where the king is founder or patron
of the house, or where the same heredytamentes were of tholde foundation or
possessyon.

Item touching the avoiding of grauntes or leases for years (such as before
be spoke of) where any interreste and term at the time of the making thereof
remains in the grauntee or lessee it is provided that the same grauntee or
lessee shall have.xxi. years of the said new grant or lease in (...) there
be so many years. And if there be not than for so many years as be in his new
grant or lease, so that tholde rent be thereupon reserved and so that the same
lease or grant excede not xxi. years.

Item a like prouiso is ordained for grauntes or leases made by any late
governor or gouernesse within a year next before the dyssolucion of his house
for term of life where such grant or lessee at the same time held the same
for life or years than not expired, so that tholde rent be there upon reserved.

Item al leases and grau^tes for life of any hereditame^tes customari made by
copy of the court to use, be saved, so that tholde rent be thereupon reserved.
Ite^ al leases made by thauctoryte of the court of Augmentacions. And all
leases feffementes and wodsales made by the said governors or governesses
under their comen seal within a year before the dissolucion. etc. which have
been affyrmed in the said court. And the same degree put in writing sealed
with the seal of the same court shall be good and effectual.

Item the Chaunceler of the said court with ii more of them shall restore
recompense (as they shall think conuenyente all such sums of money as any
governor or gouernesse has taken for any wodsale without fraud or couyn, in
cas the pertye that paid the same may not lawefully enjoy his bargayne.

Item all purchases by any persons by indenture fine feffement recovery or
otherwise of any governor or gouernes syns the.iiii. day of February
the.xxvii. year aforesaid of any their heredytamentes by the kings license
pardon ^onfyrmacyon relese or consent under his great seal, had or hereafter
to be had be good according to the purport of the same assura^ces.

An.xxxi. h. viii. cap. xiii.
Bishops.
The king may fro time to time name by his letters patentes or other wrytynges
under his great seal such nombre of Bishops cytyes fees for Bishops,
cathedrull Church and dyoses by meets and boddes as shall apperteyn and endewe
the (...) such possessions as his grace shall think co^uenye^t Also he may
make and divise tra^slacio^s, rules and statutes concerning every of the^.

An.xxxi. H. viii. cap. ix.
Look more of Byshopes in the title of visitacyo^.

Contynuaunce of the statutes of west* heretofore made.
U^o^ acts made for punysheme^t of vacabou^des, for restreynt of co^ueynge of
horses and mare^ out of this realm, for assautes and affrayes of welsshemen
upon thinhabitau^tes of berforde shyre, Gloucester shyre, and Salop. for
punyshement of y^ vice of buggory, for refireynt of co^nueyng of brass, latin,
and coper, out of this realm For y^ true making of ropes and cables, for
windi^g of wolles, for kylli^g we^lynges, bullockes and steres under.ii. years.
For atteynt. For pewterers, for sown of flax and he^pe. And of making of
^ayles shall stand in force till y^ last day of the next parlyame^t.

An. ^1. H. 8 cap. 7
Excestre.
FOr the amendeme^t of the river of Exe it is enacted that shall be lawefull at
all times after the feast of Easter next coming for the Mayre bayliffe and
cominaltie of the cite of Exestre to pluck down, dygge moyne, break, ba^ke
and cast up al manner of lettes and noysau^ce in the said river, and in other
places necessary for the same where soever they be, lyeng between the said
cite and the high see. And further to do and make all things necessary whereby
al manner of vessels may have sure course and recourse in the said river to
and fro the said cite and there to charge and discharge gooddes and
marchau^dyses without disturbance of any person paying and making to the owners
of the soil where they shall so dygge and moyne due satysfaccion for the land
so dygged and moyned after the rate of.xx. years purchase, or else as the
Justices of assise in deuonshyre for the time being shall ^ing* the eleccyon
thereof to be at the pleasure of the same owners of y^ soil, without any let or
trouble of such owners by suyte in the law or otherwise upon pain of
forfayture of.xx. li. for every such let or trouble, the one half to the king^
hyghnes and the other to him that will pursue for the same b^^accyon of Debt
byl plaint or information in any of y^ kings courts. In which suyte no wager
of law essoyne proteccion nor license shall in no wise be admytted nor
allowed. Also if any fermours be of any of the said lands where. etc. then
they to take such recompense as by the said Justices or their deputies in
that behalf shall be assessyd. All the said recompenses and satisfactions to
be made and paid within.vi. wekes after the ratynge or assessyng thereof,
oneles they can otherwise agree, for which satisfaccion or recompense the
parties shall have an actio^ of Det by the course of the common law against the
said Mayre baylyffes and co^mynalty i^ any shyre of these realm wherein no wager
of law essoyne license or protection to be allowed.

Fysshynge.
ALl manner fysshynge with nets hooks or baytes in any several ponde stewe
or more with an intent to steal fysshe out of the same after the feast of the
Natyuite of saint Johan Baptist the.xxxi. year of the raygne of king Henry
the.viii. between.vi. of the clock in y^ eneninge and.vi. in the morning
against the wylles of the owners of such ponde stewe or mote. And also the
unlawful breaking up of the head of any several po^d stewe or mote by day or
by night after the said feast without color of title so to do whereby any of
y^ fysshe there being is taken or destroyed against the owners will be to
every intent felony. Moreover they yt fysshe in y^ day time affter y^ manner and
form aforsayde in any several po^de stewe or mote at any other tym tha^ before
is rehearsed and there of be lawefully co^uicted at the kings suite or the
parties grieved shall suffer.iii. months imprisonment. And afterward to fi^de
sufficiete sureties for their good abering or else to remain in prison without
bail or mainprise until they fyude such suerties.

Fawkon.
Look therefore in the title of Felony. 31. H. 8. Felonye.

Unlawful taking of thegge or eggs of any fawkon goshauke or lanet or of
any of their brydes or the brydes of a Laneret out of the neste in any of the
kings grounds is made felony, but this statute extends not for any such
taking out of other men's grounds.

Item whosouer fyndeth and takes up any fawken gerfawkon Ierken sacre or
sacret goshauke lenet or laneret of the kings and having the mark of the
kings arms and veruels and causes not the same hawk within.xii. days next,
after the taking up to be brought to the master of the kings hawks, or to
some of his graces fawkeners, or else within the said time do not give
knowledge thereof to the said master or to the sheryfe where such hawk
shall be taken up, or to one of the kings faukeners nere there abiding. Than
such taking up and not bryngyng or gynyng knowledge shall be felony. Except it
so happen that the taker^^ of such hawk by chance neclygently against his
will lose the same hawk, or if it shall happen such hawk to dye against his
will before he may deliver the same.

An.xxxi. H. viii. Capi.xii.
Item if any person wrongfully enters into any forest, park, or chase of the
kings y^ queen's the princes, or of any of y^ kings children lawfully begotten
or any other enclosed ground of their used for keeping of dear between the
son risyng and the son going down with his face hid or covered with hoode
or vyser or with face painted or himself otherwise disguysed to the intent he
would not be known and in the same ground intends to steal any of the dear
And by huntyng or other wise by stealteth slay or take any of the same dear, or
else drive them out of such ground with an intent to stele the same, or else if
any person in a like manner and time and with a like intent as before is said,
take or kyl any conyes or rabettes with hey or other net, or with fyrret or
pursnet within the fre warren of the king or any of the persons above named or
in the form aforesaid kill any such conyes or rabettes being within any of
the said parkes except it be such parson as shall be fermour of the same conyes
rabettes or else shall be lycensed by writing of the king or other persons
aforesaid so to do. Or if any person between the son going down, and the
rysyng of the same into any of the said grou^des to the intent there to steal
any dear or by any mean in the time next aforesaid sle or take any dear
there or out of the same ground do chase any dear to the intent to steal it
or in any such time do take or kill any conyes or rabettes (after the form as
before is expressed of killing them in the day time except it be the fermour
of them or else lycensed as before is said) every such offense is ordained and
made to be felony Provided alwayee that no person shall be demed accessory to
such offenders except such as do procure the same offense to be done Nor that
this act extend to any offendour in any of the kings, the queen's, princes or
any of his graces lawefully begotten children, forestes, chaces, or warrens in
wales or the borders against Scotland, the foreste of Snowden in wales only
except. Also thoffenders contrary to this statute must be endyted within one
year next after the offense committed or else he stands as he did at y^ common
law.

An. 31. H. 8. C. 12
Gauelkynde.
ALl manner of heredytamentes being in the county of kynte whereof the lord
Crumwell of wimbyldon lord Pryuy seal and of diverse other persons specified
in these act be seized to there own uses in Fe si^ple or Fe tail now being
of the nature of Gauelkynde be changed fro the same nature, and made
desce^dable after the form of the common law.

Hampton court.
The kings manner of hampton Court is made an honor. And of the lands lyenge
within the Lordshyppes towns and villages of Estmalsey, westmulsy, walto^,
Esher, weybridge and part of Cobha^ in the county Surrey is made a new Chase
having all lybertes to a chase perteynynge. And is called hampton court Chase.

Hunting.
Look therefore in the title of felonye. 31. h. 8.

Particion.
IOyntenau^tes and tenau^tes in common yt be or shall be seized of any estate of
inheritance in their own right or in the right of their wyfes of any
heredytamentes shall be compelled thereof to make partycyon between them by write
of Participatione facienda at the common law in like manner and form as
parceners have used. And after such particion made they and their heirs to
have aid of other and their heirs to deteygne their warrantye paramou^t and
to recover prorata as is used between coparceners.

Placynge of lords and other high officers.
NO manner person except only the kings children shall presume to sit or have
place at any side of the cloth of estate in the parlyament chamber, whether the
king be present or absent. Also the vycegerent for the time being in all
parlyamentes shall sit on the right side of the parlyament chamber next above
the Archebyshoppe of Caunterbury and to have voice there as other lords of the
parlyament. Next unto him shall sytte on the same side the said Archebyshop
upon the same form, next unto him the Archebyshoppe of York, next unto him
the Bishop of London, next unto him the Bishop of Duresme, next unto him the
Bishop of wynchester. And tha^ al other by shops as they have heretofore
accustomed. Item on the least side of the parlyement chamber the lord
Chaunceler, lord Treasorer lord Presydent of the kings Counsel and the
lord Pryue seal being of the degree of barons of the parlyament or above
shall sit above al dukes except such as shall happen to be the kings son
his brother, his uncle, his neuewe or his brother or suster sons. Item the
great Chamberlayne, the Constable, the Marshall, the lord Admyrall, the great
master or lord Steward, and the kings Chamberlayne shall sit in order as
they be here tokened next after the lord pryue seal above al other parsons
being of their degrees. Item the chief Secretary being a Baron shall sit
above al Barons not having any of the offices aforemencioned. And if he be a
bishop than he to sytte above al other Bishops not hanynge any of the offices
above remembered, Item off Dukes not before rehearsed, Marquesses Earls,
Vycountes, and Barons not having any of the offices aforemencyoned shall sit
according to their auncyentyes. Item if the lord Chauncelour, lord
Treasorer, lord Presydent of the counsel, lord Preuy seal or chief
Secretary happen to be under the degree of a Baron of the parlyament than they
to be placed in order at the vppermoste part of the Sakkes in the mids of
the parlyament Chamber either upon one form or else upon the vppermoste
Sack. Item peers of the realm that shall be called for the trial of treasons
and having any of the said offices shall be placyd according to their offices
above the other peers that be called to such trial. And also this order of
placinge touching the lord Chancellor, lord Treasorer and other te^porall
officers before rehearsed shall be kept and observed as well in the Star chamber
and al other assembles and conferences of counsel as before is declared to be
in y^ Parliament.

An. 31. H. 8 Ca. x.
Proclamacyons.
The king by the advice of y^ Metropolitan^ the lord Chauncelour, lord
Treasorer / the presydent of the kings most honorable Counsel, lord Preuy
seal, and of other high officers named in this statute or the most part of
them may at all times set furthe his proclamacyons under such penalties and
pains and after such sort as to his hyghnes and the most part of them
shall seem necessary to be obeyed as if they were made by parlyament oneles
the king do dispense with them under his great senle. So that such
proclamacions extend not to take away the inheritannces lawful possessions
offices lybertyte preuyleges nor gooddes or catelles of any persons or bodies
polytyke, nor to cause any parson to suffer death other than hereafter ensues.
Nor to infringe or break any Acts common laws, now in force nor laudable
custom. And that every officer^ to whom such proclamacion shall be dyrected
by wryt under the great seal shall cause the same to be proclaimed
within.xiiii. days next after the recepte thereof in.iiii. market tewnes if
there be so many. And if not in.vi. other villages within there auctoryte. And
they to cause the same proclamacion to be set up i^ open places upon the pain
to be contained in the same. Item they that before the Metropolytane, lord
Chaunceler, lord Treasores the presydent of the kings most honorable
counsel, Lord preuy seal and other officers reheresed in the said statute
or the most part of them (where of the lord Chaunceler, lord Treasorer, the
said president, Lord preuy seal, the great Cha^berlayne of England, the lord
Admyral, the two chief Judges or.ii. of them shall be.ii) within one half year
next after his offense committed shall happen to be accused. And thereof
within.xviii. months next after his said offense committed conuycted by
confession or lawful witness and proves of and for brekynge or obstynatly not
observing any article contained in the said proclamacyon shall lose and pay
all such forfaitures or sums of money and suffer such imprisonment as shall be
expressed in such proclamacyon, which such offenders shall break, So yt the
same proclamacyo^ be made in the shyre where thoffenders is or was co^uersaunt
within a year before, Item either of the lord Chauncelour, and lord pryuy seal
with thassent of.vi. of the before named counsaylours shall have power upon every
informacion to either of them given to cause process under the great or pryuy
seal to be made against such offenders that is to say, first by proclamacyon
under (...) pain. And if he appear not upon the same not having a lawful
excuse than they to awarde another proclamacyon upon alligeans. And if it be
within the liberty of the duchy of Lancaster than the same process to pass by
the chau^celour there under the seal of the duchy with the assent of.vi. of y^
said cou^saylers. And if any such offe^ders do depart out of the realm
obstinatly wyllingly or co^te^ptuously to the intent he will not answer to his
offense tha^ such departing to be iuged high treason. And if any such
offender do absente or secretly hyde him self within any of the kings
dominions by the space of.ii. months next after any proclamacyon awarded and
proclaimed where he may by any reasonable mean have knowledge so that by
occasyon thereof his offense can not be tried and iuged within y^ said time
of.xviii. months tha^ such offenders to stand convict of the offense with
losyng such forfayture and suffrynge such imprisonment as shall appertain.
Ite^ the Justices of peace to whom any such proclamacion shall be dyrectyd,
within.xiiij. days after the recept thereof may by their discretions divide
them selfs into sundry places within their iurisdiccion for the due execucyon
of such proclamacion. Item the said counsaylours appointed to the
determynacion of every such offense (knowing the kings pleasure) have
auctoryte to mytygate the penalties comprised in any such proclamation.

Anno.xxxi. h.viii. cap. viii
Tithes.
The king and every other parson which hereafter shall have any monasterye or
other religious or ecclesiastical house or place, lands tenementes or any
parsonage appropriat tithes pe^sions or porcions or other hereditame^tes late
parteynyng to such house shall enjoy as well y^ said parsonage tithes, pe^cions,
and porcio^s as other y^ premises according to their littes in the same
discharged of payment of tithes in as ample manner as the late governors or
governesses of the same did enioy^ the same at the days of their dissolucyon.
Saving to the king, all manner of re^tes services and other duties.

An. xxxi. h. viii. cap. xiii.
Vysitacions.
ALl such of the late relygious or ecclesiastical houses dissolved with all
the churches and chapels to any of them belonging which before y^ said
dissolucion were exempted from the visitacion and al other iurisdiccions or
ordinary within whose dyoces they were set, shall fro^shensforth be within
the visitacio^ and iurisdiccyon of the same ordynary within whose dyoces they
be set or of such persons (...) by the k^nges highness shall be appointed.

Anno. xxxi. h viii. cap. xiii.
Wales.
The kings hyghnes has from the first day of this parlyament during the
term of.iii years than next following auctoryte by writing under his great
seal to lymyt to every of the shires in wales late made by auctorite of the
parlyament holden the.xxvii. year of his reign so many lordeshyps towns
parishes hamelettes hundredes co^motes and cantredes as he shall think
co^uenynt, and also to lymyt the shire towns in eu^ry such shyre.

FINIS.
Here begins the Abregement of the statutes of made in the.xxxii. year of
the reygne of king Henry the eight.
Alyens.
ALl Alyens Denysens or which shall be made Denysyns shall be bound and obedyent
to al laws and statutes made not being repelled. And a specyal prouiso there of
to be expresed in their letters patentes. And that no Alyen using any
handycrafte shall repair and keep in their service any apprentyce iorneyman or
servant being Alyene above.ij. at one time, with diverse other good prouysyons
in the said statute,

xxxii. Henrici. viij. Cap. xvi.
Auowrye.
See in the Title of Det in the.xxxii. year of Henry the.viij. Ca. xxxvii

Byeng of Tytles.
See in the title of Embracery in the.xxxii. year of henry the.viij. Cap ix.

Barbours and Surgyons.
The ii. several companyes of Barbours and Surgyons of London shall be
fromhensforthe one company and a body corporate perpetual called by the name
of masters or governors


