THE SINNERS GLASS. Containing AUGUSTINES Ladder to Paradise. With diverse
Meditations and Prayers, both for Morning and Evening. Collected out of Saint
Augustine and other ancient Fathers.

LONDON Printed by John VVindet for John Budge. 1609.

To the virtuous and honorable Lady, Anne Windsor, wife to the right honorable
Lord Henry Windsor.
AFter I had collected certain doctrines and Meditations, out of sundry works
of Augustine, to mine own private contentment: In time following, some of my
learned friends, by chance perusing and liking the order and method of them, it
put me in comfort, to make them more known through the Englishing of them. And
honorable Lady, first out of that Book (under the name of Augustine)
entitled of the Spirit and Soul, I had according to mine own purpose,
disposed and framed 15. portions, or particulars out of many Chapters in that
book. They are especial and easy teachings to many, that yet know not what
themselves are, that thereby (considering and beholding well of what they are
made, and their substance, which is of the Soul and Body united, and yet
falling too often at variance, will not be persuaded the one by the other) they
may, feeling their own misery by it, seek and desire higher after many divine
knowledges, which may keep their souls and bodies in unity, and to be at
peace with God. Then for the Meditations, that follow, I gathered them out of
that blessed man his works, every where when I thought which might move a
godly mind: not setting down whole Chapters neither, except four or five,
but parcels thereof: and contented partly with brevity, as also some time in a
chapter, meeting with the ignorance and corruption of that time, in praying to
Saints: I left that part out, which invocation is a sacrilege, not possible to
have any office allowed it in prayer through the whole scripture: but by the
large authority thereof it is most forcibly extruded. And no doubt, but
Augustine in his time found it so, lib. contra Parmenid. 2. cap 8. For he
says Christian men do together commend themselves in their prayers, but he
for whom none makes intercession, but he himself for all: He is the very,
only and true Mediator. And says Ambrose, lib. de Isaac and anima, He is our
mouth by which we speak to the father: our eye by which we see the father: our
right hand by which we offer us to the father: otherwise then by whose
intercession, neither we nor all the Saints has any thing with God. And I
intend not, that these abstracts out of those prayers and meditations, unto
part of which I have after my judgment, applied some verses out of the Psalms,
should be used of any, for, or as in stead of their prayers, for that cannot
be, they have been long sithence offered up by that holy man, they were his
own. But now they are to be taken as moouers and stirrers up of others, to
heavenly contemplation, contrition, and holy sorrow. Our perfect prayer with
the duties thereto belonging, rises of faith and knowledge which comes by
hearing and reading the Scriptures, whereby thorough the holy ghost, we are
made able to seek Christ, and so the invisible father, who is not found
elsewhere, but in Christ, that thus we are come to have a certain
communication with God, in which (entered into the Sanctuary of heaven) we
have to do with three persons, As Gregory Nazianzene upon the Trinity
writes. I cannot (says he) think of one, but presently I am compassed
round, with the brightness and glory of three: Neither can I distinguish of
three, but suddenly I am brought again to one. And so in our prayers it is with
us. Paul says thus Gal. 4. God has sent the Spirit of his Son into our
hearts, which cries Abba father, which spirit so sent, proceeds from the
Father and the Son, and sends us forthwith to call on the Father, through
his Son. And also Romans 8. That spirit in our hearts certifieth our Spirit,
that we are the children of God. And the same most holy 3. persons and one
God, keeps such an immediate course in our prayer, that no Saint in heaven
can come between the holy ghost and our redeemer, to entreat him to hear us,
or to be joined with him, or to be in his stead for an in tercessor: his leave
and worthiness makes us worthy through his spirit to come to him our selves.
As also that holy Spirit which is the cause that we have knowledge in the
Scriptures, prompteth us how to pray how to edify, and how to answer our
adversaries, visible and invisible. Moreover most excellent and heavenly
knowledge is learned out of the Scripture, in praise of which, and comparing it
above all other learnings. Augustine says, de doct. Christiana lib. 2.
Whatsoever a man can learn without it if it be faulty, or offensive, there it
is condemned. If it be profitable, there it is found. And when whosoever has
found, all things which elsewhere he has profitably learned, he shall find
those things the more abundantly by much, which are learned no where else at
all, but in the admirable highness and marvelous humility of the sacred
Scriptures. Thus (Madame) signifying unto you the contents of this brief
Collection, I pray to the Almighty to enlighten and direct you always with
his Spirit, to the increase of true honor through you in this life, and to
crown you with glory in the life everlasting.

Your servant to your honor dutifully affected. Timo. Pimm.

A confession of our Sins.
O Lord my God everlasting and almighty Father: I acknowledge and confess
before thy holy and high Majesty, that I was bred and born in sin and
corruption: and that since my birth I have not ceased, nor do cease daily to
transgress thy commandments. In respect whereof. I cannot escape ruin and
destruction according to thy rightful justice Notwithstanding, forasmuch as I
am sorry that I have offended thee, and do condemn both my self and my sin:
and forasmuch as it has pleased thee to love us, even when we were thine
enemies and for assurance thereof, to give us thy only and well be loved Son,
our Lord Jesus Christ, to be a Mediator, and advocate between thee and us,
promising that we shall obtain whatsoever we ask of thee in his name.

Vouchsafe O most loving God and merciful Father, to pardon and forgive me in
his name, and for his sake: and not only to cleanse my heart from all vanity and
uncleanness, but also to govern and guide me by thy holy spirit in all my
ways, that I may live according to thy holy and heavenly commandments all the
days of my life, to the glory of thy holy name, through the same thy
well-beloved Son, So be it.

Morning Prayer.
O God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom no man knows but by thy
special gift: grant that unto the rest of thine exceeding great benefits
toward me, this which is the greatest, that can be bestowed upon mankind,
may be added also, namely that as thou have raised up my body from fast and
sound sleep, so also thou will deliver my mind from the sleep of sin, and
from the darkness of this world: and after death restore the same body to life,
as well as thou have called it again from sleep. For that which is death to
us, is but sleep unto thee. I pray and beseech thee, that through thy
goodness, this body of mine may be fellow and furtherer of all godliness to
my soul in this life, so as it may also be partner with it of the endless
felicity in the life to come, through Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord. For
whose sake and by whom, thou give us all good and wholesome things to our
welfare, Amen.

Evening Prayer.
LOrd Jesus Christ, to whose vnconsumeable goodness we be beholden for all
things: which have granted the cheerful light of the day, unto all men both
good and bad to do their business in, and mercifully given them the sweet
stillness of the night, to refresh the powers of their silly bodies, and to put
away the cares of their minds, and to aswage their sorrows: For so much as
thou thy self performest all these things much more beneficially to them that
love thee, to whom thou give a far greater light by the grace of faith, to
do all deeds of godliness by, then does the shining of the Sun unto the
world: Insomuch as thy promises never suffer them to faint, but the comfort of
thy spirit puts away all cumberances of mind, far more effectually then
any sleep of the body. And the whole man rests not more sweetly, or safely
in any thing, then in thy mercy (O dear Redeemer:) I ^eseech thee, that if I
have done any thing this day through human frailty, and negligence, which
has offended thine eyes, pardon it for thine wonted goodness sake, and grant
therwithall that this night may be happy to me, by thy prospering thereof,
pure by thy preserving of me, and safe from the nightly illusions of wicked
feends, through thy protection, so as this sleep may make both my body and
mind more cheerful, and lusty to serve thee to morrow.

Moreover, because this life has not one hour certain, whenever the
euentide thereof comes and the long sleep of the body grows upon me, from
which we shall not wake, till the dead rise again at the sound of thine
Angels Trumpet. I beseech thee lighten thou then the eyes of my mind, so as I
may not sleep in everlasting death, by the quenching of my faith, but rest in
thee, to whom even the dead are alive; Which live and raignest with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, one God world without end, Amen.

Augustine his Ladder to Paradise.
BEing busied on a certain day with the bodily labor of hands, when I had
begun to consider of a spiritual man's exercise: Four degrees or steps
suddenly offered themselves unto my consideration, which were, Reading,
Meditation, Prayer, and Contemplation. This is the Ladder of secluded men, of
solitary men, wherewith they are lifted up into heaven, it is a Ladder
distinguished and noted but with a few degrees or stepps, and yet of an
unmeasurable, and incredible greatness. The first part of the which is stayed
upon the earth, but the uppermost part pierces the clouds, and searches the
secrets of the Heavens. These degrees or steps, as in names and number they are
diverse, so in order and number they are distinguished^ Whose properties and
benefits, surely every of them, what they may bring to pass in us, How
between themselves they differ and excel, if any one would thoroughly
consider, whatsoever labor or study he shall bestow in them, be shall briefly
and easily think and think again upon them, in regard of the greatness of
their profit, sweetness, and delight. For Reading is a diligent and earnest
looking on the scriptures, with a bending and strayning of the mind. Meditation
is a studious action of the mind searching out the knowledge of the secret
truth, by the leading of ones own and special reason. Prayer, is a devout
intention of the mind to God, for the putting away of evil things, and the
obtaining of things that are good, Contemplation, is a certain lifting up of a
stayed mind to God, tasting the joys of eternal sweetness.

A description of the parts and duties of those four degrees.
THerefore the discriptions of the four degrees assigned it remains that we
should see their parts and duties. Reading searches. Meditation finds.
Prayer sueth or makes intercession. Contemplation, feels or tastes.
Whereupon the Lord himself, says. Seek and ye shall find, knock, and it
shall be opened unto you. Seek by reading and ye shall find in meditating.
Knock ye by Prayer, and it shall be opened to you in contemplation. Reading
sets the mouth as it were to sound meat. Meditation cheweth and breaks
Prayer obtayneth taste. Contemplation is the same sweetness which gladdeth and
comfort. Reading is in the bark or shell, Meditation in the fat. Prayer in
the supplication of desire. Contemplation in the delectation of gotten
sweetness, which that it may appear more plain, I will apply one example out
of many. I hear in reading, Blessed are the clean 'n heart for they shall see
God. Behold a short sentence, but sweet and manifold in knowledge. I come
over and beside to the feed of the soul, as it were of a Grape, the which
thing after the soul has diligently seen into it says within it self, may
there be any good? I will come to my heart and will try if happily I may
understand and find this cleanness, for this thing is precious and worthy to
be 1 wished for, the possessors of which are called Gods, to whom is promised
the sight of God, which is eternal use, which is commended with so many
testimonies of holy scriptures. Therefore destring this thing more plainly, to
be expounded to it self, it begins to chew and break this grape, and putts
it into the press, until it moves reason to search out, whether this
cleanness so precious and worthy to be wished for, can be, and how it may be
bad.

The office of Meditation.
THEN comes Diligent and earnest Meditation, it farieth not behind, it has
not any thing in the superficie or outside of another, it pitcheth foot, it
pierces the inward parts, it seeks every corner, it considers beedely,
that he has not said, Blessed be the clean in body but in mind: because it
suffices not to have harmeles hands from evil work, but that also we should
be ^lensed in mind from wicked thoughts. Which is confirmed by the authority
of the Prophet saying. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, or who shall
rise up. in his holy place: even he that has clean hands and a pure heart.
Also this Meditation, it considers this cleanness of heart which the same
Prophet would Think also how careful blessed Job was in keeping this, who
said, I have made a covenant with mine eyes that I would ^ot think any thing
of the Virgin. See how much the holy man strayned himself, who shut his eyes
least he should behold vanity, lest by chance unawares he should respect
that, which afterward inwardly he might desire. Afterward and after such sort
that the prophet has entreated of the cleanness of the heart, he begins to
speak of the reward thereof. How glorious and delectable a thing it would be
to see the face of the Lord so long wished for, beautiful in fairness above
the Sons of men. Now not abject and base not having a hope with which his
mother clothed him, but arrayed with a robe of immortality, and Crowned with a
diadem, with which his father has crowned him in the day of resurrection and
glory, the day which the Lord has made. Meditation thinks, that in that
vision, there shall be that fulness of which the prophet speaks. We shall be
satisfied when thy glory shall appear. Do you not percerue how much lie our
has flowed out of a little grape, how great a fler is risen out of this
spark, and how much this little text is extended in the same Meditation.
Blessed be the clean in heart, for they shall see God. But how much yet might
be extended or enlarged, if any one should come that has proved such things?
For I feel that the well is deep and I in these things unskillful, I have
scantly sound a vessel, in which I might draw up few things The soul inflamed
with these lights, sacrificed with these desires, the Alablaster box of sweet
ointment broken, begins to savor, not of taste, but as it were of an
odoriferous sent. Of this the soul does gather, how sweet a thing it is, to
feel the experience, whereof it has known Meditation to be so pleasant. But
what shall the soul do, it burns with desire to have it, but it does not
find in it self, how it may have it, and in how much more it searches, the
more greatly it desires, whilst it sets before it meditation, it sets
before it also sorrow, because it understands not the sweetness which
Meditation shows to be in the cleanesse of heart. For it comes not of
reading and meditating to understand this, sweetness, except it be given from
above, for to read and meditate, is as common to the evil as to the good. And
those Philosophers of the Gentiles by the leading of reason found out in what
the ch^efe of true goodness consisted. But because when they had known God,
they glorified him not as God (but presuming on their ^wne power, they said
be will magnify our own tongues, our lips (...) our own) they deserved not
to understand what they might see. They vanished in their own thoughts, and
their wisdom is devoured, which humane study of discipline had bestowed upon
them, not the spirit of wisdom, which only gives true wisdom, which is to
say, sauory knowledge, which when it is, in whomsoever that inestimable savor
gladdeth and comfort. And of that it is said, wisdom does not enter into a
malicious soul. For this is of God alone, and as God had given the office of
baptizing to many, yet in baptism he has retained to himself only, the
power and authority of forgiunesse of sins Where upon John has said of him
distinctly* this is he which baptiseth in the holy Ghost. And of him we may
say, this is he which gives the taste or savor of wisdom, he makes
knowledge sauory to the Soul.

For truly speech is given to many: Wisdom to a few, the which the LORD
distributeth to whom he will and how he will.

The office of Prayer.
But the Soul perceiving of it self, that it cannot atta^ne to the desired
sweetness of knowledge and experience, and by how much the more it comes to
the secret heart, by so much the more God is exalted, it humbles it self unto
prayer saying. Lord which art not seen but of clean hearts, I have searched
in reading, I have sought in me^itating, how true cleanness of heart may be
had that by that means I might know thee. I did seek thy face O Lord, thy
face O Lord did I seek. I have long meditated in my heart, and in my
meditation the fire waxed not. and my desire more to know thee, whilst thou
breakest to me the bread of holy scripture, and in the brea^ing of bread, in
which then art more known. And how much more I know thee, I long the more to
know thee, not in the bark of the letter, but in the see^ng of practice and
experience. Neither do I humbly ask this O Lord, for my merits, but for thy
mercy. Because I confess I am unworthy and a sinner, but yet the dogs do eat
of the crumbs that fall from their masters table. Give me O Lord an earnest of
the inheritance to come, at least one drop of heavenly rain, wherewith I may
cool my thirst, for I burn with great desire.

The office of Contemplation.
WIth these and such burning speeches, the soul does inflame her desire, like
as she does show her affection. With these incantations she calls upon her
bridegroom. But the Lord whose eyes are upon the righteous, and his ears open
only unto their prayers: even those their prayers he tarteth not for, until
they shall end their speech, but interrupteth the middle course of their prayer
and making speed offers h^mselfe, and compassed about with the dew of
heavenly sweetness, meets the longing soul, and anointed with excellent
ointments refreshes the wearied soul, comfort the hungry, fatneth the
poor, makes it forget earthly things, quickneth it unmindful of it self, in
strengthening it meruailously. And as in certain carnal and fleshely
pleasures, carnal concu^iscence does so much overcome, that it loses all the
use of reason: So of good right, worthyly in this supernal Contemplation,
carnal and fleshly motions are quite consumed and swallowed up from the soul,
so that the flesh may contrary or gain say the soul in nothing and man become
altogether spiritual.

Signs of the holy Ghost coming to man.
O LORD how do thou appear when thou will do these things, and what sign
of thy coming? Whether are deep sighs and tears witnesses and messengers of
this comfort and gladness. If it be so, this is a new meaning, and an
unusual sign For what agreement is there of comfort to sighs, of gladness
to tears: but yet if these are to be called tears, and not rather the
ouerflowing abundance, of the inward dew powered upon, and a sign of an inward
washing, and an outward clensing. Like as in baptism of Children, by the
outward washing is signified and figured the inward washing of the soul, so
here the inward clensing goes before the outward washing. O happy tears by
which, the inward spotts are purged, and by which the burning flames of sins
are quenched. Blessed are you that so mourn, for you shall rejoice. O soul
acknowledge thy Bridegroom with tears, embrace thy long wished for. Now be
drunken with the flowing stream of pleasure, suck milk and honey from the
breast of his comfort. These be the clean gifts and comforts which thy
Bridegroom has given thee, which are sobs and tears. He brings to thee
drink with tears in measure these tears are bread to thee day and night: bread
truly strengthening man's heart, sweeter then honny and the honnies Comb. O
Lord if these tears be so sweet which are stirred up through ye remembrance
and desire of thee, how sweet shall the joy be conceived, by the open and
m^nifest sight of thee. If it be so sweet to weep for thee, how sweet will
it be to be glad and rejoice with thee. But why do we set forth in common,
these secret conferences of that? Why do we endeavor to express eternal
affections in common words The inexpert understand not such things in the book
of experience: whom the same annoynting teaches. And other ways the outward
leter profits not the reader any whit. Little sauory is the reading of the
outward letter, except it can take the exposition and inward sense from the
heart.

How the Soul remains, the feruency of the holy Ghost ceasing for a time.
O My soul we have a great while prolonged speech. It were good for us to be
here with Peter and John, to behold the glory of the Bridegroom and to tarry
long with him. But I would to be made here, not two or three tabernacles, but
one, in which we might be together, and take delectation together. But as the
Bridegroom says let me depart, for now rises the morning, thou have received
the light of grace, and the visiting which thou did desire. Therefore the
blessing being given, the sinnow of the thigh mortified, and the name changed
from Jacob to Israel, the bridegroom long wished for, withdraws himself for
a little time. He withdraws himself as well from the foresaid vision, as from
the sweetness of the Contemplation, notwithstanding he remains as much as
to government, as much as to glory, and as much as to peace and unity.

Here is rendered a cause why the feruency of the holy Ghost leaves the Soul a
little time.
But thou may not be afraid Spouse, nor despair, neither think thy self
despised although the Bridegroom withdraw his face from thee a little while:
All is wrought for thy good, and of his coming and going away thou gettest
profit. He comes to thy comfert, he goes away as a warning to take heed,
least the greatness of consolation should heave and puff thee up, least if
always the Bridegroom should be with thee, thou should begin to contemn
thy fellows, and attribute such continual visiting not to grace, but to
nature. But the Bridegroom gives this grace to whom he will, and when he
will, it may not be possessed by right of Inheritance. It is a common proverb
yt too much familiarity breeds contempt. Therefore he goes away least by too
much continuance he should be contemned, and being absent he might be the more
wished for: and the more wished and desired, he might the more ardently be
sought for. Moreover what is present life, which (in respect of future glory,
that shall be reveled to us) is like a riddle, by which now we know in part.
For we have not here an abiding City, but we seek one to come. Therefore we
should not esteem banishment for a country, a token for a great sum of money.
The bridegroom comes, likewise he goes away, now bringing comfort, then
changing our general state with infirmity, a little while he suffers us to
taste how sweet he is, and before we can fully feel it, he withdraws
himself, and so as it were with spread wings houering over us, provoke us to
fly, as though he would say. Behold you taste a little, I am sweet, if you will
fully be satisfied with this sweetness, run ye after me in to the sweet
savor of my ointments having your hearts lifted up, where I am, on the right
hand of God the Father, where you shall see me, not by a glass or in a ridle,
but face to face, and where your hearts shall rejoice fully, and your joy no
man can take from you.

A care and diligence of the Soul that it be not altogether forsaken of God.
But take heed thou Spouse how the bridegroom may turn away himself from
thee. He goes not far, and though thou see not him, yet he full of eyes
sees thee before and behind* thou can never hide thy self from him. He has
also about thee spirits, his messengers most witty, and prudent spies, that
they should mark how (the Bridegroom absent) thou behauest thy self, and
might accuse thee before him; If they perceive and find in thee any signs of
wantonness or scurrility, this Bridegroom is ielous, i^ thou entertain an
other lover, if thou fancy to please others, he will presently separate
himself from thee, and cleave to other young ones. This bridegroom is delicate
noble and rich, goodly to behold in beauty above the Sons of men. And
therefore he does not vouchsafe or think worthy to have any other then a
beautiful Spouse. If he see in thee a spot or a wrinkle, presently he turns
away his face. He cannot endure any uncleanness. Therefore be thou chaste, be
thou modest and humble, that so of thy Bridegroom thou may desire often to
be visited.

The office and effects of every one of the degrees by repetition.
THerefore that those things that are difficultly spoken, joined and united
together, may seem the better, let us gather (by repetition) the summ^ of such
things spoken of before, like as that before noted, may be seen in the
foresaid examples, how those steps and degrees may agree together, and as
jointly and severally they may surpass or excel either other. For reading as
it were a ground work and chief mean; first offers it self, and in matter
being ministered sends us to meditation And then Meditation diligently
inquireth, what is worthy to be sought for and as it were digging, finds
treasure and shows it. But when it cannot obtain of it self, it sends us
to Prayer Prayer lifts up it self with all vehemence, when it finds by the
sweetness of conte^plation, the treasure worthy to be desired. Coming to this,
when it moistneth the thirsty soul with the dew of heavenly sweetness, it
rewards the labor of these three before. So then reading is an outward
exercise Meditation an inward perceiving. Prayer a desire, and Meditation above
al sense. The first degree is of beginning, the second of profiting, the third
of deuoutnes, the fourth of blessedness. But these degrees, are so linked
together, and are so serviceable, in supplying help one to another, that those
going before without those that follow, profit little or nothing, and those
that follow without those that go before, seldom or never profit. For what
profits it to use the time with continual reading, to run over the great
acts and writings of holy men, except in breaking and chewing on them, we may
suck the juice and pass it through in swallowing it, even to the most inward
part of the heart, that out of them we may diligently consider our state or
order of life, and study and endeavor to do their works* whose deeds and
writings we covet to read often. Bubow shall we conceive these things in
mind, or how may we take heed, least in meditating on some of them falsely,
and vainly, we should pass the bounds set down of the holy Fathers, except
first we shall be instructed by reading or by hearing, for bearing after a
certain manner belongs to reading. Whereupon we were wont to say, not only
to have read those books which we read to our selus and others, but also those
which we have heard of our Masters. Also what profits it a man when he may
perceiu what may be done by meditations, except he gets help by prayer,
and Gods grace to obtain to them. Every good gift and every perfect gift, is
from above, coming from the Father of Lights, without whom we can do nothing.
It required prayer of the Samaritane woman, when he said, if thou knew the
gift of God, and who it is that says to thee give me drink, thou would
have asked of him, and he would have given thee water of life. The woman
hearing this, (as if she had been instructed by reading) meditating in her
heart to be good and profitable for her to have this water: Therefore inflamed
with desire of having it, turned her self to prayer, saying, Sir give me of
that water, that I may not thirst, neither come hither to draw. Note the
hearing of the word of God, and the meditation upon it, incited or stirred her
up to prayer. For how might she be careful and earnest to ask, except first
meditation had moved her? Or what had meditation going before profited her,
except prayer following did show what she had requested to attain to.
Therefore to the end that meditation be profitable, it behooves that devout
prayer should follow, the effect of which is as it were the sweetness of
Contemplation.

Here are declared all these degrees so to be conjoined, that they are
inseparable.
OVt of these we may gather ye reading without meditation is barren. Meditation
without reading is erroneous. Prayer without Meditation is nothing earnest.
Meditation without prayer unprofitable. Prayer with deuoutnesse and obtainer of
Contemplation. The obtaining of Contemplation without Prayer is very rare or
miraculous. For God of whose power there is no number or end, and whose mercy
is above all his works, reads up Sons to Abraham out of five stones,
whilst or as yet hard and unwilling, he brings them together to assent,
that they may be willing. And so as prodigal (as it is a common saying) he
draws the Ox by the horn, when not called he puts in himself. Which
thing, and if when we read to happen to some men, as to Paul and some
others, yet notwithstanding we ought not as in a manner of tempting God, to
take upon us divine things, but to do that which belongs unto us, that is to
read and to meditate in the law of God To pray to him yt he would help our
infirmities, and consider our imperfections. Which he teaches us to do,
saying, ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find* knock and it
shall be opened unto you* For now the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence,
and the violent takes it by violence. See if the properties of the four
degrees aforesaid, in their agreeable distinctions, can bring to pass how they
may agree together, and what every one of them may effect, or accomplish in us.
Blessed is the man whose mind is at leisure, from other businesses, he always
desires to be exercised in these four degrees, who, althings that he has
being sold, buyeth that field in which lies hid the treasure long wished for
Mark ye and consider how sweet the Lord is. Who that is exercised in the
first degree, heedful and circumspect in the 2. devout in the 3. and in the 4.
lifted up above himself, he does asce^d by these (which he has disposed and
set in order in his heart) from virtue to virtue until he may see the Lord of
Lords in Sion. Blessed is he to whom it is granted to remain in this highest
degree, even a small time, for he may truly say, behold I feel the grace and
favor of God, behold I contemplate with Peter and John, behold with Jacob I am
often times delighted with the imbracings of Rachel. But let this man beware,
least after this Contemplation in which he was lifted up to heaven, he fall
down by any disordinate occasion, into the bottomless pit, nor after that
visiting ended, he be turned into lascivious deeds of the world, and
inticements of the flesh. When in truth the weak sight of man's mind, cannot
long endure the brightness of the true light, let it descend easily and
orderly, to some one of the three degrees, by which it had ascended, and by
course and turn, now in one, now in another, it may stay, as in consideration
of the place and time, then is it by so much the nearer to God, by how much it
is the further from the first step or degree. But alas ^he frail and
miserable condition of man! behold we apparently see by the leading of
reason, and the testimonies of scriptures, the perfection of good life, to be
contained in these four degrees; And in these spiritual good things man's
exercise ought to be employed. But whois he? and we will praise him. To will is
present with many, but with a few to perform, and would to God we were of
that few.

Four Causes which draw us from these four degrees.
BUT there are Four causes which draw us often times from these four degrees,
that is to wit, unavoidable necessity. Commodity of honest business. Humane
infirmity, and worldly vanity. The first excusable, the second tolerable, the
third miserable, the fourth culpable. For those whom such cause withdraws
from a holy purpose, had been yet better not to know the glory of God, (then
known) afterward to go back. What excuse shall we have for sin? for justly
can the Lord say what should I have done for thee and have not done it. Thou
wast not and I have created thee, thou have sinned, and made thy self the
servant of the Devil, and I have redeemed thee, thou diddst run a race of
the world with the wicked, and I have chosen thee. When I gave thee grace in my
sight and would make an abiding with thee thou despisedst me, and not only
have cast behind thee my words but my self, and have walked after thine own
concupiscenses But O good God, gentle and meek, a sweet friend, a wise
councellor, a strong h^lper, how vain how rash is he that renounceth thee, that
puts back so mild and quiet a guest from his own heart. O unhappy and
dangerous change, to put away his Creator and to receive hurtful cogitations.
Yea that secret seat of the holy Ghost, the secret of the heart, which a little
time before, bent and applied it self to heavenly joys, so suddenly to be
suppressed with unclean thoughts and sins. The stepps of the Bridegroom are
but yet fresh in it, and now adulterous desires are let in. It evil beseems
and it is a filthy thing, the ears which even now heard the words, which are
not lawful for man to speak, and so soon to be inclined to hear fables,
and slanders, the eyes which even now were baptized with holy* and devout
tears, so suddenly to be turned to behold vanities, the tongue which even now
sweetly song the wedding song, which had reconciled the Bride and her
bridegroom, with eloquent persuasions, and now lead her into the tavern again,
to be turned into vain speeches, to scoffing and scurrillity, to forge
deceits, and to report evil. Lord be it far from us. But if it happen we slide
into such falts through human infirmity, we should not then despair, but let
us run back agine to that mild and merciful Physician who takes the
simple out of the dust, and lifts the poor out of the mire, and which will
not the death of a sinner, he will again cure us. Let us pray God therefore,
that those impediments which wtdraw us from his Contemplation, that for the
present he will mitigate them in us, and hereafter utterly take them from us.
Who bring us by those foresaid degrees from virtue to virtue, until we see
the God of Gods in Sion. Where the Elect shall not receive the sweetness of
Divine Contemplation drop after drop, but (incessantly replenished with the
river of pleasure) shall have that joy which no man shall take from them, and
peace, not subject to any alteration, peace into it self.

Amen.
THE SINNERS GLASS.
CHAP. I. How God gave the soul to Man.
IN the beginning, God on the sixth day, gave to man and woman reasonable
souls, such as continually he breaths into every one in their creation. My
Father says Christ, works even till now, and I also work. The flesh is
begotten of the flesh. But one soul begets not an other. Touching all other
living creatures, it is said in the first of Genesis. Let the waters bring
forth, etc. And let the earth bring forth living creatures, etc. But neither
the water nor earth brings forth the Soul, for God inspireth that into man.
And man has not original sin, by reason of the soul, but by the flesh,
from whence ye soul is made guilty of the first fault, or original sin,
which the flesh draws or powers into the soul, with which flesh the soul
is united in person, although differing in nature, for the acts and deeds of
the body are of one sort, and the actions of the soul of another. And yet
notwithstanding the vices of ye body may charge the soul. Because the Soul
was given to that end that it should correct the unlawful motions of the
flesh, whether they happen by negligence or ignorance. which cannot be excused.
Like as when the scholar or servant by the negligence of the teacher or master
does offend, the teacher or master cannot be without blame: So no less can
the soul be blameles, when it ought to govern and cause the flesh to obey.

CHAP. II. A distinction between the spirit and the soul.
THe Soul and the spirit although they be two words, and names, it is not to
be understood, that they are of several essence or being in a man but are
clearly one essence, and substance, as self one of pure nature, for in these
two words, as there is not understood a double substance, yet in them, there is
a difference to be noted, by a double force* of the same essence or being in a
man. As thus the spirit is taken as the higher, and the soul is taken as the
lower, or inferior part. The soul, in that it is a lively, and an everlasting
thing, and maintaining life, in the body, is reckoned as it were the lower
part. But the spirit in that it is spiritual, flies up to the highest, and is
served from the Soul, that it might be united to God: because as it is
written, that cleaving to God is one spirit with him. Happy is that division,
of the spirit from the soul, and maruailous, which being lifted up unto the
Lord, is transformed into his Image. And thus, at that present and instant
lifting up of the Spirit, the soul which is the inferior part, is most quietly
in peace* and great tranquillity. And the spirit which is the higher and purer
part, is exalted into excellent glory, and rejoicing. My soul, says the
virgin, does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. Men
may perceive, being touched by the word of God, either in their sorrow and
contrition (being cast down by the power of the same word) or comforted
thereby, how the soul and spirit are divided. For as the very truth says, the
word of God is quick and of great force, more piercing then the two edged
sword, even reaching out to the division of the soul, and the Spirit. So that
no division amongst men is so much to be marueiled at, as when that which is
essentially one, and indiuideable, should be parted in it self. Now before yt
this soul and spirit do leave our bodies, we must consider and understand an
other spirit, a leaged by the Apostle, which is the grace of the holy spirit,
the which the Apostle does pray that it may remain in us sound, and whole,
because that spirit does fly from that which is fained, and remoueth it self
from the thoughts which be without understanding. Therefore with continual
Meditation, we should exercise our selves and consider our miseries and wants,
our labors and sorrows. For we entered into this life with mourning, and live
in it with travel, and must again put it of with pain and fear. Therefore
we ought to think, how short our life is, how frail a life it is, how
certain it is that we shall die, and how uncertain the hour of death is.
Let us consider with how many bitter griefs life is mixed, if any thing be
sweet and joyful, in the way of this life fanning on us, how deceitful it is,
and to be suspected: how unconstant and transitory it is, whatsoever the love
of this world brings forth, whatsoever show or temporal bravery it
promises. On the other side, let us consider, the pleasant beauty, and
sweetenes of our heavenly country. Let us take heed and well weigh from whence
we are fallen, and where we lie, what we have lost, and what we find: that on
both parts we may understand, how much we ought to mourn and lament in this
exile, and banishment. And then hereupon it is that Solomon says, he that
sets before him knowledge, sets before him sorrow. Because, by how much
the more a man knows his evils, by so much the more he has cause and ought
to sigh and groan.

CHAP. III. How man is made to the Image of his creator.
THe reasonable soul and belonging to understanding, is made according to the
Image and likeness of God yt it may know ye creator by his Image, and love him
because of his likeness: for according to ye image of God, it has reason, and
according to his likeness it has love or charity, for as the creator which
created man according to his own Image, is charity good and just, pacient and
meek, pure and pitiful with other notable and holy virtues read of him. So a
man is created, that he should have charity, that he should be good and
just, patient and meek, pure and pitiful. Which virtues, any man, by how much
the more he has them in himself, by so much the nearer he is to God, and
bears the greater likeness of him his Creator. But if any man, by the wrong
ways of vices, and the crooked turnings of evils, does out of kind, wander
from this most noble likeness of his creator, then it shall become of him, as it
is written, A man when he was in honor did not understand* etc. for what
greater honor may there be to a man, then to be made according to the
likeness of his creator, and to be adorned with the same robes of virtues,
that he is of whom it is read. The Lord is King, and has put on glerious
apparel, etc. Which is, that he is glorified with all the shining of virtues,
and garnished with the honor of all goodness. What greater disgrace may there
be to man, or vnhappier misery, that this glory of his Creator being lost, he
should slide and fall into the deformity, and unreasonable similitude of a
brute Beast. Wherefore let every man, more diligently have his mind fixed,
into the excellency of his first state and condition, and acknowledge in
himself, the most worshippfull Image of the holy Trinity: and strive with
himself, to obtain the true honor of the divine likeness, by the nobleness
of good conditions, and manners, and the exercise of virtues, that when he
shall appear, what he is, then he may show himself, like unto him that
maruailously made him to his likeness in the first man, and more marueilously
renewed him in the second.

CHAP. IIII. That the soul is no part of God.
THe soul is no part of God, the mutability into which it runs proves
that, for God is immutable, or unchangeable. The soul is often changed, by
reason of sin, and sometime changed by reason of pain, and being damned,
becomes most miserable. Yet nothing may hurt it, but when it departs from
God. It departs, when it sins, whereupon the miserable runnagate from God,
is tormented. Severed from one, it is scattered into many things, and by reason
of the intemperance of it, is made as it were sick, and corrupt, and is become
discomfited, and grieved. Therefore the bodily senses (the memory being
distempered or disturbed) are disquiet and heavy, they are made feeble, and
dismaide. Then the flesh does suffer, then faintings begin, and violent death
houereth about. Surely a man turned from God by sinning, is froward, and
unfortunate, because he disagreeing with God, is also at discord, and
discontent with himself, and brings pain of himself into himself.

CHAP. V. That the soul is immortal.
A Man consists of body and soul, and whatsoever is seen, with these bodily
eyes, is made for the body, the body for the soul, but the soul for God: that
when the body returns to the earth, out of which it is taken, the spirit may
return to God, who gave it. The soul gives life to the flesh, when it
comes, (no other ways then the Sun gives light to the day) and it causes
death when it departs: yet death does not consume the body and soul, once
joined together, but parts them until both of them come again, to their
first original or beginning. And least any man should think, the soul to be
consumed by the death of the body, let him hear what the Lord says in the
Gospel: Fear ye not them (says he) which kill the body, but the soul they
cannot kill.

CHAP. VI. Of the love and friendship between the body and the soul.
Wonderful is the fellowship of the flesh and the soul, the breath of life,
and the clay of the earth: for thus it is written, God made man of the clay of
the earth, and breathed into his nostrels, the breath of life, giving to him
sense, and understanding, that by sense, he should quicken the clay assotiated
to him: and by understanding, he should rule and govern it, and by that
understanding, he should enter inwardly into himself, and behold the wisdom
of God; and that by sense, he should go forth, and behold the works of his
wisdom. By understanding he has enlightened man inwardly, and to sense he
has abroad, beautified, and made things so fair that man might find delight,
and recreation in both of them: felicity inwardly, and outwardly: and abroad
pleasure and gladness. But because the outward good things cannot endure long:
man is commanded to return from them, to things inward, and from those inward
things, to ascend to higher matters. For, of so great a dignity, is the state
and condition of man, that no good thing, besides the chief good, may suffice
him. It is very miraculous, that such diverse and contrary things, one from the
other, might conioine together in one. Neither less maruaylous is it, that the
everlasting and living God, has joined himself to our molde and clay, that
God and clay should be united together, so great a highness, and so much
baseness: for nothing is higher then God, and nothing more base then slime and
clay. Maruaylous was the first conjunction, and maruailous the second, nor
less maruailous shall the third be, when men, Angels, and God, shall be one
spirit. For with the same goodness is man good, with the which the Angels are
good, and with that self goodness, both, and either of them are blessed. If
so it be, that both do desire the same thing, with the same will and the same
spirit. For if God could join such a differing and unlike in nature, as is of
the flesh and soul, to be of one league, confederacy and friendship, no
doubt, it is as possible for him, to exalt and extol a reasonable spirit, to
the partaking of his glory, which is brought low, even to the company of an
earthly body, that the same body being gloryfied, it may be to it a glory,
which was a burden, yea even to the fellowship of those blessed spirits, which
have continued still in their brightness and purity. Very certainly the most
highest has created man to that purpose, of his only and mere love, without
any necessity, that he might become partner of his happiness, If therefore so
much joy, and so great gladness, is in this temporal life, which consists
by the presence and company of the spirit, in a corruptible body, then how much
more gladness, and joy shall there be in the eternal and everlasting life,
which consists by the presence of the Godhead, in a reasonable spirit.
Therefore let the body be subject to the soul, and the soul to GOD, and it
shall be one spirit with him, so that it remain in humility, and acknowledge
the grace and favor of him the Creator of it, by whom it is to be exalted and
glorified.

CHAP. VII. For what cause the soul is united to God.
IT is his commandment, that we should abide in his love, Abide you, says
he, in my love: For my love he has coupled man unto him that he should have
him always, and should ever remain in him, delighting, reioicing, and
magnifying of him, and in him. Man is coupled by love unto his Creator: for it
is the only bond of love, that binds them together. By the love of God, all
of us cleave unto him: by the love of our neighbor, we are all one together,
that the goods of all should become the goods of every one, and whatsoever
any one has not of himself, he should possess it by another. Charity and
love is the way of God to men, and the way of men to God: for through love God
came to men, he came into men, and he was made man. By charity and love men
love God, they choose him above all things, they fly unto him, and live to
him. So familiar is charity with God, that he will have no abiding place,
where Charity is not. Then if thou have love and Charity, then have God,
because God is charity.

CHAP. VIII. A persuasion to love God.
WRetch that I am, how much ought I to love my Lord my God, who made me when I
was not, redeemed me when else I had been lost, and perished. I was not, yet
he made me of nothing, neither stone nor tree, nor bird, nor any of the brute
creatures. But his pleasure was to make me a man, he gave me life, senses and
discretion. I had perished, he descended to mortality, he took upon him
mortality, he suffered his passion, he overcame death, and so restored me. I
had perished, and had been cast away, because I was sold in my sins. He
came after me to redeem me, he weighed the price of his precious blood for
me, and by that mean brought me back from exile, and redeemed me from
bondage. Also he called me by his name that the memorial of him should
always be with me. He anointed me with the oil of gladness, with the
which he was anointed, and that of Christ I should be called a Christian. So
his grace, and mercy, has always prevented me. He my God has often
delivered me from many perils, and dangers. When I erred, he led me forth of
it. When I was ignorant, he taught me. When I sinned, be corrected me. When
I was sad, he comforted me. When I dispaired, be strengthened me again. When
I fell, he reared me. When I stood, he held me. When I went he led me.
When I came, he received me. This and many other things, my Lord my God, did
for me, of which his goodness, sweet it is to me, ever to speak of, always
to think of, and always to give him thanks for. And I desire him, that for
all his benefits, I may for ever prayss him, and love him: for as he is an
aider to every one, filling and satisfying every one, having care over all, and
as well provident to every one, as to all: so I see him wholly busied for my
safety. So that if I will regard mine own safety: he is as though forgetful
of all men, and would attend only on me. He shows himself ever present,
offers him self ever ready, if he might find me ready. Whither soever I
turn my self he forsakes me not, except I first forsake him. Whersoeuer I
will be, he departs not because he is every where. So that wheresoever I go
I may find him, with whom I may be. Likewise, whatsoever I shall do he
stands by, as if he were a continual ouerseer of all my thoughts, purposes,
and deeds, When I do diligently consider these things, I am confounded, both
with fear and great shame, because I behold him every where present with me,
seeing into all my secrets, for there be many things in me before his eyes,
of which I am ashamed: and for which I greatly fear to displease him. Neither
have I for all these things anything to render him, but only I will love him,
for there is nothing better, or more becoming then to render that by love,
which was given for love.

CHAP. IX. Of the inward sense, and the outward.
THere are two senses in man, one inward, and an other outward, and either of
them has his good, in which it is recreated and comforted. The inward sense is
refreshed and comforted in the contemplation of divinity: the outward sense,
in beholding of matters belonging to men. Wherefore God was made man, that he
might make blessed the whole man in himself, and that the whole conversion of
man, might be to him, and that all the love of man should be in him. But this
is all the good of man, that whether he should go in, or go out, he should
find comfort in his maker, comfort abroad in the flesh of his Savior, comfort
inwardly in the Godhead, and divinity of his creator. But there is an evil
following this great good, because (the good lost that was within) the soul is
gone forth to straying goods that are abroad, and made a covenant with the
delights of the world, reposing upon them: not regarding the absence of his
inward good, in that that he possesses his consolations in strange goods. For
whilst the outward carnal sense uses his good, the inward sense of the
mind, lies as it were asleep, for he does not know the goods of the inward
sense, which is taken and ensnared, with the iolity of outward things. For he
that delights in the flesh, lives and abides therein, fleeing the griefs
and sorrows thereof, by all possible means* but of the wounds of the soul
he is utterly ignorant, neither seeks he any remedy for them. But here in
this world, if he be not cleansed of that fleshly sense, the same flesh being
put off, the soul shall feel the pains of those wounds, it has received by
the pleasures of the outward sense, in what worldly things soever.

CHAP. X. That a man may know how he is disposed to good or evil.
THere be two things necessary to us, by which we should know our selves, that
is to say, how we are disposed to evil, and how to good. Prone we are to
evil, and if the mercy of God keep us not, likely we are of our selves to
fall into every vice: nor to rise from them, except the mercy of God follow us
at hand, to hold us up. The Prophet well knew this when he said, Thy mercy O
Lord, is before mine eyes, which keeps me, and let thy mercy follow me, that
it may sustain me. Weak and unable we are to goodness, neither without the
grace of God to do any good, or able to persevere in any good thing. This also
the Apostle did know, when he said: By the grace of God I am that I am, and
because his grace in me is not in vame, his grace remains in me. This double
knowledge had Abraham of himself, when he said, Behold I have taken upon me
to speak unto ye Lord which am but dust and ashes. In truth man is but dust:
for as dust is forced about with every wind and is cast down and there
remains. So man may fall into every vice, neither can move to rise except the
mercy of God aid him. Also man is ashes, because as ashes brings forth
neither budde, nor sproute of it self, neither the received seed springs
out of it: So a man neither can do good, nor remain in any good thing,
without the grace of God. Therefore we ought to render great thanks unto God,
because he has granted many good things unto us, and many evils that we have
done he has pardoned us, and has preserved us from many evils, which we
might have done, as likely as many others which we have committed and done.
for what evil soever we have not done, it is through his mercy that we have
not done it: for if he had suffered it, surely we had done it as well in deed as
will. And in sooth I do not know, whether we ought to love him more for those
things, which he has forgiven us, or for those sins which he has kept us
free from. For although we have not done them, we ought to think as if we
had done them, and as though he had forgiven them: for so much as we had at the
least done the^ willingly, if he had suffered it. In very truth whosoever in
such manner does acknowledge himself, he is both humble before God and men. He
loves God, and all men for God his sake. And if he have perfect charity, he
judges no man, he accuses no man he condemns no man, he bears no malice,
he moves no brawles, ^ee sows no discord, he does not persecute
innocents he h^re^^ not those which reprove him, he commits no theft, no
false witness, no perjury, he slandereth no man, be hurts no man, he hates
none, but loves all men. It is written, ye shall love one another: for so
familiar is charity with God, that he will not dwell in him in who^ charity is
not. Who so ever therefore has charity, has God, because God is charity. And
who so hates one man, loses God, and the good that he does Wherefore let
every one be carefu^l least for the hating of one man he loses God, and every
good thing.

CHAP. XI. That every man should know himself.
KNow thy self, know from whence thou come, and whither thou shall, how thou
live, how much good thou do or failest therein, how far thou art from
God, or how near, not as in space between places, but in the likeness and
unlikeness of good life and behauior. Know how thou art a man, whose conception
was in sin, to be borne in misery, to live in grief and pain, and that to
die there is no remedy. Certain is it that thou shall die* but uncertain
how, or when, or where. because death expects thee every where. And thou, if
thou be wise expect it ever. Therefore carefully take heed what thou do, or
what thou oughtst to do: if thou have anything to do, do it. If it be to do
good, mix it not with any evil: if it be good, that thou should do
accomplish it with much uprightness as thou ought, If it be for another,
do it as if thou should do it for thy self. If thou thy self do good,
do it so well that it be a good example to others. And thus, as the Prophet
David says and wills* Thou shall decline from evil, and do good.

CHAP. XII. What Meditation is.
BY Meditation we may the better know God and our selves. Meditation brings
knowledge, knowledge brings compunction, compunction causes devotion,
devotion causes prayer. Meditation is an often moving of the mind, very
diligent and foreseeing, to search or find out the meaning of things, which
are hard to be understood, and to bring secret things to knowledge.
Knowledge or learning, is when a man is enlightened by often. Meditation, to the
knowledge of himself. Compunction, is when through the consideration of his
own evils, the heart is touched with an inward grief. Devotion is a godly
and an bu^ble affection toward God. Hamble by the knowledge of his own
infirmities, godly by the consideration of the divine mercy. Prayer is a
devotion of the mind, converting to God, thorough holy and humble affection.
Affection is a certain self will, and sweet inclination of the mind, wholly
toward God: for there is nothing moving God so much to love and mercy, as the
pure affection of the mind. Men's natures is to love and praise the knowledge
of heavenly and earthly things. But they are much better that prefer before
this knowledge, the knowledge whereby to know themselves. For truly more
praise worthy is the soul, that knows his own infirmity, and misery, then
it which searches the course of the stars, and natures of things. For the
soul which waits upon the Lord, moved by the feruency of the holy Ghost, and
imbaseth it self before him in his love: and though not able, yet willing to
enter into him, and he shining o^ that soul, it wayteth on him, and finds
him, and acknowledging the grief of mind not to be compared to his mercy,
has good cause meekely to weep, and to beseech him, that he will have mercy
and compassion on it, and to put from it all misery. This poor soul, needy
and sorrowful, knowledge puffs not up, because love and charity edifieth and
establishes it. For man sets before him knowledge, that is to know
himself, and his own infirmities, rather then to know the force and virtue of
herbs, and the nature of all living creatures, and setting before him this
knowledge, he sets before him grief and sorrow: that is, in what he has
rebelled, and lailed in, in this his life and pilgrimage in the earth,
considering of his own country which he is to go to, and to see his living
and eternal God. He sorroweth that he is kept in banishment and exile, because
he is delayed and put off from his kingdom. He sorroweth whilst he calls
to mind, what and how great evils he has done, and what intolerable pains
for them he is like to suffer.

CHAP. XIII. That the soul cannot contain it self in good thoughts.
WHen I do consider what the nature of the Soul is, which can give life to
the flesh, but cannot as it desires contain it self in good thoughts, I do
find a certain spirit belonging to understanding, living by the power of the
Creator, and quickening the body, which it nourishes and maintains. But
notwithstanding subject to vanity and changeableness, which often times mirth
and gladness lifts up, fear troubles, iniquity mortifieth righteousness
reuiueth, for in truth the life of the Soul is God, the death of the Soul is
sin, for it is said by the holy Spirit, that the soul which sins shall
die, but that Soul which has done Judgment and righteousness shall live and
not die. In such sort is the soul immortal that it cannot die, and in such
sort mortal that stea^not but die. By mortality it is mortal. and by
immortality it is immortal. Wherefore to the wretched and accursed, death is
without death, end without end, wearines without weariness, because death
ever lives, and the end shall ever begin, and wearines shall not know to be
weary: death shall kill, and yet not end life: pain shall torment, and shall
not put away fear and horror: the flame shall burn, but not drive away
darkness: for there shall be in fire darkness: in darkness horrible fear:
and in burning unspeakable torment* Thus the reprobate cast into hell fire,
shall feel in their punishment sorrow and pain and in the extremity of
sorrow, shall be strooken with fear, and shall ever suffer and ever be afraid,
because ever tormented without end, they shall ever live without hope of
pardon, and mercy, which is a misery above all miseries: for after so many
thousand of years in number as they have had hairs on their head, how many
soever they were, if they should hope to end their pains then, yet they should
much the better endure them. But because they have no hope, nor shall have,
they shall faint in despair, and shall not suffice their torments. Of them it
is written by Esaias the Prophet, Their worm shall not die, and their fire shall
never be put out, because, neither they shall ever be consumed. The worm
shall gnaw their conscience, the fire shall burn their flesh: and because they
have forsaken their Creator in heart and body, they shall be punished both in
heart and body, and when the soul shall be separated from the blessed life
everlasting, the body shall be subject to everlasting punishment. There shall
be fear and heaviness of heart, mourning and sorrow. There shall be the
tormentors sitting, the worm gnawing, the fire consuming, sins discovered,
the guilty punished, and all this everlastingly. Who soever shall come to these
torments, shall never go out again, where they shall see detestable monsters
of devils, and the ugly shapes of them. And they shall also see, in the
torments of fire their mates, and followers, which against the commandments
of God, they have loved in unlawful love, and lust, and beholding their
destruction, it shall afflict them in the increasing of their damnation. Such
shall not see God, which is the most misery of all miseries: for who can
express what a pain it is not to see the Creator, and framer of al things,
the redeemer and savior of the faithful, the King of heaven and earth, the
Lord of all, by whom we are, we live, and have knowledge. Therefore it
behooves us on every side, that we circumspectly look about us, and every
where watch, that we commit no evil, or do not those things rightly that we
are commanded to do. And in those things rightly done, that we be not proud
in our thoughts therefore: for many through their virtues that way have fallen
headlong into hell.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the evil Angel.
IT is said that Satan does fill the mind of some, not entering into them and
their senses, but (intycing and inducing them by guile and iniquity) does by
every malicious mean, bring lewd motions, and alluring vices into their
thoughts. But the devil does not fill the soul by participation of nature, or
substance, as some think, as an inhabiter therein, but by fraudulent deceit
and malice, fills them whom it is said he dwells in: for it only
belongs to the Trinity, to fill the nature and substance which it has
created.

CHAP. XV. That we desire and seek after good things.
Whosoever truly and unfeignedly be waileth his sins and will fear to commit
sin, and will rebuke himself in his smallest faults, remembering how much he
has offended in the greatest. And although with how great virtue soever his
mind may be mighty, and with how great constancy it may be in force, yet
childishly notwithstanding, some fleshly toys will outwardly bewray
themselves. And except with a certain manly vehemence, they be restrained,
they draw the weak mind to all frailties and lightness, wherein if by long
custom it be inured, when it would rise it cannot, being pressed down by the
weight of evil use and custom. Therefore as the Apostle says, who soever
stands, let him take heed he fall not: and if he fall, let him with an humble
and contrite heart very quickly rise again, let there be no deferring. Let him
be the ^um^ler in his own conscience, the earnester and readier to
repentance, and the waryer not to offend again: for whosoever through the
only desire of heavenly blessedness hates these temporal things, and loves
nothing of this world, and seeks only his after everlasting Country, shall
be comforted and sustained with great peace and tranquillity of mind. How much
the clearer does man see God, when he finds himself with him alone. For
nothing is more present then God, and nothing more secret. We ought to desire
therefore a separation of the mind, from the swarm of earthly delights and
desires, and then driving out from the inward of the heart, the commotions of
unlawful imaginations and thoughts: we should labor with diligence to our
heavenly Country, for the love of eternal rest. Let us deeply consider what
those companions of Angels be, what that fellowshipp is of blessed souls.
What is the Majesty of the vision of God, and how God does comfort his Saints
with the sweet euerlastingnesse thereof, For no man in this life, can worthyly
weygh in his mind how great that felicity is, to see God face to face, how much
sweetness to hear that Angelical melody, how much gladness to enjoy the
company of al saints. For every one shall rejoice so much at the blessedness
of the other, as at his own unspeakable joy. In that glory, I bebeholde
nothing more willingly, I find nothing more delectable to contemplate, then the
affection of the inward love, wherewith every one shall love the other so much
as himself, and God more then himself, and God shall love the^ more then they
shall love them selves and that in perpetual joy. There we shall see nothing
strange, we shall love nothing out of order, we shall hear nothing to
offend out ears: for all things there are agreeing, al things delightful,
all things quiet. There is all felicity, all pleasantness, all gladness, al
things goodly to behold, all beauty, all sweetness. Whatsoever is needful,
and whatsoever to delight is there, as all riches, and al da^nties, all rest,
and all solace. There is continual tranquillity, pleasant sayrenesse, eternal
ioyfulnesse, joyful and honorable praise, and the full knowledge of al good
things. For what may be wanting there where God is, which wants nothing. How
many so ever be there, are as Gods: neither it needs that the one say to the
other, know God, for all knows him, and beholds him, all praise him and
love him. They know him without error, they see him without end, they praise
him and love him without weariness. They ever see him, and desire to see him,
so much worthy he is to be seen. They ever love him and ever desire to love
him, so sweet is he to be loved. And by how much they love him, by so much
the more they will love him, he is so delightful to be enjoyed. In this
delight they repose themselves, being full of God, full of all blessing and
sanctification, and cleaving ever to blessedness, they are blessed, and
happy, beholding ever eternity, they are eternal. And joined to the light,
are made light, beholding ever unchangeableness, are changed into
vnchaungeablenesse. So much the more willinglier they behold him, in how much
he is the sweeter, which countenance is holy and merciful, his face
honorable, his speech pleasant. O blessed sight to see the King of Angels in
his honor, to see the holy of all holy, by whom all are holy. To see him is
the chiefest felicity, the chiefest joy, a blessed life, and life everlasting.

Godly Prayers.
A Prayer to God the Father to vouchsafe to help mankind.
ALmighty God the ouerseer and searcher of my heart, I do most humbly confess
the omnipotency of thy Majesty, and the majesty of thy omnipotency. But how
thou have vouchsafed to help mankind, to the end of all ages, as I believe
in my heart to righteousness and justification: so with my mouth before thee,
I confess to my comfort and salvation. Thou only indeed God the father art
never read as sent; but the Apostle writes so of thy Son, which is, when the
fullness of time came, God sent his son. When he says he sent, he
apparently shows that he came sent into this world (as borne of the blessed
virgin) he appeared in the flesh* very true and perfect man. But what is it
that the cheifest of the Evangelists says of him: he was in the world, and
the world is made by him. In truth thither he is sent in humanity, where he
was ever, and is, touching his Gothead. Which sending I assuredly believe with
all my heart, and confess with my mouth to be the work of all the holy
Trinity: But how have thou loved us, holy and good* Father, how much have thou
loved us merciful maker, which also have not spared thine only Son, but
have delivered him for us wretched sinners. He was subject and obedient to
thee, even unto the death yea to the death of the cross, taking up the ha^^
writing against us, of our sins and nailing it to the Cross, crucified
sin, and slew death: he only free amongst the dead, having power to lay
down his life for us, and to take it again for us. Therefore is he a
conqueror, and a sacrifice for conquest, and therefore a conqueror, because a
sacrifice to thee for us: a Priest and an oblation, and therefore a Priest
because an oblation or offering. Worthily have I a strong hope in him, because
thou shall heal through him all my griefs and weakness, who sits at the
right hand and makes intercession for us. For Lord my languors, and griefs
are great and many, many they be and great, for the Prince of this world has
many things in me, I know and confess it. But I beseech thee deliver me
through our redeemer, sitting at thy right hand, in whom no evil may be found.
Thorough him justify me, which has done no offense, neither was there found
any guile in his mouth: through him our head, in whom is no spot, deliver me,,
a member of him although very slerder and weak, I beseech thee deliver me,
from all my sins, imperfections, faults, and negligences. Replenish me with
thy holy virtues and make me to prevail in good usage and behavior: make me
for thy holy names sake, to perseuers in goodness even to the end according to
thy will, Amen.

A Prayer to God the Son.
Obountiful Jesus, O sweet Jesus, O Jesus, the Son of the blessed virgin Mary,
full of mercy and truth. O sweet Jesus, have mercy on me, according to thy
great mercy. O gracious Jesus, I beseech thee by that precious blood, which thou
have vouchsafed to shed for us wretched sinners, upon the altar of the Cross,
that thou will cast away all mine iniquities, and that thou will not despise
me, humbly praying thee, and calling upon this thy most holy name Jesus, this
name Jesus is a comfortable name, for what is Jesus but a savior. O bountiful
Jesus, which have ^reated me, and redeemed me with thy precious blood, suffer
me not to be damned, whom thou have made of nothing. O good Jesus Christ* let
not mine iniquity destroy, whom thy omnipotent goodness has made and
created. O sweet Jesus reknowledge that which is thine in me, and wipe away
that which is contrary, from me. O good Jesus have mercy on me, whilst time is
of taking mercy, least thou should destroy me in time of thy terrible
judgment. O good Jesus, if I wretched sinner, from thy true justice have
deserved everlasting punishment for my most grievous sins, yet having a sure
confidence, I appeal from thy true justice unto thine unspeakable mercy,
until thou have compassion on me, like a loving Father, and a merciful God.
O merciful Jesus, what profit is there in my blood, if I descend into
everlasting corruption. For O Lord the dead shall not praise thee, neither such
as go down into hell. O most merciful Jesus have mercy on me, O most sweet
Jesus be unto me wretched sinner a favorable Judge. O Jesus the health of those
that put their trust in thee. O Jesus the health of all that beleeee in thee,
have mercy on me. O sweet Jesus, the remission of all my sins. O Jesus son of
the virgin Mary, pour into me grace, wisdom, charity, chastity, and also a
holy patience in all mine adversities, that I may perfectly love thee for ever
world without end, Amen.

A Prayer to God the holy Ghost.
Give sentence with me O GOD, and discern my cause against the ungodly people.

Teach me to do thy will because thou art my god, I believe, in whom soever
thou dwell, thou buildest there the long abiding place of the Father and the
son together. Blessed is he that shall deserve to receive and lodge thee,
because by thee the Father and the son make their mansion with him. Come now,
come most blessed comforter of the sorrowful soul, descending in due time. In
tribulation an helper. Come the clenser of evils, the curer of wou^ds^ Come ye
strength of the weak, the releeuer of those ready to fall. Come the teacher of
the humble, the destroyer of the proud. Come the gentle Father of the
fatherless and motherlesse. the favorable Judge of the widows. Come the hope
of the poor, the refresher of ye faint. Come thou star of the Mariner, thou
haven of them that escape shipwreck, Come the excellent glory of all the
living, the only health of the dying. Come most holy spirit, come and have
mercy on me, prepare me for thee, and descend lovingly to me, that my
inability and weakness may please thy greatness and strength, according to
the multitude of thy compassions, through Jesus Christ my savior: who with the
father in unity of thee, lives and reigns world without end, Amen.

A Prayer to the holy Trinity.
O Three coequal and coeternall persons. one god and true, the Father, the
Son, and the holy ghost, who only possesses eternity and light, that no man
can come to: who have made the whole world with thy power, and rulest the
round compass of the earth with thy wisdom. Holy-holy, holy, Lord God of
Sabbath, terrible and strong, just and merciful, to be wondered at, to be
praised, and to be beloved, one god three persons: one power, wisdom, and
goodness one and inseperable Trinity. Open to me calling on thee, the gates
of righteousness, and then entering into them, I will confess to thee O Lord.
Behold the earnest desire of the inward affections of my heart crying out, and
the complaint of the tears of mine eyes, at thy gate O most gracious father,
before thee is all my desire, and my mourning is not hid from thee, and thou,
O Lord turn not thy face any more from me, neither pass by in thy wrath from
thy servant. Father of mercy, hear the wailing of thine Orphan, and reach out
thy right hand an helper, that it draw me back from the depth of waters, and
lake of miseries and the puddle of dregs, least I should perish, the mercy of
thine eyes looking on, the clemency of thy heart beholding, but that I may
pass without danger to thee my Lord God, that I may see the riches of thy
Kingdom, and behold thy face for ever, and sing praises to thy holy name O
Lord, which do maruailous things, which make my heart glad with the
remembrance of thee, which lightenest my youth. Despise not mine old age but
make my bones to reioy^e and my gray hairs to renew as an Eagle. Amen.

Another of the same.
O God the true and very excellent life, from whom, by whom, and in whom,
all things whatsoever do live, are good and glorious to see to. God whose
faith does erect us, whose hope does comfort us, whose love does link us
together. God which command thy self to be sought, and make thy self to
be found, and openest to him that knocks, God from whom to be turned, it
is to fall, to whom to be turned, it is to rise, in whom to remain, it is
most available. God whom no man loses, but is deceived, whom no man
seeks, but is warned, whom no man finds, but is cleansed and healed God
whom to know, it is to live, whom to serve, it is to reign, whom to praise,
^t is health and joy to the soul. Thee I praise, bless, and honor with my
lips, and heart, and with all the strength and power I am able, and I thank
thy mercy, and goodness for all thy benefits, and I sing an Hymn to thy
glory, Holy, holy, holy: I call on thee O blessed Trinity, that thou would
come into me, and make me a worthy temple of thy glory. I beseech the
Father,, by the Son, I beseech the son by the Father, I beseech the holy
Ghost, by the Father and the son, that all my sines and weckednesse be
removed far from me. Most mighty God, from whom all things, by whom all
things and in whom all things are made, visible and invisible, which
compassest thy works round about. which replenishest them within, couerest
them above. and sustainest them underneath, keep me the work of thy hands,
hoping in thee, and trusting in thine only mercy: keep me I beseech thee
here and every where, now and ever, within, and without, before and behind,
above, beneath and round about, so that no place lie open in me, to the deceits
of mine enemies. Thou art God omnipotent, the keeper and protector of all them
that put their trust in thee, without whom no man is safe, no man is delivered
from dangers: thou art God, and there is no other God besides thee neither in
heaven above, nor in earth below, which do great things to be wondered at, of
which there is no number. Praise, honor, and songs, to thy laud belongs. To
thee all the Angels, to thee the heuens and all the powers, make Hymns and sing
praises incessantly: as it behooves the creatures to their Creator, the
servants to their Master, the Soldiers to their King. Every creature
magnifyeth thee, every soul prayseth thee, most holy, and inseparable Trinity
through Isus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer how the word becoming flesh, is cause of our hope.
GOD is not so much an enemy that he may not love his own flesh, his own
members' and bowels, verily I might despair, by reason of my too many sins and
vices, faults, and infinite negligences, which I have committed, and daily and
continually do in Heart, and Word and deed, and by all the means by which
human frailety may sin, but that thy word my GOD, was become flesh, and
dwelled in us. But now I dare not despair, because he being obedient to
thee, even to the Death, yea the death of the Cross, took up the hand writing
of our sins, and nailed it to the Cross, Crucified sin and Death.
Therefore in him safely I rest, which sits at thy right hand, and makes
intercession for us. Having a sure confidence in him, I look for to come to
thee, in whom we are risen again now we are ascended into heaven, and set
together in the celestial places: to thee be praise to thee he glory, to
thee be honor, to thee be praise and thansgiuing, Amen:

A Prayer that the kingdom of Heaven may be obtained.
O Happy rejoicing, and rejoicing happiness to see the holy ones, to be
with them, and to be to see the holy God, to possess God for ever, and
infinitely, these things we should consider of with an earnest mind, these
things we should desire with all longing that we might be able quickly to
come to them. If thou would consider and inquire how this may be brought to
pass, either by what means, hear me: this matter is put in the power of him
that can do it, because the kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, the
Kingdom of Heaven. O man seeseeketh no other price then thy self, it is worth
so much as thou art, give thy self and thou shall possess it. Why art thou
troubled touching the price, Christ has yielded and delivered up himself to
God his father* that thou should purchase thee a Kingdom: thou so give thy
self, that thou be his Kingdom and that sin may not reign in thy mortal
body, but the spirit in obtaining of eternal life.

A Prayer for the sweetness of heavenly love.
I Love thee my God, I love thee and more and more will love thee O my Lord my
God fair and honorable before all the sons of men, grant me that I may
desire thee, that I may love thee so much as I will, and as much as I ought.
Thou art exceeding great, and exceedingly thou ought to be beloved, chiefly
of us whom thou have so loved, so saved, for whom thou have done so many
things. O love which ever burnest, and art never quenched. Sweet Christ, meek
love Jesus my God, inflame me wholly with thy love, with thy light, with thy
delight, with thy desire, with thy gladness and rejoicing, with thy affection
and sweet kindness, with thy pleasure and desire, which is holy and
excellent, which is chaste and clear, that being altogether full with the
sweetness of thy love, altogether pleasured with the feruencie of thy love, I
may love thee my Lord most sweet and beautiful, with all my heart, with all
my soul, with all my power, and all my diligence, with great contrition of
heart, and a fountain of tears, with great reverence and fear, and having thee
in heart, in mouth, and before mine eyes, always and every where, so that no
place in me, appear open to false and counterfeite loves, Amen.

Prayers of the Soul thirsting to see Jesus
MY soul thirsts for thee my L. God my flesh also longs alter thee. My
soul thirsts for God ye living fountain, when shall I come and appear
before the face of the Lord? When will thou come my comforter who^ I wait for?
O when shall I see my joy I look for, O then I shall be satisfied, when my
glory will appear, whom I hunger for. O then shall I be drunken of the
abundance of his house, which I sigh for. O that thou will soake me with the
flowing stream of the pleasures. In the mean time, O Lord, let my tears be
to me bread day and night, until it be said to me, behold thy God, until my
soul may there look upon the Bridegroom. Feed me in the mean time with my
sobbes, refresh me with my sorrows, it may be that my redeemer will come,
because he is loving, and will not tarry because he is merfull. To him be all
honor for ever and ever Amen.

Another of the same.
STrike Lord, strike I beseech thee, this my most hard heart, with the godly
and strong point of thy dear love, and pierce deeper to the very bottom, with
thy mighty power. And so bring forth passing much water from my head, and a
true fountain of tears from my eyes, abundantly flowing, through the
exceeding affection and desire of the sight of thy beauty, that I may mourn
day and night, receiving no comfort in this present life, until I may be
worthy to see thee my beloved Lord and God, in the celestial bride chamber,
that there beholding thy glorious admirable and most beautiful face, full with
all pleasure and sweetness, I may humbly adore and worshipp thy majesty,
with those whom thou have chosen, and there at the last, replenished with the
unspeakable joy of eternal rejoicing. I may cry out with them that love thee,
saying. Behold now I see that I have desired, now I hold that I have hoped
for: now I have that I have longed for: I am joined to him in heaven, whom sent
upon the earth I have with all my power loved, with all love embraced, to whom
with all love I have cleaued: him I extol, praise and honor, who lives and
reigns God without end, Amen.

A Prayer for the fear of the great Judge.
LLord God of gods, forceable and mighty upon all wickedness, I know certainly
yt thou will come I know thou will not ever be si^ent, when in thy sight the
lightening waxes violent, and in thy course the great tempest shall suddenly
come, when thou shall call heaven from above, and the earth to judge thy
people. Then lo, before so many thousands of people, all mine iniquities shall
be revealed, before so many armies of Angels, all my abominations shall he
open, not of my deeds only, but of my thoughts and words. Thou righteous
Judge marking sins, have kept all my ways, as in a Sachell, and have numbered
my steps together: thou have held thy peace, thou have been silent, thou
have been long suffering. But woe is me at last thou speak as though sore
travailing with child, etc.

A Prayer where the Father is called upon through the Son.
O Father I beseech thee, for the love of thy almighty Son bring my soul out
of prison, to praise thy holy name, I instantly desire thee, through thine
only son coeternall with thee, deliver me from the bonds of sin, and thou
most highest, being appeased through the intercession of thy Son, sitting at
thy right hand, restore me to life, whose own merits threaten to me deadly
and eternal doom. For what other intercessor I should bring to thee I know
not, but the same which is the only sacrifice for our sins, which sits at
thy right hand entreating for us. Behold my advocate with thee God the Father,
behold the chief Bishop, who needs not to make an atonement with others
blood, because he appears glorious, imbrued with the blood of his own
wounds. Behold the holy sacrifice, well pleasing and perfect, offered up and
accepted into the savor of sweetness. Behold the lamb without spot, who
before the sheerers of him became as dumb, who beaten with buffetes, beraied
with spittle, and rayled upon, opened not his mouth. Behold him that has done
no sins, has borne our sins, land healed our infirmities with his own
blood, Amen.

A prayer of the penitent.
CReator of heaven and earth* king of kings* and Lord of all that rule, which
have made me of nothing to thy Image and likeness and have redeemed me with thy
precious blood, whom I wretched sinner am not worthy to name, neither to call
upon, or meditate of in heart, I bese^ch thee, kneeling on my knees, and humbly
entreating thee, that thou will pitifully regard me, thy evil servant, and
to have mercy on me, who had compassion on the woman of Canaan, and of Marie
Magdelen, who forgauest the Publicane, and thief hanging on the Cross. In
thee most merciful Father I confess my sins, which to conceal from thee, O
Lord, I cannot, if I would, Pardon me O Christ, whom I have greatly offended,
both in thought, word and deed, and by all the means in which I wicked frail
man might offend. Therefore O Lord, I beseech thy clemency, who descendedst from
heaven, for my safety, who rearedst David from the fall of sin, pardon me, O
Lord pardon me, O Christ, who forgauest Peter denying thee. Thou art my
Creator and redeemer, my Lord and my savior, my king and my God, thou art my
hope and my trust, I beseech and entreat thee help me, and I shall be safe:
govern and defend me, strengthen me, and comfort me, confirm me, and make me
glad' inlighten and visit mee' rear me that am dead, because I am of thy
making, and thy work: Lord despise me not, because I am thy servant although
a bad one, unworthy, and a sinner. But whatsoever I am either good or bad I am
always thine, to whom should I fly but to thee? If thou cast me off, who
shall receive me? If thou despise me, who shall regard me? O God I do
acknowledge my self unworthy, flying again to thee, Lord thy mercy is greater
then my iniquity thy compassion is more then my ungraciousness toward thee.
Thou can forgive more the^ I can commit, and can pardon more then I can
offend. Despise me not O Lord, neither note the multitude of my sins, but
acording to the multitude of thy mercies pity me, and be favorable unto me a
heinous sinner. Say unto my soul* I am thy savior, which saydest, I will not
the death of a sinner, but rather that he convert and live. Convert me O Lord
to thee, and be not wrathful against me. I beseech thee most gentle father,
for thy mercies sake, that I may end my life well, and with true and hearty
repentance of all my sins. Amen.

Short Meditations.
THy hands O Lord, have made me, and fashioned me, I may say, those hands which
were nailed with nails for me, Lord despise not the work of thy hands.
Behold in thy hands, O Lord my God, thou have written me, read that writing
and save me. Behold I thy creature sigh to thee; thou art my creator, renew
me, make me again, behold thy workemanshippe, I cry unto thee, thou art life,
quicken me, behold, I thy clay look back to thee, thou art the Potter
fashion me again. Lord have mercy on me, for my days are nothing, etc^

Another.
THou full of pity, say unto me thy wretched servant, say unto me, through
thy compassions what thou art to me. Say unto my soul. I am thy health, do
not hide thy face from me least I die.

Another.
Save me O Lord which art the true safety, and that willest not the death of a
sinner. Lord have mercy on my sinful Soul, loose the bonds thereof. Sweet
Jesus regard my humility, and blot out all my transgressions, be my aid,
leave me not, neither despise me O God mine only comfort, but teach me to do
thy will. O bountiful Jesus, although though I have offended, whereupon thou
may justly damn me, yet thou have not lost that whereby thou art
accustomed to save. Good lord my Jesus, why came thou down from heaven, to
what end yeeldest thou thy self to death, but that thou would save
sinners, of which sort I am exceeding. O vile sinner that I am, take breath
again be of good cheer, thou may not despair: hope in him whom thou
fear, fl^e to him from whom thou have fled, call upon him importunately,
whom proudly thou have provoked. Say unto him, Jesus for thy sweet names sake.
do by me according to thy name. Jesus is a name of favor, a name most
delightful, a name comforting a sinner, and a name of happy hope: for what is
Jesus but a Savior? Therefore for thine own sake O Jesus, be Jesus to me, be
to me a merciful Savior which art magnified and blessed world without end,
Amen.

Godly Meditations of our Lord his sufferings
O God, who for the worlds Redemption would be reproved of the Jews,
delivered by the traitor Judas, and be bound with bonds like an innocent Lamb
led to the sacrifice. Also unseemly to be brought before the beholding of
Annas, Caiaphas, Pilate, and Herod, to be acc^used, by false witnesses to be
tormented with whippes and reproaches, to be defiled with spittle, crowned with
thorns, beaten with buffets, stricken with a Reed, blindfolded, thy garments
put off, would be nailed on the cross, lifted up thereon, reputed among
thieves, drink vinegar and gal, and be wounded with a Spear. O most mighty
Lord, how wonderful is thy kindness and pity, that would endure all these
extreme torments, shames and cruel death, and all for to appease the almighty
father, and be an atonement between him and sinful mankind. I beseech thee
most merciful Jesus, sithence all this was of exceeding love, that through
those thy sharp and bitter pains, which I unworthy wretch now meditate of
and call to mind, thou will defend and deliver me from the pains of hell,
and vouchsafe to bring me whether thou broughtest the thief crucified with
thee. O meek and unspotted lamb* my only righteousness and justification,
have mercy on me, who with the father and the holy ghost live and raignest
world without end.

Another.
HOrde Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, which hanging on the Cross, saying,
father forgive the^ for they know not what they do grant yt I for the love of
thee may pardon every one that does evil unto me. And which saidest unto the
thief, this day thou shall be with me in paradise, grant me so well to live
that in the hour of my death, thou say to me: this day thou shall be with me
in Paradise. And which saydst to thy mother, Woman behold thy son: Moreover
to thy Disciple, behold thy mother, grant that thy love, and perfect charity
may accompany me unto thy mother. And which saiedst, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me, grant me to say in all my afflictions, and griefs of mind,
m^ Father, my Lord, have mercy on me a sinner, and help me, my king, and my
God, which with thy precious blood have redeemed me. And which saydest, I
thirst, grant that I may ever thirst after thee, the fountain of living
water. And which saidest, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. Receive
me yielding my self up unto thee. And which saydest, It is finished: grant
that I may be worthy to hear that sweet voice of thine, saying, Come my
Love, my dearly beloved spouse, come that thou may go up with me with my
Angels, and Saints, to banquet, rejoice, and remain together in my kingdom,
through infinite worlds of worlds. Amen.

Another.
O Lord Jesus Christ, for ye bitterness which thou sustainedst for me wretch
on the Cross, chiefly about that hour, when thy most excellent soul departed
out of thy blessed body. Grant (I most humbly beseech thee) mercy to my
soul in the departure thereof, and bring it into life everlasting. Amen.

Another.
I Beseech thee Lord Jesus Christ, through those thy wounds suffered on the
Cross and bringing Salvation unto us, wound this my sinful soul, for which
also thou have vouchsafed to die, wound it with thy burning and most mighty
dart of thy exceeding love, Thrust my heart through with the arrow of thy love,
that my soul may say unto thee, I am wounded with thy love, so that out of
that wound, tears may bountifully flow day and night. O Lord strike I
beseech thee, strike my most hard heart, with the godly and strong point of thy
love, yea deeply to the bottom pierce it, with thy mighty power, who live
and raignest world without end, Amen.

Another of the same.
KIng of the elect, I beseech thee, through him, holy of all the holy ones,
through him my redeemer, make me to run the way of thy commandments that I
may be able to come to him, in spirit, which has not feared to be covered
with my flesh. Merciful father, do thou not behold the head, bowing down of
toy most beloved Son, resolved to most precious death. Regard O most
favorable Creator, the humanity of thy dearly beloved son, and have mercy
on the weakness of brittle clay. Look on (O glorious Father) the torn lims of
thy most acceptable son, and graciously remember of what I am made. See the
pains of God and man, and release the misery of mortal man. Behold the
punishment of the Redeemer, and forgive the offense of the redeemed. My Lord it
is he whom for the sins of thy people thou have stricken although he be the
dearly beloved, in whom thou art well pleased the same is he, the innocent
in whom no guile is found, and yet ^s reputed amongst the wicked.

Another.
WHAT have thou committed most sweet Son of God, that thou should so be
adjudged, what have thou offended (most loving Lord) that in such sort thou
should be handled? What is thy wickedness? what is thy fault? what is the
cause of thy death? what is the occasion of thy condemnation? Doubtless I am
the wound of thy grief, the blame of the slaughter done on thee: I am the
deserving of thy death: the heinous offense of thy punishment I am the print,
and sign of thy passion, the worker of thy torment. O marvelous manner of
judgment, and unspeakable misery.

The wicked sins, and the just is punished, the gui^tie offends, and the
innocent is beaten, the ungodly does amiss, and the godly is condemned. What
the evil deserves the good suffers: what the servant trespasseth, the master
discharges: what man commits* God bears, etc. Behold my unrighteousness,
and thy righteousness is manifest. My King and my God. what shall I render
again to thee for all that thou have done for me?

That the remembrance of the wounds of Christ is a Preuayling remedy against
all adversities.
I have committed a grievous sin, and am guilty of maay offenses, neither
therefore do I despair, because where sin has abounded: also grace has
much more abounded. He that despaireth of pardon of his sins, denies God to
be merciful. He does great wrong to God that is mistrustfull of his mercy:
for so much as in him is, he denies God to have love, truth and power, in
which things all my hope consists, which is in the love of his adoption, in
the truth of his promise, and in the power of his redemption. Now let my
foolish imagination murmr how much it will, saying? What art thou, and how
great is that glory? or with what mer^is hopest thou to obtain the same? I
as well will faithfully answer, I know, whom I have trusted because in
exceeding love he has adopted me for a son, because he is true in his
promise, able in the performance thereof, and has power to do what he will.
I cannot be terrified with the great multitude of sins, if the death of the
Lord come into my mind, because my sins cannot overcome him. The nails and
Spear call unto me that I am truly reconciled unto Christ, if I will love him.
Longius opened to me the side of Christ with his Spear, and I have entered and
there safely do I rest. He stretches out his arms on the cross, and
spreads out his hands ready for the imbracement of sinners. Between the
arms of my Savior, both will I live and desire to die. There safe and sure
will I sing unto him high praises, I will praise thee O Lord, because thou have
received me, neither would thou suffer mine enemies to triumph over me. Our
savior in his death, bowed down his head, that he might kiss his dearly
beloved. So often do we kiss God, as often as we are pricked in heart with
the love of him.

Prayers before the receiving the Communion.
MErciful lord Jesus Christ I sinful soul nothing presuming of mine own merits,
but only trusting in thy mercy and goodness; am afraid and tremble, to draw
near to the table, of thy most sweet and comfortable feast: for I have a
heart and body polluted with many grievous crimes; and a mind, and a tongue
very euilly governed. Therefore O gracious Deity, O dreadful Majesty, I
miserable wretch apprehended and taken between the troubles and griefs of
mind, and spirit, return to thee the fountain of mercy. I make haste to thee
to be healed. I fly under thy protection. And thee who^ I cannot endure to be
my Judge, I hope to have my savior* to thee Lord I show my wounds to thee I
uncover my shame. I know my sins to be many and great, for the which I am
afraid, yet I trust in thy mercies, of which there is no number. Lord Jesus
Christ eternal King, God and man, crucified for man, look on me with the eyes
of thy mercy, hear me putting my trust in thee, have mercy on me full of
miseries and sins, thou which ever make the fountain of thy compassions to
spring. Remember Lord thy creature, who^ with thy precious blood thou have
redeemed, I am sorry that I have sinned, I desire amendment, of thy gracious
favor help me take from me most merciful Father al my sins and iniquities,
that being cleansed in mind and body. I may through thee, deserve worthily to
taste the holy thing of all holiest, and grant that the holy and spiritual
receiving of thy body and blood which I unworthy intend, be a full remission
of all my sins, and a perfect purging of all my transgressions, a banishing
of all evil thoughts, and a getting again of good senses, also a most strong
defense against all the deceits of the world, the flesh and the devil, Amen.

Another.
ALmighty and everlasting god behold I come to the Sacrament of thine only
Son our Lord Jesus Christ. I come as one sick to the Physician of life,
foul to the fountain of mercy: blind, to the light of eternal brightness:
poor and needy to the Lord of heaven and earth. Therefore I beg of the
abundance of thy exceeding bounty to that end, thou would vouchsafe to heal
my infirmity, to wash away mine uncleanness, to lighten my blindness, to
enrich my poverty, to cloth my nakedness yt I may receive the bread of Angels,
the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords, with so much reverence and meekenes, with
so much contrition and devotion, with so much purity and faith, with such
purpose and intention as is expedient to the health of my soul. Grant me O
Lord I beseech thee not only to take the Sacrament of the body and blood of the
Lord; but also the effect and virtue of the Sacrament. O most favorable God;
grant me, so spiritually to receive the body of thy only Son our Lord
Jesus Christ, that I may be worthy to be incorporated in his mystical body,
and to be numbered amongst the members of him. O loving father, grant to me
thy dearly beloved Son, whom now as a shadow in the way I purpose to receive,
and at last his face revealed to behold him for ever: who lives and reigns
with thee and the holy Ghost world without end, Amen.

Another.
O Lord, my soul, my companion, and friend, weary and coming out of the
way, faints, and lies broken and torn, of those vanities which it had
passed through, it is hungry and greatly thirsts, and I have not wherwithall
to set before it, because I am poor and a, beggar. Thou my Lord God art rich
of al good things, most rich and a liberal giver of dainties satisfying from
above, give meat to the weary, bind up the scattered, refresh the broken and
torn. See, it stands at thy door and knocks, I beseech thee through the
vowels of thy mercy, with which thou have visited us rising out of the deep:
open (to the wretched knocking) the hand of thy devotion, and bid with thy
merciful favor, that it may enter into thee, it may live with thee and be
refreshed of thee, with heavenly Bread and Wine, whereby being satisfied, and
strength taken again, it may ascend to higher places and being taken up with
the wings of holy desire, from this veil of tears, it may fly to the
celestial kingdoms. Lord I beseech thee, that my spirit might receive wings
like an Eagle, and might fly and not faint, that it might fly even to the
beauty of thy house, and to the place of the habitation of thy glory, that
there upon the table of the refection of heavenly Citizens, it may be fed of
thy secrets in the place of thy Pasture, next toe most flowing waters. etc.

Prayers after the Communion.
MOst sweet lord Jesus, strike through the inward part of my heart, and bowels
of my Soul, with the most sweet and Healing wound of thy love, with the true,
clear, and most holy Apostolical love, that my soul may languish and melt
with the only and continual love and desire of thee, that it may covet thee,
and faint in thy porch: that it may desire to be dissolved and be with thee.
Grant that my soul may hunger after thee, the bread of Angels the refreshing
of holy souls, our daily bread, having all pleasantness of taste, and all
delectation of sweetness, yea for ever that my heart hunger and be fed on
thee, on whom the Angels delight to look, and that the inwards of my soul may
be filled with the plesantnesse of the taste of thee, that it may ever thirst
after thee, the well of life, the fountain of wisdom and knowledge, the
spring of eternal light, the river of pleasure, the bounty of the house of
God, that it may ever desire thee, seek thee, find thee, come to thee,
Meditate on thee, speak to thee, and may work all things to the praise and
glory thy holy name, with all humility and discretion, with delight and
delectation, with obedience and affection, with perseverance to the end. And
be thou always my only hope, my trust, my riches, my delight, my reioicing,
my joy, my rest, my peace, my sweetness, my wisdom, my portion, my
possession, my treasure. In whom be my mind and heart fastened sure and
immovable rooted for ever, Amen.

Another.
I Give thee thanks O Lord, holy Father, almighty and eternal God, which
vouchsafest to satisfy me sinner, thy unworthy servant, with the precious body
and blood of thy son our Lord Jesus Christ, not by any of my merits, but with
the only favor of thy mercy, I beseech thee that this holy Communion be not my
guiltiness to punishment, but a healthful intercession to pardon. Be it unto
me an armor of faith, and a target of good will, be it an avoiding of my
faults, an increasing of Charity, patience, humility and obedience, a sure
defense against the wiles and deceits of all mine enemies, as well visible as
invisible, a perfect appeasing of my motions, as well carnal as spiritual, a
sure fastening in the true and one God, and a happy consummation of my ending.
And I pray thee, that thou will vouchsafe to bring me sinner, to that
unspeakable feast, where thou with thy Son and the holy Ghost, with thy elect
art the true light, the full satiety, the joy everlasting, the confirmed
rejoicing, and p^rfite felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A warning to the soul.
O Sins, what easy entries you have whilst you are in counsel, but how hard
and difficult goings out have you? Whilst you persuade and obtain, you do
delight: but after you sting and vex even to the death of the soul. My soul
before all things I warn thee, as the Mother of virtues, least in the thoughts
of thy evils, thou should run into the snares of some Diuill, into the
which many vnheedily run, and through the remembrances of the sinful delights,
foolishly fall again into the same their sins and evils.

The Concupiscence of the flesh, the concupiscence of the eye, and the pride of
life.
BEhold Lord my God, all the world is full of snares and concupiscences, which
they have prepared for my feet. And who may fly these snares? Truly he from
whom thou take away the evil lifting up of his eyes, that the concupiscence
of his eyes take him not: and from whom thou take a way the concupiscence of
the flesh, least the concupiscence of the flesh take him: And from whom thou
take away an vnreuerent and a vain glorious mind: least the pride of life
subtillie deceive him. O how happy is he, for whom thou do these things,
surely he shall pass through free and blameles Now my redeemer, I beseech thee
for thine own sake, help me that I fall not grievously in the beholding of
mine adversaries, taken with their snares which they have made ready for my feet,
that they bow not down my soul. Thou Lord God father of the fatherles, hear
ye pitiful cries of the children and spread out thy wings, that we may fly
under them, from the face of the enemy. Thou tower of ye strength of Israel,
which slumbrest neither sleep, keeping Israel because the enemy neither
slumbreth nor sleeps that fights against Israel.

Of the misery of man without God.
LOrd forsake me not, least the shadows of mine ignorance increase, and mine
offenses multiply, for without thee all things are darkness, unto me all
things are evil, because nothing is good without thee, the true, only and
chiefest good. This I confess, this I know, my Lord my God, for whersoeuer I
am without thee, it is evil with me, not only of matters external,
concerning my self, but in my self, for all plenty, and abundance without my
God, is to me want and misery. Then shall I be rich and satisfied, when thy
glory shall appear. And thou lord my happy life, grant that I may ever
confess my misery to thee.

With how much bitterness this life is sprinkled.
I Am greatly weary Lord of this life of tedious pilgrimage. This life is a
frail life; an uncertain life, a painful life, a defiled life, a life Lady
of evils, a Queen of pride, full of miseries and errors, which is not to be
termed a life but death, in which we die every moment with diverse kind of
deaths, through sundry the defects of mutability. Whether therefore we which
live in this world, may call it a life which humors puff up, sorrows abate,
airs infect, meats breed diseases, hunger makes lean, disports makes
dissolute sadness co^sumes, thought shortneth, riches makes proud, poverty
debaseth, youth aduanceth, old age makes crooked, and sickness over comes.
And after all these evils furious death follows, and moreover appoints such
an end to all the joys of this miserable life, that when it cease to be, it
may be suposed never to have been. This death vital and life mortal, although
it be sprinkled with these and other bitternesses, yet alas, how many does it
deceive with false promises? And so this life as of it self, it is false and
bitter, so also, it cannot be hidden and unknown to the blind lovers of it,
yet notwithstanding, it soketh and utterly drunkeneth an infinite number of
fools, with the golden cup it has in hand. Happy they are, and they be but
few, that forsake the familiarity of it, that despise the flitting joys of it,
and reject the fellowship thereof, least that also they be compelled to perish
with that perishing deceiuer.

Prayers in adversity and trouble.
Have mercy Lord, have mercy on me miserable sinner, doing wickedness, and
worthily suffering therefore, continually sinning and daily earning thy
scourges. If I weigh the evil daily that I have done, it is not much that I
suffer, grievous it is that I have committed, easy it is that I endure. Thou
art just, O Lord, and thy judgments are right, all thy judgments are just and
true. Just and upright art thou our Lord and God, and there is no iniquity in
thee: for not unjustly, neither cruelly, do thou aflict us sinners, almighty
and most merciful Lord, who when we were not, mightily made us, and when
we had been lost through our own offense, in thy mercy and goodness,
marueyloussy thou restoredst us. I know, and am sure, that our life is not
guided with rash motions, but is ordered and governed by thee our Lord God,
whereby thou have care of all, chiefly of thy servants, who have put their
whole hope in thy only mercy. Therefore I beseech and humbly pray, that thou
do not to me according to my sins, in which I have deserved thy wrath,
but according to thy great mercy, which passes the sins of the whole world.
Thou O Lord which outwardly imposest plagues and scourges, grant always an
vnfainting patience, so that thy praise never depart out of my mouth, have
mercy on me Lord, have mercy and help me, as thou know how; because I have
need thereof both in soul and body, thou know all things, thou can do
all things, which live and raignest world with out end, Amen.

Of the felicity of the life which God has prepared for them that love him.
O Thou life which God has prepared for them that love him: a life long hoped
for: a blessed life, a peaceable life: a glorious life: a undefiled life: a
chaste life: a holy life: a life without knowledge of death, ignorant of
sadness, a life without spot, without pain, without grief without
corruption, without vexation, without variety and change, a life of all beauty,
and most full of honor, where there is no adversary resisting, where be no
allurements of sin, where there is perfect love and no fear, where day is
everlasting, and of all one spirit, where God is seen face to face, and the
mind satisfied with this nourishment without want. O thou life most happy,
where that soldier the conqueror (accompanied with all the companies of
Angels singing praises) sings to God without ceasing the pleasant song of
the songs of Sion, the perpetual crown compassing his honorable head. I would
to God, the pardon of my sins granted me, and this unprofitable burden of the
flesh put off, I might enter to possess the true rest to thy joy. And that I
might go into the bright and beautiful walls of thy City, to receive a crown
of life of the hand of ye Lord, that I might be in presence with those most
holy companies. that I might stand before the glory of the Creator, with the
most blessed spirits, that I might see the present countenance of Christ, that
always I might behold that high, and unspeakable and unmeasurable light, and
so to be moved with no fear of death, but that I might rejoice of the reward
of everlasting incorruption without end.

A Meditation of the celestial Soul.
O My soul sigh fervently, desire earnestly that thou may come into ye City
above, of which so glorious things are spoken in which there is a dwelling of
all reioysinges, Thou may ascend through love, nothing is difficult to him
that loves, nothing impossible. The Soul that loves ascends often, and
passes familiarly through familiarly through the streets of heavenly
Jerusalem, in visiting the Patriarks and Prophets, in saluting the Apostles, in
marueling at the armies of Martyrs, and Confessors, and in beholding the
companies of Virgins. Let not heaven and earth cease to call on me, that I
love the Lord my God.

That all our hope and desire ought to be to God.
ONe thing I have asked of the Lord, and this I request, that I might dwell in
the house of God all the days of my life. For as the Heart desires the water
springs. so my soul longs after thee, my living God. O when may I come and
appear before thy face, when shall I see my God, whom my soul thirsts for:
when shall I see him in the land of the living* For in earth of dying men he
cannot be seen with mortal eyes. What shall I do, wretch that I am, bound
with the setters of my mortality, what shall I do? Whilst we are in this
body, we go on pilgrimage to God, we have not here any City to inhabit,
but we seek an other that is to come, for our incorporation is in heaven. Ah
woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to have my habitation
amongst the Tents of Cedar. My soul has long dwelt amongst them that have
been enemies to peace. Who shall give me wings like a dove, and I will fly
and take m^ rest. Nothing is so sweet to me as to be with my Lord, for it is
my good to cleave unto the Lord. Grant me O Lord whilst I am present in
these frail lims to cleave unto thee, according as it is written. He that
cleaves to the Lord is one spirit with him.

Another.
THou O lord, the hope of Israel, the desire after which our hearts sigheth,
daily make have, tarry not. Arise, make speed and come that thou may
deliver us out of this prison, to praise thy holy name, that I may glory in thy
light. Open thine ears to the cries and tears of thine Orphans, which cry
out unto the. Our Father give us this day our daily bread that with the
strength thereof, we may walk day and night, until we come unto thy holy
mount Horeb, And I a little one among the little ones of thy household O God ye
father and my strength, when shall I come and appear before thy face? that who
now acknowledges thee for a time, I may here after acknowledge thee for ever.
Blessed shall I be, if I be admitted to see thy brightness. Who may grant me
this that thou license me to come to this, I know O lord, I know and confess
my self unworthy to enter under the roof of thy house, but grant it for
thine honor, and confound not thy servant, putting his trust in thee.

The vision of God is lost by reason of sin and misery found.
O Lord thou art my God and my Lord and I have never seen thee, thou have
made me, and made me new again, and have bestowed all thy good things on
me, and yet I have not seen thee, neither know thee. Finally, I am made to
see thee, and yet I have not done that for which I am made. O miserable
condition of man, when he lost that for which he was made: O that cursed and
hard fall. Alas what lost he, and what has he found? what departed, and what
remained? He lost felicity, to which he was made, and found misery, to which
he was not made, That departed without which nothing is happy, and that
remained, which of it self is not but miserable. Man did then eat the bread
of Angels which now he hungreth for: and now he eats the bread of sorrow
which then he knew not. O thou lord, how long will thou forget for ever, how
long turnest thou thy face from us when will thou look back and hear us.
When will thou lighten our eyes, and show thy face unto us? When will thou
restore thyselfe unto us? Regard O lord, hear and enlighten us, and show thy
self unto us, that it may be well with us, without whom it is so evil with
us. Recreate us, help us I beseech thee O Lord, My heart is become bitter in his
desolation, make it sweet with thy consolation Being hungry, I have begun to
seek thee, let me not live unfed of thee, I come poor to the rich, a wretch
to the pitiful, let me not go away empty, and despised, O Lord I am bowed
down and crooked, that I cannot see but downward, rear me, that I may look
and endeavor my self upward. Mine iniquities are gone over my head, they have
covered me, and wrapped me round about, and lode me like an heavy burden.
Unwrap me, and unburden me, least the pit shut her mouth upon me. Teach me to
seek thee, and show thy self to me, seeking thee, because I can not seek
thee except thou teach me, neither find thee except thou show thy self to
me. I may seek thee, in desiring after thee. I may desire thee in seeking
thee, I may find thee in loving thee: and I may love thee in finding thee.

A reason entreating God to help.
Help me O Lord my life, least I should perish in my wickedness, If thou
had not created me, O Lord. I had not been, but because thou have created
me, now I am. If thou gouernest me not, yet I am not: for my merits, my grace
compelled thee not that thou should create me, but thy most favorable
goodness and thy mercy. That love of thine, O lord my love of thine, O Lord my
God, which compelled thee to creation: I beseech thee now, that the same may
compel thee to govern it. For what profits that thy love has compelled
thee to create me, if I should perish in my misery, and thy right hand should
not govern me. Let the same mercy O Lord my God compel thee to save that,
that is created, which compelled thee to create, what was not created. Let the
love win thee to save, which won thee to create, because that love is not
less now then it was, for thou thy self art the same love, who ever art all
one.

Prayers and Meditations much moving the heart to devotion and divine love.
BLessed be the pure in heart, for they shall see GOD. Blessed be they which
dwell in thy house O Lord, they shall praise thee world without end.

I beseech thee therefore O Lord, through all thy mercies, by which we are
delivered from everlasting death, make soft my hard and stony heart, my rockie
and iron heart, with thy precious and rich anointing, and make me through the
inward touch and grief of heart for my sins, to become a lively Sacrifice
before thee, at all times. Grant me in thy sight, ever to have a contrite and
an humble heart, with abundance of Tears, grant me for the love of thee,
utterly to be dead to this world, and through the greatness of thy fear and
love, quite forgetful of transitory things, so far forth, that concerning
worldly things, I neither mourn nor rejoice for them, neither that I may fear
any thing temporal, nor love it, neither that I be corrupted with
allurements, nor broken with adversities. And because thy love is as forceable
as death, I beseech thee, that the very whote and sweet force of thy love, may
draw up my mind from all things, which are under heaven, that I may abide fast
to the only memory of thy sweetness. Lord let thy most sweet savor
descend I beseech thee, let it descend into my Heart, that thy love most
sweet may enter in, let the wonderful and unspeakable fragrant sweetinesse
of thy savor come to me, which may rear up everlasting desires in me, and
may bring the veins of the springing water of my heart into eternal life, and
that at length I may see thee the God of Gods in Sion, and that I may dwell in
thy house O Lord, world without end Amen.

Another.
Sweet Christ, bountiful Jesus, I beseech thee replenish always my heart with
thy unquenchable love, with thy continual remembrance insomuch that as a
burning flame, I may wholly burn in the sweetness of thy love, the love, the
which many waters may never quench in me, Make me, sweet Lord to love thee,
and for the desire of thee, to put off the heavy burden of earthly
concupiscence, which fights against, and grieueth my miserable soul, that
running without let after thee in the savor of thy sweet perfumes, I may
effectually be satisfied, and thou being my guide I may deserve to come to
the sight of thy beauty.

Another.
Sweet Christ, bountiful Jesus, as I desire, and as I humbly pray with all my
mind and heart, grant me thy love, holy and chaste, which may fill me, may
dwell in me, and altogether possess me. And grant to me an evident sign of
thy love, a watering fountain of tears, continually flowing, that also those
my tears may witness thy love in me, that they may bewray and declare how much
my soul loves thee, Whilst for the exceeding sweetness of thy love, it
cannot reframe from tears. I do remember, holy lord, that good woman Hanna,
which came to the tabernacle, to pray and intreted thee to have a son: of
whom the Scripture mentions that her countenance after tears and prayers,
was no more diversely changed. But I mindful of so much virtue, and so great
constancy, am tormented with sorrow, and confounded with shame, because I
behold my self, wretch, so much abased. For if a woman wept so, and
perseuered in weeping, which desired to have a son, how much ought my soul
to lament and continue in lamentation which seeks and loves GOD, and loves
to come to him? How ought such a soul to mourn and lament, which seeks God
day and night, which besides Christ, will love nothing. Surely marvel it is,
if then the tears of that soul be not made bread for it day and night. Look
back therefore and have mercy on me because the sorrows of my heart be
multiplied. Grant me thy heavenly comfort and despise not my sinful soul
for which thou dyedst, Grant me I beseech thee inward tears with all effect,
which may break the bonds of my sins, and for ever store my soul with
heavenly rejoicing.

Another.
Sweet Christ bountiful Jesus, the marvelous devotion of an other woman, also
comes into my mind, the which with holy love sought the living in the
Sepulcher, the which (the Disciples going away from the Sepulcher) departed not
the which sat down there sad and sorrowful, and wept both long and much: and
rising with many tears again and again, she diligently searched the hollow
places of the forsaken sepulcher, if happily she might see thee in any place,
whom with a fervent desire she looked for. Then surely going into the
Sepulcher, she had seen it once and again. but too much was not sufficient
to her that loved. For the virtue of a good work is perseverance, or constant
abiding therein. And because before others she loved* and in loving wept, and
in weeping sought, and in seeking perseuered: therefore the rather she first
of all others deserved to find thee, to see thee, and to speak to thee And not
only for these things, but she was the first tidings bearer to the Disciples
of thy glorious resurrection, thou instructing, and meekely aduertising her,
saydest, Go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, there they shall see
me If therefore a woman so wept, and perseuered in weeping, which sought the
living amongst the dead, which touched thee with the hands of faith, how ought
the soul to lament and abide in lamentation, which believes in heart, and
confesses with mouth thee hi^ redeemer now ruling in heaven, and reigning
every where* How therefore ought such a soul to mourn and weep, which loves
thee with all heartinesse, and coueteth to see thee with all desire. Thou alone
succor and only hope of al, that are in misery, who never is humbly
entreated without hope of mercy. Give me this grace for thine own sake, and
for thine holy name, that how often I think of thee, I speak of thee, I write
of thee, I read of thee. I confer of thee, how often I remember thee, I
stand before thee, I offer thanks, prayers and sacrifice to thee, that so often
with rising tears in thy sight, I may abundantly and meekely weep, so that
my tears be instead of bread to me day and night. Verily thou king of glory,
and master of all virtues, have taught in thy word and example to mourn and
weep, saying, Blessed be they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

Another.
AH, alas my Lord, woe is my soul, you comforter of my soul, thou departedst
and saidest not so much as farewell. Going thy ways, thou blessedst thine,
neither was I present, Thy hands lifted up, thou waft received into heaven
with a cloud neither did I see it. The Angels promised thou would come
again, neither did I hear it What shall I say, what shall I do whether shall
I go, where shall I seek him, or when shall I find him? Whom shall I ask who
shall tell my deerly beloved that I languish in love, the delight of my heart
cease, my laughing is turned into heaviness, my flesh and my heart faints,
O God of my heart, and my portion, thou God for ever. My soul refuses to be
comforted, but of thee my delight, for what have I in heaven, and besides thee
what would I upon the earth. I wish for thee I hope for thee, I seek thee, my
heart has said to thee, I have sought thy face, I will seek after thy face:
O lord, turn not thy face away from me. O most gracious lover of men, the poor
is left alone to thee, thou art an ayder to the Orphan? My only defending
advocate, have mercy on me desolate Orphan. I am become fatherless, my Soul
is as it were, a widow. Regard the tears of my lack, and widowhoode, which I
offer unto thee until thou co^mest again Ah now my Lord, alas, Appear unto
me, and I shall be comforted. Let me behold thy presence and I shall enjoy my
desire: reveal thy glory, and my joy shall be full.

Remember this note.
SO often as we do well the Angels rejoice, and the Devils are sad. So
often as we go out of the way from that which is good, we make the devils
glad, and defraude the Angels of the^r joy. For there is joy with them over one
sinner which heartily repents.

Grace before Dinner.
ALmighty GOD, whose providence reaches to the uttermost ends of the world,
and to the depth of the Sea: which nourishest all creatures with sustenance
agreeable to their natures, the fish, the foul, the foure-footed beast, and
the creeping worm: we beseech thee, that the meat and drink which is set
before us on this table, at this present may be so moderately received, that
our bodies thereby may be refreshed, and our senfes comforted, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Grace after dinner.
BLessed God, eternal thanks and praise be ascribed unto thee, which have
opened thine hand at this time, and made us partakers of thy benefits: and
have supplied the necessity of our nature with these nourishing elements:
without the which our life cannot be maintained. We beseech thee to kindle in
us a continual remembrance of thy bountiful goodness toward us, that as thou
never withdrawest thy fatherly care from us, so we may never cease to offer
unto thee the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, through Jesus Christ our
Lord and Savior, Amen.

FINIS.

