A work of the holy bishop S. Augustine concerning adulterous marriages
written by him to Pollentius, divided into two books, very necessary to be
known of all men and women.

LONNDINI. ANNO. 1550.

The first book.
RIGHT well-beloved brother Polle^tius, Cha. 1.
the first question of those which you writing unto me entreated as by way of
consultacion, 1. Cor. 7.
is that the Apostle says, To those that be in marriage, I command, not I,
but the Lord, that a wife do not go from her husband, but if she go from him,
that she remain unmarried, or else be reconcyled to her husband again. And that
an husband put not away his wife. Whether it ought so to be taken and
vnderstonded that the woman is prohibited to marye, which goes from her
husband without cause of fornication (for that is your opinion): or else, as I
thought in those books which many years ago I wrote upon the sermon in
saint Mathewes gospel which our savior made upon the mountain, that he
commanded those women to remain unmarried which did go from their husbands
for that cause which is only permitted, that is to say, the cause of
fornication. For you think that a woman going from her husband ought not than
to marye, if she go away being not compelled by any fornication of her husband.
And you considre not, if her husband give no cause of fornication, that than
she ought not to remain unmarried if she go away, but she ought not at all to
go from him. For truly she that is commanded to remain unmarried if she go
from her husband, has not the liberty of going away taken from her, but the
liberty to be married. Which saying of you if it be true, than is liberty
given to those women that be disposed to live in continency, not to tarry nor
regard the consent of their husbands, that the saying of the Apostle, (let
not a woman go from her husband) should seem to be commanded to them that
may chose, not continency, but such a deuorse as may be lawful to join
with other in marriage. Therefore it shall be lauful to those women that love to
desire no company of man nor to bear the yoke of marriage, to forsake their
husbands yea without any cause of fornication and according to the Apostles
saying to remain unmarried. And men likewise (for there is like form in both)
if they will live contine^tly, may without the consent of their wives forsake
them, and remain without any marriage. For than (as you think) they may seek
new marriages, if the deuorse be for the cause of fornication. But when that
cause is not, than it follows (after your mind) that the wife either ought not
to go from her husband, or if she go from him, to remain with out marriage, or
else to return to her former husband again. Therefore when there is no cause of
fornication, it shall be lawful to either of them to chose one of these three
things, either not to go one from the other, or if either part go away, to
remain so, or if they do not remain so, then not to seek the^ another, but to
return to their former husband or wife again.

And where is than that the same Apostle would not yt either of ye married
parties should defraud the other in their carnal debt, Cha. 2*
no not for a time, and for this cause also that they might wholly and with more
fervent diligence apply them selves to prayer, but by their mutual consent?
How shall this be saved that the Apostle says. 1. Cor. 7.
But for fornicatio^s, let every husband have his wife, and every wife have her
husband. And let the husband pay his debt to his wife, and likewise the wife to
her husband. The wife has not power of her body but the husband, and likewise
the husband has not power of his body but the wife. How shall this be true,
except when the one party will not, the other party may not live in
continency? For if the wife may so put away her husband that she may remain
unmarried, then the husband has not power of her body, but she her self Which
is also understood of the husband. Moreover when it is said, whosoever
puts away his wife, Math. 5.
exceptyng the cause of fornication, makes her to be an adultresse: How
shall we understand this saying, but that a man isprohibite to put away his
wife, if there be no cause of fornication? and it is told why? lest he make
her to be an adultresse. Truly therefore, because although she put not him
away, but be put away her self, she shall be an adultresse if she marry.

Therefore for this great harm and inconvenience, Cha* 3.
it is not lawful for a man to put away his wife, but for the cause of
fornication. For then in puttyng her away he does not make her an adultresse,
but puts away an adultresse. What if the man say, I put away my wife without
any cause of fornication, but for that he will live chaste, in continency: shall
we therefore say that he does lawfully that he does? Who dare say so, that
understands the will of the Lord, saying that he would not have the wife put
away, no not because the man would live sole and chaste, which excepted only the
cause of fornication? But let us return to the very words of the Apostle,
saying: 1. Cor. 7.
To them that be in marriage I command, not I but the Lord, that the wife go
not from her husband, but if she go, to remain unmarried. And let us ask of
him, and as it were consult with him being present. Why did thou say O
Apostle, if she go from her husband let her remain unmarried? Is it lawful for
her to go away from him, or is it not lawful? If it be not lauful: why do
thou command her going from her husband to remain unmarried? But if it be
lawful, than truly there is a cause why it should be lawful. This cause with
no serchyng is founden but only that which our savior excepted, that is to
say, the cause of fornication. And therefore the Apostle commanded not a wife
that did go from her husband, to remain unmarried, except she went from him for
that cause, for which only it is lawful for a wife to go from her husband.
For where it is said, I command her not to go away, but if she do go away, to
remain unmarried: God forbid that she that so goes away that she must remain
unmarried, should do any thing against this commandment. How therefore is she
commanded to remain unmarried if she go away, except ye understand her that
may lawfully go away, which is not lawful to any wife, but in case her husband
commit fornication? Who is it that will say, if a wife go from her husband
without cause of fornication, let her remain unmarried: seeing that she may not
at all go from him but for fornication? Therefore I think that you now
perceive, how much this your understanding is contrary to the bond of
marriage, where God would not that continency should be taken on hand, but by
the mutual agreement and consent of both the parties.

But let us open the matter a little playner, Cha. 4
and as it were set the thing before our eyes. Put the case, that continent
life pleases the woman, but not the man. The woman goes from him, and
begins to live co^tinently, she for her part will live chaste, but she shall
make her husband an adulteror (which God will not) because he, when he will not
live co^tine^tly, will seek another woman. What shall we say to the woman, but
that the church says in an holsom doctrine, pay thy debt to thy husband, lest
whiles thou sekest how to be more honored, he do find how to be damned.
For this would we say to him also, if he would live co^tinently without thy
good will. For thou have not power of thy body but he, like as he has not
power of his body but thou. Do not defraude one another but by common consent.
When we have said these and other things that pertain to this purpose, does it
content you that the woman should answer us after your opinion, I am obedient
to the Apostle that says, I command a wife not to go from her husband, but
if she do go, to remain unmarried, or else to be reconciled to her husband. Loo
I have gone from my husband, and I will not be reconciled, but will remain
unmarried. For he says not, if she go away, let her remain unmarried till she
be reconciled to her husband but let her remain unmarried, or else be reconciled
to her husband. And he says let her do either this or that. He has permitted
one of the two to be chosen, and co^pelleth not to take the one. I have chose^
to remain unmarried, and so do I fulfill the commandment. Correct me, blame
me, refuse me, use what severity you will if I do marry.

What can I say again to this woman, but this. Thou do not understand the
Apostle well? For he would not have commanded the woman to remain unmarried if
she go from her husband, but only such a woman as may lawfully go from him,
that is to say, for that one cause, which is therefore not expressed there,
because it is most known, which is fornication. For god our master excepted
that cause only, when he spoke of puttyng away a wife, and did give us to
understand, that the like form was also to be kept in the husband, for not
only the wife has not power of her body but the man: but also the man has
not power of his body but the wife. Therefore when thou can not accuse thy
husband of fornication, how do thou think to excuse thy going from him by
living unmarried, from whom it is not lawful for the to go at all? When the
woman shall hear these things of us, I suppose she will answer us thus again,
and say that she remains therefore unmarried, because she went from her husband
without any fornication on his part. For if he had done fornication, then it
had been lawful not only to go from him, but also to marry again.

She can not say this, seeing that you are ashamed to give that license to
women. Cha. 6
For you said, if a man put away his wife for adultry, and marry another, the
woman only shall have the shame. But if a wife put away her husband for the
same cause, and be married to another, not only the man but also the woman
shall have the shame. For which your saying you made this reason, That men will
say, she went therefore from her husband, because she would marry another man.
And if that man be perchance such as the other was (for it is likely and
easily for men to faull into that kind of vice) if she put him also away,
and marry to the third: then they will say more and more that she desires to
have a great nu^bre of husbands. And by this reason you conclude and say. These
things thus entreated and discussed, the woman must tolerate her husband or
else remain unmarried. You have given good counsel to women, that seeing they
know that it is permitted unto them to marry other, if they put away their
former husbands for fornication, yet they should not do it for the shame, but
rather tolerate their adulterous husbands, lest by this occasion they might
seem to have a will to be joined with many men, because it is hard for a woman
not to find such a man to marry, as he was whom she put away, because men be
prone to this vice. Seeing therefore we say that it is not lawful for a woman
that puts away her husband for fornication, to marry another: and you say
that it is lawful, but not expedient: Than without doubt we both say that she
ought not to marrye that puts away her husband for fornication. But this
difference there is, that when both the parties be christened, we say that a
woman puttyng away her husband for fornication, may not marry an other, and
that she may not put away her husband without the cause of fornication. But you
say that a woman may not marry an other, if she put away her husband without
any cause of fornication, But if she do put him away for that cause, that
than it is not expedient for her to marry, because of the shame and reproach.
And so you permit a woman that shall not marry, to go from her husband be he a
fornicator or none at all.

But because the Apostle or rather Christ by the Apostle does not permit a
woman to go from her husband that is no fornicator, Cha. 7*
therefore he forbids her to mary that goes away, who^ he suffers to go
away for fornication. For she of whom it is said, if she go away let her not
marry: is suffered under that condition to go away that she should not marry.
If therefore she chose not to marry, there is no cause why she should be
prohibited to go away, as she of whom it is said, if she live not continently,
let her marry, and so is permitted to live not contine^tly upon this condition
that she marry. If therefore she chose to marry she cannot be compelled to live
co^tinently. Like as a woman refusyng to live continently, is compelled to
marry, that her incontinent life may not be damnable: so she going from her
husband is compelled to remain unmarried, that her going away may be not
culpable. But she shall be culpable if she go from her husband without
fornication, although she remain unmarried. Therefore she is commanded to
remain unmarried, if she go away, that goes away from a fornicator. Seeing
these things be thus, if we understand the Apostle after that sort, that we
say to women, go not from your chaste husbands, but if ye will go, see that ye
remain unmarried: than will all those that delight to live continently: suppose
that they may lawfully go away without the consent of their husbands. Which
thing seeing we ought not to permit, than it follows that the saying of the
Apostle, (if she go away let her remain unmarried,) we ought to teach that it
is spoken of her, who^ we have learned may lawfully go away for no cause but for
fornication. Lest (if we teach otherwise) by pretense of co^tinentliuyng we
trouble christen marriages, and lest against the most merciful commandment of
our Lord, we compel and drive into adulteryes men that will not live
continently without their wives, when they be forsaken of their wives that will
not live continently. And so likewise of women.

Than this that the lord says, Cha. 8.
not in that sermon I expounded, but in another place. Whosoever puts away
his wife but for the cause of fornication, and marieth another, commits
adultery: if we understand it this way, that whosoever puts away his wife
for fornication and marieth another does not commit adultery: Than it seems in
this matter yt there is not like form and reason between the husband and the
wife, because the wife although she go from her husband for fornication, and
marieth another, yet she does adultery: but ye man if he puts his wife away
for the same cause and marieth another, does no adulteri. But if there be like
form in both: than both be adulterours if they marry other, although they
separate them selves for fornication. And that there is like form in this
matter between the man and the wife, the Apostle shows there (whereof I must
often make mencio^) where when he had said, the wife has not power of her own
body, but the man, he added and said likewise, the man has not power of his
own body, but the woman.

Than (say you) why did Christ add to his saying, Cha. 9
the cause of fornication, and did not rather say generally, whosoever puts
away his wife and marieth another commits adultery, if he also commits
adultery which putting away his wife for fornication, marieth another? I
think because Christ would make mention of that which is the greater fault.
For who denies but it is more adultery to put his wife away without cause of
fornication and marry another, than puttyng her away for fornication to marry
an other, not because this is no adultery, but because it is less adultery,
when after the first wife put away for fornication the second is married. For
saint James the Apostle using a like speech, says To him that knows to do
well and do not, it is sin. Is it therefore no sin to him that knows not
to do well, and therefore does it not? yes truly it is sin, but this is
greater, if he both know, and do not. And this is not therefore no sin,
because it is less. But to speak then both after one sort, like as whosoever
puts away his wife, excepting the cause of fornication, and marieth another,
commits adultery: Even so whosoever knows good and does it not, synneth.
But like as it ca^ not be well said here therefore if he know not, he synneth
not, (for there be also sins of those that be ignorant, although they be
less than of those that know: Even so it can not be well said there, Therefore
if he puts away his wife for fornication, and maryeth another, he commits
no adultery. For there is adultery also of them which marry other, forsakyng
their former wives for fornication, but yet less than of those that marry
other, forsakyng their wives not for fornication. For like as it is said, to
him that knows good and does it not, it is sin: even so this also may be
said, to him that forsakes his wife without cause of fornication and maryeth
another, it is adultery. Therefore like as if we say, whosoever maryeth a woman
that is forsaken of her husband not for fornication, commits adultery,
without doubt we say true: and yet we do not deliver him from that crime that
marieth a woman which is put away for fornication, but doubt not but both
be adulterors, Even so we pronounce him an adulteror, that without cause of
fornication forsakes his wife and marieth another, and yet we do not
therefore defend him from the spot of that crime, that puts away his wife for
fornication and maryeth another. For although one be more than another, yet we
know them both to be adulterors. For there is no man so unreasonable, that
will deny him to be an adulteror that marieth a woman whom her husband has
put away for fornication, when he will call him an adulteror that maryeth her
that is put away without fornication. After this sort therefore these be
both adulterors. Wherefore when we say, whosoever maryeth her who^ her husband
has put away without cause of fornication, commits adultery: we speak it
of one of them, and yet do not therefore deny him to be an adulteror that
marieth her whom her husband has put away for fornication. So when both be
adulterors, that is to say, both he that puttethaway his wife without cause of
fornication and maryeth another, and also he that puttyng away his wife for
fornication, coupleth him self to another: Truly when we read this of one of
them, we may not understand it so, as though by him the other were denied to be
an adulteror, because he is not expressed. But if saint Mathewe the Evangelist
make this hard to be understood, by expressyng the one kind, and keeping in
silence the other: did not the other Evangelists comprehe^d both so generally,
that it may be understood of both? For in saint Marks gospel it is thus
written, whosoever puts away his wife, and maryeth another, commits
adultery upon her: and if the wife puts away her husband and be married to
another, she commits adulterye. And in saint Lukes gospel thus. Every man
that puts away his wife, and maryeth another, is an adulteror, and he that
marieth her that is put away of her husband, is an adulteror. Than what are
we that do say, there is one that puttyng away his wife and mariyng another,
is an adulteror, And there is another that doing the same thing is no
adulteror: seeing the gospel says, every manne is an adulteror that does it.
Therefore if whosoever does it, that is to say, puttyng away his wife, maryeth
another, is an adulteror: without doubt than they be both adulterors, both
he that without fornication and he that for fornication puts away his wife.
For that is, whosoever puts away, that is to say, every one yt puts away.

Cha. 10.
And when I brought forth the words of S. Mathewes gospel I did not skyppe over
that was written (and maryeth another) and said thus, (he commytteth adultery)
as I can not tell why it is thought so to you: but I put in the words which
be red in the long sermon that the Lord made upon the mountain. For that took
I on hand to entreat upon, which words be there red so as I put them, that
is to say, whosoever puts away his wife except the cause of fornication,
causes her to commit adultery, and he that maryeth her that is loosed from her
husband, commytteth adultery. Where although diverse examples of books have in
diverse words the same sense when it is interpretated: yet they do not diffre
from that is understand of it. For some copyes have, Whosoever puts away,
Other have, every manne that puts away. Likewise, some have, except the
cause of fornication, other, beside the cause of fornication, other, but for
the cause of fornication. Likewise, some have, he that maryeth her yt is losed
from her husband is an adulteror: other have, he that marries her that is
dimissed or put away of her husband is an adulteror. Where I suppose you see
that it makes no matter for one and the same sentence, although this last
sentence, that is to say, he that maryeth her that is put from her husband, is
an adulteror, Diverse books both Greek and Latin have it not in that sermon
that the Lord made upon the mountain. And I suppose therefore because this
sentence may be thought there to be explicated, in this that is said before.
He makes her to commit adultery. How can she that is put away be made an
adultresse except he that shall marry her be made an adulteror?

The words also that you put in, Cha. 11
wherefore you thought, that he committed no adultery, that put away his wife
for the cause of fornication, and married another: be verily obscure and darkely
put in. Wherefore I meruail not if the reader do stycke at the understanding of
them, but yet they be not in that sermon of our Lord which I than entreated,
when I wrote these things that moved you when you red the^. For in another
place the same Mathewe calls that Christ spoke those words, not when he made
the long sermon upon the mountayn, but when he was asked of the Pharisees,
whether it was lawful to a man for any cause to put away his wife. But that
which is not understood by saint Mathewe, may be understood by other
Evangelists. Wherefore when we read in saint Mathewes gospel, whosoever
puts away his wife but for fornication, or rather this that is red in the
greek text, beside the cause of fornication, and marieth another, is an
adulteror: We ought not by and by to think him no adulteror, that for the
cause of fornication puts away his wife and maryeth another, but yet be in
doubt till we co^sult and read ye gospel of other Eua^gelistes that write of
the same matter. What and if all be not written by S. Mathewe that pertains
to this matier, but a part is so written, that the whole may be understood of
the part, which thing S. Mark and saint Luke as it were making it plain, had
rather speak the whole, that the full sentence may appear? Seeing therefore
first, not doubting that to be true that is red in S. Mathewe, who soever
puts away his wife for the cause of fornication, and marieth another, is an
adulteror: we do ask, whether only he is an adulteror in mariyng another wife,
that beside the cause of fornication puts away his former wife: or else
every man that puts away his wife and maryeth another, that he may be also
included that puts away his wife for fornication. Shall it not be answered
to us by saint Marks gospel, why ask you, whether the one be an adulteror
and not the other? Whosoever puts away his wife and maryeth another
co^mytteth adultery. Shall it not also be said to us by S. Lukes gospel, why
dout you whether he for the cause of fornication puts away his wife and
maryeth another, be an adulteror or no? Every man that puts away his wife
and maryeth another, is an adulteror. And because it is not lawful to say the
Evangelists do not agree in one sense and one understanding, although they
speak of one thing in diverse words, therefore we must understand, that it
pleased saint Matthew to signify the whole by the part, and to be of the same
mind, not that one man that puts away his wife, and maryeth another, that
is to say, he that puts her away beside the cause of fornication is an
adulteror, and another man that puts away hiswife for fornitation, is no
adulteror, but every man that puts away his wife and maryeth another, should
not be doubted, but that he is an adulteror.

For that also that follows in saint Luke, Cha. 12
he that maryeth a woman that is put away from her husband, is an adulteror,
how is it true? How is he an adulteror, but because she who^ he marieth is
yet another man's wife, so long as he lives that did put her away? For if he
have carnal copulation with his own wife, and not with another man's wife,
than commytteth he no adultery. But he does commytte adultery. Therefore she is
another man's wife with whom he keeps company. Moreover if she be another
man's wife, that is to say, his wife that put her away, although she be put
away for fornication, yet she ceasseth not to be the wife of him that did put
her away. But if she cease to be his wife, than is she wife to him that married
her the time. And if she be his wife, then is not he to be judged an
adulteror, but an husband. But because the scripture calls him not an
husband, but an adulteror, therefore she is yet his wife that did put her away
for fornication. And therefore what woman soever he maryeth that puts away
his former wife for fornication, she is an adulteress, because she companyeth
with another wives husband. Than how can it be that he should be no adulteror,
when it is certain that she commytteth adultery whom he maryeth.

Now let us see and considre this that the Apostle says. Cha. 13
But to other, I say, not the Lord, being about to speak to unequal marriages.
(Unequal marriages is when both the parties be not Christians, but the one
part.) Which saying, me think, he said by the way of exhortacion and
admonishement, for because the party christened be it manne or wife, may
lawfully forsake and put away the other party that is an infidele: therefore
not the Lord but the Apostle forbyddeth that to be done. For that the Lord
forbids, may not be done at al. Therefore the Apostle does exhort and
admonish the parties that have received the faith, not to use their license
permitted them in forsakyng the infidele parties, that there may be an
occasion to win many to the faith. But you think that it is not lawful for
the christians to put away the infideles that be married to them, because the
Apostle forbids it: When as I say, it is lawful, because the Lord does not
forbid it, but not expedient, because the Apostle does counsel it not to be
done, who also gives a reason why it is not expedient to be done, although
it be lawful he says. 1. Cor. 9.
When I was free from all men, I made my self servant of all men, that I might
win many men. When he had said a little before: Have not we power to take our
meat and drink? Have not we license to lead about with us a woman a sister
as the other Apostles and the Lords brethren and Peter? Have I only and
Barnabas no power thus to do? Who does ever go on warfare at his own wages and
charges? who does plant a vyneyarde, and eats not of the fruit of it? who is
a shepeherd and takes not of the milk of ye flock? And a little after he
says: If other men have this power over you, why not we rather? But we have
not used this power, but suffer all things, least we give any stop to the
gospel of Christ. And a little after he says: What reward shall I have, that
preaching the gospel, do make the gospel to be at no cost or charge to the
receiver, and do not abuse my power in the gospel. And by and by he puts
after, that I said a little before, when I was free from all men, I made my
self servant of all men, that I might win many. Likewise in another place
concerning things pertainyng to men, he says: 1. Cor. 6.
All things be lawful to me, but I will be brought under the power of nothing.
The meat is for the belly, and the belly is for the meat, but God shall cause to
cease both the belly and the meat. Likewise in another place concerning the
same. All things be lawful, 1. Cor. 10
but all things be not expedient, all things be lawful, but all things do
not edifye. Let no man seek that is his own, but that is another man's.
And to show whereof he spoke, he said: What soever is sold in the market, eat
of it, askyng and serchyng nothing for conscience sake. And yet in another
place he says: I will not eat flesh for evermore, 1. Cor 8.
lest I should offend my brother. And likewise in another place: All things be
clean, To. 14.
but it is evil to that man that eats by offensio^. What is this (al things
be lawful? Uerely this, (all things be clean. (And what is this (but al
things be not expedient)? Uerely this (but it is evil to that man that eats
by offension. Thus he shows that things which be lawful, that is to say,
which be prohibit by no commandment of the Lord, ought rather to be
ordered as they be expedient, not by the appointment of law, but by the
counsel of charitee. These be the things that be further bestowed upon the
wounded man, which was brought by the mercyfulnes of the Samaritane to the
Inn to be cured and made whole. And therefore they be called not commanded of
the Lord, although they be admonished of the Lord to be done and offered, that
we should understand them so much to be the more thankful as they be
declared to be voluntary and not due.

But in such things that be of this sort, Cha. 15
that although they be lauful yet they be not expedient: It may not be said in
them, this is good, but that is better, as it is said: 1. Cor. 7.
He that gives his virgyn to marriage does well, and he that gives not his
virgyn to marriage does better, for there both be lawful, and the one somtymes,
somtymes the other is expedient. For to those women that live not syngle
cotinently, it is expedient to marry, and so that is lawful, is expedient. But
to them that have vowed continency, it is neither lawful nor expedient.
Moreover it is lawful to go from an infidele husband, but not expedient. And
to remain with him if he consent to dwell with her, is both lawful and
expedient. For if it were not lawful it could not be expedient. One thing
therefore may be lawful, and not expedient: But it can not be expedient that is
unlawful. And for that cause not all lawful things be expedient, but all
unlawful things be not expedient. For like as every one that is redeemed by
the bloudde of Christ, is a man or a woman: but not every one that is a man or
a woman is redeemed by the bloudde of Christ: Even so every thing that is not
lauful is not expedient, but not every thing that is not expedient is also
unlawful. For there be lawful things that be not expedient as we have
learned by the Apostles testimony.

But it is herd to define by any universal rule, Cha. 16
what difference is between that is unlawful and therefore not expedient, and
that is lawful and yet not expedient. For a man will soon say, every thing
that is not expedient to be done, is sin, but every sin is unlawful,
therefore every thing not expedient, is unlawful. And than where be those
things the Apostle says be lawful, but not expedient, if every thing that is
not expedient be unlawful? wherefore, because we may not doubt but the Apostle
said true, and we dare not say that any sins be lawful: Than it follows we
must say, that some thing is done that is not expedient, and yet if it be
lawful it is not sin, although it be not to be done, because it is not
expedient. But if it be thought an absurditee, that any thing should be done
that is not expedient, and that he should be said not to have sinned that did
it: we must understand that it is called an absurditee by ye custom of speech,
which custom of speech extends so far, that we say, beasts having no
reason ought to be beaten when they faut or sin. But to sin, properly
pertayneth to nothing but to him that uses the reasonable election of frewyl,
which among al mortal living creatures, is given to none but to manne. But it
is one thing when we speak properly, and another thing when we borowe words
either by abusyng of them, or else by translation from other things.

That we may therefore labor (if we can) by some propre difference to put
distinction between that is lawful and not expedient, Cha 17
and that is unlawful and therefore not expedient: Me think, those things be
lawful and not expedient, which by righteousness be permitted before God, but
for offendyng of men, ought to be avoided, least thereby they be stopped from
salvation, and those things be unlawful and therefore not expedient, that be
forbidden by righteousness it self to be done at all, although they be praised
of those to whose knowledge they be brought. Which thing if it be so, than
only unlawful things be prohibited of God, that things lawful and not
expedient, may be avoided not by the bond of law, but by the free
benevolence of man's discrecion. Therefore if it were not lawful to put away the
infidele husband or wife, the lord would have forbidden it to be done, and the
Apostle forbiddyng it would not have said, I say, not the Lord. For if the man
be permitted to be separated from his wife for the cause of fornication: how
much more ought the man to detest and abhor in his wife the fornication of
the mind, that is to say, infidelity, of the which it is written: Psalm. 72
Because loo they that make them selves far from the, shall perish. Thou
have destroyed every one that has gone by fornication from thee.

But because it is after that sort lawful, Cha, 18
that it is not expedient, least men being offended for the separation of
their wyfes, should abhor the doctrine of salvation, by which unlawful
things be prohibited, and so remain worse and worse in their infidelity to
their own damnacion: Therefore the Apostle is an intercessor, and by
admonishment forbids to be done, that is lawful in that sort that it is
not expedient. For christen men and women be even in like sort not forbidden
of the Lord to go from their infidele wyfes and husbands, as they be not
commanded. For if they were commanded to put away such wives and husbands:
than there should be no place left to ye counsel of the Apostle that
admonishes ye thing should not be done. For a good servant would by no means
forbid a thing to be done that the Lord commands. For the Lord ones by
Esdras the prophet commanded it to be done, 1. Es. 10.
and it was done. The Israelites all that than had any, put away their wyfes
that were strangers borne of another stock, by which wyfes the men were
seduced and led to strange gods, and not the women were won and brought to
ye true god by their husbands. For as yet the great grace of our savior did
not shine, and the multitude of that people didgape and look for the temporal
promises of the old testament. And therefore when they saw those men also that
worshypped many false gods abound in worldly goods which they looked for at
the Lords hand as a great reward, by the flattery of their wives. First they
were afraid to offend those false gods, and afterward were induced to
worship them. Wherefore the Lord commanded by the holy man Moses, that no
man should marry a wife being a stranger born. Therefore by good right they did
put away at ye lords commandment, those wives they married against the Lords
commandment. But when the gospel began to be preached to the Gentyles it
found one Ge^tile married to another, of whom if both the parties did not
receive the faith, but the man or the woman being an infidele did consent to
dwell with the other part being christened: Neither the christian ought to be
prohibited of ye lord to put away the infidele, nor yet to be commanded. For
she ought not to be prohibited, because justice suffers to go away from a
fornicator, and an infidele man has in his heart the greater fornication: nor
his chastitee with his wife can not be called true, because whatsoever is not
of faith is sin, although a christian woman may have true chastity with an
infidele husband that has no true chastity. Therefore the christians ought not
to be commanded to be separated from infideles, because they were both married
being Gentiles, not against the commandment of the Lord. Seeing than ye Lord
neither forbyddeth nor commands the christian to go from the infidele:
Therefore, that the christian should not go away, not the Lord, but the Apostle
says, having the holy ghost in whom he is able to give fruitful and faithful
counsel. Wherefore when he had said of the woman whose husband was dead, she
shall be more happi, if she remain so, after my counsel: lest any man might
think this to be contemned as man's counsel and not as Gods, he added
after, I think verily that I have the spirit of God. We must therefore
understand that the things that be not commanded of the Lord, but be
fruitfully cou^sailed of his servant, be counseled by the inspiration of the
same Lord. God forbid that any Catholic man say, when the holy ghost does
counsel, that the Lord does not counsel: seeing that he also is the Lord, and
the works of the Trinity be inseparable. Yet he says, (concerning virgynes I
have no commandment of the Lord, 1. Cor. 7.
but give counsel, not that we should think this counsel came not of the
Lord, seeing it follows by and by, and he says. As having obtained mercy of
the Lord to be a faithful counsailor. By God therefore he gives a faithful
cou^sail in ye spirit of who^ he says. I think that I also have ye spirit of
God. Notwithstanding the commandment of the Lord is one thing, and the
faithful counsel of the servant according to the mercyful gift of charitee
which is inspired and given to him of the Lord, is another thing. There to do
otherwise is not lawful, here it is lawful, but so that the thing lauful, is
partly expedient, partly not expedient. It is than expedient, when not only by
righteousness before god it is permitted, but also when men receive of it no
impediment to salvation: although to do otherwise, (that is to say, to marry
and embrace marriage which is good, but less than continency) is both lawful
and expedient. Because it so releueth by the honesty of marriage the infirmity
of ye flesh which is ever prone to fall to al unlawful things, that it
stops no man from salvation, although it were more expedient and more honest,
if a virgyn would take that counsel, whereunto ye commandment does not co^pel
her. Than also a lauful thing is not expedient, when it is permitted, but the
use of that liberty and power, brings to other an impediment of salvation.
Of this sort is (whereof we have spoken long) the departing of a christian man
or wife from an infidele, which the Lord forbyddeth not by commandment of
law, because it is not unjust before him: but the Apostle forbids it by the
counsel of charytie because it is to the infidels an impediment of salvation,
not only for that they be very perniciously offended: but also for that when
they fall and join them selves in other maryages their wives being alive that
put them away before, than they be with much difficulty loosed and pulled
from such adulterouse maryages, as they be bounden unto.

Therefore here where that is lawefull is not expedyent, Cha. 19
it may not be said, if she put away the infidel, she does well, if she
put him not away, she does better: as it is said, he that gives to marriage
does well, and he that does not give to marriage does better. For in that
second part not only both be lawful, and therefore to neither of them any
manne is compelled by Gods commandment: but also both be expedient, the one
less, ye other more, wherefore to that is more expedient, by the Apostles
counsel every man that may is provoked to take it. But this where the questyon
is concerning the putting away or not puttyng away of the infideles wife or
husband? both be like laweful by that ryghtwysenes which is before God, and
therefore the Lord forbyddeth neither of them: but yet both be not expedient
for the infyrmities of men, and therefore the Apostle forbids that is not
expedient, the Lord geuyng him free liberty to forbid, for neither that the
Apostle counsaileth, the lord forbyddeth, nor that the Apostle forbyddeth, the
Lord commands. Which thing if it were not so, neither the Apostle would
counsel any thing against the lords prohibition, nor would forbid any thing
against the Lords commanded. Wherefore in these two causes, the one concerning
mariyng and not mariyng, the other concerning puttyng away or not putting away
the infidele party: In the Apostles words there is some thing like* some
thing unlike. The like thing is that both there he says, I have no
commandment of the Lord, but do give counsel, and here he says: I say, not
the Lord. For this saying, I have no commandment of the Lord, is like to
this, The Lord says not. and this saying, I counsel, is like to this, I say.
But this is unlike that concerning mariyng and not mariyng, it may be said,
this is well done, that is better, because both be expedient; the one less, ye
other more But concerning the puttyng away or not puttyng away of the infidele
party, it may not be said he that puts away does well, and he that puts
not away does better, but it must be said, let him not put away, for although
it be laweful, yet it is not expediente. Thus we may say, it is better not to
put away the infydle wife or husband, although it be lawful to put him or her
away even as we say well, it is better, that is lawful and expedye^t, then that
is lawful and not expediente.

For these causes, Cha. 20
when I expoundyng the Lords long sermon which he made upon the Mountain,
came to that questyon concerning the putting away of wives or not putting
away, ioynyng also thereunto the testimonies of the Apostle: I said it was the
Apostles council, and not the Lords commandment where he said. To other I
say, 1. Cor. 7
not the Lord, counsellyng those that had infidel wyfes not to put them away,
if they consented to dwell with them. Which thing truly was to be counseled
and not to be commanded, for me^ may not be forbidden with such great weight
and charge to do things lawful although not expedyent, as they be forbidden
to do things unlawful. And if at any time the Apostle did vouchfafe to counsel
those things that were also to be commanded: that did he to favor men's
infirmytie, not to do any prejudice to Gods commandment. For which cause
he said, I write these things not to confound you, but I admonish you as
most derely beloved children. What question is in this that he says, I say,
not the lord? likewise where he says. Behold I Paul say unto you, that if ye
be cicumcised, Gala. 5.
Christ will profit you nothing: did he not also in this place say, I say,
not the Lord? But these be not like, because it is not unseemly nor contrary,
if the Apostle council these things that the lord also commands. For we
counsel and admonish them whom we love, to do the precepts or
commandments of the Lord. But when he says, I say, not the lord, he shows
sufficiently that the lord forbids not that he forbad. And ye Lord would
have forbidden it, if it had been unlawful. Therefore according to those things
that we have before long and much disputed: it was lawful by righteousness,
and yet being lawful it was not to be done for good will and free benevolence.

But you, whose opinion is, that it is as well unlawful that ye lord forbids
not, but ye Apostle, Cha. 21
as it is unlawful that the Lord forbyddeth. When ye would have expounded what
meant this saying of the Apostle, I say, not the lord, whereas the Apostle spoke
unto christians that were married with infideles, you said that the Lord
commanded there should be no marriages made with them that be of a diverse
religion, and ye brought in the testimony of the Lord, saying: Thou shall not
take a wife to thy son of the daughters of strangers borne, Deuteronomy. 7.
least she lead him after her gods, and his soul perish. You did also add
ye words of the Apostle where he says: A woman is bounden so long as her
husband lives. But if her husband be dead, she is free to marry whom she will,
only in the lord. Which you expounded so, that you added, that is to say, to a
christian. Tha^ you added further. This is therefore the commandment of the
Lord as well in the old testament as in the new, that no parties should remain
being coupled in marriage except they be of one religion and faith. Than if this
be the Lords commandment both in the old testament and the new, and if
the Lord command it and the Apostle teach it, that no marriage remain
coupled but of one religion and faith: Why than against the lords
commandment, against his own doctrine, against the precept of the old
testament and the new, does the Apostle command, not only cou^saileth but
also commands, that if the husband or wife receive ye faith, the one should
not put away the other being an infidele if the infidele consent to dwell with
him? By these your words you show evidently enough that this is one thing and
that another. For that (as you say) the Lord byddeth, ye Apostle teaches, both
the testamentes command. But this is another matter, who can deny? where it
is entreated, not of those that are to be married, but of those that be already
married. For they were both of one infidelity when they were married, but when
the gospel came, the man without the wife, or the wife without the man received
the faith. Than if this be a diverse thing, as it appears without any scruple
or doubt: why does not the Lord command as the Apostle does, that the
christian should remain in marriage with the infidele, except peradventure that
lacks in this place, that he himself said so boldly in another place. Will
ye receive an experiment of Christ that speaks in me? 2. Cor. 13
And truly Christ is the lord: understand you not what I say? or shall I tarry
in this and declare it a litel better? mark whether I do not in a playner
speech lay the matter as it were before your eyes to be considered. Behold
there be two married persons, both infidels when they were married: in these two
there is no question that can perteine to the lords commandment, and the
Apostles doctrine, and the precept of the old and new testament, whereby a
Christian is forbidden to join in marriage with an infidel, for now they be man
and wife and as yet both be infidels, as yet they be such as they were before
they married, and as they were married. the precher of the gospel comes, one of
them he or she receives the faith, but so that the other infidel co^senteth to
dwell with the Christian, whether does the Lord command the Chrystyan to put
away the infidel, or not command? if you say he commands: the Apostle gain
says, I say, not the Lord. If you say he commands not, I ask the cause
why. You will not answer the cause which you put in your letters, yt the Lord
forbids Christians to be married to infidels: for that is no cause in this
matter where we speak of persons married, not of persons to be married. If
therefore you have found no cause why the Lord should not forbid that the
Apostle forbids, (for you see now as I suppose, that it is no cause which
you thought before was one) then consider whether this be ye cause which I
thought was it, and was then to be spoken and now to be defended, that the
Lord says that thing, which rightwisnes before him permytteth, which may
not be tra^sgressed by any means, that is to say, which the Lord so
commands or forbids yt it is not lawful at all to do otherwise. For what
thing he permits to the liberty of man's free will, either to do or not to
do lawfully: therein he seems to give place to the counsel of his servants,
that they should rather counsel that they shall see expedient. Let this rule be
first and specially kept, that no unlawful things be done. And where any thing
is lawefull after that sort, that to do otherwise is not altogether unlawful:
Than let it be done that is expedient, or that is more expedient. For that the
Lord says as the Lord, that is to say, not by the advice of a cou^sailor, but
by the commandment of a ruler, it is not lawful to do those things, and
therefore not expedient. The lord comaundeth a woman not to go away from her
husband, but if she go away, (that is to say, for that cause for which it is
lauful so to do) to remain unmarried or else to be reconciled to her husband. For
a married woman, her husband being alive, is bounden to the law, and during his
life she shall be called an adulteress, if she be with another husband, because
the woman is bounden so long as her husband lives. Wherefore if a wife put away
her husband and marierh another, she commits adultery, and he that maryeth
her that is put fro her husband, is an adulteror. And so by ye same
commandment of the lord, let a man not put away his wife, for he yt puts
away his wife without cause of fornication, makes her to commit adultery,
but if he put her away for that cause, yet let him remain so.

For every man that puts away his wife and marieth another is an adulteror.
Cha, 22
These constitucions of ye Lord must be observed without any breach or
retractio^. For righteousness before God wylleth these things, whether men
allow them or disalow the^. And therefore it may not be said, that they ought
not to be kept, lest men be offended, or lest men be stopped from that
salvation which is in Christ. For what christian man dare say, lest I offend
men, or to win men to Christ, I will cause my wife to commit adultery, or I
be my self an adulteror? For it may come to pass that a christen man when he
has put away his wife for adultry, may be thus tempted, that a certain woman
which has not yet received the faith, desiryng to be married to hi^, do
promise that she will become a christian not deceitfully, but in very deed, if
he will marry her. And when the man refuses this marriage, the tempter may make
this suggestion, the Lord says, whosoever puts away his wif without the
cause of fornication, and marieth another is an adulteror. But if thou that
have put away thy wife for fornication, do marry another: thou shall not commit
adultery. To this suggestion let him wisely answer, that he commits more
grievous adultery yt puttyng away his wife without the cause of fornication,
maryeth another: but yet he that after his wife put away for fornication has
married another, is not therefore no adulteror because he has put away an
adulteress, as he is an adulteror that maryeth her yt is put away without
cause of fornication, nor yet therefore he is no adulteror that married her who^
he found put away for the cause of fornication. And for that cause, yt which in
S. Matthew is put very darkely, where the whole is signified by ye part: is set
forth plainly in other that have expressed the hole generally, as it is red in
S. Mark: whosoever puts away his wife and marieth another commits
adultery. And in S. Luke, Every man that puts away his wife and marieth
another commits adultery. They say not, some do commit adultery, and not
other some that put away their wives and marry other: but whosoever puts
away, every man, say they, without exception that puts away his wife and
marieth another commits adultery.

Cha. 23
But if the christian answer thus to the tempter, understanding that it is
lawful for him to put away his wife for fornication, but not lawful to marry
another: What if that tempter say, commit this sin for this intent, to win
the woman's soul to Christ, that is dead by infidelity, who is ready to be
made a christian, if she be married to thee: what can the Christian answer else
or say, but that if he do it, he can not escape co^demnacion, which ye Apostle
made mencio^ of, Romans 5.
saying: And as some report us to say, let us do evil, that good may come,
whose judgment is just? How can she be a true christian woman, that shall live
in adultery with him that married her?

Adultery is not only not to be committed, cha. 24
which not certain me^ commit, but every man that puts away his wife and
marryeth an other, although he marry her for this intent to make her a
chrystian: But also whosoever being not bounden to a wife, has vowed to God
to live contynentlye, ought by no menes to sin by this pretense and recompense,
that he should believe therefore he might marry her to his wife, because she
that desires his marriage has promised to become a Chrystyan. For that thing
that is laufull to any man before he has vowed, is not lauful when he has
vowed he will never do it, if he vow that thing that he may vow, as for
example, perpetual virginity, or else, continent life after the experience of
matrimony when the parties be losed from the bond of marriage, or by the mutual
consent of the parties living, and relesynge carnal debte one to an other, both
the parties being faithful and chaste, which thing is not lauful for the man
to vow without the wife, nor the wife without the man. These things and
such other as may be vowed very well, after that men have vowed them may be
broken by no condicyon which were vowed without any condition. For we must
understand that ye Lord commanded so where it is red, Psalm. 75
vow and perform your vows to your lord God. Whereupon the Apostle concerning
certain women that vowed contine^cie, and afterward would marry, which before
they had vowed was lawful for the^ to do, says: Having damnation because they
have made void their first faith and promise. 1. Tim. 5
Therefore nothing is expedient that is unlawful, and nothing is lawful that
the lord forbids.

As for those things that be restrained by no commandment of the Lord, Cha.
25
but be left in the power and liberty of man: Let us hear and obey the
Apostle monishyng and counsellyng in the holy ghost, either to take things that
be better, or to beware of things that be not expedient. On the one side let
the Apostle be heard* saying: I have no precept of the Lord, but give counsel.
And I say, not the Lord. On ye other side where the hearer chooses the better,
let him be heard, saying: 1. Cor. 7.
He that is loosed from a wife let him not seek a wife, and if he take a wife
he sins not. And also let a virgyn not marry, for he yt does not give her to
marriage, does better, and he that does give her to marriage does well. And
also, the woman shall be more happy if she remain so, which when her husband is
dead has in her liberty to marry whom she will, only in the Lord which may be
taken two ways, either remainyng a christian, or mariyng a christian. For in
the time of the reuelyng of the new testament, I do not remember that it is
without al ambiguities and doubts declared in the gospel, or in the Apostles
writings, whether the Lord did forbid ye christians to be married to infideles
or no? Although the most blessed man Cyprian doubts not of it, and does not
put it among small and light crimes, to join marriage with infideles, and
says, that that is to prostitute and to join the me^bres of Christ with
infideles and Gentiles. But because it is another question of them that be
alredi joined, let the Apostle here also be hard saie^g, if any brother have an
infidel to his wife, and if she consent to dwell with him, let him not put her
away: and if any woman have an infidel to her husband and if he consent to
dwell with her, let her not put hi^ away And let him be herd so, that
although it is lawful to be done, because the lord says it not: yet let it
not be done, because it is not expediente. For the Apostle as I have showed
before most plainly tetheth, that al things be not expedient that be lawful.
So that for every kind of fornicacion, either of the flesh, or of the spirit
(where also infydelitye is understood) both it is not lauful for a woman,
putting away her husband to marry an other man, and also it is not lauful for
a man puttyng away his wife to marry an other, because the lord says with out
any exception. If a wife put away her husband and marries an other, Luke. 6.
she commytteth adulterye. And every man that puts away his wife and marieth
another, commits adultery. These things after the mesure of my talent,
being thus entreated and discussed: yet I am not ignorant but that the question
concerning marriages is very dark and intricate and hard to make plain. Nor I
dare not profeffe that I have as yet unfolded either in this work or in any
other, or that I now can (if I be pressed upon) explicate all the secret
corners of it. As for that you thought good likewise to consult and ask my
mind in an other letter, I would have declared it apart by it self, if I had
thought otherwise of it then you do. But seeing our minds and opinions
concerning that be both one, it is not needful to dyspute of it here any
longer.

They that be as yet vnchrystened and lerning the cathechysme, being at the
point of death, cha. 26
if by sickness or by any chance they be so oppressed, that although they yet
live, yet they can not for the^ selfs ask baptism, or answer to the
interrogatories of their faith: there will which in Christ's faith is manifestly
known, may profyt them so, that they may be baptized after yt sort as infantes
be baptized, whose will as yet does not apere at al. And yet we may not
therefore condemn those yt be in that thing more ferefull the^ we think they
ought to be, least men think by us that we wolde^ judge of the talent
committed to our fellow servant rather noughtely then warely. For in such
matters we must consydre what the Apostle says. Romans 14.
Every one of us shall give account for hi^ self, therefore let us no more one
judge an other. There be that think, that both in this and in other things we
must observe, that we read ye Lord said. Mat. 7.
Do not give an holy thing to dogs, nor cast not precious stones before
hogs, and rehersinge these our Sauioures words, dare not baptize those yt
can not answer for them self, least peradventure they have a contrary will,
which can not be spoken of infantes, in whom as yet there is no use of reason.
And it is not only incredible that this man which is unchristened and lerninge
his Cathechisme, would not be baptized in the end of his life: but also if his
will were unknown, it is better to give baptism to hi^ that will not, the^ to
deny it to him that will, where it appears not whether he wills it or
refuses it, and yet it is more credible yt he would rather say if he could, yt
he would receive those Sacraments, without which he believed now that he ought
not to depart out of this body.

If the Lord where he says, give not an holy thing to dogs would have that
understood, cha. 27
that these men think they ought to beware of, he would never hi^ self have
given to his betrayer, that which he unworthy received with other being worthy,
to his destruction without any faut of the giver. Wherefore we must believe yt
the Lord would declare by yt his saying, that unclean hearts bear not the
light of spiritual understanding. And if the doctor do preche and put into
their heads, what doctrine they ougbt to bear, which they do not take right:
because they take it not, either they bite and rent it by reprehending it, or
else they tread it underfoot by conte^ning it. 1. Cor. 3.
For if the blessed Apostle say, that he gave milk and not strong meat to
those that were borne again and yet but children in Christ? for (says he) as
yet ye could not, nor even now ye can not take it. And if the Lord him self
said to his elect Apostles, Ihon. 16
yet I have many things to say to you, but you can not bear them now: how
much less can the unclean minds of wicked men do al things that be spoken
of the heavenly and incorporall light.

But to make an end of my disputacio^ in the same matter it began in, Cha. 28
I think that not only ye unchristened lerners of our faith, but also they
that be coupled and live still in adulterouse marriages, although we do not
admit them to baptism: being in good health of body, and remaininge still in
their adultery, yet if they lie in desperacion of life, and be penytente within
them selfs, and can not answer for them selfs: I think they ought to be
baptized that this syn may also with the rest be washed away by the lauer of
regeneracyon. For who knows whether percha^ce they had purposed to retain
still the adulterouse pleasure and prouocacyon of the flesh even to baptism
or no? But if they may recover the health from that desperacyon they were in
and live: either they will do that they purposed, or they will obey as they be
taught, or else if they be contemners, it shall be done to them, as it ought to
be done to such naughty Christened men. Moreover that which is the cause of
Baptysme, the same is the cause of reconciliacion, if by any chance the peril
of death do prevent the penytent. For our mother the church ought not to will
them to depart out of this life, without the pledge of their peace.

Thus ends the first book.
The second Book.
FOR answer to these things you wrote to me of before, Cha. 1.
Christen brother Pollentius, I have now written again no small, volume,
concerning those yt having their own wifes or husbands alive, yet be coupled
and married unto other. Which thing when it was known unto you, you did add
certain other matters to your book, desiri^g me to make answer to those also,
but when I was about to do so, and to add likewise to my book, so that there
should be but one book of mine answer: suddenly my former book as soon as I had
finished it, it was published, at the request of our brethren, and not knowing
yt any thing was more to be added unto it, for that cause I am compelled to
make answer in any other book by it self to those things which you added.
And those your additions be not joined to ye end of your book, but are put and
interlaced where it pleased you in the body of your book.

Cha. 2
The first of them whereunto I think I must make answer, is that in these
words of the Apostle where he says. (But to the other, I say, not our Lord,
that the wife do not forsake and goo from her husband, but if she goo from
him, then to remayn unmarried, or else to be reconcyled again to her husband)
your opinion is, that it is not so spoken of S. P. (if she goo away) that it
should be understood of her goi^g away from her husband co^myttynge adultery,
for which only cause it is lawful to make deuorse: but rather you think
that she is therefore commanded to live unmarried that she might be reconciled
to her husband, in case he will not live continently, least she being not
reconciled, might so bring her husband to fornicacion, that is to say, to marye
an other she being alive. Moreover if she goo from her husband for
fornicacion, then you think that she is not co^maundyd to remain unmarried,
but yt she does it, because she will live contine^tly, not that she should be
taken as breki^g the commandment, if she be afterward married. Which form
also you think ought to be observed of the husband likewise, yt he do not put
away his wife, except it be for fornication, but if he put her away, that he
remain without marriage, that he might afterward be reconcyled to his chaste
wife, except she by chance have chosen continencye, least he refusing to be
reconcyled to his chaste wife, might compel her to commyt adultery, if she
forbearyng to live sole chance to be married to an other, during her first
husbands life. But if he be deuorsed from his wife for fornication, than you
think, he is bownden by no commandment, to live unmarried, and that he
co^mytteth no adultery, if she being alive, he do marie an other, because the
saing of the same Apostle S. paul (the woman is bownden so long as her husband
lives, but if her husband be dead, she is delivered from that bond, to marye
whom she will,) you think yt ought so to be understood, that if the husband
commit adultery, he should be taken for dead, and also the wife for dead, and
therefore yt it is lawful for either of the^, as after death, even so after
fornication of either part to be married to an other.

Now having considered these your vndersta^di^ges, Cha. 3
I demand and ask upon you, whether he yt shall marye a woman, that is
delivered from the bond of matrymonye with her husband, is to be counted an
adulterour or no? I suppose you think him to be noon. For therefore a woman
during her husbands life, shall be called an adultresse, if she be with an other
man: because she is bownden so long as her husband lyuethe, And if this bond
were dissolved her husband being alive: than without any crime of adultery she
might be married to an other man. But if she be bownden so long as her husband
liuethe: the^ by no means she may be called free from that bond, but by the
death of her husband. Further if this bond between the man and the wife be
broken and lowsed by the death of either party, and (as you say) if
fornication be counted for death: then without dowt a woman shall be delivered
from yt bond between her and her husband, whenever she shall commit
fornication. For it can not be said yt she is bownden to her husband, and if
any man do marie her, he shall be no adulterour.

But mark what a great absurdity it is, Cha. 4.
that therefore the man is no adulterour because he maryethe an adultresse. Yea
also (which thing is more mo^struouse) the woman her self that commits
adultery, shall not be called an adultresse, bebause she shall be to the second
man, not an other ma^s wife, but his own wife. For when the former bond of
matrimony is broken by adultrye, to whatsoever man not having a wife, she
shall be married, she shall not be an adultresse with an adulterour, but rather a
wife with her husband. Then how can it be true, that a woman is bownden so
long as her husband liuethe? Behold her husband lives, because he is neither
departed out of his body, nor yet has committed fornication, (which you would
have reputed for death): and yet the woman is now no more bownden unto him.
Do you not mark how directly this is agai^ste ye Apostle, saiynge, a woman
is bownden so long as her husband lyuethe? or will you perchance say, that he
lyuethe, but yet he is not her husband? for than he ceased to be her husband,
when she, by adulterye, dissolved the bond of marriage. Than how shall she
duringe her husbands life, be called an adultresse, if she be with an other
man, seying that her husband is not now her husband, the bond of matrymonie
beying dissolved by the womans adultery? For during which husbands life, shall
she be called an adultresse, if she be with an other man but her own husband?
But if he cease to be her husband, than truly she shall not be called an
adultresse duringe her husbands life, if she be with an other man but having
no husband she may be married to her own husband. He that is of this mind, do
you not see how much he thinks against ye Apostles mind? Which thing is not
your opinion, but this folowethe your opinion. Change therefore the antecede^t,
if ye will beware and avoid ye co^seque^t. And say not yt the dead man or dead
wife, may in this place be understood for the man or wife co^mittinge
adultery. Wherefore after ye holsom doctrine and teachinge, the woman is bownden
so long as her husband lyuethe yt is to say, is not departed out of his body.
For a woman married be of the Apostles mind, that we say not, a man committing
adultery, is to be counted as a dead man, and yt therefore it is lawful for his
wife to marye an other man. For although adultery be death, not of ye body,
but of the soul, which is worse: yet the Apostle spoke not of that death,
when he said, if her husband be dead, she may marie to whom she will: but of
that only death whereby a man departs out of his body. For if by the man's
adultery, the bo^d of matrimonye be dissolved: than follows that absurdity,
which I told before ought to be avoided, that the wife also by her
fornication, should be loosed from ye bond, and if she be loosed, she is free
from the law of her husband, and therefore (which thing is most foulishly
spoken) she shall be no adultresse if she be with an other man, because by her
own adultery she is departed from her former husband. Which thing if it be so
far wide of truth, yt no man, (I speak not only of Christianes,) but no
commen wit will admit it: than truly the woman is bownden so long as her
husband lives, and to speak more plainly, so long as her husband is in his
body. And after like form and manner, the husband is bownden, so long as ye
woman lyuethe, in her body. For which cause, if he will put away the
adultresse, let him not marye an other woman, lest he him self do commit yt
he blames in his wif. Likewise if the woman put him away, let her not couple
her self to an other, for she is bownden so long as her husband lives nor
she is not delivered from the law of her husband (except he be dead) that she
be no adulteress, if she be with on other man.

And where as it is thought hard to you, Cha. 6
that after adoulterye the one party should be reconciled to ye other: it shall
not be herd if faith be present. For why should we reken them as yete
adulteroures, whom we believe be either washed by baptism, or healed by
penance? These crimes in the old law of God were purged by no sacrifyces,
which by the blood of the new testament without any dowbte are purged, and
therefore than it was prohibyte all to gyther to take again his wife, after
she hade been defiled by an other man: although David as being a prefigurer
of the new testament without any delay took again the dowgther of Saul which
her father had separated from David and given to an other. But now after that
Christ has said to the woman taken in adulterye? And I also will not condemn
the go thy ways, sin no more hereafter: who understands not that the
husband owghte to forgive, that he sees ye Lord of them both did forgive, and
that he ought not now to call her an adulteress whose crime at her penance,
he believes is forgiven by the mercyfulnes of God.

But the unfaithful men's understanding abhors this, Cha. 7
in so much that some having little faith or rather being enemies of true
faith, fearing as I suppose, that liberty to sin without punisheme^t is
given to their wyfes, would pull out of there books that which the Lord did, in
pardonyng the woman taken in adulteri: as though he had permytted and given
liberty to sin, that said, syn no more herafter: or else that the woman ought
not to be made hole of god the phisyciane, by the remission of that sin, lest
they being infected and not wholle might be offended: For these men that be
displeasede with this fact of the Lord be not them selfs chaste: nor yet
chastity does not make them so severe and extreme: but rather they be of that
number of men, to whom the lord said, which so ever of you is with out sin,
let him first cast a stone against her, saving that they afraid by their own
co^scie^ces went away, and ceased to rempte Christ, or to pursue the
adultresse: but these, both being sick the^ selfs, reprehend the Phisicyane,
and also being adulterours be cruel against women committing adultery: to
whom if it were said, not as it was to the Jews, he that is without sin,
(for who is without sin?) but he that is without this sin, let him first
cast a stone against her: than perchance, they that were grieved for not
killing the adulterouse woman would consider, with what great mercy of god they
them selfs were spared and favored, that being adulterours yet were alive.

When we say these things to them, Cha. 8
not only they will remyt nothing of there severity, but be more over angry
at ye verity and truth it self, and speak and answer thus: but we be men.
Shall the dignity of our kind being men, susteyn this injury, that we
should be compared to women in sufferynge of punishment, if we commit any
fornication with other women beside our wives? As though they ought not
therefore the more to refreyn like men their unlawful desires and lusts,
because they be men: as though they ought not therefore the more, to give them
selfs as examples of this virtue to there wifes, because they be men: as
though they ought not therefore the less to be ouercommed with filthy pleasure,
because they be men: as though they ought not therefore the less to serve the
wa^tones of the flesh, because they be men. And yet they be angry if they
hear that adulterouse men do suffer like punishment with adulterouse women,
saying they ought to be punished so much the more grievously, as it perteynethe
more to them, both to ouercom women in virtue, and to rule them by example. I
speak to Chryste^ men, that with faith hear this saying, the man is the head
of the woman: where they knowledge yt they ought to be the guydes, and the women
to be the folowers. And therefore the man must beware that he go not that way
by this lyuinge that he fearethe, his wife will go by following.

But they that be displeased, that like form of chastytie be kept between man
and wife, and chose rather (specially in this matier) to be under the laws of
ye world, than of Christ, because the civil laws of the world seem to bind
men not with the same bonds of chastity, that they bynd women: let them read
what Antonius the Emperor, which was no Christen man, did constitute and
ordeyn concerning this matier, where the husband is not suffered to accuse the
wife for the crime of adultery, to whom he has not in his living given
example of chastity, so that both should be condemned if that contention did
prove them both alyke to have been unchaste. For the foresaid Emperors words
written to Gregorianus, be these. My letters, says he, shall in no part of
the cause be any prejudice. For if the fawlt be in you, yt the marriage be
dissolved, and if your wife Eupasia do marie according to the law of Julius,
she shall not be condemned of adulterye for my writing, except it appear and
be proved that she has done adulterye. They shall have before their eyes
authorytie to inquyre, whether you living chastely, have been author for her
to live likewise well and chastely or no? For it semethe to me very unright,
that the man should require chastity of his wife, which he him self will not
perform: which thing may both condemn the man, and for mutual recompense of
both their crimes, make an end of the matier between them both, or else take
away the cause of the fact. If these be to be observed for the comlynes of the
earthly city, how much more chaste does the heavenly city and the
feloshyppe of angels require men to be. Seeing these things be thus, is the
uncleanness of men therefore the less, and not rather more and worse, because in
them there is a certain proud and licentyouse boastinge? Let not therefore
men abhor that Christ forgave the adulterouse woman, but rather let them
know their own peril, and being infected with the same sickness, let them
flee with devout supplication to the same Savior, and let them confess it
to be necessary to them, that they read was done in her, let them receive the
medycyne of their adulteryes, and cease to commit any more adulteryes, let them
praise the patience of God in them, let them do penance, and receive pardon,
and finally let them change there opinion concerning the punishment of women,
and the impunitie of them selfs.

Which things considered and entreated, Cha* 9
if the commen concondicion between man and wife, the commen harm, the common
peril, the commen wound, the commen health and saftye, be faithfully and
humbly thought upon: the reconcylinge of them both, after adulteries committed
and purged, shall not be honest nor hard, where men doubt not but remission of
sin is made by the keys of the kingdom of heaven, not that after deuorse
from her husband the adultresse should be called home again: but that after
felowshyppe without Christ, she should be called no more an adultresse. But
behold (some will say) it ought not to be done which noman compels,
because peradventure some law of this world after the manner of ye earthly
city forbids it, where the remission and abolishinge of sin by the holy
blood of Christ is not thought upon. Than let continency be taken, which no
law forbyddethe, and let no mo new adulteries be committed. And what is that
to us, if ye adulterouse wife being at lest purged and made clean by the mercy
of god be not reconciled to her husband, so that whiles they be vnreconcyled,
no other maryages be made as lawful matrimonye, which are proved to be
adulteries? For the woman is bounden so long as her husband lives, and so
consequently the man is bounden so long as his wife lyuethe. This byndyng
causes that they can not be joined with other without adulterouse copulation,
where upon it follows necessarily that of two married persons are made four
adulterers, if she marye an other man and he marye an other woman. For
although he commytteth more wicked adulterye that puttinge away his wife not
for fornication, maryeth an other, which kind of adulterye Saint Matthewe
made mention upon: yet not only he commits adultery and as Luke says, every
man that puttethe away his wife and marieth an other, commits adultery. Of
which testimonies I have disputed ynowgh in my former book.

But you answer me that to live continently is given to few men and therefore
they that have put away their wifes for fornication, Cha. 10.
because they can not be reconcyled, they see the^ selfs to be in so great
danger, that they pronounce christ's law not to be merciful and gentle, but
beastely and cruel. O brother, me^ that live not contine^tli for as much as
pertains to the^ may have many co^plaintes whereby (as you sai) to pronounce
Christ's law to be cruel and not merciful and yet we ought not for their cause
to peruerte and change the gospel of Christ. You are moved only by their
complaint, that put away their wifes for fornication, and be not suffered to
mari other: because to live continently is given to few men, and to it, men
ought to be exhorted by praise, not compelled by law. And so if when an
adulteress is put away, an other wife may not be married: the incontinencie of
men shall have (as you think) a just complainte. But mark how many things
there be where if we will not admyt the complayntes of me^ not living
continently, we must needs permytte adulteryes to be done. For what and if the
wife be holden with a long and incurable sickness of the body, so that carnal
copulation islet? What and if captivity or some other violence, do separate ye
one from the other so yt the man knows his wife is alive and yet can not
enjoy her: think you yt we ought to admit ye grudgyng of incontinent men, and
to permyt adulteries? What think you in that same wherein the Lord was asked
the question, and answered that it ought not to be done, but that Moses for
the hardenes of their heart did permytte a libel of deuorse to be given, and
for every cause to put away the wife. Does not Christ's law displease the
incontinent livers, that will by a divorce reiecte and put away their wifes
that be chyding, conte^tiouse iniuriouse, proud and disdainful to pay their
carnal debte, and marie other? Now because the incontinent life of these men
abhors the law of Christ, therefore must Christ's law be changed to their
will. Moreover if a wife forsake her husband, or a man his wife, not for
fornication but rather for this intent to live in continencye, and yet is an
incontinent liver, to whom for that cause is given a libell of divorce: I ask
the question whether shall not he or she be adulterours, if either of them be
coupled in marriage to any other? If it be said, they shall not be. than it is
said against the Lord, whose words be these, who soever puts away his
wife except the cause of fornication, Mark. v.
causes her to commit adultery, and he that marieth her that is put away, is
an adulterour. Behold she is put away, and puttethe not her husband away,
and because to live continently is given to a few, she gave place to
incontinencie, and took an husband, and yet an adulterour married an
adulteress. Both be guilty both are to be condemned, both she that was
married her husband being alive, and he that married her, that had an husband
alive. Do we here call Christ's law unmercifully, whereby she is made giltye of
so great a crime, and is punyshed, whom her husband put away, without any
former fornication of her part, and because to live continently is given to
few, in putting her away he compelled her to mari? Why do we not here say,
that the man is to be cownted as dead, that by putti^g her wrongfulli away,
brake first the bond of matrimony? For by what reason will you say, that he
brake the bond of matrimony, that althowgh he be an adulterour, did not put
away his wife, and that he brake the bond of matrimony, that did put away his
wife being chaste? but I sai that the bond remains in them both, where by the
woman is bownde^ so long as her husband lives, be he a continent liver or an
adulterour and that therefore the woman which is put away commits adulteri, if
she marie, and that he is an adulterour that mariethe a woman put away, whether
her husband that put her away be an adulterour or a continent liver, because
the woman is bownde^ so long as her husband lives. But now we dispute of the
co^plaintes of incontinent livers. What is thought mor right wise tha^ the
complaint of this woman that says, I am put away, and have not put away, and
because to live continently is given to few, I have not lived contine^tly, but
lest I should commit fornication have married, and yet I am said to have
committed adulteri because I have married? Shall we for this woman as it were a
just complaint, think the law of God is to be changed yt we should not judge
this woman to be an adulteress? god forbid. But ye will answer that the woman
ought not to have been put away, for that no cause of fornication was given
before. You say truth. For ye lord expressed her husbands syn, where he said,
he that puts away his wife except the cause of fornication: makes her to
commit adultrie. But did not she therefore sin after in marieng, because he
sinned before in putting her way? Therefore what does it profit him that the
woman not living continently complayneth of the law of Christ, except he
for his murmuringe be punyshed?

Now let us see those things that ye added in an other place, Cha. 11.
and would have me to make answer to them. Where it moves you, and you have
pity of that man, that although it be not for that he lives not contine^tly,
yet at least for the necessity to beget children, is compelled to lie with an
adulteress, if it be not lawful for him so to put her away, that he may marie
an other she being alive: Where upon you should be justly moved, if it were not
adulterye to marye an other, his adulterouse wife being alive. But if it be
adultery, (as the things before disputed have taught) why is the cause of
bygettynge children pretended? We may not therefore permit and give a license,
to heynowse crimes, and we may not so avoid to dye without issue of children,
as we must choose and labor to live our selfs for evermore. And adulterers
be not suffered to live evermore, who after ye first death, must needs be
condemned by ye eternity of the second death. This excuse and allegation for
the bygettinge of children, compellethe men to put away not only adulterouse
women but also most chaste women, if perchance they be bareyn, and to mary
other, which thing I suppose pleasethe not you. Wherefore if adulteries be not
to be excused for ye cause of not living co^tinently, how much less are they
excusable, for the cause of bygettinge of children.

Cha. 12.
This infirmity of incontinent living, ye Apostel would have releaued by ye
honesty of marriage, for he says not, if she have no children let her marye,
but, if she live not co^tinently, let her marye. The generation of children is
a recompense, for that she giuethe place to incontine^t life by marienge. For
inco^tinency is a vice, but marriage is no vice, and therefore by this good the
other is made venial evil. Seeing therefore marriage is institute for
generation, for that cause our fathers were married, yt only for generation and
not unlawfully did company with women. For than there was a certain necessity
of procreation, which is not now, because there is a time of embracing (as it
is written) which truly was than, Eccle. iii.
and there is a time of absteininge from embracinge, which is now. Of the which
time the Apostell speaking, says: from hence forth, brethren, the time is
short, it folowethe that they that have wives, be as not having wives.
Whereupon at this time it is very well and aptly said, he that can take, let him
take, and she that liuethe not continently, let her marye. Continencye than
descended to the office of matrimony for the generation of children: but now
the bond of marriage, releauethe the vice of incontinencye, that of them that
live not continentlye should come the generation of children, not by the
dishonestie of fornications, but by the honestye of marriages. Why than says
not the Apostell, if she have no children, let her marye? because at this time
of absteynyng from embraci^g, it is not necessarily to bygette children. And
why says he, if she live not continently let her marye? Truly therefore,
lest by her inco^tinencie she be compelled to commit fornication. If therefore
she live co^tinently, let her neither marye nor bring forth children, but if
she live not co^tine^tly, let her marie lawfully lest she bring forth
children unlawfully, or else lest she using carnal copulation more unlawfully
bring forth no children at al. Although this that I said last, some men do
it, that be also married lawfulli. For a man lies with his lawful wife
unlawfully, and dishonesteli, where the co^ceiuyng of a child is avoided. Which
thing Onan ye son of Judas did, and for ye god killed him. Gene. xxxviii.
Therefore ye generation of children is the first and natural cause of marriage,
and for that cause they yt be married by reason of incontinencie, ought not so
to temper and moderate their euel, that they ba^nyshe the goodness of marriage,
that is to say, the fruit of children. For the Apostell spoke of incontinent
livers when he said. i. Tim. v.
I will that the younger vydowes do marie, and bring forth children, and be
huswifes, and to give no occasion to the adversary of euel speakinge. For now
certain be, turned back after Satan. When he said: I will ye yo^ger to mary,
he counseyled yt. to stay the fall of incontinencie, but lest peradventure they
should think only of the infirmity of carnal concupisce^ce, which only
must be served and releaued in the work of marriage, and lest the goodness of
marriage be either contemned or neglected: he said by and by after: and to
bring forth children, and to be huswyfes. They yt choose to live continently,
choose truly a better thing, than is the goodness of marriage, yt is to say,
than the generation of children. If continency be chosen, for this intent, to
take upon them a better thing than ye goodness of marriage how much more ought
it to be kept to avoid adulterye. For when the Apostell had said, if she live
not continently, let her marye: for it is better, said he, to be married than
burn, he said not, it is better to commytt adultery than burn. Cha. 13.


There is nothing whereunto we may exhort these that fear to be reconciled to
their adulterous wifes or husbands, being purged and healed by penance, but
to keep continency. For a woman is bounde^ so long as her adulterouse or
chaste husband lives, and commits adultery, if she marye an other: and a man
is bounden so long as his adulterouse or chaste wife liuethe and committethe
adultery if he marye an other. This bond truly is not dissolved, although
the wife being chaste of her body be separate by dyuorse, much less it is
dissolved, if she be not separate and commyt adulterye. And therefore nothing
dissolueth this bond, but the death of the man or the wife, not falling into
adulterye, but departing out of the bodi Wherefore if a wife go from her
adulterouse husband and will not be reconcyled to him again, let her remayn
unmarried: and if a man put away his adulterouse wife, and will not receive her
again, no not after her penance, let him keep continencye: although not of will
to chose the better good, yet at least of necessity to avoid the perniciouse
evil. To this also I would exhort, if the wife were holden with a long and
incurable sickness, or else if she were corporally separate and kept in some
place, whyther her husband could not have access. Last of all to this also I
would exhort, if the woman disposed and willing to live continently, would,
being chaste her self, put away her chaste husband, although it is against
the discipline, because it is not by mutual consent. For I think no Chryste^
man withstandethe him to be an adulteroure, that his wife either being long
sick, or long absent, or desyrouse to live continently, keeps carnal
company with an other woman. even so in like manner a man putting away his
adulterouse wife, lyuethe being an adulteroure, with an adultresse because, not
he or he but every man that puts away his wife and mariethe an other,
committethe adultery. Wherefore if the life of holy men which is free from the
bond of marriage is not desired: let the punishment of adulterers be feared. And
at least let concupiscence be brydelyd with fear, if continency be not chosen
by love. If where fear is, their labor workethe also: truly where labor
was, there shall love be. We may not trust of our own strength, but prayer
must be joined to our labors and endeavors, that he might kill us with good,
that fearethe us from evil.

Let us answer also to that, yt you think, Cha. 14.
men are compelled to punish their adulterous wifes with out any mercy, when
they would have them dead, if it be not lawful for them to marye other
duringe their wifes life's. And going about to amplyfie this cruelty, you said,
this semethe not to me, most loving father, to be a godly sense, where
gentilnes and pity be excluded. These words you speak, as though men ought
therefore to favor and spare their adulterous wifes, because they may mary
other, or if they may not, yt than they should not spare the^, for this intent
that they might marye other. But rather they ought to show mercy to their
sinful wifes that they the^ selfs might obteyn mercy for there sins. And
much more this ought to be done of the^ yt puttinge away their adulterous
wifes, desire to live contine^tly: for they ought so much to be more
merciful, as they labor to be more holy, yt they may be helped of god to
preserve chastytie in the^ selfs, whiles that they revenge not the violation
and breach of chastity in their wives, and specially that word of the lord is
to be called to memory, he that is without sin let him first cast a stone
against her: not he yt is without that sin, as we speak of chaste men, but
he yt is without sin, which thing if they say they be, they deceue them
selves and truth is not in the^. But if they do not seduce them selves, and
if truth be in them there shall not be in the^ any cruel and bluddy
severity. For knowinge the^ selves not to be without sin, they forgive that
they myghe be forgyuen, and mercy and pity are not excluded from them. But
rather they be excluded, if lice^tiouse pleasure and not careful pity, did
obtain of them pardon for there wives sin, that is to say that the^y should
therefore favor and spare them, because, they may marie other: and not rather
therefore, because they would god should favor and spare the^. Therefore how
much better, honester and worthier is it a Christen man's profession, to spare
the blood of adulterouse wives because it is written, Eccle. xxviii.
forgive thy neyghbors vnryghtuosnes, and then at thy prayer thy sins shall
be loused. A man reserueth his anger to a man and askethe a medecin of the
lord, he has no mercy upon a man like him self, and for his own sins he
askethe mercy. Seeing he being flesh reseruethe anger, who shall have mercy
upon his sins? And in the gospel. Matt. vi.
Forgive and it shall be forgyuen to you, that we may say forgive us our debtes
as we forgive the^ that be debtors to us. And in the Apostell, Romans xii.
rendrynge to no man euel for euel, and such like saynges if there be any holy
scripture, whereby when a man's mind is provoked to vengeance, because he is a
Christen man, he is mitigated.

Cha. 15.
How much better is it to speak after this sort as I have told, tha^ to say
thus, forgive only your adulterouse wifes, and seek not their blood, all the
sorrow you took for their noughty living, the comfort of your new wifes
which you shall marie, will take it away, for you might right well desire to
take the^ out of their life's if their life were a stop to you for marieng of
other, but now when they being alive, it is lawful to provide for your
selfs other wyfes, why should you desire so much to kill the^? If we say thus,
do you not mark how much this persuasion is against ye foorme of a
Christian man's life, because both it is false yt they may do which they may
not, yt is to say, their adulterouse wifes being alive, to be coupled with
other: and also if they therefore favor and spare the^, they shall not spare
the^ for pity and godliness, but for yt they have fre liberty to marie again.
Last of al, I ask of you, whether it be lawful for a Christen husband,
either by ye old law of god, or by ye romans law, to cast away or kyl his
wife? If it be lawful it is better, to refreyn him self from both, that is to
say, both from lawful punishment, if she do sin, and also from unlawful
marriage, if she be alive. And if he continue erneste to choose ye one, it is
better for him to do that is lawful, that the adultresse be punished, then to
do that is unlawful, that she being alive, he commyt adultery. But if that be
said that is more true, that it is not laufull for a Christen man to kill his
adulterouse wife, but only to put her away: who is so mad as to say unto
him, do that is unlawful, that it may be laufull for you to do yt is
unlawful. For when by Christ's law, both is unlawful, either to kill the
adultresse, or to mary an other she being alive: men must absteyn from both,
and not do one unlawful thing for an other. But if he will needs do that is
unlawful, let him than commit adultery, and not murdre, and rather to marye an
other, his wife being alive, than to shed man's blood. and if both be cruel
wykednes, he ought not to do the one for the other, but to avoid both.

Here I see what may be said of those yt live not co^tinently, Cha. 16.
that he that puttethe away his adulterouse wife, and suffrethe her to live, if
he marie an other, so long as his first wife liuethe, he is a perpetual
adulteroure, and does no fruitful penance in yt he leauethe not his wicked
life, and if he be vnchrystened and a learner of the catechism, he is not
admitted to baptism, because he is not changed from that, yt letthethe him,
nor can not be reconciled by any means, co^tinuinge in the same wickedness. But
if he accusynge his adulterouse wife do kill her, this synn because he is
paste it, and remains not in it, if it be committed of a learner of our
faith, it is washed and purged by baptism, and yfit be done of him that is
Chrystened it is made hole by penance and reconciliation. But shall we therefore
say adultery is no adultery, which without doubt is committed, if another wife
be married, ye first adulterous wife being alive? But exceptyng this kind of
adultery, you put no doubts but that it is adultery, if any man marry ye wife
of him that lives, which is put a way from her husband by a lybell of divorce
without any fornication of the woman. What say we than, when he shall see
himself not to be admitted to Baptism, if he be a learner, nor to do penance
fruitfully, if he did this fault being christened, in that he corrects not
and forsakes not his offense: if he would or could kill him whose wife he
married, that his mischeuous sin may either be washed by baptism, or loosed by
penance, and so his adulterye should not remain, the woman being void of the
law of her husband after his death, but for his sin that is paste he should
satisfy by penance, or have it washed away by regeneration. Is Christ's law
therefore to be accused, as co^pellyng murder to be done, seeing it calls it
adultery to marry her yt is put away without the crime of fornication? In this
matier (if we consider and mark what we say) many more weighty things may be
spoken than you have said. For you, whiles that you will not have it adultery
to put away their adulterous wives and to marry other, have found out this yt
if we call these adulteries, yt me^ shall be compelled to kill their adulterouse
wifes, by whose life they be stopped to marie other, and to amplify this
matier, you said, this seems not to me, most loui^g father, to be a godly
sense, where gentilnes and pity is excluded. Tha^ if any man not willing to
believe it adultery, when a woman forsaken of her husband without the crime of
fornication* is married of an other man, does invent this against you yt by
that reason men are induced to co^mitt murders, and by all trayns and sclanders
they ca^e to lie in wait for ye husbands of these women which being forsaken
without crime of fornication they have married, or else by some true crimes to
accuse the^ and kill the^, that when they are dead they may be true marriages,
which when they were alive were adulteries: will not this man in amplifiynge ye
matier say unto you, this semethe not to me, most louinge brother, to be a
godly sense, where not only gentleness and pity is excluded, but also great
malignitie and wyckednes is provoked? For it is a great deal more light and
tolerable, yt the husbands should kill their adulterouse wifes, than that
adulterours should kill their wyfes former husbands. Does it please you, that
for this most vayn envy, we should forsake ye defense of the lords mind and
sentence, or else that we should moreover accuse it, saying, adultery ought not
to be punished and revenged, although a woman forsaken without the cause of
fornication be joined to another man, lest he be compelled to kill her husband
that put her away, whiles yt he desyrethe by ye death of her former husband to
turn his adultery into marriage. I know this pleases not you, yt for this
most vayn envy Christ's law, being found true and wholesome, should be called
hard and unmerciful. Even so after this sort, you ought not to be of this
mind, to deny it to be adultery, when the second wife is married, ye first
adulterouse wife being alive, because ye husband by that means may be compelled
to kyl the adulterous wife, whiles yt he desirethe yt it may be lawful for him
to marie an other wife, she being slain, if it be not lawful to do it, she
being alive. For what and if the sclanderers and enemies of Christ's faith
should also speak this, that men were compelled to kill their wives, by wicked
mischief and crafty trains which they could not bear, being paynfull and
greuouse to dwell with all, or else being sick with a continual disease, and not
able to lie with them, or else being poor, or else for love of some fairer wives:
because it is not laufull beside the cause of fornication to forsake and put
away these wives which they will not bear, and marye other, lest that they
being bounden in a perpetual adulterye, can neither be baptized, nor by
penance healed. Shall we therefore say, lest these myscheuous murders be done,
that they commytt no adulteryes, that put away there wives beside the cause of
fornication, and be married to other?

But now for as much as you Cha. 17.
think it is no adultery, if a man put away his wife for fornication, and
marie an other, do you not think we ought to beware, lest me^ by this
opinion should learn to compel their wives to commit adultery, which wyfes for
other innumerable causes they can not bear, that when the bond of matrimony
is (as you suppose) by their fornication dissolved, it may be lawful for the
men to marie other: and for yt they compelled their wives to commit adultery,
either to be washed by baptism or healed by penance, for both grace and
medicine shall be denied to the^, so long as they shall live in adultery with
their second wifes, having put away their former wyfes beside ye cause of
fornication? Except perchance, some man say, yt no man can cause his wife to
co^mytt adultery, if she be chaste: and yet ye lord says, every man yt
puts away his wife beside ye cause of fornication, makes her to commit
adulterye, therefore truly, because when she lived chaste with her husband* yet
being put away, she is compelled in yt she lyuethe not continently to be
coupled with an other man, her former husband being alive, and yt is to co^mitt
adultery. And if she do not thus, yet he, for as much as perteynethe to him,
caused her to do it, and god will impute that sin to him, although she
remain chaste. But who knowethe not, how few there be, yt live so chastely with
their husbands, yt although they be put from the^, yet do not seek for other
husbands. For without comparison ye number of women is greater, that where as
they live chastely with their husbands, yet if they be put from their
husbands, do not differ to be married again. Therefore when men shall believe
god, saying: Every man that puts away his wife beside the cause of
fornication, causes her to commit adultery: if they believe also you, saying:
if the woman commit fornication, her husband may lawfully marie an other wife:
whosoever for any other kind of grefes would lack his wife with whom he is
joined, first he causes her to commit adultery, by puttinge her away, without
cause of fornication, that he might than marye an other, when she by marienge
is an adultresse, and so he being delivered either by baptism or by penance
from the first sin whereby he caused her to commit adultery, might seem to
have and inioye without any adultery of his part, the second wife, which he
married after the adultery of ye first, the bond of matrimonye by yt means
being as it were dissolved. Which thing if any man shall attempt or interpryse:
both he shall cause his wife to commyt adulterye, and he shall be an
adulteroure him self, although he marie an other after the adulterye of his
wife, and it shall profit him nothing, that he believed you, and not rather
him, ye says without any exception: every man that forsakethe his wife and
mariethe an other, commyttethe adulterye.

All which things well considered and entreated, Cha. 18.
it folowethe yt they yt hear these things diligently should say to us yt same
yt was said to the lord, if this be ye state of a man with his wife, Mat. xix.
it is not expedient to marie. Tho whom what should we answer again, but yt he
answered, every man takethe not this word, but they to who^ it is given? There
be Eunuchs yt be so borne from their mothers womb, and there be Eunuchs yt
be made so of me^, and there be Eunuchs yt gelde them selfs for ye kyngedome
of heaven. He yt may take, let him take. Therefore he yt may take, let him take,
which all men take not, but they may take, to whom the secret just mercy of
God gives ye gift. But among all these that geld the^ selfs for the kingdom
of heaven, there be some of both kinds, yt never knew carnal copulatio^,
some that have had experience of it, and are turned from it refusyng it, other
some yt have proved it, partly lawfully, partly unlawfully. Morouer of the^ yt
have proved it laufully, some there be yt have proved only lawfully, some both
unlawfully and lawfully. For among them there be some yt know only their own
wyfes, some that know also other women and all kind of adultery. But they yt
after carnal copulation with their wyfes, geld them selfs for the kingdom of
heaven, either loose their wifes by death, or profess to live continently with
the^ by mutual consent, or by necessity of diuorses, lest by marie^g of
other, their wyfes being alive they should co^mitt adulterye, do geld the^
selfs for the kyngedome of heaven, not yt they might be more clear and purer
there, but that they can not otherwise be there, for they yt live co^tinently
not for this necessity, but for desire of ye greater good, may be there, eue^
keeping still the chastity of marriage, although in less rewards, yet within
the kingdom of heaven. But they that live therefore continently, because they
fear to be married to other, their former wives being alive: ought to take
more care for their own salvation, than they took that loved continency for
greater reward. For than they shall be there, if they be not adulterers. And if
they do not live continently, they shall be adulterours, for during the life's
of their former wives they shall not join them selves with other lawful wives
but with adulterous women. And if they shall be absent from the kyngedome of
heaven, where shall they be, but where they shall not be saved*

These men therefore do I speak unto, Cha. 19.
that what thing they ought to do, if they had their wives liyng sick and
consuminge in a continual diseasse, or else absent in a place where they could
not come unto them, or else of some unlawful stomach refreynynge to keep
carnal company with the^: the same thing they should do, if their wives did
commit fylthy adultery, and for that cause diuorsyng them selves from their
wives company, should not seek new marriages, because they shall not be
marriages, but adulteries. For seeing there is like form in this bond of
matrimony betwe^ ye husband and the wife, like as ye wife during here
husbands life, shall be called an adultresse if she be with another man: even so
the man, during his wifes life, shall be called an adulterer if he be with an
other adulterouse woman. For although it be more greuouse sin, beside ye
cause of fornication, yet every man yt puts away his wife and mariethe an
other, committethe adultery. Let not ye burdyn of continencye fear them: it
shall be a light burden, if it be Christ's, it shall be christ's if faith be
present, which obteineth of christ ye co^maunder, ye performing of the
commandment. Let it not move the^, that their continent living, semethe to
be of necessity, and not of will: for they also that have chosen contine^cy by
their will, have made it to be of necessity, because they can not now without
damnation go from it, and they that be driven unto it by necessity, make it to
be voluntary, if they trust, not in the^ selfs, but in him from who^ every
good thing commethe. Some do clyme up to this gift of contine^cy, for the
cause of more glory, that they might attein some greater reward: other some
fly unto it, for ye care and thought of their final salvation, lest they
should perish and be condemned: but let the^ both remayn, let both walk
even to the last end in that state they have co^med unto, let the^ be fervent
in study and desire, let the^ be suppliant in prayer, because ye one sort
must think upon their salvation, and beware they faul not from that their
will has chosen: and the other sort may not despair of greater glory, if
they love to persyste and continue in ye state that necessity has brought
the^ unto. For it may be possible and come to pass, that by god fearing and
exhorting, converting and replenishinge, man's affection may he changed unto
the better: and yt they should vow to live most co^sta^tely to their lives
end, without marriage, without any carnal copulation, and experience of filthy
and unclean pleasure: yt although ye dissolutio^ of marriage by death, give
them occasion to marie other wifes, yet it should be shut and bound by vow,
that was open and free by lawfulnes* and yt it should be made perfect by
charity, that was bego^ by necessity, to such truly like reward shall be
given, as to the^, that by mutual consent with their wyfes do vow
continencye, or else being unmarried, have chosen contine^t life for the greater
good. But if they live continently after this sort, that they be in mind to
marye other women, if their wives dye by whose life they be stopped from such
marriages: truly although they depart before out of there bodies, in that
kind of co^tinent life, yet it can not be imputed but for chastity in marriage,
for the which they do not yt they would do if it were lawful. For to live
continently with this intent, is little to the atteynynge of ye reward of
continency which is freely chosen, yet it is sufficient to avoid adulteries.

See that you remember that I speak these things of both the kinds of man
and woman, Cha. 20.
but specially for me^: which therefore think the^ selfs to be superiors to
women, lest they should vouchesafe to be like in chastity, wherein they ought to
go before, yt their wives might follow the^ as their heads. And saying the law
forbiddethe adulteries, if the excuse of carnal infirmity be admitted under
pretense of incontine^cie, there shall be an occasion of sin and destruction
given to many under the name and color of fained lawfulnes and impunitie. For
women also have flesh as men have, to whom men will not any such thing should
be lawful, as though it were lawful to them because they be men. But god
forbid, that any thing should be due to the honor of man being the better
kind, that is a derogation to the chaste honestye of the same, seeing yt just
honor is due to virtue and not to vice. And truly saying men require so great
chastity of women having flesh as they have, yt when they have been very
long absent from their wives yet they would have the^ pass over the heat of
their youth undefiled with any adulterouse company of man: and very many
most chaste women, specially in Syria pass over their youth honestely, whose
husbands being occupied about ye gains of merchaundise, leave their wives
very young, and scarsely at last return again old men to their old wifes: by
this fact they prove evidently that it is not impossible which they allege
for the^ selfs that they can not do. For if the infirmity of man can not do
it: much less the weker kind of women can do it. For which cause when we put
the^ in fear that think the excellency of man is nothing but a license to
sin, lest by the means of adulterouse maryages they might perish for ever
more: we are wont to set ye co^tinencie of clerks before the^, which often
times are taken against their wills to bear that burden, which when they have
taken it, perform it by gods help even to the due end of their life's. And
therefore we say to them, what if you also be taken by the violence of the
people to bear this burden, would you not keep ye office which you have taken
upon you chastely, being suddenly converted to purchase strength of the Lord,
which you never thought of before? But, say they, honor does comfort the^
much and we answer again, let fear temper and bridle you the more. For if
many of gods ministers take suddenly and at unawares, this office that is laid
upon them, hoping that they shall more bryghtly shine in ye inheritance of
Christ how much more ought you, being ware of adulteries, to live
continently, fearinge not to shine less in the kingdom of god, but to burn
more in the fire of hell. These and such like, as we can, we say unto them,
that going from their wives by any means, or putting them away for adultery,
will needs marry other, and when they are forbid, they allege to us the
infirmity of their flesh. But now this book also is to be ended, and god is
to be prayed, that either he would not suffer them to be tempted by the
separation of their wives: or else suffer them so, that the fear of their
salvation which is in danger, may be an occasion of greater or more approved
chastity.

Here ends the second book.
Imprynted at London in Fletestrete at the Sign of the George next to saint
Dunstones Church by Wyllyam Powell.


