MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONINUS THE ROMAN EMPEROR, HIS MEDITATIONS Concerning
HIMSELF: TREATING OF A NATVRALL Man's happiness; Wherein it consists, and of
the means to attain unto it.

TRANSLATED OVT OF THE Original Greek; with Notes: BY MERIC CASAVBON, B. of
D. and Prebendarie of CHRIST Church, Canterbury.

ECCLVS. 18.8. What is man, and whereto serves he?
What is his good, and what is his evil?
Ibid. 37.3. O wicked imagination, whence came thou in, to cover the Earth
with deceit?

LONDON, Printed by M. FLESHER, for RICHARD MYNNE, in Little Britain at the
Sign of S. Paul.

MDCXXXIV.

REcensui hunc tractatum, cui titulus est. (M. Aurelius Antoninus the Emperor,
His Meditations concerning Himself, etc. Translated out of the original
Greek with notes) in quo nihil reperio, quod non cum utilitate Publica
imprimatur, modo intra septem menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur.

Dat, ex Aedibus Londin. decimo quarto die Mensis Maii. 1633. Guil. Bray R. P.
Domino Episcopo Londin. Capellanus Domesticus.

sideways coat of arms (...)
(...)
To the most R. Father in God, WILLIAM, BY THE DIVINE Providence, LORD
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primat of all England, and Metropolitan, One of the
Lo: of his Maties most Honorable privy Council; and Chancellor of the
University of Oxford My very Honorable good Lord.
May it please your Grace,
I Praesent here unto you the Writings of a King. J have praesumed that You
would honor that sacred Name even in a Heathen so far, as to accept of the
work, were it but for the Authors sake. For as it may well be esteemed (in
such an age as this) none of your Graces least commendations, that you are
truly (...); so J suppose your self account it no small happiness, that you
live to serve so Great and Gracious a King. But if the bare Name of a King
would not serve, J could add, that they are the writings of the Wisest, the
Learned, the Bost that ever was among Heathen Kings, if Historians may be
credited. It is observed by some of them as a great argument of the Divine
Providence, that such a Prince was provided against such times, when all things
seemed to tend to ruin and confusion, and all human ordinary means were
thought too little to keep the Empire standing: the happy praeservation
whereof they generally adscribe to the singular and extraordinary VVisdome of
this One; both in his Wars, abroad; and in his Civil government, at home.
Hence it is, that as of a man of whom there is no hope, we commonly say, Ne
Salus quidem: so was it used as a Proverb in afterages by some of them, of a
State irrecoverably gone, and declined, Ne Marcus quidem. As for his Learning,
J could wish your Grace had the leisure to peruse the historians own words,
least mine may seem too hyberbolicall, and yet come far short of their
expressions. What shall J say then of his Integrity, which is so commended by
them, as it alone might well be thought sufficient without any other
commendation, to make him Incomparable? And indeed J fear J have spoken but
improperly, when J have mentioned his Wisdom, Learning, and Integrity, as
three several Excellencies, since that (as he Himself professed, and they
report of him) all the Learning he was ambitious of, was but to be Wise, and
all the wisdom, but to be good. The writings of such a one, J know your Grace
would respect, although he had been no King. And yet another reason, which
has made me the bolder to praesent them to your Grace is, because in reading
them you shall often read your self: and though perchance your Modesty will
not suffer you to make the application, yet others will, J am sure, that shall
read him, and J could not but have respect unto it. Upon these reasons I have
presumed. If beyond reason; I have no other excuse of my boldness, but as I am,

YOUR GRACES humbly devoted Chaplain, MERIC CASAUBON.

SOME FEVV TESTIMONIES CONCERNING ANTONIUS, AND THESE HIS BOOKS.
Out of SVIDAS.
MARCUS the Roman Emperor; whom it is easier to admire in silence then to
praise, it being altogether impossible to equal his merits with any expression
of words. For from his youth having betaken himself to a compozed, and settled
course of life, hoe was never seen to alter his countenance, through either
fear or pleasure. He most approved the Stoics, not only in their order and
discipline of life, but also in their course and method of learning. He
therefore from his younger years, became so famous and illustrious, that
Adrianus intended oftentimes to settle the Empire upon him: but having after a
more legal way first settled it upon Antoninus Pius, he nevertheless reserved
the succession of it unto Marcus. He thought good also by marriage to ally him
unto Anton. Pius, that so by succession of blood also he might come to the
Empire. As for Marcus, he still continued in the same private course of life,
and in the like subjection as other Romans did, and was in nothing altered by
this adoption, and new affinity. And when he was come to the Empire, and had
the absolute power in his hands, he was never known to do any thing
insolently, but as in matters of bounty he was always most free, and
exuberant; so in his government, he was no less meek and moderate.

Again out of the same.
MArcus Antoninus a Roman Emperor, having deserved in all things the
commendation of a perfect Philosopher, etc. He has written concerning the
course of his own life, twelve Books.

Athenagoras, a Philosopher of Athens, in his Apology for the Christians
addressed unto Marcus Antoninus, and his son Commodus, by way of humble
Mediation and Intercession.
I Know well enough, that ye do not more surpass others in royal power and
prudence, then in the exact perfection of all manner of learning: so that even
they that have singled out, and wholly applied themselves to any one part, have
not attained to that happy perfection in that one, which ye have attained unto
in all parts of learning.

Iul. Capitol. in vita Marci.
ERat enim ipse tantae tranquillitatis, ut vultum nunquam mutaverit maerore vel
gaudio, Philosophiae deditus Stoicae, quam et per optimos quosque magistros
acceperat, et undique ipse collegerat.

Vulcatius Gallicanus in Avidio Cassio.
NEc defuere qui illum [ Cassium, scil.] Catilinam vocarent; cum et ipse
gauderet se ita appellari, addens futurum se Sergium, si Dialogistam
occidisset, Antoninum hoc nomine significans; qui tantum enituit in
Philosophia, ut iturus ad bellum Marcommanicum, timentibus cunctis ne quid
fatale proveniret, rogatus sit, non adulatione sed serio, ut praecepta
Philosophiae ederet, etc.

Aurelius Victor, in Breviario.
TAntum Marco sapientiae, innocentiae, ac literarum fuit, ut is Marcommanos cum
filio Commodo, quem Caesarem suffecerat, petiturus, Philosophorum obtestantium
[vi] circumfunderetur, ne se expeditioni aut pugnae prius committer et, quam
sectarum ardua et occulta explanavisset. Ita incerta belli [in] ejus salute
doctrinae studijs metuebantur; tantumque illo imperante floruere arts bonae,
ut illam gloriam etiam temporum putem.

Is. C. Exercit. in Bar. page 85.
MVlta in hanc sententiam scribit M. Antoninus Imperator, in suis illis divinis
libris, etc.

Idem ad ista Iulij Capit: ridens res humanas, etc. Non ridere, sed rite, ac
suo pretio aestimare res humanas solitus hic vir sapientissimus. Hoc ille nos
docet, divinis illis suis libris: velut cum ait in II. non enim tempero mihi,
quin mellitissimi doctoris verba adscribam, etc.

Canterus Nou. Lect. lib. 7. cap. 1.
MArcus Aurelius Antoninus, imperator optimus, atque idem philosophus tantus,
ut hoc meruerit proprium cognomen, duodecim conscripsit de officio suo libros,
maximae pietatis, humanitatis, temperantiae, eruditionis, aliarum rerum
praeclararum testes plenissimos; et cum quibus multorum philosophorum operosa
praecepta collata, merito sordere possint. Quocirca nemo, spero, male
collocatum tempus putabit, quod in ejus operis lectionem studiose quondam
impendimus, cum ex ea praeter caetera, fructum hunc retulerimus, quod ex multis
vitiosis locis duo saltem dextro, si dicere licet, Aesculapio sanavimus. Ac
primum sub finem primi lib. ait, Lib. 1. number. XIV.
(...), repetitur autem (...), sed pro (...), ego (...) legendum affirmare no^
dubito. Nam ideo mox subjungit haec, (...) Quod si, inquit, in poeticis et
oratoriis studiis faeliciter progressus fuissem; nemo me inde retrahere, et ad
maiora perducere facile potuisset. Quocirca Diis gratias ago, quod in studiis
illis non nimis magnum feci profectum, nec ea nimis adamare coepi. Nec iniuria
Imperator. Nam ut in homine privato tolerari fortassis queat, si natura
iubente, suppetente otio, aspirante fortuna, iucunda Musarum studia paulo
diutius colat, et amoenissimas sirenas, quae tamen non dent sine mente sonum,
attentius ac pertinacius auscultet: Ita non potest is, quem ad res maximas
gerendas, ac totius Vniversi curam natura progenuit, alio cogitationes omnes
suas, quam ad cum scopum dirigere, et ut illum assequatur quam citissime, non
omnem operam dare. Sed iam ad alterum pergamus locum. Lib. VI. number. I.
In fin. lib. sexti, hanc adfert similitudinem, (...); Quemadmodum, inquit, si
nautae gubernatori, aut aegroti medico maledicerent, non facile alium
auscultarent, nec vel ille vectorum salutem, vel hic aegrotantium sanitatem
procurare posset: ita cum quis alius nunquam alteri been et recte monenti
parere consilium capit, is non temere vel rectum vitae cursum tenere, vel post
errore^ in viam possit redire. Ueru^ quod pene oblitus eram, pro (...) legendum
est (...). Quod cum non advertisset interpres, A lanaer.
alioqui doctissimus, quique paucos hac aetate pares habet, alienum plane
sensum commentus est. Sed profecto homines omnes sumus, et erramus facilime:
nec reperitur hoc saeculo quisquam, qui securus possit medium Momo digitum
ostendere.

ERRATA.
PREF. page 4. lin. 31. read arbitretur. p. 5. l. 8. r. by nature. p. 21. l.
21. r. inpraecipuis.

ANTONIN. p. 33. l. 15. as a man. r. a man. p. 37. l. 20. r. cheerfully. p.
120. l. 19. Africanus. r. Adrianus. p. 121. l. 9. and that it des. r. and
desires. p. 137. l. 3. r. everflowing. p. 159. l 17. r. thou art enclosed. p.
162. l. 10. r. shall they that are of my K. p. 172. l. 20. r. of or for any th.
p. 179. l 26. r. so then. p. 182. l. 23. for shame. r. for dance. p. 183. l.
29. r. Io Cith. p. 184. l. 25. r. of life. p. 186. l. 3. r. common it is. p.
196. l 4. r. after green figs. p 198. l. 11. r. nev. begin to live.

NOTES. p. 40. l. 3. r. (...). p, 43. l. 15.16. (...) must be put out. ibid. l.
25. r. Iam. p. 44. l. 28. r. and be.

TO THE READER.
THis Book (of what worth I say not; but more men, I fear, will commend it,
then will know how to make use of it:) after it had for so many ages
undeservedly been buried in darkness: is now first; if I may not say brought
unto light, yet at least made common and intelligible. Twice it is true, within
these 80. years it has already been set out in its own original Greek:
and set out both times with a Latin Translation, much revised and corrected in
the latter edition. Yet such are those editions, both of them, so confused, and
so corrupt; and such is the Translation in both the Editions, so imperfect
often, and impertinent; that I say not so absurd and erroneous, as that it is
not easy to determine, whether it be harder to understand Antoninus his
meaning by the Greek that is printed; or the Greek that is printed, by the
Translation of it: but that of both we may boldly and peremptorily conclude; of
the one, that it cannot possibly be understood, as it is printed; and of the
other, that it would be more for the credit of the Author (a man otherwise
acknowledged very learned:) if we did take no notice of it at all. I must add
besides, that there has been many years ago a certain Book, first written
in Spanish, and since translated into Italian, French, English, and how many
tongues more I know not; pretended by the Title to be a Translation of M.
Aurel. Antoninus. But that the Author of it, (a learned Spaniard) was in good
earnest, I could never have believed, and would have thought I had done him
great wrong to say it, had not I read his Prefaces, where he so earnestly by
reasons, such as he could find, goes about to make his Title good, and as
earnestly expostulates with men for their incredulity, who did not take his
reasons for current and clear ones. I cannot but commend his intention, which
certainly was to do good; but his way I much abhor, and wonder as much at
his judgment and discretion. Sure I am that by his whole book it does not
appear, that he had ever so much as seen that himself, which his Title does
promise unto others, M. Aurel. Antoninus his book: which either must be this
here, or none. For besides this, there is not any other, that ever was extant.
For as for those other writings of his, which either he himself in his second
book, or Capitolinus in his life, or Nicephorus in his Ecclesiastical
History (lib. 3. cap. 31.) or any others mention, they mention them as books
written, and composed by him, but not as ever publikly extant; which if they
had, Suidas, or whosoever they be, whom Suidas in his Dictionary, in the word
Marcus, does allege, would not have omitted them. Thus much I thought good
here briefly to acquaint the Reader with; who if he please, may receive further
satisfaction, by the ensuing Discourse.

A DISCOVRSE BY WAY OF PREFACE: Concerning The Use and Subject of this Book:
The Author ANTONINUS; And this Translation of it.
OF all the several sects and professions of Philosophers that ever were
known or heard of in the world, there was not any that ever did hold maxims
and opinions so contrary to flesh and blood; never any that was judged even by
the learned Heathens themselves (witness learned Plutarch, who has written a
whole Book of this very subject:) so grossly and manifestly to oppose nature,
and to overthrow all grounds and principles of humane sense or reason, as the
Stoics did. And yet of all sects and professions, never any, that either with
the best was of more credit, or with the vulgar more plausible. So plausible
and popular, that there have been times, Lucian in Hermotimo, and Is: C. ad
ista Pers. Si Cynico barba^ petulans, etc. page* 165.
when the number of the Stoics alone, did exceed all the followers and
professors of all other sects being put together. A thing the more to be
wondered at, because that for that very reason, Christianity (though nothing so
harsh in comparison:) has ever by them of contrary professions, been much
opposed and contradicted. Of this a maine reason I conceive to have been, that
the Stoics, though by their particular Tenets and opinions, they might seem
of all others most to oppose nature, yet that which they proposed unto
themselves as the end of their lives, and the ground of all their Philosophy;
that which they did ever sound in the ears of men and press them with, was
(...), to live according to nature. (...): B. V. N. IX.
Remember that philosophy requires no more at thy hands, then what thine own
nature does require, and leads thee unto: says Antoninus. (...). B. VI. N. XXV.
What acruell and unnatural thing would it be to restrain men from the
pursuit of those things, which they conceive to themselves and their own
nature, See Ant. B. V. Numb. I.
most proper and convenient? So they all speak, and that which they all
generally did most beat upon, was this. Now whether the particular means
which they did commend and propose unto that end, were indeed proper and
natural unto that end, unto which they did propose them, I will not here
dispute. For the end, whether true or pretended, is that which men usually take
most notice of. As for the means, how direct or indirect to that end, is not
so easily discerned. Their end therefore, being of it self so plausible and
acceptable, I conceive it to have been the thing especially, which made their
doctrine and philosophy so too. And I am as verily persuaded, that a conceit
and opinion many Christians have, that most of those things which are reproved
in them as sins and vices, agree best with their natures; and many, if not
most, of those duties that are required of the^ as Christians, are against, not
depraved and corrupted only, which is not properly nature; but absolutely
against the nature of man: and in general that divine law and humane sense and
reason, are things contrary and opposite; is that as much as any thing that
does discourage them from the intent practice and study of those things, which
they by their profession cannot but acknowledge themselves bound unto. For it
is not more natural to a man to love his own flesh, (which the Apostle
witnesses, no man ever hated:) then to love nature, and what he conceives to
be according to nature. Though it be not so, yet if he conceive it so, he
affects it naturally, and in time it becomes natural unto him indeed.

Now concerning Christianity, I know it is the opinion of many, that, matters
of Faith and the Sacraments only excepted, there is nothing in the whole
Gospel which is not juris naturalis, and most agreeable to humane reason. For
my part, as I would not take upon me, See Hugo Grot. de jure Belliac P. lib.
1. cap. 2. 6.
to maintain their opinion precisely true in all points, and circumstances; so
I must needs say, if we esteem that natural, which natural men of best
account by the mere strength of humane reason, have taught and taken upon them
to maintain as just and reasonable, I know not any Evangelical precept, or
duty belonging to a Christians practice, (even the harshest, and those that
seem to ordinary men most contrary to flesh and blood, not excepted,) but upon
due search and examination, will prove of that nature. I say upon due search
and examination. Many have touched upon this point, rather to show the way unto
others, then by way of undertaking themselves: among others, of late, the best
able that I know now living to perform this or any thing else that belongs to
a general and complete Scholar, Mr. Hugo Grotius, in his collection and
Translation of Greek sentences. There be too, I know, that have undertaken
much in this kind: but of whom (as many as I have seen:) I may boldly say
(and the more boldly because I name none:) that in many respects they have
performed but little. I wish it with all my heart, that some able and judicious
man would think it worth his labor and pains: were it but to this end, that
the harshnesse which many Christians (though Christians, yet flesh and blood
they will say) do conceive to be in many divine precepts, might be mollified
and lessned, when it shall appear that the very same things did not seem
harsh to them, that (in comparison of them whom God has called by more
special and supernatural illumination:) were nothing but flesh and blood.
That they who as men can so hardly prevail upon themselves to strive against
nature, and to yield to those things which they conceive against all humane
sense and reason; might be of another mind, when they shall see that mere
natural men, who in humane sense and reason, of all others most excelled, have
both esteemed themselves bound by nature, and others most unnatural that
refused, to follow or to forbear those very things: ut quivis arbitratur
(says Minutius F. though upon another occasion) aut nunc Christianos
philosophos esse, aut philosophos fuisse jam tunc Christianos. But not to
prosecute this general any further at this present. Of all Books in this
kind that ever have been written by any Heathens. I know not any which either
in regard of it self, (for the bulk thereof;) or in regard of the Author,
deserves more respect, then this of Marcus Antoninus; son by name of Annius
Verus (a man of great quality in Rome) and adopted son of Antoninus Pius, a
Roman Emperor, whom also he succeeded in the Empire about the year of our
Lord 162, or 163. The chiefest subject of the Book, is, the vanity of the
world and all worldly things, as wealth, honor, life, etc. and the end and
scope of it, to teach a man how to submit himself wholly to Gods providence,
and to live content and thankful in what estate or calling soever. But the
Book, I doubt not, will sufficiently commend it self, to them who shall be
able to read it with any judgment, and to compare it with all others of the
same subject, written either by Christians or Heathens: so that it be
remembered that it was written by a Heathen: that is, one that had no other
knowledge of any God, then such as was grounded upon natural reasons merely:
no certain assurance of the Immortality of the soul; no other light whereby
he might know what was good or bad, right or wrong, but the light of nature,
and humane reason. Which though it were, (such as it was) from God the Author
of nature (as what is not?) yet inregard it was not by any revelation, or any
other extraordinary means, is therefore called humane and natural. As for the
Book it self then, to let it speak for it self; In the Author of it two
maine things I conceive very considerable, which because by the knowledge of
them, the use and benefit of the Book may be much the greater then otherwise
it would be, I would not have any ignorant of. The things are these: first,
that he was a very great man, one that had good experience of what he spoke;
and secondly, that he was a very good man, one that lived as he did write, and
exactly (as far as was possible to a natural man,) performed what he
exhorted others unto.

For the first, I have always thought that it was not without Gods especial
Providence, that of all them that once were the peculiar people of God, he was
chosen to write against the vain pleasures and delights of this world, who of
all the rest had had most knowledge and experience of those things, that he
did write against. A poor man may from his heart perchance declaime against
the vanity of wealth, and pleasures; and a private man, against the vanity of
honor, and greatness; it may be from their hearts, but it is ever suspicious,
and therefore of less power and efficacy. Suspicious I mean, that they are
angry with that they would feign, and cannot get themselves; yea, and perchance
inveigh of purpose, that by inveighing (an ordinary thing in the world:) they
may get that which they inveigh against. But at the best, that they make a
virtue of necessity; that they speak against they know not what; and though
they mean sincerely, as now; yet if they were in place themselves, God knows
what mind they would be of. And the event indeed, does justifiie these
suspicions but too often. But when a man shall hear such a one as Solomon was,
speaking in this manner: I said in my heart, Go to now, I will prove thee
with mirth etc. I made me great works, etc. I made me gardens and orchards,
etc. I made me pooles of water, etc. I got me servants and maidens, etc. I
gathered me silver and gold, etc. So I was great, etc. And whatsoever mine
eyes desired, I kept not from them, I withheld not my heart from any joy, etc.
Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labor
that I had labored to do; and behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit,
and there was no profit under the Sun. Is there any man so bewitched, and
besotted with worldly wealth and pleasure, whom such a confession from such a
one, will not move for a while at the least? And if this of Solomon, who at
first had received such measure of Grace and illumination from God, that it may
be more justly wondered, that he ever did any thing contrary to this profession,
then that he should profess so much; how much more should that confession of
Antoninus move us, dilated here by him and enlarged into XII. books and
briefly expressed and summed up in these words of his eight Book. B. VIII. N.
I.
(...). Thou have already had sufficient experience, that of all the things
that hitherto thou have wandered and erred about, thou could not find
happiness in any of them: not in syllogismes, and Logical subtilties; not in
wealth, not in honor and reputation; not in pleasure: in none of all these. Of
Antoninus I say, a mere Heathen, lead by humane reason only; Antoninus a man
for worldly wealth and greatness so far greater then Solomon, as Lord and
Master I dare say of more great Kingdoms, then Solomon was of great towns in
all his Kingdom; Antoninus, a man for his goodness and wisdom, by all men
during his life, had in that honor and reputation, as never man either before
him was, or (that we know of) ever after him.

But his goodness was the second consideration. It has ever been the
complaint of all ages: There has ever been store enough of men that could
speak well, and give good instructions: But great want of them that either
could, or so much as endeavored, to do as they spoke and taught others to
do. And what is the good that such can do? The only good I can conceive, is,
that they persuade men as much as in them lies (and they go very effectually
about it:) that (...). That all this that we call virtue and godliness, so
much spoken of amongst men, are but words and empty sounds; that there is no
such thing really existent indeed, as piety and justice, but that it is a mere
figment of some cunning juglers and impostors, or at the best a pretty device
of Lawmakers, and founders of commonwealths, to keep silly people in awe and
fear. Can any man think otherwise (if otherwise he be not better grounded:)
that shall hear them speak and then look upon their actions? Such therefore
in my judgment might deserve far more thanks if they did forbear, and
would rather lose the commendations of either a smooth tongue, or a ready pen,
then to incur both the just suspicion of being Atheists themselves, and the
certain guilt and crime of having made many others so. Be it therefore spoken
to the immortal praise and commendation of this famous Antoninus, that as
(...) did write so he did live. Never did writers so conspire to give all
possible testimony of goodness, uprightness, innocence, and whatsoever could
among Heathens be most commendable, as they have done to commend this One. They
commend him, not as the best Prince only, but absolutely as the best man, and
best Philosopher that ever was. And it is his proper commendation, that being
so commended, he is commended without exception. If any thing has ever been
talked against him, the Historians mention it but as a talk: not credited by
them nor by any that ever were of any credit. Thus the Heathens of Him. The
Christians had but little reason to speak well of him, as having suffered many
cruel persecutions under him: And in this case how free they have been (some
of them:) even with all extremity to enveigh against other Emperors, though
much commended and magnified by the Heathens, is not unknown. Yet I find not
that ever they could fasten any thing upon our Antoninus, whereby to stain his
reputation; that ever they did so much as object unto Him, these many and
grievous persecutions which they did suffer under him, as his own act, or
charge Him therefore of cruelty. And though it be granted, that Antoninus gave
way to those persecutions, which certainly he could not altogether be ignorant
of; yet to them that know the state of those days, it can be no wonder, that
such a thing should happen in the days of such a Prince as Antoninus was. When
Christians, besides the infamy of many horrible crimes, as common incest,
homicide, etc. which (such was the power of calumny:) lay upon them; were
generally accounted no better, then mere Atheists and Epicures. For indeed
Atheists, Christians, and Epicures, were commonly joined together as names, if
not of the same signification, yet of very great affinity, and hardly
distinguished by the vulgar, but that of the three, the Christian was thought
the worst. Let it be then Antoninus his commendation, the greater and the more
incredible in this age, the more the age is full of dissimulation and
hypocrisy, that he was not (as now they rightly style themselves, whom the
common received Names of Christians, and Protestants will not content, such is
their Zeal and purity they think:) a Professor: as he spoke and wrote, so he
did. His meditations were his actions. His deeds (so still you remember Him a
man and a Heathen:) did agree with his sentences. (...), etc. And again,
(...), etc. That he did not only as he spoke, but what he did, he did it out
of mere love to virtue. That it was a clear case, which no man doubted of,
that he was in very deed a good man; so incapable was he of any dissimulation.
So Dio of him, and so others. And now that I have spoken so much of Antoninus
his life, it will not be amiss to say somewhat of that surname the
Philosopher, which by many has been given and appropriated to this Emperor.
In so much as Xylander, though he found it not at all (as he confesses) in
his MS. yet thought it fitting to add it in the Title, and Inscription of
these books as his proper and usual Cognomen. But sure enough it is (as has
been observed by learned men:) that this Title of Philosopher was never taken
by Antoninus himself, nor given unto him by others, as a proper surname, as
his father Antoninus was surnamed PIUS, and others otherwise, but only as a
deserved Elogium and testimony, at the discretion of them that either did
speak unto Him, or wrote of Him. And so indeed it was very commonly, and even
by those learned and Pious Christians, that directed Apologies unto Him for the
Christians, adscribed unto him as an Elogium, and Testimony: just indeed and
deserved, but arbitrary and not proper unto Him, by way of a Cognomen or
surname.

But, an Elogium and testimony of what think you? of his great learning (as we
take learning now;) and progress in the Sciences? Read him himself, and judge
how much he would have esteemed such a commendation. A man would think, if
Heathens, through their ignorance of the true God, and of his truth, had been
mistaken in the true application of words of praise or dispraise, that we, by
the help of a better light, might have rectified them, and not followed their
examples. But now it is fallen out quite contrary. Who they be that the holy
Scriptures usually call wise; who they to whom they adscribe knowledge and
understanding; and who they are, who by them are termed fools, blind,
ignorant, and the like, is not unknown unto any. So spoke the Ancient
Heathens, when they would speak properly. He that was an honest upright,
virtuous man, without dissimulation and hypocrisy, though he were such a one
as had never been brought up to learning, yea such a one as could neither read
nor write, was their (...) their good scholar, their learned man, their
Philosopher. His life and his actions, were all that they stood upon, though
indeed they were of opinion, that it was very difficult, if not altogether
impossible, for a man to come to the knowledge, of that which was right and
wrong, just or unjust, and by consequent of true virtue, without much study
and pains taking. On the other side, an unjust man, a cunning, an intemperate;
in general, a vicious man, was their (...) their Illiterate, their Ignorant,
their Idiot. The most ordinary distinction was, of an Idiot, and a Philosopher.
Neither was this the proper language of the Stoics (which sect our Antoninus
was much addicted unto:) but of the Platonicks likewise, and of most others.
But the maine and principal property, whereby they did distinguish a
Philosopher from all other men, was that he did all things (...), with a
relation unto God and his Providence; (...), as Epictetus (in Arrianus)
speaks. This you shall find that Antoninus does much stand upon. For indeed
they did esteem it the very character and essential note of a philosopher. In
so much as that if any man seemed never so just and upright in his actions, yet
if it were not (...), they esteemed him little more then a mere Idiot.

Much more I had here to say concerning this matter, both in defense of Plato
(whose name has much suffered through some men's ignorance of the true sense of
this word Philosophus) and for the clearing of many obscure places of
Antoninus, which otherwise I think will hardly be understood. But because I
fear it would make the body of this Preface to swell too much beyond the
proportion of the rest, See Notes upon B. VIII. N. I.
and that in the Notes it will come in well enough, I will reserve it unto that
place.

Now for this my Translation of Antoninus, which is the last thing we are to
speak of, were it so that this Book were as commonly known, and as easy to
be got as many others of less worth are, I should be well content to spare my
labor, and refer it wholly to the judgment of the Reader. But for as much
as by my own experience I know the Book, (though twice printed,) to be so
rare, that it is not to be found in many private studies, and sometimes not
for many years together, in any Booke-sellers shop: (I was beholding to
learned Mr. Holsworths well furnished library for the first sight, and long use
of the latter and better Edition; as also for the use of many other Books:)
and that the Latin Translation of Xylander, has been commended and approved
by the most learned ( doctissimus; eruditissimus Interpres; vir profundae
eruditionis, etc. So they speak of him:) I do think it very necessary, both
that I should give the Reader that satisfaction, that I do not actum agere,
and do my self that right, that whereas I take upon me to translate Marcus
Antoninus Augustus, I may not be suspected to have translated Guilielmus
Xylander Augustanus. Indeed what might be expected from Xylanders
Interpretation, may be collected by his own ingenuous intimation, both in his
Preface, where he is feign to Apologize for it, that he durst undertake it,
professing that in quibusdam he was constrained, to divinare and audacter a
codice Graeco aut usu communi recedere; as also in his Notes, where his words
are, Sunt autem passim permulta, in quibus ariolo magis quam Interpret opus
sit: And that he does so indeed, it does but too manifestly appear by his
Translation. For I dare boldly say, and do him no wrong, that sometimes in a
whole page, he has not two lines of Antoninus his sense, and meaning. Besides
the liberty that he takes unto himself to supply of his own head, to leave
out sometimes words, sometimes lines, to change and alter at his will; without
any reason given for it, or so much as the Reader acquainted with it. And
whereas Xylander puts the fault of all this upon the corruption and
imperfection of the copy, I cannot any ways approve it. For first, as I
confess the faults and corruptions of it, if in the printed copies they have
not been made more, then they were in the Manuscript (which I do not
believe:) to be many, so of those many, I know none or very few, that may be
termed incurable. And as for the Lacunae of it, I hope that they neither in
this Translation (and what ancient book is there almost but has some?) will
not be found many. As for any greater hiatus, as perchance of many leafes
together, if any shall suspect the Copy to have been defective in that kind,
the method and composition of the book being such, that it does for the most
part consist of certain Aphorisms and Canons, (they called them (...), etc.)
without any certain order or series, either in regard of the whole (but that
they all tend to one purpose;) or in regard of the parts themselves: as it is
not possible by the matter it self for any man, to determine how much more in
this kind may have been written by Antoninus; so if there were never so much
extant, yet how this that we have here, could thereby be made more perfect then
it is, I do not see. Their conceit, who by reason of this undependance of
matters, would have the whole book to be but excerpts and (...) of a greater,
and better compacted work; there being so many other books both sacred and
profane written in the same kind; and Epictetus (the Pattern of all latter
Stoics:) his Enchiridion among the rest, it can at the best pass but for a
mere conceit, and needs I hope no other refutation.

To tell you then what I have done, and that you may be the better satisfied
that I except not against Xylanders Interpretation without cause, it remains
that for a Specimen I produce some few passages, by which it will be easy for
any to judge of the rest. But first I must faithfully profess that my purpose
in all this is not any ways to detract, either from Xylander himself, or from
the judgment of those learned men, by whom he has been highly commended, but
rather to follow (after my best ability:) Xylanders own example; whom for his
great pains, and labor in his lifetime to further and promote learning, I
acknowledge to have deserved much honor and respect from all that love
learning. I might add that I shall deal with him more ingenuously too, then
some others have done, who take upon them to correct some corrupt places of
Antoninus, which Xylander in his Translation, whereof they take no notice, had
already plainly corrected. But now to Antoninus.

Where Antoninus in his first Book says, that he learned by his Fathers
example, that it is not impossible for a man that lives at the Court, B. I. N.
XIV.
(...). To live almost a private man's life, for matter of worldly pomp, and
magnificence, and all outward show and appearance (expressed by him before more
at large:) and yet for all that, not to be a whit the more base and
pusillanimous, or less stout or resolute in any public affairs that shall
require the power and authority of a Prince and Commander: he translates it,
Bas. Edit. page 174.
sed licere ei proximum privato homini habitum sumere: imo vero eum splendorem,
eos qui principes rempublicam gerere velint, demissiores, segnioresque
efficere. Which neither of it self affords any tolerable sense, and is as wide
from Antoninus his meaning, as any thing that could have been conceived.

In the eight book Antonius says that (...): Pas. Edit. 247.
That the common Nature (which was one of the many Synomina's, by which the
Stoics did express God:) does distribute all things in equality, as matter,
form, duration, and the like; and then adds, (...); This equality, thou shall
observe, not if absolutely thou shall go to compare all the particulars of any
one thing by themselves, with the particulars of another by themselves: (...),
(it is printed, (...), etc.) (...); that is, B. VIII. N. VI.
but if thou consider all the particulars of any one thing together, with all
the particulars of another, together likewise. His meaning is, that every
natural thing in his own kind, that is, after a Geometrical, though not
Arithmeticall equality, is equally perfect: an Ant, as perfect in her
quantity, as an Elephant and Whale, so great and vast, in theirs. As strong
for her little proportion of body, and other circumstances of her nature, and
as long lived, as any other creature; and so of all other things, if all things
be well considered. And this does not only extend to things of several kinds
and natures; but even to those that are of the same. It is a very pleasant and
useful speculation, as it may be prosecuted and applied, and it is very fully
expressed by Antoninus. After this (as his manner is:) abruptly passing to
another matter, (...), says he to himself (for so must the words be
distinguished, which in the Greek are viciously joined and confounded --
(...), etc.) by way of objection, and then immediately answers, (...), etc.
Thou have no time nor opportunity to read books; What then? Have thou not
time and opportunity to practice thy self not to do any wrong: (to thy self
I understand it; that is, to thy soul according to Plato's doctrine, followed
and expressed by Antoninus, in those words at the beginning of the second
book, (...), etc. and again at the end of the same book more at large:) to
resist and overcome all pains and pleasures, to contemn honor and vain
glory, and not only not to be angry with those whom thou do find unsensible,
and unthankful toward thee, but also to have a care of them still, and of
their welfare? Confer this with other like passages of Antoninus, See B. V.
N. V. B. VII. N. XXXVIII.
both for form and matter, and you will think that nothing could be plainer.
All this is expressed by Xylander: Considera autem aequalitatem eam, inventurum
te si singulas res examines; sin unam cum universis conferas, non item. and
then he leaves a blanck, and begins a new line; Atqui licet libidinem arcere,
voluptatibusque and doloribus superiorem esse, itemque gloriola: licet etiam
stupidis and ingratis non irasci.

Some three or four pages from the beginning of the seventh Book, B. VII. N.
XVIII. Bas. edit. 234.
(...)(says Antoninus:) (...) See Note 2. upon B. II.
(...); That an angry countenance, (says he) is much against nature, hence
may thou gather, because oftentimes it is the proper countenance of them that
are at the point of death; [and a forerunner of death as it were.] But were it
so that all anger and passion were so thoroughly quenched in thee, that it were
altogether impossible that it should be kindled any more, yet [herein must not
thou rest satisfied, but] further endeavor by good consequence of true
ratiocination perfectly to conceive and understand, that all anger and passion
is against reason: For if thou shall not be sensible of thine innocence, as it
is innocence; if that also shall be gone from thee, [the comfort of a good
conscience, See B. III. N. VII. XI. XIII. B. VIII. N. II.
that thou do all things to thy utmost power according to Reason:] what
should thou desire to live any longer for? All this is by Xylander
contracted into these few words; Irati vultus omnino est contra naturam, quando
saepius immoriendi sit praetextus, page: 251.
aut ad extremum extinctus est, ut omnino inflammari non potuerit. Hoc ipso
intelligere labora, iram a ratione esse alienam. Nam si etiam sensus peccati
nullus erit, quae erit vivendi causa?

At the end of the fifth book, Antoninus having spoken of some vanities, adds
(...). O man have thou forgotten what things these are? yea, but howsoever,
they are things that other men much care for; says he, by way of objection;
then answers, (...) Will thou therefore be a fool also? it is enough that
thou have already been one so long. And then passes to another matter: (...).
Let death surprise a man where and when it will. It is more then it can do to
make him therefore unhappy. He is an happy man, who (in his life time) deals
unto himself a happy lot and portion. A happy lot and portion is; good
inclinations of the soul; good motions, and desires, good actions. This
passage cannot well be translated, because we have never a word answerable to
the Greek (...) which Antoninus here elegantly, and acutely plays upon, which
may signify, either in general a happy man, or in particular one that dies
happily: but properly signifies one that has obtained a good part and portion.
Howsoever, to render it as it may be rendered, the sense is very tolerable. Now
Xylander having found the words somewhat confused, and incorrect, (for it is
printed (...), etc.) translates them: Propteria tu quoque stultus es factus?
Aliquando utcunque relictus, factus sum faelix: Faelicitas autem est, etc.

At the end of the seventh Book, Antoninus his words are, (...). That the
place must be so read and corrected (if any man make a question of it:) I will
be judged by Antoninus himself B. VI. N. 39. B. IX. 26. not to mention
others, as Arrianus lib. 1. cap. 12. Ven. Edit. page 21. The nature of the
Universe, says he, did once certainly deliberate and resolve upon the
creation of the world. Whatsoever therefore, since that, is and happens in the
world, is either but a consequent of that first, and one deliberation; (by
which all things by a necessary and uninterrupted series of causes, were
ordained and appointed to be:) or if so be that this Ruling rational part of
the world, takes any thought and care of things particular, They are surely his
reasonable and principal creatures, that are the proper object of his
particular care and providence. This often thought upon, will much conduce to
thy tranquillity. I take (...) here, as spoken of the same that (...); to
which purpose he has other passages, that reasonable creatures are the
chiefest creatures. Yet if any man would rather have it; (...), etc. reasonable
creatures are his chiefest objects, I will not be against it, and it will be
all one thing. But who could bear with Xylander his Interpretation, Universi
natura olim ad mundum fabricandum se contulit: nunc autem vel omnia quae fiunt,
consequentia fiunt sua: vel etiam in principiis eorum, ad quae se mundi
gubernatrix natura confert, rationi nullum locum esse and consilio, tenendum
est. Hoc si memoria teneas, multis in rebus animo ut sis tranquilliori,
efficiet.

An easy matter it were to add to these many more such passages, if I thought
it as necessary, as it would be easy. They that shall take the pains (and it
will be worth their pains I dare promise them) to compare diligently the
Translations with Antoninus himself, will, I doubt not, before they have gone
one or two Books over, be of my mind. I have of purpose made choice of such
places especially, where I have made bold somewhat to correct the Text. I say
bold, but no bolder I will maintain, then any reasonable man must, and ought,
that does undertake any such work. For I have not (to my knowledge:) by my
Translation altered any one place in this kind in the whole book, but such as
by certain proofs and demonstrations from Antoninus himself, I can
maintain. Those places that I thought any thing doubtful, I have given
account of them to the Reader in my Notes. And if I have left any for
desperate, as either imperfect or not intelligible by me, I may truly say, that
had I taken to my self but the tenth part of the liberty, which Xylander does
usually throughout the whole book; I needed not to have left any such places at
all. And I make no question, but that in so doing, I might have given to many
content and satisfaction good enough. But considering how much this liberty is
commonly abused, and how prejudicial it proves to good Authors, I have rather
chosen sometimes to say less then I might, then to give unto others an example
of this bold kind of dealing with ancient Authors. The chiefest ground of all
the obscurity in the Book, is, that Antoninus having been all his life an
indefatigable student, and so read a world of writers of all sorts, his manner
is in these his books, as he rend any thing that made for his present purpose,
closely and briefly to allude unto it, by some short meditation upon it:
sometimes barely to excerpt some words, which either he had an especial liking
unto, or afterward intended further to meditate upon, without any mention of
the place or Author from whence they are taken. Now many of these Authors being
quite perished, many of his allusions so close and obscure, that though the
Authors be yet extant, yet it is not easy to find from whence, or of whom,
nor to what intent or purpose: it must not be wondered, if not only many places
seem obscure, but some also of little worth and use; because, it does not
appear, what further use Antoninus had of them in his mind. Howsoever to them
that are any thing versed in the writings of ancient Philosophers, Stoics
especially, there will not occur many such places. If a man take but
Arrianus, and Seneca, and compare them diligently with Antoninus, he will find
a mavelous consent, and many obscure short places of Antoninus, illustrated
and explained by their larger discourse. I have done it in some few places,
which I thought could not well otherwise be understood. And for the rest, I
leave them to every diligent Readers industry. Neither indeed would I have put
my self to the labor of writing any Notes at all, if the book could as well
have wanted them, as I could easily have found as well, or better to my mind,
how to bestow my time. However as I thought some would be needful, so did I
think also, that if in the former Books, I did give satisfaction to the
Reader, I might afterward be spared, and either be trusted my self, or trust
to the Readers diligence and ability for the rest. Wheresoever by supplying a
word or two in the Text, I thought I could help the sense, and illustrate the
matter sufficiently; to spare my self a Note, and for the ease of the Reader,
I have done it. All such additions to the Text, you shall find within two such
[] marks included. And whereas those former passages by me produced wherein I
except against the Latin Translation, are all such as could not be well
translated without some correction of the Text, that it may not be thought,
that in such places only it is amiss, I have for the further satisfaction of
the Reader (the books as has already been said, being so scarce and hard to
become by:) taken occasion in my Notes, now and then to instance in some other
passages, wherein there can be no such exception. In the Author himself I
fear exception will be taken, at many places, as mere repetitions; at some
others, wherein he seems to contradict what he had said before. But if the
Readers consider, first, that what Antoninus wrote, he wrote it not for the
public, but for his own private use; and secondly, that Antoninus his words
are so intermingled every where with his Excerpta that it does not well appear
what is his own, and what is not; as in regard of the first consideration they
will, I doubt not, allow him far more liberty then otherwise were fitting:
so in regard of the second, I presume they will yield both those many suspected
repetitions in the Books, and those few supposed contradictions, the one
perchance to be but several collections of one subject and to one purpose from
several Authors; and the others certainly, rather the different opinions of
different Authors concerning the same thing, then the contradictions of one
man, inconstant to himself. And as for such places which may give offense, as
repugnant to our Christian faith, and impious; as when he seems to speak
doubtfully of God, and his Providence; and to adscribe all things to Fatal
necessity, and the like: I shall but desire the Readers to remember who he was
that wrote, and I hope they will desire no other satisfaction in this point.
For that any Christian should expect from any out of the Church and without the
Scriptures perfect sound knowledge in these high points would be no small
wonder to me: it being both the happiness of every the meanest Christian,
that he may know more in these mysteries, then the greatest Philosophers could
ever, with all their wit and learning attain unto; and the proper privilege
of the divine Scriptures, that from them only all solid truth in points of this
nature, is to be expected. However that Antoninus may not want any just defense
that his cause does afford, the Reader must further be entreated not to judge
of his opinions, by one or two short passages here and there, occurrent, which
whether they be his or no (as we have already said) is hard to determine; but
to have a respect to other more large, and peremptory passages concerning the
same purpose elsewhere to be found. As for example concerning God and his
Providence, to B. II. Number. VIII. B. V I. Number. XXXIX. etc. and concerning Fatal
necessity not only to the same Lib. II. Number. VIII. but also to diverse other
places, as B. VIII. Number. 6.27.30.32.46. etc. by which places as it does plainly
appear, that he does exclude all manner of Necessity from humane wills and
actions, so does it appear by other passages, as Lib. 8 Number. 33. that he did
not altogether exclude from all divine providence not even those actions of
men, that are most contrary to the will of God: from which place moreover may
appear what it is that he often calls (...), Fate, or Destiny; which in his
meaning is no other then (as by diverse other Philosophers also it is expounded)
Gods order and providence in matters of the world: to which purpose he does
also expound the word Fortune, B. I. Number. XVII. On the other side, although he
does every where very absolutely maintain this liberty of man's will, and that
he was not acquainted with the mystery of original sin, and natural
concupiscence; yet shall you not find in him those blasphemies, in exaltation
of this humane power and liberty, which you shall in Seneca, and other
Stoics: neither did he (it should seem, though but an Heathen:) so much rely
upon it, but that he does very piously commend prayers, as very powerful and
effectual unto virtue. See lib. IX. Number. XL. Now if Antoninus himself being a
Roman, for the propriety and facility of his expressions (wherein the Latin
tongue, in matter of Philosophy, comes as short of the Greek, as the English
does of the Latin:) did in the composing of these his Books prefer the
Greek tongue before his own mother tongue; no man I hope will expect, that
all things should in this Translation run so smoothly, as in another kind of
Translation happily they might. But herein I must confess my fear is for
Antoninus, more then for my self. For first whereas he, being (I think) as
well acquainted with ancient writers and philosophers as ever any was, does
every where very strictly and carefully observe their proper choice words and
terms, which both make the sense it self more current, and pleasing; and for
a Scholar to know them and to be acquainted with them, is in many respects
very useful; This in the Translation must needs be lost, and by consequent so
much lost to Antoninus, of his due praise and commendation. And secondly,
whereas in all these his XII. books there be not many lines (if any:) which if
well considered, will not be found either to be taken out of some ancient
Author, or at least by way either of Exception, Confirmation, Illustration, and
the like, to either passage or opinion of some ancient to have some relation;
as to Scholars I know whatsoever is in this kind, be it otherwise what it
will, cannot but be acceptable and useful, so to others I fear, many things
for want of this use of it, which they are not capable of, will seem but dry
and impertinent. In these two respects I cannot deny but I have done Antoninus
some wrong to make him so vulgar, as I have done, and yet because I thought he
might in other respects do good to any that should read him, if before the
credit of one I have preferred the good of many I have but done what Antoninus
himself (as by these his books may appear:) would have me or any others do
in the like case.

And now in the last place, if any shall by these my pains receive any
content, my desire is that they would thank him, by whose encouragement
especially I did undertake this little work, my Reverend Kind friend Dr.
Lyndsell, the right worthy Bishop of Pee^er-borough, a man for his singular
worth and lear^ing in all kind of literature, not to be named by any that know
Him, without expression of all due respect ^d admiration; and one to whom my
self, and my ^dies of old have been much beholding, as I shall ever most
gladly acknowledge.

M. AVREL. ANTONIUS THE ROMAN EMPEROR, HIS FIRST BOOK concerning HIMSELF:
Wherein Antoninus records, What and of whom, whether Parents, Friends or
Masters; by their good examples, or good advice and counsel, he had learned:
Divided into Numbers, or Sections.
[ ANtoninus Book VI. Number. XLIII. Whenever thou will rejoice thy self,
think and meditate upon those good parts and especial gifts, which thou have
observed in any of the^ that live with thee: as industry in one, in another
modesty, in another bountifulness, in another some other thing. For nothing
can so much rejoice thee, as the resemblances and parallels of several
virtues, eminent in the dispositions of them that live with thee; especially
when all at once, as it were, they represent themselves unto thee. See
therefore, that thou have them always in a readiness.]

Number. I. OF my Grandfather Verus [I have learned] to be gentle and meek, and
to refrain from all anger and passion. From the fame and memory of him that
begot me [I have learned both] shamefastness, and manlike behavior. Of my
Mother [I have learned] to be religious, and bountiful; and to forbear, not
only to do, but to intend any evil; to content my self with a spare diet,
and to fly all such excess as is incidentall to great wealth. Of my great
Grandfather,

II. Of him that brought me up, not to be fondly addicted to [either of the
two great factions of the Coursers in the Circus, called] Prasini, and Veneti:
[nor in the Amphitheater] partially to favor [any of the Gladiators, or
fencers, as either] the Parmularij, or the Secutoriani. Moreover, to endure
labor; not to need many things. when I have any thing to do, to do it my
self [rather then by others;] not to meddle with many businesses; and not
easily to admit of any slander.

III. Of Diognetus, not to busy my self about vain things, and not
[commonly] spoken, by such as take upon them to work wonders, and by
Sorcerers, [or, praestigiators, and impostors;] concerning the power of
charms, and their driving out of Demons, [or, evil spirits;] and the like.
Not to coturnices [or, quails for the game;] nor to be mad after such things.
Not to be offended with other men's liberty of speech, and to apply my self
unto Philosophy. [Him also I must thank:] that ever I heard first Bacchius,
then Tandasis, and Marcianus: and that I did write [Philosophers] little couch
and skins, and such other things, which by the Grecian discipline are proper
[to those who profess philosophy.]

IV. To Rusticus I am beholding, that I first entered into the conceit that my
life wanted some redress, and cure. And then, that I did not fall into the
ambition of [ordinary] Sophists, either to write tracts concerning the [common]
Theorems, or to exhort men [unto virtue and the study of philosophie] by
[publike] orations; as also that I never by way of ostentation [for any kind
of bodily exercises.] And that I gave over the study of Rhetoric and Poetry,
and of elegant neat language. That I did not use to walk about the house in
my long robe, nor to do any such things. Moreover [I learned of him] to write
letters without any affectation, or curiosity; such as that was, which by him
was written to my Mother from Sinoessa: and to be easy and ready to be
reconciled, and well pleased again with them that had offended me, as soon
as any of them would be content to seek unto me again. To read with
diligence; not to rest satisfied with a light and superficial knowledge, nor
quickly to assent to things commonly spoken of: whom also I must thank that
ever I lighted upon Epictetus Hypomnemata [or, moral commentaries and
commonefactions:] which also he gave me of his own.

V. From Apollonius, true liberty, and unvariable steadfastness, and not to
regard any thing at all, though never so little, but right and reason: and
always, whether in the sharpest pains, or after the loss of a child, or in
long diseases, to be still the same man; who also was a present and visible
example unto me, that it was possible for the same man to be both vehement and
remiss: a man not subject to be vexed, and offended [with the incapacitie of
his Scholars and Auditors] in his lectures and expositions; and a true pattern
of a man who of all his good gifts and faculties, least esteemed in himself,
that his excellent skill and ability to teach and persuade others the common
Theorems, [and Maxims of the Stoic Philosophy.] Of him also I learned, how to
receive favors and kindnesses (as commonly they are accounted:) from friends,
so that I might not become obnoxious unto them, for them, nor more yielding
[upon occasion, then in right I ought;] and yet so that I should not pass them
neither, as an unsensible and unthankful man.

VI. Of Sextus, mildness and the pattern of a family governed with paternall
affection; and a purpose to live according to nature: to be grave without
affectation: to observe carefully the several dispositions of my friends, not
to be offended with Idiots, nor [his conversation] being an example how a man
might accommodate himself to all men and companies; so that though his company
were sweeter and more pleasing, then any flatterers cogging and fauning; yet
was it at the same time most respected and reverenced: who also had a proper
happiness, and faculty, rationally, and methodically to find out, and set in
order all necessary Dogmata [or, determinations] and instructions for a man's
life. A man without ever the least appearance of anger, or any other passion;
able at the same time most exactly to observe the stoic Apathia, [or,
unpassionatnesse] and yet to be most tender hearted: ever of good credit; and
yet almost without any noise, or rumor: very learned, and yet making little
show.

VII. From Alexander the Grammarian, not hastily to reprehend others, and not
reproachfully to take up any man for a barbarism, or a solaecisme, or any
false pronunciation, but dexterously by way of answer, or testimony, or
confirmation of the same matter (taking no notice of the word) to utter it as
it should have been spoken; or by some other such close and indirect
admonition, handsomely and civilly to tell him of it.

VIII. Of Frontinus, to how much envy and fraud, and hypocrisy the state of a
Tyrannous King is subject unto, and how they who are patricii, i. nobly borne]
are in some sort incapable [or, voide] of natural affection.

IX. Of Alexander the Platonic, not often nor without great necessity to say,
or to write to any man in a letter, I am not at leisure; nor in this manner
still to put off those duties, which we owe to our friends and acquaintances,
(to every one in his kind:) under pretense of urgent affairs.

X. Of Catulus, not to contemn any friends expostulation, though unjust, but
to strive to reduce him to his former disposition: Freely and heartily to
speak well of all my Masters [upon any occasion;] as it is reported of
Domitius, and Athenodotus, and to love my children with true affection.

XI. From my Brother Severus, to be kind and loving to all them of my house and
family; by whom also I came to the knowledge of Thraseas and Helvidius, and
Caro, and Dio, and Brutus. He it was also that did put me in the first
conceit and desire of an equal common wealth, administered by Justice and
equality; and of a Kingdom wherein should be regarded nothing more then the
good and welfare of the subjects. Of him also, to observe a constant tenor,
(not interrupted, with any other cares and distractions,) in the study and
esteem of Philosophy: to be bountiful and liberal in the largest measure;
always to hope the best; and to be confident that my friends love me. In whom
I moreover observed open dealing toward those whom he reproved at any time,
and that his friends might without all doubt or much observation know what he
would, See B. VIII. N. 58.
or would not; so open and plain was he.

XII. From excessively] to laugh: nor to be angry, or suspicious, but ever
ready to do good, and to forgive, and to speak truth; and all this, as one
that seemed rather of himself to have been straight and right, then ever to
have been rectified, or redressed: neither was there any man that ever thought
himself undervalued by him, or that could find in his heart, to think
himself a better man then he. He would also be very pleasant and gracious.

XIII. In my Father, I observed his meekness; his constancy without wavering
in those things, which after a due examination and deliberation, he had
determined. How free from all vanity he carried himself in matter of honor
and digni^ie, (as they are esteemed:) his laboriousnesse, and assiduitie, his
readiness to hear any man, that had ought to say, tending to any common ^ood:
how generally and impartially he would give every man his due; his skill and
knowledge, when rigor or extremity; when remissness or moderation was in
season; how he did abstain from all unchaste love of youths; his moderate
condescending to other men's occasions as an ordinary man, neither absolutely
requiring of his friends, that they should wait upon him at his ordinary
meals, nor that they should of necessity accompany him in his journies; and
that whenever any business upon some necessary occasions was to be put off
and omitted before it could be ended, he was ever found when he went about it
again, the same man that he was before. His accurate examination of things in
consultations, and worshipper of the gods, nor an ambitious pleaser of men, or
studious of popular applause but sober in all things, and every where observant
of that which was fitting, no affecter of novelties: in those things which
conduced to his ease and convenience, (plenty whereof his fortune did afford
him,) without pride and bragging, yet with all freedom and liberty: so that
as he did freely enjoy them without any anxiety or affectation when they were
present; so when absent, he found no want of them. Moreover, that he that every
one of them might in his kind, for that wherein he excelled, be regarded and
esteemed: and although he did all things carefully after the ancient customs
of his forefathers, yet even of this was he not desirous that men should take
notice, that he did imitate ancient customs. Again, how he was not easily
moved and tossed up and down, but loved to be constant, both in the same
places and businesses; and how after his great fits of headache, he would
return fresh and vigorous to his wonted affairs. Again, that secrets he
neither had many, nor often, and such only as concerned public matters: His
discretion and moderation, in exhibiting of the Spectacula, [or, public sights
and shows for the pleasure and pastime of the people:] in public buildings,
Congiaries, and the like. In all these things, soundly, and agreeably. A man
might have applied that to him, which is recorded of Socrates, that he knew how
to want, and to enjoy those things, in the want whereof, most men show
themselves weak; and in the fruition, intemperate: But to hold out firm and
constant, and to keep within the compass of true moderation and sobriety in
either estate, is proper to a man, who has a perfect and invincible soul;
such as he showed himself in the sickness of Maximus.

XIV. From the gods [I received] that I had good Grandfathers, and Parents, a
good Sister, good masters, good domestics, loving kinsmen, almost all that I
have; and that I never through have, and rashness transgressed against any of
them, notwithstanding that my disposition was such, as that such a thing (if
occasion had been) might very well have been committed by me, but that it was
the mercy of the gods, to prevent such a concurring of matters and occasions,
as might make me to incur this blame. That I was not long brought up by the
Concubine of my Father; that I preserved the flower of my youth. That I took
not upon me to be a man before my time, but rather put it off longer then I
needed. That I lived under the government of my Lord and Father, who would take
away from me all pride and vainglory, and reduce me to that conceit and
opinion that it was not impossible [for a Prince] to live in the Court
apparel, such and such torches and statues, and other like, particulars of
state and magnificence; but that a man may reduce and contract himself almost
to the state of a private man, and yet for all that not to become the more base
and remiss in those public matters and affairs, wherein power and authority
is requisite. That I have had such a Brother, who by his own example might
stir me up to think of my self; and by his respect and love, delight and
please me. That I have got ingenuous children, and that they were not borne
distorted, nor with any other natural deformity. That I was no great
proficient in the study of Rhetoric and Poetry, and of other faculties, which
perchance I might have dwelt upon, if I had found my self to go on in them
with success. That I did by times prefer those, by whom I was brought up, to
such places and dignities, which they seemed unto me most to desire; and that I
did not put them off with hope and expectation, that (since that they were yet
but young:) I would do the same hereafter. That I ever knew Apollonius, and
Rusticus, and Maximus. That I have had occasion often and effectually to
consider and meditate with my self, concerning that life which is according to
nature, what the nature and manner of it is: So now that I was not yet partaker
and in present possession of that life, that I my self (in that I did not
observe those inward motions, and suggestions, yea and almost plain and
apparent instructions and admonitions of the gods,) was the only cause of it.
That my body in such a life, has been able to hold out so long. That I never
had to do with Benedicta and Theodotus, yea and afterward when I fell into
some fits of love, I was soon cured. That having been often displeased with
Rusticus, I never did him any thing, for which afterward I had occasion to
repent: That it being so that my Mother was to die young, yet she lived with me
all her latter years. That as often as I had a purpose to help and succor
any that either was poor, or fallen into some present necessity, I never was
answered [by my Officers] that there was not ready money enough to do it; and
that I my self never had occasion to require the like succor from any other.
That I have such a wife, so obedient, so loving, so ingenuous. That I had
choice of sit and able men, to whom I might commit the bringing up of my
children. That by dreams I have received help, as for other things, so in
particular, how I might stay my casting of blood, and cure my dizzenesse, and
how thou should make use of that in Cajeta [or, when thou were as Cajeta.]
And when I did first apply my self to Philosophy, that I did not fall into
the hands of some sophists, or spent my time either in reading the manifold
volumes [of ordinary Philosophers,] nor in practicing my self in the solution
of arguments and fallacies, nor dwelt upon the studies of the Metheores, [and
other natural curiosities.] All these things without the assistance of the
gods, and See N. XVII
fortune, could not have been.

XV. In the Country of the Quadi at Granua, these.

Betimes in the morning say to thy self, This day I shall have to do with an
idle curious man, with an unthankful man, a railer, a crafty false, or an
envious man; an [onely] is to be desired; and of that which is bad, that it
[onely] is [truly] odious and shameful: who know moreover, that this
transgressor, whosoever he be, is my kinsman, not by the same blood and seed,
but by participation of the same reason, and of the same divine particle; How
can I either be hurt by any of those, since it is not in their power, to make
me incur any thing that is [truly] reproachful? or angry, and ill affected
toward him, who by nature is so near unto me? for we are all borne to be
fellow workers, as the feet, the hands, and the eyelids; as the rows of the
upper and under teeth: for such therefore to be in opposition, is against
nature; and what is it to chafe at, and to be averse from, but to be in
opposition?

X VI. Whatsoever I am, is either flesh, or life, or [that which we commonly
call] the mistress and overruling part of man; [Reason.] Away with thy books,
suffer not thy mind any more to be distracted, and carried too and fro; See B.
III. N. XV.
for it will not be; but as even now ready to die, think little of thy flesh:
[thinke no more of it, then so.] And as for thy life, consider what it is: a
wind; not one constant wind neither, but every moment of an hour let out,
and sucked in again. The third, is thy ruling part; and here consider; Thou art
an old man; suffer not that excellent part to be brought in subjection, and to
become slavish: suffer it not to be drawn up and down with unreasonable and
(...). See before Note 17.
unsociable lusts and motions, as it were with wyres and nerves; suffer it not
any more, either to repine at any thing now present, or to fear and fly any
thing to come, which the Destiny has appointed thee.

XV II. Whatsoever proceeds from the gods [immediately,] See B. III. Number. XII.
that [any man will grant] totally depends from their divine providence. As for
those things that [are commonly said to] happen by Fortune, even those must be
conceived to have dependence from nature, or from that first and general
connection, and concatenation of all those things, which [more apparantly] by
the divine providence are administered and brought to pass. All things flow
from thence: And whatsoever it is that is, is both necessary, and conducing to
the whole; part of which thou art: and whatsoever it is that is requisite and
necessary for the preservation of the general, must [of necessity] for every
particular nature, be good and behoovefull. And as for the whole, it is
preserved, as by the perpetual mutation and conversion of the simple Elements
one into another, so also by the mutation, and alteration of things mixed and
compounded. Let these things suffice thee; Let them be a ways unto thee, as
thy general rules and precepts. As for thy thirst after books, away with it
with all speed, that thou die not murmuring and complaining, but truly meek
and well satisfied, and from thy heart thankful unto the gods.

THE SECOND BOOK.
REmember how long thou have already put off these things, and how often a
certain day and hour as it were, having been set unto thee by the gods, thou
have neglected it. It is high time for thee to understand the true nature both
of the world, whereof thou art a part; and of that Lord and Governor of the
World from whom, as a channel from the spring, thou thy self did flow: And
that there is but a certain limit of time appointed unto thee, which if thou
shall not make use of to calm and alay the many distempers of thy soul, it
will pass away and thou with it, and never after return.

II. Let it be thy earnest and incessant care as a Roman and a man to perform
whatsoever it is that thou art about, with true and unfeigned gravity, natural
affection, freedom and justice: and as for all other cares, and imaginations,
how thou may ease thy mind of them. Which thou shall do; if thou shall go
about every action as thy last action, free from all vanity, all passionate
and wilful aberration from reason, and from all hypocrisy, and self-love,
and dislike of those things, which by the Sea Pref. fol. 26.
fates [or, appointment of God] have happened unto thee. Thou see that those
things, which for a man to hold on in a prosperous course, and to live a divine
life, are requisite and necessary, are not many, for the gods will require no
more of any man, that shall but keep and observe these things.

III. Do, See Pref. fol. 18. and Number. 14. of this Bo:
Soul, do; abuse and contemn thy self; yet a while and the time for thee to
respect thy self, will be at an end. Every man's happiness

IV. Why should any of these things that happen externally, so much distract
thee? Give thy self leisure to learn some good thing; and cease roving and
wandering to and fro. Thou must also take heed of another kind of wandering, for
they are idle in their actions, who toil and labor in this life, and have no
certain scope to which to direct all their motions, and desires.

V. For not observing the state of another man's soul, scarce was ever any man
known to be unhappy. But whosoever they be that

VI. These things thou must always have in mind: What is the nature of the
Universe, and what is mine in particular: This unto that what relation it has:
what kind of part, of what kind of Universe it is: And that there is no body
that can hinder thee, but that thou may always, both do and speak those
things, which are agreeable to that Nature whereof thou art a part.

VII. Theophrastus, where he compares sin with sin (as after a two is the
more to be condemned, that sins with pleasure, then he that sins with grief.
For indeed this latter may seem first to have been wronged, and so in some
manner through grief thereof to have been forced to be angry, whereas he who
through lust does commit any thing, did of himself merely resolve upon that
action.

VIII. Whatsoever thou do affect, whatsoever thou do project, so do, and
so project all, as one who, for ought thou know, may at this very present
depart out of this life. And as for death, if there be any gods, it is no
grievous thing to leave the society of men. The gods will do thee no hurt thou
may be sure. But if it be so that there be no gods, or that they take no care
of the world, why should I desire to live in a world void of gods, and of all
divine providence? But gods there be certainly, and they take care for the
world; and as for those things which be truly evil, as vice and wickedness;
such things they have put in a man's own power, that he might avoid them if he
would: and had there been any thing besides that had been truly bad and evil,
they would have had a care of that also, that a man might have avoided it. But
why should that be thought to hurt and prejudice a man's life in this world,
which cannot any ways make man himself the better, or the worse in his own
person? Neither must we think that the Nature of the Universe did either
through ignorance pass these things, or if not as ignorant of them, yet to
prevent, or better to order and dispose them. It cannot be that she through
want either of power or skill, should have committed such a thing, as to suffer
all things both good and bad, equally and promiscuously to happen unto all both
good and bad. As

IX. Consider how quickly all things are dissolved and resolved: the bodies and
substances themselves, into the matter and substance of the world: and their
memories into the general Age and Time of the world. Consider the nature of
all worldly sensible things; of those especially, which either ensnare by
pleasure, or son their irkesomenesse are dreadful, or for their outward luster
and show are in great esteem and request, how vile and contemptible, how base
and corruptible, how destitute of all true life and being they are.

X. It is the part of a man endowed with a good understanding faculty, to
consider what they themselves are in very deed, to die, and separate from it in
his mind all those things which with it usually represent themselves unto us,
he can conceive of it no otherwise, then as of a work of nature, and he that
fears any work of nature, is a very child. Now death, it is not only a work
of Nature, but also conducing to Nature.

XI. Consider with thy self how man, and by what part of his, is joined unto
God, and how that part of man is affected, diffused. There is nothing more
wretched then that soul, which in a kind of circuit compasses all things*
searching (as he says) even the very depths of the Earth; and by all signs
and conjectures prying into the very thoughts of other men's souls; and yet of
this is not sensible, that it is sufficient for a man to apply himself wholly,
and to confine all his thoughts and cares to

XII. If thou should live 3000, or as many 10000 of years, yet remember
this, [whensoever we die,] it does manifestly appear, that it can be but a
moment of time, that we then part with. For as for that which is either past
or to come, a man cannot be said properly to part with it. For how should a man
part with that which he has not? These two things therefore thou must
remember. First, that all things in the world from all eternity, by a
perpetual revolution of the same times and things ever continued and renewed,
are of one kind and nature; so that whether for a 100 or 200 hundred years
only, or for an infinite space of time, a man see those things which are still
the same, it can be no matter of great moment. And secondly, that that life
which any the longest liver, or the shortest liver parts with, is for length
and duration the very same, for that only which is present, is that, which
either of them can lose, as being that only which they have, for that which he
has not, no man can truly be said to lose.

XIII. Remember that all is but opinion and conceit,

XIV. A man's soul does wrong and disrespect it self first and especially,
when as much as in it self lies it becomes an Aposteme, and as it were an
excrescencie of the world, for to be grieved and displeased with any thing that
happens in the world, is direct apostasy from the Nature of the Universe, part
of which, all particular Natures of the world, are: Secondly, when she either
is averse from any man, or lead by contrary desires and affections, tending to
his hurt and prejudice; such as are the souls of them that are angry. Thirdly,
when she is overcome by any pleasure or pain. Fourthly, when she does
dissemble, and covertly and falsely, either does or says any thing. Fifthly,
when she does either affect or endeavor any thing to no certain end, but
rashly and without due ratiocination, and consideration, how consequent or
inconsequent it is to the common end. For even the least things ought not to be
done, without relation unto the end; and the end of the reasonable creatures
is, to follow and obey him, who is the reason as it were, and the law of this
great City, and ancient Commonwealth.

XV. The time of a man's life is as a point; the substance of it ever flowing,
the sense obscure: and the whole composition of the body, tending to
corruption. His soul is restless, fortune uncertain, and same doubtful, to
be brief, as a stream so are all things belonging to the body; as a dream,
or as a smoke, so are all that belong unto the soul. Our life is a warfare,
and a mere pilgrimage. Fame after life, is no better then oblivion. What is it
then that will adhere and follow? One only thing, Philosophy. And philosophy
does consist in this, for a man to preserve that Spirit which is within him,
from all manner of contumelies and injuries, and above all pains or pleasures;
never to do anything either rashly, or fainedly, or hypocritically: Wholly to
depend from himself, and his own proper actions: all things that happen unto
him to embrace contentedly, as coming from Him from whom He Himself also
came; and above all things, with all meekness and a calm cheerfulness, to
expect death, as being nothing else, but the resolution of those Elements, of
which every creature is composed. And if the Elements themselves suffer nothing
by this their perpetual conversion of one into another, that dissolution, and
alteration, which is so common unto all, why should it be feared by any? Is not
this according to Nature? But nothing that is according to nature, can be evil.

Whilst I was at Carnuntus.
THE THIRD BOOK.
A Man must not only consider how daily his life wastes and decreaseth, but
this also, that if he live long, he cannot be certain, whether his
understanding shall continue so able and sufficient, for either discreet
consideration, in matter of businesses; or for contemplation: it being the
thing, whereon true knowledge of things both divine and humane, does depend.
For if once he shall begin to dote, his respiration, nutrition, his
imaginative, and appetitive [and other natural faculties, may still continue
the same:] he shall find no want of them. But how to make that right use of
himself that he should, how to observe exactly in all things that which is
right and just; how to redress and rectify all [wrong, or sudden:]
apprehensions and imaginations, and even of this particular, whether he should
live any longer or no, to consider duly: for all such things, wherein the best
strength, and vigor of the mind is most requisite; [his power and abilitie]
will be passed and gone. Thou must hasten therefore; not only because thou art
every day nearer unto death then other, but also because that intellective
faculty in thee, whereby thou art enabled to know the true nature of things,
and to order all thy actions by that knowledge, does daily wast and decay: [or,
may fail thee before thou die.]

II. This also thou must observe, that whatsoever it is that naturally does
happen to things natural, has somewhat in it self, that is pleasing and
delightful, as a [great] loaf when it is baked, some parts of it cleave as it
were, and part asunder [and make the crust of it rugged and unequal,] and yet
those parts of it, though in some sort it be against the art and intention of
baking it self, that they are thus cleft and parted, [which should have been,
and were first made all even and uniforme,] they become it well nevertheless,
and have a certain peculiar property, to stir the appetite. So figs are
accounted fairest and ripest then, when they begin to shrink, and wither as
it were. So ripe olives, when they are next to putrefaction, then are they in
their proper beauty. The hanging down of grapes, the brow of a Lion; the
froath of a foaming wild boar, and many other like things, though by
themselves considered, they are far from any beauty, yet because they happen
naturally, they both are comely, and delightful; so that if a man shall with a
profound mind and apprehension, consider all things in the world, even among
all those things which are but mere accessories, and natural appendices as it
were, there will scarce appear any thing unto him, wherein he will not find
matter of pleasure and delight. So will he behold with as much pleasure the
true rictus of wild beasts, as those which by skillful painters, and other
artificers are imitated. So will he be able to perceive the proper ripeness
and beauty of old age, whether in man, or woman: and whatsoever else it is that
is beautiful and alluring in whatsoever is, with chaste and continent eyes, he
will soon find out and discern. Those and many other things will he
discern, not credible unto every one, but unto them only who are truly and
familiarly acquainted, both with nature it self, and all natural things [or,
and all the works of nature]

III. Hippocrates having cured many sicknesses, fell sick himself and dyed.
The Chaldeans [and Astrologia^s] having foretold the deaths of diverse, were
afterward themselves surprised by the fates. Alexander and Pompeius, and Caius
Caesar, having destroyed so many towns, and cut off in the field so many
thousands both of horse and foot, yet they themselves at last, were feign to
part with their own lives. Heraclitus having written so many natural tracts
concerning the [last and generall] conflagration of the world, dyed afterward
all filled with water within, and all bedawbed with dirt and dung without. Lyce
killed Democritus; and Socrates, another sort of vermin; [wicked ungodly men.]
How then stands the case? Thou have taken ship, thou have sailed, thou art come
to land, go out, if to another life, there also shall thou find gods, who are
every where. If all life and sense shall cease, then shall thou cease also to
be subject to either pains, or pleasures; and to serve and tend this vile
cottage; so much the viler, by how much that which ministers unto it does
excel; the one being a rational substance, and a spirit, the other nothing
but earth and blood.

IV. Spend not the remnant of thy days in thoughts and phancies concerning
other men, when it is not in relation to some common good, when by it thou art
hindered from some other [better] work. That is, [spend not thy time] in
thinking, what such a man does, and to what end: what he says, and what he
thinks, and what he is about, and such other things [or, curiosities] which
make a man to roave and wander from the care and observation of that part of
himself, which is rational, and overruling. See therefore in the whole
series and connection of thy thoughts, that thou be careful to prevent
whatsoever is idle and impertinent: but especially, whatsoever is curious and
malicious: and thou must use thy self to think only of such things, of which
if a man upon a sudden should ask thee, what it is that thou art now
thinking, thou may answer This, and That; freely and boldly, that so by thy
thoughts it may presently appear that all in thee is sincere, and peaceable;
as becomes one that is made for society, and regards not pleasures, nor gives
way to any voluptuous imaginations at all [or, to any longing thoughts or
desires at all*] free from all contentiousnesse, envy, and suspicion, and from
whatsoever else thou would blush to confess, thy thoughts were set upon. He
that is such, is he surely that does not put off to lay hold on that which is
best indeed, a very Priest and Minister of the gods, well acquainted and in
good correspondence with Him especially that is seated and placed within
himself, [as in a Temple and sacrarie:] To whom also he keeps and preserves
himself unspotted by pleasure, undaunted by pain; free from any manner of
wrong, or contumely, [ by See B. II. N. XIV.
himself offered unto himself:] not capable of any evil [ See B. IV. N. VII.
from others:] a wrastler of the best sort, and for the highest prize, that he
may not be cast down by any passion, or affection of his own; deeply dyed and
drenched in righteousness, embracing and accepting with his whole heart,
whatsoever either happens or is allotted unto him. One who not often, nor
without some great necessity tending to some public good, minds what any
other, either speaks, or does, or purposes: for those things only that are in
his own power [or, that are truly his own;] are the objects of his
employments, and his thoughts are ever taken up with those things, which of the
whole Universe are by the Fates [or, Providence] destinated and appropriated
unto Himself. Those things that are his own, and in his own power, he
himself takes order for that they be good: and as for those that happen unto
him, he believes them to be so. For that lot and portion which is assigned to
every one, as it is unavoidable and necessary, so is it always profitable. He
remembers besides that whatsoever partakes of reason, is a kin unto him, and
that to care for all men generally, is agreeing to the nature of a man: But as
for honor and praise, that they, ought not generally to be admitted and
accepted of from all, but from such only, who live according to nature. As for
them that do not, what manner of men they be at home, or abroad; day, or
night, how conditioned themselves with what manner of conditions [or, with men
of what conditions] they moile and pass away the time together, he knows,
and remembers right well, he therefore regards not such praise and approbation,
as proceeding from them, who cannot like and approve themselves.

V. Do nothing against thy will, nor contrary to the community, nor without
due examination, nor with reluctancie. Affect not to set out thy thoughts with
curious neat language. Be neither a great talker, nor a great undertaker.
Moreover, let thy god that is in thee to rule over thee, find by thee, that he
has to do with a man; and aged man; a sociable man; a Roman; a Prince; one
that has ordered his life, as one that expects, as it were, nothing but the
sound of the trumpet, sounding a retreat to depart out of this life with all
expedition. One who [for his word or actions] neither needs an oath, nor any
man to be a witness.

VI. To be cheerful, and to stand in no need, either of other men's help or
attendance, or of that rest and tranquillity, which thou must be beholding to
others for. Rather like one that is straight of himself [or, See B. I. N. XII.
has ever been straight] then one that has been rectified.

VII. If thou shall find any thing in this mortal life better then
righteousness, then truth, temperance, fortitude, and in general better then
a mind contented both with those things which according to right and reason
she does, and in those, which without her will and knowledge happen unto thee
by the Providence; If I say, thou can find out any thing better then this;
apply thy self unto it with thy whole heart, and that which is best
wheresoever thou do find it, enjoy [freely.] But if nothing thou shall find
worthy to be preferred to that Spirit which is within thee; if nothing better
then to subject unto thee thine own lusts and desires, and not to give way to
any fancies or imaginations before thou have duly considered of them, nothing
better then to withdraw thy self (to use Socrates his words) from all
sensuality, and submit thy self unto the gods, and to have care of all men in
general: If thou shall find that all other things in comparison of this, are
but vile, and of little moment; then give not way to any other thing, which
being once, [though but] affected and inclined unto, it will no more be in thy
power, without all distraction [as thou oughtest] to prefer and to pursue
after that good, which is thine own and thy proper good. For it is not
lawful, that any thing that is of another [and inferiour] kind and nature, be
it what it will, as either popular applause, or honor, or riches, or
pleasures; should be suffered to confront and contest as it were, with that
which is rational, and operatively good. For all these things, if once though
but for a while, they begin to please, they presently prevail, and pervert a
man's mind [or, turn a man from the right way.] Do thou therefore I say
absolutely and freely make choice of that which is best, and stick unto it.
Now, that [they say] is best, which is most profitable. If they mean
profitable to man as he is a rational man, stand thu to it, and maintain it;
but if they mean profitable, as he is a creature [only] reject it; and from
this thy Tenet, and Conclusion keep off carefully, all plausible shows, and
colors of external appearance, G^eeke (...). See B. VI. Number. XI.
all plausible shows, and colors of external appearance, that thou may be
able to discern things rightly.

VIII. Never esteem of any thing as profitable, which shall ever constrain
thee either to break thy faith, or to lose thy modesty; to hate any man, to
suspect, to curse, to dissemble, to lust after any thing, that requires the
secret of walls, or vailes. But he that prefers before all things his
Rational part and Spirit, and the sacred mysteries of virtue which issues
from him, he shall never lament and exclame; never sigh, he shall never want
either solitude or company: and which is chiefest of all, he shall live without
either desire or fear. And as for life, whether for a long or short time he
shall enjoy his soul thus compassed about with a body, he is altogether
indifferent. For if even now he were to depart, he is as ready for it, as for
any other action, which may be performed with modesty, and decency. For all
his life long, this is his only care, that his mind may always be occupied
in such intentions and objects, as are proper to a rational sociable creature.

IX. In the mind that is [once truly] disciplined and purged, thou can not
find any thing, either foul or impure, or (as it were) festered: nothing that
is either servile, or affected: no [partiall] tie; no [malicious] averseness;
nothing obnoxious; nothing concealed. The life of such one, Death can never
surprise as imperfect; as of an Actour, that should dye before he had ended, or
the play it self were at an end, as a man might speak.

X. Use thine opinative faculty with all honor and respect, for in her
[indeed] is all: that thy opinion do not beget in thy understanding any thing
contrary to either Nature, or the proper constitution of a Rational creature.
The end and object of a Rational constitution, is, to do nothing rashly, to
be kindly affected toward men, and in all things willingly to submit unto the
gods. Casting therefore all other things aside, keep thy self to these few,
and remember withal that no man properly, can be said to live more then that
which is now present, which is but a moment of time. Whatsoever is besides
either is already past, or incertaine. The time therefore that any man does
live, is but a little, and the place where he lives, is but a very little
corner of the earth, and the greatest fame that can remain of a man after his
Death, even that is but little, and that too, such as it is whilst it is, is
by the succession of silly mortal men preserved, who likewise shall shortly
die, [and even whiles they live] know not what in very deed they themselves
are: and much less can know one, who long before is dead and gone.

XI. To these ever present helps and mement^^s, let one more be added, Ever to
make a particular description and delineation as it were of every object that
presents it self to thy mind, See B. VI. Number. XI.
that thou may wholly and thoroughly contemplate it, in its own proper
nature, bare and naked; wholly, and severally; divided into its several parts
and quarters: and then by thy self in thy mind, to call both it, and those
things of which it does consist, and in which it shall be resolved, by their
own proper true Names, and appellations. For there is nothing so effectual to
beget true Magnanimity, as to be able truly and methodically to examine and
consider all things that happen in this life, and so to penetrate into their
natures, that at the same time, this also may concur in our apprehensions:
What is the true use of it? and what is the true nature of this Universe, to
which it is useful? How much in regard of the Universe may it be esteemed?
how much in regard of man, a Citiren of the supreme City, of which all other
Cities in the World, are as it were but houses and families?

XII. What is this, that now my fancy is set upon? of what things does it
consist? how long can it last? which of all the virtues, is the proper virtue
for this present use? as whether meekness, fortitude, truth, faith,
sincerity, contentation, or any of the rest? See B. I. N. XVII.
Of every thing therefore thou must use thy self to say, This [immediately]
comes from God, This by that fatal connection and concatenation of things, or
(which almost comes to one:) by some coincidentall casualtie. And as for this,
it proceeds from my neighbor, my kinsman, my fellow: through his ignorance
indeed, because he knows not what is truly natural unto him: But I know it,
and therefore carry my self toward him according to the natural law of
fellowship; that is kindly, and justly. As for those things that of themselves
are altogether indifferent, as in my best judgment I conceive every thing to
deserve more or less, so I carry my self toward it.

XIII. If thou shall intend that which is present, following the rule of right
and reason carefully, solidly, meekly, and shall not intermixe any other
businesses, but shall study this [onely] to preserve thy Spirit impolluted,
and pure, and shall cleave unto Him without either hope or fear of any thing,
in all things that thou shall either do or speak, contenting thy self with
Heroical truth, thou shall live happily; and from this, there is no man that
can hinder thee.

XIV. As Physicians [and Chirurgions] have always their instruments ready at
hand for all sudden cures; so have thou always thy Dogmata in a readiness
for the knowledge of things, both divine and humane: and whatsoever thou do,
even in the smallest things that thou do, thou must ever remember that
mutual relation, an connection that is between these two [things divine, and
things humane.] For without relation unto God, thou shall never speed in any
worldly actions; nor on the other side in any divine, [without some respect had
to things humane.]

XV. Be not deceived; For thou shall never live to read thy moral
Commentaries, nor the Acts of the [famous] Romans and Grecians; nor those
Excerpta from several Books; all which thou had provided and laid up for
thy self, against thine old age. Hasten therefore to an end, and giving over
all vain hopes, help they self [in time] if thou carest for thy self, as
thou ought to do.

XVI. To See B. X. N. XV. B. XI. N. XVI.
steal, to See B. IV. N. XXIX.
sow, to buy, to be See B. IV. N. III.
at rest, to See B. IV. N. XXIV. B. VIII N. XXXVI.
see what is to be done (which is not seeneby the eyes, but by another kind of
sight:) what these words mean, and how many ways to be understood, they do
not understand. The Body, the Soul, the Understanding. [As] the senses
[naturally,] belong to the body, and the desires and affections to the soul,
so do the dogmata to the understanding.

XVII. To be capable of fancies and imaginations, is common to man and beast.
To be violently drawn and moved by the lusts and desires [of the soul,] is
proper to wild beasts and monsters; such as Phalaris, and Nero were. To follow
reason for ordinary duties and actions, See Pref. fol. 12. and Notes upon Book
VIII. 1.
is common to them also, who believe not that there be any gods, and for [their
advantage would make no conscience] to betray their own Country; and who when
once the doors be shut upon them, dare do any thing. If therefore all things
else be common to these likewise, it follows, that for a man to like and
embrace all things that happen and are destinated unto him, and not to trouble
and molest that Spirit which is seated in the temple of his own breast, with a
multitude of [vaine] fancies, and imaginations, but to keep him propitious and
to obey him as a god, never either speaking any thing contrary to truth, or
doing any thing contrary to Justice; is the only true property of a good man.
And such a one, though no man should believe that he lives as he does, either
sincerely and conscionably; or cheerful and contentedly; yet is he neither
with any man at all angry for it, nor diverted by it from the way that leads
to the end of his life, through whih a man must pass pure, ever ready to
depart, and willing of himself without any compulsion to fit and accommodate
himself to his proper lot and calling.

THE FOURTH BOOK.
THat inward mistress part [of man] if it be in its own true natural temper,
is toward all worldly chances and events ever so disposed and affected, that
it will easily turn and apply it self to that which may be, and is within
its own power to compass, [when that cannot be which at first it intended.]
For it never does absolutely addict and apply it self to any one object, but
whatsoever it is that it does now intend and prosecute, it does prosecute it
with exception and reservation; so that whatsoever it is that falls out
contrary [to its first intentions] even that afterward it makes its proper
object. Even as the fire when it prevails upon those things that are in his
way; by which things indeed a little fire would have been quenched, but a
great fire does soon turn to its own nature, and so consume whatsoever comes
in his way: yea by those very things it is made greater and greater.

II. Let nothing be done rashly, and at random, but all things according to
the most exact and perfect rules of art.

III. They seek for themselves private retiring places, See B. X. 24.
as country villages, the sea shore, mountains; yea thou thy self art wont
to long much after such places. But all this [thou must know] proceeds from
simplicity in the highest degree. At what time soever thou will, it is in thy
power, to retire into thy self, and to be at rest, and free from all
businesses. A man cannot any whither retire better, then to his own soul. He
especially who is before hand provided of such things within, which whenever
he does withdraw himself to look in, may presently afford unto him perfect
ease and tranquillity. By tranquillity I understand a decent orderly
disposition and carriage, free from all confusion and tumultuousnesse. Afford
then thy self this retiring continually, and thereby refresh and renew thy
self. Let these [precepts] be brief and fundamental, which as soon as thou
do call them to mind, may suffice thee to purge thy soul thoroughly, and to
send thee away well pleased with those things whatsoever they be, which now
again [after this short withdrawing of thy soul into her self:] thou do
return unto. For what is it that thou art offended at? Can it be at the
wickedness of men, when thou do call to mind this conclusion, that all
reasonable creatures are made one for another? and that it is part of justice
to bear with them? and that it is against their wills that they offend? and
how many already, who [once likewise] prosecuted their enmities, suspected,
hated, and fiercely contended, are now [long agoe] strecht out, and reduced
unto Ashes? It is time for thee to make an end. As for those things which among
the common chances of the world happen unto thee as thy particular lot and
portion, can thou be displeased with any of them, when thou do call that
[our ordinary] Dilemma to mind, Either a Providence, or [Democritus his]
Atoms; and with it, whatsoever we brought to prove, that the whole world is as
it were one City? And as for thy body, what can thou fear, if thou do
consider that thy Mind and Understanding, when once it has recollected it
self, and knows its own power, has in this life and Breath, (whether See B.
V. N. XX. B. VII. XX XVII. B. IX.XLI.
it run smoothly and gently, or whether harshly and rudely,) no interest at
all, but is altogether indifferent: and whatsoever else thou have heard and
assented unto concerning either pain or pleasure? But the care of thine honor
and reputation will perchance distract thee? How can that be, if thou do
look back, and consider both how quickly all things that are, are forgotten,
and what an immense chaos of eternity was before, and will follow after all
things: and the vanity of praise, and the inconstancy and variableness of
humane Judgments and opinions, and the narrowness of the place, wherein it is
limited and circumscribed? For the whole earth is but as one point; and of it,
this inhabited part of it, is but a very little part; and of this part, how
many in number, and what manner of men are they, that will commend thee? What
remains then, but that thou often put in practice this kind of retyring of
thy self, to this little part of thy self; and above all things, keep thy
self from distraction, and intend not any thing vehemently; but be free and
consider all things, (...).
as a man, [whose proper object is virtue:] as a (...). See Note 14. and 18
upon B. I. And B. V. N VI.
man [whose true nature is to be kind and sociable] as a Citizen; as a mortal
creature. Among other things, which to consider, and look into thou must use
to withdraw thy self, let those two be among the most obvious and at hand.
One, that the things or objects themselves, reach not unto the soul, but stand
without still, and quiet, and that it is from the opinion only which is within,
that all the tumult and all the trouble does proceed. The next, that all these
things, which now thou see, shall within a very little while be changed, and
be no more: and ever call to mind, how many changes and alterations in the
world thou thy self have already been an eye witness of in thy time. This
world is mere change, and this life, opinion.

IV. if to understand and to be reasonable be common unto all men, then is that
reason, for which we are termed reasonable, common unto all. If reason in
general, then is that reason also, which prescribes what is to be done and
what not, common unto all. If that, then Law. If Law, then are we fellow
Citizens. If so, then are we partners in some one common weal. If so, then
the world is as it were a City. For which other common weal is it, that all
men can be said to be members of? From this common City it is, that
Understanding, Reason, and Law is derived unto us, for from whence else? For as
that which in me is earthly I have from some [common] earth; and that which is
moist from some other Element is imparted: as my breath and life has its
proper fountain; and that likewise which is dry and fiery in me: (for there is
nothing which does not proceed from something; as also there is nothing that
can be reduced unto mere nothing:) so also is there some [common beginning]
from whence my understanding has proceeded.

V. As generation is, so also death, a secret of Natures wisdom: a mixture of
Elements, resolved into the same Elements again, a thing surely which no man
ought to be ashamed of: in the series of other fatal events and consequences,
to which a rational creature is subject unto, not improper or incongruous; nor
contrary to the natural and proper constitution of man himself.

VI. Such and such things, from such and such causes, must of necessity
proceed. He that would not have such things to happen, is as he that would
have the fig tree [grow] without any sap or moisture. See B. VI N. LI. B.
VIII N XIII
In sum, remember this, that within a very little while, both thou and he
shall both be dead. and after a little while more, not so much as your names
and memories shall be remaining.

VII. Let opinion be taken away, and no man will think himself wronged. If no
man shall think himself wronged, then is there no more any such thing as
wrong. That which makes not man himself the worse, cannot make his life the
worse, neither can it hurt him either inwardly or outwardly. It was expedient
in nature that it should be so, and therefore necessary.

VIII. Whatsoever does happen in the world, does happen justly, and so if thou
do well take heed, thou shall find it. I say not only in right order by a
series of inevitable consequences, but according to Justice and as it were by
way of equal distribution, according to the true worth of every thing.
Continue then to take notice of it, as thou have begun, and whatsoever thou
do, do it not without this proviso, that it be a thing of that nature that
a good man, (as the word good is properly taken) may do it. This observe
carefully in every action.

IX. Conceit no such things, as he that wrongeth thee conceives, or would have
thee to conceive, but look into the matter it self, and see what it is in
very truth.

X. These two rules, thou must have always in a readiness. First do nothing
at all, but what Reason proceeding from that Regal and supreme part, shall for
the good and benefit of men, suggest unto thee. And secondly, if any man that
is present, shall be able to rectify thee or to turn thee from some
[erroneous] persuasion, that thou be always ready to change thy mind, and
this change to proceed, not from any respect of any pleasure or credit thereon
depending, but always from some probable appearant ground of Justice, or of
some public good thereby to be farthered; or from some other such inducement.

XI. Have thou reason? I have. Why then make thou not use of it? For if thy
reason do her part, what more can thou require?

XII. As a part hitherto thou have had a particular subsistence: and now shall
thou vanish away into the common substance of Him, who first begot thee or
rather thou shall be resumed again into that original rational substance, out
of which all others have issued, and are propagated. Many small pieces of
frankincense are set upon the same alter, one drops first [and is consumed]
another after; and it comes all to one.

XIII. Within ten days [if so happen] thou shall be esteemed a god of them,
who now if thou shall return to the Dogmata and to the honoring of Reason,
will esteem of thee no better then of a mere brute, and of an ape.

XIV. Not as though thou had thousands of years to live. Death hangs over
thee: whilst yet thou live, whilst thou may, be good.

XV. How much time and leisure does he gain, who is not curious to know, what
his neighbor has said, or has done, or has attempted, but only what he does
himself, that it may be Just and holy? or to express it in Agathos words, Not
to look about upon the evil conditions of others, but to run on straight in
the line, without any loose, and extravagant agitation.

XVI. He who is greedy of credit and reputation after his death, does not
consider, that they themselves by whom he is remembered, shall soon after every
one of them be dead; And they likewise that succeed those; until at last all
memory, which hitherto by the succession of men admiring and soon after dying
has had its course, be quite extinct. But suppose that both they that shall
remember thee, and thy memory with them should be immortal, what is that to
thee? I will not say to thee after thou art dead; but even to thee living, what
is thy praise? But only for a secret and politic consideration, which we call
(...) or Dispensation. For as for that, that it is the gift of nature [what
soever is commended in thee, what might be objected from thence,] let that now
that we are upon another consideration, be omitted as unseasonable. That which
is fair and goodly, whatsoever it be, and in what respect soever it be, that
it is fair and goodly, it is so of it self, and terminates in it self, not
admitting praise as a part or member: that therefore which is praised, is not
thereby made either better or worse. This I understand even of those things,
that are commonly called fair and good, as those which are commended either
for the matter it self, or for curious workmanship. As for that which is truly
good, what can it stand in need of more, then either Law or Truth; or more then
either kindness and modesty? Which of all those, either becomes good or
fair, because commended; or dispraised suffers any damage? Does the Emrald
become worse in it self, or more vile if it be not commended? Does gold, or
yvory, or purple? Is there any thing that does though never so common, as a
knife, a flower, or a tree?

XVII. If so be that the souls remain after death [say they that will not
believe it:] how is the air from all eternity able to contain them? How is
the earth [say I:] ever from that time able to contain the bodies of them that
are buried? For as here the change and resolution of dead bodies into another
kind of subsistence, (whatsoever it be;) makes place for other dead bodies: so
the souls after death transferred into the air, after they have conversed
there a while, are either by way of transmutation, or transfusion, or
conflagration, received again into that original rational substance, from
which all others do proceed: and so give way to those souls, who before
coupled and associated unto bodies, [now begin to subsist single.] This, upon
a supposition that the souls after death do for a while subsist single, may
be answered. And here, (besides the number of bodies, so buried and contained
by the earth,) we may further consider the number of several beasts, eaten by
us men, and by other creatures. For notwithstanding that such a multitude of
them is daily consumed, and as it were buried in the bodies of the eaters, yet
is the same place and body able to contain them, by reason of their
conversion, partly into blood, partly into air and fire. What in these things
is the speculation of truth? to divide things into that which is passive, and
material; and that which is active and formal.

XVIII. Not to wander out of the way, but upon every motion and desire, to
perform that which is just: and ever to be careful to attain to the true
natural apprehension of every fancy, that presents it self.

XIX. Whatsoever is expedient unto the, O World, is expedient unto me, nothing
can either he unseasonable unto me, or out of date, which unto thee is
seasonable. Whatsoever thy seasons bear, shall ever by me be esteemed as
happy fruit, and increase. O Nature! from thee are all things, in thee all
things subsist, and to thee all tend. Could he say of Athens, Thou lovely City
of Cecrops; and shall not thou say of the World, Thou lovely City of God?

XX. They will say commonly, Meddle not with many things, if thou will live
chearefully. Certainly there is nothing better, then for a man to confine
himself to necessary actions; to such and so many only, as reason in a
creature that knows it self borne for society, will command and enjoyne. This
will not only procure that cheerfulness, which from the goodness, but that
also, which from the paucitie of actions does usually proceed. For since it is
so, that most of those things, which we either speak or do, are unnecessary;
if a man shall cut them off, it must needs follow that he shall thereby gain
much leisure, and save much trouble, and therefore at every action a man must
privately by way of admonition suggest unto himself, What? may not this that
now I go about, be of the number of unnecessary actions? Neither must he use
himself to cut off actions only, but thoughts and imaginations also, that are
unnecessary; for so will unnecessary consequent actions the better be prevented
and cut off.

XXI. Try also how a good man's life; (of one, who is well pleased with those
things whatsoever, which among the common changes and chances of this world
fall to his own lot and snare; and can live well contented and fully satisfied
in the justice of his own proper present action, and in the goodness of his
disposition for the future:) will agree with thee. Thou have had experience of
that other kind of life: make now trial of this also. Trouble not thy self
any more henceforth, reduce thy self unto perfect simplicity. Does any man
offend? It is against himself that he does offend: [why should it trouble
thee?] Has any thing happened unto thee? It is well, whatsoever it be, it is
that which of all the common chances of the world from the very beginning in
the series of all other things that have, or shall happen, was destinated and
appointed unto thee. To comprehend all in few words; Our life is short; we
must endeavor to gain the present time with best discretion and justice. Use
recreation with sobriety.

XXII. Either this world is a (...), or a comely piece, because all disposed
and governed by certain order: or if it be a mixture, though confused, yet
still it is a (...), a comely piece. For is it possible that in thee there
should be any beauty at all, and that in the whole world there should be
nothing but disorder, and confusion? and all things in it too, [by natural
different properties] one from another differenced, and distinguished; See B.
VI. N. 38.
and yet all through diffused, and by natural Sympathy, one to another
united, as they are?

XXIII. See before N. XV.
Ablack, [or, malign disposition, an effeminate disposition; an hard
inexorable disposition, a wild inbumane disposition, a sheepish disposition, a
childish disposition; a blockish, a false, a scurril, a fraudulent, a
tyrannical: [what then?] If he be a stranger in the world, that knows not the
things that are in it; why not he astranger as well, that wonders at the things
that are done in it?

XXIV. He is a true fugitive, that flies from reason, by which men are
sociable. He blind, who cannot see with the eyes of his understanding. He
poor, that stands in need of another, and has not in himself all things
needful for this life. He an Aposteme of the world, who by being discontented
with those things that happen unto him in the world, does as it were
Apostatize, and separate himself from Common Natures rational Administration.
For the same nature it is that brings this unto thee, whatsoever it be, that
first brought thee into the world. He raises sedition in the City, who [by
irrational actions] withdrawes his own soul from that One and common soul
of all rational Creatures.

XXV. There is, who without so much as a Coat; and there is, who without so
much as a book, does put philosophy in practice. I am half naked, neither
have I bread to eat, and yet I depart not from Reason, says one. But I say; I
want the food of good teaching, and instructions, and yet I depart not from
Reason.

XXVI. What art, and profession soever thou have learned, endeavor to affect
it, and comfort thy self in it; and pass the remainder of thy life as one who
from his whole heart commits himself and whatsoever belongs unto him, unto the
gods, and as for men, carry not thy self either tyrannically, or servilely
toward any.

XXVII. Consider in thy mind, for examples sake, the times of Vespasian: Thou
shall see but the same things: some marying, some bringing up children, some
sick, some dying, some fighting, some feasting, some merchandising, some
tilling, some flattering, some boasting, some suspecting, some undermining,
some wishing to die, some fretting and murmuring at their present estate, some
wooing, some hoarding, some seeking after Magistracies, and some after
Kingdoms. And is not that their age quite over, and ended? Again, consider
now the times of Trajan. There likewise thou see the very selfsame things,
and that age also is now over and ended. In the like manner consider other
periods, both of times, and of whole nations, and see how many men, after they
had with all their might and main intended, and prosecuted some one worldly
thing or other, did soon after drop away, and were resolved into the Elements.
But especially thou must call to mind them, whom thou thy self [in thy life
time] have known much distracted [about vain things,] and in the mean time
neglecting to do that, and closely, and unseparably (as fully satisfied with
it:) to adhere unto it, which their own proper constitution did require. And
here thou must remember, that thy carriage in every business must be according
to the worth, and due proportion of it, for so shall thou not easily be [tyred
out] and vexed, if thou shall not dwell upon small matters longer then is
fitting.

XXVIII. Those words which once were common and ordinary, are now become
obscure, and obsolet; and so the names of men once commonly known and famous,
are now become in a manner obscure, and obsolet names. Camillus, Caeso,
Volesius, Leonnatus; not long after, Scipio, Cato, then Augustus, then
Adrianus, then Antoninus Pius: All these in a short time will be out of date,
and [as things of another world as it were.] become fabulous. And this I say of
them, who once shined as the wonders of their ages, for as for the rest, no
sooner are they expired, then with them all their fame and memory. And what is
it then that shall always be remembered? all is vanity. What is it that we
must bestow our care and diligence upon? even upon this only: That our minds
and wills be just; that our actions be charitable, that our speech be never
deceitful: [or, that our understanding be not subject to error:] that our
inclination be always set to embrace whatsoever shall happen unto us, as
necessary, as usual, as ordinary, as flowing from such a beginning, and such a
fountain, [from which both thou thy self, and all things are.]. Willingly
therefore, See the Pref. toward the end.
and wholly surrender up thy self unto that fatal concatenation, yielding up
thy self unto the fates, to be disposed of at their pleasure.

XXIX. Whatsoever is now present, and from day to day has its existence; all
objects of memories, and the minds and memories themselves, incessantly
consider, all things that are, have their being by change, and alteration. Use
thy self therefore often to meditate upon this, that the Nature of the
Universe delights in nothing more, then in altering those things that are, and
in making others like unto them. So that we may say, that whatsoever is, is
but as it were the seed of that which shall be. For if thou think that that
only is seed, which either the Earth, or the womb receives, thou art very
simple.

XXX. Thou art now ready to dye, and yet have thou not attained to that perfect
simplicity: thou art yet subject to many troubles, and perturbations; not yet
free from all fear and suspicion of external accidents; nor yet either so
meekly disposed toward all men, as thou should; or so affected as one,
whose only study, and only wisdom is, to be just in all his actions.

XXXI. Behold and observe, what is the state of their rational part; and those
that the world does account wise, see what things they fly, and are afraid of;
and what things they hunt after.

XXXII. In another man's mind and understanding thy evil cannot subsist, nor
in any proper temper or distemper of the natural constitution of thy body,
which is but as it were the coat, or cottage of thy soul. Wherein then, but
in that part of thee, wherein the conceit, and apprehension of any misery can
subsist? Let not that part therefore admit any such conceit, and then all is
well. Though thy body which is so near it, should either be cut or burnt, or
suffer any corruption, or putrefaction, yet let that part to which it belongs
to judge of these, be still at rest; that is, Let her judge this, that,
whatsoever it is, that equally may happen to a wicked man, and to a good man,
is neither good, nor evil. For that which happens equally to him that lives
according to Nature, [and to him that does not:] is neither according to
nature, nor against it; [and by consequent, neither good, nor bad.]

XXXIII. Ever consider and think upon the world, as being but one living
substance, See B. VI N. XXIII.
and having but one soul, and how all things in the world, are terminated,
into one sensitive power, [or, terminate into one general sense;] and are done
by one general motion as it were, and deliberation [of that one soul;] and
how all things that are, concur in the cause of one another being, and by
what manner of connection and concatenation all things happen.

XXXIV. What art thou, [that better and divine part excepted] but as Epictetus
said well, a wretched soul, appointed to carry a carcass up and down?

XXXV. To suffer change, can be no hurt; as no benefit it is, by change to
attain to being. The age and time of the world is as it were a flood, and
swift current, consisting of the things that are brought to pass in the world.
For as soon as any thing has appeared, and is passed away, another succeeds,
and that also will presently out of sight.

XXXVI. Whatsoever does happen in the world, is [in the course of nature] as
usual and ordinary as a rose in the spring, and fruit in summer. Of the same
nature is sickness and death; slander, and lying in wait, and whatsoever
else ordinarily does unto sooles use to be occasion either of joy or sorrow.
That, whatsoever it is, that comes after, does very naturally, and as it were
familiarly, follow upon that which was before. For thou must consider the
things of the world, not as a loose independent number, consisting merely of
necessary events; but as a discreet connection of things orderly and
harmoniously disposed. There is then to be seen in the things of the world, not
a bare succession, but an admirable correspondence and affinity.

XXXVII. Let that of Heraclitus never be out of thy mind, that the death of
earth, is water; and the death of water, is air; and the death of air, is
fire; and so on the contrary. Remember him also who was ignorant whither the
way did lead, and how that Reason being the thing, by which all things in the
world are administered, and which men are continually and most inwardly
conversant with: yet is the thing, which ordinarily they are most in opposition
with, and how those things which daily happen among them, cease not daily to be
strange unto them, and that we should not either speak, or do any thing as
men in their sleep, [by opinion and bare imagination:] for then we think we
speak and do, and that [we must not be] as children, who follow their fathers
[example:] for best reason alleging their bare (...); or, As [by successive
tradition from our forefathers] we have received it.

XXXVIII. Even as if any of the gods should tell thee, thou shall certainly
die to morrow, or next day, thou would not (except thou were extremely base,
and pusillanimous) take it for a great benefit, rather to die the next day
after, then to morrow: (for alas what is the difference! Sce N. XLII.
) so [for the same reason] think it no great matter to die rather many years
after, then the very next day.

XXXIX. Let it be thy perpetual meditation, how many physicians who once
looked so grimme, and so tetrically shrunk their brows upon their patients,
are dead and gone themselves. How many Astrologers, after that in great
ostentation they had foretold the death of some others; how many Philosophers
after so many elaborate tracts and volumes concerning either mortality, or
immortality; how many brave Captains and Commanders, after the death and
slaughter of so many: how many Kings and Tyrants, after they had with such
horror and insolency abused their power upon men's lives, as though themselves
had been immortal; how many, that I may so speak, whole Cities [both men and
Towns:] Helice, Pompeii, Herculanum, See Notes
and others innumerable are dead and gone. Run them over also, whom thou thy
self, one after another, have known in thy time to drop away. Such and such a
one took care of such and such a ones burial, and soon after was buried
himself. So one, so another: and all things in a short time. See B. V. N.
XXVII B. VII N. III.
For herein lays all indeed, ever to look upon all worldly things, as things
for their continuance, [that last but] from day to day; [or, that are but for a
day:] and for their worth, most vile, and contemptible, as [for example, What
is man?] That which but the other day [when he was conceived] was vile Greek
(...). See B. VI. N. XI.
sniuell; See Notes
and within few days shall be either an embalmed carcass, or mere ashes. Thus
must thou according to [truth and] nature, thoroughly consider, how [mans life]
is but for a very moment of time, and so depart meek, and contented: even as
if a ripe Olive falling, should praise the ground that bare her, and give
thanks to the tree that begat her.

XL. Thou must be like a promontorie of the sea, against which though the waves
beat continually, yet it both it self stands, and about it are those swelling
waves stilled and quieted.

XLI. Oh, wretched I! to whom this mischance is happened! nay, happy I, to whom
this thing being happened, I can continue without grief; neither wounded by
that which is present, nor in fear of that which is to come. For as for this,
it might have happened unto any man, but any man having such a thing befallen
him, could not have continued without grief. Why then should that rather be an
unhappiness, then this a happiness? But however, can thou, O man! term
that unhappiness, which is no mischance to the nature of man! can thou
think that a mischance to the nature of man, which is not contrary to the
[end, and] will of his nature? What then have thou learned is the will of man's
nature? Does that then which has happened unto thee, hinder thee from being
just? or magnanimous? or temperate? or wise? or circumspect? or true? or
modest? or free? or from any thing else of all those things in the present
enjoying and possession whereof the nature of man, (as then enjoying all that
is proper unto her,) is fully satisfied? Now to conclude; upon all occasion of
sorrow remember henceforth to make use of this Dogma, that whatsoever it is
that has happened unto thee, is in very deed no such thing of it self, as a
misfortune; but that to bear it generously, is certainly great happiness

XLII. It is but an ordinary coorse one, yet it is a good effectual remedy
against the fear of death, for a man to consider in his mind the examples of
such, who greedily and covetously (as it were:) did for a long time enjoy their
lives. What have they got more, then they whose deaths have been untimely? Are
not they themselves dead at the last? as Cadicianus, Fabius, Julianus, Lepidus,
or any other who in their life time having buried many; were at the last buried
themselves. The whole space of any man's life, is but little; and as little as
it is, with what troubles, with what manner of dispositions, and in the society
of how wretched a body must it be passed? Let it be therefore unto thee
altogether as a matter of indifferency. For if thou shall look backward;
behold, what an infinite Chaos of time does present it self unto thee; and as
infinite a Chaos, if thou shall look forward, In that which is so infinite,
what difference can there be between that which lives but three days, and
that which lives three ages?

XLIII. Let thy course ever be, the most compendious way. The most compendious,
is that which is according to nature; [that is,] in all both words and deeds,
ever to follow that which is most sound and perfect. For such a resolution will
free a man from all trouble, strife, dissembling, and ostentation.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
IN the morning when thou find thy self unwilling to rise, consider with
thy self presently, it is to go about a man's work that I am stirred up. Am I
then yet unwilling to go about that, for which I my self was borne and
brought forth into this world? Or was I made for this, to lay me down, and
make much of my self in a warm bed? O but this is pleasing. And was it then
for this that thou were borne, that thou might enjoy pleasure? Was it not in
very truth for this, that thou might [alwayes] be busy and in action? See
thou not [how all things in the world be sides,] how every tree and plant, how
sparrowes and ants, spiders and bees: how all in their kind are intent [as it
were] orderly to perform whatsoever (toward the preservation of this orderly
Universe; or, of this Universe, which does consist of Order) naturally does
become and belong unto them? And wilt not thou do that, which belongs* unto a
man to do? Wilt not thou run to do that, which thy nature does require? But
thou must have some rest. Yes, thou must. Nature has of that also, as well as
of eating and drinking, allowed thee a certain stint. But thou go beyond
thy stint, and beyond that which would suffice, and in matter of action, there
thou come short of that which thou may. It must needs be therefore, that
thoudost not love thy self, for if thou did, thou would also love thy
Nature, and that which thy nature does propose unto her self as her end.
Others, as many as take pleasure in their trade and profession, can even pine
themselves at their works, and neglect their bodies and their food for it; and
do thou less honor thy nature, then an ordinary mechanic his trade, or a
good dancer his art? then a covetous man his silver, and a vain glorious man
applause? These to whatsoever they take an affection, can be content to want
their meat and sleep, to further that every one which he affects: and shall
actions tending to the common good of humane society, seem more vile unto
thee, or worthy of less respect, and intention?

II. How easy a thing is it for a man to put off from him all turbulent
adventitious imaginations, and presently to be in perfect rest and
tranquillity?

III. Think thy self fit and worthy to speak, or to do any thing, that is
according to Nature, and let not the reproach, or report of some that may ensue
upon it, [ever] deter thee. If it be right and honest to be spoken or done,
undervalue not thy self so much, as to be discouraged from it. As for them,
they have their own rational overruling part, and their own proper
inclination: which thou must not stand and look about to take notice of, but
go on straight, whither both thine own particular, and the common nature do
lead thee; and the way of both these, is but one.

IV. I continue my course by actions according to nature, until I fall and
cease, breathing out my last breath into that air, by which continually
breathed in I did live; and falling upon that earth, out of whose gifts and
fruits my father gathered his seed, my mother her blood, and my nurse her milk,
out of which for so many years I have been provided, both of meat and
drink. And lastly, which bears me that tread upon it, and bears with me
that so many ways do abuse it, [or, and so freely make use of it, so many
ways to so many ends.]

V. No man can admire thee for thy sharp acute language, [such is thy natural
disabilitie that way.] Be it so: yet there be many other [good] things, for the
want of which thou can not plead the want of natural ability. Let them be
seen in thee, which depend wholly from thee; sincerity, gravity,
laboriousnesse, contempt of pleasures; be not querulous, be content with
little, be kind, be free; avoid all superfluity, all vain prattling; be
magnanimous. Do not thou perceive, how many things there be, which
notwithstanding any pretense of natural indisposition and unfitness, thou
might have performed and exhibited, and yet still thou do voluntarily
continue drooping downwards? Or will thou say, that it is through defect of
thy natural constitution, that thou art constrained to murmur, to be base and
wretched, to flatter; now to accuse, and now toplease, and pacify thy body: to
be vainglorious, to be so guidy headed, and unsettled in thy thoughts? nay
(witnesses be the Gods) of all these thou might have been rid long ago:
Only, this thou must have been contented with, to have borne the blame of one
that is somewhat slow and dull. Wherein thou must so exercise thy self, as one
who neither does much take to heart this his natural defect, nor yet pleases
himself in it.

VI. Such there, be, who when they have done a good turn to any, are ready to
set them on the score for it, [and to require retaliatio^.] Others there be,
who though they stand not upon retaliation, to require any, yet they think
with themselves nevertheless, that such a one is their debtor, and they know
[as their word is] what they have done. Others again there be, who when they
have done any such thing, do not so much as know what they have done; but are
like unto the vine, which bears her grapes, and when once she has borne her
own proper fruit, [is contented] and seeks for no further recompense. As a
horse after a race, and a hunting dog when he has hunted, and a Be when she
has made her honey, look not for applause and commendation; so neither does
that man [that rightly does understand his own nature] when he has done a
good turn: See B. IV III.
but from one does proceed to do another, even as the vine after she has
once borne fruit in her own proper season, is ready for another time. Thou
therefore must be one of them, who what they do, barely do it without any
further thought, and are in a manner unsensible of what they do. Nay [but, will
some reply perchance] this very thing a rational man is bound unto, to
understand what it is, that he does. For it is the property, say they, of one
that is naturally sociable, to be sensible, that he does operate sociably:
nay, and to desire, that the party himself that is sociably dealt with,
should be sensible of it too. [I answer;] That which thou say is true
indeed, but the true meaning of that which is said, thou do not understand.
And therefore art thou one of those first, whom I mentioned. For they also are
led by a probable appearance of reason. But if thou do desire to understand
truly what it is that is said, fear not that thou shall therefore give over
any sociable action.

VII. The form of the Athenians prayer did run thus; O rain, rain good
Jupiter, upon all the grounds and fields that belong to the Athenians. Either
we should not pray at all, or thus absolutely, and freely; [and not every one
for himself in particular alone.]

VIII. As we say commonly, The physician has praescribed unto this man,
riding; unto another, cold baths; unto a third, to go bare foot: so it is
alike to say, The Nature of the Universe has praescribed unto this man
sickness, or blindness, or some loss, or damage, or some such thing: For as
there, when we say of a physician that he has praescribed any thing, our
meaning is, that he has appointed this for that, as subordinate and conducing
to health so here, whatsoever does happen unto any, is ordained unto him as a
thing subordinate unto the fates, and therefore do we say of such things,
that they do (...), that is, happen, or, fall together; as of square stones,
when either in walls, or pyramides in a certain position they fit one another,
and agree as it were in an harmony, the Masons say, that they do (...); as if
thou should say, fall together: so that in the general, [though the things
be diverse that make it] yet the consent or harmony it self is but one. And as
the whole world is made up of all the particular bodies of the world, one
perfect and complete body, of the same nature that particular bodies; so is the
Destiny of particular causes [and events] one general one, of the same nature
that particular causes are. What I now say, even they that are mere Idiots are
not ignorant of: for they say commonly (...), that is, This his Destiny has
brought upon him. This therefore is [by the Fates] properly and particularly
brought upon this, as that unto this [in particular] is by the physician
praescribed. These therefore let us accept of in like manner, as we do those
that are praescribed unto us by our Physicians, For them also in themselves
shall we find to contain many harsh things, but we nevertheless, in hope
of health, and recovery, accept of them. Let the fulfilling and accomplishment
of those things which the common nature has determined, be unto thee as thy
health. Accept then, and be pleased with whatsoever does happen, though
otherwise harsh and unpleasing, as tending to that end, to the health and
welfare of the Universe, and to Joves happiness and prosperity. For this
whatsoever it be, should not have been (...)
produced, had it not (...)
conduced to the good of the Universe. For neither does any ordinary particular
nature bring any thing to pass, that is not to whatsoever is within the sphere
of its own proper administration and government agreeable and subordinate. For
these two considerations then thou must be well pleased with any thing that
does happen unto thee. First, because that for thee properly it was brought to
pass, and unto thee it was praescribed; and that from the very beginning by
the series and connection of the first causes, it has ever had a reference unto
thee. And secondly, because the good success and perfect welfare, and indeed
the very continuance of Him, that is the Administrator of the whole, does in a
manner depend on it. For the whole (because whole, therefore entire and
perfect:) is maimed, and mutilated, if thou shall cut off any thing at all,
whereby the coherence, and contiguity (as of parts, so) of causes, is
maintained and preserved. Of which certain it is, that thou do (as much as
lies in thee:) cut off, and in some sort violently take somewhat away, as
often as thou art displeased [with any thing that happens.]

IX. Be not discontented, be not disheartened, be not out of hope, if often
it succeed not so well with thee punctually and precisely to do all things
according to the right dogmata, but being once cast off, return unto them
again: and as for those many and more frequent occurrences [either of worldly
distractions, or humane infirmities] which as a man thou can not but in some
measure be subject unto, be not thou discontented with them; but however, love
and affect that [only] which thou do return unto: [a Philosophers life, and
proper occupation after the most exact manner.] And when thou do return to
thy philosophy, return not unto it [as the manner of some is after play and
liberty as it were] to their School Masters and Pedagogues; but as they that
have sore eyes to their sponge and egg: or as another to his cataplasme; or as
others to their fomentations: so shall not thou make it a matter of ostentation
at all to obey reason; but of ease and comfort. And remember that philosophy
requires nothing of thee, but what thy nature requires, and would thou thy
self desire any thing that is not according to nature? for which of these
[saiest thou; that which is according to Nature or against it,] is of it self
more kind and pleasing? Is it not for that respect especially, that pleasure it
self is to so many men's hurt and overthrow, most prevalent, [because esteemed
commonly most kind, and natural?] But consider well whether magnanimity
rather, and true liberty, and true simplicity, and equanimitie, and holiness;
whether these be not most kind and natural? And prudencie it self, what more
kind and amiable then it, when thou shall truly consider with thy self, what it
is through all the proper objects of thy rational intellectual faculty
curre^tly to go on without any fall or stumble? As for the things of the world,
their true nature is in a manner so involved with obscurity, that unto many
philosophers, and those no mean ones, they seemed altogether incomprehensible:
and the Stoics themselves, though they judge them not altogether
incomprehensible, yet scarce and not without much difficulty, comprehensible,
so that all assent of ours is fallible, for who is he that is infallible [in
his co^clusions?] From the nature of things, pass now unto their subjects and
matter: how temporary, how vile are they? such as may be in the power and
possession of some abominable loose liver, of some common strumpet, of some
notorious oppressor, and extortioner. Pass from thence to the dispositions of
them that thou do ordinarily converse with, how hardly do we bear, even
with the most loving and amiable? that I may not say, how hard it is for us to
bear even with our own selves. In such obscurity, and impuritie [of things:]
in such [and so continuall] a flux both of the substances and time; both of
the motions themselves, and things moved; what it is that we can fasten upon;
either to honor, and respect especially; or seriously, and studiously to seek
after; I cannot so much as conceive. For indeed they are things contrary.

X. Thou must comfort thy self in the expectation of thy natural dissolution,
and [in the mean time] not grieve at the delay; but rest contented in those
two things. First, that nothing shall happen unto thee, which is not according
to the nature of the Universe. Secondly, that it is in thy power, to do
nothing against thine own proper god, and [inward] Spirit. For it is not in
any man's power to constrain thee to transgress against him.

XI. What is the use that now at this present I make of my soul? Thus from
time to time and upon all occasions thou must put this question to thy self,
what is now that part of mine which they call the rational mistress part,
employed about? Whose soul do I now properly possess? a childs? or a
youths? a woman's? or a tyrants? some brute, or some wild beasts soul?

XII. What those things are in themselves, which by the greatest part are
esteemed good, thou may gather even from this. For if a man shall hear
things mentioned as good, which are really good indeed, such as are prudence,
temperance, justice, fortitude; after so much heard and conceived, he cannot
endure to hear of any more, for the word good is properly spoken of them. But
as for those which by the vulgar are esteemed good, if he shall hear them
mentioned as good, he does hearken for more. He is well contented to hear,
that what is spoken by the Comaedian, is but familiarly and popularly spoken,
so that even the vulgar apprehend the difference. For why is it else, that this
offends not and needs not to be excused, [when virtues are styled good:] but
that which is spoken in commendation of wealth, pleasure, or honor, we
entertain it only as merrily and pleasantly spoken? Proceed therefore, and
inquire further, whether it may not be that those things also which being
mentioned [upon the stage] were merrily, [and with great applause of the
multitude] scoffed at with this jest, that they that possessed them, had not in
all the world of their own, (such was their affluence and plenty:) so much as
a place where to avoid their excrements. Whether, I say, these ought not also
in very deed to be much respected, and esteemed of, as the only things that are
truly good.

XIII. All that I consist of, is either form or marter. No corruption can
reduce either of these unto nothing: for neither did I of nothing become a
subsistent creature. Every part of mine then, will by mutation be disposed into
a certain part of the whole world, and that in time into another part; and so
in insinitum; by which kind of mutation, I also became what I am, and so did
they that begot me, and they before them, and so upwards in infinitum For so we
may be allowed to speak, though the age and government of the world, be to
some certain periods of time limited, and confined.

XIV. Reason, and rational power, are faculties which content themselves with
themselves, See B. IV N. I. B. V. N. X VII. B. VI. N. XLV.
and their own proper operations. And as for their first inclination and
motion, that they take from themselves. But their progress is right to the end
and object, which is in their way, as it were, and lies just before them: that
is, which is feasible and possible, whether it be that which at the first they
proposed to themselves, or no.] For which reason also such actions are termed
(...), to intimate the directnesse of they way, [by which they are atcheived.]
Nothing must be thought to belong to a man, which does not belong unto him as
he is a man. These [the event of purposes] are not things required in a man.
The nature of man does not profess any such things. The final ends and
consummations [of actions] are nothing at all to a man's nature. The end
therefore of a man, or that summum bonum whereby that end is fulfilled, cannot
consist in the consummation of actions [purposed and intended.] Again,
concerning these [outward worldly] things, were it so that any of them did
properly belong unto man, then would it not belong unto man, to contemn them
and to stand in opposition with them. Neither would he be praise worthy that
can live without them; or he good, (if these were good indeed:) who of his own
accord does deprive himself of any of them. But we see contrary wise, that the
more a man does withdraw himself from these [wherein external pomp and
greatness does consist,] or any other like these; or the better he does bear
with the loss of these, the better he is accounted.

XV. Such as thy thoughts and ordinary cogitations are, such will thy mind be
in time. For the soul does as it were receive its tincture from the phancies,
and imaginations. Dye it therefore and thoroughly soke it with the assiduitie of
these cogitations. As for example. Wheresoever thou may live, there it is in
thy power to live well and happy. But thou may live at the Court, there then
also may thou live well and happy. Again, that which every thing is made
for, he is also made unto that, and cannot but naturally incline unto it. That
which any thing does naturally incline unto, therein is his end. Wherein the
end of every thing does consist, therein also does his good and benefit
consist. Society therefore is the proper good of a rational creature. For that
we are made for society, it has long since been demonstrated. Or can any man
make any question of this, that whatsoever is naturally worse and inferior, is
ordinarily subordinated to that which is better? and that those things that are
best, are made one for another? And those things that have souls, are better
then those that have none? and of those that have, those best that have
rational souls?

XVI. To desire things impossible, is the part of a mad man. But it is a thing
impossible, that wicked men should not commit some such things. Neither does
any thing happen to any man, which in the ordinary course of nature as natural
unto him does not happen. See Note upon B XI. N. III.
Again, the same things happen unto others also. And truly, if either he that
is ignorant that such a thing has happened unto him, or he that is ambitious
to be commended for his magnanimity, can be patient, and is not grieved: is it
not a grievous thing, that either ignorance or a vain desire to please and to
be commanded, should be more powerful and effectual then true prudence? As
for the things themselves, they touch not the soul, neither can they have any
access unto it: neither can they of themselves any ways either affect it, or
move it. For she her self alone can affect and move her self, and according as
the Dogmata and opinions are, which she does vouchsafe her self, so are those
things which, as accessories, have any coexistence with her.

XVII. After one consideration, man is nearest unto us; as we are bound to do
them good, and to bear with them, but as he may oppose any of our true proper
actions, so man is unto me but as a thing indifferent: even as the sun, or
the wind, or some wild beast. By some of these it may be, that some operation
or other of mine, may be hindered; however, of my mind and resolution it
self, See B. IV. N. I.
there can be no let or impediment, by reason of that ordinary constant both
Exception [or, Reservation wherewith it inclines:] and ready Conversion [of
objects; from that which may not be, to that which may be, which in the
prosecution of its inclinations, as occasion serves, it does observe.] For by
these the mind does turn and convert any impediment whatsoever, to be her
aim and purpose. So that what before was the impediment, is now the principal
object of her working; and that which before was in her way, is now her
readiest way.

XVIII. Honor that which is chiefest and most powerful in the world, and that
is it, which makes use of all things, and gouernes all things. So also in thy
self, honor that which is chiefest, and most powerful, and is of one kind
and nature with that [which we now spoke of.] For it is the very same, which
being in thee, turns all other things to its own use, and by whom also thy
life is governed.

XIX. That which does not hurt the City it self, cannot hurt any Citizen.
This rule thou must remember to apply and make use of upon every conceit and
apprehension of wrong. If the whole City be not hurt by this, neither am I
certainly. And if the whole be not, why should I make it my private grievance?
[consider rather] what it is wherein he is overseen [that is thought to have
done the wrong.] [Againe,] often meditate how swiftly all things that subsist,
and all things that are done in the world, are carried away, and as it were
conveyed out of sight: For both the substances themselves, (we see) as a
flood, are in a continual flux; and all actions in a perpetual change; and
the causes themselves, subject to a thousand alterations, neither is there any
thing almost, that may ever be said to be now settled, and constant. Next unto
this, and which follows upon it, [consider] both the infiniteness of the time
already passed, and the immense vastness of that which is to come, wherein all
things are to be resolved, and annihilated. Art not thou then a very fool,
who for these things, art either puffed up with pride, or distracted with
cares, or as for a thing that would trouble thee for a very long time, can
find in thy heart to make such moanes? Consider the whole Universe, whereof
thou art but a very little part, and the whole age of the world together,
whereof but a short and very momentarie portion is allotted unto thee; and all
the Fates and Destinies together, of which how much is it that comes to thy
part and share! [Againe:] Another does trespass against me. Let him look to
that. He is master of his own disposition, and of his own operation. I for
my part am in the mean time in possession of as much, as the common Nature
would have me to possess: and that which mine own Nature would have me do,
I do.

XX. Let not that chief commanding part of thy soul be ever subject to any
variation through any corporal either pain or pleasure, neither suffer it to
be mixed with these, but let it both circumscribe its self, and confine those
affections to their own proper parts and members. But if at any time they do
reflect, and rebound upon the mind and understanding (as in an united and
compacted body it must needs;) then must thou not go about to resist sense and
feeling, it being natural. However let not thy understanding [to this natural
sense and feeling, which whether unto our flesh pleasant or painful, is unto
as nothing properly:] add an opinion of either good or bad, [and all is well.]

XXI. To live with the Gods. He lives with the Gods, who at all times affords
unto them the spectacle of a soul, both contented and well pleased with
whatsoever is afforded, or allotted unto her; and performing whatsoever is
pleasing to that Spirit, whom (being part of himself) Jove has appointed to
every man as his overseer and governor.

XXII. Be not angry neither with him whose breath, neither with him whose ala
[or arm holes] are offensive. What can he do? such is his breath [naturally]
and, such are his ala; and from such, such an effect, and such a smell must of
necessity proceed. O, but the man (say thou:) has understanding in him, and
might of himself know, that he by standing near, cannot choose but offend.
And thou also (God bless thee:) have understanding. Let thy reasonable
faculty, work upon his reasonable faculty; show him his fault, admonish him.
If he hearken unto thee, thou have cured him, and there will be no more
occasion of anger.

XXIII. Where there shall neither roarer be, nor wheremonger. See B. IV. N. III
[Why so?] As thou do purpose to live, when thou have retired thy self [to
some such place, where neither roarer, nor wheremonger is:] so may thou
here. And if they will not suffer thee, then may thou leave thy life [rather
then thy ca^^ing,] but so as one that does not think himself any ways
wronged. Only as one would say, Here is a smoal^^; I will out of it. And what a
great matter is this? Now till some such thing force me out, I will continue
free; neither shall any man hinder me to do what I will, and my will shall
ever be by the proper nature of a reasonable and sociable creature, regulated
and directed.

XXIV. That rational essence by which the Universe is governed, is for
community and society; and therefore has it both made the things that are
worse, for the best, and those which are best allied and knit together, as it
were in an harmony. See thou not how it has subordinated, and coordinated?
and how it has distributed unto every thing according to its worth? and those
which have the praeeminencie and superiority above all, has it united
together, into a mutual consent and agreement.

XXV. How have thou carried thy self hitherto toward the Gods? toward thy
Parents? toward thy Brethren? toward thy Wife? toward thy Children? toward
thy Masters? thy foster Fathers? thy Friends? thy Domestics? thy Servants? Is
it so with thee, that hitherto thou have neither by word or deed wronged any
of them? Remember withal through how many things thou have already passed, and
how many thou have been able to endure; so that now the Legend of thy life is
full, and thy charge is accomplished. Again, how many truly good things have
certainly by thee been discerned? how many pleasures, how many pains have
thou passed over with comtempt? how many things [externally] glorious have thou
despised? toward how many perverse unreasonable men, have thou carried thy
self kindly, and discreetly?

XXVI. Why should imprudent unlearned souls trouble that which is both
learned, and prudent? And which is that that is so? she that understands the
beginning and the end, and has the true knowledge of that Rational essence,
that passes through all things subsisting, and through all ages [being ever
the same] disposing and dispensing (as it were) this Universe by certain
periods of time.

XXVII. Within a very little while, thou will be either ashes, or a sceletum;
and a Name perchance; and perchance, not so much as a Name. And what is that
but an [empty] sound, and a rebounding Echo? Those things which in this life
are dearest unto us, and of most account, they are [in themselves] but vain,
putrid, contemptible. The most weighty and serious, if rightly esteemed, but as
puppies, biting one another: or untoward children, now laughing and then
crying. As for faith, and modesty, and justice, and truth, they long since [as
one of the Poets has it] have abandoned this spacious Earth, and retired
themselves unto Heaven. What is it then that does keep thee here, if things
sensible be so mutable and unsettled? and the senses so obscure, and so
fallible? and our souls nothing but an exhalation of blood? and to be in
credit among such, be but vanity? What is it that thou do stay for? an
Extinction, or a Translation; either of them with a propitious and contented
mind. But till that time come, what will content thee? what else, but to
worship and praise the Gods; and to do good unto men. To bear with them, and
to forbear to do them any wrong. And for all external things belonging
either to this thy wretched body, or life, to remember that they are neither
thine, nor in thy power.

XXVIII. Thou may always speed, if thou will but make choice of the right
way; if in the course both of thine opinions and actions, thou will observe a
true method. These two things be common to the souls, as of God, so of men,
and of every reasonable creature, first that [in their own proper worke] they
cannot be hindered by any thing: and secondly, that their happiness does
consist in a disposition to, and in the practice of righteousness; and that in
these their desire is terminated.

XXIX. If this neither be my wicked act, nor an act any ways depending from
any wickedness of mine, and that by it the public is not hurt; what does it
concern me? And wherein can the public be hurt? For thou must not altogether
be carried by conceit [and common opinion:] but though thou must after thy best
ability as occasion shall require, though but in middle [or, worldly] things
they sustain any damage, ever be ready to help them; yet do not thou
conceive that they are truly hurt thereby: for that is not right. But as that
old foster Father [in the Comaedie] being now to take his leave does [with a
great deal of Ceremony:] require his Foster Child's rhombus, remembering
nevertheless that it is but a rhombus; so here also [do thou likewise]

XXX. What is all this pleading and public bawling for at the Courts? O man,
have thou forgotten what those things are! yea but they are things that others
much care for, and highly esteem of. Will thou therefore be a fool too? Once
I was; [let that suffice.]

XXXI. Let death surprise me when it will, and where it will, I may be
(...)[or, a happy man] nevertheless. For he is a happy man, who [in his life
time] deals unto himself a happy lot and portion. A happy lot and portion
is, good inclinations of the soul, good desires, good actions.

THE SIXTH BOOK.
THe matter it self, of which the Universe does consist, is of it self very
tractable and pliable. That rational essence that does govern it, has in it
self no cause to do evil. It has no evil [in it selfe] neither can it do
any thing that is evil; neither can any thing be hurt by it. And all things
are done and determined according to its will and prescript.

II. Be it all one unto thee, whether half frozen or well warm; whether only
slumbering or after a full sleep; whether discommended or commended thou do
thy duty: or whether dying or doing somewhat else; for that also to die, must
among the rest be reckoned as one of the duties and actions of our lives.

III. Look in, let not either the proper quality, or the true worth of any
thing pass thee, [before thou have fully apprehended it.]

IV. All substances come soon to their change, and either they shall be
resolved by way of exhalation (if so be that all things shall be reunited into
one substance) or [as others maintain:] they shall be scattered and dispersed.
As for that Rational Essence by which all things are governed, as it best
understands it self, both its own disposition, and what it does, and what
matter it has to do with [and accordingly does all things; so we that do not,
no wonder, if we wonder at many things, the reasons whereof we cannot
comprehend.]

V. The best kind of revenge is, not to become like unto them.

VI. Let this be thy only joy, and thy only comfort, from one sociable [kinde]
action [without intermission] to pass unto another, God being ever in thy
mind.

VII. The rational commanding part, as it alone can stir up and turn it
self; so it makes both it self to be, and every thing that happens, to
appear unto it self, as it will it self.

VIII. According to the nature of the Universe all things [particular] are
determined, not according to any other nature, either about compassing and
containing; or within, dispersed and contained; or without, depending. Either
this Universe is a mere confused mass, and an intricate context of things,
which shall in time be scattered and dispersed again: or it is an Union
consisting of Order, and administered by providence. If the first, why should I
desire to continue any longer in this fortuit confusion and commixtion? or why
should I take care for any thing else, but that as soon as may be I may be
Earth [againe?] And why should I trouble my self any more [whilest I seek to
please the gods?] Whatsoever I do, Dispersion is my end, and will come upon me
whether I will or not. But if the latter be, then am not I religious in vain;
then will I be quiet and patient, and put my trust in Him, who is the Governor
of all.

IX. Whenever by some present hard occurrences thou art constrained to be in
some sort troubled and vexed, return unto thy self as soon as may be, and be
not out of tune longer then thou must needs. For so shall thou be the better
able to keep thy part another time, and to maintain the harmony, if thou
do use thy self to this continually; once out, presently to have recourse
unto it, and to begin again.

X. If it were that thou had at one time both a stepmother, and a natural
mother living, thou would honor and respect her also; nevertheless to
thine own natural mother would thy refuge, and recourse be continually. So
let the Court and thy Philosophy be unto thee. Have recourse unto it often,
and comfort thy self in her, by whom it is that those other things are made
tolerable unto thee, and thou also in those things not intolerable unto others.

XI. How mavelous useful it is for a man to represent unto himself meats,
and all such things that are for the mouth, under a right apprehension and
imagination? as for example: This is the carkase of a fish; this of a bird; and
this of a hog. And again more generally; This Phalernum, [this excellent
highly commended wine,] is but the bare juice of an ordinary grape. This purple
robe, but sheep hairs, dyed with the blood of a shellfish. So for coitus,
it is but the attrition of an ordinary base entrall; and the excretion of a
little Greek (...). See B. IV 39.
vile snivell; with a certain kind of convulsion: [according to Hippocrates
his opinion.] How excellent useful are these lively phancies and
representation of things, thus penetrating and passing through the objects, to
make their true nature known and apparent! This must thou use all thy life
long, and upon all occasions: and then especially, when matters are apprehended
as of great worth and respect, [thy art and care must be] to uncover them, and
to behold their vileness, and to take away from them all those serious
circumstances and expressions, under which they made so grave a show. For
outward pomp and appearance, is a great jugler; and then especially art thou
most in danger to be beguiled by it, Gr: (...) See B III N. VII.
when (to a man's thinking) thou most seem to be employed about matters of
moment.

XII. See what Crates pronounces concerning Xenocrates himself.

XIII. Those things which the common sort of people do admire, are most of
them such things as are very general, and may be comprehended under things
merely natural, or naturally affected and qualified: as stones, wood, figs,
vines, olives. Those that be admired by them that are more moderate and
restrained, are comprehended under things animated: as flocks, and herds.
Those that are yet more gentile and curious, their admiration is commonly
confined to reasonable creatures only; not in general as they are reasonable,
but as they are capable of art, or of some craft and subtle invention; or
perchance barely to reasonable creatures; as they that delight in the
possession of many slaves. But he that honors a reasonable soul ingenerall,
as it is reasonable and naturally sociable, does little regard any thing else:
and above all things is careful to preserve his own, in the continual habit
and exercise both of reason and sociablenesse: and thereby does cooperate with
him, of whose nature he does also participate; [God.]

XIV. Some things hasten to be, and others to be no more. And even whatsoever
now is, some part thereof has already perished. Perpetual fluxes and
alterations renew the world, as the perpetual course of time does make the age
of the world (of it self infinite) to appear always fresh and new. In such a
flux and course of all things, what of these things that hasten so fast away
should any man regard, since among all there is not any that a man may fasten
and fix upon? as if a man would settle his affection upon some ordinary
sparrow flying by him, who is no sooner seen, then out of sight. For we must
not think otherwise of our lives, then as a mere exhalation of blood, or of
an ordinary respiration of air. For what [in our common apprehension] is, to
breath in the air and to breath it out again, which we do daily: so much is
it and no more, at once to breath out all thy respirative faculty into that
common air from whence but lately (as being but from yesterday, and today,)
thou did first breath it in, and with it, life.

XV. Not vegetative spiration, it is not surely (which plants have) that [in
this life] should be so dear unto us; nor sensitive respiration, the proper
life of beasts, both tame and wild; nor this our imaginative faculty; nor that
we are subject to be led and carried up and down by the strength and violence
of our sensual appetites; or that we can gather, and live together; or that
we can feed: for that in effect is no better, then that we can void the
excrements of our food. What is it then that should be dear unto us? to hear
a clattering noise? if not that, then neither to be applauded by the tongues of
men. For the praises of many tongues, is in effect no better, then the
clattering of so many tongues. If then neither applause, what is there
remaining that should be dear unto thee? This I think: that [in all thy
motions and actions] thou be moved, and restrained according to thine own true
natural constitution and construction only. And to this even ordinary arts and
professions do lead us. For it is that which every art does aim at, that
whatsoever it is, that is by art effected and prepared, may be fit for that
work that it is prepared for. This is the end that he that dresseth the vine,
and he that takes upon him either to tame colts, or to train up dogs, does
aim at. What else does the education of Children, and all learned professions
tend unto? Certainly then it is that, which should be dear unto us also. If in
this particular it go well with thee, care not for the obteining of other
things. But is it so, that thou can not but respect other things also? Then
can not thou truly be free; then can thou not have self content: then
will thou ever be subject to passions. For it is not possible, but that thou
must be envious, and jealous, and suspicious of them who [thou knowest] can
bereave thee of such things; and again, a secret underminer of them, whom thou
see in present possession of that which is dear unto thee. To be short, See
Note 5. upon the II. B. out of Epictetus, and N. XXXVI. of this VI. B
he must of necessity be full of confusion within himself, and often accuse
the Gods, whosoever stands in need of these things. But if thou shall honor
and respect thy mind only, that will make thee acceptable toward thy self,
toward thy friends very tractable; and conformable and concordant with the
Gods; that is, accepting with praises whatsoever they shall think good to
appoint and allot unto thee.

XVI. Under, above, and about, See Job 28.1.2. to 12.13. etc.
are the motions of the Elements: but the motion of virtue, is none of those
motions, but is somewhat more excellent and divine. Whose way (to speed and
prosper in it) must be through a way, that is not easily comprehended.

XVII. Who can choose but wonder at them? They will not speak well of them
that are at the same time with them, and live with them; yet they themselves
are very ambitious, that they that shall follow, whom they have never seen,
nor shall ever see, should speak well of them. As if a man should grieve that
he has not been commended by them, that lived before him.

XVIII. Do not ever conceive any thing impossible to man, which by thee
cannot, or not without much difficulty be effected; but whatsoever in general
thou can conceive possible and proper unto any man, think that very possible
unto thee also.

XIX. Suppose that at the Palaestra some body has all to torn thee with his
nails, and has broken thy head. Well, thou art wounded. Yet thou do not
exclame; thou art not offended with him. Thou do not suspect him for it
afterward, as one that watches to do thee a mischief. Yea even then, though
thou do thy best to save thy self from him, yet not from him as an enemy. It
is not by way of any suspicious indignation, but by way of gentle and friendly
declination. Keep the same mind and disposition in other parts of thy life
also. For many things there be, which we must conceit and apprehend, as though
we had had to do with an antagonist at the Palaestra. For as I said, it is
very possible for us to avoid and decline, though we neither suspect, nor hate.

XX. If any body shall reprove me, and shall make it apparent unto me, that in
any either opinion or action of mine I do err, I will most gladly retract.
For it is the truth that I seek after, by which I am sure that never any man
was hurt; and as sure, that he is hurt that continues in any error, or
ignorance whatsoever.

XXI. I for my part will do what belongs unto me; as for other things,
whether things unsensible or things irrational; or if rational, yet deceived
and ignorant of the true way, they shall not trouble or distract me. For as
for those creatures which are not endued with reason, and all other things and
matters of the world whatsoever, I freely, and generously, as one endued with
reason, of things that have none, make use of them. And as for men, toward
them as naturally partakers of the same reason, my care is to carry my self
sociably. But whatsoever it is that thou art about, remember to call upon the
Gods. And as for the time how long thou shall live to do these things, let it
be altogether indifferent unto thee, for even three such hours are sufficient.

XXII. Alexander of Macedon, and he that dressed his mules when once dead, both
came to one. For either they were both resumed into those original rational
essences from whence all things in the world are propagated; or both after one
fashion were scattered into Atoms.

XXIII. Consider how many different things, See B. IV Number. XXXIII
whether they concern our bodies, or our souls, in a moment of time come to
pass in every one of us, and so thou will not wonder if many more things or
rather all things that are done, can at one time subsist, and coexist in that
both One and General, which we call the World.

XXIV. If any should put this question unto thee, how this word Antoninus is
written, would thou not presently fix thine intention upon it, and utter
out in order every letter of it? And if any shall begin to gain say thee,
and quarrel with thee about it; will thou quarrel with him again, or rather
go on meekly as thou have begun, until thou have numbered out every letter?
Here then likewise remember, that every duty that belongs unto a man does
consist of some certain letters or numbers as it were, to which without any
noise or tumult keeping thy self, thou must orderly proceed to thy proposed
end, forbearing to quarrel with him that would quarrel and fall out with thee.

XXV. Is it not a cruel thing to forbid men to affect those things, which they
conceive to agree best with their own natures, and to tend most to their own
proper good and behoof? But thou after a sort deniest them this liberty, as
often as thou art angry with them for their sins. For surely it is with an
opinion of their own proper good and commodity, that they are lead unto such
things. But it is not so, thou therefore teach them better, and make it appear
unto them: but be not thou angry with them.

XXVI. Death is a cessation from the impressions of the senses, the tyranny of
the passions, the errors of the mind, and the servitude of the body.

XXVII. If in this kind of life thy body be able to hold out, it is a shame
that thy soul should faint first, and give over. Take heed, lest [of a
Philosopher] thou become a [meere] Caesar in time, and receive a new tincture
[from the Court.] For it may happen [if thou do not take heed.] Keep thy
self therefore, truly simple, good, sincere, grave, free from all ostentation,
a lover of that which is just, religious, kind, tender hearted, strong and
vigorous to undergo any thing that becomes thee. Endeavor to continue such,
as philosophy [hadst thou wholly and constantly applied thy self unto it]
would have made, and secured thee. Worship the gods, procure the welfare of
men, this life is short. Charitable actions, and a holy disposition, is the
only fruit of this earthly life.

XXVIII. Do all things as becomes the Disciple of Antoninus [Pius.] Remember
his resolute constancy in things that were done by him according to reason,
his equabilitie in all things, his sanctity; the cheerfulness of his
countenance, his sweetness, and how free he was from all vain glory; how
careful to come to the true and exact knowledge of matters in hand, and how
he would by no means give over till he did fully, and plainly understand the
whole state of the business, and how patiently, and without any contestation
he would bear with them, that did unjustly condemn him: how he would never be
overhasty in any thing, nor give ear to slanders and false accusations, but
examine and observe with best diligence the several actions and dispositions
of men. Again, how he was no backbiter, nor easily frighted, nor suspicious,
and in his language free from all affectation and curiosity: and how easily he
would content himself with few things, as lodging, bedding, clothing, and
ordinary nourishment, and attendance. How able to endure labor, how patient;
able through his spare diet to continue from morning to evening without any
necessity of withdrawing before his accustomed hours to the necessities of
nature: his uniformity and constancy in matter of friendship. How he would
bear with them that with all boldness and liberty opposed his opinions; and
even rejoice if any man could better advise him: and lastly, how religious he
was without superstition. [All these things of him remember,] that whenever
thy last hour shall come upon thee, it may find thee, as it did him [ready for
it] in the possession of a good conscience.

XXIX. Stir up thy mind, and recall thy wits again [from thy natural
dreams, and visions:] and when thou art perfectly awaken, and can perceive
that they were but dreams that troubled thee, as one newly awakened [out of
another kind of sleepe] look upon these worldly things with the same mind as
thou did upon those, [that thou saw in thy sleep.]

XXX. I consist of body and soul, unto my body all things are indifferent, for
of it self it cannot affect one thing more then another with apprehension of
any difference; as for my mind, all things which are not within the verge of
her own operation, are indifferent unto her, and for her own operations,
those altogether depend of her; neither does she busy her self about any,
but those that are present; for as for future and passed operation, those also
are now at this present indifferent unto her.

XXXI. As long as the foot does that which belongs unto it to do, and the
hand that which belongs unto it, their labor, whatsoever it be, is not
unnatural. So a man as long as he does that which is proper unto a man, his
labor cannot be against nature; and if it be not against nature, then neither
is it hurtful unto him. [But if it were so that happiness did consist in
pleasure:] how came notorious robbers, impure abominable livers, parricides,
and tyrants, in so large a measure to have their part of pleasures?

XXXII. Do thou not see, how even those that profess mechanique arts,
though in some respect they be no better then mere Idiots, yet they stick
close to the course of their trade, neither can they find in their heart to
decline from it, and is it not a grievous thing that an architect, or a
physician shall respect the course and mysteries of their profession, more then
a man the proper: course and condition of his own nature, Reason, to which the
gods themselves are bound?

XXXIII. Asia, Europe; what are they, but as corners of the whole world; of
which the whole Sea, is but as one drop; and the great mount Athos, but as a
clodde, as all present time is but as one point of eternity. All, petty
things, all things that are soon altered, soon perished. And all things come
from one beginning; either all severally and particularly deliberated and
resolved upon, See B. VII. N. XLIV.
by the general ruler and governor of all; or all by necessary consequence.
So that the dreadful hiatus of a gaping Lion, and all poison, and all hurtful
things, are but (as the thorn and the mire) the necessary consequences of
goodly fair things. Think not of these therefore, as things contrary to those
which thou do much honor, and respect; but consider in thy mind the true
fountain of all.

XXXIV. He that sees the things that are now, has seen all that either was
ever, or ever shall be, for all things are of one kind; and all like one unto
another. Meditate often upon the connection of all things in the world; and upon
the mutual relation that they have one unto another. For all things are after
a sort folded and involved one within another, and by these means all agree
well together. For one thing is consequent unto another, by local motion, by
natural conspiration and agreement, and by substantial union, [or, reduction
of all substances into One.]

XXXV. Fit and accommodate thy self to that estate and to those occurrences,
which by the destinies have been annexed unto thee; and love those men whom
thy fate it is to live with; but love them truly. An instrument, a tool, an
utensile, whatsoever it be, if it be fit for the purpose it was made for it is
as it should be, though he perchance that made and fitted it, be out of sight
and gone. But in things natural, that power which has framed and fitted them,
is and abides within them still: for which reason she ought also the more to
be respected, and we are more obliged (if we may live and pass our time
according to her purpose and intention) to think that all is well with us, and
according to our own minds. After this manner also, and in this respect it
is, that He that is all in all does enjoy his happiness.

XXXVI. What things soever are not within the proper power and jurisdiction of
thine own will [either to compass or avoid,] if thou shall propose unto thy
self any of those things as either good, or evil; it must needs be that
according as thou shall either fall into that which thou do think evil, or
miss of that which thou do think good, so will thou be ready both to
complain of the gods, and to hate those men, who either shall be so indeed, or
shall by thee be suspected as the cause either of thy missing of the one, or
falling into the other. And indeed we must needs commit many evils, if we
incline to any of these things, more or less, with an opinion of any
difference. But if we mind and phancie those things only, as good and bad,
which wholly depend of our own wills, there is no more occasion why we should
either murmur against the gods, or be at enmity with any man.

XXXVII. We all work to one effect, some willingly, and with a rational
apprehension of what we do: others without any such knowledge. As I think
Heraclytus in a place speaks of them that sleep, that even they do work in
their kind, and do confer to the general operations of the World. One man
therefore does cooperate after one sort, and another after another sort; but
even he that does murmur, and to his power does resist and hinder; even he as
much as any [doth cooperate.] For of such also did the World stand in need. Now
do thou consider among which of these thou will rank thy self. For as for
him who is the Administrator of all, See B. VIII N. XXXIII.
he will make good use of thee [whether thou will or no,] and make thee (as a
part and member of the whole) so to cooperate with him, that whatsoever thou
do, shall turn to the furtherance of his own counsels, and resolutions.
But be not thou [for shame] such a part of the whole, as that See the Notes.
vile and ridiculous verse (which Chrysippus in a place does mention) is a part
of the Comaedy.

XXXVIII. Does either the Sun take upon him to do that which belongs to the
rain? or his son Aesculapius that, which unto the Earth does properly belong?
See B. IV N. 22. B. VII. N. 26. last lines.
How is it with every one of the stars in particular? Though they all differ
one from another, [and have their several charges and functions by
themselves,] do they not all nevertheless concur and cooperate to one end?

XXXIX. If so be that the gods have deliberated in particular of those things
that should happen unto me, I must stand to their deliberation, as discreet and
wise. For, that a god should be an imprudent god, is a thing hard even to
conceive: and why should they resolve to do me hurt? for what profit either
unto them or the universe (which they specially take care for) could arise from
it? But, if so be that they have not deliberated of me in particular, certainly
they have of the whole in general, and those things which in consequence and
coherence of this general deliberation happen unto me in particular, I am
bound to embrace and accept of. But if so be that they have not deliberated at
all (which indeed is very irreligious for any man to believe: forthen let us
neither sacrifice, nor pray, nor respect our oaths, neither let us any more use
any of those things, which we persuaded of the presence and [secret]
conversation of the gods among us, daily use and practice:) but, I say, if so
be that they have not indeed [either in general, or particular] deliberated
of any of those things, that happen unto us in this world, yet [God be thanked,
that] of those things that concern my self, it is lawful for me to
deliberate my self, and all my deliberatio^ is but concerning that which may be
to me most profitable. Now, that unto every one, is most profitable, which is
according to his own constitution and Nature. And my Nature is, to be
rational [in all my actions] and as a good, and natural member of a city and
common wealth, toward my fellow members ever to be sociably and kindly
disposed and affected. My City and Country, as I am Antoninus, is Rome; as a
man, the whole world. Those things therefore that are expedient and profitable
to those Cities, are the only things that are good and expedient for me.

XL. Whatsoever in any kind does happen to any one, is expedient to the whole.
And thus much [to content us] might suffice, [that it is expedient for the
whole in general.] But yet this also shall thou generally perceive, if thou
do diligently take heed, that whatsoever [doth happen] to any one man or men.
And now I am content that the word expedient, should more generally be
understood of those things which we otherwise call] middle things, [or, things
indifferent; as health, wealth, and the like.]

XLI. As the ordinary shows of the Theater and of other such places, when thou
art presented with them [ affect thee; as the same things still seen, and in
the same fashion, make the sight ungrateful and tedious; so must all the
things that we see all our life long affect us. For all things, above and
below, are still the same, and from the same [causes.] When then will there be
an end?

XLII. Let the several deaths of men of all sorts, and of all sorts of
professions, and of all sort of nations, be a perpetual object of thy
thoughts, so that thou may even come down to Philestio, Phoebus, and
Origanius. Pass now to other generations. Thither shall we after many
changes, where so many brave Orators are; where so many grave Philosophers;
Heraclytus, Pythagoras, Socrates. Where so many Heroes of the old times; and
then so many brave captains of the latter times; and so many Kings. After all
these, where Eudoxus, Hipparchus, Archimedes; where so many other sharp,
generous, industrious, subtle, peremptory dispositions; and among others, even
they, that have been the greatest scoffers and deriders of the frailty and
brevity of this our humane life; as Menippus, and others, as many as there have
been such as he. Of all these consider, that they long since are all dead,
and gone. And what do they suffer by it! Nay they that have not so much as a
Name remaining, what are they the worse for it? One thing there is, and that
only, which is worth our while in this World, and ought by us much to be
esteemed; and that is, according to truth and righteousness, meekely and
lovingly to converse with false, and unrighteous men.

XLIII. When thou will comfort and cheer thy self, call to mind the several
gifts and virtues of them, whom thou do daily converse with; as for example,
the industry of the one; the modesty of another; the liberality of a third;
of another some other thing. For nothing can so much rejoice thee, as the
resemblances and parallels of several virtues, visible and eminent in the
dispositions of those who live with thee; especially when unto thee many
together do represent themselves: as many as thy mind is well capable of at
once. And therefore thou must have them always in a readiness.

XLIV. Do thou grieve that thou do weigh but so many pounds, and not 300
rather? Just as much reason have thou to grieve that thou must live but so many
years, and not longer. For as for bulcke and substance thou do content thy
self with that proportion of it that is allotted unto thee, so should thou
for time.

XLV. Let us do our best endeavors to persuade them; but however, if Reason
and Justice lead thee to it, do it, though they be never so much against it.
But if any shall by force withstand thee, and hinder thee in it, convert [thy
virtuous inclination from one object unto another, from Justice.] to contented
aequanimitie, and cheerful patience: so that what [in the one] is thy
hinderance, thou may make use of it for the exercise of another virtue: See
B V. N. XIV.
and remember that it was with due exception, and reservatio^, that thou did
at first incline and desire. For thou did not set thy mind upon things
impossible. Upon what then? that all thy desires might ever be moderated with
this due kind of exception, and reservation. And this thou have, and may
always obtain, [whether the thing desired be in thy power or no? And what do
I care for more, if] that for which I was borne, and brought forth into the
world [to rule all my desires with reason and discretion] may be?

XLVI. The ambitious supposes another man's act, [praise and applause] to be
his own happiness; the voluptuous his own sense and feeling; but he that is
wise, his own action.

XLVII. It is in thy power absolutely to exclude all manner of conceit and
opinion, as concerning this matter; and by the same means, to exclude all
grief and sorrow from thy soul. For as for the things and objects themselves,
they of themselves have no such power, whereby to beget and force upon us any
opinion at all.

XLVIII. Use thy self when any man speaks unto thee, so to hearken unto him,
as that in the interim, thou give not way to any other thoughts; that so thou
may (as far as is possible) seem fixed and fastened to his very soul,
whosoever he be that speaks unto thee.

XLIX. That which is not good for the Be hive, cannot be good for the Be.

L. Will either passengers, or patients, find fault and complain, if either
the one be well carried, or the others well cured? Do they take care for any
more then this; the one, that their Shipmaster may bring them safe to land, and
the other, that their Physician may effect their recovery.

LI. How many of them who came into the world at the same time when I did, are
already gone out of it?

LII. To them that are sick of the jaundis, honey seems bitter; and to them
that are bitten by a mad dog, the water terrible; and to children, a little
ball seems a fine thing. And why then should I be angry? or do I think that
error and false opinion is less powerful [ to make men transgress, See B VII
N. 34. B. VIII. 13. etc.
] then either choler, [being immoderate and excessive] to cause the jaundis; or
poison, to cause rage?

LIII. No man can hinder thee to live as thy nature does require. Nothing can
happen unto thee, but what the common good of Nature does require.

LIVE. What manner of men they be whom they seek to please, and what to get,
and by what actions: how soon time will cover and bury all things and how
many it has already buried.

THE SEVENTH BOOK.
What is wickedness? It is that which many times and often thou have already
seen and known [in the world.] And so, as any thing does happen [that might
otherwise trouble thee,] let this memento presently come to thy mind, that it
is that which thou have already often seen and known. Generally, above and
below, thou shall find but the same things. The very same things whereof
ancient stories, middle age stories, and fresh stories are full: whereof towns
are full, and houses full. There is nothing that is new. All things that are,
are both usual and of little continuance.

II. What fear is there that thy Dogmata [or, Philosophical resolutions, and
conclusions] should become dead in thee, [and lose their proper power and
efficacy to make thee live happy,] as long as those proper and correlative
phancies, and representations of things on which they mutually depend (which
continually to stir up and revive is in thy power,) are still kept fresh and
alive? It is in my power concerning this thing [that is happened, whatsoever it
be,] to conceit that which is right and true. If it be, why then am I troubled?
Those things that are without my understanding, are nothing to it at all: [and
that is it only, which does properly concern me.] Be always in this mind,
and thou will be right.

III. [That which most men would think themselves most happy for, and would
prefer before all things, if the gods would grant it unto them after their
deaths] thou may [whilest thou livest] grant unto thy self; to live again.
See the things of the world again; as thou have already seen them. See B IV.
N. 39. B V.N. 27.
For what is it else to live again? Public shows and solemnities with much
pomp and vanity, stage plays, flocks and herds; conflicts and contentions:
a bone thrown to a company of hungry curres; a bait for greedy fishes: the
painfulness, and continual burden-bearing of wretched ants, the running to
and fro of terrified myce; little puppets drawn up and down with wyres and
nerves: [these be the objects of the World.] Among all these thou must stand
steadfast, meekly affected, and free from all manner of indignation; with this
right ratiocination and apprehension, that as the worth is of those things
which a man does affect, so is [in very deed] every man's worth [more or less.]

IV. Word after word, every one by it self, must the things that are spoken be
conceived and understood; and so the things that are done, purpose after
purpose, every one by it self likewise. And as in matter of purposes and
actions, we must presently see what is the proper [use and] relation of every
one; so of words must we be as ready, See B. III. N. XVI. B. IV. N. XXIV.
to consider of every one what is the true meaning, and signification of it
[according to truth and Nature, however it be taken in common use.]

V. Is my reason, and understanding sufficient for this, or not? If it be
sufficient, [without any private applause, or public ostentation] as of an
Instrument, which by nature I am provided of, I will make use of it for the
effecting of such a work. If it be not, and that otherwise it belong not unto
me particularly as a private duty, I will either give it over, and leave it to
some other that can better effect it: or I will endeavor it; but with the
help of some other, who with the joint help of my reason, is able to bring
somewhat to pass, that will now be seasonable and useful for the common good.
For whatsoever I do either by my self, or with some other, the only thing
that I must intend, is, that it be good and expedient for the public. [For as
for praise, consider] how many who once were much commended, are now already
quite forgotten, yea they that commended them, how even they themselves are
long since dead and gone. Be not therefore ashamed, whenever thou must use
the help of others. For whatsoever it be, that lies upon thee to effect, thou
must propose it unto thy self, as the scaling of walls is unto a soldier. And
what if thou through [either] lamenesse [or some other impediment] art not able
to reach unto the top of the battlements alone, which with the help of another
thou may; [wilt thou therefore give it over, or go about it with less
courage and alacrity, because thou can not effect it all alone?]

VI. Let not things future trouble thee. For if necessity so require that they
come to pass, thou shall (whenever that is:) be provided for them with the
same reason, by which whatsoever is now present, is made both tolerable and
acceptable unto thee. All things are linked and knitted together, and the knot
is sacred, neither is there any thing in the world, that is not kind and
natural in regard of any other thing, [or, that has not some kind of
reference, and natural correspondence with whatsoever is in the world
besides.] For all things are ranked together, and by that decency of its due
place and order that each particular does observe, they all concur together
to the making of one and the same (...) [or, World: as if you said, a comely
piece, or an orderly composition.] For all things throughout, there is but one
and the same order; and through all things, one and the same god the same
substance and the same Law. There is one common Reason, and one common Truth,
that belongs unto all reasonable creatures, for neither is there save one
perfection of all creatures that (...)
are of the same kind, and partakers of the same reason.

VII. Whatsoever is material, does soon vanish away into the common substance
of the whole, and whatsoever is formal, [or, whatsoever does animate that
which is materiall] is soon resumed into the common Reason of the Whole, and
the fame and memory of any thing, is soon swallowed up by the general Age
and duration of the whole.

VIII. To a reasonable creature, the same action is both according to nature,
and according to reason.

IX. Straight [of it selfe] not made straight.

X. As several members in one body united, so are reasonable creatures in a
body divided and dispersed, all made and prepared for one common operation. And
this thou shall apprehend the better, if thou shall use thy self often to say
to thy self, I am (...) or, a member of the mass and body of reasonable
substances. But if thou shall say I am (...) or, a part, thou do not yet
love men from thy heart. The joy that thou take in the exercise of bounty,
is not yet grounded upon a due ratiocination, and right apprehension of the
nature of things. Thou do exercise it as yet upon this ground barely, as a
thing convenient and sitting; not, as doing good to thy self, [when thou do
good unto others.]

XI. Of things that are external happen what will to that which can suffer by
external accidents. Those things that suffer let them complain themselves, if
they will; as for me, as long as I conceive no such thing, that that which is
happened is evil; I have no hurt, and it is in my power not to conceive any
such thing.

XII. Whatsoever any man either does or says, thou must be good; [not for any
man's sake, but for thine own natures sake;] as if either gold, or the Emrald,
or purple, should ever be saying to themselves, Whatsoever any man either does,
or says, I must still be an Emrald, and I must keep my color.

XIII. [This may ever be my comfort and security:] my understanding, that
rules over all, will not of it self bring trouble and vexation upon it self.
This I say; it will not put it self in any fear, it will not lead it self
into any concupiscence. If it be in the power of any other to compel it to
fear, or to grieve, it is free for him to use his power. But sure if it self
do not of it self, through some [false] opinion or supposition incline it
self to any such disposition; [there is no fear.] For as for the body, why
should I make the grief of my body, to be the grief of my mind? If that it
self can either fear or complain, let it. But as for the soul, which
indeed, can only be truly sensible of either fear or grief; to which only it
belongs according to its different imaginations and opinions, to admit of
either of these, or of their contraries; [thou may look to that thy self,
that] it suffer nothing. Induce her not to any such opinion or persuasion. The
understanding is of it self sufficient unto it self, and needs not (if it
self does not bring it self to need) any other thing besides it self, and by
consequent as it needs nothing, so neither can it be troubled or hindered by
any thing, if it self does not trouble and hinder it self.

XIV. What is (...) [or, happiness:] but (...), [or, a good Demon, or,
Spirit?] What then do thou do here, O opinion? By the gods I adjure thee,
that thou get thee gone, as thou came: for I need thee not. Thou came
indeed [unto me] according to thy ancient wonted manner. [It is that, that all
men have ever been subject unto. That thou came therefore] I am not angry
with thee; only be gone, [now that I have found thee what thou art.]

XV. Is any man so foolish as to fear change, to which all things [that once
were not] owe their being? And what is it, that is more pleasing and more
familiar to the nature of the Universe? How could thou thy self use thy
ordinary hot bathes, should not the wood [that heateth them] first be changed?
How could thou receive any nourishment from those things that thou have
eaten, if they should not be changed? Can any thing else almost (that is
useful and profitable) be brought to pass without change? How then do not
thou perceive, that for thee also [by death] to come to change, is a thing of
the very same nature, and as necessary for the nature of the Universe?

XVI. Through the Substance of the Universe, as through a torrent pass all
particular bodies, being all of the same nature, and all joint workers with the
Universe it self, as in one of our bodies so many members among themselves.
How many such as Chrysippus, how many such as Socrates, how many such as
Epictetus, has the Age of the world long since swallowed up and devoured? Let
this, be it either men or businesses, that thou have occasion to think of, to
the end that thy thoughts be not distracted and thy mind too earnestly set
upon any thing,] upon every such occasion presently come to thy mind. Of all
my thoughts and cares, one only thing shall be the object, that I my self do
nothing which to the proper constitution of man, (either in regard of the thing
it self, or in regard of the manner, or of the time of doing,) is contrary.
The time when thou shall have forgotten all things, is at hand. And that time
also is at hand, when thou thy self shall be forgotten by all. Whilst thou
art, apply thy self to that especially] which unto man as he is a man, is most
proper and agreeable, and that is, for a man even to love them that transgress
[against him.] This shall be if at the same time [that any such thing does
happen:] thou call to mind, that they are thy Kinsmen; that it is through
ignorance and against their wills that they sin; and that within a very short
while after, both thou and he shall be no more. But above all things, that he
has not done thee any hurt; for that by him thy mind and understanding is not
made worse or more vile then it was before.

XVII. The nature of the Universe, of the common substance of all things as it
were of so much wax has now perchance formed a horse; and then destroying
that figure, has new tempered and fashioned the matter of it into the form and
substance of a tree: then that again into the form and substance of a man:
and then that again into some other. Now every one of these does subsist but
for a very little while. As for dissolution, if it be no grievous thing to the
chest or trunck, to be joined together; why should it be more grievous to be
put asunder?

XVIII. An angry countenance is much against nature, and it is oftentimes the
proper countenance of them that are at the point of death. But were it so, that
all anger and passion were so thoroughly quenched in thee, that it were
altogether impossible to kindle it any more [yet herein must not thou rest
satisfied,] but further endeavor by good consequence of true ratiocination,
perfectly to conceive and understand, that all anger and passion is against
reason. For if thou shall not be sensible of thine innocence; if that also
shall be gone from thee [the comfort of a good conscience, that thou do all
things according to reason:] what should thou live any longer for? All
things that now thou see, are but for a moment. That nature, by which all
things in the world are administered, will soon bring change and alteration
upon them, and then of their substances make other things [like unto them:] and
then soon after others again of the matter and substance of these: that so by
these means, the world may still appear fresh and new.

XIX. Whenever any man does trespass against thee, presently consider with
thy self what it was that he did suppose to be good, what to be evil, when he
did trespass. For this when thou know, thou will pity him thou will have
no occasion either to wonder, or to be angry. For either thou thy self do
yet [live in that error and ignorance, as that thou doest] suppose either that
very thing that he does, or some other like [wordly] thing, to be good: and so
thou art bound to pardon him [if he have done that which thou in the like case
would have done thy self.] Or if so be that thou do not any more suppose
the same things to be good or evil, that he does; how can thou but be gentle
unto him that is in an error?

XX. Phancie not to thy self things, future, as though they were present: but
of those that are present, take some aside, that thou take most benefit of,
and consider of them particularly, how wonderfully thou would want them, if
they were not present. But take heed withal, least that whilst thou do
settle thy contentment in things present, thou grow in time so to overprize
them, as that the want of them (whenever it shall so fall out) should be a
trouble and a vexation unto thee. Wind up thy self into thy self. Such is
the Nature of thy reasonable commanding part, as that if it exercise justice,
and have by that means tranquillity within it self, it does rest fully
satisfied with it self [without any other thing.]

XXI. Wipe off all opinion: stay the force and violence of unreasonable lusts
and affections: Circumscribe the present time: Examine whatsoever it be that is
happened; either to thy self or to another: Divide all present objects, either
in that which is formal or material: think of the last hour. That which thy
neighbor has committed, where the guilt of it lies, there let it rest.
Extend thy mind to [or, Examine in order] whatsoever is spoken. Let thy mind
penetrate, both into the effects, and into the causes. Rejoice thy self with
true simplicity, and modesty, and that all middle things between virtue and
vice are indifferent unto thee. [Finally,] Love mankind; obey God.

XXII. All things (says he) are by certain order and appointment. And what if
the Elements only. It will suffice to remember, that all things in general
are by certain order and appointment: or if it be but few. And as concerning
death, that either Dispersion, or the Atoms, or Annihilation, or Extinction,
or Translation [will ensue.] And as concerning pain, that that which is
intolerable is soon ended by death; and that which holds long must needs be
tolerable; and that the mind in the mean time [ which is all in all may (...)
See B. V. N. 20. B. IX. N. 41
by way of interclusion, or interception [by stopping all manner of commerce
and sympathy with the body,] still retain its own tranquillity. Thy
understanding is not made worse by it. As for those parts that suffer, let
them, See Note 6. upon B. II. and B. VII. 34.
if they can, declare their grief themselves. As for praise and commendation,
view their mind and understanding, what estate they are in; what kind of
things they fly, and what things they seek after and that as in the seaside,
whatsoever was before to be seen, is by the continual succession of new
heaps of sand cast up one upon another, soon hid and covered; so in this
life, all former things by those which immediately succeed.

XXIII. Out of Plato. He then whose mind is endowed with true magnanimity,
who has accustomed himself to the contemplation both of all times, and of all
things in general; can this mortal life (think thou) seem any great
matter unto him? It is not possible; answered he. Then neither will such a one
account death a grievous thing? By no means.

XXIV. Out of Antisthenes. It is a princely thing to do well, and to be ill
spoken of. It is a shameful thing that the face should be subject unto the
mind, to be put into what shape it will, and to be dressed by it as it will;
and that the mind should not bestow so much care upon her self, as to fashion
her self, and to dress her self as best becomes her.

XXV. [Out of several poets and Comicks] It will but little avail thee, to
turn thine anger and indignation upon the things themselves [that have fallen
cross unto thee.] For as for them, they are not sensible of it, etc. Thou
shall but make thy self a laughing slock; both unto the gods and men, etc. To
reap ones life, as a ripe ear, etc. And that this is, and that this is not,
etc. But if so be that I and my children be neglected by the gods, there is
some reason even for that, etc. As long as right and equity is of my side,
etc. Not to lament with them, Not to tremble, etc.

XXVI. Out of Plato. My answer, full of justice and equity, should be this:
Thy speech is not right, O man! if thou supposest that he that is of any worth
at all, should apprehend either life or death, as a matter of great hazard and
danger; and should not make this rather his only care, to examine his own
actions, whether just or unjust: whether actions of a good, or of a wicked man,
etc. For thus in very truth, stands the case, O ye men of Athens. What place
or station soever a man either has chosen to himself, judging it best for
himself; or is by lawful authority put and settled in, therein do I think
(all appearance of danger notwithstanding:) that he should continue as one who
fears neither death, nor any thing else so much as he fears to commmit any
thing that is vicious and shameful, etc. But, O noble Sir, consider I pray,
whether true generositie and true happiness, do not consist in somewhat else
rather, then in the preservation either of ours, or other men's lives. For it is
not the part of a man that is a man indeed, to desire to live long [or to make
much of his life whilst he lives:] But rather (he that is such) will in these
things wholly refer himself unto the gods, and believing that which every
woman can tell him, that, no man can escape death; the only thing that he takes
thought and care for is this, that what time he lives, he may live as well and
as virtuously as he can possibly, etc. To look about, and with the eyes to
follow the course of the stars and planets, as though thou would run
with them; and to mind perpetually the several changes of the Elements one
into another. For such phancies and imaginations, help much to purge away, the
dross and filth of this our earthly life, etc. That also is a fine passage of
Plato's, where he speaks of worldly things in these words: Thou must also as
from some higher place look down, See B. X 29. B. X.I 18.
as it were upon the things of this world, as flocks, armies, husband-mens
labors, marriages, divorces, generations, deaths: the tumults of Courts and
places of judicatures; desert places; the several nations of Barbares, public
festivals, mournings, faires, markets. How all things [upon Earth] are pesse
mess; See B. IV N. 22.
and how [miraculously things contrary one to another, concur to the beauty
and perfection of this Universe.

XXVII. To look back upon things of former ages, as upon the manifold changes
and conversions of several Monarchies and commonwealths. We may also foresee
things future, for they shall all be of the same kind; neither is it possible
that they should leave the tune, or break the consort that is now begun as
it were, by these things that are now done and brought to pass in the World.
It comes all to one therefore, whether a man be a spectatour of the things of
this life but forty years, or whether he see them ten thousand years
together: for what shall he see more? And as for those parts that came from the
Earth, they shall return unto the Earth again; and those that came from
Heaven, they also shall return unto those heavenly places. Whether it be a
mere dissolution and unbinding of the manifold intricacies and intanglements
of the confused atoms; or some such dispersion of the simple and incorruptible
Elements. With meats and drinks and diverse charms, they seek to divert the
channel, that they might not die. Yet must we needs endure that blast of wind
that comes from above, though we bewail our toil and misery.

XXVIII. He has a stronger body, and is a better wrastler then I: [What then?]
Is he more bountiful? is he more modest? Does he bear all adverse chances
with more equanimitie: Or with his neighbors offenses with more meekness and
gentleness then I?

XXIX. Where the matter may be effected agreeably to that Reason, which both
unto the gods, and men is common, there can be no just cause of grief or
sorrow. For where the fruit and benefit of an action well begun and
prosecuted according to the proper constitution of man may be reaped and
obtained, [or, is sure and certain,] it is against reason that any damage
should there be suspected. In all places, and at all times, it is in thy power
religiously to embrace whatsoever [by Gods appointment] is happened unto thee,
and justly to converse with those men, whom thou have to do with; and
accurately to examine every phancie that presents it self, that nothing may
slip and steal in, before thou have rightly apprehended the true Nature of
it.

XXX. Look not about upon other men's minds and understandings; but look
right on forwards whither Nature, both that of the Universe, in those things
that happen unto thee; and thine in particular, in those things that are done
by thee, does lead, and direct thee. Now every one is bound to do that, which
is consequent and agreeable to that end which by his true natural constitution
he was ordained unto. As for all other things, they are ordained for the use
of reasonable creatures: as in all things we see that that which is worse and
inferior, is made for that which is better. Reasonable creatures, they are
ordained one for another. That therefore which is chief in every man's
constitution, is, that he intend the common good. The second is, that he yield
not to any lusts and motions of the flesh. For it is the part and privilege of
the reasonable and intellective faculty, that she can so bound her self, as
that neither the sensitive, nor the appetitive faculties, may not any ways
prevail upon her. For both these are brutish. And [therefore] over both she
challenges masterie, and cannot any ways endure [if in her right temper,] to
be subject unto either. And this indeed most justly. For by nature she was
ordained to command all in the body. The third thing proper to man by his
constitution, is, to avoid all rashness, and precipitancie; and not to be
subject to error. To these things then, let the mind apply her self and go
straight on [without any distraction about other things] and she has her end,
[and by consequent her happiness.]

XXXI. As one who had lived, and were now to die by right, whatsoever is yet
remaining, bestow that wholly as [a gracious] overplus upon a virtuous life.
G^: (...). See pref.
Love and affect that only, whatsoever it be that happens, and is by the
Fates appointed unto thee. For what can be more reasonable? And as any thing
does happen unto thee [by way of cross, or calamity,] call to mind presently
and set before thine eyes, the examples of some other men, to whom the self
same thing did once happen likewise. Well, what did they? They grieved; they
wondered, they complained. And where are they now? All dead and gone. Will thou
also be like one of them? Or rather leaving to men of the world (whose life
both in regard of themselves, and them that they converse with, is nothing but
mere mutabilitie; or men of as fickle minds, as fickle bodies; ever changing
and soon changed themselves:) their own fickle dispositions; let it be thine
only care and study, how to make a right use of all such accidents. For there
is good use to be made of them, and they will prove fit matter for thee to
work upon, if it shall be both thy care and thy desire, that whatsoever thou
do, thou thy self may like and approve thy self for it. And both these,
see, that thou remember well, according as the diversity of the matter of the
action that thou art about; shall require. Look within; within is the
fountain of all good. Such a fountain, where springing waters can never
fail, so thou dig still deeper and deeper.

XXXII. Thou must use thy self also to keep thy body fixed and steady; free
from all loose fluctuant, either motion, or posture. And as upon thy face and
looks, thy mind has easily power over them to keep them to that which is
grave and decent; so let it challenge the same power over the whole body also.
But so observe all things in this kind, as that it be without any manner of
affectation.

XXXIII. The art of true living in this world, is more like a wrastlers, then a
dancers practice. For in this they both agree [to teach] a man whatsoever falls
upon him, that he may be ready for it, and that nothing may cast him down.

XXXIV. Thou must continually ponder and consider with thy self, what manner
of men they be, and for their minds and understandings what is their present
estate, whose good word and testimony thou do desire. For then neither will thou see cause to complain of them that offend against their wills; or find
any want of their applause, See B. VIII. N. 13.
if once thou do but penetrate into the true force, and ground both of their
opinions; and of their desires. No soul (says he:) is willingly bereaved of
the Truth, and by consequent, neither of justice, or temperance, or kindness,
and mildness; nor of any thing that is of the same kind. It is most needful
that thou should always remember this. For so shall thou be far more
gentle and moderate toward all men.

XXXV. What pain soever thou art in, let this presently come to thy mind,
that it is not a thing whereof thou need to be ashamed, neither is it a
thing, whereby thy understanding, that has the government of all, can be made
worse. For neither in regard of the substance of it, nor in regard of the end
of it (which is, to intend the common good;) can it alter and corrupt it. This
also of Epicurus may thou in most pains find some help of, that it is:
neither intolerable, nor eternal; so thou keep thy self to the true bounds
and limits [of reason] and give not way to opinion. This also thou must
consider, that many things there be, which oftentimes unsensibly trouble and
vex thee [as not armed against them with patience, because they go not
ordinarily under the name of paines] which in very deed, are of the same nature
as pain; as to slumber unquietly: to suffer heat, to want appetite, when
therefore any of these things make thee discontented, check thy self with
these words. Now has pain given thee the foil. Thy courage has failed thee.

XXXVI. Take heed least at any time thou stand so affected, though toward
unnatural evil men, as ordinary men are commonly one toward another.

XXXVII. How know we whether Socrates were so Eminent indeed, and of so
extraordinary a disposition? For that he dyed more gloriously, that he
disputed with the Sophists more subtly; that he watched in the Pagus more
affiduously; that being commanded to fetch [innocent] Salaminius, he refused
to do it more generously; all this will not serve. Nor that he walked in the
streets, with much gravitie and majesty as was objected unto him by his
adversaries, which nevertheless a man may we doubt of whether it were so or
no, [or, which above all the rest, if so be that it were true, a man would well
consider of, whether commendable, or discommendable.] The thing therefore that
we must inquire into, is this; what manner of soul Socrates had whether his
disposition was such; as that all that he stood upon; and sought after in this
world, was barely this; That he night ever carry himself justly toward men,
and holily toward the gods. Whether without indignation, when it would do no
good, he could bear with other men's wickedness, and yet never condescend to
any man's evil fact, or evil intentions; [through either fear, or engagement
of friendship.] Whether of those things that happened unto him by Gods
appointment, he neither did wonder at any when it did happen, or thought it
intolerable in the trial of it. And lastly, whether he never did suffer his
mind to sympathize with the senses, and affections of the body. For we must
not think that Nature has so mixed and rempered it with the body, as that she
has not power to circumscribe her self, and by her self to intend her own
ends and occasions.

XXXVIII. For it is a thing very possible, that a man should be a very divine
man, and yet be altogether unknown. This thou must ever be mindful of, as of
this also, that a man's true happiness does consist in very few things. And
that although thou do despair, that thou shall ever be a good either
Logician, or Naturalist, yet thou art never the further off by it from being
either liberal, or modest, or charitable, or obedient unto God.

XXXIX. Free from all compulsion in all cheerfulness and alacrity thou may
run out thy time, though men should exclame against thee never so much, and
the wild beasts should pull in sunder the poor members of thy pampered mass
of flesh. For what in either of these or the like cases, should hinder the
mind to retain her own rest and tranquillitle, consisting both in the right
judgment of chose things that happen unto her, and in the ready use of all
present matters and occasions? So that her judgment may say, Gr: (...).
to that which is befalne her by way of cross: This thou art in very deed, and
according to thy true nature; notwithstanding that in the judgment of opinion
thou do appear otherwise: and her Discretion to the present object; Thou
art that, which I sought for. For whatsoever it be, that is now present, shall
ever be embraced by me as a fit and seasonable object, both for my reasonable
faculty, and for my sociable, or charitable inclination to work upon. And
that which is principal in this matter, is, that it may be referred either
unto [the praise of] God, or to [the good of] men. For either unto God or man,
whatsoever it is that ^oth happen in the world has in the ordinary course of
nature its proper reference; neither is there any thing, that [in regard of
nature] is either new, or reluctant and intractable, but all things both usual
and easy.

XL. Then has a man attained to the estate of perfection in his life and
conversation, when he so spends every day, as if it were his last day: never
hot and vehement in his affections, nor yet so cold and stupid as one that had
no sense; and free from all manner of dissimulation.

XLI. Can the gods, who are immortal, for the continuance of so many ages
bear without indignation with such and so many sinners, as have ever been,
yea not only so, but also take such care for them, that they want nothing; and
do thou so grievously take on, as one that could bear with them no longer;
thou that art but for a moment of time? yea thou that art one of those sinners
thy self? A very ridiculous thing it is, that any man should dispense with
vice and wickedness in himself, which is in his power to restrain, and should
go about to suppress it in others, which is altogether impossible.

XLII. What object soever, our reasonable and sociable faculty does meet with,
that affords nothing either for the satisfaction of reason, or for the practice
of charity, she worthily does think unworthy of her self.

XLIII. When thou have done well, and another is benefited by thy action, must
thou like a very fool look for a third thing besides, as that it may appear
unto others also that thou have done well, or that thou may in time, receive
one good turn for another? No man uses to be weary of that which is
beneficial unto him. But every action according to Nature, is beneficial. Be
not weary then of doing that which is beneficial unto thee, whilst it is so
unto others.

XLIV. The nature of the Universe did once certainly [ before it was created,
See B. VI Number. XXXIII XX XIX. B. IX.XXVI.
whatsoever it has done since] deliberate and so resolve upon the creation of
the World. Now since that time, whatsoever it is, that is and happens in the
world, is either but a consequent of that one and first deliberation: or if so
be that this ruling rational part of the world, takes any thought and care of
things particular, they are surely his reasonable and principal creatures, that
are the proper object of his particular care and providence. This often thought
upon, will much conduce to thy tranquillity.

THE EIGHTH BOOK.
THis also, among other things; may serve to keep thee from vain glory, if
thou shall consider, that thou art now altogether incapable of the commendation
of one, who all his life long, or from his youth at least, has lived a
Philosophers life. For both unto others, and to thy self especially, it is
well known, that thou have done many things contrary to that perfection of
life. Thou have therefore been confounded in thy course, and henceforth it
will be hard for thee to recover the Title, and credit of a Philosopher. And to
it also is thy calling and profession repugnant. If therefore thou do truly
understand, what it is that is of moment indeed; as for thy same and credit,
take no thought or care for that: let it suffice thee if all the rest of thy
life, be it more or less, thou shall live as thy nature requires. [or,
according to the true and natural end of thy making.] Take pains therefore to
know what it is that thy nature requires, and let nothing else distract thee.
Thou have already had sufficient experience, that of those many things that
hitherto thou have erred and wandered about, thou could not find happiness
in any of them. Not in Syllogismes, and Logical subtilities, not in wealth, not
in honor and reputation, not in pleasure. In none of all these. Wherein then
is it to be found? In the practice of those things, which the nature of man, as
he is a man, does require. How then shall he do those things? If his Dogmata,
or, moral Tenets and opinions (from which all motions and actions do
proceed:) be right and true. Which be those Dogmata? Those that concern that
which is good or evil, as that there is nothing truly good and beneficial
unto man, but that which makes him just, temperate, courageous, liberal; and
that there is nothing truly evil and hurtful unto man, but that which causes
the contrary effects.

II. Upon every action that thou art about, put this question to thy self; How
will this when it is done agree with me? Shall I have no occasion to repent of
it? Yet a very little while and I am dead and gone; and all things are at end.
What then do I care for more then this, that my present action whatsoever it
be, may be the proper action of one that is reasonable; whose end is, the
common good; who in all things is ruled and governed by the same law [of right
and reason,] by which God himself is.

III. Alexander, Caius, Pompeius; what are these to Diogenes, Heraclitus, and
Socrates? These penetrated into the true nature of things: into all causes, and
all subjects: and upon these did they exercise their power and authority; [or,
these were the objects of their power and jurisdiction:] But as for those as
the extent of their error was, so far did their slavery extend.

IV. What they have done, they will still do, although thou should hang thy
self. First; Let it not trouble thee. For all things [both good and evil:]
come to pass according to the nature and general condition of the Universe,
and within a very little while, all things will be at an end; no man will be
remembered: as now of Africanus (for example) and Augustus it is already come to
pass. Then secondly; Fix thy mind upon the thing it self; look into it,
and remembering thy self, that thou art bound nevertheless to be a good man,
and what it is that thy Nature requires of thee as thou art a man, be not
diverted from what thou art about, and speak that which seems unto thee most
just: only speak it kindly, modestly, and without hypocrisy.

V. That which the Nature of the Universe does busy her self about, is; that
which is here, to transfer it thither, to change it, and thence again to
take it away, and to carry it to another place. So that thou need not fear
any new thing. For all things are usual and ordinary; and all things are
disposed by equality.

VI. Every particular nature has content, when in its own proper course it
speeds. A reasonable nature does then speed, when first in matter of phancies
and imaginations, it gives no consent to that which is either false or
incertaine. Secondly, when in all its motions and resolutions it takes its
level at the common good only, and that it desires nothing, and flies from
nothing, but what is in its own power to compass or avoid. And lastly, when
it willingly and gladly embraces, whatsoever is dealt and appointed unto it by
the common Nature. For it is part of it; even as the nature of any one leaf,
is part of the common nature of all plants and trees. But that the nature of a
leaf, is part of a nature both unreasonable and unsensible, and which [in its
proper end] may be hindered; [or, which is servile and slavish:] whereas the
nature of man is part of a common nature which cannot be hindered, and which is
both reasonable and just. From whence also it is, that according to the worth
of every thing, she does make such equal distribution of all things, as of
duration, substance, form, operation, and of events and accidents. But herein
consider not whether thou shall find this equality in every thing absolutely
and by it self; but whether in all the particulars of some one thing taken
together, and compared with all the particulars of some other thing; and them
together likewise.

VII. Thou have no time nor opportunity to read. What then? Have thou not time
and opportunity to exercise thy self, not to wrong [thy self;] tostrive
against [all carnall] pleasures and pains, and to get the upper hand of them;
to contemn honor and vain glory; and not only, not to be angry with them,
whom toward thee thou do find unsensible and unthankful; but also to have
a care of them still, and of their welfare?

VIII. Forbear henceforth to complain of the troubles of a Courtly life,
either in public before others, or in private by thy self.

IX. Repentance, is an inward and selfe-reprehension for the neglect or
omission of somewhat that was profitable. Now whatsoever is good, is also
profitable, and it is the part of an honest virtuous man to set by it, and to
make reckoning of it accordingly. But never did any honest virtuous man repent
of the neglect or omission of any [carnall] pleasure: no [carnall] pleasure
then is either good or prositable.

X. This, what is it in it self, and by it self, according to its proper
constitution? What is the substance of it? What is the mattter, [or, proper
use?] What is the form [or, efficient cause?] What is it for in this world,
and how long will it abide? [Thus must thou examine all things, that present
themselves unto thee.]

XI. When thou art hard to be stirred up and awaked out of thy sleep, admonish
thy self and call to mind, that, to perform actions tending to the common
good is that which thine own proper constitution, and that which the nature of
man do require. But to sleep, is common to unreasonable creatures also. And
what more proper and natural, yea what more kind and pleasing, then that which
is according to Nature?

XII. As every phancie and imagination presents it self unto thee, consider
(if it be possible) the true nature, and the proper qualities of it, and reason
with thy self about it.

XIII. At thy first encounter with any one, say presently to thy self; This
man, what are his opinions concerning that which is good or evil? as
concerning pain, pleasure, and the causes of both; concerning honor, and
dishonor, concerning life and death; thus and thus. Now if it be no wonder
that a man should have such and such opinions how can it be a wonder, that he
should do such and such things? I will remember then, that he cannot but do as
he does [holding those opinions that he does.] Remember, that as it is a shame
for any man to wonder that a fig tree should bear figs, so also to wonder
that the World should bear any thing, whatsoever it is which in the ordinary
course of nature it may bear. To a physician also and to a pilot it is a shame
either for the one to wonder, that such and such a one should have an ague; or
for the other, that the winds should prove contrary.

XIV. Remember, that to change thy mind upon occasion, and to follow him that
is able to rectif^ thee, is equally ingenuous, [as to find out at the first,
what is right and just, without help.] For of thee nothing is required, that
is beyond the extent of thine own deliberation and judgment, and of thine
own understanding.

XV. If it were thine act and in thine own power, why would thou do it? If
it were not, whom do thou accuse? the atoms, or the gods? For to do
either, is the part of a mad man. Thou must therefore blame no body, but if it
be in thy power, redress what is amiss; if it be not, to what end is it to
complain? For nothing should be done but to some certain end.

XVI. Whatsoever dies [and falls, however and wheresoever it die and fall,]
it cannot fall out of the world. If here it have its abode and change, here
also shall it have its dissolution into its proper elements. The same are the
worlds Elements, and the elements of which thou do consist. And they when
they are changed, they murmur not; [why should thou?]

XVII. Whatsoever is, was made for something: as a horse, a vine. Why wondrest
thou? The Sun it self will say of it self, I was made for something: and so
[hath] every god [its proper function.] What then were thou made for? to
disport and delight thy self? See how even common sense and reason cannot
brook it.

XVIII. Nature has its end as well in the end and final consummation of any
thing that is, as in the beginning and continuation of it.

XIX. As one that tosseth up a ball. And what is a hall the better, if the
motion of it be upwards; or the worse if it be downwards; or if it chance to
fall upon the ground? So for the bubble; if it continue, what is it the better?
and if it dissolve, what is it the worse? And so is it of a candle too. [And so
must thou reason with thy self, both in matter of fame, and in matter of
death. For as for the body it self, (the subject of death) would thou know
the vileness of it?] Turn it about, [that thou may behold it the worst
sides upwards as well, as in its more ordinary pleasant shape:] how does it
look, when it is old and withered? when sick and pained? when in the act of
lust, and fornication? [And as for fame] This life is short. Both he that
praises, and he that is praised; he that remembers, and he that is remembered,
[will soon be dust and ashes.] Besides, it is but in one corner of this part
of the world [that thou art praised;] and yet in this corner, thou have not the
joint praises of all men; no nor scarce of any one constantly. And yet the
whole earth it self, what is it but as one point, [in regard of the whole
world?]

XX. That which must be the subject of thy consideration, is either the matter
it self, or the Dogma, or the operation, or the true sense and signification.

XXI. Most justly have these things happened unto thee: [why do not thou
amend?] O but thou had rather become good to morrow, then to be so to day.

XXII. Shall I do it? I will; so the end of my action be to do good unto men.
Does any thing by way of cross, or adversity happen unto me? I accept it, with
reference unto the Gods, and [their providence;] the fountain of all things,
from which whatsoever comes to pass, does hang and depend.

XXIII. [By one action judge of the rest:] This bathing [which usually takes up
so much of our time] what is it? Oil, sweat, filth; [or the sordes of the
body:] and excrementitious viscositie, [the excrements of oil, and other
ointments used about the body, and mixed with the sordes of the body: all base
and loathsome. And such [almost] is every part of our life, and every [worldly]
object.

XXIV. Lucilla [buried] Verus; then was Lucilla herself [buried by others.] So
Secunda, Maximus then Secunda her self. So Epitunchanus, Diotimus; then
Epitunchanus himself. So Antoninus Pius, Faustina [his wife;] then Antoninus
himself. This is the course of the world. First, Celer, Adrianus; then
Adrianus himself. And those austere ones; those that foretold other men's
deaths; those that were so proud and stately, where are they now? Those
austere ones I mean, such as were Charux, and Demetrius, the Platonic; and
Eudaemon, and others like unto those. They were all but for one day; all dead
and gone long since. Some of them no sooner dead, then forgotten. Others soon
turned into fables. Of others, even that which was fabulous, is now long since
forgotten. This therefore thou must remember, that whatsoever thou art
compounded of, shall soon be dispersed, and that thy life and breath [or, thy
soul:] shall either be no more, or shall be translated, and appointed to some
certain place and station.

XXV. The true joy of a man, is to do that, which properly belongs unto a man.
That which is most proper unto a man, is, First, to be kindly affected toward
them, that are of the same kind and nature as he is himself; to contemn all
sensual motions and appetites to discern rightly all plausible phancies and
imaginations, to contemplate the nature of the Universe; both it, and all
things that are done in it. [In which kind of contemplation] three several
relations [are to be observed.] The first, to the appearant secundarie cause.
The second, to the first original cause, God, from whom originally proceeds
whatsoever does happen in the world. The third and last, to them that we live
and converse with: [what use may be made of it, to their use and benefit.]

XXVI. If pain be an evil, either it is in regard of the body; (and that
cannot be, Gr: (...) See. B. VII. N. 13.
because the body of it self is altogether insensible:) or in regard of the
soul. But it is in the power of the soul, to preserve her own peace and
tranquillity, and not to suppose that pain is evil. For all judgment and
deliberation; all prosecutio^, or aversation is from within, whither the sense
of evil [except it be let in by opinion] cannot penetrate.

XXVII. Wipe off all [idle] phancies, and say unto thy self incessantly; Now
if I will it is in my power to keep out of this my soul all wickedness, all
lust, and concupiscences, all trouble and confusion. But on the contrary, to
behold and consider all things according to their true nature, and to carry my
self toward every thing according to its true worth. Remember then this thy
power, that Nature has given thee.

XXVIII. Whether thou speak in the Senate, or whether thou speak to any
particular, let thy speech be always grave and modest. But thou must not
openly and vulgarly observe that sound and exact form of speaking [concerning
that which is truly good and truly evil; the vanity of the world, and of
worldly men:] which otherwise Truth, and Reason does prescribe.

XXIX. Augustus his Court; His wife, his daughter, his nephews, his sons in
Law; his sister, Agrippa, his Kinsmen, his domestics, his friends; Areus,
Mecaenas, his aruspices [or slayers of beasts for sacrifice and divination:]
There thou have the death of a whole Court together. Proceed now on to the rest
[that have been since that of Augustus.] Has death dealt with them otherwise,
[though so many and so stately whilst they lived] then it does use to deal
with any one particular man? Consider now the death of a whole kindred and
family, as of that of the Pompeyes, as that also that uses to be written
upon some monuments, HE WAS THE LAST OF HIS OWN KINDRED. O what care did his
predecessors take, that they might leave a successor, yet behold! at last one
or other must of necessity be THE LAST. Here again therefore consider the
death of a whole kindred.

XXX. Contract thy whole life to the measure and proportion of one single
action. And if in every particular action thou do perform what is fitting
to the utmost of thy power, let it suffice thee. [or, think that thou have
lived long enough.] And who can hinder thee, but that thou may perform what
is fitting? But there may be some outward let and impediment. Not any, that
can hinder thee, but that whatsoever thou do, thou may do it, justly,
temperatly, and with the praise of God. Yea but there may be somewhat, whereby
some operation or other of thine may be hindered. And then, with that very thing
that does hinder, thou may be well pleased, and so by this gentle and
aequanimous conversion of thy mind unto that which may be [in stead of that
which at first thou did intend] in the room of that former action there
succeeds another, which agrees [as well] with this contraction of thy life,
that we now speak of.

XXXI. Receive [temper all blessings] without ostentation, when they are sent;
and [thou shall be able] to part with them with all readiness and facility
when they are taken from thee again.

XXXII. If ever thou saw either a hand, or a foot, or a head lying by it
self, in some place or other, as cut off from the rest of the body, such must
thou conceive him to make himself, as much as in him lies, that either is
offended with any thing that is happened, (whatsoever it be) and as it were
divides himself from it: or that commits any thing against the natural Law of
mutual correspondence, and society among men: or, [hee that commits any act of
uncharitableness.] Whosoever thou art, that art such, thou art cast forth I
know not whither out of the general unity, which is according to Nature. Thou
were borne indeed a part, but now thou have cut thy self off. However, herein
is matter of joy and exultation, that thou may be united again. God has not
granted it unto any other part, that once separated and cut off, it might be
reunited, and come together again. But, behold, that GOODNESS [how great and
immense it is!] which has so much esteemed MAN. See N. 53. B. XI. N. 7.
As at first he was so made, that he needed not, except he would himself,
have divided himself from the whole; so once divided and cut off, IT has so
provided and ordered it, that if he would himself, he might return, and grow
together again, and be admitted into its former rank and place of a part, as
he was before.

XXXIII. As almost all her other faculties and properties the nature of the
Universe has imparted unto every reasonable Creature, so this in particular
we have received from her, that as whatsoever does oppose it self unto her,
and does withstand her in her purposes and intentions, she does though against
its will and intention, bring it about to her self, Gr: (...): etc. See B. VI
N. xxxvij.
to serve her self of it in the execution of her own dostinated ends; and so
[by this though not intended cooperation of it with her selfe] makes it part of
her self [whether it will or no;] So may every reasonable Creature, what
crosses or impediments soever it meets with [in the course of this mortal
life,] it may use them as fit and proper objects, to the furtherance of
whatsoever it intended, and absolutely proposed unto it self [as its natural
end and happiness.]

XXXIV. Let not the general representation unto thy self of the wretchedness
of this our mortal life, Gr: (...).
trouble thee. Let not thy mind wander up and down, and heap together in her
thoughts, the many troubles and grievous calamities which thou art as subject
unto as any other. But as every thing in particular does happen, put this
question unto thy self, and say; What is it that in this present matter,
seems unto thee so intolerable? For thou will be ashamed to confess it. Then
upon this presently call to mind, that neither that which is future, nor that
which is past can hurt thee; but that only which is present. (And that also is
much lessened, if thou do rightly circumscribe it:) and then check thy mind
if for so little a while, (a mere instant) it cannot hold out with patience.

XXXV. What? are either Pantheas or Pergamus abiding to this day by their
Masters tombs? or either Chabrias or Diotimus by that of Adrianus? O foolery!
For what if they did, would their Masters be sensible of it? or if sensible,
would they be glad of it? or if glad, were these immortal? Was not it
appointed unto them also (both men and women,) to become old in time, and then
to dye? And these once dead, what would become of these former? [And when all
is done, what is all this for,] but for a mere bag of blood and corruption;
[or, loathsome excrements?]

XXXVI. If thou be quick-sighted, be so in matter of judgment, and best
discretion, says he.

XXXVII. In the whole constitution of man, I see not any virtue contrary to
justice, whereby it may be resisted and opposed. But one whereby pleasure and
voluptuousness may be resisted and opposed, I see, Continence.

XXXVIII. If thou can but withdraw conceit and opinion concerning that which
may seem hurtful and offensive, thou thy self art as safe, as safe may be.
Thou thy self? and who is that? Thy Reason. Yea, but I am not Reason. Well, be
it so. How ever, See before N. XXVI.
let not thy Reason [or vnderstanding] admit of grief, and if there be any
thing in thee that is greeved, let that, (whatsoever it be,) conceive its own
grief, [if it can.]

XXXIX. That which is a hinderance of the senses, is an evil to the sensitive
nature. That which is an hinderance of the appetitive and prosecutive faculty,
is an evil to the sensitive nature. As of the sensitive, so of the vegetative
constitution whatsoever is an hinderance unto it, is also in that respect an
evil unto the same. And so likewise, whatsoever is an hinderance unto the
mind and understanding, must needs be the proper evil of the reasonable
nature. Now apply all those things unto thy self. Do either pain or pleasure
seize on thee? Let the senses look to that. See B. IV. N. 1.
Have thou met with some obstacle or other in thy purpose, and intention? If
thou did propose without due reservation and exception, now has thy
reasonable part received a blow indeed. But if in general thou did propose
unto thy self whatsoever might be, thou art not thereby either hurt, nor
[properly] hindered. For in those things that properly belong unto the mind,
she cannot be hindered by any man. It is not fire, nor iron; nor the power of
a tyran, nor the power of a slandering tongue; nor any thing else that can
penetrate into her.

XL. If once round and solid, there is no fear that ever it will change.

XLI. Why should I grieve my self; who never did willingly grieve any other?
One thing rejoices one, and another thing another. As for me, this is my joy;
if my understanding be right and found, as neither auerse from any man, nor
refusing any of those things, which as a man I am subject unto; If I can look
upon all things in the world meekely and kindly; accept all things, and carry
my self toward every thing according to the true worth of the thing it self.

XLII. This time that is now present, bestow thou upon thy self. They that
rather hunt for fame after death, do not consider, that those men that shall
be hereafter, will be even such, as these whom now they can so hardly bear
with. And besides they also will be mortal men. But to consider the thing in
it self, if so many with so many voices, shall make such, and such a sound, or
shall have such, and such an opinion concerning thee, what is it to thee?

XLIII. Take me and throw me where thou will: [I am indifferent.] For there
also I shall have that Spirit which is within me propitious; that is well
pleased and fully contented both in that constant disposition, and with those
particular actions, which to its own proper constitution are suitable and
agreeable.

XLIV. Is this then a thing of that worth, that for it my soul should suffer,
and become worse then it was? as either basely dejected, or disordinately
affected, or confounded within it self, or terrified? What can there be, that
thou should so much esteem?

XLV. Nothing can happen unto thee, which is not incidentall unto thee, as thou
art a man. As nothing can happen either to an ox, a vine, or to a stone, which
is not incidentall unto them; unto every one in his own kind. If therefore
nothing can happen unto any thing, which is not both usual and natural; why
art thou displeased? Sure the common nature of all would not bring any thing
upon any, that were intolerable. If therefore it be a thing external that
causes thy grief, [know, that] it is not that properly that does cause it,
but thine own conceit and opinion concerning the thing: which thou may rid
thy self of, when thou will. But if it be somewhat that is amiss in thine
own disposition, that does grieve thee, may thou not rectify thy dogmata
[or, moral Tenets and opinions.] But if it gireve thee, that thou do not
perform that which seems unto thee right and just, why do not thou choose
rather to perform it then to grieve? But somewhat that is stronger then thy
self does hinder thee. Let it not grieve thee then, if it be not thy fault
that the thing is not performed Yea but it is a thing of that nature, as that
thy life is not worth the while, except it may be performed. If it be so, upon
condition that thou be kindly and lovingly disposed toward all men, thou
may be gone. For even then, as much as at any time, art thou in a very good
estate of performance, when thou do die in charity with those, that are an
obstacle unto thy performance.

XLVI. Remember that thy mind [is of that nature as that it] becomes
altogether unconquerable, when once recollected in her self, she seeks no
other content then this, that she cannot be forced: yea though it so fall out,
that it be even against Reason it self, that it does bandie. How much less
when by the help of Reason she is able to judge of things with discretion? And
therefore let thy chief fort and place of defense be, a mind free from
passions. A stronger place, (whereunto to make his refuge, and so to become
impregnable) and better fortified then this, has no man. He that sees not
this, is unlearned. He that sees it, and betaketh not himself to this place
of refuge; is unhappy.

XLVII. Keep thy self to the first [bare and naked] apprehensions of things,
as they present themselves unto thee, and add not unto them. It is reported
unto thee, that such a one speaks ill of thee. Well; that he speaks ill of
thee, so much is reported. But that thou art hurt thereby, is not reported:
[That is the addition of opinion, which thou must exclude.] I see that my child
is sick. That he is sick, I see, but that he is in danger of his life also, I
see it not. Thus thou must use to keep thy self to the first motions and
apprehensions of things, as they present themselves outwardly; and add not
unto them from within thy self [through mere conceit and opinion.] Or rather
add unto them; but as one that understands the true nature of all things
that happen in the world.

XLVIII. Is the cucumber bitter? set it away. Brambles are in the way? avoid
them. Let this suffice. (...).
Add not presently speaking unto thy self, What serve these things for in the
world? For, this, one that is acquainted with the mysteries of Nature, will
laugh at thee for it; as a Carpenter would or a Shoo-maker, if meeting in
either of their shops with some shavings, or small remnants of their work,
thou should blame them for it And yet those men, it is not for want of a
place where to throw them [that obey keep them in their shops for a while:]
but the nature of the Universe has no such out-place: but herein does consist
the wonder of her art and skill, that she having once circumscribed her self
within some certain bounds and limits, whatsoever is within her that seems
either corrupted, or old, or unprofitable, she can change it into herself, and
of these very things can make new things, so that she needs not to seek
elsewhere out of her self either for a new supply of manner and substance, or
for a place where to throw our whatsoever is irrecoverably putrid and corrupt.
Thus she, as for place, so for matter and art, is her self sufficient unto
her self.

XLIX. Not to be slack and negligent; or loose, and wanton in thy actions, nor
contentions, and troublesome in thy conversation, nor to rove and wander in thy
phancies and imaginations. Not basely to contract thy soul: nor boistrously to
fally out with it, [or, furiously to launch out as it were,] nor ever to want
employment.

L. They kill me, they cut my flesh: they persecute my person with curses. What
then? May not thy mind for all this continue pure, prudent, temperate, just?
As a fountain of sweet and clear water, though she be cursed by some slander
by, yet do her springs nevertheless still run as sweet and clear as before,
yea though either dirt or dung he thrown in, yet is it no sooner thrown, then
dispersed, and she cleared. She cannot be dyed [or, infected] by it. What then
must I do, that I may have [within my selfe] an overflowing fountain, and not
a well? Beget thy self by continual [paines and endeavours] to [true] liberty
with charity, and true simplicity and modesty.

LI. He that knows not what the world is, knows not where he himself is.
And he that knows not what the world was made for, cannot possibly know
either what are the qualities, or what is the nature of the world. Now he that
in either of these is to seek, for what he himself was made, is ignorant
also. What then do thou think of that man, who proposes unto himself, as a
matter of great moment, the noise and applause of men, who both where they are,
and what they are themselves, are altogether ignorant? Do thou desire to be
commended of that man, who thrice in one hour perchance, does himself curse
himself? Do thou desire to please him, who pleases not himself? or do
thou think that he pleases himself, who does use to repent himself almost
of every thing that he does?

LII. Not only now henceforth to (...).
have a common breath [or, to hold correspondencie of breath:] with that Air,
that compasses us about; but (...).
to have a common mind [or, to hold correspondencie of minde] also with that
rational substance, which compasses all things. For, that also is of it
self, and of its own nature (if a man can but draw it in as he should:) every
where diffused, and passes through all things, no less then the Air does, if
a man can but suck it in.

LIII. Wickedness in general does not hurt the World. Particular wickedness
does not hurt any other: See before N. 32.
only unto him it is hurtful, [whosoever he be that offends,] unto whom [in
great favor and mercie] it is granted, that whenever he himself shall but
first desire it, he may be presently delivered of it. Unto my Free Will my
neighbors free will, whoever he be, (as his life, or his body) is altogether
indifferent. For though we are all made one for another, yet have our minds
and understandings, each of them their own proper and limited jurisdiction.
For else another man's wickedness might be my evil; which God would not have,
that it might not be in another man's power; to make me unhappy: [which nothing
now can do but mine own wickedness.]

LIVE. The Sun seems to be shed abroad. And indeed it is diffused but not
effused. For that diffusion of it is a (...) or an extension. For therefore are
the beams of it called (...) from the word (...), to be stretched out and
extended. Now what a Sun beam is, thou may know if thou observe the light
of the Sun, when through some narrow hole it pierces into some room that is
dark. For it is always in a direct line. And as by any solid body, that it
meets with in the way that is not penetrable by air, it is divided and
abrupted, and yet neither slides off, or falls down, but stays there
nevertheless: such must the diffusion of the mind be: not an effusion, but an
extension. What obstacles and impediments soever she meets with in her way,
she must not violently, and by way of an impetuous onset light upon them;
neither must she fall down; but she must stand, and give light unto that
which does admit of it. For as for that which does not, [it is its own fault
and loss, if] it bereave it self of her light.

LV. He that fears Death, either fears that he shall have no sense at all,
or that his senses will not be the same. Whereas, [he should rather comfort
himself, that] either no sense at all, and so no sense of evil; or if any
sense, then another life, and so no death [properly.]

LVI. All men are made one for another either then teach them better, or bear
with them.

LVII. The motion of the mind, is not as the motion of a dart. For the mind
when it is wary and cautelous, and by way of diligent circumspection turns
her self many ways, may then as well be said to go straight on to the
object, [as when it uses no such circumspection.]

LVIII. To pierce and penetrate into the estate of every ones understanding
[that thou have to do with:] See B. IX. N. 16 B. I. N. XI
as also to make the estate of thine own open, and penetrable to any other.

THE NINTH BOOK.
HE that is unjust, is also impious. For the Nature of the Universe, having
made all reasonable creatures one for another, to the end that they should do
one another good; more or less according to the several persons and
occasions; but in no wise hurt one another: it is manifest that he that does
transgress against this her will, is guilty of impiety toward the most
ancient and venerable of all the Deities. For the Nature of the Universe, is
the nature [the common Parent of all, and therefore piously to be observed] of
all things that are, and that which now is, to whatsoever first was, and gave
it its being, has relation of blood and kindred. She is also called Truth;
and is the first cause of all truths. He therefore that willingly and wittingly
does lie, is impious in that he does deceive, and so commit injustice: but he
that against his will, in that he disagreeth from the nature of the Universe,
and in that striving with the nature of the World he does in his particular,
(...).
violate the general order of the world. For he does no better then strive
and war against it, who contrary to his own Nature applies himself to that
which is contrary to truth. For Nature had before furnished him with instincts
and opportunities [sufficient for the attainement of it:] which he having
hitherto neglected, is not now able to discern that which is false from that
which is true. He also that pursues after pleasures, as that which is truly
good; See Note 5. upon B. II.
and flies from pains, as that which is truly evil, is impious. For such a
one must of necessity oftentimes accuse that common Nature, as distributing
many things both unto the evil, and unto the good, not according to the
deserts of either: as unto the bad oftentimes pleasures, and the causes of
pleasures; So unto the good, pains, and the occasions of pains. Again, he
that fears pains and crosses in the world, fears some of those things
which sometime or other must needs happen in the world. And that we have
already showed to be impious. And he that pursues after pleasures, will not
spare, [to compass his desires] to do that which is unjust, and that is
manifestly impious. Now those things which unto Nature are equally indifferent
(for she had not created both, both pain and pleasure, if both had not been
unto her equally indifferent:) they that will live according to Nature, must in
those things (as being of the same mind and disposition that she is) be as
equally indifferent. Whosoever therefore in either matter of pleasure and
pain; death, and life; honor and dishonor, (which things Nature in the
administration of the world, indifferently does make use of,) is not as
indifferent, it is apparent that he is impious. When I say that common Nature
does indifferently make use of them, my meaning is, that in the ordinary course
of things, which by a necessary consequence (according to that first and
ancient deliberation of Providence, by which she from some certain beginning,
did resolve upon the creation of such a World, conceiving then in her womb as
it were some certain rational generative seeds and faculties of things
future, whether subjects, changes, successions; both such and such* and just so
many:) whether as principal or accessorie come to pass in the world, they
happen indifferently.

II. It were indeed more happy and comfortable, for a man to depart out of this
World, having lived all his life long clear from all falsehood, dissimulation,
voluptuousness, and pride. But if this cannot be, yet is it some comfort for a
man [joyfully] to depart [as] weary, and out of love with those; rather then to
desire to live, and to continue long in these wicked courses. Has not yet
experience taught thee to fly from the plague? For a far greater plague is
the corruption of the mind, then any certain change and distemper of the
common air can be. This is a plague of creatures, as they are living
creatures; but that of men as they are men [or reasonable.]

III. Thou must not in matter of death, carry thy self scornfully, but as one
that is well pleased with it, as being one of those things that Nature has
appointed. For what thou do conceive of these, of a boy to become a young
man, to wax old, to grow, to ripen, to get teeth, or a beard, or gray hairs;
to beget, to bear, or to be delivered; or what other action soever it be, that
is natural unto man according to the several seasons of his life; such a
thing is it also to be dissolved. It is therefore the part of a wise man, in
matter of death, See note upon B. XI N. 3.
not in any wise to carry himself either violently, or proudly; but patiently
to wait for it, as one of Natures operations: that with the same mind as now
thou do expect when that which yet is but an Embryo in thy Wifes belly shall
come forth; thou may expect also when thy soul shall fall off from that
[outward coat or skin:] wherein [as a child in the belly] it lies involved
and shut up. But if thou desire a more popular, and though not so direct and
philosophical, yet a very powerful and penetratiue receipt against the fear
of death, Nothing can make thee more willing to part with thy life, then if
thou shall consider, both what the subjects themselves are that thou shall part
with, and what manner of dispositions thou shall no more have to do with. True
it is, that offended with them thou must not be by no means, but take care of
them, and meekely bear with them. However, this thou may remember, that
whenever it happens that thou depart, it shall not be from men that held the
same opinions that thou do. For that indeed, (if it were so) is the only
thing that might make thee averse from death, and willing to continue here, if
it were thy hap to live with men that had obtained the same belief that thou
have. But now, what a toil it is for thee to live with men of different
opinions, thou see: so that thou have rather occasion to say, Hasten, I thee
pray, O Death; least I also in time forget my self.

IV. He that sins, sins unto himself. He that is unjust, hurts
himself, in that he makes himself worse then he was before. Not he only that
commits, but he also that omitteth some thing, is oftentimes unjust.

V. If my present apprehension of the object be right, and my present action
charitable, and this, toward whatsoever does proceed from God, be my present
disposition, to be well pleased with it, it suffices.

VI. To wipe away phancie, to use deliberation, to quench concupiscence, to
keep the mind free to her self.

VII. Of all unreasonable creatures, there is but one unreasonable soul; and
of all that are reasonable, but one reasonable Soul, divided betwixt them all.
As of all earthly things there is but one Earth; and but one light that we see
by; and but one air that we breath in, as many as either breath or see. Now
whatsoever partakes of some common thing, naturally affects and enclines unto
that whereof it is part, being of one kind and nature with it. Whatsoever is
Earthly, presses downwards to the common Earth. Whatsoever is liquid, would
flow together. And whatsoever is ayrie, would be together likewise. So that
without some obstacle, and some kind of violence, they cannot well be kept
asunder. Whatsoever is fiery, does not only by reason of the Elementarie fire
tend upwards; but here also is so ready to join, and to burn together, that
whatsoever does want sufficient moisture to make resistance, is easily set on
fire. Whatsoever therefore is partaker of that reasonable common Nature,
[naturally] does as much and more long after his own kind. For by how much in
its own nature it excells all other things, by so much more is it desirous to
be joined and united unto that, which is of its own nature. As for
unreasonable creatures then, they had not long been, but presently begun among
them swarms, and flocks, and broods of young ones, and a kind of mutual love
and affection. For [though but unreasonable, yet] a [kinde of] soul these had,
and therefore was that natural desire of union more strong and intense in
them, as in creatures of a more excellent nature, then either in plants, or
stones, or trees. But among reasonable creatures, begun commonwealths,
friendships, families, public meetings, and even in their wars conventions
and truces. Now among them that were yet of a more excellent nature, as the
stars and planets, though by their nature far distant one from another, yet
even among them began some mutual correspondencie and unity. So proper is
it to excellency in a high degree to affect unity, as that even in things so
far distant, it could operate unto a mutual Sympathy. But now behold, what
is now come to pass. Those creatures that are reasonable, are now the only
creatures that have forgotten their natural affection and inclination of one
toward another. Among them alone [of all other things that are of one kinde]
there is not to be found, a general disposition to flow together. But though
they fly from Nature, yet are they stopped in their course, and apprehended. Do
they what they can, Nature does prevail. And so shall thou confess, if thou
do observe it. For sooner may thou find a thing earthly, where no
earthly thing is, then find a man that [naturally] can live by himself alone.

VIII. Man, God, the World, every one in their kind, bear some fruits. All
things have their proper time to bear. Though by custom, the word it self is
in a manner become proper unto the vine, and the like, yet is it so
nevertheless, as we have said. As for reason, that bears both common fruit
for the use of others; and peculiar, which it self does enjoy. Reason is of a
diffusive nature, what it self is in it self, it begets in others, and so
does multiply.

IX. Either teach them better if it be in thy power; or if it be not, remember
that for this use [to bear with them patiently] was mildness and goodness
granted unto thee. The gods themselves are good unto such; yea and in some
things, (as in matter of health, of wealth, of honor,) are content often to
further their endeavors: so good and gracious are thy. And might thou not
be so too? or, tell me, what does hinder thee?

X. Labor not as one [to whom it is appointed to be] wretched, nor as one that
either would be pitied, or admired; but let this be thine only care and
desire, so always and in all things to prosecute or to forbear, as the law of
Charity [or, mutual society] does require.

XI. This day I did come out of all my trouble. Nay I have cast out all my
trouble; it should rather be. For that which troubled thee, whatsoever it was,
was not without any where [that thou should come out of it] but within in
thine own opinions, [from whence it must be cast out, before thou can truly
and constantly be at ease.]

XII. All those things, for matter of experience are usual and ordinary; for
their continuance but for a day; and for their matter, most base, and filthy.
As they were in the days of those whom we have buried, so are they now also,
and no otherwise.

XIII. The things themselves [that affect us] they stand without doors,
neither knowing any thing themselves nor able to utter any thing unto others
concerning themselves. What then is it, that passes verdict on them? The
understanding.

XIV. As virtue and wickedness consist not in passion, but in action; so
neither does the true good or evil of a reasonable charitable man consist in
passion, but in operation and action.

XV. To the stone that is cast up, when it comes down it is no hurt unto it;
as neither benefit, when it does ascend.

XVI. Sift their minds and understandings, and behold what men they be, whom
thou do stand in fear of what they shall judge of thee, what they
themselves judge of themselves.

XVII. All things that are in the world, are always in the estate of
alteration. Thou also art in a perpetual change, yea and under corruption too,
in some part: and so is the whole world.

XVIII. It is [not thine, but] another man's sin. [Why should it trouble
thee?] Let him look to it, whose sin it is.

XIX. Of an operation and of a purpose there is an ending [or, of an action and
of a purpose we say commonly; that it is at an end:] from opinion also there
is an [absolute] cessation, which is as it were the death of it. In all this
there is no hurt. Apply this now to a man's age, as first, a child; then a
youth, then a young man, then an old man; every change from one age to another
is a kind of death. And all this while here is no matter of grief yet. Pass
now unto that life, first, that which thou livedst under thy Grandfather, then
under thy Mother, then under thy Father. And thus when through the whole course
of thy life hitherto thou have found and observed many alterations, many
changes, many kinds of endings and cessations, put this question to thy self,
what matter of grief or sorrow do thou find in any of these? [or, what
do thou suffer through any of these?] If in none of these, then neither in
the ending and consummation of thy whole life, [which also is but] a cessation
and change.

XX. [As occasion shall require,] either to thine own Understanding, or to
that of the Universe, or to his, [whom thou have now to do with,] let thy
refuge be with all speed. To thine own, that it resolve upon nothing against
justice. To that of the Universe, that thou may remember, part of whom thou
art. Of his, that thou may consider, whether in the estate of ignorance, or
of knowledge. And then also must thou call to mind, that he is thy Kinsman.

XXI. As thou thy self [who ever thou art] were made for the perfection and
consummation [being a member of it] of a common society; so must every action
of thine tend to the perfection and consummation of a life that is [truly]
sociable. What action soever of thine therefore that either immediately or
afar off, has not reference to the common good, that is an exorbitant, and
disoderly action; yea it is seditious; as one among the people who from such
and such a consent and unity, should factiously divide and separate himself.

XXII. Childrens anger, mere bables; wretched souls bearing up dead bodies,
that they may not have their fall so soon: Even as it is in that common dirge
song. [or, bearing up dead bodies, that the number of the dead, may not be full
so soon.]

XXIII. Go to the quality of the cause [from which the effect does proceed.]
Behold it by it self bare and naked, separated from all that is material.
Then consider the utmost bounds of time that that cause, thus and thus
qualified, can subsist and abide.

XXIV. Infinite are the troubles and miseries, that thou have already been put
to, by reason of this only, because that for all happiness it did not suffice
thee, [or, that thou did not account it sufficient happiness,] that thy
understanding did operate according to its natural constitution.

XXV. When any shall either impeach thee with false accusations, or hatefully
reproach thee, or shall use any such carriage toward thee, get thee presently
to their minds and understandings, and look in them, and behold what manner
of men they be. Thou shall see, that there is no such occasion why it should
trouble thee, what such as they are think of thee. Yet must thou love them
still, for by nature they are thy friends. See before N. IX.
And the gods themselves, in those things that they seek from them as matters
of great moment, are well content, all manner of ways (as by dreams and
oracles) to help them [as well as others.]

XXVI. Up and down, from one age to another, go the ordinary things of the
world; being still the same. And either of every thing in particular [before it
come to pass,] the mind of the Universe does consider with it self and
deliberate: And if so, then submit [for shame] unto the determination of [such
an excellent] Understanding: or once for all it did resolve upon all things in
general; and since that whatsoever happens, happens by a necessary
consequence; and all things indivisibly in a manner and inseparably hold one of
another. In sum, either there is a God, and then all is well; or or if all
things go by chance and fortune, yet may thou use thine own providence [in
those things that concern thee properly; and then art thou well.]

XXVII. Within a while the Earth shall cover us all, and then she her self
shall have her change. And then the course will be, from one period of
eternity unto another, and so a perpetual eternity. Now can any man that
shall consider with himself in his mind the several rollings [or,
successions] of so many changes and alterations, and the swiftness of all
these rollings; can he otherwise but contemn in his heart and despise all
worldly things? The Cause of the Universe [or, the general cause] is as it
were a strong torrent, it caryeth all away.

XXVIII. And these your professed politicians, the only true practick of
philosophers of the world, (as they think of themselves) so full of affected
gravitie, [or, such professed lovers of virtue and honesty,] what wretches be
they in very deed; how vile and contemptible in themselves? O man! what a do
do thou keep? Do what thy nature does now require. Resolve upon it, if
thou may: and take no thought, whether any body shall know it or no. Yea,
but [sayest thou] I must not expect a Plato's commonwealth. If they profit
though never so little, I must be content; and think much even of that little
progress. Does then any of them forsake their former [false] opinions [that I
should think they profit?] For without a change of opinions, alas! what is all
that ostentation, but mere wretchedness of slavish minds, that groan
privately, and yet would make a show of obedience [to Reason, and Truth?] Go
too now and tell me of Alexander and Philippus, and Demetrius Phalaereus
Whether they understood what the common nature requires, and could rule
themselves or no, they know best themselves. But if they kept a life, and
swaggered; I (God be thanked) am not bound to imitate them. The effect of true
Philosopie is, unaffected simplicity, and modesty. Persuade me not to
ostentation and vain glory.

XXIX. From some high place as it were to look down, and to behold here
flocks, See B. VII. N. 26.
and there sacrifices, without number; and all kind of navigation; some in a
ruff and stormy sea, and some in a calm: the general differences, [or,
different estates] of things, some, that are now first upon being; the several
and mutual relations of those things that are together; and some other things
that are at their last. Their lives also, who were long ago, and theirs who
shall be hereafter, and the present estate and life of those many nations of
Barbares that are now in the world, thou must likewise consider in thy mind.
And how many there be, who never so much as heard of thy Name, how many that
will soon forget it; how many who but even now did commend thee, within a very
little while perchance, will speak ill of thee. So that neither fame, nor
honor, nor any thing else that this world does afford, is worth the while. The
sum then of all; Whatsoever does happen unto thee, whereof God is the cause,
to accept it contentedly: whatsoever thou do, whereof thou thy self art the
cause; to do it justly: which will be, if both in thy resolution, and in thy
action thou have no further end, then to do good unto others, as being that,
which by thy natural constitution, [or, as a man:] thou art bound unto.

XXX. Many of those things that trouble and straighten thee, it is in thy power
to cut off, as wholly depending from mere conceit and opinion, and then thou
shall have room enough.

XXXI. To comprehend the whole world together in thy mind, and the whole
course of this present age to represent it unto thy self, and to fix thy
thoughts upon the sudden change of every particular object. How short the
time is from the generation of any thing, unto the dissolution of the same; but
how immense and infinite both that which was before the generation, and that
which after the generation of it shall be. All things that thou see, will
soon be perished, and they that see their corruptions, will soon vanish away
themselves. He that dies a hundred years old, and he that dies young, shall
come all to one.

XXXII. What are their minds and understandings; and what the things that they
apply themselves unto: what do they love, and what do they hate for? Phancie
to thy self the estate of their souls openly to be seen. When they think
they hurt them shrewdly, whom they speak ill of; and when they think they do
them a very good turn, whom they commend and extol: O how full are they then
of conceit, and opinion!

XXXIII. Loss and corruption, is in very deed nothing else but change and
alteration; and that is it, which the Nature of the Universe does most delight
in, by which, and according to which, whatsoever is done, is well done. For
that was the estate of worldly things from the beginning, and so shall it ever
be. Or would thou rather say, that all things in the world have gone ill
[from the beginning for so many Ages] and shall ever go ill* And the^ among so
many Deities, could no Divine power be found all this while, that could
rectify the things of the world? Or is the world, to incessant woes and
miseries, for ever condemned?

XXXIV. How base and putrid, every common matter is? Water, dust, [and from the
mixture of these] bones, and all that loathsome stuff [that our bodies do
consist of; so subject to be infected, and corrupted. And again [those other
things that are so much prized, and admired, as] marble stones [what are they,
but as it were] the Kernels of the Earth? gold and silver, [what are they, but
as] the more gross faeces of the Earth? Thy [most royall] apparel, for matter,
it is but as it were the hair [of a silly sheepe] and for color, the very
blood [of a shell fish] of this nature are all other things. Thy life it self,
is some such thing too; [a mere exhalation of blood:] and it also, apt to be
changed into some other common thing.

XXXV. Will this querulousnesse, this murmuring, this complaining and
dissembling never be at an end? What then is it, that troubles thee? Does any
new thing happen unto thee? What do thou so wonder at? At the Cause, or the
matter? Behold either by it self, [is either of that weight and moment
indeed?] And besides these, there is not any thing. But thy duty toward the
Gods also, it is time that thou should acquit thy self of it with more
goodness and simplicity.

XXXVI. It is all one to see these things for a hundred of years together, or
but for three years.

XXXVII. If he have sinned, his is the harm, not mine. But perchance he has
not.

XXXVIII. Either all things by the providence of Reason happen unto every
particular, as a part of one general body; and then it is against reason that
a part should complain of any thing that happens for the good of the Whole; or
if [according to Epicurus] Atoms [be the Cause of all things] and [that life
be] nothing else but an accidentarie confusion of things, and [death nothing
else, but] a mere Dispersion [and so of all other things:] what do thou
trouble thy self for?

XXXIX. Say thou unto that Rational part, Thou art dead; corruption has
taken hold on thee? Does it then also void excrements? Does it like either
Oxen, or sheep, graze or feed; [that it also should be mort all, as well as
the body?]

XL. Either the Gods can do nothing for us at all, or they can still and alay
all the distractions and distempers of thy mind. If they can do nothing, why
do thou pray? If they can, why would not thou rather pray, that they will
grant unto thee, that thou may neither fear, nor lust after any of those
[worldly] things [which cause these distractions, and distempers of it?] Why
not rather, that thou may not at either their absence or presence, be
grieved and discontented: then either that thou may obtain them, or that
thou may avoyde them? For certainly it must needs be, that if the Gods can
help us in any thing, they may in this kind also. But thou will say perchance,
In those things the Gods have given me my liberty: and it is in mine own power
to do what I will. But if thou may use this liberty, rather to set thy
mind at true liberty, then wilfully with baseness and servility of mind, to
affect those things, which [either to compass or to avoyde] is not in thy
power, were not thou better? And as for the Gods, who has told thee, that they
may not help us up even in those things that they have put in our own power?
Whether it be so or no, thou shall soon perceive, if thou will but try thy
self and pray. One prays that he may compass his desire, to lie with such
or such a one, pray thou that thou may not lust to lie with her. Another how
he may be rid of such a one; pray thou that thou [mayest so patiently bear
with him, as that thou] have no such need to be rid of him. Another, that he
may not lose his child. Pray thou that thou may not fear to lose him. To
this end and purpose, let all thy prayer be, and see what will be the event.

XLI. In my sickness (says Epicurus of himself:) my discourses were not
concerning the nature of my discase, neither was that, to them that came to
visit me, the subject of my talk; but in the consideration and contemplation
of that, which was of especial weight and moment, was all my time bestowed and
spent, and among others in this very thing, how my mind, by a natural and
unavoydable sympathy partaking in some sort with the present indisposition of
my body, might nevertheless keep herself free from trouble, and in present
possession of her own proper happiness. Neither did I leave the ordering of
my body to Physicians altogether to do with me what they would, as though I
expected any great matter from them, [Or, as though I thought it a matter of
such great consequence, by their means to recover my health:] for my present
estate, me thought, liked me very well, and gave me good content. Whether
therefore in sickness (if thou chance to sicken:) or in what other kind of
extremity soever, endeavor thou also to be in thy mind so affected, as he
does report of himself: not to depart from thy philosophy for any thing that
can befall thee, nor to give ear to the discourses of silly people, and mere
naturalists.

XLII. It is common to all trades and professions to mind and intend that
only, which now they are about, and the instrument whereby they work.

XLIII. When at any time thou art offended with any ones impudency, put
presently this question to thy self; What? Is it then possible, that there
should not be any impudent men in the world! Certainly it is not possible.
Desire not then that which is impossible. For this one, (thou must think)
whosoever he be, is one of those impudent ones, that the world cannot be
without. So of the subtle and crafty, so of the perfidious, so of every one
that offends, must thou ever be ready to reason with thy self. For whilst
in general thou do thus reason with thy self, that the kind of them must
needs be in the world, thou will be the better able to use meekness toward
every particular. This also thou shall find of very good use, upon every such
occasion, presently to consider with thy self, what proper virtue nature has
furnished man with, against such a vice, [or, to encounter with a disposition
vicious in this kind.] As for example, against the unthankful, it has given
goodness and meekness, as an antidote, and so against another [vicious in
another kinde] some other peculiar faculty. And generally, is it not in thy
power to instruct him better, that is in an error? For whosoever sins, does
in that decline from his purposed end, and is certainly deceived. And again,
what art thou the worse for his sin? For thou shall not find that any one of
these, against whom thou art incensed, has in very deed done any thing whereby
thy mind (the only true subject of thy hurt and evil:) can be made worse,
then it was. And what a matter of either grief or wonder is this, if he that
is unlearned, do the deeds of one that is unlearned? Should not thou rather
blame thy self, who, when upon very good grounds of reason, thou might have
thought it very probable, that such a thing would by such a one be committed,
did not only not foresee it, but moreover do wonder at it, that such a
thing should be. But then especially, when thou do find fault with either
an unthankful, or a false man, must thou reflect upon thy self. For without
all question, thou thy self art much in fault, if either of one that were of
such a disposition thou did expect that he should be true unto thee: or when
unto any thou did a good turn, thou did not there bound thy thoughts, as
one that had obtained his end; nor did not think that from the action it
self thou had received a full reward of the good that thou had done. For
what would thou have more? Unto him that is a man, thou have done a good
turn: does not that suffice thee? What thy nature required, that have thou
done. Must thou be rewarded for it? As if either the eye for that it seeeth, or
the feet for that they go, should require satisfaction. For as these being by
nature appointed for such an use, can challenge no more, then that they may
work according to their natural constitution: so man being borne to do good
unto others whenever he does a real good unto any [by helping them out of
error;] or though but in middle things [as in matter of wealth, life,
preferment, and the like] does help to further their desires; he does that for
which he was made, and therefore can require no more.

THE TENTH BOOK.
O My soul, the time I trust will be, when thou shall be good, simple, single,
more open and visible, then that body by which it is enclosed. Thou will one
day be sensible of their happiness, whose end is love, and their affections
dead to al worldly things. Thou shall one day be full, and in want of no
external thing: not seeking pleasure from any thing, either living or
unsensible, that this World can afford; neither wanting time for the
continuation of thy pleasure, nor place and opportunity, nor the favor either
of the weather or of men. When thou shall have content in thy present estate,
and all things present shall add to thy content: when thou shall persuade thy
self, that thou have all things; all for thy good, and all by the providence
of the gods: and of things future also shall be as confident, See B. v. N. 8.
last lines.
that all will do well, as tending to the maintenance and preservation in some
sort, of his perfect welfare and happiness, who is perfection of life, of
goodness, and beauty; Who begets all things, and contains all things in
himself, and in himself does recollect all things from all places that are
dissolved, that of them he may beget others again like unto them. Such one day
shall be thy disposition, that thou shall be able, both in regard of the gods,
and in regard of men, so to fit and order thy conversation, as neither to
complain of them at any time, for any thing that they do; nor to do any
thing thy self, for which thou may [justly] be condemned.

II. As one who is altogether governed by nature, let it be thy care to observe
what it is that thy nature [in generall] does require. That done, if thou find
not that thy nature, as thou art a living sensible creature, will be the worse
for it, thou may proceed. Next then thou must examine, what thy nature as
thou art a living sensible creature, does require. And that, whatsoever it be,
thou may admit of and do it, if thy nature as thou art a reasonable living
creature, will not be the worse for it. Now whatsoever is reasonable, is also
sociable. Keep thy self to these rules, and trouble not thy self about idle
things.

III. Whatsoever does happen unto thee, thou art naturally by thy natural
constitution either able, or not able to bear. If thou be able, be not
offended, but bear it according to thy natural constitution [or, as nature
has enabled thee,] If thou be not able, be not offended. For it will soon
make an end of thee, and it self, (whatsoever it be) at the same time end with
thee. But remember, that whatsoever by the strength of opinion, grounded upon a
certain apprehension of both [true] profit and duty thou can conceive
tolerable; that thou art able to bear that by thy natural constitution.

IV. Him that offends, to teach with love and meekness, and to show him his
error. But if thou can not, then to blame thy self, or rather not thy self
neither, [if thy will and endeavors have not been wanting,]

V. Whatsoever it be that happens unto thee, it is that which from all time was
appointed unto thee. For by the same cohaerence of causes, by which thy
substance from all eternity was appointed to be, was also whatsoever should
happen unto it, destinated and appointed.

VI. Either [with Epicurus, we must fondly imagine] the atoms [to be the cause
of all things] or [wee must needs grant] a Nature. Let this then be thy first
ground, that thou art part of that Universe, which is governed by nature. Then
secondly, that to those parts that are of the same kind and Nature as thou
art, thou have relation of kindred. For of these, if I shall always be
mindful, first as I am a part, I shall never be displeased with any thing,
that falls to my particular share of the common chances of the world. For
nothing that is behoovefull unto the whole, can be [truly] hurtful to that
which is part of it. For this being the common privilege of all natures, that
they contain nothing in themselves that is hurtful unto them; it cannot be
that the nature of the Universe (whose privilege beyond other particular
natures, is, that she cannot against her will by any higher external cause be
constrained,) should beget any thing [and cherish it in her bosome] that should
tend to her own hurt and prejudice. As then I bear in mind that I am a part
of such an Universe, I shall not be displeased with any thing that happens. And
as I have relation of kindred to those parts that are of the same kind and
nature that I am, so I shall be careful to do nothing that is prejudicial
to the community, but in all my deliberations shall my Kind ever be; and the
common good, that, which all my intentions and resolutions shall drive unto, as
that which is contrary unto it, I shall by all means endeavor to prevent and
avoid. These things once so fixed and concluded, as thou would think him an
happy citizen, whose constant study and practice were for the good and benefit
of his fellow Citizens, and the carriage of the City such toward him, that he
were well pleased with it; so must it needs be with thee, that thou shall live
a happy life.

VII. All parts of the world, (all things I mean that are contained within the
whole world,) must of necessity at some time or other come to corruption.
Alteration I should say, to speak truly and properly; but that I may be the
better understood, I am content at this time to use that more common word. Now
say I, if so be that this be both hurtful unto them, and yet unavoidable,
would not, think thou, the whole it self be in a sweet case, all the parts
of it being subject to alteration, yea and by their making it self fitted for
corruption, as consisting of things different and contrary? And did nature
then either of her self thus project and purpose the affliction and misery of
her parts, and therefore of purpose so made them, not only that happily they
might, but of necessity that they should fall into evil; or did not she know
what she did, when she made them? For either of these two to say, is equally
absurd. But to let pass nature in general, and to reason of things particular
according to their own particular natures; how absurd and ridiculous is it,
first to say that all parts of the whole are, by their proper natural
constitution subject to alteration; and then when any such thing does happen
[as when one does fall sick and dyeth] to take on and wonder as though some
strange thing had happened? Though this besides might moove not so grievously
to take on when any such thing does happen, that whatsoever is dissolved, it is
dissolved into those things, whereof it was compounded. For every dissolution
is either a mere dispersion, of the Elements into those Elements again
whereof every thing did consist, or a change, of that which is more solid into
Earth; and of that which is pure and subtle [or, spiritual;] into air. So
that [by this means nothing is lost, but] all resumed again into those
rational generative seeds of the Universe; and this Universe, either after a
certain period of time to be consumed by fire, or by continual changes to be
renewed, and so for ever to endure. Now that solid and Spiritual that we speak
of, thou must not conceive it to be that very same, which at first was, when
thou were borne. For alas! all this that now thou art in either kind [either
for matter of substance, or, of life;] has but two or three days ago partly
from meats eaten, and partly from air breathed in, received all its (...)
influxe, [being the same then in no other respect, then a running river,
maintained by the perpetual influxe and new supply of waters, is the same.]
That therefore which thou have since received, not that which came from thy
Mother, is that which comes to change [and corruption.] But suppose that that
[for the general substance, and more solid part of it] should still cleave
unto thee never so close, yet what is that to the proper qualities, and
affections of it, [by which persons are distinguished] which certainly are
quite different?

VIII. Now that thou have taken these names upon thee of good, modest, true; of
(...); take heed least at any times [by doing any thing that is contrary,]
thou be but improperly so called, and lose thy right to these appellations. Or
if thou do, return unto them again with all possible speed. And remember, that
the word (...) notes unto thee an intent and intelligent consideration of every
object that presents it self unto thee, without distraction. And the word
(...), a ready and contented acceptance of whatsoever by the appointment of
the common nature, happens unto thee. And the word (...), a super-extention
[or, a transcendent, and outreaching disposition] of thy mind, whereby it
passes by all bodily pains and pleasures, honor and credit, death and
whatsoever is of the same Nature, [as matters of absolate indifferency, and in
no wife to be stood upon by a wise man.] These then if inviolably thou shall
observe, and shall not be ambitious to be so called by others, both thou thy
self shall become a new man, and thou shall begin a new life. For to continue
such as hitherto thou have been, to undergo those distractions and distempers
[as thou must needes] for such a life [as hitherto thou have lived,] is the
part of one that is very foolish, and is overfond of his life. Whom a man might
compare to one of those halfe-eaten wretches, matched in the Amphitheatre with
wild beasts; who as full as they are all the body over with wounds and blood,
desire for a great favor, that they may be reserved till the next day, then
also, and in the same estate to be exposed to the same nails and teeth as
before. Away therefore, ship thy self, and [fro^ the troubles and distractions
of thy former life] convay thy self as it were unto these few Names; and if
thou can abide in them [or, be constant in the practice and possession of
them] continue there [as glad and joyfull] as one that were translated unto
certain [truely and really so, not by way of name and appellation onely]
MAKAPON NHCOYC. Islands of the Blessed, [ otherwise called, The Blessed Islands.
And whenever thou find thy self, that thou art in danger of a relapse,
and that thou art not able to master and overcome [those difficulties, and
temptations that present themselves in thy present station:] get thee into any
private corner, where thou may be better able. Or if that will not serve,
forsake even thy life rather. But so that it be not in passion, but in a plain
voluntary modest way: this being the only commendable action of thy whole
life, that thus thou art departed [or, this having been the maine work, and
business of thy whole life, that thou might thus depart.] Now for the
better remembrance of those names that we have spoken of, thou shall find it a
very good help, to remember the Gods [as often as may be;] and that, that
which they require at our hands, of as many of us, as are by nature reasonable
creatures; is not that [with fair words, and outward show of piety and
devotion.] we should flatter them, but that we should become like unto them:
and that as all other natural creatures, the Fig tree for example; the
Dog, the Be; both do, all of them, and apply themselves unto that, which by
their natural constitution, is proper unto them; so man likewise should do
that, which by his Nature, as he is a man, belongs unto him.

IX. Toys and fooleries [at home;] wars [abroad:] sometimes terror, sometimes
torpor, or, stupid sloth:] this is thy daily slaverie. By little and little
[if thou do not better look to it] those sacred Dogmata will be blotted out
of thy mind. How many things be there, which when as a mere naturalist, thou
have barely considered of according to their nature, thou do let pass
without any further use? Whereas thou should i^ all things so join action
and contemplation, that thou might both at the same time attend all present
occasions, to perform every thing duly, and carefully; and yet so intend the
contemplative part too, that no part of that delight and pleasure, which the
contemplative knowledge of every thing, according to its true nature does of it
self afford, might be lost. [Or, that the true and contemplative knowledge of
every thing according to its own nature, might of it self, (action being
subject to many lets and impediments) afford unto thee sufficient pleasure and
happiness.] Not apparent indeed, but not concealed. And when shall thou
attain to the happiness of true Simplicity, and unaffected gravity? When
shall thou rejoice in the certain knowledge of every particular object
according to its true Nature: as what the matter and substance of it is; what
use it is for in the world: how long it can subsist: what things it does
consist of: who they be that are capable of it, and who they that can give it,
and take it away?

X. As the Spider, when it has caught the Fly that it hunted after, is not
little proud, nor meanly conceited of her self: as he likewise that has
caught an Hare, or has taken a Fish with his net: as another for the taking of
a Boar, and another of a Bear: so may they be proud, and applaud themselves
for their valiant acts against the Sarmatae [or, Northern Nations lately
defeated.] For these also, [these famous soldiers and warlike men,] if thou
do look into their minds and opinions, what do they for the most part but
hunt after prey?

XI. To find out, and set to thy self some certain way and method of
contemplation, whereby thou may clearly discern and represent unto thy
self, the mutual change of all things, the one into the other. Bear it in
thy mind evermore, and see that thou be thoroughly well exercised in this
particular. For there is not any thing more effectual to beget true
magnanimity.

XII. He has got loose from, [or, he has shaken off the bonds of] his body,
and perceiving that within a very little while he must of necessity hid the
World farewell, and leave all these things behind him, he wholly applied
himself, as to righteousness in all his actions, so to the common Nature in
all things that should happen unto him. And contenting himself with these two
things, to do all things justly, and whatsoever God does send to like well of
it: what others shall either say or think of him, or shall do against him,
he does not so much as trouble his thoughts with it. To go on straight,
whither right and reason directed him, and by so doing to follow God, was the
only thing that he did mind, that, his only business and occupation.

XIII. What use is there of suspicion at all? [or, why should thoughts of
mistrust, and suspicion concerning that which is future, trouble thy mind at
all?] What now is to be done, if thou may search and enquire into that, what
needs thou care for more? And if thou art well able to perceive it alone, let
no man divert thee from it. But if alone thou do not so well perceive it,
suspend thine action, and take advice from the best. And if there be any thing
else that does hinder thee, go on with prudence and discretion, according to
the present occasion and opportunity, still proposing that unto thy self,
which thou do conceive most right and just. For to (...) that aright, and to
speed in one prosecution of it, must needs be happiness, since it is that
only which we can. [truely and properly be said to] miss of, [or, miscarrie
(...)]

XIV. What is that that is slow, and yet quick? merry and yet grave? Hoe that
in all things does follow Reason for his guide.

XV. In the morning as soon as thou art awaked [when thy judgment, before
either thy affections, or external objects have wrought upon it, is yet most
free and impartial:] put this question to thy self whether if that which is
right and just be done, the doing of it by thy self, or by others [when thou
art not able thy selfe] be a thing material or no. For sure it is not not. And
as for these that keep such a life, and stand so much upon the praises, or
dispraises of other men, have thou forgotten: what manner of men they be? that
such and such upon their beds, and such at their hoard: what their ordinary
actions are: what they pursue after, and what they fly from: what thefts and
rapines they commit, if not with their hands and feet, yet with that more
precious part of theirs, their minds: which (would it but admit of them) might
enjoy faith, modesty, truth, justice, a good spirit.

XVI. Give what thou will, and take away what thou will, says he that is well
taught and truly modest, to Him that gives, and takes away. And it is out of a
stout, and peremptory resolution, that he says it, but in mere love and
humble submission.

XVII. So live [as indifferent to the world, and all worldly objects] as one
who live^ by himself alone upon some desert hill. For whether here, or there,
if the whole world be was one Town, it matters not much for the place. Let
them behold, and see a Man, that is a Man indeed, living according to the true
nature of man. If they cannot bear with me, let them kill me. For better were
it to die, then so to live [as they would have thee.]

XVIII. Not to make it any longer a matter of dispute, or discourse, what are
the signs and proprieties of a good man, but really, and actually to be such.

XIX. Ever to represent unto thy self, and to set before thee, both the
general Age, and Time of the World, and the whole Substance of it. And how all
things particular in respect of these are for their substance, as one of the
least seeds that is, [or, as the seed that is in a Fig:] and for their
duration, as the turning of the pestle in the Mortar once about. Then to six
thy mind upon every particular object of the World, and to conceive it, (as it
is indeed,) as already being in the state of dissolution, and of change;
tending to some kind of either putrefaction or dispersion; or whatsoever else
it is, that is the death as it were of every thing in his own kind.

XX. Consider them through all actions and occupations, of their lives: as when
they eat, and when they sleep: when they are in the act of necessary
exoneration, and when in the act of lust. Again, when they either are in their
greatest exultation; and in the middle of all their pomp and glory; or being
angry and displeased, in great state and majesty, as from an higher place,
they chide and rebuke. How base, and slavish, but a little while ago, they
were feign to be, that they might come to this; and within a very little while
what will be their estate, [when death has once seized upon them.]

XXI. That is best for every one, that the common Nature of all does send unto
every one, and then is it best, when she does send it.

XXII. The Earth [saith the Poet] does often long after the rain. So is the
glorious sky often as desirous to fall upon the Earth, which argues a mutual
kind of love between them. And so [say I] does the world bear a certain
affection of love to whatsoever shall come to pass. With thine affections shall
mine concur, O World. The same (and no other,) shall the object of my longing
be, which is of thine. Now that the World does love as it is true indeed, so
is it as commonly said, and acknowledged, when [according to the Greek phrase,
imitated by the Latins, of things that use to be,] we say commonly, that they
love to be.

XXIII. Either thou do continue in this kind of life, and that is it, which
so long thou have been used unto [and therefore tolerable:] or thou do
retire [or, leave the World] and that of thine own accord, [and then thou have
thy mind:] or thy life is cut off, and then [mayest thou rejoice that] thou
have ended thy charge. One of these must needs be. Be therefore of good
comfort.

XXIV. Let it always appear, See B. IV N. III.
and be manifest unto thee, that solitariness, and desert place, [by many
Philosophers, so much esteemed of, and affected,] are of themselves but thus
and thus; and that all things are here [to them that live in Towns, and
converse with others:] as they are [the same nature every where to be seen and
observed:] to them that have retired themselves to the top of mountains, and
to desert Havens, or what other [desart and inhabited] places soever. For any
where [if thou wilt] may thou quickly find and apply that to thy self,
which Plato says [of his Philosopher,] in a place; [as private and retired]
says he, [as if he were] shut up and enclosed about in some Shepherds lane,
on the top of a hill. There by thy self to put these questions to thy self
[or, to enter into these considerations:] What is my chief and principal
part, which has power over the rest? What is now the present estate of it, as
I use it: and what is it, that I employ it about? Is it now void of reason or
no? Is it free, and separated; or so affixed, so congealed and grown together,
as it were with the flesh, that it is swayed by the motions and inclinations of
it?

XXV. He that runs away from his Master, is a fugitive. But the law is every
man's Master. He therefore that forsakes the Law, is a fugitive. So is he,
whosoever he be, that is either sorry, angry, or afraid, or for any thing that
either has been, is, or shall be by his appointment, who is the Lord and
Governor of the Universe. For he truly and properly is (...) [or, the Law] as
the only (...) [or, distributer and dispenser:] of all things that happen unto
any one in his life time. Whosoever then is either sorry, angry, or afraid is a
fugitive.

XXVI. From man is the seed, that once cast into the womb, man has no more
to do with it. Another Cause succeeds, and undertakes the Work, and in time
brings a Child (that wonderful effect from such a beginning!) to perfection.
Again, Man lets food down through his throat; and that once down, he has
no more to do with it. Another Cause succeeds and distributeth this food
into the Senses, and the affections: into life and into strength; and does with
it those other many and marvailous things, that belong unto man. These things
therefore that are so secretly, and invisible wrought and brought to pass,
thou must use to behold and contemplate; and not the things themselves only,
but the power also by which they are effected; that thou may behold it,
though not with the eyes of the body, yet as plainly and visibly as thou can
see and discern the [outward] efficient cause of the depression and elevation
of any thing.

XXVII. Ever to mind and consider with thy self, how all things that now are,
have been heretofore much after the same sort, and after the same fashion that
now they are: and so to think of those things which shall be hereafter also.
Moreover, whole dramata, and uniforme scenes, [or, scenes that comprehend the
lives and actions of men of one calling and profession:] as many as either in
thine own experience thou have known, or by reading of ancient histories; (as
the whole Court of Adrianus, the whole Court of Antoninus Pius, the whole Court
of Philippus, that of Alexander, that of Craesus:) to set them all before thine
eyes. For thou shall find that they are all but after one sort and fashion:
[or, all of the same kind and nature:] only that the actors were others.

XXVIII. As a pigge that cries and flings when his throat is cut, phancie to
thy self every one to be, that grieves [for any wordly thing] and takes on.
Such a one is he also, who upon his bed alone, does bewail the miseries of
this our mortal life. And remember this, that unto reasonable creatures only
it is granted that they may willingly and freely submit unto Providence: but
absolutely to submit, is a necessity imposed upon all creatures equally.

XXIX. Whatsoever it is that thou go about, consider of it by thy self, and
ask thy self, What? because I shall do this no more when I am dead, should
therefore death seem grievous unto me?

XXX. When thou art offended with any man's transgression, presently reflect
upon thy self, and consider what thou thy self art guilty of in the same
kind. As that thou also perchance do think it a happiness either to be
rich, or to live in pleasure, or to be praised and commended, and so of the
rest in particular. For this if thou shall call to mind, thou shall soon
forget thine anger: especially when at the same time this also shall concur
in thy thoughts, that he was constrained [by his error and ignorance] so to
do: For how can he choose [as long as he is of that opinion?] Do thou
therefore if thou can, take away that from him, that forces him to do as he
does.

XXXI. When thou see Satyro, think of Socraticus, and Eutyches, or Hymen,
and when Euphrates, think of Eutychio, and Sylvanus, when Alciphron, of
Tropaeophorus, when Xenophon, of Crito, or Severus. And when thou do look
upon thy self, phancie unto thy self some one or other of the Caesar's; and so
for every one, some one or other that has been for estate and profession
answerable unto him. Then let this come to thy mind at the same time; And
where now are they all? No where or any where? For so shall thou at all times
be able to perceive how all worldly things are but as the smoke, [that
vanishes away:] or, indeed, mere nothing. Especially when thou shall call to
mind this also, that whatsoever is once changed, shall never be again as long
as the world endures. And thou then, how long shall thou endure? And why does
it not suffice thee, if virtuously, and as becomes thee, thou may pass
that portion of time, how little soever it be, that is allotted unto thee?

XXXII. What a subject, and what a course of life is it, that thou do so
much desire to be rid of. For all these things, what are they, but fit objects
for an understanding, that beholds every thing according to its true nature,
to exercise it self upon? Be patient therefore, until that (as a strong
stomach that turns all things into his own nature; and as a great fire that
turns in flame and light, whatsoever thou do cast into it:) thou have made
these things also familiar, and as it were natural unto thee.

XXXIII. Let it not be in any man's power, to say truly of thee, that thou art
not truly simple, [or, sincere and open,] or not good. Let him be deceived
whosoever he be that shall have any such opinion of thee. For all this does
depend of thee. For who is it that should hinder thee from being either truly
simple or good? Do thou only resolve rather not to live, then not to be such.
For indeed neither does it stand with reason that he should live that is not
such. What [then] is it that may upon this present occasion according to best
reason and discretion, either he said or done? For whatsoever it be, it is in
thy power either to do it, or to say it, and therefore seek not any
pretenses, as though thou were hindered. Thou will never cease groaning and
complaining, until such time as that, what pleasure is unto the voluptuous, be
unto thee, to do in every thing that presents it self, whatsoever may be
done conformably and agreeably to the proper constitution of man, [or, to man
as he is a man.] For thou must account that pleasure, whatsoever it be, that
thou may do according to thine own Nature. And to do this, every place
will fit thee. Unto the Cylindrus [or, roller] it is not granted to move every
where according to its own proper motion, as neither unto the water, nor unto
the fire, nor unto any other thing, that either is merely natural, or natural
and sensitive, but not rational. For many things there be that can hinder
their operations. But of the mind and understanding this is the proper
privilege, that according to its own nature, and as it will it self, it can
pass through every obstacle that it finds, and keep straight on forwards.
Setting therefore before thine eyes this happiness and felicity of thy mind,
whereby it is able to pass through all things [and is capable of all motions,
whether] as the fire, upwards; or as the stone downwards, or as the Cylindrus
through that which is sloping: [or, through a declivitie:] content thy self
with it, and seek not after any other thing. For all other kind of
hindrances [that are not hindrances of thy minde] either they are proper to
the body, or merely proceed from the opinion, Reason not making that resistance
that it should, but basely, and cowardly suffering it self to be foiled; and
of themselves can neither wound, nor do any hurt at all. Else must he of
necessity, whosoever he be that meets with any of them, become worse then he
was before. For so is it in all other subjects, that that is thought hurtful
unto them, whereby they are made worse. But here contrariwise, man (if he make
that good use of them that he should) is rather the better and the more praise
worthy for any of those kind of hindrances, then otherwise. But generally
remember that nothing can hurt a natural Citizen, that is not hurtful unto
the City it self, nor any thing hurt the City, that is not hurtful unto the
Law it self. But none of these casualties, or external hindrances, do hurt
the Law it self; [or, are contrary to that course of Justice, and equity, by
which public societies are maintained:] neither therefore do they hurt either
City or Citizen.

XXXIV. [As he that is bitten by a mad dog, is afraid of every thing almost
that he sees: so] unto him, whom the Dogmata have once bitten [or, in whom
true knowledge has made an impression] every thing almost [that he sees or
reades] be it never so short or ordinary, does afford a good memento; to put
him out of all grief and fear, as that of the Poet, The winds blow upon the
trees, and their leaves fall upon the ground. Then do the trees begin to
budde again, and by the spring time they put forth new branches. So is the
generation of men; some come into the world, and others go out of it. Of these
leaves then thy Children are. And they also that applaud thee so gravely, [or,
that applaud thy speeches, with that their usual acclamation, (...), or, O
wisely spoken!] and speak well of thee, as on the other side, they that stick
not to curse thee, they that privately and secretly dispraise and deride thee,
they also are but leaves. And they also that shall follow, in whose memories
the names of men famous after death, is preserved, they are but leaves neither.
For even so is it of all these [worldly] things. Their Spring comes, and they
are put forth. Then blows the wind, and they go down. And then in lieu of
them grow others out of the wood [or, common matter of all things:] like unto
them. But, to endure but for a while, is common unto all. Why then should
thou so [earnestly] either seek after these things, or fly from them, as
though they should endure for ever? Yet a little while, and thine eyes will be
closed up, and for him that caries thee to thy grave shall another mourn
within a while after.

XXXV. A good eye must be good to see whatsoever is to be seen, and not green
things only. For that is proper to sore eyes. So must a good ear, and a good
smell be ready for whatsoever is either to be heard, or smelt: and a good
stomach as indifferent to all kinds of food, as a millstone, to whatsoever she
was made for, to grind. As ready therefore must a sound understanding be for
whatsoever shall happen. But he that says, O that my Children might live! and,
O that all men might commend me for whatsoever I do! is an eye that seeks
after green things; or as teeth, after that which is tender.

XXXVI. There is not any man that is so happy in his death, but that some of
those that are by him when he dies, will be ready to rejoice at his [supposed]
calamity. Is it one that was virtuous and wise indeed? Will there not some one
or other be found, who thus will say to himself, Well now at last shall I be
at rest from this Pedagogue. He did not indeed otherwise trouble us much: but
I know well enough that in his heart, he did much condemn us. Thus will they
speak of the virtuous. But as for us, alas! how many things be there, for
which there be many that glad would be to be rid of us. This therefore if thou
shall think of whenever thou dyest, thou shall die the more willingly, when
thou shall think with thy self, I am now to depart from that world, wherein
those that have been my nearest friends and acquaintances, they whom I have so
much suffered for, so often prayed for, and for whom I have taken such care;
even they would have me die, hoping that after my death they shall live
happier, then they did before. What then should any man desire to continue here
any longer? Nevertheless, whenever thou dyest, thou must not be less kind
and loving unto them for it; but as before, see them, continue to be their
friend, to wish them well, and meekly, and gently to carry thy self toward
them, but yet so that on the other side, it make thee not the more unwilling to
die. But as it fares with the^ that die an easy quick death, whose soul is
soon separated from their bodies, so must thy separation from them be. To these
had nature joined and annexed me: now she parts us; I am ready to depart, as
from friends and kinsmen, but yet without either reluctancie, or compulsion.
For this also is according to Nature.

XXXVII. Use thy self, as often, as thou see any man do any thing,
presently (if it be possible) to say unto thy self, what is this man's end in
this his action? But begin this course with thy self first of all, and
diligently examine thy self [concerning whatsoever thou do.]

XXXVIII. Remember, that that which sets a man at work, and has power over
the affections to draw them either one way, or the other way, is [not any
external thing properly but] that which is hidden within [every man's dogmata,
and opinions:] That, that is Rhetoric; that is life; that (to speak true) is
man himself. As for [thy body,] which as a vessel, [or, a case:] compasses
thee about, and the many and curious instruments that it has annexed unto it,
let them not trouble thy thoughts. For of themselves they are but as a
carpenters axe; but that they are borne with us, and naturally sticking unto
us. But otherwise, without the inward cause that has power to moove them, and
to restrain them, those parts are of themselves of no more use unto us, then
the shuttle is of it self to the weaver, or the pen to the writer, or the whip
to the coachman.

THE ELEVENTH BOOK.
THE natural properties, and privileges of a reasonable soul are; That she
sees her self; that she can order, and compose her self: that she makes her
self as she will her self: that she reapes her own fruits whatsoever,
whereas plants, trees, unreasonable creatures, what fruit soever (be it either
fruit properly, or analogically only;) they bear, they bear them unto others,
and not to themselves. Again; Whenever, and wheresoever [sooner, or later]
her life does end, she has her own end nevertheless. For it is not with
her, as with dancers, and players, who if they be interrupted in any part of
their action, the whole action must needs be imperfect: but she in what part,
of time, or action soever, she be surprised, can make that which she has in
her hand whatsoever it be, complete and full, so that she may depart with that
comfort, I have lived; neither want I any thing of that which properly did
belong unto me. Again, she compasses the whole world, and penetrateth into
the Vanity, and mere outside (wanting substance and solidity) of it, and
stretches her self unto the infiniteness of eternity; and the revolution [or,
restauration] of all things after a certain period of time, to the same state
and place as before, she fetches about, and does comprehend in her self; and
considers withal, and sees clearly this, that neither they that shall follow
us, shall see any new thing, that we have not seen, nor they that went
before, any thing more then we: but that he that is once come to forty (if he
have any wit at all) can in a manner (for that they are all of one kind) see
all things, both passed, and future. As proper is it, and natural to the soul
of man to love her neighbor, to be true and modest; and to regard nothing so
much as her self: which is also the property of the Law: whereby [by the way]
it appears, that sound reason and justice comes all to one, and therefore that
justice is the chief thing, that reasonable creatures ought to propose unto
themselves as their end.]

II. A pleasant song or dance; the Pancratiastes exercise, See B. xii N. VI.
[sports that thou art wont to be much taken with,] thou shall easily contemn,
if the harmonious voice thou shall divide into so many particular sounds
whereof it does consist, and of every one in particular shall ask thy self,
whether this or that sound is it, that does so conquer thee. For thou will be
ashamed of it. And so for shame, if accordingly thou shall consider it, every
particular motion and posture by it self: and so for the wrestlers exercise
too. Generally then, whatsoever it be, besides virtue, and those things that
proceed from virtue [that thou art subject to be much affected with] remember
presently thus to divide it, and by this kind of division, in each particular
to attain unto the contempt of the Whole. This thou must transfer and apply to
thy whole life also.

III. That soul which is ever ready, even now presently (if need be) from the
body, whether by way of Extinction, or Dispersion, or Continuation [in another
place and estate] to be separated, Gr: (...). See the Notes.
how blessed, and happy is it? But this readiness of it, it must proceed, not
from an obstinate and peremptory resolution of the mind, violently and
passionatly set upon opposition, (as Christians are wont;) but from a peculiar
judgment; with discretion and gravity, so that others may be persuaded also
and drawn to the like example, but without any noise and passionate
exclamations.

IV. Have I done any thing charitably? then am I benefitted by it. See that
this upon all occasions may present it self unto thy mind, and never cease to
think of it. What is thy profession? to be good. And how should this be well
brought to pass, but by certain Theorems and doctrines; Some concerning the
Nature of the Universe, and some concerning the proper and particular
constitution of man [or, by the true and Theoremeticall knowledge both of the
nature of the Universe, etc.

V. Tragedies were at first brought in, and instituted, to put men in mind of
worldly chances and casualties: That these things in the ordinary course of
nature did so happen: That men that were much pleased and delighted by such
accidents upon this stage, would not by the same things in a greater stage be
grieved and afflicted: For here you see what is the end of all such things; and
that even they that cry out so mournfully to Cithairon, must bear them [for
all their cries and exclamations,] as well as others. And in very truth many
good things are spoken by these Poets; as that (for example) is an excellent
passage: But if so be that I and my two children be neglected by the Gods, they
have some reason even for that, etc. And again, It will but little avail thee
to storm and rage against the things themselves, etc. Again, To reap ones
life, as a ripe ear of corn; and whatsoever else is to be found in them,
that is of the same kind. After the Tragedy, the Comoedia vetus, or ancient
Comoedie was brought in, which had the (...).
liberty to enveigh against personal vices; being therefore through this her
freedom and liberty of speech of very good use and effect, to restrain men
from pride and arrogancy. To which end it was, that Diogenes took also the
same liberty. After these, what were either the Media, or Nova Comoedia
admitted for, but merely, (or for the most part at least) for the delight and
pleasure of curious and excellent imitation? It will steal away; look to it,
etc. Why, no man denies, but that these also have some good things [whereof
that may be one:] But the whole drift and foundation of that kind of
Dramaticall Poetry, what is it else, but as we have said?

VI. How clearly does it appear unto thee, that no other course of thy life
could fit a true Philosophers practice better, then this very course, that thou
art now already in?

VII. A branch cut off from the continuitie of that which was next unto it,
must needs be cut off from the whole tree: so a man that is divided from
another man, is divided from the whole Society. A branch is cut off by another,
but he that hates and is averse, cuts himself off from his neighbor, and
knows not that at the same time he divides himself from the whole body,
[or, corporation.] But herein is the gift and mercy of God, the Author of this
society, in that, [once cut off] we may grow together and become part of the
Whole again. But if this happen often [the misery is that] the further a man
is run in this division, the harder he is to be reunited and restored again:
and however, the branch which, once cut off, afterward was graffed in,
gardners can tell you is not like that which sprouted together at first, and
still continued in the unity of the body.

VIII. To grow together like fellow branches [in matter of good correspondence
and affection;] but not in matter of opinions. They that shall oppose thee in
thy right courses, as it is not in their power to divert thee from thy good
action, so neither let it be to divert thee from thy good affection toward
them. But be it thy care to keep thy self constant in both; both in a right
judgment and action, and in true meekness toward them, that either shall
do their endeavor to hinder thee, or at least will be displeased with thee
[for what thou have done.] For to fail in either (either in the one to give
over for fear, or in the other to forsake thy natural affection toward him,
who by nature is both thy friend and thy kinsman:) is equally base, and much
savouring of the disposition of a cowardly fugitive soldier.

IX. It is not possible that any nature should be inferior unto art, since
that all arts imitate nature. If this be so; that the most perfect and general
nature of all natures should [in her operation] come short of the skill of
arts, is most improbable. Now common is it to all arts, to make that which is
worse for the betters sake. Much more then does the common Nature do the same.
Hence is the first ground of Justice. From Justice all other virtues have their
existence. For Justice cannot be preserved, if either we settle our minds and
affections upon worldly things; or be apt to be deceived, or rash, and
inconstant.

X. The things themselves (which either to get or to avoid thou art put to so
much trouble:) come not unto thee themselves; but thou in a manner go unto
them. Let then thine own judgment and opinion concerning those thing be at
rest; and as for the things themselves, they stand still and quiet, without any
noise or stir at all; and so shall all pursuing and flying cease.

XI. Then is the Soul [as Empedocles does liken it] like unto a Sphere, or,
Globe, when she is all of one form and figure: When she neither [greedily]
stretches out her self unto any thing, nor [basely] contracts her self, or
lies flat and dejected; but shines all with light, whereby she does see and
behold the true nature, both that of the Universe, and her own in particular.

XII. Will any contemn me? let him look to that, [upon what grounds he does
it,] my care shall be that I may never be found either doing, or speaking any
thing that does truly deserve contempt. Will any hate me? let him look to
that. I for my part will be kind and loving unto all, and even unto him that
hates me [who^soever he be] will I be ready to show his error, not by way of
exprobration, or ostentation of my patience, but ingenuously and meekly: such
as was that famous Phocion, if so be that he did not dissemble. For it is
inwardly that these things must be: that the gods [who look inwardly, and not
upon the outward appearance,] may behold a man truly free from all indignation
and grief. For what hurt can it be unto thee [whatsoever any man else doth] as
long as thou may do that which is proper and suitable to thine own nature?
Wilt not thou (a man wholly appointed to be both what, and as the common good
shall require:) accept of that which is now seasonable to the nature of the
Universe?

XIII. They contemn one another, and yet they seek to please one another: and
whilst they seek to surpass one another [in worldly pomp and greatness:]
they most debase and prostitute themselves [in their better part] one to
another.

XIV. How rotten and unsincere is he, that says, I am resolved to carry my
self hereafter toward you with all ingenuitie, and simplicity. O man, what
do thou mean! what needs this profession of thine? the thing it self will
show it. It ought to be written upon thy forehead, No sooner thy voice is
heard, then thy countenance must be able to show what is in thy mind: even as
he that is loved knows presently by the looks of his sweetheart what is in
her mind. Such must he be for all the world, that is truly simple and good, as
he whose arm holes are offensive, that whosoever stands by, as soon as ever
he comes near him, may as it were smell him whether he will or no. But the
affectation of simplicity, is nowise laudable. There is nothing more shameful
then perfidious friendship. Above all things, that must be avoided. [However]
true goodness simplicity and kindness cannot so be hidden, but that [as we
have already said] in the very eyes and countenance they will show themselves.

XV. To live happily is an inward power of the soul, when she is affected
with indifferency [or, indifferently affected] toward those things that are
by their nature indifferent. To be thus affected she must consider all worldly
objects both divided and whole: remembering withal that no object can of it
self beget any opinion in us, neither can come to us, but stands without still
and quiet; but that we our selves beget, and as it were print in our selves
opinions concerning them. Now it is in our power, not to print them; and [if
they creep in] and lurk in some corner, it is in our power to wipe them off.
Remembering moreover, that this care and circumspection of thine, is to continue
but for a while, and then thy life will be at an end. And what should hinder,
but that thou may do well with all these things? For if they be according
to nature, rejoice in them, and let them be pleasing and acceptable unto thee.
But if they be against Nature, seek thou that which is according to thine own
Nature, and whether it be for thy credit or no, use all possible speed [for the
attainment of it:] for no man ought to be blamed, for seeking his own good and
happiness.

XVI. Of every thing [thou must consider] from whence it came, of what things
it does consist, and into what it will be changed: what will be the nature of it
[or, what it will be like unto] when it is changed; and that it can suffer no
hurt by this change. [And as for other men's, either foolishness, or
wickedness, that it may not trouble and grieve thee;] First generally thus;
What reference have I unto these? and that we are all borne for one another
good: Then [more particularly] after another consideration; as a Ram is first
in a flock of Sheep, and a Bull in a Heard of cattle, so am I borne to rule
over them. Begin yet higher, even from this: if Atoms be not the beginning of
all things [then which to believe nothing can be more absurd] then must we
needs grant that there is a Nature, that does govern the Universe. If such a
Nature, then are all worse things made for the betters sake; and all better for
one another sake. Secondly, what manner of men they be, at board, and upon
their beds, and so forth. But above all things, how they are forced by their
opinions that they hold, to do what they do; and even those things that they
do, with what pride and self-conceit they do them. Thirdly, that if they do
these things rightly, thou have no reason to be grieved. But if not rightly, it
must needs be that they do them against their wills, and through mere
ignorance. For as [according to Platoes opinion] no soul does willingly err,
so by consequent neither does it any thing otherwise then it ought, but against
her will. Therefore are they grieved, whenever they hear themselves charged,
either of unjustice, or unconscionablenesse, or covetousness, or in general,
of any injurious kind of dealing toward their neighbors. Fourthly, that thou
thy self do transgress in many things, and art even such another as they
are. And though perchance thou do forbear the very act of some sins, yet
have thou in thy self an habitual disposition to them, but that either
through fear, or vain glory, or some such other ambitious foolish respect,
thou art restrained. Fifthly, that whether they have sinned or no, thou do
not understand perfectly. For many things are done by way of discreet policy;
and generally a man must know many things first, before he be able truly and
judiciously to judge of another man's action. Sixthly, that whenever thou do
take on grievously, or make great woe, [little ^^est thou remember then] that
a man's life, is but for a moment of time, and that within a while we shall all
be in our graves. Seaventhly, That it is not the sins and transgressions
themselves that trouble us properly; for they have their existence in their
minds and understandings only, [that commit them;] but our own opinions
concerning those sins. Remove then, and be content to part with that conceit
of thine, that it is a grievous thing, and thou have removed thine anger. But
how should I remove it? [How?] reasoning with thy self that it is not
shameful. For if that which is shameful, be not the only true evil that is,
thou also wilt be driven [whilest thou do follow the common instinct of
Nature, See B. ^II
to avoyde that which is evil,] to commit many unjust things, and to become a
thief, and any thing, [that will make to the attainement of thy intended
worldly ends.] Eighthly, How many things may and do oftentimes follow upon such
fits of anger and grief; far more grievous in themselves, then those very
things which we are so grieved or angry for. Ninthly, That meekness is a
thing unconquerable, if it be true and natural, and not affected, or
hypocritical. For how shall even the most fierce and malicious that thou shall
conceive, be able to hold on against thee, if thou shall still continue meek
and loving unto him; and that even at that time, when he is about to do thee
wrong, thou shall be well disposed, and in good temper, with all meekness to
teach him, and to instruct him better? As for example; My son, we were not
borne for this, to hurt and annoy one another; It will be thy hurt not mine, my
son: and so to show him forcibly and fully, that it is so in very deed: and
that neither Bees do it one to another, nor any other creatures that are
naturally sociable. But this thou must do, not scoffingly, nor by way of
exprobration, but tenderly without any harshnesse of words. Neither must thou
do it by way of exercise, or ostentation, that they that are by and hear
thee, may admire thee: but so always that no body be privy to it, but
himself alone: yea, though there be more present at the same time. These nine
particular heads, as so many gifts from the Muses, see that thou remember well:
and begin one day, whilst thou art yet alive, to be a man indeed. But on the
other side thou must take heed, as much to flatter them, as to be angry with
them: for both are equally uncharitable, and equally hurtful. And in thy
passions, take it presently to thy consideration, that to be angry, is not the
part of a man, but that to be meek and gentle, as it savours of more
humanity, so of more manhood. That in this, there is strength and nerves [or,
vigour] and fortitude; whereof anger and indignation is altogether void. For
the nearer every thing is unto unpassionatnesse, the nearer it is unto power.
And as grief does proceed from weakness, so does anger. For both [both he
that is angry and that grieveth] have received a wound, and cowardly have as it
were yielded themselves [unto their affections.] If thou will have a Tenth
also, receive this Tenth gift from [Hercules] the Guide and Leader of the
Muses: That it is a mad man's part, to look that there should be no wicked men
in the World, because it is impossible. Now for a man to brook well enough,
that there should be wicked men in the World, but not to endure that any should
transgress against himself, is against all equity, and indeed tyrannical.

XVII Four several dispositions, [or, inclinations] there be of the mind and
understanding, which to be aware of, thou must carefully observe: and
whenever thou do discover them, thou must rectify them, saying to thy
self concerning every one of them, This imagination is not necessary; This is
uncharitable: This thou shall speak as another man's slave, or instrument; then
which nothing can be more senseless and absurd: For the Fourth, thou shall
sharply check and upbraid thy self, for that thou do suffer that more
divine part in thee, to become subject and obnoxious to that more ignoble part
of thy body, and the gross lusts and concupiscences thereof.

XVIII. What portion soever, either of air, or fire there be in thee, although
by nature it tend upwards, submitting nevertheless to the ordinance of the
Universe, it abides here below in this mixed body. So whatsoever is in thee,
either earthy, or humid, although by nature it tend downwards, yet is it
against its nature both raised upwards, and standing [or, consistent,] So
obedient are even the elements themselves to the Universe, abiding patiently
wheresoever (though against their Nature) they are placed, until the sound as
it were of their retreat, and separation. Is it not a grievous thing then,
that thy reasonable part only should be disobedient, and should not endure to
keep its place: yea though it be nothing enjoined that is contrary unto it,
but that only which is according to its nature? For [wee cannot say of it when
it is disobedient, as we say of the fire, or air,] that it tends upwards
toward its proper Element, for then goes it the quite contrary way. [or, For
we cannot say of it, as of the Elements, that it suffers against its own
nature to be obedient: but rather when disobedient, then goes it a quite
contrary course, to that which is natural unto it.] For the motion of the
mind to any injustice, or incontinencie, or to sorrow, or to fear, is nothing
else but a separation from nature. Also when the mind is grieved for any thing
that is happened [by the divine Providence] then does it likewise forsake its
own place. See B. XII. I.
For it was ordained unto holiness and godliness, [which specially consist in
anhumble submission to God and his Providence in all things;] as well as unto
Justice: these also being part of those duties, which as naturally sociable,
we are bound unto; and without which we cannot happily converse one with
another [or, without which common societies cannot prosper:] yea and the very
ground, and fountain indeed of all just actions.

XIX. He that has not one and the self same general end always as long as
he lives, cannot possibly be one and the self same man always. But this will
not suffice except thou add also what ought to be this general end. For as
the general conceit and apprehension of all those things which upon no
certain ground are by the greater part of men deemed good, cannot be uniforme
and agreeable, but that only which is limited, and restrained by some certain
proprieties and conditions, as of community: [that nothing be conceived good,
which is not commonly, and publicly good:] so must the end also that we
propose unto our selves, be common and sociable. For he that does direct all
his own private motions and purposes to that end, all his actions will be
agreeable and uniforme; and by that means will be still the same man.

XX. Remember the fable of the country mouse, and the city mouse, and the
great fright and terror that this was put into.

XXI. Socrates was wont to call the common conceits and opinions of men, the
common Lamiae, or bugbeares of the world: the proper terror of silly children.

XXII. The Lacedaemonians at their public spectacula, were wont to appoint
seats and forms for their strangers in the shadow; they themselves were
content to set any where.

XXIII. What Socrates answered unto Perdicas, why he did not come unto him,
Least of all deaths I should die the worst kind of death, said he: that is,
not able to requite the good that has been done unto me.

XXIV. In the ancient mystical letters of the Ephesians, [commonly called
Ephesiae litterae] there was an Item, that a man should always have in his
mind some one or other of the Ancient Worthies.

XXV. The Pythagoraeans were wont betimes in the morning the first thing they
did, to look up unto the heavens, to put themselves in mind of them who
constantly, and unvariably did perform their task: as also to put themselves
in mind of orderlinesse [or, good order] and of purity, and of naked
simplicity. For no star or planet has any cover before it.

XXVI. How Socrates looked, when he was feign to gird himself with a skin,
Xantippe his wife having taken away his clothes, and carried them abroad with
her, and what he said to his fellows and friends, who were ashamed; and out of
respect to him, did retire themselves when they saw him thus decked.

XXVII. In matter of writing or reading thou must needs be taught before thou
can do either: much more in matter of life. For thou art borne a mere slave,
[to thy senses and brutish affections;] destitute [without teaching] of all
true knowledge and sound reason.

XXVIII. My heart smiled within me. They will accuse even virtue her self,
with most heinous, and opprobrious words.

XXIX. As they that long after figs in winter [when they cannot be had;] so
are they that long after children, before they be granted them.

XXX. As often as a Father kisseth his Child, He should say secretly with
himself (said Epictetus,) To morrow perchance shall be die. But these words
be ominous. No words ominous (said he) that signify any thing that is
natural: In very truth and deed not more ominous then this, To cut down
grapes when they are ripe. Green grapes, ripe grapes, dried grapes [or,
raisons:] so many changes and mutations of one thing, not into that which was
not absolutely [or, into so many several substances:] but rather so many
successions of time in one and the self same subject, and substance. [or, so
many several changes and mutations, not into that which has no being at all,
but into that which is not yet in being.]

XXXI. Of the free will there is no thief or robber: out of Epictetus; Whose
is this also: That we should find a certain art and method of assenting; and
that we should always observe with great care and heed the inclinations of our
minds, that they may always be with their due restraint and reservation,
always charitable, and according to the true worth of every present object.
And as for earnest longing, that we should altogether avoid it: and to use
averseness in those things only, that wholly depend of our own wills. It is
not about ordinary petty matters, believe it, that all our strife and
contention is, but whether [with the vulgar] we should be mad, or [by the
help of Philosophie] wise and sober, said he.

XXXII. Socrates said, What will you have? the souls of reasonable, or
unreasonable creatures? Of reasonable. But what? Of those whose reason is sound
and perfect? or of those whose reason is vitiated and corrupted? Of those whose
reason is sound and perfect. Why then labor ye not for such? Because we have
them already. What then do ye so strive and contend between you?

THE TWELFTH BOOK.
WHatsoever thou do hereafter adspire unto, thou may even now enjoy and
possess, if thou do not envy thy self thine own happiness. And that
will be, if thou shall forget all that is past, and for the future, refer
thy self wholly to the divine providence, and shall bend and apply all thy
present thoughts and intentions, to holiness and righteousness. To holiness,
in accepting willingly whatsoever is sent by the divine providence, as being
that which the nature of the Universe has appointed unto thee, which also has
appointed thee for that, whatsoever it be. To righteousness in speaking the
Truth freely, and without ambiguity; and in doing all things justly and
discreetly. Now in this good course, let not other men's either wickedness, or
opinion, or voice hinder thee: no, nor the sense of this thy pamperd mass of
flesh: for let that that suffers, look to it self. If therefore whenever
the time of thy departing shall come, thou shall readily leave all things, and
shall respect thy mind only, and that divine part of thine, and this shall be
thine only fear, not that some time or other, thou shall cease to live, but
that thou shall never live to live according to Nature: then shall thou be a
man indeed, worthy of that world, from which thou had thy beginning; then
shall thou cease to be a stranger in thy Country, and to wonder at those things
that happen daily, as things strange and unexpected, and anxiously to depend of
diverse things [that art not in thy power.]

II. God beholds our minds and understandings, bare and naked from these
material vessels, and outsides, and all earthly dross. For with his simple
and pure understanding, he pierces into our inmost and purest parts, which
from His, as it were by a water pipe and channel, first flowed and issued. This
if thou also shall use to do, thou shall rid thy self of that manifold
luggage, wherewith thou art round about encumbred. For he that does regard
neither his body, nor his clothing, nor his dwelling, nor any such external
furniture, must needs gain unto himself great rest and ease. Three things
there be in all, which thou do consist of; thy body, thy life, and thy
mind. Of these the two former, are so far forth thine, as that thou art
bound to take care for them. But the third alone is that which is properly
thine: from which (thy mind I mean:) if thou shall sequester, and separate
whatsoever other men either do or say, or whatsoever thou thy self have
heretofore either done or said; and all troublesome thoughts concerning the
future, and whatsoever, (as either belonging to the body or life:) is without
the jurisdiction of thine own will, and whatsoever in the ordinary course of
humane chances and accidents does happen unto thee; so that thy mind (keeping
her self loose and free from all outward coincidentall intanglements; always
in a readiness to depart:) shall live by her self, and to her self, doing
that which is just; accepting whatsoever does happen, and speaking the truth
always; If I say thou shall separate from thy mind, whatsoever by sympathy
might adhaere unto it, and all time both past and future, and shall make thy
self in all points and respects, like unto Empedocles his [allegorical]
Sphaere, all round and circular, etc. and shall think of no longer life, then
that which is now present: Then shall thou be truly able to pass the
remainder of thy days without troubles and distractions; nobly and generously
disposed, and in good favor and correspondencie, with that Spirit which is
within thee.

III. I have often wonderd, how it should come to pass, that every man loving
himself best, should more regard other men's opinions concerning himself, then
his own. For if any God or grave Master standing by, should command any of us
to think nothing by himself, but what he should presently speak out; no man
were able to endure it, though but for one day. Thus do we fear more what
our neighbors will think of us, then what we our selves.

IV. How comes it to pass, that the Gods having ordered all other things so
well and so lovingly, should be overseene in this one only thing, that
whereas there have been some very good men, that have made many covenants as
it were with God, and by many holy actions, and outward services contracted a
kind of familiarity with Him; that these men when once they are dead, should
never be no more [or, should never rise again,] but be extinct for ever. But
this thou may be sure of, that this (if it be so indeed;) would never have
been so ordered by the Gods, had it been fit otherwise. For certainly it was
possible, See Note 4. upon B. II.
had it been more just so; and had it been according to Nature, the Nature of
the Universe would easily have borne it. But now because it is not so, (if so
be that it be not so indeed) be therefore confident that it was not fit it
should be so. For thou see thy self, that now seeking after this matter,
how freely thou do argue and contest with God. But were not the Gods both
just and good in the highest degree, thou durst not thus reason with them. Now
if just and good, it could not be that in the creation of the world, they
should either unjustly, or unreasonably oversee any thing.

V. Use thy self even unto those things that thou do at first despair of.
For the left hand we see, which for the most part lies idle because not used;
yet does it hold the bridle with more strength then the right, because it has
been used unto it.

VI. Let these be the objects of thy ordinary meditation: to consider, what
manner of men both for soul and body we ought to be, whenever death shall
surprise us: The shortness of this our mortal life: The immense vastness of
the time that has been before, and will be after us: the frailty of every
worldly material object: all these things to consider, and behold clearly in
themselves, all disguisement of external outside being removed and taken away.
Again, to consider the efficient causes of all things: the proper ends and
references of all actions: what pain is in it self, what pleasure, what
death: what fame or honor, how every man is the true and proper ground of his
own rest and tranquillity, and that no man can truly be hindered by any
other: That all is but conceit and opinion. As for the use of thy Dogmata, thou
must carry thy self in the practice of them, rather like unto a Pancratiastes,
[or, one that at the same time both fights and wrastles with hands and feet,
etc.] then a Gladiator. For this, if he lose his sword that he fights with, he
is gone: whereas the other has still his hand free, which he may easily turn,
and manage at his will.

VII. All worldly things thou must behold and consider, dividing them into
matter, form, and reference, [or, their proper end.]

VIII. How happy is man in this his power [that has been granted unto him:]
that he needs not do any thing but what God shall approve, and that he may
embrace contentedly, whatsoever God does send unto him?

IX. Whatsoever does happen in the ordinary course and consequence of natural
events, neither the gods, (for it is not possible, that they either wittingly,
or unwittingly should do any thing amiss) nor men, (for it is through
ignorance, and therefore against their wills that they do any thing amiss:)
must be accused. None then must be accused.

X. How ridiculous and strange is he, that wonders at any thing that happens
in this life in the ordinary course of nature!

XI. Either Fate, (and that either an absolute necessity, and unavoidable
decree; or a placable and flexible Providence:) or All is a mere casual
Confusion, void of all order and government. If an absolute and unavoidable
Necessity, why do thou resist? If a placable and exorable Providence, make
thy self worthy of the divine help and assistance. If all be a mere
confusion without any Moderator, or Governor, then have thou reason to
congratulate thy self, that in such a general flood of Confusion, thou thy
self have obtained a reasonable Faculty, whereby thou may govern thine
own life and actions. But if thou be carried away with the flood, it must be
thy body perchance, or thy life, or some other thing that belongs unto them
that is carried away: thy mind and understanding cannot. Or should it be so,
that the light of a candle indeed is still bright, and lightsome until it be
put out: and should Truth, and Righteousness, and Temperance cease to shine in
thee whilst thou thy self have any being?

XII. At the conceit and apprehension that such and such a one has sinned
[thus reason with thy selfe] What do I know whether this be a sin indeed, as
it seems to be? But if it be, what do I know but that he himself has
already condemned himself for it? And that is all one as if a man should
scratch and tear his own face, [an object of compassion rather then of
anger.] Again, that he that would not have a vicious man to sin, is like
unto him that would not have moisture in the fig, nor children to weep, nor
a horse to neigh, nor any thing else that in the course of nature is necessary.
For what shall he do that has such an habit? If thou therefore be
powerful and eloquent, remedy it if thou can.

XIII. If it be not fitting; do it not. If it be not true, speak it not.
Ever maintain thine own purpose and resolution free from all compulsion and
necessity.

XIV. Of every thing that presents it self unto thee, to consider what the
true nature of it is, and to unfold it, as it were, by dividing it into that
which is formal: that which is material: the true use or end of it, and the
just time that it is appointed to last.

XV. It is high time for thee, to understand that there is somewhat in thee,
better and more divine then either thy passions, or thy sensual appetites and
affections. What is now the object of my mind, is it fear, or suspicion, or
lust, or any such thing? To do nothing rashly without some certain end; let
that be thy first care. The next, to have no other end then the common good.
For, alas! yet a little while, and thou art no more: no more will any, either
of those things that now thou see, or of those men that now are living, be
any more. For all things are by nature appointed [soone] to be changed, turned,
and corrupted, that other things might succeed in their room.

XVI. [Remember] that all is but opinion, and all opinion depends of the mind.
Take thine opinion away, and then as a ship that has stricken in within the
arms and mouth of the harbor, a present calm; all things safe and steady: a
Bay, not capable of any storms and tempests: [as the Poet has it.]

XVII. No operation whatsoever it be, ceasing for a while, can be truly said to
suffer any evil, because it is at an end. Neither can he that is the Author of
that operation; for this very respect, because his operation is at an end, be
said to suffer any evil. Likewise then, neither can the whole body of all our
actions (which is our life:) if in time it cease, be said to suffer any evil
for this very reason, because it is at an end: nor He truly be said to have
been ill affected, that did put a period to this series of actions. Now this
time or certain period, depends of the determination of Nature: sometimes of
particular nature, as when a man dies old; but of nature in general, however;
the parts whereof thus changing one after another, the whole world still
continues fresh and new. Now that is ever best and most seasonable, which is
for the good of the Whole. Thus it appears that death of it self, can neither
be hurtful to any in particular, because it is not a shamfull thing (for
neither is it a thing that depends of our own will, nor of it self contrary
to the common good) and generally, as it is both expedient and seasonable to
the Whole, that in that respect it must needs be good. It is that also, which
is brought unto us by the order and appointment of the divine providence; so
that he whose will and mind in these things runs along with the divine
ordinance, and by this concurrence of his will and mind with the Divine
providence, is led and driven along, as it were by God himself, may truly be
termed and esteemed the (...), or Divinely led and inspired.

XVIII. These three things thou must have always in a readiness: first
concerning thine own actions, whether thou do nothing either idly, or
otherwise, then justice and equity do require: and concerning those things
that happen unto thee externally; that either they happen unto thee by chance,
or by providence; of which two to accuse either, is equally against reason.
Secondly, what like unto our bodies are [or, what are the beginnings of our
bodies] whilst yet rude and imperfect, until they be animated: and from their
animation, until their expiration: of what things they are compounded, and
into what things they shall be dissolved. Thirdly, [how vain all things will
appear unto thee] when, from on high as it were, looking down, See B. VII. n.
26
thou shall contemplate all things upon Earth, and the wonderful murability,
that they are subject unto: considering withal, both the immensnesse of that
Air, and of that Heaven [or, the infinite, both greatness and variety of
things aeriall and things celestial,] that are round about it. And that as
often as thou shall behold them, thou shall still see the same: as the same
things, so the same shortness of continuance of all those things. And, behold,
These be the things that we are so proud, and puffed up for.

XIX. Cast away from thee opinion, and thou art safe. And what is it that
hinders thee from casting of it away? When thou art grieved at any thing, have
thou forgotten that all things happen according to the Nature of the Universe;
and that him only it concerns, who is in fault; and moreover, that what is
now done, is that which from ever has been done in the world, and will ever
be done, and is now done every where: how nearly all men are allied one to
another by a kindred not of blood, nor of seed, but of the same mind. Thou
have also forgotten that every man's mind, partakes of the Deity; and issues
from thence; and that no man can properly call any thing his own, no not his
son, nor his body, not his life; for that they all proceed from that One [who
is the giver of all things:] That all things are but opinion; that no man lives
properly, but that very instant of time which is now present [or, that all life
properly does consist in this present instant of time, See B. II. n. XII.
separated from the which is either past or future.] And therefore that no man
[whensoever he dieth] can properly be said to lose any more, then an instant
of time.

XX. Let thy thoughts ever run upon them, who once for some one thing or
other, were moved with extraordinary indignation; who were once in the highest
pitch of either honor, or calamity; or mutual hatred and enmity; or of any
other fortune or condition whatsoever. Then consider what is now become of all
those things. All is turned to smoke; all to ashes, and a mere fable; and
perchance not so much as a fable. As also whatsoever is of this Nature, as
Fabius Catulinus in the field; Lucius Lupus, and Stertinius at Baiae; Tiberius
at Capreae: and Velius Rufus, and all such examples of vehement prosecution in
worldly matters; let these also run in thy mind at the same time; and how
vile every object of such earnest and vehement prosecution is; and how much
more agreeable to true Philosophy it is, for a man to carry himself in every
matter that offers it self, justly, and moderatly, as one that follows the
Gods with all simplicity, For, for a man to be proud and high conceited, that
he is not proud and high conceited, is of all kind of pride and presumption,
the most intolerable.

XXI. To them that ask thee, Where have thou seen the Gods, or how know
thou certainly that there be Gods, that thou art so devout in their worship? I
answer first of all, that even to the very eye, they are in some manner visible
and apparent. Secondly, neither have I ever seen mine own soul, and yet I
respect and honor it. So then for the Gods, by the daily experience that I
have of their power [and providence toward my self and others:] I know
certainly that they are, and therefore worship them.

XXII. Herein does consist happiness of life, for a man to know theroughly the
true nature of every thing; What is the matter, and what is the form of it:
with all his heart and soul, ever to do that which is just, and to speak the
truth. What then remains but to enjoy thy life in a course and cohaerence of
good actions, one upon another immediately succeeding, and never interrupted,
though for never so little a while?

XXIII. There is but one light of the sun, though it be intercepted by walls
and mountains, and other thousand objects. There is but one common substance
of the whole World, though it be concluded and restrained into several
different bodies, in number infinite. There is but one common soul, though
divided into innumerable particular essences and natures. So is there but one
common intellectual soul, though it seem to be divided. And as for all other
parts of those Generals which we have mentioned, as either sensitive souls or
subjects, these of themselves (as naturally irrational) have no common mutual
reference one unto another, though many of them contain a Mind [or, Reasonable
Faculty] in them, whereby they are ruled and governed [or, that has power and
authority over them.] But of every reasonable mind, this is the particular
nature, that it has reference to whatsoever is of her own kind, and desires
to be united: neither can this common affection, or mutual unity and
correspondencie, be here intercepted or divided, or confined to particulars [as
those other common things are.]

XXIV. What do thou desire? To live long. What? To enjoy the operations of a
sensitive soul; or of the appetitive Faculty? or would thou grow, and then
decrease again? Would thou long be able to talk, to thinck and reason with
thyselfe? Which of all these seems unto thee a worthy object of thy desire?
Now if of all these thou do find that they be but little worth in
themselves, proceed on unto the last, which is, In all things to follow God and
Reason. But for a man to greeve that by death he shall be deprived of any of
these things, is both against God and Reason.

XXV. What a small portion of vaste and infinite eternity it is, that is
allowed unto every one of us, and how soon it vanishes into the general age
of the world: of the common substance, and of the common soul also what a
small portion is allotted unto us: and in what a little clod of the whole Earth
(as it were) it is that thou do crawle. After thou shall rightly have
considered these things with thy self, phancie not any thing else in the world
any more to be of any weight and moment but this, to do that only which thine
own nature does require; and to conform thyselfe to that which the common
Nature does afford.

XXVI. What is the present estate of my understanding? For herein lies all
indeed. As for all other things, they are without the compass of mine own
will: and if without the compass of my will, then are they as dead things unto
me, and as it were mere smoke.

XXVII. To stir up a man to the contempt of death this among other things, is
of good power and efficacy, that even they who esteemed pleasure to be
happiness, and pain misery, did nevertheless [many of them] contemn death
[as much as any.] And can death be terrible to him, to whom that only seems
good, which [in the ordinary course of nature] is seasonable? to him, to
whom, whether his actions be many or few, so they be all good, is all one;
and who whether he behold the things of the world [being always the same]
either for many years, or for few years only, is altogether indifferent? O
man! as a Citizen thou have lived, and conversed in this great City [the
World.] Whether just for so many years, or no, what is it unto thee? Thou have
lived (thou may be sure) as long as the Laws, and Orders of the City
required; which may be the common comfort of all. Why then should it be
grievous unto thee, if (not a Tyran, nor an unjust Judge, but) the same nature
that brought thee in, does now send thee out of the world? As if the Praetor
should fairly dismiss him from the scene [or, stage] whom he had taken in to
act a while. Oh, but the play is not yet at an end, there are but three Acts
yet acted of it? Thou have well said: for in matter of life, three Acts is the
whole Play. Now to set a certain time to every man's acting, belongs unto him
only, who as first he was of thy composition, so is now the cause of thy
dissolution. As for thyselfe, thou have to do with neither. Go thy ways then
well pleased and contented: for so is He that dismisseth thee.

FINIS.
NOTES UPON ANTONIUS.
UPON The first Book.
THe inscription of these Books is: M. (...), which I verily believe to be
Antoninus his own, because both for propriety and obscurity so suitable to
these his Books. I say both for propriety and obscurity: for as no other
title could fit the subject of these books better, if rightly understood; so is
the obscurity of it such, that few I think have penetrated into the true
meaning of it. Not they I am sure, (as that ancient Greec Author, whom Suidas
does allege) who expound it, (...): much less they, (as Xylander and Lipsius)
who translate it, De vita sua. Canterus comes nearer: De officio suo. But, de
seipso (as Xylander himself in his first Edition had well renderd it, but ill
expounded it, seu vita sua:) or Dese; as my Father (of blessed memory) does
render it in his Comments upon Persius, is both more litterall, and more true
by far. Now by (...), you must know, the Stoics understood (...), a man's
reason or intellectual part, and his opinions, by which he did frame and
order the course of his life. Of all other things whatsoever, they held, that
they were little or nothing at all unto man; (and therefore termed them (...),
or, things indifferent:) his mind and his opinions (in their judgment,) being
the only thing, that every man in himself could properly call Himself. (...).
Never either commend or discommend any man for ordinary common things (which
men usually are either commended or discommended for:) but only for his
dogmata, or, certain Tenets in points of life and practice. For they only are
that which every man may truly account his own, and that only which can make
actions either shameful or praiseworthy. See Antoninus himself Book VIII.
Number (as for the ease and convenience of the Reader we have divided him)
XXXVIII. And again B. X. n. XXXVII. Apuleius de Deo Socr. Si cotidiana little
era dispungas, invenies in rationibus multa prodige profusa, and in Semet
nihil. In sui dico Daemonis cultum. If thou shall run over their ordinary
expenses (says he) thou shall find that upon many other occasions they have
been very prodigal and excessive; but Upon Themselves at little or no cost at
all. Upon their own Demon [or, Spirit: See note 5. upon Book II.] I mean,
etc.

1. Both to frequent public Schools.] (...), rendered by Xylander, ut ne in
publicos ludos commearem, sed, etc. which by the plain and evident testimony
of ancient Writers will appear most false. Witness the ancient Author cited
by Suidas, who speaking of Antoninus, (...)(says he with great admiration:)
(...). And that he did so to his dying day appears by that which follows
in the same writer. Tantum in eo studium Philosophiae fuit (they are the words
of Julius Capitolinus in his life:) ut adscitus jam in Imperatoriam dignitatem
tamen ad domum Apollonii discendi causae veniret. Audivit and Sextum
Chaeronensem, etc. And again, Studuit and Iuri, audiens L. Volusium etc.
Frequentauit and declamatorum Scholas publicas, etc. So much I think will
suffice, to make any man confess that it must be written, as I have
interpreted, not (...)* but (...), etc. or without any pronoune (if any man had
rather have it so, because it is omitted in most places, though expressed in
some toward the end,) (...) etc.

2. Not easily to believe those things which are commonly etc.] The words are,
(...) in the second edition:) (...), etc. Xylander in his translation corrects
it, (...); which is very probable. Suidas cites it, (...), which I cannot
altogether reject, because (...) and (...) are words, that Antoninus does often
use, and to this purpose: as where he says, (...). But in this sense I must
confess, it should rather have been, Bas^p 242.
(...). However, that Antoninus by these words does understand the Christians,
I think probable for these reasons. First, because (as appears by the
ancients) Christians were ordinarily accounted by the Heathens, and Christ
himself held by them to have been a great Magician. Secondly, that the
Heathens themselves, not only upon other occasions, but especially for
Daemoniacs, and such as were possessed, made often use of Christians, appears
by more then one passage of Tertullian: and in particular, how Lucilla daughter
to this Antoninus, infested with the Devil, was cured by one Abercius, Bishop
of Hieropolis; may be seen by the acts and particulars of it yet extant.
Whether also those laws of Antoninus, made against them, qui sub obtentu and
monitu deorum quaedam vel renunciant uel jactant, vel scientes effingunt, quo
leves hominum animi superstitione Numinis terreantur, mentioned by Ulpianus and
Modestinus, were made against Christians, as some are of opinion, I will not
determine. Now if so be that Antoninus does here intend the Christians, I do
not see, how he could altogether discredit the truth of their strange and
miraculous operations: especially if we give credit to those Acts extant, not
as yet, that I know of, questioned by any: and that in general he should
discredit all such operations as were accounted miraculous and supernatural,
is much less credible: when as (besides many good reasons that might be given
to the contrary:) the Christians themselves (as Athenagoras who then lived) did
not deny, but that strange things in that kind were done and brought to pass
among the very Heathens. (...): That in some certain places and towns of
several nations some operations (or, wonderful effects) are brought to pass
in the name of Idols, is not by us denied: says he in his Apology. I say
therefore, except we much restrain Antoninus his words, of such, and such
impostours, and of such, and such wonders; I do not see how he could profess
that he did (...): but (...) well he might; that is, first with best
discretion and diligence examine things before he did believe them: and then
in case the truth did appear, yet not as one of the silly multitude to stand
amazed with a superstitious kind of astonishment, but as a wise man to consider
of the causes and possibility of all such whether only seeming, because secret;
or truly and really supernatural events and operations. For these reasons I
conceive it should have been either (...) he did consider of them with
discretion: or, (...) at least; that he gave noe great heed unto such things;
rather then so absolutely (...), that he did not believe. But I determine it
not. All this while, though my matter did in a manner lead me unto it, have I
forborne to mention that great wonder, which in the days, and in the very
presence of this Antoninus, happened in his wars of Germany, when God at the
same time by a miraculous rain from heaven, both revived the Romans, which
were now at the last cast, having lost already many of their number, which
perished for want of water; and overthrew their enemies in the hight of their
greatest hopes and security: acknowledged by all generally as well Heathens as
Christians, miraculous; but by the Heathens, adscribed, by some of them, to God
immediately; by others, to art Magic; and by the Christians, both Fathers and
Historians, to the Name of Christ, at the Intercession of some Christian
Soldiers of the army. Before I would ground any thing upon this story, I must
first profess my mind concerning some circumstances of it, wherein I may
perchance be found to differ from others; and that I would be loath to do but
upon very good grounds, which would require a large discourse; and therefore it
is, that I have declined it. I will only tell you (because it may concern
Antoninus, that you know it:) what some learned men have judged of those
letters, which in these days go under Antoninus his name as written by him to
the Senate about this matter (produced by Baron and others;) which is, that
they are either supposititiae, aut saltem interpolatae. Capp. Hist. Eccles. p.
42.

3. Not to keep coturnices] (...). How marveilously and even madly some men
were wont to affect such things, may appear by the co^positio^ of the word
(...), which among other examples of the like composition as (...), etc. is set
down by Athenaeus lib. 11.

4. I did write Dialogues in my youth] in imitation of Plato and others: to
good purpose, as Antoninus did it; but not as many others, who took a pride in
it, and thought themselves fine fellows for it. (...)! Behold how bravely I
can write Dialogues! says a vain glorious Stoic, Arr. lib. 2. cap. 1. The
next words may be conferred with those of Capitolinus in this Emperors life:
Duodecimum annum ingressus habitum philosophi sumpsit, and deinceps
tolerantiam, cum studeret in pallio, and humi cubaret: vix autem matre agente
instrato pellibus lectulo accubaret. Thus may many other places be compared
with the like either of Capitolinus, or others that have written his life, or,
of him, which will be no great labor for any to do, that desires to
understand this book, and would be too taedious for me to undertake: which I
desire the reader to take notice of.

5. That I did never affect by way of ostentation] (...). etc. Of this kind of
vanity see Epictetus in Arrianus at large lib. 6. cap. 12. (...).

6. Epictetus his Hypomuemata] collected and set out by Arrianus his Scholar,
and so called and entitled by Arrianus himself, in his preface before the
said books: as learned Master Young, the worthy keeper of the Kings Library,
and my kind friend had noted in the Margin of that Antoninus, which he did
lend me.

7. A man not subject to be vexed] Antoninus his words are, (...). Xylander
translates them, Tum etiam ut in percipienda doctrina me non morosum praeberem:
sed circumspicerem de homine qui palam experientiam, and in tradend^s scienti^
facultatem minimum suorum bonoru^ putaret, praeterea modum beneficia (ut iis
videntur) ab amicis accipiendi, ne vel accepta ea nos viliores redderent vel
etc. The reason of that limitation, (...) (as commonly they are accounted,)
added by Antoninus to the word (...), is, because that favors and courtesies
may be thought a thing arbitrary, which either to perform or to omit wholly
depends of our own good will and discretion; whereas all possible good turns
and good offices of what kind or extent soever, that one man can perform unto
another, are, by Antoninus his philosophy, mere duties of nature, and right
reason: which all men as men, are qually obliged unto. So afterward using the
word (...) of things external and worldly against the prcise decrees of the
Stoics, he restraines it likewise with a (...): honors and dignities, as
commonly they are accounted.

8. Not to be offended with Idiots, nor unseasonably to set] (...). There was
not any thing more ordinary with their vain glorious affected Stoics, then
in all places and upon all occasions, semper crepare Theoremata, To be ever
talking and disputing about their Theorems and proper Tenets: so that this very
word Theoremata, became almost infamous, through their abus and vanity. To
repress this abuse, the learned Stoics, who are yet extant, have many caveats
and serious admonitions. But most pertinent here are Epictetus his words cap.
68. (...), which he repeates in the very next chapter also (...) and (...) are
words so frequent and ordinary, in the writings of the Stoics appropriated by
them, to them, that they called Idiots, as men that in very deed saw nothing as
it was, nor knew the true nature of any thing, but were altogether led by
phansies and opinions: that I shall not need to produce any examples. Now for
the word (...), that I offer it no violence to translate it as I do, may
appear by this passage of Diog. Laertius, who writes that the Stoics called
virtues some (...) and some (...) etc. If this would not serve, with little
alteration it might have been read to the same purpose (...). For in the
Stoics language (...) (taken in another sense) and (...) are all one thing; as
I could easily have showed.

9. Who are commonly called (...)] His meaning by these words I take to be no
other, then, That Great men are not commonly so tenderhearted. Some such thing
it was that Antoninus Pius alluded unto when in excuse of this our Antoninus
his (as it was thought by others) unseemly lamentation, for the death of his
Foster-father, he used these words: Permittite illi ut homo sit, neque enim
vel Philosophia, vel Imperium tollit affectus. The word (...), some lines
after: I might have translated, I know, more literally. But then would it have
been taken by many of the Vulgar, quite contrary to Antoninus his meaning:
whose meaning we may best know by his form of Government, which he never went
about to alter, that I know of. He might also allude perchance to that (...)
that he speaks of lib. 9. toward the end.

10. From Claudius Maximus] it is printed, (...), etc. whereas in all the other
examples from the beginning to the end, it is constantly (...) as (...), etc.
But that here also it must of necessity be so, may be collected by these
words following some few lines after, (...), etc. which words if you refer to
(...), you cannot possibly make any sense of. But if unto (...), it will be
here, as in other places, where this (...) must be paraphrased, not only, I
have learned from, but also, I have observed in; as in the example immediately
before. (...), etc. It was written it seems (...) etc. which was turned into
(...). That this Maximus surname was Claudius we learn by the Historians.
Capitolinus. Audivit and Sextum Chaeronensem, Plutarchi nepotem, Iunium
Rusticum, Claudium Maximum and Cinnam Catulum, Stoicos.

11. And patient hearing of others] in the Greec (...), which words do not
well hang together as any man may see. My Father in his Notes upon Jul.
Capitol. cites this place, and writes it thus: (...), etc. which may very well
be, if you conceive those words, (...). etc. (as it seems my Father would
have it:) not as Antoninus own words, but as taken by him from some other, and
here applied; as indeed he does often; and so here perchance. Otherwise, I
should like better, that the words were thus read, (...), etc. which I have
followed in my translation.

12. And kept an account of the common expences] (...). Capitolinus in his
life, Rations omnium provinciarum apprime scivit, and vectigalium, etc. This
book of accounts was called Rationarium Imperij: and it was kept very strictly
by many Emperors, but not so strictly by any as by this Antoninus; who
therefore was called by some in scorn (...) as Xiphilinus records, and is
here intimated by our Antoninus; who touches upon it again, B. 6. n. XXV III.
See also Julian, in his Casares. But as patient as he was, I doubt much
whether he would have borne with any man, that should have reported that of
him, which Xylander (not Antoninus:) does here, who translates this passage:
Sumptus procurabat, neque detrectabat de iis rebus causar^ dicere: which is
little better then of a meek and patient prince, to make him an obnoxious
subject. Now if the word (...) be not found in other Greec authors in this
very sense, yet is it a most proper word for Anton. his purpose. For what is
(...) properly, but rigor? and rigor was the word, that was then used among the
Latins upon this occasion. So Valerianus in his Epistle written in the behalf
of Aurelianus, Vellemus q. (says he) singulis devotissimis Reipub. viris multo
maiora defer compondia -- sed facit rigor publicus ut accipere de
provinciarum oblationibus ultra ordinis sui gradum nemo plus possit, etc. Flav.
Vopiscus, in the life of Aurelianus the Emperor.

13. That he never was commended by any man] (...), etc. The Greec words may
be interpreted, either that he never so commended others, or, (as we have
renderd it,) that he never was by others so commended himself. For both
interpretations, probable reasons may be given. As for the first, That such a
man as Antoninus was, should not be commended by any, for an officious
obsequious man should be no wonder, a man would think, but rather a wonder if
he should. Neither do these other titles of (...) or (...) sat so well with
the person of a Prince, that the omission of them should be noted and
recorded, as a matter observable. But that so ingenuous a man as Antoninus
was, should never commend in any other those saidparts and faculties mentioned,
is not in any man's judgment, I think, without some wonder; and in the
judgment of a Stoic, must needs be very commendable: out of the school of
which Sect proceeded this decree: (...); etc. Never either commend or
discommend any man for any thing that is common and popular, but only for his
Dogmata or certain Tenets in point of life and practice; for they only are
that which every man may truly account his own, and that only which can make
our actions either shameful or praiseworthy: as by Epictetus in Arrianus, you
shall find more then once expressed. But now on the other side, that which
Antoninus not many lines after does add of his Fathers care, that all in any
profession (as Orators by name) excellent might according to their desert be
reputed and respected in the world; and that which in the sixth book he does
more clearly set down of the same among other things, that he was not
Sophistes; does as pregnantly cross and overthrow that former interpretation.
Neither is it necessary, that what is here said of Pius, must be understood of
him when Emperor; which he was not till the year of his life 53. or
thereabouts. And as for those other commendations of Sophista and Scholasticus
(words then, of the same or little different signification:) they were
generally then, and many years after, titles of that high credit and esteem,
that the greatest that were, as they disdained not the practice, so they were
for the most part, very ambitious of the Name. That interpretation of the word
(...) (whereof (...) I suppose to be but an illiterate, though litterall
glossema from the margin crept into the Text:) anofficious obsequious man, I
have collected from the use of the words vernilitas and verniliter, for (...)
and (...), etc. which I have found in Horace, Seen a and others. But a better
interpreter of Antoninus his mind (though he was before him) we cannot desire
then Epictetus, who, if I mistake not much, what ours intended by the words
(...), does more plainly express by (...); a man of a sweet and pleasing
conversation: by whom also, both how ambitious men were generally of this
commendation, and how incompatible (as it was used:) the Stoics esteemed it
with true virtue, we may further learn, (...), etc. For if of the two (says
he) thou had rather be a true modest grave man, then hear they self thus
commended: O what a loving sweet man this is! then away with these, etc.
(...), etc. But if otherwise, etc. Arrianus lib. 4. cap. 2. (...).

14. Having a respect unto men only as men] in the Greec (...), which I think
should be read, -- (...), etc. (...) scil. or, for (...). I read it, (...),
because this (...) ((...), etc.) must needs have reference to some former
reason. Now that (...) is a very good reason, these other passages of Antoninus
may declare, lib. 8. n. XXII. (...). Shall I do it? yeas; I will: and the end
of my action shall be, to do good unto men: that is, and my comfort shall
be, that I do it for the good and benefit of men. And in the ninth Book n.
XLIII. (...), etc. Thou have done a good turn to a man: what would thou
more? is not this sufficient? must thou also for a thing done according to thy
nature be rewarded? many other like passages there be. And here I think it
will not be unseasonable to note, that he that reads the writings of the
Stoics, must not always too preciscly stand upon the ordinary use and
construction of words. For besides that they were miri verborum novatores (as
Cicero somwhere speaks of them) and coyners of new words (in this little
book you may observe many words not any where else to be read that I know:)
them Master Chrysippus had taught them (as is recorded by Plutar.) not to
think much if at any time they committed either (...); even such soloecismes
which most others would be ashamed of. For one thing I cannot but highly
commend them, that they would express their thoughts, though commonly with
words very proper and significant, yet in a style so free from all affectation
or curiosity (such as is this of our Antoninus, that of Epictetus and some
others) as comes next to the simplicity of the holy Scriptures.

15. ] The Greec words, as they are printed are, (...). Two learned men have
had already to do with this place, and several ways have gone about to
correct it; as may be seen in their Notes and Comments upon the Augustae
Historiae scriptores. I may not interpose my self as a Judge between them, for
many reasons: and perchance some reasons I could give, if I were to speak my
mind freely, why I would follow neither. The case so standing, that I neither
knew how to mend them my self, nor yet was sully satisfied with their
conjectures, I thought good not to meddle with the place at all, and therefore
have noted it as an imperfect place, though my opinion be (I must confess)
that it is rather obscure then imperfect; and that very little alteration will
serve the turn. The best is, the drist and scope of it, is apparent enough by
the words before.

16. To live in the Court without either guards or followers] (...). Lipsius in
his Comments upon Tacitus takes it for granted, that this place must needs be
understood of those things which were properly called (...), or, Insignia
Imperii. Indeed (...) I confess, or (...) is commonly the first that is
reckned among these particulars; and yet the words are not so proper to
express the Royal guard, but they are sometimes used of any troop or
company, that either in duty, good will, or respect, attend any one, though he
be neither King nor Prince, as for the words (...) which he translates by
Purpura they contain no more then extraordinary apparel in general; All the
question is, by (...) and (...) what is to be understood. By (...), that (...)
or fire (says Lipsius:) which Herodian testifies was wont in his time to be
carried before the Emperor, as Insigne Majestatis. A strange thing to me it
is, if this (...) were a (...) indeed, that Herodian making mention of it so
often as he does (four several times at the least) should never call it
(...), but always (...). But if this were granted of (...), what are these
(...) that Antoninus speaks of here? does any other Author mention any such
thing among the Insignia Imperis? That indeed the ancient Romans had their
cubiculares imagines (as is observed by my Father upon Suetonius:) and that the
latter Emperors of Rome did keep a Fortunam Auream in their bed-chambers as
Insigne Imperii, I know. Of these I am sure these (...) here mentioned cannot
be understood, and Lipsius tells us nothing of them at all, nor any other that
I know. For my part I rather think that Antoninus does not here speak of those
Insignia particularly, but that he does instance in these particulars, as
particulars of worldly pomp and magnificence in general: which he himself by
those words ((...)) does seem to intimate. Now among those many descriptions
of great worldly pomp and magnificence, that have been made by ancient
authors, there is not any that has been more taken notice of (imitated since
by others, and among others by Virgil himself in his Culex:) then that of
Lucretius, in his second Book, the very beginning whereof is,

Si non aurea sunt Juvenum Simulachra per aedes,
Lampadas igniferas manibus retinentia dextris
Iumina nocturnis epulis ut suppoditentur. etc.
And yet long before Lucretius, had a greater Poet, even Homer the Poet of
Poets, used the same expression, whom Lucretius herein does seem rather to
translate then imitate: for as their sense so their words are the same without
any difference, but of the language. Homers words in the description of
Alcinous his Palace are these:

(...),
(...)
(...).
Where though there could be no great doubt of it, yet since the Scholiast,
thought good to make a note of it, I think it not impertinent, to transcribe
it hither from him, that by (...) are to be understood (...): which is the
word by Antoninus here used. I need not to say more. Let the reader judge. I
must only add, that whereas Antoninus may be thought to commit a kind of
Tautologie in these words, (...), his meaning by those (...) is, to distinguish
those (...) and (...) from ordinary common ones such as were in every Romans
house almost, which could be no fit instance of great excess and
sumptuousness; but Such and Such, as were ordinary among the great ones and in
great places.

17. So that as for the Gods] (...) -- (...); etc. Xyl. Quod ad Deos attineret
-- nihil jam obstare, quin aut secundum naturam viverem, aut non. Atque hoc
quidem fore mea culpa, qui Deum monitus, etc. Between the particles (...) and
(...), there is a manifest opposition, which Xylander did not observe. The
words otherwise I confess are somewhat intricate and confused. Not long after,
(...), is by Xylander rendered, Hocque Caietae sicut Chraesae, as if it had
been, (...): which although Xylander do not so well like of in his Notes, and
therefore I may the better be excused, if I did not follow him; yet now upon
better consideration I durst undertake to maintain it both against Xylander
himself and my translation. For Caieta we know, was an Haven town of
Campania in Italy; where Antoninus as it should seem, having been an earnest
suter by the sea shore, whether to Apollo, or any other Heathen God for some
thing or other, wherein he conceived himself afterward to have been heard;
it could not but put him in mind of Chryses, Apollos priest, who is described
in Homer Iliad. 1. earnestly praying (...); that is, by the seashore; and
there immediately obtaining his request. The words therefore, as I conceive,
should thus be translated, -- my dizzenesse: as that also that happened unto
thee at Caieta, as unto Chryses, [when he prayed by the seashore.] That the
seashore was a place in great request with Antoninus, he himself professes.
B. IV. n. 3.

18. An unsociable uncharitable Man] (...), (a frequent word with him:) must in
Antoninus be taken as the opposite of (...) a sociable Man, one who out of a
due respect unto, and affectionat care of humane society, and of the public
community of men, is in all things that tend to their good, willing to fit and
accommodate himself unto others, accounting their welfare his own happiness.
He then that is not so, is (...): that is in general, an unsociable man. Now
the virtue of a sociable man consisting especially partly in meekness and
affability, and partly in goodness and bountifulnes; (...) may be more
particularly interpreted either a harsh rigid and arrogant man; or one that is
hard hearted and uncharitable. Of these two, because Anton. does always use
the word (...), whether adjectively or substantively with special relation to
(...), and the like; by which words he does also sometimes express himself: the
proper signification of (...) must in his acception be that which is properly
contrary to goodness and bountifulness. But as Charity being otherwise of it
self but one particular virtue, is nevertheless in another sense and respect
said to comprehend all other virtues, (as Romans 13. Cor. 13. and elsewhere we
are taught at large,) so that a man any ways vicious may be called an
uncharitable man: even so is the word unsociable used by Antoninus, which
therefore I know not how better to express, then by the word uncharitable. And
here I cannot but say somewhat of the marveillous consent of this Heathen man's
philosophy, with the holy scriptures. That it does in many things agree with
the sacred word of God, any man that reads him will easily observe. But
however, that in many it does agree I do not so much regard, as that it does in
the chiefest. In those things I mean, which in the scriptures are termed,
(...) in the old Testament; Hos. 8.12. M. 23.23.
and in the new, (...), of which kind especially are those two great
Commandments, to love God with all our hearts, and our neighbors as our
selves. Which be the very things which in these books are most pressed and
stood upon; as might appear by a number of passages, obvious enough to any
man that reads him; or almost any part of him. And as our Savior says of
those, that on them the law and the prophets do hang; so does Antoninus in
some places seem to reduce all his Philosophy to these two very points: (...);
58.
(says he in a place) (...), what will suffice thee, as long as thou live?
what else, but to worship and praise the Gods, and to do good unto men? and
again in another book: 60
(...). Let the only object of thy joy and content in this world be this,
from one charitable action presently to pass unto another, God always
remembered in all. And in the same book again (...). Fear the Gods, succor
them that are in misery [or, intend the good and preservation of men] this life
is but short, and the only fruit and comfort of this earthly life is, a holy
disposition, and actions that are charitable. In the sixth book, (...) There is
but one thing in this present life, that is of great consequence, and by us
much to be respected; for a man whilst he lives, living according to justice
and truth, kindly and lovingly to converse with false unrighteous men. And
again as the Apostle does particularly reduce all commandments to Charity
which therefore he calls the fulfilling of the Law, as elsewhere it is called
the end of the Law and the bond of perfectnes: so does Antoninus not only often
mention (...), etc.) which I cannot better English then by the word Charity) as
that which is all in all; but also for the same reason, by words (as already
has been intimated) which of themselves are proper and peculiar to either this
one virtue, as (...), etc. or to the contrary vice, as (...), etc. (words which
of themselves imply no more then sociableness or unsociableness* a charitable,
or uncharitable disposition;) he does include and comprehend all virtues and
vices in general. And whereas I have mentioned the word (...) as proper to
signify a sociable, or charitable disposition; of it self indeed, and as
Antoninus does use it, it is so: how be it it is not so used by all. For Plato
(whom Antoninus otherwise both in words and sentences does studiously follow:)
first taking the word more popularly, for one that bears offices in the
commonwealth and for an ambitious aspiring man; as Anton does extend that more
proper signification of the word, to imply an honest virtuous man in general;
so he (upon further consequences, and deductions from the present estate of
that common wealth whereof he was a member,) that other more popular word, in
general to express a vicious ungodly man. In a matter of such weight and
consequence as this, which by writers both divine and humane is made the very
matter indeed and purpose of our lives and of all religion: I thought I ought
to be the larger, to make the words fully understood; for sure I am they are
oftentimes much mistaken.

19. Blood bones and a skin] (...), etc. It is certain that (...) or (...) was
properly some Peplus, or coyfe used by women tocover their head and hairs:
answerable (if not the very same) to that which by the Latins was called
reticulus or reticulum. As for the words therefore, we might have thougt that
Antoninus here had alluded to that part of the body which the Latins usually
call omentum, and by the Greecs is sometimes called (...) and (...), (a fishers
net properly;) as is observed by the Anatomists: and that these following
words, (...), had been a further explication of this reticulus or (...), the
reason of this greec appellation being renderd by Pollux, because that (the
omentum scil. or (...)) (...), etc. and that the Anatomists do further
describe it, as consisting of a world of little nerves, veins and arteries.
And by this, I further grant, Antoninus might allude (and so include) to the
bowels also, covered in some sort by this omentum, as the hairs divided into
tresses, and winded up together (not much unlike the foulding and twisting of
the bowels in the belly:) were covered and kept in by this reticulus. Yet
nevertheless why after general and principal parts as blood and bones, he
should make such express mention either, of the omentum, or (to extend it as
far as may be) of the belly it self, more then of other parts, I know not.
And therefore until I be better satisfied, I rather understand this (...)
here of a more general covering, to wit the skin of the body, which though by
parts of less moment; yet wholly taken, is not only the most apparent; but also
may be reckned as a principal similary part of the body, and so of one
extraordinarily fallen in his flesh, we usually say in English, that he is
nothing but skin and bones; Now of it Anatomists say, that it is the opinion of
the vulgus that exvenarum, arteriarum, and nervorum extremitatibus dilatatis,
and eorum inexplicabili textura generatur. Whether it be so or no, I leave it
to them to dispute.

Notes upon the second Book.
EVery man's happiness depends from himselfe] (...), etc. The purpose and
meaning of all this passage, I think is apparent enough. If I thought it were
not, I would refer the Reader to n. XIV. of this very Book, and sundry other
places, where he handles the same matter more at large. As for those words
(...), certainly somewhat must be supplied, to make the sense full; either
(...) as we have translated it: or (...); which I think more probable,
because Antoninus does much affect (if I may use that word of him and do him
no wrong) the simplicity of these repetitions, and that it is ordinary for
Scribes (as is well known to all them that ever had to do with MS.) to flipp
over some thing, when they come to such repetitions. All this passage is thus
translated (whether I speak properly or not, when I say translated, let the
Reader judge: Bas. ed. p. 179.
) by Xylander, Ignominia teipsum affice, anime, contemn teipsum inquam: ut
enim honor teipsum afficias, non tibi praeterea tempus suppetet. Vita enim
unicuique id praebet: quae tibi propemodum jam exacta est. Non igitur teipsum
venerare sed felicitatem tuam aliorum in animis repositam habe. etc.

2. That intend not, and guide not by reason and discretion] (...), etc. Xyl.
qui vero sui ipsius animi motibus non obsequitur, etc. motus non assequitur, at
least, had been far more tolerable. (...), is in Antoninus, a word of great
weight, and does always import, a due, right and rational apprehension of
things: but it cannot always be translated alike, though never but very fitly
and properly used by him. (...) also and (...), as (...), and (...) are proper
Platonic words, by the right and full explication whereof much light might be
given to many obscure passages both of Antoninus and of others.

3. As after a vulgar sense such things,] (...), etc. Xyl. ubi ostendit
communioremea inter se conferendi rationem etc. But they are Antoninus words of
himself, who though he were not a professed Stoic, yet was so respective of
them, that he would not transgress against their common Tenets and opinions
without some short apology for himself. Now all the world knows, that the
Stoics held, that omnia peccata were aequalia, and to compare things known
and granted aequall must needs be very absurd. Therefore does Antoninus by
this short parenthesis here, from the rigor of their Decrees, appeal to more
vulgar and popular judgments.

4. As unable either to prevent, or better to order and dispose] (...) etc. a
word (or blasphemy rather) which most other Stoics upon this or the like
occasion did not stick at. whose error therefore Antoninus does here modestly
and obscurely point at and correct. Epictetus (a man otherwise so divine in his
writings, that some Christians I see, but upon weak grounds I think, have
undertaken to prove him a Christian:) in Arrianus lib. 1. cap. 1. (...). you
may read more in him to the same purpose. so Seneca. Mittamus animum ad ea
quae aeterna sunt, miremur in sublime volitantes rerum omnium formas, Deumque
inter illa versantem and providentem, quemadmodum qua immortalia facere non
potuit, quia materia prohibe bat, defendat a morte, ac ratione vitium corporis
vincat. Epist. 58. and de Benef. lib. 2. cap. 29. Quicquid nobis negatum est,
dari non potuit.

5. As for life therefore and death, honor and dishonour] These words I would
have the Reader, that is not otherwise much versed in the Stoics to take
especial notice of, as the true ground of all their strange and unnatural
Tenets and Paradoxes. That all temporal worldly blessings are common both to
good and bad, they saw. That this, if there were no more in it then so, could
not stand with Gods justice and goodness (which to deny is to deny that there
is a God:) they saw likewise. Upon this ground (a ground that he stands much
upon, and presses as far, as ever any Christian did:) Plato's illation was,
That after this life there must needs be a Judgment, when both good and bad
should according to their deeds be rewarded. The Stoics, as fully persuaded,
as Plato was, that a God there is, and he a just and good God; and yet
concerning the future estate of the dead, not so fully satisfied, as he was; to
maintain their belief against that common exception could find no better way
then to maintain, that all those things that men usually did either seek
after or fly from, as either good or bad; were in themselves and in very truth,
neither good nor bad, but altogether indifferent So that whether a man was rich
or poor, in health or in pain, long lived or soon cut off, in honor or
dishonor; that all this was nothing at all to either his happiness or
unhappines, no not whilst he lived; and by consequent, that it was no argument
against the goodness and justice of God, that these things were known and
grunted to happen unto all promiscuously, whether good or bad, Antoninus does
elsewhere touch upon it again, as toward the end of the fourth, and about the
beginning of the ninth book. To him (though I intend brevity, yet for further
illustration of a point of that weight and moment, as has been the occasion of
so many large volumes, I can do no less then add Epictetus his words at the
least, out of his Enchirid: chapter as I find him by some divided, 38. as by
others 29. (...) etc. Know that in this specially true piety toward the Gods
does consist, that thou have right opinions concerning them: as, That they are,
that with justice and equity they govern the whole world: That thou to this
end were appointed and ordained, to obey them, to submitt unto them, and
willingly to follow them in all things, as proceeding all from Him, and by Him
brought to pass, who is Reason and Understanding it self in the highest
degree of excellency. So shall thou never complain of the Gods, or accuse them
as neglected and little cared for by them. But this cannot possibly be, except
thou first give over all pursuit after those things which are not in our own
power: and that on them only which are in our power and wholly depend on our
own wills, thou be fully persuaded, that all that is truly good or evil does
depend. For as for any other things if thou shall deem any of them good or
evil, it must needs follow, See Ant. B. VI. n. XV. B. IX. n. I.
that as thou do either miss of those thou do desire, or fall into those
thou would not, thou shall not only complain of them that are the cause,
but hate them also. For this is natural unto every creature, as to shunn and
abhor all things hurtful, both the things themselves and their causes: So
those that are profitable both the things themselves, and their causes to
prosecute and highly to respect: etc.

6. From whose bare conceits and voices honor and credit] (...), etc. quorum
opiniones and voces gloriam. Quidnam est mors. etc. So Xylander translates it,
and marks it for an imperfect place. That a verb, to make the sense full,
must be supplied I grant: but because without it the sense of the words may
be apparent enough, it may very well be, that whatsoever it is that is to be
supplied, was by Antoninus himself omitted as not necessary. Now for the sense
I must appeal to other like places as lib. III. n. IV. toward the end; (...),
etc. Moreover that honor and praise ought not generally etc. and again in the
same book n. X. (...) etc. And the greatest fame that can remain, etc. In the
fourth book n. III. toward the end, (...) etc. For the whole Earth is but as
one point, etc. But I will not heap all the passages he has against the
vanity of praise and applause. This in the sixth, n. XV. comes very near:
(...). what is it then that should be dear unto us, etc. See also the last
words of the same book.

7. And how that part of man is affected when it is said to be diffused]
(...). Xyland. Praterea quomodo afficitur eo tactu pars illa. I translate it as
written (...); from the 8. book toward the end, where he treats concerning
the (...) and (...) of the mind and understanding. But it may be, it would
fit the place better if it were (...): whether Antoninus himself did so by
an ((...)) further expound himself; or whether it be but a mere glossema
proceeding from any other, I leave to others to judge.

8. To the tendance of that spirit which is within him] (...) etc. I could not
easily find a word either Latin or English, whereby to express this (...) here
and elsewhere so often mentioned by Antoninus. That by that word Antoninus does
intend a Deity he himself does sufficiently clear, not only where he calls
it (...), and (...) but by other passages, where he plainly says of him that
he is a God But even for these passages sake (besides other reasons) could not
I well translate it God; for so must I have made him say, not only that God was
a divine effluence, and a particle of God; but also that God was God; which
would have been too gross and manifest a tautologie. The word Genius used by
Xylander, however it might fit in some respects; and as it is used and
interpreted by some ancients, comes nearest of any Latin word to Antoninus his
meaning: yet certain it is, as out of Apuleius may appear, that it is against
its proper signification, that it is so used, and in regard of its more popular
and ordinary use, there could not be any other more improper and contrary. For
whereas there is nothing more ordinary among the Latins then these phrases
Genio indulgere; genium curare, genium defraudare and the like, in which manner
of speeches the word Genius is used, as the best and greatest motive, to
Epicuraean mirth and jovialtie; Antoninus does always press his (...) as the
best and greatest motive, and obligation to all manner of temperance, sobriety,
chastiry, modesty, holiness and the like. Some will think perchance that I
might have retained the word Daemo^. But seeing eve^ in Antoninus his time and
before, that word by means of the blessed Gospel of Christ, was already
become so publicly odious to Latin ears, that Apuleius himself, an arrant
Heathen, being to write (...) (which was Plutarchs title) though he maintained
the thing, that it was not a God but a direct Demon, of a nature far different
and inferior to the Gods, yet avoided the word as odious, and of purpose, (as
is well and at large observed by S. Augustine De Civitate Dei. lib. 8. cap. 14.)
entitled his book not, de Daemone, but de Deo Socratis: I should have done
Antoninus great wrong, if I could not have fitted his excellent matter and
purpose, with a more plausible word. Now for the word Spirit which of all
others I have made choice of, some will think perchance, that I have made too
bold with it, to put it, so sacred a word, in a Heathens mouth so often, and to
make it so common a word with him, as it will be found by my Translation.
Although I could give a more direct and general answer both for Antoninus and
my self, if I would take occasion here to fall upon that subject: yet for
brevities sake, I will content my self to require that of the Reader, which I
think no reasonable man can deny, that to express an Heathens meaning, I may
be allowed words that have been used by Heathens. I think that of Seneca, no
man makes any question, (notwithstanding that ancient report an dopinion of
many concerning some Epistles that should pass between him and S. Paul, which
S. Hierome and others speak of;) but that he was a Heathen. His words are
these Epist. 41. Prope est a te Deus: tecum est: intus est. Ita dico Lucili.
Sacer intra nos Spiritus sedet, malorum bonorumque nostrorum observator and
custos: hic prout a nobis tractatus est, it a nos ipse tractat. Bonus vir sine
Deo nemo est. etc. Thus much of the word. Now concerning the thing it self,
how Antoninus came by this philosophy (so much by him in these his books
inculcated) of this inward spirit; and so to examine Plato's and other ancients
opinion concerning the same: or how near either he or any of them came to the
truth, and so to heap together many passages, and to compare them with some
like passages in the scripture; is a thing which I my self have taken much
pleasure in, and some others would perchance, but that would require far more
scope, then this place can afford me, and therefore I let it alone.

9. With a kind of pity and compassion also] (...) etc. The Stoics would not
allow (...) or misericordia in a wise man. For they maintained that such a one,
was in continual joy. Now (...) they defined to be Aegritudinem animi ob
alienarum miseriarum speciem or, a grief of the mind, for other men's supposed
miseries. As therefore the word employed grief and sorrow, they rejected it.
But as for the effects of it, as clemency, goodness, and whatsoever it is that
true compassion in the highest degree, for the releife and comfort of any
distressed, would prompt a man unto, that they thought themselves bound unto as
much as any, and proposed it (so they professed) as the maine scope of their
lives and actions. Seneca is very large upon this subject. The truth is: they
would not have men to be men but mere Gods. And whiles they thus went about
to elevate this virtue, the crown of all virtues, to a higher pitch of divine
purity and simplicity, then humane nature was capable of; and to abstract from
it, as it were, all that was humane and fleshly; I fear they made many, who
were not so capable of their distinctions and subtilties (such as you shall
find in Seneca upon this subject) the less to regard that, which nature
otherwise, and to good purpose, had made them more capable of. Certain it is
and by them confessed, that for this very thing, they commonly and their
profession had a very hard report. This may be the occasion that Antoninus
takes occasion to mention so often, and to commend (...), which if it be not
the same, yet comes next to (...). Yet such respect did he bear unto the
Stoics, that he would not we see here, use that word by them condemned
without some qualification; not (...) barely; but, (...).

10. That man can part with noe life properly, then that little] (...). Xyl.
Tamen recordandum tibi est, neminem aliam ab ea quam vivit vitam deponere,
neque aliam deponere quam eam quam vivit, so shall you find it in both the
Editions.

11. For those things are plain and apparent which] (...), etc. Spoken unto
Monimus, you must understand, by way of Dialogue, and philosophical
conference; by persons introducted; and made to speak by Monimus himself. For
that Monimus himself and no other must be conceived to be the Author of
those writings both sweet and profitable, upon which Antoninus does here pass
his judgment, may be gathered by what Laertius does relate of him, whose
words are, (...), etc. He became (says he) merveillous grave and serious; as
in matter of honor and credit altogether careless; so after Truth, very hott
and vehement. He did write some merry Pleasant books, mixed with hidden and
profitable seriousness. That therefore of Monimus his own writings Antoninus
is to be understood, I think is apparent, but because what was the form of
these writings, whether they were Dialogues or otherwise, is not certain, and
that Laertius says nothing of it; I could be well content, that (...) were
more generally translated, those things that are spoken of in the writings of
Monimus the Cynick; if the Greec would allow it; which I much doubt of, though
(...) for apud, I know is ordinary.

And thus have I now for reasons mentioned in the Preface, gone over the two
first books, not omitting wittingly any place that required either light or
cure. And because I presume the Reader by this to be fully satisfied both
concerning my course that I have held in the translating of this Book, and that
it needed a new translation: I will spare my self the labor to proceed
further in the same kind; some few places, here and there (which would by no
means be omitted) excepted. And to this end I will take all that remains
together.

Cursorie Notes and Illustrations, UPON The X. Books that remain.
B. IV. n. XXXIX. Helice, Pompeii, Herculanum] concerning Helice, that may
suffice that Xyl. has in his Notes. Of the sudden ruin of the famous town
Pompeii by an earthquake, you may read in Tacitus Ann. XV. Seneca Not. Quaest.
lib. 6. cap. 1. Tertullian in his Apologetis, and elsewhere. Herculanum was
very near Pompeii, as by Pliny, Strabo, Pomp. Mela, and others does appear;
by which neighborhood it may be conceived that when the one did perish, the
other could not but suffer. And though otherwise of the ruin of it I find not
much in any other ancient besides Antoninus, yet as much as I said Seneca says
in the same place where he speaks of Pompeii; Nam and Herculanensis oppidi
pars ruit, dubieque stant etiam quae relicta sunt. Xylander in his Notes upon
this places refers us to another place of Anton. B. VIII. n. 29. where he by
his Translation makes Antoninus to mention the same Pompeii again. But there
the words bearing either Pompeiorum gens, as Xyl. in his first Edition had
renderd it; or urbs Pompeii, as it is in his second: though I condemn not this
latter, yet I have rather followed that former interpretation, for reasons
which upon a better opportunity I shall give more at large.

Ibid. That which but the other day, was vile snivell,] The whole passage in
the Greec, (as it is printed) runs thus, (...), etc. The latter words (for the
former he slips quite over) are thus translated by Xyland. Bas. ed. 214. and
quod heri fuit piscis, eras erit salsamentum, aut cinis. The Greec words as
they are printed, are not without fault; but the fault is neither great, nor
hard to be discoverd, in steed of (...), it must be corrected, (...): a
phrase to this purpose often used by Antoninus; as (...); and the like; which
all signify one thing. Now for (...), which by Xylander is translated Piscis:
whether the Greec Dictionaries deceaved him, or he them; I know not: but sure
I am, that both he and they are much deceaved, and that (...) here is a mere
diminutive of (...), as it signifies mucus or mucor; used again in the same
sense (and there well translated by Xylander) by Antoninus himself in another
passage of these his Books. They that are any thing versed in the writings of
Greec Stoics, cannot but know, that it is their ordinary style to speak of
all worldly things (the more emphatically to express their vileness and
contemptible baseness) by Diminutives: to that end taking usually that liberty
to themselves, as to coin new ones, where they find none ready coined to
their hands. For examples whereof I need to send you no further then to this
our Anton. in very many places of these his books. The ground, as it seems by
him, of Xylanders mistake, was the word (...) here; which because in its more
ordinary signification signifies salsamentum; and salsamentum is most proper of
fishes; he concluded that (...) must needs be a fish, and thus, by a
translation rather of substances then of words, (which we might more properly
call a Metamorphosis) of a man he has made a fish; and so has it continued
hitherto in all Greec Dictionaries that I have seem. As for the word (...),
that Antoninus may not be thought either the first, or only, that everused it
in this sense; I will produce but one passage of Lucian, which I think will
abundantly do the deed. He therefore in his discourse de Luctu, toward the end
treating of the several sorts of burial used by sundry nations, has these
words; (...) (says he) (...). The Grecian did burn; the Persian, bury; The
Indian does anoint with swines grease; (the word in Lucian is (...), which must
need signify either swines dung; or as Erasmus does render it, adipem suillum:
but some learned men there be, who correct it, (...) medulla:) the Scythian
eat; and the Egyptian powder, or imbalme. When Antoninus then says, (either
an imbalmed carkase or ashes;) he does allude to the custom of his days
among the Romans, which was either to bury (the bodies of the richer sort
being first imbalmed:) or to burn: though indeed the latter, through the
increase of Christians, began soon after Antoninus his time to grow much out
of use every where. Now they that burned, used to gather the relics of the
dead corpse, consisting of bones and ashes, and to lay them up in urnis, ollis,
ossuariis; in potts, urnes, crockes, and the like earthen vessels made of
purpose; and so to bury them. I would not Note it, (I must confess,) as a
thing that I thought worth nothing (for I think there can be nothing more
common:) but that I am glad to take this occasion to impart unto the Reader a
memorable curiosity in matter of antiquity, which by the learned Antiquaries
beyond the Seas, I am sure, would be much esteemed. Some 2. or 3. miles beyond
Sitting borne in Kent, West, as you go to London, there is a little village in
the way called Newington. It has not been my luck hitherto in any either
later Book or ancient record, to find any thing concerning this village worth
the noting. All that I can say of it is, that the inhabitants show a place, to
which they say that in former times the water came, as indeed by many
circumstances it is very probable: and that Milton (A town before the Conquest
of great fame, and of very great antiquity) is not above two miles from it.
About a quarter of a mile before you come to Newington, not much above a stones
cast from the high way on the right hand as you come from Sittingborne, there
is a field, out of which, in a very little compass of ground, have been taken
out by digging within these few years Roman pots and Vrnes, almost of all
seyzes and fashions, and in number very many: some thousands, I have been told
upon the place; but many hundreds, I am sure I may say, and speak within
compass. And though so many have already been found, and carried way, yet
does the field afford them still (as I am told) plentifully enough now and
then, according as you prove either skillful or lucky in the digging. The
figures of some of them I have here caused to be represented to the Reader.

The first and greatest, with an Inscription graven and ^^tt in about the neck
of it SEVERIANVS, etc. was above a year ago by the pious and ingenuous Vicar
of that Parish, M. Henry Dearing, bestowed upon me, which I keep as a great
Treasure: as also was the last not long after, with the cover of it over it, so
severally represented of purpose, that the form of either might the better
appear. The words of the Inscription of that first (as near as they could be
imitated) are these:

inscription on urn

depiction of urns

In the writing of which (...) although something may be observed not
ordinary, as G^^ for Olla; and those kind of A. and L. etc. yet is there
nothing so singular, but a learned antiquarie well versed in ^ruter's Thesaurus
of Inscriptions, will soon find examples of it. As for the sense and meaning
of the words, though not so obvious perchance as might be wished, yet must I
(because few words will not serve) suspend my opinion till some sitter
opportunity. That in the middle, with the Inscription COCCILLIM, was by the
means of a worthy fiend, M. Dr. Winston, (that great ornament of his
profession) procured unto me from the Right Honorable (for his worth, and love
to learning as well as by his place) Richard, Earl of Pordand, Lord High
Treasurer of England, etc. whom, with some other rare antiquities it was sent
unto, some years ago. I was desirous to compare these that I had (for the
Inscriptions sake especially) with some others of the same kind. But I find
this difference, that whereas mine were much perished and worn by age. such
was the brightness and smoothness of this middle, (of the cover of it I
mean, which is of a redd colcureth earth) as that it rather resembled pure
Corrall, then ordinary red earth: and as for the letters of the Inscription,
that they were not as mine widely graven in with the hand, but in the same
mould, and at the same time when the cover it self was formed, very
artificially printed, or imbossed rather: as by these figures, that are
represented, you may in part perceive. Since that, when I passed last by
Newington coming from London, among many other fragments of antiquity in M.
Dearings gardin I found the peec^ of just such an other Cover (but that the
color of it is nothing so fresh) with this Inscription in the middle likewise,
PRISCIAN. Now as the multitude of these Newington urnes (for I do not remember
that ever so many in so narrow a compass of ground were founds is observable;
so is the manner of their laying in the ground. They that have been present
often at their digging up, have observed, that where one great Vrne is found,
diverse less vessels are; some within the great, some about it: all coverd
either with a proper cover of the same earth and making as the pott it self
is; or more coursely, but very closely stopped up with other earth. Of all
those small vessels of what fashion soever that are found either in or about
these urnes, I know no other use (to satisfy in some part their curiosity,
that wonder at them when they see them) that was ordinary among the Romans,
but either to contain some fragrant odoriferous liquor, and durable
confection; or that libatie of wine and milk that they used about their dead;
or lastly (not to speak here of those burning lamps that have been found in
some ancient urnes and monuments, which so many have largely written and
disputed of) to receive and preserve the tears that were shed by the friends
of the deceased for grief of their death. As for the difference of the greater
and the lesser urnes, Fabricius in his Roma, and Marlianus in his
topographicall description of the same, are of opinion, that when urnes of
different bigness are found in the same place, the greater were for the greater
and richer, as the masters and Patroni; and the lesser, for the poorer, and
inferior, as the servants and clientes.

In things of this nature, which were I mean, altogether arbitrarie, there is
no question but different fashions were used in different places; yea and
likely in the same place, as every man's particular conceit, or humor served
him. And therefore it were hard to determine any thing as certainly, and
generally true. But as for these N. urnes, this seems to have been the
custom there used. One great urne was appointed to contain the bones and
ashes of all one, either household or kindred. As often therefore as any of
them dyed, so often had they recourse unto the common urne, which so often was
uncovered. To prevent this I find that the fashion has been in some places,
to let in the ashes through some holes made and fitted for that purpose. See
Gruter fol. 814. Now besides the great and common urne, it is likely that every
particular person that dyed, had some less urne or vessel, particularly
dedicated to his own memory; whereby both the number of the deceased, and the
parties themselves might the better be remembered. There might be also another
use of these lesser pots, in my judgment very necessary, and that is, that by
them the common great Urnes, might the better be known and discerned one from
another; which being so near, in so small a compass of ground, and not much
unlike one another, might otherwise easily be mistaken. And this is the more
likely, because of those many hundreds that have been taken up of the lesser
sort, scarce have there been found any, of one and the same making, I hear
not of any thing that has hitherto been found, in these Newington urnes
besides bones, and ashes; and sometimes clear water. And so do I read of
urnes or Earthen vessels plenis limpidissima aqua, that have been found
elsewhere, as that which is mentioned in Gruterus fol. 927. I doubt not but
many would be glad (as well as I) to know certainly what this place has
formerly been. But alas! how should we (who are of yesterday, and know
nothing) without the help of ancient records, recall the memory of things
forgotten so many hundred of years ago? Thus much we may certainly enough
conclude: First, from the multitude of these urnes, that it was once a common
burying place for the Romans. Secondly, from the History of the Romans in this
land, that no urne is there found, but is 1200. or 1300 Years old, at the
least: so many ages of men have these poor earthen vessels (of so much better
clay for durance then human bodies are,) outlasted both the makers of them, and
the persons to whose memory they were consecrated. Lastly, from the place,
which is upon an ascent (and for a good way beyond, hilly;) not far from the
Sea, and near the high way; we may affirm in all probability, that it was
once the feate of a Roman station. If any man can teach me more of it. I shall
heartily thanck him. Since this was written, I made another journey to the
place and spent some time there in digging, but with no success. However, that
I might not return home empty, the same M. Dearing gave me a piece of urne,
which has this inscription, FVL LINVS.

B. VI. n. XXXVII. As that vile and ridiculous verse] Chrysippus his own words
and Plutarchs censure upon them you may read in Plutarch (...): whereby it
appears that Chrysippus his word was not (...), as we have it here, but (...).

Book. VIII. n. 1. Contrary to that perfection of life] (...) (says Epictetus
in Arrianus lib. 4.) (...) The profession of a Philosopher is, not to sin:
and in the same chapter shall you find, (...), exploded, as implying a flat
contradiction. And now here will I perform, P. 13.
what in my Praeface I did promise for the more full and perfect explication of
this word (...). That the immortality of the soul, and the reward of the good
and bad after this life was never more stoutly maintained by any of all the
Heathens, then by Plato, is full well known and acknowledged by all. But it is
objected, that this sound and true Tenet, he by many odd fictions of his own,
and ridiculous descriptions of the torments of the wicked after this life, has
much corrupted and adulterated. One thing especially, though by more objected
against him, Ihcodor.
yet by one Greec Father specially is much exaggerated, that in a place where
he treatch of the reward of the just and unjust after this life, he should
there propose unto his Philosophers as their best reward for their justice and
piety, the metompsycosis and transmutation of their souls into bees and ants,
and such like; a thing so strange and ridiculous even to conceive, that I
cannot but wonder, how they that could believe any such thing of Plato, could
in other places find in their hearts so highly to extol, and so absolutely to
prefer him before all other Philosophers that ever were. But as for his many
relations, and strange descriptions both of the manner and place of torments
after this life, I will not take upon me to excuse him. Only this I will say,
that he professing in so many places, that what he related in this kind, he
neither believed himself, nor required of any that they should believe; and
that he was well content, that such and such relations as these, should go for
old women's tales, for that in very deed they were no better; and that all that
he stood upon, was, That men might certainly be persuaded, that the soul was
immortal, and that there was a reward for the just after this life; but as for
the rest, whether these very things or somewhat quivalent were believed, until
they had more certain information was to him indifferent: I do not see, what
could well be expected more from an Heathen. And he that shall compare those
many descriptions of Hell and Purgatory, which are to be found in books
written many hundred years ago, with his; will cerrainly judge, that either
Plato was not much amiss, or that many Christians have deserved far more
blame then he. And I further think that Plato might in this case with as much
reason, to maintain among the vulgar an opinion of the immortality of the
soul and of a judgment after this life, make use of old women's tales; as the
Angelical Doctor against some Fathers, who affirm the contrary, does take
upon him to maintain; that ignis inferni, ejusdem est speciei cum igne nostro,
Supplem. 3. part. q. 97. Art. 6.
because Aristotle has written, that omnis aqua omni aquae est idem specie.
And as for that which Plato writes concerning the transformation of worldly
carnal men's souls, according to Pythagoras doctrine; it is true, that
Pythagoras and his opinions being in great esteem among the people, Plato not
knowing himself what certainly to affirm of the manner of their punishment
after their death, was very indifferent, whether this or that were believed, so
somewhat were believed; and therefore proposes sometimes one opinion, some
times another. But as for the reward of the just and godly, it is an
intolerable mistake. For in that very place which is alleged, he plainly
says that the true Philosophers after their death (...), are received into the
communion and society of the Gods, and are transformed into their very natures.
And though it cannot be doubted, who they are that Plato calls Philosophers,
they being so often and so amply described by Him; yet to make the case
clearer, I will produce his description of them in that very place: (...), etc.
All true Philosophers abstain from all carnal lusts and concupiscences, etc.
They fear not the ruin of their goods and howses, nor poverty as other
ordinary men, and such as are addicted to wealth and riches; They fear not the
reproach and dishonor of a private idle life, as they that hunt after honor
and glory; for they purposely avoid all such things, etc. The ground (and yet
no ground at all, had he been but looked upon:) of the mistake, (as appears
by them who have objected this unto him) is, that Plato setting down the
several transformations of worldly men, according to their several
dispositions and employments during their life; says that (...) etc. by which
words of (...). etc. he was mistaken as though he had meant them, whom he
usually calls Philosophers, which in many respects was a very gross mistake.
For first, as was said in the Praeface, it was not the love or exercise of
virtue alone, that made a Philosopher, as they meant it; but the love of a
virtue (...); and so distinguished them from politic worldly men, who (not to
speak of the vain glorious:) often exercise justice, and many other virtues,
not out of any love to them, but because, as the times are, it may be most
advantageous for them, to show themselves in their actions just and righteous.
And from the Epicuraeans, who though they acknowledged not divine providence,
nor immortality of the soul, and proposed unto themselves pleasure as the only
end of their lives; yet maintained (most of them) that they that were (...),
or, lovers of pleasure, must of necessity be, (...) or, lovers of justice: and
that (...), or, without virtue it was not possible for a man to live in true
pleasure. And certain it is that the Epicureans have written as many excellent
books to exhort men to virtue, and for the most part, in the sight of the
world lived as well as any of any other sect: so that as it was said of the
Stoics (for they were most of them notable hypocrites) that they did (...), of
the Epicuraeans it was said, that they did (...). Then it was further to be
observed that Plato does not say (...) absolutely, but, (...); nor (...)
absolutely, but, (...): by which words he cannot be understood to mean
others, then those, whom in other places he calls (...); men that interessed
themselves in public affairs and in the government of the commonwealth; of
which kind of men he in many places (as things then stood) maintained that
they could not possibly be Philosophers: though otherwise (as all know) those
commonwealths he pronounced most happy, which were governed by them that were.
But that which plainly pats all out of doubt, and makes the mistake in a manner
inexcusable, is, that Plato after these words, presently adds (...): and in
the words immediately following, setts down those that he calls Philosophers,
as men of a quite different sect and profession; which they that object this
place unto him, confound with the former.

I am glad I have had occasion here in this subject to do Plato some right; a
man, if ever Heathen was (as Plutarch somwhere of Socrates (...); and I shall
(when occasion serves) as gladly do it in many others, wherein he is as
wrongfully mistaken. However that which has now made me the more willing to
say so much in his defense, is partly that our Antoninus might the better be
understood as often as he uses these words Philosophy and Philosophers; and
partly that some passages of his, otherwise obscure, compared with this of
Plato, with that which has been said upon it, might be made plain and easy.
See B. III. n. 17. B. VIL. n. 37. B. II. n. 28. etc. Neither will this
interpretation of these words Philosopher and Philosophy, only be useful in
the reading of this Antoninus and other Heathens; but of ancient Fathers also,
by whom they have been used in the same sense; but especially by Saint
Chrysostom; as where he says, that (...), that a man is bound to a great
deal more Philosophy since Christ, then they were under the Law; that the
Philosophy of the Gospel is most perfect: and many such other speeches, which
he uses almost in every page.

B. X. n. X. And appland themselves for their valiant acts against the
Sarmate.] Great was the glory of these wars, equalled by good Historians to
the greatest conquests of the Romans. Bellum quantum nulla unquam momoria fuit,
say some of them. And by the same Historians, is all the honor and glory of
these wars, next unto God (whose providence in some particular passages of
this expedition is acknowledged both by Heathens and Christians, to have been
very extraordinary, and indeed miraculous. (See Note 2. upon B. 1.) adscribed
to Antoninus his great valor and wisdom; who himself was present in person
all the while for many years together. Yet so little did Antoninus take upon
himself of all that he had deserved, that as by the Heathens he is often
styled verecundus Imperator, so by Orosius the Spanish Priest, and
Historiographer, who lived in Saint Augustines days, for this very reason he
is called, gravissimus and modostissimus Imperator.

B. X. n. 33. What [then] is it, that may upon this present occasion.] Because
the coherence of these words with the former (grounded by me upon B. IV. n.
21.) will, I fear, be obscure unto many, I rather wish for plainness sake, I
had begun here a new number, and had expressed the sense thus: [Wouldest thou
now be happy?] Do that and speak that whatsoever it be, that may now upon this
present occasion, according to best reason and discretion either be said or
done; (For whatsoever it be, it is in thy power either to do it, or to say it,
and therefore seake not any pretenses, as though thou were bindred:) and thou
have thy wish. For until such time that thou be so minded, and affected, as
that what pleasure is unto the voluptuous, the same thing be unto thee to do
in every thing that presents itself, whatsoever may be done conformably and
agreably to the proper constitution of man, thou will never cease groaning and
complaining. Thou must therefore [if ever thou will be happy.] account that
pleasure, whatsoever is be that thou may do etc. See B. III. n. 13. B.
VIII. n. 30. B. IX. n. 5.24. as also B. VI. n. 2. the last words; which because
they there were forgotten by me, I will here set them down: (...): duties --
and actions of our lives. [Whensoever then the time of that duty shall come,]
then also may it suffice thee [to make thee happy,] that thou do well acquit
thyselfe of that present duty. [or that the present time is spent by thee upon
a good action.]

B. X. n. XXXVI. What then should any man desire, etc. Nevertheless,] Did ever
a more meek soul concur, with so valiant and courageous a disposition? But
these perchance, were but his intentions; perchance, not so much as intentions,
but bare speculative Meditations. If that be true which Historians of best
account relate concerning his son Commodus, that he have ened his Fathers
death, etc. it will appear, that as he prooved a true prophet in regard of
others, so in regard of himself he approved himself in his death as true,
and prositable a Teacher; yea that his practice in this very particular, rather
went beyond his vows and meditations, then came short of them.

B. XI. n. III. Violenty and passionately set upon opposition as Christians are
wont,] Gr. (...), etc. It was an error of the Stoi ks (forsaking herein the
more sound doctrine of ancienter Philosophers, as Plato, Aristotle, and
others:) that in some cases it was not only lawful, but also laudable for a
man to make himself away. I do not find that our Antoninus does any where
absolutely and directly oppose this error; but this I find and any man may
observe that shall read him, that in many places he does restrain the case
with such limitations and restrictions, as might seem in some manner
equivalent to a plain and direct opposition. However, I speak not this to
excuse him, but that it shall be free for me for any man to judge him or his
opinions, as they shall see occasion. The reason that mooves me to take here
more particular notice of his opinion in this point, then I do in many others
of no less moment, is, partly because Antoninus, though he often touches upon
it, yet every where he does it so breefly and obscurely, that his maine drift
and intention I fear will not so easily be discovered by many: and partly,
because I shall at once both remove from Antoninus the crime and imputation of
being the author of a most heinous and foul slander concerning the Christians,
and vindicate those primitive godly Christians innocence from the malice or
ignorance of Heathenish tongues. Antoninus then, you must know, was of opinion
that they were much to blame, who either passionatly, or inconsideratly (for to
these two we may refer all his other exceptions by him inculcated in diverse
places:) did at any time part with their lives; and in steed of these requires
and presses often these two, rationally; and calmely; or meekely. For the
first, (...), etc. It is the part of a wise man, etc. B. IX. n. 3. (...), not
comtemptibly, or scornfully; (...), not angrily, or passionately, says he
elsewhere to the same purpose, and inculcats the word (...): calmly, and meekly
so often, that were it not so good a word as it is, hardly would any man have
the patience to read it so often as he repeates it. But much more shall we be
induced to bear with Antoninus his many repetitions in this kind, if we
further consider, that all that he did aim at by all these words, was merely
to take down the pride and haughty spirit of the common Stoics of his days,
and before. Many of whom both by their own practice, and by their doctrine and
exhortations, did teach a man generally upon all occasions, but in matter of
death especially, rather to be desperately stout and resolute; then rationally
and really wise: which made Antoninus in almost all his exhortations and
instructions so carefully to inculcat humility and a meek spirit. (...). Give
what thou will, and take away what thou will, etc. B. X. n. 16. They that are
any thing acquainted with Senecas style and genius of writing, will easily make
a Comment upon this. But not to go from this very subject of death, that we are
now upon, how does he set out his Cato, his great and almost only pattern of
wisdom? Tam (says he) non tantum Caesari, sed sibi iratus, nudas in vulnus
manus egit, and genero sum illum contemptoremque omnis potentiae spiritum non
emisit, sed ejecit, etc. Epist. 24. Is this to dye like a Philosopher or a wise
man, or rather like a desperate wretch? If any man shall answer for S. that he
wrote this as an Orator rather then a Philosopher, I grant indeed that it was
wit that he affected more then sound wisdom, (in this and many such passages
I mean:) but yet it is in the person of a Philosopher that he speaks it; and
whether it were a good Orators part to adscribe such a passionat (that I say
not desperate;) and discontented end to such a perfect wise man, as he would
have Cato reputed, I leave to others to judge.

The other maine condition that Antoninus does generally stand upon (as has
been said) is, rationally, or, not inconsideratly. A man may undervalue life as
well as overprize it. It was Aristotle's opinion that a man (...), the more
virtuous he is, and the better furnished with all manner of rare perfections,
the more unwilling he must needs be to dye. And certainly according to truth
and sound Philosophy, for a man to contemn life, and either in a mere bravado
(as many duellists, and contentions persons often do:) to cast it away; or
otherwise easily and slightly upon no ground of sound reason and good
ratiocination, to part with it, must needs be the highest degree of madness and
mere brutishnes, that can be conceived. As on the other side, (...)(as
Epictetus upon this occasion speaks:) when apparent reason does induce us for
some greater good, (as either for a better life, or for the performance of some
duty which in reason ought to be dearer unto us then life:) not to regard it,
for a man then through either fear of death or love of this world, to linger
and to draw back, is great baseness and greater folly. As for that Antoninus
does here allege the Christians as an exemple of that phrenzie that be does
tax and reproove; the ground of it is, the servent zeal of the primitive
Christians, whole love to Christ was such, that they not only were content to
suffer for him, when they were called to it, but even so longed to dye for him,
that they could hardly by the Church Canons and discipline provided in that
behalf be restrained from offering themselves to death, and being their own
accusers and promooters. In so much that in Africa at a certain time when they
flocked by multitudes to the Inquisitors or Judges, the Governor of that
Province amazed cried out, O wretched creatures, if you must needs dye, have
you no halters or praecipices at home? as is recorded by Tertull. ad Scap. last
chapter. And though this course was by the better learned and more sober
praelats inhibited and restrained, yet such was commonly their constancy and
their readiness to death whenever they were apprehended and condemned by their
persecuters, Yea their joy and exultation such, ( Deo gratias, or, God be
praised, was their common and solemn word, when their sentence was read;) that
that alone was sufficient to a^^^e their enemies, and to make them thi^^^ very
strangely of them. Neither indeed were the Christians better known unto the
Heathens by any other property then this, that they were a kind of people,
that did not regard their lives. Before Antoninus, Arrianus had already
mentioned them upon the same occasion. For lib. 4. c. 7. (...) treating of an
undaunted disposition, not capable of any fear or terror, (...), etc. To him,
(says he) that stands so affected, what Tyrant, what officers, what swords can
be dreadful? Or shall it be so that some through mere madness; others by use
and custom, as the Galilaeans, can be brought to that pass, that they shall
fear nothing; and shall not reason and sound ratiocination, etc. I know these
words are somewhat otherwise interpreted by others, who refer both (...) and
(...) to Christians; but if the whole passage be well considered, it will
appear otherwise, especially if it be compared with Senecas last words of his
Ep. 36. which are these, Denique finem faciam si hoc unum adjecer^, nec
infantes, nec pueros, nec mente lapsos timere mortem; and esse turpissimum, si
came securitatem nobis ratio non praestat, ad quam stultitia perducit. Which
words of Seneca I produce here the more willingly, because they may also serve
to give light to another place of Antoninus lib. v. n. 1^. if any shall take
the pains to compare them. As for that Arrianus calls the Christians
Galilaeans, he does but as many others did; as Lucian by name (if he be the
author of that Dialogue concerning S. Paul, which goes under his Name:) and
Julian the Apostat, as all men know. This readiness then and alacrity of these
godly Christians to seal their profession with their blood, so known and
prooved every where, was nevertheles so much mistaken and misinterpreted, as
that upon a supposition that it had no ground in reason (as Anton you see, does
here allege:) it was commonly termed by the Heathens, pervicacie and
obstinatnes. Obstinatio indeed was the very word. Illa ipsa Obstinatio quam
exprobratis, says Tertull. toward the end of his Apologeticus. and ad
Nationes lib. 1. c. 18. Reliquum Obstinationis in illo capitulo collocatis,
quod neque gladios, neque cruces, neque bestias vestras; non ig^em, non
tormenta ob duritatem ac contemptum mortis animo recusemus, etc. And before him
Pliny in his Epistle de Christianis written to Traianus the Emperor, Neque
enim dubitabam qualecunque esset quod faterentur, pervicaciam certe and
inflexibilem obstinationem debere puniri. Seneca also, though not of the
Christians particularly he, yet in the same sense does use the word obstinatio,
in his 76. Epist. by which passages it does appear how happily Xylander,
professing what he does in his Notes, did hitt upon this word in his
Translation, then which he could never have found a more fit and proper, had
he sought never so long. But some Interpretors of Tertull. it seems did not
well understand it in his de Spectac. first chapter, where he says, Sunt qui
existiment Christianum, expeditum morti genus ad hanc Obstinationem abdicatione
voluptatum erudiri, etc. who note that Tertull. does there use Obstinatio in a
good sense for constantia; whereas he uses it in no other sense then the
Heathens did, that objected it unto them; and it is as from them that he
speaks it, as if he said, ad hanc quam nobis objicitis, or, exprobratis (as
elsewhere) obstinationem, etc. The word (...) here used by Anton. will I thinck
hardly be found in any other Greec author in this sense, a word nevertheless
(as all his are) as elegant and proper as may be: importing as much in things
civil, as (...) does in things natural. That which S. Basil does elegantly
call (...) is much to the same purpose. Antoninus does use the word again (but
in the Verb there, as others use it also: in the same sense, B. VIII. n 46.
speaking of the liberty of the will of man, (...) (says he) (...), etc.
Remember that thy mind, etc.

FINIS.

