AVSTINS URANIA, OR, THE HEAVENLY MUSE, IN A POEM FVLL OF MOST FEELING
MEDITATIONS for the comfort of all souls, at all times:

By S.A. B. of Arts of Ex. College in Oxford.

Aut perlegas, aut non legas.
What ever thou be, whose eyes do chance to fall
Upon this Book, read all, or none at all.


LONDON, Printed by F.K. for Robert Allot and Henry Seile, 1629.

An Apology for my Muse, that it chose this subject before any other, which
might seem more pleasing to the Times.
I Write not news of Ree, or our late Fleet
For Rochels aid; or of the States that meet
In our great present Parliament, to cure
Those wounds our dearest England does endure
For her both hid and open sins: Oh no;
It is not fit for me, who am so low,
To speak, when greater tongues are tide: but I
Bring news from Heaven, wrapped in a mystery:
The sweetest news that ever was heard; and such
That cannot choose but please: yet it is not much,
And therefore easier to be borne: In brief,
It is a remedy against every grief
Of these our present troublous times; I mean,
To those alone that cry, Unclean, unclean,
And feign would be washed white from sin, and be
Secured also from all the misery
That follows it: (those Judgments now that threat
Our Englands fall, if Mercy prove not great.)
Thus have I thought the safest way to please,
By writing what might give to all men ease.
S. A.
E Musaeo meo in Coll. Exon. in Oxonio. 26. Maij, 1628.
AVSTINS URANIA, OR, THE HEAVENLY MUSE: Being a true story of man's fall and
redemption, set forth in a Poem containing two Books: whereof one resembles
the Law, the other the Gospel:

Wherein is chiefly imitated the powerful expressions of holy Scripture: very
necessary to be read of all, both Divines and others, especially those who
labor under the heavy burden of their sins, and would feign be comforted.

By S.A. B. of Arts of Ex. College in Oxford.

1. TIM. 4.12. Let no man despise thy youth, etc.

JOHN 3.16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

ROMANS 5.19, 21. For as by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners: so by
the obedience of One shall many be made righteous: That as sin has reigned
unto death: even so might Grace reign through righteousness unto eternal
life, by Jesus Christ our Lord.

LONDON, Printed by F.K. for Robert Allot and Henry Seile. 1629.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, THE especial favorer of my Studies, Mr. Dr.
PRIDEAVX, the Kings Professor of Divinity, and the most deserving Rector of
Exeter College in Oxford, Grace and peace, etc.
Reverend Sir!
IT may happily seem strange unto you, to receive such a Present as this from my
hands: but when you have well considered it, and the occasion of it; I doubt
not, but without further wondering, you will be ready to challenge it before any
other, as your own principal due. It is not your mind, I know, that I should
here proclaim unto the world the many dutiful ties, and special engagements,
wherein I stand bound unto you; how that (next under God) I have lived in this
happy place above this four years, especially by sucking in the sweet air of
your continuing favors: and not so only, but how in a nearer kind of
reference, you have vouchsafed to take me into your own Divine Tutorage, and
honored me (beyond all desert) with the privilege of usual disputes before
your self, amongst those that were your Noble Scholars. How much these, and
the like, may serve for the illustration of your goodness, I well know not, in
that you placed your favors on so low and worthless a subject; but I am sure,
they stand with my credit for ever to remember them: for which, and for diverse
other particular respects, if I had not just occasion to present you these
first fruits of my Studies, which were nourished up in your own Garden: yet
here again I could appeal unto you, as to a common Patron, or Godfather as it
were of the Diuiner Muses. If I had made choice of any other Muse then Urania;
or if my Subject were not Divine, I would not have presumed to approach your
eyes with it, or entreat the world might know it under your Patronage. But
since all these circumstances do so happily conspire; and if these my labors
may also prove any way beneficial to Gods Church and Children by your good
approuement; let them, I beseech you, as my first conceptions, have leave to
breathe forth their sorrows to the world under your Name: Neither let it be
accounted my pride, that I seek after the vainglory of the world by being in
Print; for these, I hope, can sufficiently witness for me, that if I glory in
any thing, it is with 2. Cor. 12.9.
Paul, in my infirmities: after this manner would I have the world take notice
of me, and to amend in themselves what they find defective in me: but if any
thing herein seem praiseworthy, I would entreat all men to know, that this
came from a higher Spirit, and my self can glory in nothing of it, but by
being the Instrument. If you knew but the pains I have suffered in travel
hereof, how many precious hours and days I have detained from those sports
and vanities which are common to others; yea, how much time I have stolen from
my other private Studies (which lay of necessity on me in this place) and
sacred them only to this: and then again, when I came about it with earnest
intents, how unaptly I was disposed for it; how ready for any thing besides it;
what drowzinesse would set upon me; and when I went sometimes more happily
onwards by the strength of Gods Spirit, what Legions of evil thoughts would
suddenly interrupt me; in brief, what heavy and hard conflicts, and what a
tedious travel I have had (as God knows) in the producing of it, I dare
promise my self, it would make your yielding heart even bleed to think on it.
Had I gone about any any work of vanity, I am sure I should have had the
World, Flesh and Devil at hand to forward it: but this has showed it self to
be a work of a contrary nature, and has had all these (as erst Neh. 4.7, 8.
Nehemiah had Sanballat and his accomplices) conspirators to hinder it: But now
(thanks be to my God) after two years tedious travel, I have at length
finished it. And since it has grown up hitherto under your Tuition, I do here
also humbly commend it to you for its future preservation, and favor in
publishing it: which if you please but daine me, I dare promise, its life
shall prove so thankful unto you, as besides mine own prayers, procure you
the blessings of many other souls for preserving it. To which great favor I
shall only crave this one addition for the crowning of my desires, that I may
always retain my wonted privilege, in being ever

Your Worships faithful servant, to be commanded in the Lord Jesus, Samuel
Austin.
From my Study in Exet^r College in Oxford, this 11. of April, being the day
of our Saviors Passion: 1628.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READERS.
Good Readers!
FOr I write only to you that have, or at least desire earnestly to have a
part in that glory which is already in part, and shall shortly be fully
revealed:) I have here presented you with a birth, as far, I suppose, beyond
your expectations, as it seems, beyond the abilities of my younger years: but
howsoever, I shall entreat your kind acceptance of it, and crave you all to
foster it up in your own bosoms; for I dare warrant you in the Lord, that if
you but save it from death by your favorable warmings, it shall live to give
you all wished thankfulness. If I should but tell you of those fearful
conflicts I had in my travel of it, and my many grievous cares in nursing it
hitherto, you would surely say, it were an inhumane impiety presently to stifle
it. Pray peruse it well, and I hope, I shall not need much to speak for it; it
has tears enough of it self to enforce your pity; and is of so good a
nature, you cannot well choose but foster it. If you imagine it is too fair to
be mine, I shall not be so presumingly proud on selfe-abilitie, as quite to
deny you: for I must confess indeed, I have had such large experience of mine
own infirmities in the travel hereof, that I can attribute nothing unto my
self, but the imperfections herein, and the glory of an instrument only in
producing its better parts. I have been indeed as a common Father, as they say,
in bringing forth the matter; but the form, life and soul of it was from God
alone (the Father of life) to whose sole guiding and blessed aydance, I must
always thankfully ascribe these my better performances. When I began this
work, I intended only to treat of our Saviors Passion, but I was so led
away by that all-ruling Spirit of my God, that I ceased quickly from being mine
own man in it, and brought this to pass which now you see, Neh. 1.8.
(according to the good hand of my God upon me) both beyond mine own aims,
and natural abilities. And now, dear Christian friends, I humbly beseech you
in the Lord, for your faithful perusal of it: and may Ephesians. 1.17, 18.
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, give unto you the
Spirit of wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge of him, that the eyes of
your understandings being enlightened, ye may know what is the hope of his
calling, and what the riches of his inheritance in the Saints.

Yours ever in the Lord Jesus, S. A.
From my Study the 11. of April. 1628.
My Muse to my Censurers.
YOu that are troubled with the Dog-disease,
Pray read me over; then censure what you please.
Urania.

To that famous Nursery of Learning and Religion, my Mother Exeter College in
Oxford, all happiness.
GReat Mother of the Muses! (thou whose fame
Has long time been more glorious by the Name
Of thy Mr. Dr. P^id.
Learned Rector) let, I humbly pray,
A worthless son of thine have leave to stray
Abroad with his poor Muse a while, to sing
A timely welcome to the weeping Spring.
Let other Muses that derive their birth
From foreign Springs, or from some baser earth,
Enslaue their wits to toys of Love: but we
Must be Divine that take our births from thee:
My Muse shall sing of Heaven, and in thy praise,
Great (...), shall scorn the momentarie bays
Of perishing man's applause, which dies away
W^^h those that giue't, but she shall sing a Lay,
Wh^^e Heau'n-borne wings shall raise thy Name so hie,
(...) it live even through eternity.
The unworthiest of thy sons, S. A.

TO MY EVER HONORED FRIENDS, THOSE MOST REFINED Wits and favorers of most
exquisite learning, Mr. M. Drayton, Mr. Will. Brown, and my ingenious Kinsman,
Mr. Andrew Pollexsen (all known unto me) and to the rest (unknown) the Poets
of these times, S. A. wishes the accomplishment of all true happiness.
Austins advertisement.
MY Noblest Friends! you that derive your birth
From some thing that is more excellent then earth,
From some sweet influence, or some Deity
That lives above the base capacity
Of ignorant Spheres (those rude vntutor'd brains,
That never trauell'd farther then their Plains
To learn of ought, but Herds, and Flocks, or how
They might dispose a Cart, or guide a Plow:)
To you alone I write, what I of late
Have scene and heard; the lamentable state
Of these our latter iron times; and hence
It is I speak from sad experience:
The matter's this: Occasion did inuit
Me hence of late to take a Summers-sight
Of our farre-famouz'd London, where when I
Was come, I took an opportunity
For venting of these plaints of mine, which here
My Vran 'hath brought forth with many a tear,
And speakelesse pang of grief, with loss of time
Most precious to my soul: (O that a rhyme
So poor as this should cost so dear!) but lo,
When I would feign have let these waters flow
Abroad unto my Countrymen, I went
To see how well our Stationers were bent
To further me herein: but they reply,
Sure 'twill not take, for it is Divinity:
Poems divine are nothing worth; but if
I had portray'd a pretty Sea of grief
For some lost Mistress; or compos' a toy
Of love in verse, this would have been a Boy
Worth the conception, each would take it up
And play with it: or had I but a cup
Of strong-breath'd Satyrs mixed with spleen and gall,
And could but power it handsomely to fall
Upon some high-mans head, Oh, this would take
Even like Tobacco, each Barbours shop would make
A sale of it: or had I but the time
Neately to weaue some loose-lasciuious rhyme,
Stuffed with conceits of wantonness, Oh then
I had been called one of the Wits; for men
Must have their humors, now they say; but this
Is quite against them; every one will hiss
It off the Stage. And is it so, thought I?
Why then, it is time for our Divinity
To stir her self, and speak in Verse if she
Can ought persuade; O what a misery
Is like to fall upon this age! when men
Shall so forget themselves, as turn again
To their first veins of childishness, and will
Give any price to buy each toy of ill;
But will not give a straw for good, although
It be to save their very souls? What woe
And horror's this, when men grow desperate,
To buy damnation at so dear a rate,
To pay a price for hell, but will not give
A pin for heaven? O that my soul should live
To see such drearie days as these! But now,
Since things are so, what shall I say, or vow,
Or do to make them otherwise? Why sure,
Great friends! my present suit's to you, whose pure
And heavenly essences do plainly say,
You are Divine: let me presume to pray,
And challenge you on all those bonds that be
'Twixt God and you; 'twixt heavens eternity
In blissefulnesse, and your dear souls, that hence
You aid me on with your high eloquence,
And heau'n-commanding tenors, to reuerse
(If our Divinity can ought in Verse)
Those strong opposing humors of this age,
This wayward madness, this prepostrous rage
Of humane hearts which gape so greedily
To swallow sin, and drink iniquity
Like water (as the Job. 15.16.
Scripture speaks) but good
They will not taste so much, lest their ill blood
Should be Infected, I say, because wicked men account goodness as grievous a
plague to them, as the godly do wickedness, and therefore as carefully to be
shunned, for fear it should disturb their former course of cursed merriment,
and put them to the pains of blessed repentance, whereby they might live anew
unto God, and be saved.
infected by it, and so perchance
They might be drawn from hellish ignorance
Into the glorious light of Grace, whereby
They might be brought to heavens felicity,
Before they were aware often. O my soul!
What fury's this? How should we not control
Such stupid waywardness, when now aday
Men labor more (it seems) to find the way
That leads to hell, then ever heretofore
The Saints for heaven? O, how should I deplore
This wretched hum'rousnesse? How should I chide
My Countrymen for this, that they will abide
This cursed Achan to remain so long
Within their tents, which has done all the wrong,
Our Country has of late endured, how-ere
Some ignorant brains think otherwise. But here,
O that I might obtain but this of them,
Which is, that these my deare-wise-Countrimen
Would only duly think upon, and wey
The way wherein they go, knowing when they
Have had their filles of vanity, at last
They must expect a change, that fearful blast
Of the last Trumpe will one day Mat. 24.31. 1. Cor. 15.52.
sound, and then
That dreary doom also will fall on them,
Mat. 25.41.
Depart from me ye cursed, and they must go
Into those prisons of eternal woe,
The deepes of everlasting hell, where they
Shall be in pain beyond conceit; no day
Or instant shall give ease to them, but still
They shall drink up those poisonous drugs of ill,
Hells most reuengefull torturings, if they
Do not repent themselves while it is to day;
I mean, ere deaths black night approach. O then
Think you on this, my dearest Countrymen.
And thou, dear Drayton! let thy aged Muse
Turn now divine; let her forget the use
Of thy erst pleasing tunes of love, (which were
But fruits of witty youth:) let her forbear
These toys, I say, and let her now break forth
Thy latest gasp in heavenly sighs, more worth
Then is a world of all the rest; for this
Will usher thee to heavens eternal bliss:
And let thy strong-perswasiue strains enforce
These times into a penitent remorce
For this their sinful frowardness; and then
Heaven shall reward thee, never care for That is, the esteem, or respects of
mere carnal men.
men.
And honored Willy, thou whose maiden strains
Have sung so sweetly of the Vales and Plains
Of this our I Will, that all the men that be
Thy hearers, are enforced to honor thee,
Yea, and to fall in love with thee; I say,
Let me entreat thee to transport thy Lay
From earth to heaven: for sure thy Muses be
So good, the Gods will fall in love with thee,
As well as men: besides, it is fit thy Lays
Should scorn all Crowns, save heavens eternal Bays.
Then bid the world farewell with vid. Sydneys last Sonnet at the end of his
Arcadia.
Sydney, (he
That was the Prince of English Poesy,)
And join with me (the worst of all thy train)
To bring these times into a better strain.
And dearest Pol'sfen, last of all the three,
Which should be first by that affinity
And interest that thou have in me; I here
Entreat thy help amongst the rest, whose dear
And precious apprehensions reach so high,
As naught but heaven, or pure Divinity
Should be the subject of thy strains: for they
Are far too good e're to be cast away
On earth's base worthless vanities, which be
At best but emblems of mortality,
So soon they die, and quail away: but thine,
Thy wits, I mean, are heavenly and divine
Emblems of Euerlastingnesse, and can
Create conceits were never formed by man,
No, nor so much as thought upon, ere thou
Thy self gan'st being unto them: but now,
Since things are thus proportioned out, I pray
Come aid me with that heau'n-commanding sway
Of thy high Verse, which rather will compel
Men to be mad, then let them go to hell
In such a childish hum'rousnesse; nay, will
Enforce them to be good against their will,
If they can be so dull, or void of sense,
As not love goodness for selfe-excellence;
Whose sweet and lovely fairness at first sight
Without gainsay obtaines a sovereign right
Ore all ingenious hearts, at least if Grace
Reside in them; then nothing else takes place.
Come then, I say, dear Drayton, Brown and thou,
And all the rest that ever made a Vow
To keep the Muses sacred Laws, come here
And join with me, let neither love, nor fear
Make you prove partial, till this The ill humor which preferre^ (...) before
goodness, in (...) upon any ^ly respect^ (...)
hum'rous rage
Be banished quite from off our Englands Stage:
What shall I urge you more? or why entreat?
Your Wisdoms see the cause is wondrous great,
That craves your help; nay more, it craves the Pen
And tongue of our best Preachers, diuinest Professors.
Angels too: for men
Must not be humored thus in ill: or if
It should be so, sure, goodness then for grief
Would run away, or hide her self, when she
Should be discouraged thus, alas! and we
That honor her, should not once dare to speak,
O, 'twere enough to make our hearts to break.
Be valiant then, my friends, and let all those
That wish our England well, and hate her foes;
Be of like mind with us, yea, those that be
The Chief Governors in Church and Commonwealth, who can do most in this case.
Princes of our I Will; so shall we see
Our England flourish spite of Pope, and all
That thirst with bloody hearts to see her fall.
So Goodness shall prove Conqueror, but ill
Shall not dare show it self within this Hill
And holy Mountain of our God, which he
Preserues by special providence; and we
To see it thus, with gladsome hearts shall sing
Our thanks to God, who raised so good a King
To sit on our late David's Throne; and may
He grow as great, as good, still let us pray:
Yea, Peers, and all, join with my humble Pen,
And so let all the people say, Amen.
The true well-willer and servant of you all in the Lord Jesus, S. A.

Errata.
Page 4. verse 27. for rhus, read thus. v. 36. for entrust, r. instruct p. 7.
v. 9. for I Am, r. join. p. 8. v. 31. to say, in the beginning to be left out,
and in the end, for hapy, r. happily. p. 10. v. 39. for an Embassage, r. in
embassage p. 24. v. 24. for the, r. thy. p. 25. verse. 6. for Son, r. Sun.
p. 28. v. 18. for there, r. here. p. 32. verse. 30. for Son, r. Sun. p. 34.
v 39. for gifts, r. griefs. p. 39. v. 27. for tremble, r. do tremble. p. 41.
in the Margin, for Exodus 16. r. 19. p. 42. v. 21. for hight, r. light. p. 52.
v. 33. for hell, r. ill. p. 53. v. 39. for enough, r. enough.

AVSTIN'S URANIA: OR THE HEAVENLY MUSE.
THE CONTENTS.
FIrst my URANIA from the Spring,
Does take occasion here to sing
Our Saviors Passion: but her rhyme
Leaves that until a fitter time
Christ's passion more fully described in my second Book.
In my next book: from thence she hies
To speak of Humane miseries
By Adams fall, and how the times
Are now corrupted ore with crimes:
At length she falls with weeping eyes
To treat of mine own miseries,
Where she declares how first I fell
Away from God, and lay in Hell
As Prisoner fast, till his free Grace
Releasd me from this woeful Case:
Wherein a large dispute as twere,
Twixt God and me, she does declare
My penitence, and how I lie
As one that has deserved to dye
By laws just doom, but yet depend
On His sole Grace: Thus does she end
My former book, and lets me lie
To wait for mercies sweet Reply.
I That had sat near famous Isis shore
The space of twice twelve moons, and somewhat more,
And there had heard those Heavenly Muses sing
That use to solace by that sacred Spring;
At length I began recall my self, and thought,
What? shall I stand and hearken still for naught?
Sure no; I will be doing too, although
It cost me dear enough, much time, and woe:
Come then, URANIA, come, thou sacred Maid,
And Muse of Heaven, go onwards in the aid
Of my great God, whose sole commanding spright
Shall always guide thee in thy ways aright;
Go on, I say, in his sole strength, and sing
This dreary Canto to the weeping Spring,
A Song befitting well the time, I mean,
The Story of that lamentable Scene,
Which erst my Savior acted here, whilst He
Was yet on earth: Come then along with me,
And bear a part, come quickly on, I say,
For lo, my passions will no longer stay:
An allusion to the sorrow for the death of our late K. of blessed memory, K.
James.
No sooner can an earthen Caesar dye,
But Kingdoms flow in weeping Poesy,
Our days are nighted, and the heavens o're-hung
With sable clouds, as with compassion wrung
Of what we feel, and seeming sad to rue
Our great missehaps, distills a weeping dew
To bear us company, while all our eyes
Make silent tears to blab our miseryes:
And this the cause, we say, of dreary night,
Our Sun is set, and we have lost his Light:
Is It so indeed? And could that King of Kings,
That Humane-God, of whom the Luke 1.10.
Angel brings
Such happy Tidings, and the noblest Trains
Of Heavens Musicians warbled out their Strains,
To solemnize his Birth, (which then began
To Esai. 40.2.
preach Salvation to that Miser, Man)
Could He, I say, be crucified, and die,
Yet Man not melt into an Elegy?
Obdurate Clay! so sweet a Sun to see,
And not dissolve, but still more hardened be:
Ah cursed cruel Jews! where were yo^ Scribes
They could not write? What, blinded ^h your bribes,
As were your Watchmen? Did you (...) their eyes,
For fear they should bewray your villainies
By some sad Poem, writ with sable Tears
Upon his death? Which when the peoples ears
Had heard, and how you would shed his guiltless blood;
They needs would wish their Iere. 9.1.
heads a Water-flood,
To wash his wounds, and to bewail his loss,
Whom causeless you thus tortured on the Cross:
But, Tyrants, tell, how could you gaze on Him
With tearelesse eyes, who suff'red for your sin?
Had you a heart, and could it choose but bleed?
Or were you men, to act so vile a deed,
As murder Him, whose very wounds did weep,
To wash those sins that wounded you so deep?
Or when you would don't, I wonder, faithless Elues,
With Judas, straight you had not hanged your selves,
To see your Tragic Action; or with speed
If yet you lived, bewailed that horrid deed
In lasting Tears of penitence, and all
Turn sudden Mourners to his Funeral:
But it was not so, your infidelity
Was Luke 22.37.
fore-decreed from all eternity:
You did this not by chance, but to fulfill
The sacred Act. 2.23.
Scriptures, and resistlesse will
Of Heavens great Lawgiuer: who gave you eyes
To see and weep at others miseries:
But stubborn you perverting all to ill,
Did what you could to cross the Giuers will,
Blinded your selves, and would not see the Light,
Till forced you were by Mat. 27.45. and Luke 23.44, 45. (...) general Eclipse
or darkness at our Saviors Passion.
unexpected Night
To see by opposites; As those your kin,
Who ride in Poast the thorough faires of sin
With hood-winkt eyes, and dreaming all is well,
Never think on Heaven, until they feel a Hell:
But then too late, alas, the smarting Rod
Does make them learn a Heaven and a God!
Such ill Disciples you, whose faithless hate
Did play so long the wanton, till too late
Sad Terror taught you Lectures, Heavens and all
Did seem to check you, this Terrestrial Ball
Did Mat. 27.51
quake and tremble that it should sustain
Your selves, the Offspring of that cursed Cain:
The Temples veyle, and very Rocks were rent,
As touched with Passion, seeming to lament
Your deeds, and wanting tongue and tears to plain,
They brake their stony hearts for grief in twain:
And glorious Titan Heavens all-seeing Eye,
The sad Spectator of this Tragedy,
Withdrew it self, put on its sable weeds,
(Wherewith it does lament such dismal deeds)
And all the Romans 8.19.
Creature clad in mourning black,
Did sadly seem to mutter out it is lack:
Mean while a secret terror did invade
The hearts of all, and an unwonted shade
O're-vaild the Earth on sudden; all was Night,
And reason good, the Sun that gave you Light,
You banished from your Eyes, and would not see,
Though wrapped (alas) in rags of misery,
He came to be your object; but in vain,
He had but hate, and labor for his pain:
Just as his followers now that show his Light,
They Are Psalm. 22.3.3. and 4. sing.
overcome with hatred and Despite:
Thus did you entertain Him with the cross,
Wh^ harmless suff'red to redeem your loss:
An^ ^lessed Savior) thus with Math. 27.46. and Mark 15 34.
pitious Cry
He seemd to call on his Divinity,
For aydance in that Agony, wherein
He now lay gasping burned with the sin
Of me and all the world, until at length
His Godhead gave Him all sufficient strength,
Whereby He overcame: which done, He cried
It Is Mat. 29.50. and Ioh. 19.30.
finished, gave the ghost, and thus He died.
Here, passionary Eye, that dain'st to view
My weeping Meeter writ with sable Dew,
Come bear me company, and let thine Eye
Afford me Ink to write his Elegy:
Come weep by Art, make every tear a verse,
The saddest now that ever hung on hearse:
And solitary Muses bring your Trains
Of skilfull'st Mourners to entrust my brains
With most Patheticke tenors, that my pen
May Echo sorrow through the world again:
And skillful passions come assist me now
With sorrows sad Materials, show me how
To frame a sable Monument for Him,
Who paid his life a ransom for my Sin:
Come weeping Mourners, Muses, Passions, all;
Come solemnize with me his Funeral:
His funeral? alas, where am I led
To seek the Luke 24.5.
living thus amongst the Dead?
What Mary's passion has possessed my brain,
To hurry me thus up and down in vain
To seek his grave? I Am quite out of the way,
I have none Angel tells me, where he lay:
Or if I had, what Marble Monument
Can 1. Kings ^.27. and 2. Chr. 2.6.
reach so high as be his Continent?
Or were that Virgin Ioh. 19.41, 42.
sepulcher wherein
His Virgin body lay (so free from sin)
Before mine Eye, yet sure my mazed wit
Could never frame an Epitaph to fit
That sacred Monument? for if that I
Should write (as usual) Here He lies, I ly:
For He is Luke ^4.6.
Risen, and I Am sure is gone
To sit upon his everlasting Throne
In highest Heavens, where Saints and Angels sing
Romans 4.10, 11.
All Glory, Honor, Power, to Him as King.
And surely He is worthy: But mine Eye
Presumes too far in soaring up so high
As Reu. 6.1.
pry into the Heavens, and there to look
On him that opens that seu'n-sealed book:
I am not John, nor Exodus 33.^^, etc.
have I Moses face,
Thus to presume ascend that holy place
To gaze on God: Alas, I Am quite awry,
To seek his Tomb, or write his Elegy:
Never Poet yet presumed to cast a verse
Upon his grave: and shall I be perverse?
Did they refrain, for fear they should bespot
His vndefilednesse with Inky blot
Of natures brain, which cannot reach so hie
As feign a Grave above Heavens Canopie,
Where nothing is corrupt? And shall my brain
Presume to feign Him back on Earth again,
To bury Him with Man, as though that He
Might Psalm. 16.10.
see corruption as we sinners see?
Oh no, I may not, Art and natures Eye
Stand quite amazed at this great Mystery
Which faith alone conceaues; my feebled sense
Does want, alas, the high intelligence
Of Heavens pure Substances, which might endite
A higher strain by far then Humans write:
And here I want an Angels hallowed quill
To be my Pen, and then I want to fill
That sacred Pen, in stead of stayny Ink,
Those Crystal Nectars which the Blessed drink;
The purest drops of that e're-liuing Fount
Which issues from the Reu. 22.1.
Holy Holy Mount
Of God and of the Lamb: that so my Pen
Soaring aloft above the eyes of Men,
Might Touch his Tomb, and write an Elegy
Beyond the limits of Mortality:
All these I want, and here I fail in all,
Fool that I was, to name his Funeral:
But pardon, Savior, pardon here I crave,
That thus I erred in seeking out thy grave:
I did it not to err, but it was to show
My love unfeigned to Thee, to whom I owe
My self and all I have; and sure mine eine,
Had they but seen that sacred Tomb of thine,
Would thought them blessed to weep ere they we are dry,
Thereon to write with tears thine Elegy;
Might these my tears as Luke 7.38, 47. se^: Mary Magdalen.
Mary's show to Thee
I loved thee much, that did so much for me:
Somewhat I feign would do thee e're I dye,
That I might part with thee in misery,
Who partst with me in blisses; but it is vain,
I must receive, yet cannot pay again
Without thy help, and then my pay shall be
None other but the same 1. Chapter 29.14.
I had of Thee:
And thus thy favors have overcome me quite,
I know not what to say, or what to write:
Thy grave I may not seek, or fly so hie,
To blot thy pureness with my Poesy:
The Heavens thy Monument, the blessed Trains
Of Saints and Angels stead of mourning strains,
Proclaim thy triumphs in their sacred lays,
Where Reave. 5.11, 12.
every pious period Echoes praise;
Which sweetly seems to lull Heavens souls asleep,
And steals away their tears they cannot weep:
A fit Consort, so high an Harmony,
Or none should dare proclaim thy victory:
And, Blessed Jesus, let this soul of mine
Though now in flesh imprisoned, yet in fine
(...) with these blessed Quiristers, and sing
All honor, glory, to my God and King:
Mean while I crave, although my feeble Eye
May not stand gazing at thy Deity,
Yet teach it see thy passions, teach it see
The wondrous things which thou have done for me:
Say but the word, and this my worthless pen
Shall tell such wonders to the ears of men,
When it reports thy favors, that thy Glory
Shall be far greatned by my Infant Story:
Exodus 3.11.
For who am I, alas? my childish brain
Has nothing in it self but what is vain:
How dare I speak, or write? my Esai. 6.5.
mouth and quill
Are both alike be inked ore with ill:
My very Genesis 6.5.
thoughts are evil, all my man
Corrupted is; I neither will, nor can
The thing that's good, and yet by Thee I will
This very good I do, and cannot ill:
Here show thy power, lest, now I have begun,
I fail before the half my work be don:
Call me, as erst thy 1. Sam. ^.4^ etc.
Samuel from his sleep,
And as thy 1. Sam. 16.11, 12. and Psalm. 78.70, 71.
David from his flock of sheep,
To sing thy praises: Let my Poesy
Be as the words of Ier. 9.1, etc.
weeping Jeremy,
To pierce the stoniest heart, and to inuit
The dullest Ears attention when I write:
Thy Spirit be my Urania, to distill
Such sacred Measures into this my quill,
That every line it writes may reach a strain
Beyond the high conceits of Natures brain;
To show from whence it came; and then my Lays
Shall still be Echoes of my Makers Praise:
And when our brauest Poets chance to see
The virtue of Diuiner Poesy,
They Will change their Tenors all, and glory most,
To be the Penman of the Holy Ghost.
And now in brief, I Will show, if ought I can,
The many favors thou have done for Man;
But chiefly those thy favors since his Fall;
Nor mine, nor Moses pen can utter All:
When first my Speculations fled so hie
With Eyes of faith to see thy Deity,
My reason was overcome, and I amazed
Was forced to seek the thing at which I gazed:
I seekt, and saw't; but all I saw (alas)
GOD described according to man's apprehension of Him: Negatiuely.
Was this, there was a God, but what He was
I could not see, unless by Opposite,
And so He was a Being Infinite,
Because not finite: for His Excellence
Does far transcend our weak Intelligenc^
I saw well what He was not, for I Am sure,
He was not ought dependent or impure
As wretched Humans we; He was not ought
That felt our passions, or with curious thought
Was ever vexed for want, Deu. 10.14. Job 41.11. and Psalm 24.1. etc.
for all was His,
Who Genesis 1. ch^.
gave to all their being and their bliss:
In brief, He was not any thing that can
Be properly attributed to Man,
Or to Inferiors, which might ought imply
An imperfection, or dependency.
These Negatiues I saw, but here I stay,
I could not see the Affirmatiues, to say,
To say that this, or this He was; lest hapy I
Should seem to lessen much his Deity,
By these ^y weak assertions: But at length
It pleased this God of's goodness give me strength
To find him out, as good, He Will not deny
To those that seek him in sincerity:
He wills me Ioh. 5.39.
search the Scriptures, ouerlook
The secret volumes of that sacred Book
(Wherein (most Gracious) He vouchsafes to show
As much as Humans ought, or need to know
Concerning Him, till his Eternal Grace
Immortals us to 1. Cor. 13* 12. and 1. Job. 3.2.
see Him face to face:)
1. Cor. 13* 12. and 1. Job. 3.2.
And thither then I went, where soon as I
Had entered in, and with a mazed Ey
Had looked on Moses writ, my feeble sense
Was quite overcome at his Omnipotence:
For there I saw how first He did begin
To make the spacious Genesis 1.1, etc.
Heavens, and earth, (wherein
He placed Man as Verse. 28.
Lord to rule and sway
Over all the rest, until he fell away
By faithless disobedience to his Prince,
From whom he had his right; and ever since
He proved disloyal to the Deity,
He has been heir of naught but misery:)
But when I had reuiewd this goodly Ball
Of Earth, and Heaven, with furniture and all
Pertaining to it, as my unhappy Sire
Sometimes in Paradise, I had desire
To know beyond my reach, the matter whence
This all was made of, but my forward sense
Was quickly ouertopt: for there mine Eye
Began at first to see my misery
Within these sacred Axioms: there I saw
A newfound Generation, Which was that the World was made of a pre-existent
Ma^ter or Chaos; as Ovid: or that it was Eternal, as Aristotle, etc.
Natures law
Erst feigned was quite abolisht, all this frame
Was made of naught but nothing, for that Name
Of God Psalm. 33.9.
was all in all; till Gracious He
Willing the Creature should a partner be
In his exceeding goodness, spoke the Quicquod erat, Deus illud erat, etc.
Lermaeus in his Translation of Barta's Week.
word,
The earth, and Heavens were made, and all accord
To do his will, who wills what ere he lists,
And when He wills, there is nothing that resists:
For He is Lord of all, and all within
This Universe has nothing but from Him;
For all was nothing, till it pleased him say,
Let it be so; and should He take away
Psalm. 104.9.
His face a while, behold, this goodly frame
Would turn into that nothing whence it came.
And (silly wretch) There began to view
My Nakedness, which made me sad to rue
My poor estate, that durst not write one Line,
To tell the world that this, or this was mine:
For I was not mine own, but at his will
Who gave me all I had, besides mine ill:
And this my Parents gave, when erst their eyes
Were op't (as mine) to see their miseries:
A cursed gift, alas, but yet it was all
(Poor Souls) they had, after their hapless fall:
For soon as they had trespast on that Tree,
Which God forbad them or Ea^e, in the Text: Genesis 2.17.
touch, their simple fee
In Paradise was lost, their former state
Was voyded quite, both Adam and his Mate
Were Genesis 3 last.
tumbled out at doors, and all they had
Was taken away, only they kept the bad:
And thi's that cursed portion which they left
Unto their Issues, who no sooner reft
Of sc. first Integrity.
what their Parents had, but as in spite
They Would vowed to war against the Lord of might,
From whom they had their being, all in rage
They 'gan at once to rush upon the Stage:
Took up their Fathers Action, laid a plot
To make complete what Adam acted not:
A Theater of all Mankind after Adams Fall, described in their several
conditions.
Successively they come, each enters in
Bedight with various Robes of Scarlet Sin,
To act their several ills; each takes his place,
The greatest he that is the least by Grace:
Here comes a Tyrannizing Psalm. 2.2.
King, and there
A flattring Courtier lulls him in the ear:
Your Majesty is wise to lop away
Such pearching Twigs as these, that durst gainesay
Your high decrees; for be they good or ill,
It is enough for Kings to say, We will.
Next enter in the Nobles, Dukes and Earls,
Vicounts and Lords bedeckt with gold and pearls,
All draw their swords in fury, and combine
1. Swearers and Blasphemers and Curse^s.
To fight against that One-Eternall-Trine:
This vomits out such horrid oaths, and words,
As pierce far deeper then a thousand swords:
2. Honor abused.
That sends an Embassage, an angry frown,
To tell the weaker they must needs go down,
'Cause he is rising higher, and twere best
They murmur not, if that they mean to rest:
Some others that have got a Treasury 3. Usury, bribery, and the like
obliquities.

By lawless means, Extortion, Usury,
By bribry or the like, and with the same
Have bought themselves an honorable Name, 4. Pride, especially odious to God
and Man.

Look up aloft, and scorn to stoop so low,
As look on them whom they were wont to know:
It Is high disgrace they think, to cast an eye
Away on such as are in misery:
And if poor souls for grief of heart they say
The Men are proud, twere good they run away:
For they will have their tongues that dare to prate
So lauishly on Men of their Estate:
They Will force them eat their words, and what they see,
They must not say it is ill, although it be,
If touching them; but it is a Mystery,
Or some high point of their Nobility:
Thus pride the hatefulst of the rest is fled
So high, that it begins to take a head
Above our reach, and Esai. 2.12, 13, 17.
proudly seems to call
Some heavy Judgment on this wicked all.
Scarce these were silent, but there came in haste
Three roaring Knights, Each bragging of the waste
That he had made: this tells how he had spent
Some three or four hundred pounds of rent
Per Annum, on his whores, his hawks, his hounds; 5. Prodigality in whoring,
hunting, drinking, eating, carding, dicing.

And thus proclaims how he bad sold his grounds,
(The Right his Father left him) all to buy
A thousand tricks to nourish luxury:
Another boasts that he had thrown away
So much upon the cards and diceing play,
As ere he knew Godliest of them all
Bestow in building up an Hospital:
It Was I, said one, did best, another, I,
The last would needs be first in villainy;
Thus all would have the Mastery, and say
It Was I that wan the glory of the day.
Next follow in the Gentry, all bedight
With armor of unrighteousness, to fight
Against their Lord and Maker; every Lim
Had vowed it self a servant unto Sin:
Then come the vulgar, and the rusticke crew
With Bills and Staves, and Malberts to pursue
As Mat. 26.47.
erst the wicked Jews, and still they add
Some ten times worse unto the former bad:
Thus Kings and Nobles, all the hateful train
Meet here at once, and take their oaths again,
To actuate at full ere they had don
The unhappy Scene that Adam had begun.
Here might you see, (if that a humane Eye
Could tearelesse gaze upon a Tragedy
Filled with such horrid Actions) every part
Set forth with newfound evils, Satan's Art
Was eminent in all, they played so well,
That every one could act himself to Hell:
How far the men of these corrupt times exceed Adam in their sins.
Adam was nothing, had he been but here
Amongst this rout, it scarsly would appear
That ere he did a fault, his lowly lapse
Would never been heard amongst these thunderclaps:
And should I speak, sure twere not much amiss,
His ill was good in reference to this;
For he at first, it seems, had but a will
To know the diffrence twixt the good and ill,
And sure his aims in this were good to stray,
If that he had not sinned to disobey:
But when he would erred thus, his opened eye
No sooner saw, then saw his misery:
This was his recompense, his knowledge taught
Himself to know that he was worse then naught:
But when he would seen his fault, I do not doubt,
His eye again wept tears to wash it out:
But these had other aims, their imbred spite
Was only darted against the Lord of might,
To pull him down from Heaven, as if that they
Could authorize what ever they did or say,
With Psalm. 12.^^
Who shall us control? Their wicked will
Did aim at nothing else but what was ill:
Good was a Paradox, as strange to them
As sin at first to Adam was; for when
They Would knowledge once of ill, they never had
The least desire to know what was not bad;
As Adam on the contrary to know
(Who knew alone the good) what was not so:
They'ue found a stranger Art to know, for still
They learn new diff'rences twixt ill and ill:
And just as Adams heart was set on fire
To know his Novelty, so they desire
To know these ills which erst they never knew,
And seem by sinning to make evil new:
Old ills are out of date, they highly scorn
To wear the threed-bare evils which were worn
By their Progenitors, they would have it known,
The evils that they were are all their own:
And they have found new fashions out to fit
The various Genius of each wicked wit
That seeks for Novelties, they are so complete
In ill, they cannot sin without conceit:
Twere base, they think, to act a common sin,
Unless they shut some twenty more therein
By their Re-Acts, and so when they have don't,
To send it out again with Comments on it:
The dullest brain that never yet had wit
To do least good, shall scorn but he will commit
An ill as well as any of them all,
That studied sinning since old Adams fall:
He Will show you ills which never yet were known,
And without lying swear they are his own:
Thus cursed Man does do his best to fill
The woeful measures of his Fathers ill:
Sin ouerflowes already, yet in spite,
They feign would have their Actions infinite,
Would time permit; O had they eyes to see
The dismal Issues of their misery!
Here Adam could instruct them, but (alas)
Their hearts are stones, their Esaias 47.4.
brows rebellious brass,
They will not turn aside, it is vain to speak,
They scorn to how, before they needs must break:
They Are always digging deeper to invent
Some newfound malice against the Omnipotent:
They Are always eating the forbidden tree,
And yet with Adam will not learn to see
Their wretchedness; but think that all is well,
Till they are falling headlong into Hell;
From whence there is no return, but they must be
The Subjects of Eternal misery:
The examination of my self.
And here, alas, I Would scarsly drawn mine eye
From sadly gazing on this Tragedy,
But with reflection I began to look
Within the secret volumes of the book
Of this mine own estate; where soon as I
Had looked, I read a Map of misery
Described by my faults: for lo, within
I saw enwrapt a little world of sin:
First I began with weeping eye to see
From whence I did derive my Pedigree;
And when I Would seen that I was Adams son,
I thought upon the deeds that I had don,
To see my Reference to him, and there
I saw indeed that I was Adams heir:
Heir of his ills, and of his misery,
Which he bequeathd to his Posterity,
When first he fell away; for since that Time
We all had equal portions in his Crime:
And it was his will confirmed by his Deed,
To multiply his sin, as well as Seed:
I saw, alas, how I had gone astray
In Adams path, and learnd to disobey
Without a Schoolmaster, I saw my will
Inclinable to nothing else but ill:
Sometimes I saw there did a holy fire
Insinuate my soul, and my desire
Was thoroughly ravished with a love of good;
But suddenly there comes a freezing flood
Of fleshy thoughts, which quickly overcame
The aspiring Motions of that sacred flame:
My courage slackt, my forward-seeming zeal
Has hanging wings, a drowzinesse 'gins steal
Ore all my thoughts, and seems to dispossess
My soul of that new glympse of happiness.
And here no sooner were mine eyes bereft
Of those sweet Sun-shines by the cloudy theft
Of imbred dulnes; but me thinks I see
Another good more pleasing unto me
Then erst the former was, which does affect
My sense so much, that straight my Intellect
Is carried quite away, I know not how
To do my passions homage, and allow
With willing blindednesse, to give consent
In doing what my reason never meant.
And thus, alas, my poor Intelligence,
Which erst was high commander of the sense,
Is now disscepterd quite, and led away
As thrall to passion, forced to obey;
Where once it did command, and must approve
For good, what ere the senses please to love.
Thus miserable wretch I run along
Still aiming at the right, but hit the wrong:
My senses are corrupted, heart and all
Have drawn infection from my Fathers fall:
And as that happy Mat. 25.16.
Steward skild to thrive,
Did add unto his Talents other five,
To show his frugalnesse, so may I write,
But in a case, alas, quite opposite:
He did increase his good, but h^plesse I
Have added to my sin and misery,
A rhousand talents more then Adam left
To me, and yet I added none by theft;
For they were all mine own, I must confess,
The bitter fruits of mine unrighteousness:
I thought it not enough to have from him
The Originary habit of my sin,
But needs I would be sinning too, to add
Some Actuals to the Originals I had:
And here I wrought so well, that I could say,
My labors had prevented much the day:
For ever the Noontide of my life was come,
I could have truly said my Task was done:
I wanted not an ill to add to it,
To make it greater, though I might commit
Some more (perchance) the like, to multiply
The woeful actions of my Tragedy:
Thus in unhappy thriftines I grow
From ill to ill, from misery to woe:
But here is my hell, alas, I cannot see
Before I Am forced to feel my misery:
I run along with senseless drowsines,
The alluring maze of sin, and wickedness,
Which seems as twere a Paradise to me,
Still offering fruit of that forbidden Tree,
Full Genesis 3.6.
pleasing to mine Eyes, so good a meat
In show, I cannot choose but take and eat:
But when alas, I Have swallowed down the pill,
My Conscience 'gins to tell me I am ill:
Then, not before, it wakes me from my sleep,
And gives me eyes to see, but not to weep
At mine unhappiness; what greater grief
To see ones wounds, not able beg relief?
To have a sore disease, not feel the smart,
Are premises of Death: the stony heart
That sees his ill, yet does not melt within,
Portends it is frozen in the dregs of sin:
Even such my woeful case (alas) while I
Go wandering on this maze of vanity;
I run into a thousand ills with ease,
There Is nothing seems to hinder, or disease
My goings on in these, but all is well
Till I am come even to the gates of Hell:
For when I Have sinned, me thinks a lump of Lead
Lies heavy on me, I am thoroughly dead
And cannot feel my self, I cannon feel
Whether my heart be made of flesh or steel:
And yet again me thinks, I feign would weep
To moan my self; but then I am asleep:
My grief is such, it will not let me see
That I am sick, till dead in misery:
A secret dullness does possess my brain,
I needs would stir my self, but all in vain,
My life of Grace is gone away; but then
I look behind me, feign I Would out again
From this my dismal Labyrinth, wherein
I now am wandering on from sin to sin:
But when I turn me backward, there, alas,
I see the way so strait, I cannot pass;
I look besides me then, turn all about,
But still I Am clogged, I see, and cannot out.
Here comes the World to meet me in the way,
And calls me fool, that thus I Would seem to stray
From out her paths; quoth she, You Are quite undone,
To seek for goodness: would you be my son,
Or have preferment? Go^, you are unwise
To make a conscience, or to be precise:
I Will teach you better learning; get you skill
To flatter well, and do what ever is ill;
Or to be plain, never look me in the face,
If that you wander after new-come Grace.
Then comes the flesh, and offers to mine eye
A thousand sweets; and who is 't would deny
Such goodly proffers? which I must not have,
If I Will not back again, and be made slave
To sin and wickedness; but if I will,
I shall have freely all the goods of ill.
Then Satan comes, my grandest enemy,
To draw me back again to vanity
By his bewitching spelles; he slyly looks
Into my thoughts, and then he baits his hooks
With what most likes me: but he represents
Mine eyes at first with thousand discontents
That lie in goodness straites; he makes me see
The fearful image of my misery:
As Soon as ever I enter, lo, my heart
Begins to beat, my wounds begin to smart,
And new-felt tortures touch me to the quick,
Thus goodness gives me eyes to see I Am sick:
But if I Will further yet in good, he tells,
My labor is in vain, for he has spelles
Will draw me back again, and then 't were best
I go with him, or else I shall not rest
One day in quiet. Here he 'gins to show
The many wants, the miseries, and woe
That follow goodness heels, and there I see
A thousand other blocks that hinder me:
Here wicked thoughts disturb me; there again
I feel the gripings of my new-come pain:
Here pleasures dainties come inuit mine eyes
To gad abroad on thousand vanities;
I swallow up her cates, but then I find,
Though honey to my mouth, yet in my mind
They seem as gall and wormwood: thus I see
I Am daily eating fruits of Adams tree;
And thus (alas) the more I would be good,
I always see the more I am with-stood:
But if I Will on with Satan, all is well,
There Is nothing hinders then; the way to hell
Is wondrous pleasing: first, he shows to me,
There Is neither want, nor woe, nor misery
Within his Paradise; the path is fair,
The walks delightsome, and so sweet an air
As heart can wish; for pleasures do attend
The walkers all along, even to the end.
My relapse.
I heedlesse enter in, and give consent
To go into my quondam prisonment:
A prisonment? oh no; I run at will,
I have a thousand ways to walk in ill,
Where Is erst I had but one in good, and now
I run about, and live I care not how:
I Am senseless of my former ills, and here
I can offend, yet never need to fear:
Sin where, or what I will; me thinks I feel
No more, then though my heart were made of steel.
Mine enemies and I am friends, for they
Companion me along in all my way,
Whilst I am straying thus: but if I turn
Aside to good, my heart begins to burn,
And they are vexing me; I feel again
The sad reuiuals of my former pain:
"Sure then said I, He that would needs be good,
"Shall never keep himself in S^. in the mirth of the world.
merry mood,
As this world goes. Then Goodness here God b'wy,
If this be good to live in misery*
I Will none of you, no, rather I Will be ill,
If that be so to do what ever one will
Without control, to run so sweet a race,
I care not I, how far I go from Grace:
And thus I yield, alas, and thus am led
As willing captive, down unto the dead.
My Vocation, or Calling from God, after my fall, and captivity to fame.
But here behold, when I had quite gi'n over,
And strength was gone, and I could fight no more;
When Satan by his Politician-spell
Had bound me fast unto the Jaws of Hell,
As in a slumber, straight me thinks I hear
A living Trumpet rounds me in the ear,
With, Silly man, awake, Lo, I am He
That out of nothing first created thee,
Even like Genesis 1.27. Eccles. 7.29.
my self in holiness; but thou
Have sought out new inventions, car'st not how
Thou disobey'st my voice; thy foolish eye
Has wandered after naught but vanity
Even from thy Youth; yet nothing is amiss
Thou think, because thou have a seeming bliss:
Fondling, thou art deceived; thy feeble sense
May happily soothe thee, seeming to dispense
With these thy errors; but my purer eye
Both sees thy hidden sins and misery.
Up, drowzie Soul, awake; have thou forgot
Whence thou had being, as thou had it not?
Where are thy quondam speculations? Where
Is now that Eagle-eye of faith, while're
That gazed upon the Sun, and climbed so hie
The steepy mountains of Heavens canopie,
To apprehend a God? Come, let me see,
Whether thy bastard eyes can gaze on me:
'Twas I that took thee from Ps. 22.9, 10.
thy Mothers womb,
And ever since preserved thee from thy tomb,
Where thou wast often falling: and 'twas I
That guided thee with my ne'r-sleeping eye
Of Providence: but thou Ps. 32.8, 9.
like Horse or Mule,
Did always make vagaries from my Rule,
Till I was glad restrain thee by my Bit,
Affliction (that which taught 2. Chron. 33.12.
Manasses wit.)
'Twas I that fed thee with my choicest meat,
With purest milk, with finest of the wheat:
For these, and all are mine; yea, every day
Can tell my favors; every night can say,
'Twas I that did Psalm. 3.5. and 4.9.
sustain thee, and 'twas I
That have been with thee from thine infancy,
With many feeling comforts, which did tell,
While thou wast in my favor, all was well:
Then all indeed was well, but now I see,
Thou playst the truant, run'st away from me,
As wanton Asses use their Dams, when they
Have sucked their fill, they kick and run away.
Go, Wanton, go; keep on thy foolish race,
Till thou have run thy self quite out of Grace,
As others out of breath; I give thee leave
To see how well thou can thy self deceive:
An apt ^imile.
As when the tender Mother steps aside,
And lets her infant go without a guide;
It straggles in and out until it falls,
And breaks a shin or brow: but then it calls,
Good mother, come and help; and she must run,
Or else the weeping infant is undone:
So have I dealt with thee, I left thee go
To seek thy will, to wander to and fro,
In this thy maze of vanity, till thou
Had done more harm then broken shin or brow,
Thy falls were greater far, for every one
Did show thou wast a Rebel, not a Son:
Yet as a Father, I with pitying hand
Did often raise thee up again to stand:
But thou more childish still, even from on high
Would fall so low, thou wast not able cry:
And such is now that dismal case, wherein
Thou lie thus senseless in the deep of sin;
Where I could justly leave thee to thy will,
Until thou had thy recompense of ill,
In Lakes of burning Revel. 21.8
brimstone, which do fry
That damned rout* whose Mark. 9.44.
worm shall never die.
But I a God of Exo. 34.6, 7.
mercy am, and show
A thousand favors where I nothing ow.
Exo 33.19. Romans 9.15.
I favor whom I favor; and I give
My graces freely: whom I will, shall live.
Then, miserable man, awake, and see
The wondrous things that I have done for thee:
And now bring forth thy arguments, for I
Will here dispute it with Humanity.
Job. 38.3.
Gird up thy loins, and she thy self a man;
Or bring thy new distinctions, if they can
Plead for thy righteousness; here let me see,
I Job 38.3.
will demand, come thou and answer me.
Gods expostulacion, Job 38.4, 6, etc.
Where wast thou, when I first began to frame
This earthly Round? and what was then thy name?
Or can thou tell, who laid the cornerstone
Of this foundation, when there yet was none?
And where were then thy footsteps? What wast thou?
If thou have understanding, tell me now.
I see thou art confounded: stupid sense
Stands quite amazed at such intelligence.
Come, I will show thee; Ere this goodly Ball
Had being, I my self was all in all,
As erst I told thee by that sacred Writ
Of faithful Moses, Psalm. 103.7.
whom I did permit
To see my glorious Acts; and by his pen,
To tell my wonders to the sons of men.
I had no creatures then; for solely I
Took perfect solace in selfe-Deitie.
I needed not a help; for all was mine:
And all this All, was nothing but Divine.
But afterward, When, and how all things were created.
with time I did begin
To make this Universe, and all therein,
As I had fore-determined; to show
How far my boundless goodness meant to flow.
All were partakers of it; all could say,
That were the works of every several day,
We all are good; what need we further go
To tell you why? Our Genesis 1.31.
God has named us so.
And thee, O man, (most thanklesse of the rest)
I freely made to be my chiefest Guest,
And Steward in this All: I gave thee life,
Which I denyde the Elements, (whose strife
Resembles brethrens hatred) and the Stone,
And growthlesse Minerals; for they had none.
And then I gave thee Sense, which I denyde
To Trees and Plants, and whatsoever beside
Bears not the name of Animal. And then
I gave (what sole was proper unto men)
To distinguish it from intuitiue reason: because we say, that God and the
Angels are also reasonable; but it is Ratione intuitiu^, not discursiua, as
Divines say.
Discursiue Reason, which I did deny
To brutish beasts. I caused thee O^ homini sublime dedit, ^oelumque tut^
iussit, etc. Ovid. Meta^.
look on high
Toward me thy God, to meditate and see
Those wondrous things that I had done for thee.
And more, because I Would make thee wondrous fair,
I did Genesis 2.7.
inspire thee with a sacred air
Of everlasting life; that thou could say,
I once had privilege to live for aye.
But would thou vainly eleuate thy head,
To seek the stately Palace, or the Bed,
The Chair of State, or the delightsome Clime
Which thou possess'dst before the womb of Time?
Or would thou know thy being, and what thou wast
Before that Genesis 1.3. Gods free goodness notable in preferring us before
other creatures.
Fiat, yet my Word was past?
Fool, I will tell thee, do but answer me
What Palaces in no place situate be?
Such Palaces, Bed, Chair, and such a Clime,
Thou did possess before the womb of Time.
And for thy self, since needs thou will presume
To fly so lofty with so base a plume,
As seek thy being? then behold thy nest
Which thou bewray'st, thou wast a beast at best:
For you alike both nothing were; and than
Tell me the diffrence 'twixt a beast and man,
When All a nothing was. Here, Idiot, see
The wondrous things that I have done for thee.
'Twas not thy goodness; for thy self had none,
No more then Beasts, or Vegetals, or Stone:
For you were nothing, all alike to me,
That caused me thus to fix my love on thee,
Or set thee above the rest; but 'twas my will
And pleasure thus to do, and so fulfill
What I had fore-decreed, that men might know
How far the currents of my bounty flow:
For I am bound to none, but all to me.
Here see the favors I have done for thee!
But when I had created thee as Genesis 1.28.
Lord
Over all my household, who with one accord
Became as ready servants to thine hand,
And gave obeisance when thou did command.
As some Mat. 25.14, etc. A fit Simile.
great Master going far away
To foreign Countries, telling not the day
Of his return, commends his goods and ware
To the disposure, and the thriuing care
Of his chief Steward, to employ the same
With greatest gains under his Masters name,
Until he come again; but then he finds,
That all his goods are left unto the winds;
His servant plays the unthrift, Luke 12.45, 46.
spends away
He cares not what, never dreaming of the day
Wherein his Master comes; but now at last
He comes indeed, but when he sees the waste
The careless Steward made, without delay
He reaues him of his office, takes away
His goods and honors from him, and the man
He shackles fast in prison, till he can
Make satisfaction, where he justly lies
To suffer penance for his luxuries.
Or as the haughty Rabbis of this Time
Which grow so fast in that adult'rous clime
Of superstitious Rome (and some there be,
O England, that have residence in thee;)
Who take the wealth I gave them for the poor,
(Christ's members here on earth) and to restore
The brokenhearted, such as Orphans be
That languish in extremes of poverty,
Or other griefs; and Gal 6.10.
as my servant says,
To feed especially my house of Faith:
And glut their coffers with 't, or throw't away
In gaudy days, in meats and rich array,
To pamper up the flesh, and to maintain
The proud conceptions of a whorish brain:
While these poor souls (seeming with silent cries
By tears and sighs to tell their miseries,
Where Is else they durst not speak) are almost dead,
Some wanting raiment, others wanting bread.
But lo, the Day of reckoning comes, and then
The Master will return unto these men
To see their stewardships, but when he finds
Their Talents thus consumed, he takes and binds,
And Mat. 25.30, 41.
casts them with a curse from out his sight,
Into the pit of everlasting night,
Where they have justly thrall'd themselves to s^y,
'Cause Prodigals they'ue nothing left to pay.
Even so, O Man, I dealt with thee; for I
Did give thee all thou have, to glorify
My Name therewith: but thou, to cross my will,
Have spent away my Talents all in ill.
Those eyes I gave thee to behold and see
The eyes right use.
The wondrous works that I had done for thee,
To look on thine own miseries, and then
By due reflections lift them up again
To see my wondrous mercies, which would give
Eternal solace to thy soul, and drive
Base worldly objects quite away; and this
Would sweetly lead thee to my Land of bliss,
Had thou but followed it; for this would keep
The liuelesse soul from that Lethean sleep
Of carnal drowzinesse (the Hell wherein
They live that place their paradise in sin)
This would have kept thee in so sweet an aw
Of me, thou would not dare to break my Law,
Thy love would be so great; and thy delight
Would only be to walk my ways aright:
Sometimes in pity-thou would send thine eye
Abroad to those distressed souls that lie
In deepes of discontents, that thou might be
A fellow-partner in their misery;
To Romans 12.15
weep with them that weep, and to compart
With every one that has a broken heart;
And this indeed would prove so good a pill,
In purging out the relics of thine ill,
That nothing could annoy thee* for thine eye
Would scorn to look so low as v^^itie,
Whose Basliske-sight infects the heart, and kills
The very soul with thousand poisonous ills.
But as those windows that admit the light
Into the rooms of former drowzie night:
Such would thy seers be, an opened place
To give admittance to the Son of Grace,
Whose sacred beams would quickly dispossess
That great Ill-willer to thy happiness,
The Prince of darkness, and withal expel
Those drowzie clouds, which made thy house a hell
To intertaine him in: and when thy sight
Had but a glimpse of that eternal Light,
Thy soul with Eli, throwing down the cloak
Of cloggy flesh, which always strives to choke
Thy better thoughts, would quickly soar on high
To that fair City of eternity,
Where I have special residence, and there
When thou had gazed awhile, that cloudy care
Of earth, and earthly things would steal away,
As fearing much to interrupt the day,
Which I JEHOVAH gave thee; and thine eye
Would still be reading true Divinity
To thy aspiring soul, until it came
To be indeed Professor of my Name
In those celestial Schools, there to possess
My Ioh. 14.2.
Mansions of eternal happiness.
Thus, wretched soul, had thou but used aright
Those windows which I gave to be a light
Unto thy Intellect, thou had not bin
So fearfully inclouded thus in sin:
But thou, alas, as careless of my will,
As Luk 12.15. The eyes how corrupted.
he that served his Master best in ill,
Made havoc of my favors, took'st those eyes,
And spent'st them both away on vanities,
To cherish up thy flesh, and to maintain
Those bastard issues of thy wanton brain:
Nor did thou care for eyes, unless to see
Which were the pleasingst paths of vanity
Wherein to walk, that when thou would had thy fill
Of this, and that, and of the other ill,
To look about for new: and thus thine eye
Did always glut thee with variety
Of newfound evil objects, till at last
Thy sight was gone, for thou had made such waste
Of it in ill, that now it could not see
To do thee good in deepes of misery.
And as thine eye, so have thou spent away
Thy other senses, all are gone astray
From doing what I would, and what I Would not,
All the senses of man corrupted.
I Am sure thy Lethargy has not forgot
To do with special care; as if thine ill
Had been of purpose to oppose my will,
Which gave thee leave to will; yet this, not all,
Thy malice is not done, thou have a gall
To vomit out within: the total man
Within and out does do the best it can,
The corruption of the inward faculties.
To war against my will: within I see,
That all thy faculties corrupted be:
Thine understanding, guided by thine eye,
Does judge of nothing good but vanity,
According to the sense; thus underneath
A seeming-sweet, thou eat'st the gall of death.
I see thy thoughts Genesis 6.5.
all evil from thy youth,
Conceiving naught, but (Issues of thy Ruth)
Those Twins of sin and death: and when within
Thou have conceived that ugly Monster, sin,
I see without, thy members all attend,
As ready Midwiues, striving who shall send
It forth into the world, or who shall be
The second parents of thy bastardie.
I seek thy heart; but find congealed blood,
Or in its room ought else that is not good;
A piece of deadned flesh, a senseless stone;
Or all I find is this, that thou have none.
I look within, alas, but this I find,
There is no goodness durst approach thy mind:
The whole man corrupted.
All is so full of ill, without I see
There Is true allegiance to impiety.
From Esaias 1.6.
top to toe, from sole of foot to head,
I look, alas, but all thy all is dead.
Thus wretched man, thou'st lauish't all away
In vanity, never thinking of that day,
Wherein thy Master, I, should come and see,
How well those Talents which I gave to thee,
Had been bestowed. But now, behold, I come
In justice to exact, what thou have done
With these my goods: Where are thy Ears, and Eyes,
With all those other parts and faculties
That lie without? the Senses, and the rest?
And where are those within (which were the best)
Thy hallowed heart and memory? And where
Are now the virtues of that living air,
Which first I did inspire thee with, whereby
Thou had Genesis 1.26.
resemblance of the Deity
In holiness? Alas, poor soul, I see
Where all these are, and need not ask of thee:
I know thy ways full well, my watchful eye
Does still pursue thy steps, and does descrie
Thy secret'st paths; Psalm. 139.11, 12.
the veyles of darkest night
Can never hide thy actions from my sight:
For day and night are both alike to me,
Although perhaps I seemed to wink at thee,
As though I saw thee not; but I indeed
Took notice of thy diligence and speed,
In following after vanity; and saw
The little care thou had to keep my law:
That never touched thy heart of all the rest:
For thou had sold away thy Interest
Of willing what was good; that now thy will
Might be a freeman in the ways of ill.
Thus, Miser, art thou fallen off from me,
By eating fruit of that forbidden tree,
Which Satan did entice thee to; and now
Thou'st left me once, I see, thou car'st not how
Thy days are spent, but with thy fathers curse,
You Are adding still to former evils worse;
As though indeed true happiness had bin
Within these vales of misery of sin.
I Am quite forgot of thee, thy thanklesse sense
Is grown so stupid, that it feels not whence
It had it self. Thy graceless memory
Has stuffed thy Luke 2.7.
Inn so full of vanity;
I cannot have a Stable-roome, wherein
My Residence might work away thy sin:
But Satan's now thy chiefest guest, I see,
And he alone is all in all with thee.
Goodness is banished; thou have bid farewell
To me and it: O could thou see the hell
Wherein thou art, then am I sure, thine eye
Would fall a weeping straight; thy misery
Would make thee turn another leaf, and look
Within the sacred Records of my Book,
Where thou would quickly learn to see thy loss,
And then in haste return by weeping-crosse,
To me, thy God and Maker: and unless
I pity thee, thou dyest in distress:
For lo, the reckoning day is come, and now
Yield there thy Talents up, and tell me how
I have been glorifide by them and thee,
As was thy duty. But, alas, I see
Thou now art speechless; all is spent away
To pleasure Satan, and to disobey
My high behests. Go, faithless Steward, hence,
Let him that was thy Master, recompense
Thy wicked labors: Matthew* ^5. 30, 41.
Get thee from my sight,
Into that prison of eternal night,
Where Is nothing else but howlings, fears, and cries*
The Guarduants of expresselesse miseries,
The bitter fruits of sin, the recompense
Of those that weigh their pleasures by the sense:
And here is the freedom which thou needs would have,
To be in hell an everlasting slave
And where are now thy feigned friends? Oh, see
If ever they will any thing for thee,
To do thee good; now let them show their skill:
Sure, all their good is nothing else but ill:
For all they will, is ill; and all they can,
Is this, to work the overthrow of man:
And herein they will do their best for thee;
But goodness has its being all from me,
These are their comforts, these their best reliefe^,
They Will daily give additions to thy griefs*
First, Satan he will accuse thee; Vanity
Will show it self as hateful to thine eye,
As erst 'twas pleasing; and thy flesh will be
As burdens laid on man in misery.
All will prove broken r^eds to thee, or worse;
They Will all subscribe to ratify thy curse.
Thus, Miser, have thou brought thy self to Hell,
Where Justice doomes thee lastingly to dwell
In horrid sadness, and despairingly
To live a dying life, yet never dye.
Here, thou deplored, whither will thou stray
For comfort now? There Is nothing good will stay
To bear thee company: no hills will be
So kind in these extremes to fall on thee:
But dismal horrors, discontentednesse*
Despairing-thoughts, and gloomy-heauinesse:
These will attend thee faithfully, and these
Will do their utmost all to do thee ease.
But all their utmost is, as if a man
Quite froze with cold, looking so pale and wan,
As scarce thou could discern he was alive,
Should have a cup of water to revive
His so benumbed soul; and this would be
To kill a man away from misery:
Or were it so with thee, 'twere somewhat well,
Could they but kill thy soul, and so thy hell
Should be extinguished presently: for then
There would be hope of freedom yet again
From those thy tortures. But, alas, I see
These are impossibles, and cannot be;
They cannot kill that transcendentall breath,
Unless it be by an immortal death,
Which never dies: so though they use their skill,
And always kill thee, yet they will never kill.
And whither now; O, whither will thou fly
For solace in these deepes of misery?
All worldly helps are gone; thy feigned friends
Prove now as 'twere so many hellish fiends,
To vex thy soul. Thus may thou seek (in vain)
For remedies, but to increase thy pain.
And marvel not, distressed man, to see
That thou have won a hell of misery:
What could thou else expect, when thou would stray
From me, who am the true and living Way
To sauing^health; and made so light to change
My hallowed Paths, to have the freer range
In Satan's mazie ways? For all is Hell,
VVheree'r thou go away from me to dwell.
With me alone is life; and in mine Or presence. Psalm. 16.12.
Eye,
There stands the fullness of felicity
With endless pleasures: but from out my sight,
There are those Mat. 25.30.
horrors of eternal night,
VVhereto thou'st brought thy self; and whence I see
Thou can not get away, unless by me.
O thou forsaken! whither do thou run
To seek the shadows thus, and leave the Sun?
Come, look on me thy (...). ^.4, 5.
Light: O come, arise,
And see. Alas! but thou have lost thine eyes,
And art not able see, or rise, or go;
Unless I say the word, It shall be so.
Gods first free rest^^ration of man.
Then be it so, O miserable man;
Arise, and I Will be thy Physician:
Here do I give thee life again; and here
I render thee those faculties, while-ere
Which thou had lost; and here I let thee see,
How merciful I was to pity thee.
But, Miser, come, and let thy weeping eye
Reflect awhile upon that misery,
VVhereto thou had enthralled thy self; and then
Shake off thy dreary tears, and come again
To take thy solace in this sweet estate,
Which now I Have placed thee in, to contemplate
On all my former favors, and to see
Those wondrous things that I have done for thee.
Lo, here I give thee leave to speak, and now
Think well upon thy quondam ways, and how
Thou'st played the Prodigal, and spent away
Those Talents which I gave thee to defray
Thy duties here on earth, and to increase
Thy better treasures in this time of peace:
That when I came to thee, thou might restore
My Graces up with many thousands more;
To show the zealous care thou had to pay
So good a Creditor. Now come and say,
If thou can plead excuse, here speak it free:
Job 38.3.
I have demanded, come and answer me.
But here, behold, when I had heard the sound
Of this reviving Trumpet to rebound
Within the hollow cauerne of mine ears,
As one distracted with unwonted fears,
I suddenly began wake, and from my sleep,
I know not how, I was enforced to weep.
A fit Simile from a dream which I had in the Town of Totnes in D^^on, 1623.
As once I well remember on a time,
When erst I was within that happy Clime,
VVhereon the beauteous breasts of Albion stand;
And therein, where great Brutus first did land
On this our I Will; I mean, fair Totnes shore,
(Where Riches Usury much used in Totnes.
Lodestone draws the golden store
By Tennes, and Hundreds; would my Pen could say,
She is as fair in Virtue, as it may,
She is in Wealth; then all would be at peace,
When use of virtue got so great increase:)
The Spring before I sucked the sacred air
Where now I live, within Oxonia fair:
I say, I well remember on a night,
Or rather in the peep of morning-light,
When sweet Aurora with her smiling eye,
Called up the birds with wonted melody
To welcome her, and when the morning-bell
With doleful tollings newly began to tell
That it was four; it was my happy chance
To dream my self into this following Trance.
My dream begins.
Me thought I saw (and 'twas a fearful sight)
Our welcome day, that usually brought light
To glad our drowzie hearts, I know not how,
Began look on us with an unwonted brow:
Heavens vaults, me thought, were hung so sadly over
With Joel 2.20
gloomy clouds, as never: yet before
I Would seen the like; and glorious (...) beams
Were hid from us, with all those (...)
Which erst we borrowed thence* for lo, the Mat. 24.29.
(...)
Was dark'ned quite, and every man beg^n
To tremble in his heart, and to expect
From these sad premises, some sad effect.
Amongst the rest, a secret terror crept
Into my drowzy soul, and as I slept,
I know not how but ere this stranger, fear,
Had thoroughly waked my heart, I began to hear
A friend of mine proclaim with hideous cries,
The voice I heard in my thoughts.
Come quickly, see the Angels in the skies,
The Judgment day is come. At which, alas,
My sleepy soul awoke: but where I was,
I could not tell; for in a doubtful maze
Twixt fear and joy, I was enforced to gaze
At what I newly saw; and at the sight,
I was so highly ravished with delight,
That I could scarcely tell (beleeue't 'twas so)
2. Cor. 12.2
Whether my soul were in the flesh, or no.
And here, me thought, I heard the Angels say
With fearful Trumpets, Rise and come away
To Judgment all: and soon as ever the sound
Was gone abroad, me thought, this goodly Round
Revel 20.12, 13.
Delivered up the Dead; and every one
Were brought immediately before the Throne
Of Heavens great Lawgiver. But when mine eye
Had seen (alas) so great a Majesty
Should be the Judge: said I, Esaias 6.5.
I Am quite undone;
For lo, mine eyes have seen this mighty Son
Of Holiness; and now where shall I go,
That am so full of wickedness and woe?
And here (alas) amidst my hopes and fears,
My dazzled eyes became a flood of tears
To weep at what I saw: for when that I
Had but a glimmering of his purity,
I straight began hate my self; for there, me thought,
That in my self, my self was worse then naught.
But here behold, in midst of these extremes,
I felt such sweet inflowings from the beams
Of that e'rliuing Sun, that while mine eye
Did mostly weep at mine own misery,
It gave me greatest happiness: for then,
Me thought, I had beyond the state of men,
A new immortal being, which I had
From Him alone, who made my soul so glad.
Thus while I loosed my self, it seemed to me,
I was An allusion to Christ's Transfiguration.
transfigur'd to felicity:
Where I (as Luke 9.32, 33.
Peter) in amazedness,
Did wish my self no greater happiness,
Then there to build my biding place, and weep
Mine eyes away in that so sweet a sleep.
Thus passionary eye, I Have shown to thee,
That happy vision which I once did see;
With every part and circumstance; unless
I fail in telling of that happiness
Which then I had: and here indeed, mine eye,
I must confess, can never reach so hie,
VVhile's in the flesh, to apprehend aright,
The expreslesse pleasures of so sweet a sight.
'Twas but a dream indeed; yet such, The use to be made of this dream.
as I
Could always wish presented to the eye
Of us, forgetful humanes, to awake
Our drowzie souls, that we might us betake
To higher Theories; and when we see
That miserable state wherein we be,
To fix our eyes on Him, whose purer light
Would so possess us throwly with delight,
That in a sacred pride, we would scorn to throw
Away our eyes on any thing below,
To set our hearts thereon; but highly look
On Him, that keeps the everlasting Revel. 3.6. and 20.12.
Book,
Phil. 4.3.
Where blessed Souls are writ; that ere we die,
We might as 'twere shake off mortality,
And clothe us with new essences: and this
Would be a new conueyance to our bliss,
To give our souls the Heaven which we crave,
Whilst yet imprisoned in the bodies grave.
But to return unto my former dumpe
Wherein I was; when I had heard that Trumpe
With thundering sound say, Miser, come and see,
How well thy humane tongue can answer me
At my demands. As in my fearful dream,
Mine eyes brast forth into a weeping stream
Of penitential tears, I could not speak
With ought, but sighs; whose vttrance seemed to break
My very heart with horror; for mine eye
No sooner saw, but lo, my misery
Confronts me straight. I saw how I had spent
My Talents all away (which he had lent
To me) in vanity. I saw, alas,
How slow to good; how forward still I was
In following what was ill: and here I saw
How I had made digressions from his Law
In every point. In brief, I saw that I
Was now a sink of all iniquity:
I Would quite forgot his favors, and was gone
Away from Him, that everliving Sun,
To walk in darkness; and to go astray
Where ever the flesh or Satan led the way:
For I was wholly thrall'd to them; and now
I Would seen my self, alas, I knew not how,
To come into his presence, or to speak;
And yet I must, or else my heart will break.
I needs must come; alas, I cannot fly,
Go where I will, Psalm. 139.1, 2, etc.
from his all-seeing eye:
Or if I could, yet wheresoe'r I go,
There every thing proclaims it self a foe
To my rebellious soul: and lo, within
I Am tortured so with horror of my sin,
That all the Balmes of Gilead cannot ease
The fearful gripings of my sad disease.
Where Is now the world? Where are those triuiall toys,
Called Wealth and Honors? Or those seeming joys
The flattring flesh pretends? alas, I see
They all prevail no more to comfort me,
Then heavy blows to ease the aching head,
Or Papists Aue-Maries for the dead.
My gifts are natured otherwise, Genesis 37.30.
and I,
(Alas) where shall I go? feign would I cry
For help, but all my strayings are in vain;
The more I wrest, the more I feel my pain.
And here should some great Mammon-Monarch come
With golden Mountains, or with all the sum
Of earths best seeming-happinesse, (whereby
Worlds darlings use to less their misery,
Or drive it quite away:) yet all to me
Were but as light to him that cannot see.
Alas! what were it unto a man that lies
On his extremest bed with turn'd-vp eyes,
Looking aloof after that living breath,
Whose sad depart is Herald of his death?
What were it, I say, to throw whole Seas of gold
Into his throat? this comfort were as cold
As what is most comfortless: Even so I see
(O would men think on it) it goes now with me,
These by-receits are but as feasting meat
To him that has no stomach left to eat,
They make me loath them quite. For soon as I
Began but to gaze on heavens great Majesty;
They 'peare as drugges, not worth the sight, so foul,
As farthest off from clensing of a soul,
That Is so corrupt as mine. And here I find,
There Is nothing left to ease my grieved mind,
But solace from above, (the place from whence
I first began, to have a quickening sense
Of what I am:) for now I see full well,
The nature of my soul does far excel
Ought here beneath; and seems to come more nigh
To Heavens high God; claiming affinity
As 'twere, with him, from whom at first it had
Its being perfect good: (but all its bad
Was from its self, whose first original
Had being from its Father Adams fall:)
And now I think on it, our Philosophy
Seems here authentic by Divinity;
That tells, when ever our acts and passions be,
There must the matter needs in both agree:
And where the action is with victory,
The agent has the strongest faculty.
I Am sure it is true in this, my purer soul
(I mean in substance, though it be so soul
By accident) may not be wrought upon
By these base agents of corruption,
Wealth, honors, or the like; (too vile a mud
To work on humane souls to do them good.)
Their matter differs all in all: for these
Are momentary salues, and can but ease
A momentary grief, that is somewhat nie
To them in matter, and in quality,
As passions of the flesh, or discontent,
(Arising from what we call accident;)
The loss of friends, goods, or the like; (which come
Indeed from God, as sent to call us home
To him, and teach us thence that all, beside
Himself, are vanity, and cannot bide
Long time with us.) Yet here they also fail
Those that lie sole on them; for they are frail
Themselves, and cannot be a remedy
To any one, but him that does apply
Them rightly to his griefs, as mediums sent
From God; or else they are a punishment,
If made as gods, as mostly now they be
By such, as place their sole felicity
In them: for so they do not heal, but kill,
Although they give us not a sense of ill.
Alas, they soothe our senses fast asleep;
And then as enemies, they slyly creep
Upon the soul, which if it stoop so low,
As homage them, they quickly overthrow,
And make it wholly slave to them: and this
Is quite indeed to reaue it of the bliss
Which erst it had in God; and that is as bad,
As take away the essence that it had:
Which gone, its being else is naught but ill
And misery. And is not this to kill?
Alas, it is. Nay, shall I speak more free?
To be so ill, is worse then not to be.
Thus wheresoe'r I go, or turn mine eye,
Within these nether vales of vanity,
I feel no more of comfort, or of hope,
Then Protestants in Pardons from the Pope:
They Are mere delusions all, or worse; they would keep
My fainting soul in a perswasiue sleep,
That I am well; and so I should not fly
Unto the Mercies of eternity;
The sovereign salve of souls, from whence alone
I must have solace, or I must have none.
But here behold, when I had throwly seen,
The miserable state my soul was in
By nature; and had read with wearied eyes,
The tedious book of all the vanities
Which here I saw on earth; (for all that I
Could see (alas) was naught but Eccles. 1.2.
vanity:)
And when I Would seen that I was quite bereft
Of all my good, and there was nothing left
In me but misery: for lo, I saw
My horrid doom was past; and by the Genesis 2.17. To. 7.1, ^.
Law
I needs must die the death; and this, within
I saw engraven in my soul by To. 6.23.
sin.
And when I Would also cast mine eyes about,
To see those woeful helps that lay without,
Satan and faithless vanity; and these,
As Job 2.9.
Jobs unhappy wife, would give me ease
By killing me: for all their remedy
Was this, To curse my God, despair and die.
I say, when I had seen what here I saw,
I began repent, my frozen heart began thaw
Into a flood of brinish tears, that I
Had doted erst so much on vanity:
For here, alas, my terrors still increase;
My Psalm. 77.1, 2.
sore runs more and more, and will not cease
Or day, or night. My soul is troubled so,
'Twill not be comforted: and I in woe
Am hurried in and out, so sore oppressed
With killing griefs, and fears, Psalm. 38.3.
I cannot rest.
I look within, and dye: without, I see
There Is nothing left, alas, to comfort me,
But sad despair. Thus, wheresoe'r I go
From God, I wander further still in woe.
But courage here, my fainting soul, for now
I bid defiance to the world; and vow
To prosecute with an eternal (...)
This miserable All, which I of late
Esteemed so much: and, Satan, here farewell;
And farewell all that lead the ways to Hell:
For now, alas unto my grief I see,
What Job 16.2.
miserable comforters ye be,
Job 13.4.
Physicians of no value; as those friends
Of patient Job; or rather Hellish fiends
To vex distressed (...). Lo, here I fly
From off^ll, and in my misery
I run unto my God, for only He,
That out of nothing have created me,
Can now again give life unto my smile,
And make it Psalm. 51.7.
white as snow, though ever so soul*
Besides, he is Ps. 116 5.
merciful, and well I know;
He Ps. 38.6.
looks upon the troubled soul below,
Himself has said it, and he cannot lie:
Esaias 9^ 15. and 66.2.
Although his habitation be on hie,
He Is present with the humble, to enlyue
Their deadned souls, and sweetly to revive
The truly contrite heart; or were not be
Thus gracious, as he cannot choose but be;
Yet wheresoe'r I go besides, I Am sure
Of naught but death; for they are all impure,
Mere vanity, not good, but bad as sin,
Save as they have dependency on him.
What may I doubt of then? Suppose I go,
And he denies his favor, as I know
"He cannot do, (for where he daines to give
"His Grace to come, he gives the Grace to live:)
Yet howsoe'r, I Am sure I cannot be
Worse then I am; for here, alas, I see
I am in Hell already; and unless
He help me out there is naught but gloo^,
Sad thoughts, never dying deaths, and all that dwell
Within the limits of a perfect Hell,
Will hence be my companions; and will be
As hellish furies all to torture me.
Then welcome here, ye sweet melodious sounds
Of that reviving Trumpet, whose rebounds
Within the turning Lab^inth of mine ears,
Did earstly so affright my soul with (...),
And wake'd me from that drowzie sleep, wherein
I slumbred erst upon the bed of sin.
And welcome here, thou sweet celestial Sprite;
Thou very God; thou everliving Light,
That thus have quickened me; and with thy beams
Have daz'led both mine eyes to weeping streams
Of penitential tears, and made me see
My miserable state: and now to thee
I humbly come again, to be my aid
In these my high disputes; that when I Have said,
I may find mercy; and my tongue and pen
May sing thy mercies to the sons of men:
Thus humbly I appeal unto thy Throne
Of everlasting Grace, from whence alone
I seek for saving solace, and implore
For mercy; 2. Sam. 24.14.
for there is enough in store.
And here, as (...). 4.16.
Esther, when she entered in
To th'awfull presence of the Persian King,
On hazard of her life: even so do ^
Appeal my God; and Or if I perish, I perish: in Text. My appeal to God.
if I die, I die.
O thou great Maker of this goodly frame,
And all therein; at whose dread glorious Name
The devils tremble; by whose Word alone
This All had being* and without had none:
And thou that have thy seat of Majesty,
Beyond the reach of any mortal eye,
Within the Deuteronomy. 10.14.
Heaven of Heavens, and as a King
Of Kings do sit in glory, where each thing
Is subject to thy book, and all those trains
Of Heavens blessed Citizens with highest strains
Do warble forth thy praises, and adore
That Esaias ^.3. Revel. 4.8.
Three-Vnited-Holy, (which tofore
Has been, and is, and shall hereafter be
From this time forward to eternity:)
Lo, here a wretch that is summond to appear
Before thy seat of Judgment, there to clear
Himself within thy fight, if that a soul
In rags of humane flesh may dare control,
As 'twere, thy high discourse, and show that he
Has reason good whence to dispute with Thee.
See, here he comes: but lo, my dazzled eye
No sooner saw thy glimmering purity,
As shining through a cloud; but there I began
To see the spots of miserable man:
As men by opposites more plainly see
To judge of them, so it went now with me:
For when I Would seen thy wondrous Light, and then
Reflecting on the miseries of men,
I was confounded straight, as erst was he,
Who when he would seen thy glorious Majesty,
Esaias 6.5.
Cried out, I am undone; for here, alas,
I saw with grief the miserable mass
Of man's corruptions, all his righteousness
Was but as Esaias 64.6.
clouts of naught but filthiness:
Or at the best, Hos 64.
it vanishes away,
As morning-dew in brightest Sun-shine-day.
And here, alas, I began with Job 40 4.
Job to cry,
Lord, I am vile, and what shall I reply
To thee, thou Holy One? I Will lay my hand
Upon my mouth: for who is able stand
Psalm. 143.2. To. 3.20.
Within thy sight as just, or able say,
He merits ought? for we are all as clay
In Esai. 45.9. Ier. 18 6. To. 9.10.
Potters hands to thee, and shall I dare
To talk it with my Maker, that can tear
Me into thousand pieces, and consume
With thy just fury, him that durst presume
To come into thy fight, and thinks that he
Has ought to justify himself with thee?
For there is none, alas, though ere so right,
That Job 9 2, 3.
can be iustifide within thy sight.
We Psalm. 53.1, 3. To. 3.23.
all have sinned, and by the Law we all
Must die the death, and be in lasting thrall
To Hell and misery: and should thou throw
Us headlong to that Lake, from whence we know
There Is no redemption; yet we must confess,
We have the reward of our wickedness,
And thou art just: But yet, O Lord, with thee
There Is mercy to be found: or should thou be
Thus rigrous with us all, there would not one
Be left to tell of thy salvation.
Then here behold, a silly piece of clay,
My miserable self, a castaway;
A man: oh no; Ps. 22.6.
a worm, or what is worse,
Inheritor of naught but Adams curse;
Doomed by the Law to die, left in extremes
By World and all things else (which float as streams
Of water 'way from me; or as my friends
That love me for some secondary ends,
But leave me in distress:) do humbly now
Appeal thy Mercy-seat; and here I vow
With Genesis 32.26.
Jacob, I Will not leave thee, till I win
(Thy Bliss) a pardon from my death, and sin:
To thee alone I come; for only He
That made the Law, is able make me free.
And thou which at beginning did create
This corruptible lump in pure estate
From out of nothing, can again refine
Its drossie sins away, and make it shine
As Heavens bright Eye, or be as purest Snow,
Wherewith the tops of Psalm. 67.14.
Salmon ouerflow:
And though, alas, s' unclean a wretch as I,
Dares not to scale Heavens spotless canopy,
To plead with thee, lest when I should presume
To touch thy Exodus 16.12. Hebr. 12.20.
Mount, thou justly might consume
Me quite to naught: yet let it not offend
My Lord, if that a humane worm ascend
So high, as in humility to creep
From vale of woe, and from the fearful deep
Wherein he is, unto thy mercy-gate,
And there lay open his miserable state
Before thy pitying eyes; and if my grief
Afford me words, wherewith to force relief
From Mercies hands, then poor Humanity
Shall brag, that it has won the victory
Of God himself; and when our Humanes see
What weapons best prevail to conquer thee,
They Will hence make use of them, and learn to fly
Beyond the reach of base mortality,
By wings of humbleness, and waying well
The unhappy state wherein they needs must dwell
As of themselves, they will all appeal to Thee,
And all be thine, or else they will not be:
Thus then I will proceed; my miseries
Shall be my arguments; and my replies
In answ'ring shall be always to confess,
And grant those sequels of unrighteousness,
Wherewith thou can confute me; and withal
I Will tell thee why I could not choose but fall.
But pardon, Lord, what ere my passions speak,
"For grief will have its vent, or heart must break:
First then, O Lord, (I need it not to tell;
Thou know my miserable case so well:)
I am a grievous sinner, and thereby
Have lost the gracious presence of thine Eye,
Which erst gave life unto my soul, and now
I Have lost my life, alas, I know not how,
I Am left as reasonlesse, for that great hight
Which first gave being to my Reasons sight,
Is gone away from me, and all that I
Have left, is sense to feel my misery:
Far worse then brutest Animals, for they
Take pleasure by the sense, and though they may
Be sometimes passive, yet at most their pain
Is but a death; yet such whereby they gain
This happy privilege, which is to be
Never subject more to pain and misery:
But I (alas) where-e'r I run, or go,
Am still the subject of expreslesse woe:
No death can do me good, although my life
More bitter be then can the cruell'st knife
That rig^rous Fate affords; yet when I think
Upon that cup of Trembling I must drink
After deaths greatest Tyranny, (unless
Thy mercies pity mine unhappiness)
It gives new life unto my griefs, and I
Am always killed, alas, but cannot dye:
And is it not reason then, a man of grief
(So low as I) should go and seek relief,
If any to be found? and where, alas,
Should sinners go, but to the Throne of Grace,
Where mercy sits as Judge? And should not I
In these extremes of sin and misery,
Appeal to thee, my God, from whom alone
I must have help, or else I must have none?
I must, and will. But here thou will object, Objection from God against man.

I went astray from thee, and did Sins of omission and commission.
neglect
Thy high and hallowed Laws, Sins of omission and commission.
committing still
The evils of mine own corrupted will:
And therefore thou may justly cast away
A worthless wretch, who needs would disobey
So Father-like a Master, that did give
Me all I had, or else I could not live.
It Is true, great Lord, I must confess, Man's best answer.
that I
Have brought my self to all this misery,
And thou may justly cast me off: but lo,
Had I not brought my self to all this woe,
By sinning thus, what needed I to fly
To thee for mercy in my misery,
When I had none? for were I free from sin,
I then would iustle against the rig'rous din
Of Justice mouth, and plead with powr's divine,
That Paradise by grant of God was mine,
With all its pertinents, to have and hold
From this time forward, till I were so old,
That times Arithmetic would fail to tell
The number of my years: for all were well,
Had I not sinned; ah cursed humane pride!
If man had never sinned, he would never died: Sin, the Parent of death.

Death never had been, if that it had not had
It Is being from a Parent, all as bad
As it, I mean from Iam. 1.15.
sin, a thing so ill
(If we may called a thing that is able kill
So many things) as shows, its monstrous birth
Was not from him who made the Heavens and Earth,
With all therein: for all that ever he made
Were perfect Genesis 1.31.
good. But when that cursed shade
Of humane pride came in to interpose
'Twixt God and us, there suddenly arose
This dangerous mist; for lo, the ambitious brain
Of man would needs aloft, and fondly aim
At naught but Deity; and he would be
A Genesis 3.5.
God himself, forsooth; and who but he?
He Would turn Creator too, and undertake
To make of naught, what God could never make:
A high prerogative indeed! But see
The cursed fall of pride; when man would be
Subsistent by himself, scorning as 'twere,
Dependency from God: for soon as ever
(...), the work of man.
He left his God, alas, I grieve to tell,
He falls into the very deep of hell.
This Man himself did do: but when his will
Was done, he saw his work, and Man works contrary to God: for his works went
all good, as Genesis 1.31.
called it ill.
'Twas more then God could do indeed; for he
Could nothing else but good, as well we see
In all his works. Thus most unhappy man
Brought forth this Monster sin, which quickly ran
And spread abroad so fast its vip'rous brood,
That ill was greater grown by far then good:
And man could say as well as God, that he
Had got a world too, but of misery,
Of woe, of sin, of death, of what you will,
But good: for all that ever he did, was ill.
Thus when humanity would climb so hie,
As parallel with that great Deity
That made it, lo, it tumbles down so low,
As loses quite it self: for first, we know
Man's essence was immortal; but as soon
As man had sinned, he brought that cursed doom
Of lasting death upon himself, and all
That after said Amen unto his fall.
And thus men loosed themselves, became not men,
That Is mortal; for they were immortal then.
And amongst the rest, lo, here unhappy I
A sinful man, a man of misery,
Am fallen down; for I, as Adam did,
Would needs be doing what thou did forbid,
Eat of th'vnlawfull tree, be striving too
To do (a thing more then my God could do)
Something that was not good: but here, alas,
When I had seen the ill I brought to pass,
I began abhor my self, and began to know
My miserable case, that am so low,
As now I am. And here I began to see,
What man without dependency from thee
Is of himself. Alas, he is not ought,
Or worse then so, if ill be worse then naught.
But now, great Lord, I am a wretch so low,
And though in fury thou may justly throw
Me down to Hell, yet what were it for thee
To wreake thy wrath on such a worm as me?
Simile.
What honor were, if some courageous Knight
Should exercise the rigor of his might
Upon a dying Infant? Would't not be
A higher part of virtue held, if he
Should pity the poor soul, take and revive
Its dying heart, that when it was alive,
And knew to speak, it might in thanks have said,
I owe to thee my being, by whose aid
I live as now I do? yea sure: and then,
How can thou be more glorious with us men,
Then by releeuing such poor souls as mine,
Which cannot help themselves, and make us thine
By an eternal league? that when we see
How much we are beholding unto thee,
We may rejoice in nothing else but this,
That we are thine; and being thus in bliss,
I mean within thy books again, we may
Be always praising thee, as long as day
Shall give us time to live, and when we go
From out this wilderness of grief and woe,
We may in thy eternal Canaan sing
Eternal praises unto thee our King.
But further yet, O Lord, if misers we
May dare expostulate so much with thee;
"Give losers leave to speak, for misery
"Will force a man to speak, although he die
For vtt'ring of his mind; and can I choose,
But utter out my griefs, although I lose
What I have lost already, and unless
Thou hear my plaints, and pity my distress,
I Am sure I never shall find again; and than
Pardon if that I speak but as a man.
A man! and what is man or? what am I
That should not sin; or that I should not dye?
Man without especial dependence on God, could not choose but sin: in which
sense also* Adam may be said at first necessarily to have fallen.
Am I a God? Oh no; Thou know full well
My brittle nature: who can better tell,
Then him that made the same? And can it be
That man should parallel so much with thee,
As not to sin, I mean as man, that is
Without thy Aidance, when thou shall dismiss
Him of thy goodness, and himself shall be
But as, and of himself? This were to thee
A high indignity: As who should say,
There can by course of nature be a day
Without a Sun; or more, that goodness can
Be absolute, and yet contained in man?
Which is indeed to say, that there can be
Some good without dependency from thee:
And then all that is good would not be so;
Because thou made it good, but where, or no
Thou would: which all our true Divinity
Explodes as most abhorred Blasphemy.
Then let my Lord in mercy please to bear
With poor humanity, and daine to hear
Thy servant yet to speak; for lo, my grief
Will not be silent, till I find relief.
What would thou more of me? should I fulfill
Thy Laws so Romans 7.12.
good, that cannot ought but ill?
The Regenera^e man's voice, approved also by the experience of S. Paul.
Alas, unhappy wretch! feign would I do
The good thou would, but I come thereto
With hot intents; I feel a cooling ill
Arise within, which quite against my ^ill
Draws me aside, and forces me commit
A sin I hate, quite opposite to it.
And thus, To 7.15, 19
with Paul, I am enforced to cry,
Paul, voice being Regenerate.
The evil that I would not, that do I;
The good I would, I do not. Thus I see,
There Is nothing Romans 7.18.
good, alas, that dwells in me;
That is, within my flesh: for if that I
Do any thing that is good, it is from on hie:
No longer I that do it, Lord, but thee,
That do vouchsafe thy Grace to work in me
So great a good: for if thou but withold
Thy Grace awhile, I presently wax cold,
Become a deadned Lump, corrupt and foul;
Just as the body when without a soul Fit Similies.

Unapt for any good: or else (more nie)
As matters are in our Philosophy,
In ref'rence to their forms: the form we know, What man is in his relation
to God.

Does actuate the lumpish matter so,
That it is good for any thing whereto
The same was made, but of it self can do
Nothing at all, but is mere passive, dead:
Or like the body, that is without a head
To guide the same: or as an instrument,
By which the form does finish its intent;
Moves not, but as it is moved: So I to thee,
And more, have reference; I cannot be,
If thou sustain me not; or if I am,
It Is better that I were not: for I can
Be naught but ill without thee: Thou alone
Art Soul, and Form, and Head, and all in one,
T'enlyuen, actuate, inform and guide
This passive piece; which else could never bide
So many storms: (one while an envious wind,
Loss of my My dear deceased Mother.
dearest friend, with grief of mind,
By cross in other friends, with want, and w^
In their extremes: And now hurld to and fro
Betwixt my greatest enemies; that is,
By Satan, and those damned powers of his:
No humane troops, but such as always lurk
Under the veyles of world, and flesh to work
Man's final overthrow. VVe^t not for thee,
I had long since, alas, consumed be
To my first nothing; or not half so well,
Been imprisoned in the laws of burning Hell,
Never to come thence again. But it is thou
That did preserve me, and this very now,
I should fall down to that despairing Lake,
Did thou not raise me up, and always take
Especial care of me. Then let it please
Thy gracious eye of pity now to ease
My gasping soul; think on the case wherein
It lies thus bodyed as it were with sin,
Pressed with the weight to Hell, Wisd. 9.15.
and cannot fly,
By reason of its leprous clog so hie,
As souls vnbodyed may, to talk with thee
(In those pure places where the blessed be)
In thine own sweeter language, where is heard
Naught but the voice of joy: but I am b^rd
So low by sin, that from the dismal deep
Of these my griefs, I am enforced to weep.
This is my native language, which I have
Within this soil of woe, and loathsome cave
Whe^in I live, and (while this soul of mine
Lies prisoner in this sad unwholesome Clime
Of corruptible flesh, and hapless I
Go soiourne on these vales of vanity,)
I cannot change my mourning tone, until
Thy mercies put a period to mine ill.
Come quickly then, O Lord, come and apply
Thy saving salues unto my malady:
Come quickly, Psalm. 143.7.
lest my spirit fail, and then
I fall into the pit, from whence again,
Alas, there is no Job 10.21.
return: and who is it,
Shall tell thy praises in the infernal pit,
Where Is nothing else but horrors, howles and cries,
Mat. 2^.30.
Teeths gnashing, and the Esaias 66.24. Mark. 9.44.
worm that never dies?
But whither do I roaue* where am I led
In passion thus to company the dead,
By these my fearful doubtings? Can it be,
That he who has his sole depends on thee,
Should perish thus? Oh, no: he builds Ps. 91.9, 10
too hie,
That builds on thee: It Is my Ps. 77.10.
infirmity;
And more, alas, thou know I had not seen
Those miserable deepes of grief wherein
I now lie plunged, had it not pleased thee wake
My deadned sleepy soul, and made it ache
As now it does: And then how can it stand
With justice, that thy pitying mercies hand
Should give a wound, or make a soul to smart,
And then in cruelty again depart
Without applying any thing to ease
The tortured patient of his new disease;
But there to leave him sighing to the air,
And bleed afresh with tears unto despair?
Oh no; I know thy dealings are not such:
It Is sweet to smart, when mercy gives the touch:
This have I proved already in extremes,
When outward passions, or more inward threanes
Did touch me to the quick: for never yet
I swam in tears unto thy Mercy-seat,
But I have turned back so fully freight
With inward solace, stead of sorrows plight,
That all my griefs were drowned quite, and I
Have gladded thus to be in misery.
If otherwise, alas, it then had bin
Far better never to have left my sin,
Or known my miseries; if when I knew,
I so were left desparingly to rue
This my unhappy knowledge: but from hence
I learn to judge of pleasure by the sense
Of pain, and so I better know to prize
Thy greater mercies by my miseries:
As sickly patients by their greater griefs, A fit simile.

Do better learn to prize of their reliefes:
Or else if thou had heald me presently,
And I never felt the pangs of misery
My soul was in, perchance I would not stick
To say, thou heald'st me ere that I was sick;
As thankelesse patients mostly say to these
That heal their greatest griefs with greatest ease.
Thou therefore, Lord, whose Wisdom all-Diuine
Has ordered all things in so sweet a line
Of neuer-iarring harmony, that they
At every beck are ready to obey
Thy high behests, did wisely preordaine
That man should have a feeling of the pain
Himself was in by nature, ere that he
Should have that happiness to come to thee
For euer-healing Grace: and reason good:
For if that man had never understood
That he was sick, or if he had not seen
Those deepes of misery that he was in,
As of himself, how could he humbly come
With tears of penitence before thy Throne
Of everlasting Grace, when senseless he
Never knew so much that he had need of thee;
But dreams that all is well with him, and why,
Alas, he thinks there is no Deity
Besides himself; And then how can he see
So much as a beholdingness to thee
For any good? Where Is true humility
When Humanes think they have ability
Themselves to get a perfect happiness!
As As in morality.
Heathens did: (And Papists do no less)
And lo, how all was then overwhelmed with night,
When thou awhile did but conceal thy Light
From Ethnic eyes? Where was creation then?
Alas, this was a Paradox to them
Where it was imposible that ought could be
Made out of naught: and worlds eternity
Which then was held, could tell they did not know
How ever 'twas possible that they should owe
So much to thee, that did create them all,
To show thy glory forth And Adams fall
Was never heard of, whence they could not see
That woeful night, that Hell of misery,
Which they were in; and so in humbleness,
When they had seen the deeps of their distress,
As erst 2. Chro. 33.22.
Manasses, get themselves to thee
For mercy; But behold, this might not be:
Thou did derermine otherwise, to show
That Light to us which they did never know,
To wit, the wondrous things which thou have done
For us to whom thou give grace to come
To thee for grace; Lord, add this one increase
To these thy favors, that we never cease
To sing on earth the mirrors of thy praise,
Till Heavens at last eternalize our Lays.
And now, since thou have dain'd amongst the rest,
T'ensure me thus of that great Interest
I have in thee, my God, and made me see
My many wants, whereby I come to thee
With thirsty soul, as Psalm. 42.1, 2*
David's wearied heart
Did to the waterbrooks: for lo, my smart
Enforces me cry out to thee for ease
In griefs extremity; and till it please
Thy mercy send thy all Redeeming grace
To free me (...) this sad-vnhappy case
Wherein I a^ and take away from me
This heavy burden of my misery,
The sin that presses down, the loathsome Hebr. 12.^.
weight
That kills my soul, that clouds me from the light
Of thy all-ioying eyes; Alas, I see
There Is nothing here that is able comfort me:
My soul goes Psalm. 38.6.
mourning all the day, as one
Impris'ned far from his desired home,
Where Is naught can truly comfort him, till he
Has won the Haven where he longs to be:
Or rather as that Luke 15.13, 14, etc. The parable of the Prodigal child
fitly applied.
needy Prodigal,
Who when he would had his will, and lauisht all
His portion quite away, and poverty
Had pincht him so, he was enforst to cry
For help in his exteremes; but there was none
That once would give attendance to his moan,
Of all his feigned friends, (although that they
Had flattred all that e're he had away,
And seemed to promise much as long as he
Had any thing to give; but now they see
That he was left in deepes of misery,
They run away at once and let him lie:)
He then began know himself, and having seen
The fearful deeps of want, and woe wherein
He now was plunged, he began with weeping eyes
To think on these his wilful miseries,
And having deeply counted with himself,
What once he was, and now (ungracious Elfe)
Whereto he would brought his state, he would not rest,
But needs return to him that loved him best,
His first offended Father, where he hies
All tottered over with rags of miseries,
The fruits that he had got; and there he shows
His great extremes in swelling tides of woes,
Incessant tears, and penitential groans,
(For none besides would pity these his moanes:)
Unto his Fathers eyes; But soon as he
(I need not speak in parables to thee,
Thou know it well enough:) had told his sin,
His pitying Father runs and takes hi^ ^n,
Luke 15.20.
Embrac'th him in his arms with kisse^ ^eet,
To show how glad the Father was to meet
His convert son, he yearned more to give
Him life, then he himself did yearne to live:
For lo, before the Son could well entreat,
The Father grants; his love was grown so great.
This is my case, O Lord, it is I that am
That wretched Prodigal, who earstly ran
Away from thee, my God, who wast to me
By far a dearer Father, then was he
Who was the Prodigals; and lo, it is I
That brought my self to all this misery
Wherein I am; but now I 'gin to see
My poor estate: Behold, I come to thee
With, Luke 15.18, 21.
Father, I have sinned; my deep distress
Enforces me unfeignedly confess
My woeful wanderings, that have gone astray
From all thy sacred paths, and spent away
Thy talents all in hell, done nothing well
As erst I did confess, and now I tell
Again with grief of heart, with watery eyes,
With inward sighs, with soule-relenting cries,
With tears of penitence, and deepe-fetcht throes;
The dull expressions of my deeper woes:
(The Caracters wherewith the soul does write
The recantations of her past delight.)
Lo, here I feel the reward of my ill,
The penury of Grace, which yearks me still
Into the very soul: As erst did want
The Prodigal, when all things were so scant;
And here of force I cried for help, but none
Of all my friends would hearken to my moan,
As erst I said, for they did flee away
As fast as cowards from a fearful fray.
But when I saw that all were fled, and I
Was left alone beset with misery,
And there was none would help, I began to rue
With solitary sighs, and weeping Dew,
My wilful foolishness; and now I see
My running thus so far away from Thee,
(So good a God) is cause of all my woe,
Behold, I cannot rest, until I go
To thee again; for it was only Thou
That first gave being to my soul, and now
There is no other Name I know full well,
That can redeem me from the deep of Hell,
But only thine. Thus in extremes I fly
To thee for mercy in my misery,
To thee alone: for lo, with grief I see,
All other helps are burdens unto me;
Alas, they kill my soul, and do but feed
My greatest foe where all my horrors breed;
This corruptible clog of flesh, that feign
Would sink me sleeping to eternal pain,
Whence nothing may redeem: Oh, then I pray,
Come purify this filthy piece of clay,
By those sweet streams of thy ever living Grace,
Which issue from that holy-holy place
Where thou art resident, thy purest Sprite,
(The Job. 14.26. and 15.26.
Comforter and pledge of true delight)
And give my soul free liberty to see
The very fullness of its misery;
Alas! It does not see enough, I feel,
My heart continues yet as hard as steel,
It will not yield me tears enough to spend
In wished penitence, until I end
My little day of life: and here again,
I am enforced with doubled sighs to plain
To thee for remedy: this forces more
Then all the miseries that went before.
Alas! and what is the reason? Sure, I see
And feel, it is nothing but the want of thee:
He that wants thee, wants all that's good, and I
By wanting thee, have more then misery.
O then behold, if ever Prodigal
Thus pincht with poverty, had need to call,
Good Father, come and help; sure, I am he
That thus in humbleness appeal to thee:
Or look upon these caracters of woe,
The rags of misery wherein I go:
Or were not that enough, yet look upon
My greater want of thy salvation:
See how I sigh to thee for grace, or more;
I sigh, alas, because I am so poor
In sighs, and tears, and weeping words* that I
Cannot bewail enough my misery,
By reason of my sins, which strive to keep
My gasping soul in an unhappy sleep:
A fit simile.
Much like those lumpish clouds that I have seen
In lowering days, to thrust themselves between
The Sun and us, and so to keep away
Those sweet inflowings of bright Phoebus ray,
(That quickneth up our Spirits) by which wrong
It makes the sluggard lie a bed too long;
Enthrals us to a drowzinesse, that we
Are quite unapt for good, until we see
Those sleepy clouds dispelled, and Phoebus eye
Does cheer us up with new alacrity.
Such are my sins, and till that Mal. 4.2.
sacred Sun,
Which is indeed the Ioh. 1.4, 5.
light, shall shine upon
This sluggish soul of mine, and drive away
These cloudy adversaries of my day,
I cannot cry with cheerfulness, or weep;
The enemy enforces so to sleep.
O then my God, thou, thou that art the Sun,
And all I want, come quickly shine upon
My deadned sleepy soul, and let thy beams
Of grace resolve my Icy heart to streams
Of faithful feeling penitence, that I
With perfect sense of this my misery,
May swim in tears unto thy Mercy-Throne,
There to enforce thee to compassion:
And further, let my tears be all as tongues,
To intimate the penitential songs
My heart endites; or rather let my pen
(As David's) be the Scribe to publish them.
And last of all, O let my sprites loud groans
(Expreslesse) utter forth the saddest Tones
That ever yet true penitent did weep,
To wake our drowzie carnalists from sleep;
And by a secret virtue to enforce
My hearers all to melt into remorce,
When they have seen themselves by me; (for all
As well as I have played the Prodigal,
If they but duly think upon it:) and then
They Will all vouchsafe to company my pen
In weeping meeters too, or if not so,
For want of measures to express their woe,
Which is so measurelesse, yet out of love,
Thus far ( I Am sure.
I know) they will my griefs approve,
As to afford me tears in every line,
To write their penitence as well as mine:
Which done, I doubt not, but we all shall be
2 Cor. ^.^.
Compartners in the same felicity
As well as griefs, ere my Urania end
Her happy task: for lo, I apprehend
Already from above, such sweet inspires
Of quickening mercy kindling my desires,
With glad assurances of Grace, that I
Would not lay down, and change my misery
For all the worlds best happiness, that can
Be coueted by any carnal man
To glut his greedy senses with: for his
Must have its end, but mine eternal is;
I mean, my happiness, in that I see
The sweet opposer of my misery
Is now at hand. But here I must retire
My wearied Muse awhile, till my desire
Obtain its happy complement, and I
Behold my solace with a clearer eye.
Yet ere I rest, dear Father, lo, I come
To tell in brief, this is ^he total sum
Of these my weak disputes, and this is all
That I can answer thee as Prodigal.
Here I have acted out my part; and now,
Great Maker, lo, it does remain that thou
Enter the Theater, lest hapless I,
By leauing't thus, should leave a Tragedy
Imperfect to beholders eyes, which might
Strike them with sorrow more, then with delight.
Come then and perfect it, that all may see,
There Is nothing has perfection but from thee.
Lo, I remain the Prodigal, be thou
The loving Father: see with pity how
I am beset with miseries, and see
What great necessity I have of thee,
That have not ought without thee: see again,
How earnestly I Psalm. 42.1.
thirst for thee, and then
Look back upon thy Esaias 55.1.
promises, whereby
You Are bound to us that are in misery.
Thus, Father, pity me thy son, and then
With lasting favor take me home again
Into thy arms of mercy, where when I
Am knit again by that eternal tie
Of thy redeeming love, my tongue and pen
Shall be continual trumpeters to men
To tell thy mercies, and what thou have done
For him, that was so prodigal a son:
O quickly then, dear Father, quickly hie
To him that is so full of misery:
Now is the time, behold, my tedious plaint
Has tired out my soul, and she 'gins faint
In these her deep extremes: my tears and groans
Enforce a silence to her weeping Tones:
These are her latest words, Come, mercy, fly,
And take me up, Come quickly, or I dye.
Thus overcome with grief, my doleful Muse
Kept silence with my soul; for every sluice
My weepers had, brast forth in tears to stop
The passage of my plaints, and ouer-top
My sighs from flying up aloft, till (...)
Had grieved so much, that all within ^as dry:
My brain had lost its moisture to indite
Some dreary song my pen might weep to write,
To give continuance to my griefs: and here
Because I saw that Mercy was so near,
I did resolve to rest my self, and stay
Until my soul had seen a happier day
Proclaimed from above; I mean, wherein
She shall be ransomed from death and sin,
And all her present miseries: till when,
Come rest with me, my wearied Muse and Pen;
For here I vow, you shall not speak again,
Till Mercy raise you to a sweeter strain.
The end of the first Book.
AVSTINS URANIA, OR THE HEAVENLY MUSE: The second Book.

Wherein is set forth the great mystery of Man's Redemption by Christ Jesus, and
(the free will and merits of Papists being experimentally confuted) the true
and only means whereby we are to obtain salvation is plainly declared: to
the great comfort of all those that either are, or desire to be true Christians.

By S.A. B. of Arts of Ex. College in Oxford.

2. COR. 1.3, 4. Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our
tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by
the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.

PSALM. 66.16. Come, and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what
he has done for my soul.

PSALM. 89.1. I will sing the mercies of the Lord for ever: with my mouth will I
make known thy faithfulness to all generations.

LONDON, Printed by F.K. for Robert Allot and Henry Seile. 1629.

TO THAT HONORABLE GENTLEMAN, Mr. JOHN ROBARTS, Son to my Lord Robarts, Baron
of Truro in Cornwall, the accomplishment of all true happiness both in Grace
and Glory, etc.
Noble Sir!
I Have here emboldned my self to entreat you also (since you came hither so
seasonably) to be the second Godfather of these my lowly conceptions: and my
hopes are, that you will be the easier won hereto, because you have so good
a Compartner, as (my great Favorer) your divine Tutor. Neither is this all,
but I had many other most urgent incitements, to forward these my lawful
presumings: first, in that it was my happiness to be your Countryman; whence I
thought it no mean disparagement, both to my self and Country, especially to
your Honor; that our Cornwalls Muses should not find a Patron within their
own limits. Secondly, your happy growth in all virtuous perfections within
these late years, (as my self also amongst others have seriously observed, to
the great comfort of my soul) with your extraordinary zeal, and primarie
devotions to all divine exercises, has been enough to inuit, if not enforce
me, to the humble presentment of these my desires, and utmost services to
forward you. If my Muse had here played the wanton, I should have thought her
too toyish, and altogether unworthy your more serious, and judicious aspect:
but she has been somewhat affected with those passions, that were sometimes
yours; she has been bathed in the tears of a dear mothers death; but
especially, she has desired to be in all things heavenly, and to please you
even in divine contemplations; and therefore cannot despair of your good
patronage. I will no longer stand in commenting, either on your virtues, or
mine own endeauourings; only I shall entreat you to know, that there is none
more sincerely desires your perfection in goodness then my self, though happily
you may have many far better furtherers: and in confirmation of this, I have
here humbly presented you this dear (though poor) conception of mine, who,
like a weeping infant, new brought into the world, beseeches you with tears
for its Patronage; which if you but please to bless it with, and so make it
live famous in the world by being yours, you shall not fail of his continuing
prayers and thankfulness; who desires to be ever

Your true servant in the Lord Jesus, Samuel Austin.
From my Study in Exeter College in Oxford, this 11. of April, 1628.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READERS ON my second Book.
Good Readers!
IF I here come far short of mine own aims, and your expectations, I shall
entreat you to make this use of it; the apprehension of that great Mystery of
salvation (which I here treat of) is a matter of far greater difficulty, then
at first I took it for: yea sure it is an Art so hard, and of so heavenly a
nature, that Math. 16.17. John. 1.13.
flesh and blood can never attain the knowledge of it, but it must be revealed
unto us from our Father which is in Heaven. Whence it came to pass, that
whereas I thought presently to apprehend it upon the first onset, without any
further trouble, I was cast down suddenly by mine own sins and infirmities,
even to despair of my self, and there lay for a long time in a speakelesse
misery, till God of his free goodness at length restored me, and brought me to
the happy sight hereof by the sweee help and aydance of his Word and Spirit.
So that the readiest way to obtain this happy assurance, is to abandon all
Papisticall presumings on selfe-abilities, and to annihilate ourselves as
twere, by a faithful humility, that so we may Ioh. 1.12.
become the sons of God, by that sole power of Christ Jesus; and by a Ephesians.
4.24.
new Creation be transformed into his blessed likeness, till in his good time,
Philip. 3.9.
being found in him, not having our own righteousness which is of the Law,
but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of
God by faith, we shall at length appear unspotted before the presence of our
God in the highest heavens, and there enjoy that eternal weight of glory which
he has prepared for us. Now, if you make this good use of it, you shall do
well. Fare ye well.

S. A.

AVSTIN'S URANIA: OR THE HEAVENLY MUSE. THE SECOND BOOK.
The Contents.
FRom out despair my VRAN' beer
Begins to put on better cheer,
Because my God did now again
Refresh my soul with his sweet strain
Of promised Grace, which showed to me
My debt was paid, and I made free,
Free man of Grace. But lo, when I
Thought straight to have seen this mystery,
My sins step in, and cloud my sight:
From whence began so sore a fight
Betwixt my flesh and spirit, that I
Was forced even to despair, and die:
Until my God of his free Grace
Reuiues me with a sweeter face,
And leads me on by his good Sp'rit
Unto his Word, which gave me light,
Whereby I clearly saw at length.
(Only enabled with his strength)
That happy Mystery which he (...).
Began whil'ere reveal to me;
I mean, his love in Christ: and there
In humbled faith, and holy fear
My Muse began again to sing
My Saviors Life and Passioning,
Which erst it did but touch: this done,
At last she cheerfully begun
To sing my thanks, and ends her Lays
With periods of eternal praise.
NOt long my soul in this unhappy case
Had lain her down, gasping as 'twere for Grace.
With lowly sighs; but here she seemed to yield
Her weapons up, and to give death the field:
For when she looked upon her self, and saw
How deadly she was wounded by the Law:
But there was no Physician might be found,
That had a Balsome for so great a wound;
She began despair, and with extremest breath,
To give a forced welcome unto death.
Thus did she of her self; and could it be
Man's nature might do otherwise, to see
His doom already past? for well I knew
There Is no escape, the Law must have its due,
The breach whereof is death; and now that I
Have broke the same, alas, I needs must die.
Must die? But what is this? Is It but to leave
This vital breath as brutish beasts, and cleave
Unto my former earth, there to remain
Impassible of any feeling pain,
And so never to be thought on more, nor be
The subject of a future misery?
Oh no: but as if my unhappy sin
Had never broke the Law, I Would always been
Alive in endless happiness; even so
Now I have sinned, I must in endless woe,
Die a ne'r-dying death, I (...) which is
To be deprived of that eter^ bliss,
Which else I should have had: or so much worse,
To be so long the subject of that curse
Of tortures inexpressible. And here
The very thought did touch my soul so near,
That more then thousand present deaths, my heart
Did seem to taste of an eternal smart;
The woeful pledge of what I was to drink,
When I should come to that unhappy sink
Of mine unhappiness; that Hell wherein
I should drink up the furious drugs of sin.
But here, behold, in this my worst extreme,
(As erst I well remember in my Dream)
When I was mostly glozing down upon
My self and miseries, and there was none
That would, or could relieve, (I mean, within
These nether vales of vanity, of Sin,
Of Hell, of Death: where every thing that I
Could well conceive, had possibility
Of suffering for our faults, has residence:
For suffrance goes no further then the sense;
Suffrance in pain I mean, (unless it be
That pain of loss which our Divinity
Alone makes mention of.) Now there was none
That Is subject to a painful passion,
(But what is here contained:) when hap'lesse I
As of my self would needs despair and die.
Behold, I say, that great Omnipotence
Which first gave being to my soul, and since
With quickening trumpets made me to awake
From out the deep of that Lethean Lake
Wherein I lay for dead, I mean, when I
Had thrall'd my self to all iniquity
With great delight and willingness: and he
The sacred power that gave me eyes to see
My deepes of misery, and in extremes
Did erst refresh me with such pleasing beams
From off his gracious countenance, that I
Did highly prize so great a misery:
For here at length he comes (when there was none
That would, or could relieve, but him alone:)
And with the sweetest words that ever were sung,
(Not to be vtter'd by another tongue,
But his that authorized them.) Thus he began
To comfort me: Gods reply to my former quests.
O thou forsaken Man,
The work that I my self have made, full dear
To me thy God, although thou would not hear
My sweet ^nuites, but with the Prodigal
Would needs be wandering, till thou would lauisht all
Thy Portion out, and bought experience
Of what thou art by miserable sense
Of thine unhappiness. Alas, I see
^arre better then thy self can tell to me,
Thy many wants: I see thy great extremes;
Thy tears of penitence; thy earnest threanes
And longings after me: I see, I say;
And now behold, I can no longer stay
From pitying thee; my bowels yerne to show
My mercies forth, whereby to make thee know
My wondrous love to thee. Come then, Arise
Distressed soul; shake off thy miseries,
And all thy former heavy dumps: for lo,
I here intend to terminate thy woe.
Thy day of happiness is come, and I
Will here reveal so sweet a remedy.
For these thy grieuances, that soon as ere
Thou shall but see a glimpse of it, thy fear
Will vanish quite away; and thou will be
So ravished straight with new felicity,
That all thy senses will be dispossessed
Of thy first miseries, and wholly blessed
With such expresselesse joy, that tongue, or pen,
Though led by all the choicest Art of men,
With all their shadows, cannot half express
The substance of so great a happiness.
Come then, and solace here a while, till I
Have raised thee up unto a pitch so high,
Where when thy speculations sweetly see
The wondrous things that I have done for thee,
Thou will so far forget thy present state,
As scarcely think on it, save it be to hate
Thy self the more, and those inferior toys,
Which strove so much to interrupt thy joys;
That in a sacred policy, thereby
Thou may be knit in a far nearer tie
To me thy God, there always to possess
The highest tide of changelesse happiness.
And more, behold, when thy Vrania's eyes
Shall feed awhile on those sweet Theories
Of mine abundant goodness, and shall see
How all thy happiness depends on me,
She will not choose but consecrate her Lays,
To sing abroad the mirrors of my praise.
On, my beloved then; for now behold,
My love is grown so great, I cannot hold
It longer in, 'twill needs break forth and show
Its sweet effects; and make thy soul to know
How dear that sinner is to me, that will
Repent himself, and leave his former ill:
Surely Ezekiel. 18.28.
he shall not dye, but live; for I
Have spoken it, that know not how to lie.
It Is true indeed, thou said, thy self have played
The Prodigal, and now thou seek'st for aid
Of me: Behold, it is again as true,
I am thy Father longing to renew
My former love with thee. Lo, how I run
On Mercies feet to welcome thee my son.
Come in distressed, Come: My watchful Eye
Has seen at full thy deepes of misery,
And still with care attended thee, when thou
Did little think on it, till this very now.
'Twas I indeed, as erst thou did confess,
That made thee see this thine unhappiness:
And as a tender Mother to her son, An apt simile.

That seems in kindness to persuade it come,
And ask of her some thing it wants, which she
Much longs to give: So did I deal with thee,
By mercies often sweet inuites, to move
Thee humbly come and crave, what out of love
I wholly meant to give. 'Twas not in vain
I made thee feel the horrors of thy pain;
But as a happy medium to enforce
Thy deadned soul the sooner to remorce
Of thine own deeper miseries, and then
To seek about for remedy: but when
Thy woeful soul had seen, that all but I,
Were fled from thee in this extremity,
Then did I sweetly draw thee home, to see
The riches of the love I bore to thee:
I took thee up again, and did restore
Thy lifelesse soul, when thou had quite gi'n over,
And yielded up to Satan, sin, and all
That were conspiratours to make thee thrall
Unto eternal death. Alas, mine Eye
Did set full well thy poor humanity,
How weak it was to any good; how prone
To any thing was ill, as though alone
It had been wholly bent to choose the bad,
But leave the goodness which at first it had.
Yea, so it was indeed; and sure it stood
With reason, when thou left'st the chiefest Good,
How sin and death were begotten by man.
(My Self I mean, thy God; from whom alone
All have their goodness, but without have none:)
To turn aside from me, and fondly take
Some thing for good, which thou thy self did make
Without my help; scorning as 'twere, to be
Beholding for thy goodness all to me:
For lo, when thou had turned away thy sight
From me, who was alone thy Ioh. 1.4.
Life and Light,
And all the good thou had; thy blinded eyes
Could not but fall on contrarieties,
Take darkness stead of light, and so approve
The ill for good: thus thy seduced love,
When led to like by thy adult'rous will,
Brought forth thy death, the cursed child of ill.
Unhappy match of thine! Yet lo, from hence
I gathered good, by giving thee a sense
Of thine own wants, and making thee to see
How weak thou wast, and how thou could^st not be
Without my Grace; and this did make thee come
In humbleness, as erst the straying Son
To me alone in deepes of misery,
With, Luke 15.18.
Father, I have sinned, where soon as I
Had seen thy tears and thy humility,
Behold, how glad I was to pity thee:
I Luke 15.20.
ran to meet as 'twere, and re-embrace
Thy soul with arms of everlasting Grace.
All this I did for thee; but these are small:
For lo, the sum, and very chief of all
Is yet behind. Thus far I Have only bin
All mercy, winking as it were at sin:
But lo, as I am merciful, so I
Am all as just, and thou must satisfy
For sin by death: for this is also true,
My Justice and the Law will have its due.
But here, alas, I see, this very thought
Of death does strike thee down again to naught;
Kills thee a thousand times with grief, to see
How far impossible it is for thee
To suffer that, one thought whereof alone
Is able break the hardnedst heart of stone,
That would but think on it: for thus to die,
Is to despair of all felicity,
And be in endless tortures, such as none
Can tell; but those that suffer them alone.
Alas, unhappy wretch! this is thy lot,
Thy just desert, the fruit which thou have got
By leaving me. But here again arise,
Distressed soul, and wipe thy tearie eyes,
To apprehend more sweetly from above
The mystery of everlasting love,
The Malac. 2.4.
Sun of comfort to thy soul, that will
Dispell away these gloomy clouds of ill,
And all thy former miseries; and hence
Will ravish thee with more abundant sense
Of thine expreslesse happiness: for by
The utmost Psalm. 42.7
deep of this thy misery,
Thou shall perceive by happy opposite,
Another deep; how good, how infinite
My mercies are, that made my The mystery of man's Redemption by Christ Jesus.
Iustice-eie
To pity thee, because thou should not die:
I made it satisfy it self, come down
Esaias. 53.8. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
From my eternal Throne, throw off its Crown
Of glory which it had, and humbly take
Thy rags on it; and further for thy sake,
To be imprisoned in thy house of clay,
Until at length it suffered Gal. 3.13. 1. Pet. 2.24.
death, to pay
That heavy debt of thine. Thus thou art free
From sin, from death, from hell, from misery,
And all thy former ills; and now art made
Romans 6.18, 22. Ephesians 2 4, 5, 6, 19. Especial proofs of this.
Freeman of Grace, whereof thou'st but a 1. Cor. 13. 1. Ioh 3.2.
shade
Whiles here on earth, but shall hereafter have
The very substance, much as thou can crave,
Or shall know how to wish: (and 'twill not be
An age before my mercy comes to thee,
And takes thee hence, to make thee possident
Of all the happiness which here is meant:)
Now comfort here thy soul, and come and see
Those wondrous things that I have done for thee.
This spoke, behold, my sad attentive sp'rite
Now raised up, but then with woeful sight
Of my deserts, even tumbled down to death;
Yet here again revived with sweeter breath
Drawn from this sacred Oracle, which I
Heard warbling forth that pleasing Mystery
Of everlasting love, it faintly began
To urge me thus to speak, which I as man,
Thus faintly breathed out: O sacred tongue,
That have awaked me with so sweet a song,
Come once again I pray thee, let me hear
Some more of this that tickled so mine ear
With sweet celestial rapes: O how mine eye
Does long to see this happy Mystery
Explained to the full! What is it I hear?
I Am freed from death, from hell; I need not fear,
My debts are paid, and all my misery
Is freely taken away from me, and I
Made Ephesians. 2.19.
Citizen of Grace, and shall possess
Ere long, the full of changelesse happiness.
O welcome news! and feign would I believe
This which I would were true: but lo, I grieve,
Because I cannot see so much, my sin
Does lie so lumpish on my soul within,
And presses down so sore, alas, that I
Cannot so much as lift my drowzy eye
To apprehend this Light: Romans 7.24.
O wretched man!
Who shall deliver me? All that I can,
Seems worse and worse: the more I seem to stand,
The more I see Satan with all his band
Of wicked thoughts, so furiously combine
To pull me down, that all the strength of mine
Cannot so much For, as resist.
resist; but wretched I
Am hurried down to deeper misery.
The Regenerate man's changes many and miserable.
Thus miserable man with grief I see
Such fearful tumults rising still in me,
That I can never rest, or long possess
The sweet beholding of my happiness.
Sometimes I feel indeed, O blessed hour!
My soul is ravished by a secret power
Descending from above, whose sweet inspires
Do work such wonders on my slow desires,
That I am carried suddenly so high
Beyond my self, beyond mortality;
As scarce me thinks, I would vouchsafe a thought
On any thing below, which seems as naught,
Not worth the looking on, when I compare
Its baseness with the price of what is there:
Alas! it is all as Phil. 3.8.
dung, for while mine eyes
Are busied in those higher Theories,
Me thinks I seem in manner to possess
A part of Heavens eternal Blessedness;
Which now I am so thirsty for, and feign
Would have those sweet assurances again
But lo, when I had lifted up mine eye
To apprehend this sacred Mystery
Of thine eternal love, and Psalm. 2.12.
kiss that For Son, as in the Text because he is the Sun. Malach. 4.2.
Sun
Of Grace, which seemed thus smilingly to run
To lighten me, and by his powerful beams
To Cantic. 1.4. Ioh. 6.4, 4.
draw me out from these my deep extremes
Of sin and misery: Lo, here I say,
When I had thought, Sure now my wished day
Of happiness is come, and I shall see
The sweet beginnings of my life with thee;
My adversary, Satan, he that still
Has been th'occasioner of all my ill,
Genesis 3.1.
Sly Serpent as he is, that always lies,
And lurks to take his opportunities
To spoil man of his happiness; Lo, he
That always bears immortal Genesis 3.15.
enmity
To thee, and thine, as grieuing much that I
Should ever see that happy mystery How the devil watches all opportunities to
hinder man from happiness.

Of this thy boundless love to me; and then
When I had seen, to tell to other men
Thy wondrous works, that they might also see
How good thou art, and so appeal to thee
In all their deep extremities: whereby
Satan must down: for when we magnify
Thy high and hallowed Name, then does he know,
That he is nearest to his overthrow.
He sets on me a fresh, I say; for now
He saw how near his time was come, and how
I almost was beyond his reach; he 'gins
To summon all the legions of my sins
To press on me at once, and interpose
As gloomy clouds, that sun which now arose
To comfort me: and herewithall I 'gan
(O see the weakness of a sinful man)
To droope, and drowzie out my time, as one
That sleeps out the absence of the Sun
In gloomy days. Me thought I had no heart
To any good: But see the damned art
Of this deceauer; when he saw that I
Was drowzing thus, (an opportunity
Wherein most commonly he works his will)
"By drawing man from drowzinesse, to ill:
He secretly inuades on me, and there
Lays all his wicked stratagems, to rear
A mutiny within me; where my Sprite,
Because she was deprived of that sweet light,
(Which was indeed her Ioh 1.4.
life) did quickly yield,
And then my flesh began repossesse the field.
Which done, he represents unto my will
New killing sin, under the sweetest pill
That sense can wish; so Genesis 3.6.
pleasing to mine eye
And taste; I could not choose but take and try,
The flesh enforced so; and Reasons sight
Was gone, I could not see to take the right.
New sin said I? Oh no, the sin was old;
Only it had put on another mold,
Seeming far sweeter then before; but lo,
When eaten, it was the very gall of woe.
How the devil beguileth us to sin.
"Thus does he slyly use to represent
"Old sin to us, in forms of new content,
Such as he knows will please us best: but when
The soul has eaten it again, Oh then
She sees with grief, the sin is nothing new,
But old in all, save in its act, and hue:
And that new-seeming good it had in show;
In proof, alas, is nothing less then so.
Now, by the way, you troubled souls, A short digression to my troubled
Readers.
that be
In earnest longings as it were, with me,
To see that Sun of happiness; even you
That feign would bid this world, and all adieu,
To solace in his light; whose virtuous beams
Will quickly wipe away all teary streams
From off your eyes, and raise you up so high,
As never more, to be touched with misery;
Be not dismayed, I pray, although you see
Those many rubs that cross, and hinder me
In this my way to happiness; but think
Your selves must have the like, before you drink
Of that pure Well of life: Expect, that he
Which always deals thus treacherously with me,
Does also watch your ways; and when he spies
His fittest time, will rear up mutinies
Within you too: for lo, he will never cease
To vex, unless it be, where all is peace
With him; that is, whose souls are all within
His own precincts, as willing slaves to sin.
The temptation of evil thoughts especially to be heeded.
And amongst the rest, when wicked thoughts arise,
That represent you naught but vanities,
Seeming to please the flesh; Oh then take heed,
Satan is come on you; and if with speed
You do not cast them off, they will betray
The soul into his hands. Oh, these are they
That set on me so sore; these are the pills
That do induce me to so many ills:
These interrupt my soul, when she would fly
Beyond this nether Orb of vanity,
To contemplate her God (that only can
Give true content unto the soul of man:)
And these are they, (O would to God that I
Could say herein unto my self, I lie:
Would sad experience had not made me know
The truth of this, to mine abundant woe:)
That slyly steal upon, and do surprise
Those heau'n-bent hearts, and upward looking eyes
That would be votaries to good, (while they
Are Psalm. 39.12.
Pilgrims here; still traueling on the way
To their eternal blessedness; the home,
VVhereto, they cannot rest, until they come;)
And carry them, even quite against their will,
To straying paths, to wander on in ill:
And when (alas) the soul shall but digest
One little thought of ill; yea, though the least,
That make the room for more, (so strong is ill,
The very least is great enough to kill:)
For one ill seldom goes alone; but when
That gets a hold, it Matthew. 12.45. Luke 1^.26.
brings in other ten
As bad, or worse then it; which being in,
As wicked thieves, they presently begin
To fall upon the good, and dispossess
Them of their rights, fill all with heaviness.
The miseries that follow sin.
But to my self again: When careless I
Had swallowed down this pleasing misery
Of one unhappy thought; O how my heart
Was stricken straight with a benumming smart,
Pressed with a heavy drowzinesse; my sin
Had cast such gloomy mists on all within.
And hereupon, (O that so light a toy
Should seem to shipwreck all my former joy,
And so o're-whelme my soul with fears, that I
Should lose my self so long in misery.)
A Legion more (the most unlucky shade
That ever yet did my poor soul invade)
Of thoughts, distracted thoughts came rushing in,
And feign would have me (desperate) on in sin;
Never hope for Goodness more; never spend my pain
For that, which was so difficult to gain:
Nay, more, alas, (O that my shameless pen
Should dare to whisper out to other men
Those private conflicts of my soul, for fear
I should offend the true religious ear:
For Christians should not once so much as name
Such things as these, lest some say, it is profane:)
They drew me to such dangerous Rocks, The fearefullst temptation of all
others.
that I
Was put to doubtings of a Deity;
Whether I had a God or no, that He
Should seem to go so far away from me
In those my greatest deeps: O how my sprite
Was mazed at this vnaccustom'd fight?
How was I shaken? How was all my man
Struck down with fear? Good God! Psalm. 39.12. in our singing Psalms.
how pale and wan
My outward visage was, Eccles. 13.25, 26.
which might bewray
The grievous conflicts of mine inward fray?
How did I walk disconsolate, as one
That had no life in him, or had alone
His life to live in misery? wherein
Twere better not to be, then to have been.
But here, dear Christians* you, To my Christian Readers.
whose happier Eyes
Are always blessed with feeling Theories
Of Heavens chief Goodness; you that sweetly run
These happy paths, never clouded from the Sun,
Condemn me not (I pray you) straight, that I
Bear not a part in that felicity,
Which you your selves are in; but rather praise
The goodness of that God, whose Gracious Rays
He would in mercy make your eyes to see,
But in his Justice hide them now from me,
For reasons known best to himself: (and who
Shall dare gainsay what pleases him to do?)
O be Sc. Christians.
your selves, I pray; which if you be,
Then am I sure, you will rather pity me
With earnest prayers in my behalf, that I
May win at length a happy victory
After these dreary storms: Iam. 5.16.
Oh, these are they
I need especially; Good Reader, pray
To help me out; and know, what now is mine,
If Justice please, to morrow may be thine:
Calmes seldom hold continually; and we,
Though now in storms, have yet a hope to see
A fairer day. Thus may the loftiest eyes
Look for a fall, and I may look to rise:
And I may look! Alas, poor soul, how feign
Would thou be lifting up thine eyes again,
To see that Light of happiness, that Sun,
Whose beams ere-while so wondrously begun
To glad thy drooping sprites, and to expel
The dismal clouds of all thy former Hell?
But, O unhappy wretch! how do I see
My gloomy sins o're-vaile and shadow me?
What ghastly thoughts do wrest away mine eyes,
To gad, and gaze on thousand vanities,
And various shows of ill; which give to me
No more content, then does my misery?
Alas, they vex me ten times more; for these
Will not so much as let me seek for ease,
Which that enforces me to do; but still
They urge me onwards to some other ill,
Which seems as though 'twould give me ease, but when
I Have also tried its Remedy, Oh then
I grieve to see my foolishness, that I
Should be thus flatterd on in misery:
For still the more I add to ill, the more
I add of poison to my festred sore,
The more I add to weigh me down to Hell,
And more of pain my conscious soul does tell,
That I of force must undergo, e're I
Recover back my first felicity.
"Such ease it seems to fall toward Hell: but then,
"Alas, how full of tears to rise again.
And thus I add unto my griefs, although
My stupid flesh would feign persuade me no;
Oh, this is it that kills my soul, to see
Dullness or deadness of soul how miserable.
I Am sick even to the death, yet not to be
Touched truly with the sense of it, whereby
I might in haste go seek for remedy
With some new kind of Rhetoric, with cries
And teary-words; making my weeping eyes
My humble intercessors; and my groans
To utter forth more lamentable Tones,
Then ever yet before; which might enforce
The Heavens, and all unto a new remorce:
And chiefly to appease the angry frown
Of my Great God, whose absence throws me down
To all those deepes of misery; that I
Should so misprize that high benignity,
And Riches of his love (which was to me
The very sum of true felicity:)
As to exchange it for a taste, or twain
Of Satan's sweets, and so to entertain
In stead of him, those guests which now possess
My soul with naught, but cursed bitterness,
And sad desparing-heauy thoughts: and these
Are all the salues that Satan has to ease
The troubled soul. O what a fool was I,
Thus to believe his damned flattery?
Did I not know enough before, how he
Beguild my Adam, and Eve.
Parents, as he now does me,
To eat of the forbidden fruit, and said,
That they should be Genesis 3.5.
as Gods, ere he betrayed
Their souls into his cruel hands? But then
He threw them down below the state of men,
And then he triumphed in their falls, as now
He does in mine. But, Genesis 3.9.
Adam, where art thou?
Or rather, where am I? Why do I run
Amongst the Genesis 3.8.
trees to hide me from the Sun?
I Will go unto my God again, and there
Will never cease to call, until he hear
From out his holy Place, and thence come down
To take me up; and till that angry frown
Be turned to wonted pleasing similes; and he
Shall sweetly come again, and show to me
Those endless Riches of his love, which erst
He 'gan reveal: for lo, I cannot rest;
My Psalm. 77.2.
soul will not be comforted, till I
Shall see at full that happy Mystery
Of his eternal love, whereof while-ere
I had a glimpse: O let me but come there
To that high seat of happiness, to see
The fullness of that true felicity;
And in the midst of that sweet Theorie,
O let my body melt away and dye;
Or let me dye unto the flesh, that so
My soul may never more taste of bodies woe;
But always be hereafter throned so hie,
As still enjoy that happy Theorie:
Where is my God so long? O where art thou,
My John 1.4.
Light, my Life, my Happiness? Come now,
O quickly, come and take me up, for fear
I fall into the ghastly Psalm. 143.7.
pit, and there
Be none to help me up again. O why
Did thou in anger take away thine eye
So suddenly from me? Thou knew'st full well,
I needs must fall down to the pit of hell,
When thou did fail to hold me up. Alas!
I knew before how poor and weak I was;
How full of misery; which made me call,
As erst I did, to thee for help, when all
Were fled away besides, and there was none
That could relieve me but thy self alone:
Good God! what did thou mean in this, to show
Thy wondrous love to me, but straight to throw
Me down again from sight of it, that I
Had not the time so much, as to apply
Least comfort to my soul from thence? for lo,
All that I learned hence, was this, to know
There was indeed a help, but to my grief;
Because I was not able take relief,
Or any ease from thence: and sure 't had been
For me far better that I never had seen,
Then thus to see, and not enjoy that Light,
Which who once sees, can never take delight
In any thing besides, or be content,
Till he become a happy Possident
Of that which he so sweetly saw. But stay,
Rash foolish wretch! what was it that I did say
To thee, my God? What, did I say, 'twas Thou
That thus have thrown me down so low? O how
My foolishnes bewrayes it self? 'Twas I;
Even I my self, mine own iniquity
My Psalm. 107.17, 18.
foolish turning 'way from thee, my sin
That brought me to these deepes I now am in,
Even to the gates of death. But thou, my God,
Did often come with thy chastizing rod,
To call me home again, and did^ lord
The sweet (...) of thy quickening Wo^d,
To Ps. ^07.20.
heal my ^r'd soul: but foolish I
Would still be turning back to vanity.
The Sun shone on me, but, alas, my sight
Did rather choose to wander in the night
Of gloomy sin, then ^scend so hi^,
As bless it self with (...) sweet Theorie
Of this thy wondrous love to me. But stay,
Poor foolish man* What is it again, I say?
Did rather choose? Experimental proofs against man's free will to any
spiritual good*
Al^s, was it in my choice
To apprehend than light, or to rejoice
In things beyond my reach? Fool that I am;
Could I do this? Sure I were more then man,
But woe is me, Adam unhappy Son;
My sinful power^ (...) now refrained to one,
And that is bad; I have no Not that Papists have this free will, but that out
of the pride of their hearts they say so, as also to defend their opinion of
Merits, which is alike derogatorie from Gods glory.
Papists will
To take the good, or to refuse the ill,
How, when, or where I please: alas, I see
These high prerogatives are far from me!
I owe more to thy Grace then so: for when
At any time I take the good, Oh then
I feel within a sweet dependencie
I have alone on thee; and it is not I
My self I mean no more, but all 1. Cor. 15.10.
thy Grace
That works in me, which makes me thus embrace
That which is only good. And hence again
I see that tale of merits is so vain,
That I must needs confess, my humbled hope
Can never build so much upon the Pope,
That I should ever expect by doing well,
Unless by Grace, any other Heaven then Hell:
I speak but what I feel. Now if there be
Some sinful sons of Ade, as well as me,
That ever truly f^lt their hearts, Oh then
They Will also know themselves to be but men,
And never build on self deserts, whereby,
They can win naught but hell and misery:
For all that they can do, is ill, unless
By Ephesians. 2.8.
Grace; and that is no deseruingnesse,
Because not theirs, but Gods; from whom alone
They have their goodness; or if not, have none*
If they will be more then this, sure they must be
The sons of Ade in his integrity,
And is it so? Good God, then what am I,
That I should go along thus heavily,
And not enjoy thy countenance? Alas!
Am I of Job 6 12.
stone, or in my flesh of brass,
To undergo these heavy storms, to be
So long left to my self, deprived of thee?
How is it I fall not down to hell? or how
I die not straight in these my sins? sure thou,
Thou have thy working hand in this, though I
Perceive it not with my too fleshie eye;
For it is impossible that I should Iam. 3.22. Wisd. 11.2^.
stand
Thus long, unless thy all protecting hand
Did hold me up. Good God, then let me know
As thou art Good, and kind to those that show
Their griefs to thee, what is the cause that I
Should be thus plunged in deepest misery,
Deprived of thee so long why did thou let
These ^udg 16.20, 21.
Philistims alone, till they would beset
My soul about? I mean, those poisonous pills
Of wicked thoughts, those harbengers of ills,
That now possess my drowzie man, and thence
Do drive 'way all my good, and former sense
Of thy sweet favors, which were wont to be
My greatest helps in greatest misery.
Why is it, said I? why sure it is for my sin:
Yea, blessed God, but yet there lies within
Some other cause: or else I pray thee, why
Do thou not ^ut me quite away* for I
Deserve as justly that, as thus to be
Vexed with a tedious life that wants thee.
But sure thou have some other aims, I know,
As erst that sc. Job.
man of Patience found, although
Man's wisdom sees it not; thy Job 37.14, 23. Esaias 40.28.
works far pass
Our feeble findings out: But yet, alas,
Pity a wretch, come gently daine, and show,
What I my self know not which way to know;
The cause I mean; as thou art Good, come tell,
Why is it I hang so long twixt heaven, and hell?
Why do thou hide thy countenance? O why
Do thou forsake me thus in misery?
Why do thou leave me to my self? to see
What I would do without depends from thee?
And how behave my self when I should fight
Against that adversary of the Light,
The Prince of darkness, that grand enemy
Unto my peace? Alas, thou needst not try
To see what I would do, thou know full well
What I must do; despair, and so to hell.
Thus did thou try thy servant Job; but sure
Had thou not gi'en him virtue to endure
Those heavy storms, and held him up withal
By secret Grace, he ^ould not choose but fall
As well as I: for he was man, and had
Depends alike from thee; only in b^d
I differ, 'cause he was Job 1.1. Chap. 2.3.
upright* but I
A man polluted with iniquity:
And yet in this he could not say, that he
Was Job 9.2, 3.
righteous of himself, 'twas all from thee,
Even from thy Grace: And should it please thee say,
That I am clean and just, why sure I may
Be right as he; thus he, and all as I,
In what is good, have like dependencie
"On thee out God; and there is none that can
"Be good himself, as he is merely man.
But come I to my self again, alas!
This helps not yet, I still am where I was,
In my old deepes of misery; and thou
My Gracious God, O would it please thee now
At length to manifest thy self, and show
Thy judgments here to me, that I might know
Thy works (past finding out by man,) and see
The reasons of thy dealings thus with me.
O Lord, Psalm. 6.3.
how long will thou delay? how long
Shall I continue yet my plaining song,
Before thy mercies come to me, and I
Behold at full that blessed mystery
Of thy sweet Mal. 4.2.
Sun of Righteousness, which thou
Did erst begin reveal to me, but now
Have clouded from mine eyes again. Alas!
I am not steel, nor is my flesh of brass,
(As erst I said) that I should ever endure
Such heavy fearful brunts as these; for sure
I feel with Psalm. 88.6, 7 15, 16. H^man was one of the ^ingers of Israel, 1.
Chro. 25. and 2. Chr. 5.12* etc.
H^man now Thy wrathful hand
Lies hard on me; and who is able stand
Under its weight?) Again, it is of a truth,
Thy terrors have I suffered from my Childhood.
youth
Or, with troubled mind, as in the Text, verse. 15. in our daily reading
Psalms.
Up hitherto, so grievous, that I lie
Like him who is even at the point to dye
At every min^^es end: or else to go
Beyond those bounds of Heman Sea of woe?
Behold, I Am dead already, yet not dead,
As Heman seemed almost, who was but led
With outward grieuances to plain and cry,
As here he did, in his extremity,
For Verse. 8.
want of friends, or c'ause his enemies
Were multiplied, and his adversities
Had ouer-whelm'd him quite, yet none would hear
Or pity him, so that he was as 'twere
A man forlorn, even brought unto his grave,
For want of what indeed he ought to have.
And sure these his extremes were wondrous great,
I must confess, whence he might well entreat
Thy aiding face for help, and might complain
For want of it, when all things else were vain;
And either fled As friends use to do in adversity, Psalm. 38.11.
as friends, or did conspire
As foes, to clog him still in sorrows mire.
But these (if this be all) are gentle flawes
To my more inward storms of soul; because
They only kill our bodies, but these Psalm. 88.7.
waves
Hurry our souls to mo^e unhappy graves:
And sure 'twere naught, if I had all the griefs
This world can load me with, yet no reliefes
At all from it; and were my friends (most dear)
Far distant from me, (as they are not near:)
And were it that they all forsook me quite,
And every one besides swollen up with spite,
As cruel foes to vex me still, and I
Were left implung'd in all the misery
That worldlings can invent, brought to my grave;
(As Psalm. 4.5.
Heman was:) Only let me but have
The joy of thy Psalm. 4* 6. and 16.^1.
sweet countenance, and then
I will not once so much as grieve at them:
Let meee, I say, but have my peace with thee,
And come what comes, all shall be well with me:
For all the worst that they can do, is this,
To send my soul the sooner to her bliss.
But woe is me, these are but toies, if waid
With my great grieuances; for lo, thou'st laid
Me in the Psalm. 88.6.
lowest pit, a dismal place
Of naught but darkness, where no glimpse of Grace
Does once so much as shine on me, whereby
I might but taste some true felicity
In these my griefs, or else might cease to be
In misery, whiles I might speak to thee
In praises, not in plaints. Alas, I Am dead
Already, as I said, my soul's o'respred
With a benumming Lethargy of sin,
So that I Am thoroughly dead, but where? Within:
My body lives, alas, but woe is me,
My soul is dead, and that for want of thee,
Which art alone her Deuteronomy. 30.20. Psalm. 42.8.
life: this is my grave,
The deep wherein I am, that dismal Cave
Whereto I Am brought: and who, alas, am I
Ever to endure so great a misery
As this? to live without a soul, or be
Left to my self, and quite deprived of thee.
Alas, how often shall I repeat, how often
Shall I tell over my griefs? what, is there naught
That Is able comfort me? Psalm. 77.9.
Have thou forgot
Thy mercies, O my God? or have thou not
Genesis 27.38
One blessing left for me? shall it be said,
That ever any sought to thee for aid,
And was denied? Or can man's misery
Exceed the bounds of thy benignity,
And mercy which is infinite? Oh no;
I Am quite amiss; these can be nothing so:
Thy mercies never were forgot, nor thou
Without a blessing for a son, though now
Thou seem hard in granting me; beside,
There Is none ever sought thee, that was yet denied
Thy saving Grace: nor can man's miseries
Exceed the bounds of thy benignities,
And mercies which are infinite; for they
Are only finite: but if so, I pray
Let me go on with thee, my God, then why
Do thou so long pro^ogue my misery,
And do not grant my suite? for I have cried
To thee for mercy, but am yet denied
In my extremes. Alas, what would thou have?
How should I woo thee, or how should I crave
To win thy love? Thou know I am but man,
And would thou have me do more than I can?
I may not force thee whe'r thou will, or no,
To love and pity me: for were it so,
I needed not entreat so much: but I
Am Psalm. 119.^4.
thine, O Lord; my poor humanity
Is subject to thy beck, and let it be
My glory still, still to be so to thee.
But then what shall I do? Where shall I go
To ease me of this heavy grief? for lo,
I Have gone about as man, and done my best
To wear it out, but yet I cannot rest:
One while I think to drive away the pain,
By drowzying out my time: but this is vain;
When I awake, it comes afresh: but then
The tricks of these times to drive away all discontents, how value and
comfortless if truly thought on.
To try the common helps of godless men,
(Which mostly now they use to drive away
Some melancholy dump, or drowzie day:)
I card it out awhile, (but for the Die
Indeed I hate, 'cause (...) vanity
That hangs so much on chance, and has ^o wit;
And five to one against him that lays on it.)
And then perchance, A simile fit for these times.
as when some three or four
Of honest Lads are met to lose an hour
Or two in sober merriment; we have
A Bowl or twain of Beer, (but he is a knave
They say, that drinks not whole ones off: but I
Have always hated too this vanity,
'Cause 't has no show of pleasure in it, unless
It be to drown ones brains in sottishness,
And 'reaue him both at once of sense and wit:
Which if it please, let men delight in it;
For me, I like it not.) But here again,
As erst I said, this help is also vain,
Alas, it gives me no content: for when
I Have spent away my time with other men,
In these, or such like fooleries as these,
And dream all is well, because I seem to please
My outward Or, flesh.
fence; alas, even then I find
So often secret pangs within my mind,
Which come as doleful warning-bells to toule
Such fearful peales to my dead-sleepie soul,
That I can never rest in peace, until
I Have quite thrown off this Acts 28.3, 5
Viper of mine ill,
The sin that hangs on so fast: for this
It is alone Esaias 59.2.
that interrupts my bliss,
The cursed cloud that has almost undone
My woeful soul, by keeping off the Sun
Of Grace so long from it. And here, alas,
I always feel (how ever it comes to pass)
Such inward wars, that there is no peace with me,
Nor will, before I have my peace with thee.
Others, perchance, may feel a seeming ^ase,
When they resort to such vain helps as these,
In their extremes. Indeed I cannot tell
What others f^^le; but that it goes not well
With me I Am sure: and how-soe'r, if I
May speak the truth (for sure I dare not lie
Before my God) to them; think what they will,
That all is well, when nothing is not ill;
Because they have a fair flesh-pleasing calm,
Whiles thus they run to vanity for Balm
To cure their wounds; yet let them know (how ever
They dream themselves the farthest off from fear,
Because they do not feel the same) that they
Are in the Acts 8.23.
gall of woe: and though they may
Seem senseless for a while; yet lo, the day,
That Eccles. 12.^, 3, 4, 5, etc.
doleful day will come, when they shall say,
We have no pleasure in it; when The hands.
they that keep
The house, shall tremble; when the The legs.
strong men creep,
And bow themselves; the The teeth.
grinders cease, and when
Those (Seers of the vanities of men,)
That The eyes.
look out at the windows, lose their light;
And when the The lips.
doors are shut (because it is night)
And when the grinding-sound is low; and all
The The windpipes.
Maids of music take their lowest fall;
And when there is nothing left but trembling fears;
And all desire shall fail; and when the tears
Of mourners flow about the streets, 'cause they
Are going then to their long home, the way
Of all mankind: (for Eccles. 12.14.
that eternal One
Shall bring each work before his Judgment Throne,
Be It good or bad; and there will doom the ill
Down to the vales of lasting death; but will
Receive the good into his holy place,
Where they shall always see him 1. Cor. 13.12. 1. Ioh. 3.2.
face to face.)
And when, as erst I said, these days of woe
Are come, Oh then they will begin to know
All Is not so well as thought with them, although
The flesh did slyly seem persuade them so;
I mean, when drearie days of sickness come,
Or death to call them to their latest home,
(For these will come,) O then they will begin
To feel so many armies (hid within)
Of fearful sins beset their sleepie souls
So suddenly, that they will have naught but howles
And sad despairing cries, to be their fence
Against these resistlesse enemies: and sense
Will then be quick to feel (but all too late)
What erst, alas, they did not feel to hate
Their cursed peace with flesh and vanity,
Which is indeed a mortal Romans 8.6, 7
enmity
With God himself: for sure the flesh and he
Are enemies, and they can never agree.
So then to be at peace with flesh, is this,
To be a merely wicked one, which is
Not to have peace at all, for such have none,
Esaias 57. vlt.
There is no peace unto the wicked (one)
So says my God. Thus may they learn and see,
What it is to be at peace, if not with thee.
Alas, it is Romans 8.6, 7.
death. But to return again
From whence I straid: Since all these helps are vain,
(For I am troubled still so sore, that I
Can have no rest, while clouded from thine eye:)
Good God, what shall I do, where shall I go
To be delivered of this child of woe?
This heavy burden of my sin, whereby
My soul is pressed so low, she cannot fly
To thee her God, there to behold and see
Those wondrous things which thou have done for me.
Alas, why do thou leave me then? and why
Do thou so long in anger hide thine Job 13.24.
Eye,
Thus to prorogue my griefs? Shall humane sense
Dare strive it out with thy Omnipotence
On self presumes; as though it could withstand
Thy mightiness, or wrest from out thy hand
Thy mercies by constraint; when with one breath
Thou can consume us every one to death?
Oh no, my God; such lawless thoughts as these
May not come near my heart: then would it please
Thy goodness pity me at length: for why,
Thou know full well I cannot choose but die,
Unless thou come and pity me. Oh then
Delay me not, my God, but come again,
O quickly come, revive me with thy Grace,
And with those beams, (those issues of thy face)
The joy of thy sweet Psalm. 4.6. and 16.11.
countenance; which when
My soul is fully blessed withal, Oh then
I Will crave no more, save only this, thereby
Still to enjoy that blessed Theorie
Of thine eternal love to me, in him
Whom erst thou did reveal; that so my sin
Might be abolisht quite, and I may be
Knit in inseparable Ties to thee:
O meet me here, my God, this is the place,
The time, the opportunity for Grace:
Fitter thou can not have, then this; for lo,
I Am wearied out, and can no further go
For want of Grace. My soul is qui^^ bereft
Of all her strength, and here, alas, I Am left
As one for-lorne, that neither can relieve
Himself, nor call to any else to give
Him some Relief: for sure I Am grown so cold
And senseless of my griefs, that now behold,
I cannot draw one tear from out my head
To plain my self, alas, I am so dead:
So dead in sin, I mean, for want of Grace
To quicken me, that so mine eyes and face
Might flow with tears (springing from lively sense
Of what I am:) true tears of penitence;
And every word I speak, might tell my woes,
By weeping all along the way it goes.
O this were well, were it so well with me,
That I could be so good as I would be,
Thus penitent I mean, until mine eyes
Had thoroughly wept away my miseries
And sins at once; and there were none behind,
As envious clouds, to interrupt and blind
My heau'n-b^^t soul, when feign she would up and see
Those wondrous things which thou have done for me.
Alas! but it is not so, my God, there lies
That massy lump of my infirmities.
Betwixt my soul, and thee, which always press
Me down so low, that I must needs confess
Mine own unhappy wants, whose bleared eye
Can never reach this sacred Mystery
Of thine eternal love, although it be
No less then John 17.3.
life's eternal loss to me,
In that I cannot reach the same, and Bliss
Again as endless, if I could do this:
Yet all is one, my poor humanity,
Alas, is too too weak, and cannot fly
It self to thee, to apprehend that Light,
For man could never save himself by 2. Cor. 5.7.
sight
Without thy Ephesians 2.8.
Grace; which only purifies,
And takes 'way those ill humors from our eyes,
That hinder blessed sights, and in their steed
Inspires us with those that are eyes indeed,
Those 2. Cor. 5.7. and Ephesians. 1.18, compared with Chap. 2.8.
eyes of faith I mean, which only may
Approach (that treasure of eternal day)
Thy holy hill, there to behold and see
The Ephesians. 1.18 Col. 1 26, 27.
Riches of that Glory hid with thee
From all eternity, the Ephesians. 3.18 19.
depth, the hight
Which none can comprehend without the light
Of thy all-seeing Sprite: that Ephesians. 3.19.
mystery
Of everlasting love, which now mine eye
Does long so much to see, and till I see,
Alas, there is nothing that can comfort me:
Oh then, my God, here let thy Grace descend,
Here let it come, and put a happy end
To this my tedious night of grief; and here
Let that sweet Malac. 4.2.
Sun of Righteousness appear
(Which erst began shine) in such maiestick hue,
That all these gloomy shades may bid adue;
While his sweet rays come vsh'ring in the day,
Or run (as Esaias 40.3. Mat. 3.3.
John) before, to make the way:
And here, great Lord, come raise me up so high
( Psalm. 119.169.
According to thy word) that now mine eye
May soar up to thy Mercy-seate, and there
As Heavens pure eyes, fixed in a holier Sphere
Be freed from all corruptions taint, while I
Go bathe my soul in that sweet Theorie
Of thine eternal love, and when I see
Those high prerogatives I have by thee,
How thou have made me free from death, from sin,
From hell, and all those miseries wherein
I now lie plunged, and those whereto I tend
As of my self, and less thy Grace descend
And quickly come and take me up, alas,
I needs must fall; and when it comes to pass,
That thy sweet Ioh. 14.^6. and 15.26.
Comforter shall come, and tell
To my sad soul again, that all is well
With me: and when I feel thy quickening Sprite
That harbenger, and pledge of true delight,
Romans 8.^6.
Bear witness unto mine, that I am made
Ephesians 2.18, 19
Free man of Grace, whereof I Have but a shade
Whiles here on earth, but shall hereafter have
The very substance, much as I can crave,
Or shall know how to wish; as erst to me
Thou did declare in that sweet mystery
Of thy great love; then shall my tongue and pen
Be wholly votaries to thee, and then
My sad Urania (whose now weeping eyes
Are quite worn out with plainings, tears, and cries)
When she but apprehends those gladsome rays,
Shall metamorphose all her notes to praise;
And I myself, with all I have, will be
As one that is wholly consecrate to thee,
Who am alone redeemed by thee. Oh then,
Here come, my God; here quickly come again,
And take me up; here let me sweetly hear
Those heavenly tunes again, which did while-ere
Give such reuiuals to my soul, that I
Was almost past my Sea of misery,
Never to be plunged in it again; if thou
Had not so suddenly with-drawne the brow
Of that sweet Sunshine of thy Grace, whereby
I 'gan to see the blessed Romans 8.21.
liberty
Of those who are the sons of God. But come,
Great Maker, now, and what thou have begun
In me thy creature, perfect up; that so
When after-ages shall both see, and know
How kindly thou have dealt with me, they may
Appeal to thee in like extremes, and pray
To thee alone for help, seeing that I
( David's Psalm. 34.6.
poor man) did humbly call, and cry
To thee, and was delivered: for if he
Were heard, they will say, then doubtless so shall we.
What will thou more? This is the time and place,
As erst I said; thou see I want thy Grace
So much, poor soul, as We have extreme need of Grace, when we cannot
heartily pray for it.
scarce I Am able call
To thee for Grace: and if thou wilt let me fall,
Alas! I Am ready to consent, although
It be my thraldom to eternal woe,
Never thence to be redeemed again: nay, more,
Alas! I cannot choose but fall, so poor
And weak a wretch am I, that feign if I
Might have my will, ((...) decreed to die)
I Would seek out opportunities, wherein
I would enact some hig^^vnhallowed sin,
That might exclude not quite from thee; alas!
Such are the deeds my self would being to pass,
And none but such; and then how can thou have
A fitter opportunity to save
Then now thou have in me? Was ever man
Brought nearer yet to hell then now I am,
That want but one unhappy step? Oh no;
There Is none can fall to greater deepes of woe,
Unless he fall to hell it self: for I
Am the next step, so full of misery,
As quite ore-come with it; or one S^ (...) excell^ l^^fac^as (...) sum.
whose sense
Is dulled with its exceeding violence,
That so I cannot feel my self, unless
It be like him that is in a drowzinesse,
Or some unhappy Lethargy, whereby
He dully feels, but knows not how to cry,
The danger of a spiritual slumber or Lethargy, not to be cured by any humane
remedies.
Or plain himself, or call for help: and sure
This dangerous sickness is beyond the cure
Of humans best preservatives, which can
At most but reach unto the outward man,
To ease, or comfort that awhile: but when
Those heavy pangs oppress the soul, O then
All these are vain: for what were it, if I
Should live in body, whiles in soul I die?
Alas! this were the life of death, when that
Which is my bodies life is dead. But what,
What do I mean? Why is my troubled sprite
Distracted thus? Can grief be infinite,
Which rises from that inward sight of sin,
Whereby we wail that woeful ^ase, wherein
We see our selves by nature, and whereby
We learn betimes to climb so humbly hie,
As wholly to forsake our selves, and cast
Our hopes alone on thee, who only have
The treasures of eternal life? Sure no;
This is that happy path, by which we go
Into the way of saving (...); and this
Is that sweet m^lium to our future bli^,
Through which indeed we must, before we may
Approach those Ioh. 14.2.
(...) of eternal day.
Here then, dear God, here will I humbly Ps. 130.5, 6.
wait
With lowly confidence in this my strait,
(A strait more great then 2. Sam. 24.14.
David's was, when he
Did erst betake himself alone to thee,
Because thy mercies were so great) and here
Because thy Esaias 63.5. and Psalm. 107 filled with notable proofs hereof.
mercies also are full near
In midst of humanes greatest deepes, that hence
We might observe, it is thy Omnipotence
And Goodness only that relieues, when we
Are ready to despair, because we see
Naught else but 2. Cor. ^.9.
death within our selves, and how
There Is naught beside can do us good, that thou
May be made 2. Cor. 15.28.
all in all* because, I say,
Thou art so good, here will I humbly stay,
Until thy mercies raise me up, (even here,
Confounded in my plaints, without a tear
To tell my further griefs, to verify,
That sorrow in extremes is always dry.)
Here will I lay me down, here will I stay,
Alas, because I have no more to say:
For lo, I Am dead in sin and grief; Oh then
Here let thy goodness show it self, my Pen
And Muse can speak no more, till thou descend
And teach them more; needs must I make an end:
And thus in deepes of this my silent grief,
I humbly wait for answer of relief.
Man's miserable security being left to himself.
Here laying down my self, much like a man
That Is careless grown, I sleepingly began
To drowzie out my days, not caring how
I played the Prodigal with time: for now
Said I, Sure I can do no more, mine eyes
Are wearied with my tears; my sighs and cries
Have quite ore-whelm'd my feeble soul, and I
Am plunged in so deep a misery,
That now I know not what to do: alas!
For Exodus 3.11.
who am I? My Psalm. 39.12. and 102.11.
pilgrim-daies do pass
Away as shades; and still the more I have
Of life, the more I do approach my grave.
All this I see, That is, woe is me.
aye me, and more then this,
That very cloud that hinders all my bliss,
My sins do still increase on me; y^^, they
Will have no interruptions, though my day
Be clouded ere so much, they will not cease
To vex my soul, nor let me live in peace;
Alas! and these Psalm. 88.15.
distract me quite, while I
Have not the power to make resistancie,
When they oppose: but as a Romans 7.23.
captive slave,
Am forced to yield at every thing they will have,
Because my Lord is far away, (whose Grace
Alone should shield me from this great disgrace:)
And I meane-while, (O most unhappy man!
That ever knew those deepes wherein I am)
Am brought to doubtings of my God: for he
Is not, said I; or surely if he be,
How can he yet contain himself, that knows
The wondrous deepes of these my sins and woes,
And yet does let me still alone till I
Am quite ore-whelm'd, and past recovery?
Alas! he dealt not so while-ere with those
His Psalm. 22.4.
Saints of old, but sweetly would disclose
Himself to them, especially when they
Were in extremes, and did but come and pray
With humbled hearts for his relief; as I
Have often read in that sc. the Bible.
sweet History
Which registers his works, that holy Book,
Which he preserues for all to ouer-looke
With serious meditation; which, I say,
He still preserues till Doomes approaching day,
By a resistlesse providence.) And then
If they were heard so soon who were but men,
As we may see in Psalm. 6, 8, 9.
David, Esaias 38.5, 17.
Hezekiah,
And all the rest of sacred Prophecy:
(I speak not them as Kings, for sure with him
VVe're men Deuteronomy. 10.17 Job 19.34. Rom 2.11.
alike, Rom 3.23.
concluded all in sin:)
What should I say, (I say) who am a man,
As they, though not a King; who also ran
Unto my God in these my deepes, and there
With many a weary sigh, groan and tear,
Have often begged of him for Grace, that I
Might sweetly see that blessed mystery
Of those who are his happied sons, and yet
Am still denied, and can no further get,
Do what I can? Alas, what should I say,
Or think, or do? What steads it me to pray,
And never have the thing I ask? alas!
My strength, said I, is not the strength of brass,
Thus to endure without relief; but I
(The true Portraite of man's Infirmity)
Am ready here to faint, to sink, to cease
My fruitless suit, and hence to live at peace,
I mean with flesh: never more to toil for this
Which is so hard to get, so high a bliss,
That I can never attain vnto't. I see
The way's too strait for selfe-humanitie,
To thrust its feet into; or if it can,
It Is too-too hard to keep as it began;
It has so many rubs, so many Rocks,
So many slippry falls, and hindering blocks,
That 'twould discourage any one to think
That he should go, nay come unto the brinke
Sometimes of Heaven, and thinking all is well;
Yet straight be tumbled down again to Hell.
All this I Have known, (O most unhappy I
To be experienced thus in misery!)
And can I choose but faint? who is it descryes
The feeble props of man's infirmities?
Who is it, I say, that would but rightly look
Into the bloared volumes of man's book,
(His secret thoughts I mean) and there ore-see
The heart in its corrupt Anatomy,
But straight he would say (conscious as I) that I
Must faint indeed of mere necessity?
Objection.
But here perhaps some happier soul will say,
Go, go, fond wretch, first cast thy sins away;
And then thou shall be quickly heard; for sure
You Are frozen in thy dregs, a man impure,
That wallowest still in sin, or else never doubt
Thou Would long ere this been heard and helped out:
For these are they that hinder thee, yea these
Do Esaias 59.1.
separate thee from God, and do displease
His pure-ill-hating eyes, so much that he
Has hid himself so long away from thee:
Esaias 59.1.
Not that he cannot save, or hear; but 'cause
Thou still runn'st on in trespassing his Laws
By thy continuing evil thoughts, and by
Thy following acts full of iniquity:
For he has Psalm. ^39.1, 2, 3.
known and searched thee, although
The world indeed be blind, and cannot so.
And hence it is, He will not hear, but will
For certain leave thee, till thou leave thine ill.
To this said I, Alas! I must confess, My answer.

It Is true indeed, my sins, and wickedness
Are wondrous great, aye me, they still increase,
And I in them; (which hinders all the peace
Of my unhappy soul:) Alas, they are such,
I am ashamed yea quite ashamed so much
As but to name them to the world, for fear
I should offend those happier Saints that hear
Of my enormities; alas! my heart
Is sick even to the death with them; that part
Which should be purely kept, is ouer-growne
With thousand ills full of corruption:
And these do often burst forth to acts as bad
As they themselves, which makes me almost mad,
"And quite Psalm. 88.15. Sin drives a man (sometimes) out of his wits, as we
say.
distracted as it were, that I
Have not within my self ability
Whereby I might resist, or overcome
Those traitrous foes to my Salvation.
And this is it, alas, that makes me cry
(Whith Paul) in deepes of sin, and misery;
Romans 7.24.
Wretch that I am, who shall deliver me
From this unhappy Body, in the Te^.
mass of death? Sure he
That is omnipotent, it is he alone,
(My God, and Savior) besides there is none:
O then let me be here excused, if I
(Who feel my self thus in Romans 7.23.
captivity
Unto the law of sin) power forth my prayer
Unto my God; for why should I despair
By reason of my sins? Sure these are they
That chiefly do occasion me to pray
To be delivered from them; for if I
Should never be heard whiles in iniquity,
Why surely I should never be heard, if he
Do not in mercy take it away from me:
For in my self I have nor power, nor will,
At any time to shake away mine ill;
I mean, without his Grace infused, O then
Why is it I am not heard, O Lord, or when
Shall I be heard? Why do thou linger me,
That know^st so well my great infirmity,
And to what deepes I Am like to fall, if thou
Prevent me not with saving Grace? O now
Come quickly therefore, quickly come, I pray,
And raise me up: Let none be able say,
That ever any sought to thee for aid
In his extremes, and that he was delayed
So long of help, till all distractedly
He was enforced thus to despair and dye:
Or sure if so, if miserable men
Should be thus dealt withal by thee, O then
How is it they should acknowledge thee? and I,
Alas! how could I other but deny
Our Conceptions of God.
Thy Deity with them? for surely we
Cannot conceive of God, unless it be
As one Exodus 34.6.
that is most merciful, and one
That knows and sees our griefs, and can alone
Relieve us in those great extremes; Nay, more,
That can, and will; for as I said before,
He is as truly See Eccles. 2.11. Psalm. 16.5. and 145.8, 9. Exodus 34.6. the
words of God himself.
merciful, as he
Is truly God: and then how can it be
That I should either not despair; or thou
Not quickly come and help? for surely now,
Now is the very time, I say, wherein
Because I am so deeply plung^d in sin,
And misery, (so deep, alas, that I
Am almost ready to despair, and dye)
It does behooue thee come and help; nay sure
And rather too, because I Am so impure
And sinful as thou see. Alas, my sin
May not thus stop thine ears, but rather win
Thee to compassion on me, 'cause that I
Am plunged in such deepes of misery,
By this my tyrannizing sin, which strives
Not only to destroy my soul, but drives
At theee also, seeking to overthrow
Thy work of Grace, and would not men should know
The Riches of thy Goodness. O my Lord,
Why is it thou stay'st so long? Mat. 8.8.
speak but the word,
And all is done, this shackled soul of mine
(In spite of all those powers that do combine
To force me down to Hell,) shall quickly fly
Into so sweet a Heaven of liberty,
In contemplation of thy Grace, that hence
I never more shall be brought into suspense,
Or doubtings of thy goodness; but shall be
As one that has his building sure with thee,
And cannot be removed; and then mine eye
Shall have its fill of that sweet Theorie
Which erst I did so much desire: whose light
Will straight dispell these fearful clouds of night,
Wherein my sins had veiled me up; and yield
Such pleasing matter, and so large a field
Of praise to recreate my soul, that I
Shall hence be raised up so sweetly high,
As I was sadly low before; and thence
Shall have so much of selfe-experience,
To speak of thine abundant love, that I
Shall nothing else but praise thee till I dye.
O then, my Lord, here let thy mercies come
And raise me up, lest I be quite undone
In these so great extremities. Aye me!
My soul despaires to think where I shall be,
If that thou yet defer thy help; for lo,
I Am every minute ready now to go
Where-ere my sins, and Satan dragge, and they
Will dragge me sure to hell. What shall I say,
Or do, or think? Thou see my miseries
Far better then my self, and if thine eyes
Can yet forbear to pity me, Oh then
Come, come despair, come stifle up my pen,
And let it weep no more; and cruel death,
Be thou so kind to stop my tedious breath,
That I may speak no more of grief: for lo,
I Am wearied quite, and can no further go:
And thus thrown down 'twixt hope and fear, I lie
As one that hopes to live, hut fears to dye.
But here behold, midst of this dreary storm,
Wherein my billowing sins, and griefs had borne
My soul into so many deepes, that I
Was on the point to sink, despair and dye;
Behold, I say, when I had quite gi'en over
And even resolved to yield to Satan's Lore,
Out of my great distractednesse, wherein
I often was tempted to such deepes of sin,
Such foul abominable acts, that I
Dare not to name them to posterity,
For fear I should offend* even then I say,
(When I was headlong running down the way
Toward deaths accursed chambers, where I 'gan
To feel my self the miserable'st man*
That ever was on earth, the time when I
Was plunged in my great'st extremity:)
I 'gan to feel (O what a joy was this?)
That longed for Nuntius of my wonted bliss
Begin to repossesse my soul, and I
Was raised up again so sweetly high,
As scarce I could believe my self* to see
Such wonders wrought so suddenly on me*
And here, me thought, with sweet inspired lays,
He 'gan again my drooping soul to raise
With these, or such like happy notes; Gods return in his extremest misery.
Come, come,
Thou sad despairing man, lo, I have done
With thee, I see it is enough: for thou
Art too-too weak (alas) to strive, and now
Thou know thy self sufficiently, and For it is well.
well
Thou have done so, 'twas meet that thou should dwell
So long on this sad Theme; for may thou know
(In answer to thy quests) this was to show Man cannot any way save himself,
or rather be saved without Gods especial helping Grace.

Thy weakness to the full, not that my self
Was ignorant; but thou unhappy Elfe,
Wast hardly brought to search it out. Again,
To teach thee, that thy lab'rings all were vain,
Without my special helping-Grace; for thou
Might labor till thy death, yet be (as now)
So far to seek as e're thou wast: and hence
This may thou learn for thy experience,
Against the merits of works.
That Heaven can never be won with works, although
These be the According to that: Bona opera sun^ via ad Regnum, sed non causa
regnandi.
way indeed by which ye go
Thereto, and these as signs of Grace, do Good works show our true faith, as
Iam. 2.18.
show
That ye assuredly do thither go
If they be good; but all their good consists
Alone in Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10. not able to this purpose.
Grace, from whence their being is.
But now, poor soul, that thou have stayed so long
In these thy deepes, and thence conceau'st a wrong
That Is done to thee, in that I should delay
To grant thy suit, though thou did often pray,
And yearne indeed for Grace, even till thine eye
And heart with tears, and sighs were both worn dry:
And thou mean while most so oppressed with sin,
With fears without, with trembling storms within,
That thou could never be at rest: nay more,
The tedious sufferings of thy sin-borne sore
Had so bedull'd thy soul that faithlesly
Thou here had yielded to despair, and die.
Know this, I say, for answer; 'twas my will
It should be so, (who gather good from ill:)
First therefore know in all these dreary deepes,
Mine eye was open on thee (which never Psalm. 121.4. Gods admirable providence
over his children in all extremities of their temptations.
sleeps)
To keep thee safe, and my wise providence
Never suffered yet sins heinous violence
To have it is full Carreer on thee, although
I suffered it indeed thus far to go,
To make thy very heart to bleed, to see
Those fearful wounds it did inflict on thee,
When I but left thee to thy self: Why God sometimes leaves his children.
yet hence
I taught thy soul this sweet experience,
To make thy soon appeal to me, when sin
Had made thee see the danger thou wast in.
My fearful Objection against my self.
But further yet, here happily thou wilt reply;
Alas, this answer will not satisfy;
Sin has its full carreer on me; for lo,
It Romans 7.23.
draws me on even whe'r I will or no,
To give consent to it; even so that I
Am ready to enact what villainy
So ere the flesh inuites; but that perchance
I Am hinderd by some outward circumstance
Of fear, or shame of men: but woe is me!
I do not feel, alas, that fear of thee
I would within my heart, whence it is that I
Am ready here to sink, despair, and die
For want of it: and then how can it be
That sin can fuller yet carreer on me!
Gods answer.
Alas! poor foul, it is true indeed, I know
Thy sins have brought thy feeble man so low,
That thou art helpless of thy self; yea sure
Vassal'd to Satan, and could never endure
The least of these his heavy brunts, if I
Our salvation is wholly out of our selves from God alone.
Had not sustained thee by a sweet supply
Of secret Grace, but headlong would have run
Down to thine own destruction (wretched man!)
Save that I would not suffer thee; and hence
It is that thou have had this happy sense
Of these thine own infirmities, whence thou
2. Cor. 1.9.
Despairing in thy self as twere, did vow
Never to take thy rest, till thou had won
This sweet assurance that thou art my son.
O happy soul! blessed be that day, and hour
Wherein thou chos'st so good a part, to tower
So high in thy desires, as to depise
Those gay allurements, which the worldly wi^e
So greedily pursue; as wealth, delights
And honors (all esteemed in their 1 Cor. 2.14.
blind sights
As Deities;) And did more wisely crave
(What they indeed thought 1. C^r. 2.14.
foolishness to (...),)
To be entitled one of mine, to be
My Ioh. 1.12. Romans 8.16, 17 Ephesians. 2.19.
son by Grace, a heavenly high degree,
Which Mat. 16.17.
flesh and blood can never conceive: and hence
It is, that they led only by the sense;
Can never attain vnto't: nor thy weak eye,
Poor soul, can ere be able reach so high,
Do what thou can, unless my Ephesians. 1 17, 8
lightning Grace
1. Cor. 2.10, 12.
Reveal it thee: for it is nor Acts 8.20. 1. Cor. 1.26.
wealth, nor place,
Nor labor that can work it out; but I
Alone must Ioh. 1.2. Ephesians. 2 8.
giu't of my benignity.
Now what is this great gift? Why sure it is
The very Treasury of perfect bliss:
And hence, dear soul, be not a whit dismayed
To pass those many deepes, my Gracious aid
Shall still be with thee; go, and prosper on,
It Is worth thy sufferings to be called my Son.
Thou seek'st no mean preferment; know, one ask
Is not enough; no, it is a weightier task, How hard it is to go to heaven:
according to that of Seneca in Traged. viz. Non est ad astra mollis e terris
via. English: We must not go to heaven on feather-beds. How short our common
meerely-beliefe comes short of heaven.

And craves thy longest pains; so hard an Art
For flesh and blood to learn that 'twould dis-hart
The wisest of you all, did he but know
The many plunges he must undergo,
Before he can attain this height. Alas!
It Is not a common, I believe, will pass
Thereto (only, for fashions sake:) No, no,
There is an inward feeling-faith must go
With every word thou speak; and this proceeds
From my sole purer 1. Cor. 2.12. James 1.17.
Sprite, which only feeds
Those truly Esaias 57.15.
contrite souls, whose happier eyes
Have seen the deepes of their own miseries,
As thou, poor humbled soul have done, whereby
You Are made a subject fit for mercies eye
To work upon and pity. Now Is the time
Indeed to comfort thee, Esaias 63.5.
when powers divine
Alone can help, and nothing else beside
Can come so near in this so deep a tide,
As do thee but least show of good, unless
It be to drown thee quite in thy distress,
And headlong send thee down to Hell; Then come,
Come, my dear soul, or rather my dear son,
For so thou shall be called hence; arise,
Shake off thy quondam sins and miseries,
For I thy God will have it so: and now
Come on with me, where I will show thee how
Thou shall obtain thy full desires: but know,
There Is one thing yet, before thou further go,
Which must be done; and though thou think it hard,
Yet never faint, it must, or all is marred:
Thou needs must use all means hereto; but here
I know, thou wilt say, Alas, I cannot bear
This heavy yoke. Go too, I know full well
What thou can do: Nothing, but go to hell,
Without my saving Grace; but know with this,
Thou shall use all those mediums of thy bliss
With wondrous Mat 11. vlt.
ease; and this my yoke shall be
More pleasing far, then worlds best joy to thee:
For I my self will be thy Psalm. 18.1, 2. Gods charge which every Child of his
must perform; yet so, as by power from God.
strength, in whom
Thou shall perform what ere I will, and none
Thy foes shall dare resist; or if they do,
Thou shall both fight with them, and conquer too,
To thine abundant hearts content. Now then
This is the task which thou must do, (to men
I know, full harsh:) which is still to repress
The swelling pride of thy rebellious flesh,
To Gal. 5.24.
crucify thy man of sin, to die
Daily with 1. Cor. 15.31. Sin must be cast out, ere God take possession of
us.
Paul, to give to vanity
A resolute farewell, and part withal
That erst occasioned thee so great a fall;
I mean, thine own innatiue lusts: for they
Indeed are those that caused thy soul to stay
So long in these unhappy deepes: but now
Thou needs must turn another leaf, and vow
Perpetual war against them all, yea, tho
It be against thy very self (in show:)
I mean against thy outward man, thy flesh,
That Stews of ill, that Cage of filthiness,
Which needs must be pulled down, and purged of sin,
Or my pure Sprite will never enter in,
To fill it full of joy: no, no, my Grace
Cannot abide the house, till these give place:
Out then, you devilish lusts, go quickly fly
Into some Mat. 8.32. Let the swinish Epicure wallow in his lusts, but let the
bodies of Gods children be consecrated to holiness, Romans 6.22. as pure Temples
of ^he holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 6.19.
Swinish Heard, my Deity
Commands your hastening flight, you must not stay
To make it night, where I will have it day.
And thou, dead heart, I charge thee vomit up
The poisonous drugs of that deceitful cup
Which erst thy flesh did give thee, and whereby
Sh'ath brought thee to so deep a Lethargy,
That thou have quite forgot thy self, yea, me,
Who erst have done such wondrous things for thee.
And you The eyes described in brief. Their charge.
corrupted Tradesmen of the mind,
You wanton eyes, you leaders of the blind;
I charge you hence be pure, never wander more
To gaze on vanities, play not the Number. 15.3^
whore
With every idle object that you see,
Which cannot satisfy: but look on me
By often reading of my Word, and by
Perusing me in that sweet Theorie
Of my most beauteous Psalm. 8.3. and 19.1, 2, etc.
Works, where you shall see
That naught indeed is worth your eyes but me.
And you corrupted The ears charge.
Listners too, you Ears,
(Whose hollow intricate Meander bears
Each sound unto the soul) wh'are always apt
To open your doors to ill, but closely clapped
To every thing that is good; I charge you too,
That hence you sanctify your selves, and do
Naught but my will; which is to entertain
All messengers of good, but to refrain
From harkening unto any ill, whereby
Thou may conceive one thought of vanity.
Yea, Mouth, The mouths charge.
and all which have your several parts
To act in this great mystery of Arts;
I charge you all, be pure; Ephesians. 4.29.
let not a word
Be spoke of thee, but that which does afford
Matter of praise to me; whence all may know,
The Mat. 12.34.35, 36, 37.
Fount is pure from whence these waters flow.
Besides, Eccles. 37.29. A Caution for too-much, or dainty feeding.
accustom not thy self to eat
Of overmuch, or too delicious meat,
Whereby to pamper up thy flesh; for these,
Although they seem bewitchingly to please
Thy all-corrupted man of sin, and feed
Thy sense with seeming pleasures, yet indeed
If thou but duly think on them, they be
The chief maintainers of that misery
Which thou so fearfully have felt; for they
Are always stirring up those foes that sway
So domineeringly over thee, thy sin
And raging lusts, which fight so sore within
Against thy soul, against thy drooping Sp'rite,
And these are they that cause this gloomy night
Too much eating brings both body and soul into a Lethargy.
Of drowzie carelessness in thee: yea, these
Would lull thee feign along in thy disease,
As one that is in a sleppe to hell, where thou
Should be impris'ned fast ere knowing how:
Wherefore I charge thee specially from hence
Forbear these luring baits which feed the sense,
But famish up the soul: forbear, I say,
And hence inure thy self to fast and pray,
A persuasion to fasting and prayer.
The readiest means whence to Mat. 17.21.
cast forth this kind
Of devilish thoughts that so disturb the mind.
This being duly done, it is now high time
I send my sanctifying power divine
To purge thine inward faculties, thy soul
And her attendants, made so lately foul
By thine own sins, and thence to drive away
Those Alluding to that of Mat. 21.12. Luke 19.45.
theeuish lusts there gotten in to prey
Upon thy purer parts: for thou must be
A 1. Cor. 6.19. Gods charge to the soul and her faculties.
Temple wholly consecrate to me
In holiness. Wherefore I charge you all
(As subjects to my Power Imperial)
Thou The soul. Genesis 2.7.
Breath of life, you understanding parts,
And thou Invention, searcher out of Arts:
And Memory, so aged in thy youth,
The Register of ancient times, and truth:
And Judgment, thou (great Vmpier of the ^est)
Which always first to censure what is best;
I charge you strictly all, I say, Mat. 8.3.
and will
That you be clean: keep not one thought of ill
Within your sacred Chancels; but 1. Ioh. 3.3.
be pure
Even as I am: and hence yourselues inure
To naught but holy practices, that so
Thy soul and sense may both together go,
As two made one, and all to sing my praise
In sweetest Concords to ensuing days.
This being also done, I say, Come now
And prosper on; here will I show thee how
Thou shall obtain thy wished rest, and fly
So far beyond thine own ability,
As thou will wonder at thy self, to see
That height of happiness thou have in me,
Beyond conceit or utterance. Come then
My dearest, come; here will I make thy Pen
To speak of mysteries; here I Will begin
To put a period to thy days of sin:
Here will I Esaias 25.8. Revel. 21.4.
wipe away thy tears, and lead
Thee forth with David, where thy soul shall tread
In Psalm. 23.3.
paths of righteousness, till thou have won
This sweet assurance that thou art my son.
Here then return, return, thou thirsty soul,
To my pure Esaias 55.1* ^
Spring, since all the rest are foul,
And cannot satisfy. Here turn again
(Where Ioh. 5.39. as in my first Book, page 8.
first thou did begin) unto the maine
Of my sole-sauing comforts, to my Word;
I mean, that Ioh. 4.14.
Well indeed which does afford
True Cordials to distressed souls. Come here,
And take thy fill, thou need not to fear*
Of paying ought, take Esaias 55.1.
wine and milk, and buy
Without a piece, my freely bounteous eye
Looks not for thy rewards; or if it did,
Alas, poor soul, thou have not ought to bid
To counteruaile my Grace: for sure from thee
Comes nothing good, but what thou have from me.
Go then, I say, go hasten to that Well
And Spring of life, whose virtue shall expel
These sad suspenses from thy heart, and shall
Instruct thee in the truth, and tell thee all
That thou so much desir'st, only indeed
Thou must believe what ever thy soul shall read
Within this sacred Writ: for sure in this
Lies hid the treasury of Ioh. 5.39.
life, of bliss,
Which only true Ioh. 6.35, 47 Objection.
believers find. But here
I know thou wilt say, Why then it is never the near,
If this condition come between, for I
Am grown so dead in sin and misery,
I cannot stir one foot to good; and whence
Should I believe so far beyond my sense,
That which I cannot comprehend? Aye me!
Feign I Would believe indeed that true to be,
Whose truth so much concerns my good: but, O
I see no ground, alas, I should do so.
Here stands my misery; my flesh, and blood
Think sure that news must needs be too-too good
Ere to be true, as usual Proverbs say,
That brings me tidings of that happy day,
Which puts a period to mine ills; for I
Am so bedull'd with tedious misery,
That now it is grown a miracle to see
Some powers prove yet so kind to comfort me.
God resolves this scruple.
Alas, poor soul! it is true indeed, and yet
Here stay thy plaints, for here thou must forget
Thine Psalm. 45.10
own estate: these are thy miseries
Indeed as of thy self, but now thine eyes
Must soar beyond thy self, where thou shall see
Thy happiness consisting all in me,
Not in thine own abilities: and this
Is it while-ere I said to thee, which is
Indeed a Col. 1.26.
mystery that Mat 26.17.
flesh and blood
Cannot conceive, that must be understood
Only by my Ephesians. 1.17 18.
revealing Sprite. And now
Come on therefore, I know full well that thou
Can nothing do herein, unless it be
As having thine abilities from me.
But know, in me thou shall do all (as I
Ere-while did say.) Thus do I magnify
My self in Esaias 40.29, 30, 31. 2. Cor. 12.9.
weakness, thus my power shall be
Made known the more by thine infirmity.
On then, I say, go hasten to that Brook
Which runs so sweetly through my sacred Book,
Where I will surely be with thee, to lead
Thee on along, till thou have found that Head
And Spring of life where thou would be; and when
Thy so^le has bathed therein a while, even then
I will begin to make thee see and know
Thy boundless happiness in me, and show
Thee all the treasures of my love, whereby
Thou shall perceive the inseparable tie
Betwixt thy self and me. Then shall thou read
And understand, then come and go with speed
About my work, and prosper still, and then
Scorning as 'twere, those vanities of men,
Which erst so much ore-sway'd thee, thou shall be
Possessed with nothing but delight in me.
Then all shall be at thy content, when thou
Shall only ask and have; the heavens shall bow,
If thou but pray, and I my self descend
To answer thee as thy familiar friend.
Go then, I say, it is time thou were well on
In this thy way. See how the vsh'ring Mal. 4.2.
Sun
Inuites thy haste, the Revel. 22.17.
Sprite says, Come away
To celebrate this high-made Marriage-day:
For lo, the Lamb is ready, come and see
How much he John 15.13.
loved that lost his life for thee.
And where thou say, Alas, thou have not power
Whence to believe, know 'twas an happy hour
For thee that ere thou knew'st so much, for I
Never use to heal the Ioh. 9.39, 41.
Pharisaicall eye
Which thinks he sees, and yet is blind: but know
Since I have gi'en thee grace to stoop so low,
As to attribute all to me, that now
Thou shall both see, and eke believe: for thou
Have put thy trust in me, and since thou have,
Mat. 15.28.
Be 't to thee as thou will, thy worst is past:
And hence know, thou have overcome in m^,
Who am alone thy strength, and still will be.
Wherefore I will, that here thou quickly go,
And do as I have said: Ps. 33.11. Pro. 19.21. Esaias 46.^0.
it must be so;
Use thou no more thy weak replies; for I
Will have it so, what powers shall dare deny
Where I command? Go on, I say, and then,
This being done, prepare thy tongue and pen,
And all thou have, to sing of naught but praise
To me thy God: and let thy high-borne Lays
Ravish thy hearers all to heaven, whiles they
Attend to thee; whence they may bless the day
Of these thy happy miseries, and be
As ioynt-competitors of joy with thee.
What now remains? Behold, thy longed for day
Is hard at hand; I will no longer stay
Thy forward thoughts: Go, go, and take thy fill
Of Sions stream; let not a thought of ill
Dare interrupt thy good intents, but be
As happy as thy wish: hence shall thou see
The mirrors of my love; and know ere long,
I shall expect thy Muse to change her song.
Thus I surcease. Now let thy newborn heart
Succeed, and act its last and happiest part.
My reuiuall and last action.
This being said, behold, my deadned soul
Began revive, the sprite that was so foul,
(That 2. Cor. 12.7
Messenger of hell, which often brought
Me down into such desperate deepes) me thought,
Did leave me by degrees, and all gave place
To entertain a sweet succeeding Grace,
Which seized upon mine inward parts, whereby
I 'gan to feel a secret new supply
Of an vncustom'd strength, and now again
Me thought I had a power whence to refrain
From swallowing Satan's luring baits, which he
Did use erewhile thus in bewitching me.
And here me thought, by secret sweet degrees
My self gat ground, and Satan 'gan to leese
By sweet assistance from my God; for he
Indeed did work these miracles in me,
(O how I wish to thank him for it) and I
Began to feel a happy liberty
From that most loathsome slavery, wherein
I was enshackled erst so fast in sin:
My storms blew ore, and this my troubled Man
Seemed to be somewhat calmed, the clouds began
To fleet away, and an unwonted light
Fills up the place of former gloomie light;
Whereby mine eyes began to wake, and I
'Gan call unto my drowzie memory
Those happy notes I heard of late, from whence
I felt these holy changings in my sense
As well as in mine inward soul; and here,
With awful reverence, and submissiue fear
In thus repealed unto my God: Great JOVE, My re-appeale to God.

Thou sole Commander of the powers above
And these below; who only with thy Psalm. 33.6, 9
word
Do whatsoever thou will; lo here, my Lord,
I am thy servant, son of thine hand-maide
Be It done unto me all as thou have said:
I humbly here submit my self to be
Obedient to thy will, to give to thee
All glory due unto this work; for I
Desire herein no greater dignity,
Then to be made thine instrument, by whom
Thou'st pleased to show thy great salvation
To me, and all the rest of thine, which be
Implung'd in deepes of grief as well as me.
Here then, great Lord, How to proceed in ^he apprehension of salvation.
in humble confidence
Of thy sole promised aid, as having sense
Of these mine own infirmities, whereby
My wings are clipped with 2. Cor. 12.5, 6.7.
Paul, from soaring hie
On selfe-presumptious perfectness; lo, here
I do proceed in humbled faith and fear,
Crying aloud to thee with tears of grief,
Mark. 9.24.
Lord, I believe, O help mine unbelief.
Thus going on from Moses sacred Law,
Wherein ere-while with weeping heart I saw
Mine own defects and miseries; and now
Pearching aloft to Esaias 11.1.
Esay's happier bow
Which sprang from out of Iesses root, I 'gan
To see Esaias 40.2.
salvation preached to sinful man
By God himself, his holy Crier calls,
Esaias 40.3, 4
Prepare the way, the former humbled vales
Shall be exalted; but the towering hill
Shall be thrown down as low; for lo, he will
Esaias 40.5.
Reveal his glory forth, all flesh shall see
The wondrous light of his benignity;
Himself has spoken it. And here mine eye
'Gan see some glimm'rings of that mystery,
Which I so much desired: but going on
Those pleasing highways of Salvation,
To find more sweet assurances, I past
The Prophets all, by whose good help at last
I came unto That is, to the Gospel, or New Testament. Hebr. 12.22.
Mount Sion-hill, where I
'Gan see my Savior with a clearer eye
Then ever I did before: this was the place,
Wherein I found that Ier. 31.31. Ezekiel. 37 26. See Hebr. 8.8, 11, 24.
covenant of Grace,
Which erst the Prophets pointed at: the Well
And Spring of life, where all true comforts dwell
To every sad wearied heart, that lies
Matthew. 11.28.
Over laden with his heavy sins, and cries
With Esaias 55.1, 2.
thirsty Soul for ease. Here did I find
Those sweet reuiuals to my drooping mind,
Which Mat. 16.17
flesh and blood cannot conceive; I mean,
Within the Story of that happy Scene,
Which God himself came down to act, when he
Out of that boundless love he bare to me,
And all the rest of his, took Ioh. 1.14. Phil. 2.7, 8.
flesh on him,
To bear those punishments, which we by sin
Were subject to, but could not bear, unless
With everlasting loss of happiness,
And durance of expres^esse pain: which he
Alone of Esaias 63.9.
love did undergo, that we
Might have our freedom all in him. But here,
Being much desirous yet to come more near,
And pry into this sacred Fount, wherein
I might wash off my leprosy of sin,
And be made fully whole; at length I came
The manner of our Saviors Birth
To Matthew's holy Writ, marked with the Name
Of Mat. 1.1.
Jesus in the Frontispice, where I
Did quickly find his strange Mat. 1 18.
nativity,
As Esaias 7 14. and 1^ ^ and 48.6, 7. and 49.9. and 61.1, etc.
was foretold: for this indeed was he,
That should be borne of that pure Virgin tree.
Which sprang from Iesse's holy Root, yea'uen he
That was to open the blinded eyes, to free
Us that were prisoners fast to sin, to preach
Luk 4.18, 19 re^o^red to Esaias 61.1, 2, etc.
Good tidings to the meek in heart, to reach
His comforts out to those that mourn; whose Name
Was to be called Esaias 9 6.
Wonderful, the same
With God himself; which was Matthew. 1.21
ordained to save
The people for their sins. Thus far I have
Gone on with sc. Matthew^
him, but going sweetly on,
As I began, behold, I see anon,
The Mat. 2.1, 1^
Wise Men coming from the East, and they
Being guided by his star, were come to pay
Their duties to this God made man, to see
And worship him; for so it Ps. 72.10, 11 A prayer by the way.
ought to be.
O thou my God, send here thy lightning Sprite
To be my star also, to guide me right,
That I may find my Savior too, and then
Though not with th'offrings of those wiser men,
(For lo, I am unwise, alas, and poor)
Yet may I truly worship him with more,
Then e're they did; with heart, with soul and all
That now I have, or ever after shall.
Thus passing on, at length my thoughts were brought
To holy Luke, (for Mark indeed had naught
Of this his birth:) where when I ent'red in,
I saw the Luke 1.31.
Angel speak again of him,
As erst in Matthew's sacred Writ: but here
I went not far, A notable change in Christ's estate.
before there did appear
A wondrous change: this Heau'n-borne Majesty,
Whom erst the Magi came to gratify
With these their best adoring gifts (with Mat. 2.11.
Gold,
With Frankincense and Myrrh, which plainly told
How great a King, a Priest and Prince he was,
Whom they adored;) I say, it came to pass,
This Majesty so great, being now Phil. 2.7.
disgraced,
As 'twere, with Rags of humane flesh, lay placed
In an unseemly manger; for the Inn
Was happily stuffed so full with guests of sin,
There was no room for this great Lord, but he
Must seek a Stable for his high degree,
Being thought the Esaias 53.2, 3
very scorn of men: but sure
'Twas not without a Psalm. 22.6.
Prophecy, so pure
And innocent a soul should be thus left
Both in contempt and misery, bereft
Of worlds best seeming-comforts. But behold,
When earth, and cruel men were grown so cold
In charity, the Heavens themselves proclaim
His wondrous worth: for Luke 2.9, 13
lo, a glorious Train
Of that celestial Quire were come to bring
This happy Tidings to the world, to sing
His high nativity in their high-layes,
Where every Period echoed naught but praise,
And Luke 2.14.
glory to our God on high, on earth
Peace, and good will toward men; all from his birth
Issuing as from one only fount: but here
I could not but admire with holy fear,
That such a gracious light should shine, yet man
Would turn away his eyes, and rather ran
To follow shades of vanity, which be
Indeed but a mere weariness, and flee
Away as soon as ouer-tooke, wherein
Lies nothing hid but misery, and sin,
The Parents of eternal death. But here
Sending my thoughts from Luke, to John; lo, there
I quickly found the reason out: this Ioh. 1.5.
Light
Did shine indeed, but man's all-darkned sight
Had not the power to comprehend what here
Was offered him, till he himself appear
(I mean this Light) and Ioh ^.1^, 13
give it him: for he
Must not be borne of flesh, or blood; but be
Newborn of God; and Ioh. 6.44. Man cannot apprehend Christ of himself.
drawn as 'twere by him
To see, and come to Christ. It Is not within
Man's own ability; Oh no, I see
It is my God works all this all in me.
Thus having found his happy birth, I mean,
Happy to us sc. True believers.
spectators of this scene,
Though not to him that acted it; I now
The Story of our Saviors life.
'Gin trace his holy life, for here I vow,
If he but please to give me aid and For life.
breath,
I Will follow him a long even to the death.
And thus returning back to Matthew, Mark,
And Luke; thence to my John (somewhat more dark,
Though being His subject is of Christ the true light.
full of light) I here did see
The Prologue was begun in misery,
As erst I Have said, the Acts that went between,
Were not less grievous: who, had he but seen
His Mat. 4.1, 2, 3, etc.
conflicts in the wilderness, when he
Was tempted of that grandest enemy
To him and us; who is it again that saw
Those wordy-warres he had Mat. 12. and 15.
about the Law
With th'enuious Scribes and Pharisees, when they
Laid all their wicked plots how to betray
His innocence to death; but he would bleed
In heart to think on such a horrid deed?
For he, good Man, did never harm; nay sure
He was so far from this, so godly pure,
That he was good to all his very foes,
Had never better friend then him, yea'uen those
That Luke 23.34.
sought to take away his life; yet he
Was patient still. But would you farther see
His wondrous works of mercy, how he heales
The Read Mat. 9.
sick, the blind, the lame, to some reueales
His power, by raising them from death, to some,
By casting devils forth: yet when all is done,
Much like the thanklesse Or, Girgesens. Mat. 8.34. Luke 8.26, 37
Gadarens, they feign
Would have him leave their coasts, 'twas not their gain,
They thought, to lose their swinish sins; No, no,
They Will rather part by far with Christ then so.
Thus did he wander up and down, good man,
Having not Luke 9.58.
where to lay his head; and can
We tearelesse yet stand looking on? Sure no;
Or if there be a One of a stony heart.
stone that can do so;
My bowels yearne, I must confess, when I
But think on this; nay more, my griefe-worne eye
Does either ouerflow, or longs to be
Made Ier. 9.1.
Jer'mies weeping Well, when I but see
My Savior thus, Ioh. 1.11.
he comes unto his sc. his own Countrymen.
own,
But they receive him not; nay worse, are grown
Mat. 13.57.
Offended with him. Thus he goes about
Meeting with still increasing-griefes throughout
The course of all his life; yet in this case
He ceases not his work, but shows his Grace
To many a sad and sinful soul: for he
Was For a Physician.
Physic unto all that did but see,
Themselves were Mat 9 12.
sick, and needed him: but those
That stood on their own righteousness (his foes,
The Scribes and Pharisees, who thought indeed
( Or, Just as, etc.
Much like the Papists now) they had no need
Of Christ's all-sauing help, but did presume
To fly to Heaven with that deceitful plume
Of their own works;) he justly leaves to be
Condemned in this their gracelesnesse, to see
The fruits of their own froward pride, when they*
Will go to Heaven, yet scorning Ioh. 10.1, 7. and 14.6. Heb. 10.20.
Christ the way,
But to leave them, I here return again
Unto my Christ, whom I have seen in pain,
Thus far to travel with the load which he
Did take on him, only to set us free.
Now for his usual Ioh. 4.32, 34.
meat, this was indeed
To do his Fathers will, to go with speed,
And finish what he came about, not fed
With fullness or variety of Bread for all other kinds of meat.
bread,
As we unhappy For too-much fullness makes us lumpish, and indisposed to any
good performances.
lumpes; but was 2. Cor. 11.27 and read Ioh. 4.6. Christ the perfect pattern
of humility.
with Paul
In fastings often, in weariness, in all
Which might express his misery, so far
'Yond all the Sons of Adam, as they are
Inferior in integrity to him,
Who never harbourd the least thought of sin;
Which well might add unto his griefs, yet he
Was patient still; O hearers, come, and see
Wirh rented hearts, here is a woeful scene
Continued on: thus, thus did he demean
Himself in every Act, and thus was he
That perfect pattern of humility:
But, O my soul! these are the acts between,
And sad enough; but O there lies unseen
The very woe of all the rest; his death,
The manner of our Saviors Passion and death.
And passion, this that takes away my breath
With too fast running doubled sighs, that I
Shall never be able speak sufficiently
As I desire, or as I ought, beside
I Am dulled with former griefs, my fount is dryde,
I have not tears enough to spend, whereby
I might re-act this woeful Tragedy
In wotds, that nothing else but weep: yet here
I must supply something of what while're
(At first) I never thought to speak, when I
Began this work; for there in brevity,
I scarcely spoke, save of his death: but now
My soul has undergone a larger vow
(Being led by that all-ruling Sprite) which here
I must perform. And thus with wonted fear,
I entered on the Epilogue, where I
'Gan first observe that wondrous Agony,
My Savior in the Ioh. 18.1. Luke 22.3^, 44.
Garden had, when he
Did pray so earnestly; Lord, if it be
Thy sacred will, then let this fearful cup
Yet pass away, and I not drink it up.
This fearful cup: Good God, what hideous draught
Was this, at which thou that wast so well taught
In bearing miseries, did yet entreat
A escape from it! Sure, sure, that fear was great,
That made thy soul to shrink, who could bear more
Then all the world besides: O then wherefore
Did thou yet fear my Lord? Alas, What caused Christ's fear in his agony.
thy Sprite
Thus answers me, 'Twas at the amazing sight
Of mine, and every sinners sins, which now
Were Esaias 53.6.
laid upon thy back; because that thou
Would undergo so much for us, to be
A Verse 10.
Sacrifice for these our sins, that we
Might be disburdend quite of them, and so
Be Gal. 3.13.
freed from that accursed weight of woe
Which followed them; so great, so infinite,
That neither tongue can speak, nor pen can write:
And yet thy love was grown so Cant. 8.6.
strong, that thou
Did bear them all for us. Hence was it now
Thy present plunges were so great* and hence
It was thou felt'st such terrors in the sense
Of thy humanity, that made thee call
Thy Deity to help; hence was Luke 22 44.
the fall
Of those great drops of blood, which thou did sweat
In this thy fearful Agony; and yet
Do I ask why thou did entreat? Aye me!
Some little glimpse of this mine eyes 'gan see
Within mine own distressed man, when I
Pressed with the weight of mine iniquity,
Did erst implore my God to help: for sure,
Of all the miseries I may endure,
There Is none that paralels with this, to be
Depriu^d of God, which to my grief I see
My many sins do often ^ffect, whereby
I Am driven to such great extremity,
I know not what to do, which makes me crave
Either his sweet return, or else my grave,
Rather then live, and not with him, but here,
Alas, unhappy wretch! all that I bear,
Is justly for my sin, but thou my Lord,
Did 1. Pet. 2.22.
never sin, neither in deed, nor word,
No, nor in thought so much* or were it so,
Yet what speak I of these my deepes of woe,
Which be but flea-bites, as they say, if way'd
With these of thine? for thou, alas, wast laid
Down in the lowest hell of grief, to bear
All pains and punishments beyond compare,
Which we, poor souls, should else have borne, Ay me.
Yet this not all, those that should comfort thee
In these thy great extremities, yea'uen they
Did Mat. 26.40.
sleep it out as we do now a day,
Seeming as senseless of thy griefs, nor would
Be brought to watch and pray one hour: so cold
Are our affections grown toward thee, though thou
Do burn in love toward us. But whither now?
Where strayes my Muse, I say? Is not this all?
Oh no; Psalm. 42.7. in our singing Psalms.
One grief another in does call:
These plunges were no sooner past, but lo,
I see the Nuntius of another woe,
Luke 22.47.
Judas, and all his following rout, for they
Are hard at hand, and ready to betray
This guiltless Lamb unto the Wolves: but here
It Is worth the notice ere we yet draw near
To The High Priest. Ioh. 18.13. Luke 3.2.
Annas house, how that our Savior, when
Ioh. 18.4.
Knowing the hearts of these malicious men,
He boldly yet steps forth to them, and said,
Who is it ye seek? Which when they had betrayed
By naming him, he answers, Verse. 6.
I AM ^EE;
At which they starting back full suddenly
Fell down unto the ground. Here was a word
That plainly told indeed, HE was the Lord,
Whom they did now resist: but, O my soul!
Could thou, my Lord, so suddenly control
Those their presumings with a word, and yet
How was it thou seem so quickly to forget
Thy self by suffering them alone, to show
Their cruelties on thee? nay, which was more,
Thou did restrain thy Ioh. 18.11.
Peter too, when he
Drew forth his sword and would huae rescude thee:
But O, how does my reason err? for here
The Esaias 53.10 Mat. 26.54.
Scriptures were to be fulfilled while-ere
Which spoke of thee; whence 'twas thou did reply
To Peter with undaunted constancy,
Ioh. 18.11.
The cup my Father gives, shall I not drink?
Oh yes, I must and will; or may you think
'T will go but bad with you, for should I not,
Your selves must do it. Thus as he had forgot
What he indeeed was of himself, he goes
Along with them, even these his cruel foes,
Without least show of murmuring, until
At length they had accomplished all their ill
Concerning him. And first they brought him on
To Verse. 13.
Annas, next, to his malicious son
Caiphas and Annas were the High Priests that time: See Luke 3.2.
Caiphas (the then High Priest:) where harmless he
Was most unjustly Ioh 18.22.
smitten: next, we see
Him led to Pilates Judgment Hall, where when
They had not ought T'accuse him of, yet then
With most corrupted hearts they rather sought
To free their Verse. 40.
Barabbas, though he had wrought
Much wickedness with them. Thus did they bring
Our Savior forth, yea'uen him that was the King
Of Heaven, and Earth, placing upon his head
A Crown of cruel thorns; thus was he led
With scourgings, scoffings and with all disgrace
That malice could invent on to the place
Where he was to be crucified: yet here
(Wondrous to speak) he did not once appear
So much as to repine, but went along
Much like a Lamb, never muttring out the wrong
They did to him. And thus the Scriptures ought
To be fulfilled; thus was he to be brought
Unto the slaughter, Esaias. 53.7.
as our Esaias said,
Yet opening not his mouth; on whom were laid
The iniquities of all; and thus indeed
He was that true vnblemish'd Leuit. 6.6. See Ioh. 1.29.
Lamb we need
To be our sacrifice for sin. But here,
O stay, my soul, and though thou want a tear
To weep at this sad sight, yet let it be
Thy wish to imitate what thou do see;
I mean, thy Sauiour^ patient steps: for lo,
Here Is patience fit for all the Saints to know;
Yea know, and imit^^e: but I forbear,
And turn unto my Christ again even where
I left him going on but, O my heart!
A check to my heart for not weeping at this passage.
Whence is it thou look on this most tragic part,
And yet not burst thy self to tears? Alas,
Art thou so strained up with walls of brass,
As yet thou can not break? what? shall I say,
Thou want a tear to celebrate this day
Of these thy Saviors pass^^nings? Why then
Come all the griefs of miserable men,
And set on (...) once, yet be thou still
As hard as rock: never weep at any ill,
If not at this; never weep to see thy friends
Not pity thee; never weep to see their For dear (...).
ends;
Never weep at any worldly cross; nay more,
If thou seem senseless of this only sore,
And wilt not weep to see so sad a part,
Never be thou hence called by the name of heart.
But O my Because the heart i^ the fountain of life in man.
life! Why do thou ache, and burn
So sore within my breast? Why do thou mourn
So often in secret deep fetched sighs, and yet
Not weep a tear? Alas, can thou forget
Thy quondam use, when thou would freely weep
And not be staid? O 'twas a happy deep
Thou then wast in, when grief knew how to plain
It self in tears, and so dismiss the pain.
But woe is me, my fainting 1. Cor. 2.11.
sprite has seen
Those heavier plunges that thou now art in,
And known them too-too well; Alas, my heart!
Feign would thou personate this passive part
In a more seemly weed of tears; but lo,
Thy time's not come, when God will have it so,
Then sure it shall be so: mean while I pray,
Rest thee content, and follow on thy way.
Thus turning to my Christ again; behold,
I find him brought (as Esaias 53.7.
Esaias had foretold)
On to his slaughter-place, where he, good man,
Though forced by them, yet willingly began
TO embrace his latest Cross, that woeful bed,
Whereon he was to lay his wearied head,
In these his greatst extremes of death: but here,
O cursed Jews, could not you yet forbear
To cast your scorning taunts on him? Sure no;
The Psalm. 22 7, 8. Math. 27.39, 41, 42, 43, etc. Luk 22.37.
Scriptures had foretold, it should be so;
You would not, could not choose. But cruel eyes!
What malice could have wished more miseries
To fall on him, then now you saw, that yet
Your wicked brains still studied how to get
Some new-inuented grieuances, whereby
To add unto his deepes of misery,
And Psalm. 69.^6.
persecute whom God had smit? But O,
Why do I question more of this? for lo,
Your brows were Esaias 48.4.
brass, and you were Acts 2 23.
fore-decreed
To be the Actors of this horrid deed:
Wherefore I now return again, and come
Unto my Saviors latest part; the Sum
And woe of all the rest, that dreary seen
Which now he was to undergo, I mean
On this sad Scaffold of his latest cross; His Agony in the Garden was ^na
sensu^, but his last suffering on the Cross (...): Hayward.

The first was pain of sense, but this of (...):
That was his bodies pain, but here again:
His pain of soul, which is the soul o^ pa^^e.
For now behold (not to enlarge my verse
With each sad circumstance) I here rehearse
Only that one expreslesse plunge (of all
The great'st that ever was) when he did call
At his extremest gasp Our Sauiors death and last plu^ge especialy notable.
My God, my God,
Why have thou (now) forsaken me? What rod
Was it that struck this wondrous blow? Aye me!
My blessed Christ, what? God forsaken Thee?
Thy self forsake thy self? O thou my life!
How could this b^e? Never was there fatal knife
Could cut this thread; no: Thus it came to pass,
Thy Sprite (of love) has told me how it was:
Now was that woeful time at hand, wherein
Th'intolerable weight, and Gal. 3.13.
curse of sin,
Which I and all the world had done, were cast
Upon thy back at once; Now was that last
And very utmost deep which thou while-ere
Did seem in thy humanity to fear*
Now did thou drink of that accursed cup
Which erst thou did entreat thou might not sup,
Unless it were thy Fathers will; and here
Behold it was his will, and thou did bear
Those heavy brunts alone for us: from whence
It was indeed thou had such feeling sense
Of these thy miseries in us, Gal. 3.13, 14.
that we
Might thereby feel our happiness in thee.
Nay more, thou now of Ioh. 15.13.
wondrous love had took
Our 1. Pet. 2.24.
sins on thee; whence 'twas thy God forsook
Or seemed at least forsake thee thus* and why?
It Is sin indeed undoes that happy tie
Betwixt humanity, and God* for this
Is that which Esaias 59.2.
sep'rates us from all our bliss*
I mean, from God* and this is it which made
Him thus withdraw himself from thee or shade*
As 'twere, his present ^^dance from thy sight,
And leave thee to thy self, pressed with the weight
Of sin, and hell: and of thy Fathers rage
Against these our si^^es, since thou would so engage
Thy self for us: and here thy soul was brought
Down to the low^st plunge of woe* where naught
Was left to comfort thee: but thou mean while
Being made as 'twe^e a desolate Or (...).
ex^le.
From all true happiness, did undergo
Such sad expreslesse pangs* that none can know
Their depth, but thou that suffer'dst them: nay, sure
That only pain of loss thou did endure,
Was more by far in reference to thee,
Then hells most cruel torturings can be
In reference to us. What shall I say?
This was indeed a lamentable day
For thy pure eyes to see; never was there grief
Like unto this of thine, where all relief
Was held so long from thee: and here indeed,
I found that true, which I ere-while did read,
Foretold of thee, thy Esaias 53.2.
comlynesse was gone,
And form or beauty there (alas) was none,
To make thee now desired: Thou wast a man
Of Verse. 3.
sorrow, friend of grief, whence we began
To hide our faces 'way from thee, or thou
Did hide as 'twere from us: Thus did thou bow
Thy righteous back to hear our griefs, while we
Like cruel Jews, went on in torturing thee
By adding sin to sin: Thus did thou Math. 27.46, 50.
cry
Aloud for us* and thus for us did die:
Did die? yea, more, did Luk 24.6, 7. Christ's Resurrection.
rise again, that we
Might rise again from sin, and be made free
From all the pow'r^ of death, and hell; and then,
Being thus revived by thee to live again
The happy life of Grace* till thou shall please
To call us gently hence, and sweetly seize
Upon our souls, to carry us up on high,
To live with thee through all eternity,
The endless life of Glory, there where we
Shall sing of nothing else but praise to thee.
But, O my God, thou, thou that have been pleased
To aid me hitherto; thou that have easd
My wearied soul at length in this sweet Ford,
The sacred Spring of thy all-sauing Word,
Come here again, and as it pleased thee show
Those mirrours of thy love to m^e, even so
Enable me, as thou have said, that I
May sing thy mercies to posterity,
In a ne'r-dying verse, whereof each word
May speak my thankfulness, and each afford
Eternal matter of thy praise; Nay, more,
May here be found a salve for every sore,
To each good soul that ever felt the smart,
And terrors of a truly contrite heart.
Come then, my sweet Urania, come again,
And raise thy self, here change thy doleful strain,
Into some happier notes of joy, and here
Come, come, my sprites, I charge you all appear
In joyous readiness, yea, soul and all.
Give your attendance to my instant call:
For now behold, I speak; Come, come away
To celebrate this high-made Holy Day
Of reconcilement with my God. First then,
O thou sole Guider of my tongue, and pen,
And all my thoughts, and all my Acts, whiles they
Are good: Lo, here I humbly come to pay
My tributarie thanks, that thou have brought
Me hitherto, the place which erst I sought;
And here have raised my soul again, to see*
Those wondrous things which thou have done for me,
When I was past recovery; if thou
Had not been timely merciful, and now
Redeemed me by thy love, as thou have done,
Though by the death of (...) own only Son,
Thine own beloved Son: but O my Deuteronomy. 30.20
life,
Life of my soul, I say, whence is the Genesis ^5.22.
strife
I feel in me, if this be so; that I
Am subject yet to Satan's tyranny,
And cannot praise thee as I would* for lo,
My sins step still between, and (...) so,
I cannot raise my drow^ie eyes to see,
As here I ought, thy wondrous (...) to me.
But O my God! here is the reason sure
Of this my misery; thine eyes so pure
Will not vouchsafe to loo^ (...); I mean,
In smiling sort, because I am not (...):
But thou conceal'st thy co^nce, 'cause I
Have broke, indeed, thy Laws most ^ankelesly
Both in my thoughts, and (...)* and yet, alas*
I am not truly penitent, but p^sse
My time in senslesnesse as 'twere, and (...)
Burst forth in tears, to wash away the blot
Of this my great ingratitude: aye me,
All this is true, my God; for Psalm. 139.1, 2
thou do see
My secret paths: and yet behold, thine eyes
Do also see my griping miseries,
How often indeed I grieve, and sigh, and groan,
Because I am become so dead a stone;
And cannot weep, as feign I would: but here,
O thou my Lord! why should I further fear
At these mine own deficiencies? behold,
My Savior burnd in love* though I am cold;
His wounds did weep, to wash away my sin,
Though I am dull; O cast thine eyes on him!
Or look on me, but as in Him, that when
Thou see me, thou may find me cleared, and then
Thou can not be displeased with me, for he
Has made a full supply of all to thee,
In my behalf. What shall I say? he bore
My Esaias 53, 4, 5 1. Pet. 2.24.
sins, and griefs, as well thou know; yea, more,
He has fulfilled thy Law for me: and thou
Thy self ^al. 1.4. and 4.4, 5.
would have him so: yea sure and now
Thou'st also led me by thy Sprite to him,
In these my deepes of misery, and sin,
To salve, and solace up my soul; and I
Appeal to thee under no other tie
Or Acts 4.12.
name but his, that Phil. 3.9.
being found alone
Having his righteousness, and not mine own,
(For I, alas, have none) I thus might be
Made perfect in thy sighs, and so might see,
And know my self linkt in thy love, whereby
I Am bound to thee in this eternal tie
Of praise, and thankfulness. Here then, my Lord,
Come take me to thy self; here let thy Word
Speak comfort to my soul; that I may be
From hence accounted thine; here take from me
All that is mine, my sins, I mean, and hence
Compose me for thy se^e; Refine my sense,
With all mine inward faculties, that I
May be made wholly thine: Let not mine eye
So much as look on what I love, unless
It please thee sanctify the same, and bless
Its sight, and use to me for good; and let
Me here entreat thee teach me to forget
Psalm. 45.10.
My fathers house, this earth, I mean, that so
My soul may hence (with that Verse. 13.4.
fair daughter) go
Unto the King, my Christ, and there may be
Presented glorious, all within to thee,
Roab'd only with his Righteousness, and thou
May Verse. 11.
greatly cast thy love on me; for now,
Behold, I have given over my self to be
Thy worshipper alone, who art to me
My only Lord. Here will I set my heart
As Psalm. 45.1.
David erst, to act its thankful part
Of praises to the King; here shall my pen
Become his Which was the Pen of a ready writer.
tongue; here will I show to men
The wondrous Ephesians. 2.7.
Riches of thy love, which thou
Have shown to me. Come then (my friends) for now
I will begin; Psalm. 66.16.
Come ye that fear the Lord,
Come all, I say, attend to every word
Which I shall speak; here will I show to you
(Such things as may deserve the choycest view)
What God has done for my poor soul, when I
Was Psalm. 118.5.
in distress; first please you cast an eye
But back on these my many griefs, which be
Set dully forth in this sad map by me;
And you shall find, if you have eyes to look,
That can refrain from drowning my poor book,
With interrupting tears, whiles you peruse
The heavy plunges of my sorry Muse;
There shall you find, I say, what deeps of grief
My soul was in, there shall you find in brief,
The Psalm. ^16.3.
fearefull'st plunges, and extremest smart
That ever did beset so weak a heart,
O're-whelming me at once; there is the pain
My soul endured, which strove so long in vain,
To be redeemed from sin; the heauiest load
That ever yet poor wretched man abode;
There may you see the fears, despaires, and all
The sad events that ever could befall
A perfect sinful wretch, oppressing me
So sore on every side, that you may be
Made tremble, but to think upon it; for I
Was sure, me thought, past all recovery:
Yea, sure, I was in man's conceit, my soul
Was prisoner fast to death, writ in the roll
Of hells accursed books, and could not stir
One foot so much, unless it were to err
Into some greater deep of sin, whereby
I needs must fall to greater misery.
This was my case (dear friends) wherein I lay,
Bereft of help full many a tedious day;
So that I knew not what to do, nor where
I might betake my self; all that was here,
Within this earth, I mean, did seem to me
But as some friends of mine, which feign would be
Accounted so, but in my deepes of grief,
They were so far from sending me relief,
That at my greatest need my hopes proved vain,
Thus did they help to add unto my pain.
And thus, alas, I still continued on
From bad to worse, till I was so o're-gone
With my increasing killing sins, that I
Had lost all sense of mine own misery;
Which showed indeed, I was quite Ephesians. 2.1, 2
dead in sin,
Such was the fearful case my soul was in.
But here behold, now you have seen a brief,
Or shadow of my former tedious grief,
And woeful deepes that I was in; I say,
Behold, when all things else were fled away,
And would not, could not comfort me; even then
(O here was love surpassing that of men,)
My God alone took hold on me, when I
Was in my greatest deep of misery,
Enslau'd to sin, Ezekiel. 16.6
polluted in my blood,
(A loathsome lump of any thing but good,)
And there he sweetly ray^'d me up, and said
Unto me, ^iue; lo, I will be thine aid,
(For all things else are vain) even I alone,
I will redeem thee, for besides there is none
That can redeem; Exodus 33.19 Romans 9.15, 16
I will, because I will,
Of my free Grace, for thy deserts are ill,
As all the rest thy kinreds are, which came
From sinful Adams loins, 1. Sa. 12.22. Esaias 43..5. and 48.11.
for mine own Name
And goodness sake, I will that hence thou be
A vessel wholly consecrate to me
In holiness. Thus did he lead me on,
As I have shown, his sacred Word along,
Till from Mount From the Law to the Gospel.
Sinai he had brought me up
To Sions hill; where he gave me the cup
Of his salvation freely, and mine eye
Began to see that happy Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, notable to illustrate this.
Mystery
Of his abundant love in Christ, which he
Did sweetly there begin lay open to me:
Lay open indeed; for 'twas a treasury
Of love beyond conceit, the time when I
Was in my deepest plunge, pressed down by sin
Even to despair, the time when I was in
The very Jaws of Hell, even then, I say,
When there was left for me none other way,
Then did my gracious God in kindness come
And take me up, then did he send his Son,
His own beloved Son, down from on high;
And rather then he would suffer me to lie
In those eternal bonds of death* to be
Still thrall'd to Hells expreslesse misery,
Whereto my self had brought my self, even he,
His only Son, would needs come down to be
My Gal. 1.4. and 3.13.
Ransomer; his love was grown so great,
He Would rather leave his wont glorious seat
Of Majesty, then see me thus; yea more,
He Would be my surety too, Esaias 53 4. 1. Pet. 2.24.
for sure he bore
My sins, and griefs; he underwent the pain
Of death and hell for me; naught could restrain
His forward wings of speakelesse love, but he
Would straight Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
vn-God himself, as 'twere, and be
Made man like us, he would descend from high,
Where Is erst he sat in his felicity,
And glory inexpressible; that he
Might take on him our poor humanity,
The rags of our Gal. 3.13.
accursed flesh, wherein
He might in person answer for the sin
That we had done; he would become our Gage,
To undergo his fathers heavy rage
And wrath, so justly due to us; that we
From out the hell of this our low degree,
Might be raisd up so high from death, from sin,
And all those deepes of misery, wherein
We erst lay fast implung'd, as to be made
His happy Romans 8.29
Images, to have a shade
Of his Divinity as 'twere, and be
Made Ephesians. 4.24
like to him in holiness; that we
Might be made Ephesians. 2.19.
Citizens of Grace, and hence
Might lead a life beyond the Sphere of sense,
That happy life of Hab. 2.4. Gal. 2.20.
faith, I mean, in him,
Till he e're long come end these days of sin,
And take us wholly to himself, where we
Shall live with him through all eternity,
In never ending speakelesse joys, which he
Has merited for us. Thus may you see
What God has done for my poor soul, when I
Was in distress: thus did he 2. Cor. 12.9
magnify
Himself in this weak man of mine, which he
Has so redeemed to be 1. Cor. 6.19
his own to be
Made only blessed by being so. But here,
O thou my God, why would thou yet appear
So rig'rous to thine only Son, that he
Should be Gal. 3.13, 14.
accursed thus with our misery,
To bless us with his happiness? Alas!
Thou surely could have brought thy will to pass
By any other easier means; and then,
If needs thou would be so good to us, poor men,
By saving us alive, why did thou yet
Thus leave thy Son, as seeming to forget
Thy love to him, and show it us? Why, sure,
With thee 'twas small, still to have kept us pure,
And never have suffered us to fall, if thou
Would endeare thy self to us, as now
Thou show'st thou had decreed to do; and he
(Thy Christ I mean) might still have staid with thee,
In his own speakelesse happiness, and not
Have spilt his precious blood to wash this spot
Of sin from our defiled souls. Oh no;
My reason erres, thy love was more then so:
Thou would not buy us thus for naught, though we
Were thine before indeed, as dues to thee
That had created us of naught: but here
Thou needs would have thy wondrous love appear,
By making us to see our selves, what we
Were of our selves without depends on Thee,
To wit, mere slaves to sin, and death; and then
To 2. Cor. 6.20
buy us with a price so high, that men
Cannot conceive its speak less worth, so dear
As thine own only Son. Hence did appear
The wondrous Ephesians. 2.7, 8
riches of thy love, which thou
Indeed did show to me and them, that now
Are thine alone by Grace: What shall I say?
Here Is love indeed beyond Compare; the day
Of my short life would surely fail, if I
Should strive but to express it worthily,
As it deserves. What then? Why surely now
I Will onwards in my thanks, here will I vow,
And pay unto my God. But what have I,
Poor soul, to pay? Sure, I will thankfully
Take Psalm. 116.13, 14.
David's cup; here will I on, and call
Upon his name: here will I sacre all
That ever I have unto his praise; and now,
O thou my Lord, be present with my vow,
And sweetly aid thy servant on, till he
My consecration to God.
Perform at full what ever he vows to thee.
First then, my God, here do I hence commend
My self into thine hands; here I ^urrend
That right thou justly have in me by Grace,
And That is, nature in its purity.
nature both; here come and take thy place
Within this 1. Cor. 6.19
temple of thine own, I mean,
This man of mine; Come thou, ^^d make it clean
By thy alone pure-purging Sprite, and hence
Vouchafe to make continual Residence
Under this lowly roof of my Esaias 57.15, and 66.2.
poor heart,
Whereof thy self art Lord, that chiefest part
And room of all my clayey house; wherein
You Are also wont to take delight, if sin
(That cursed foe of mine) come not before,
And keep thee out, by Genesis 4.7.
lying at the door.
But, O my God, hence let it not be said,
That thy Omnipotence should be afraid
At such a nothing as it were, that it
Should keep thee out, and as a Tyrant, fit
Usurping proudly on thy right* Oh no,
Be thou thy self, my God; Come here and sho^
Thy all-commanding power, and let not sin
Dare make a start so much to enter in,
And domineere on what is thi^^: Psalm. 119.94
for I
Am wholly thine. Come, come, and magnify
Thy self in my infirmities, that hence,
Led as it were by thy Omnipotence,
I may be always doing good; nay, more,
And always take delight therein: for sure,
That only gives me true delight, when I
Am doing so in sweet dependency
On thee, my God, the chiefest good. O come
And banish thoroughly, as thou have begun,
Away from me those my most dangerous foes,
Which erst overwhelmed me with so many woes;
All my despairing thoughts I mean, and all
My thoughts of vanity, which did enthrall
My soul while ere so fast to hell, that I
Was brought into such deepes of misery,
I knew not what long time to do. Come, come,
Even for the Passion of thine only Son,
And free me from these tyrannies. Nay, hence
Let me be tied to any pain of sense
Rather then this of Or, of soul. sc. the loss or want of Gods ioying
countenance, of all pains most miserable.
loss, of loss, I say,
Of thy sweet countenance. O let the day
Of that alone shine still on me, and then
Come all the gloomy frowns of mortal men;
Come all the stormy powers of Death, of Hell;
Come any thing; in thee I shall be well:
In thee alone I shall be well; in thee,
Knit fast (I mean) in Christ, by that sweet tie
Of thine abundant love through him: for he
Has broke the bonds of hell, and set me free;
He has Psalm. 103.4.
redeemed my life from death, that I
Should hence enjoy the Romans 8.21.
glorious liberty
Of those that are thy happyed sons; and hence
Psalm. 116, 9.
Walk on alone in thy Omnipotence,
Still prosp'ring in thy ways, which is to be
Raysd up to heaven, whiles yet on earth, to me
The very chiefest happiness that I
Would here desire. O let me live, and dye
Within these links of thy sweet love: for here
My hopes are firm with Romans 8.
Paul, no faithless fear
Can break this Ibid. verse. 29, 30.
chain by which I Am tide; for I
Am thine Verse. 1.
in Christ: there is no cal^mity,
Verse. 38. and last.
Nor life, nor death, things present, nor to come,
Nor height, nor depth, nor ought that may be done,
Can separate me from thee in Christ. And now
What yet remains? here will I pay my vow
Of thankfulness to thee, my God, yea'uen here,
Led onwards in thy Psalm. 71.16.
strength, I Will sweetly steer
My leaking boat along, till it has brought
My wearied muse unto the shore she sought
With so often doubled tears, and sighs. But here,
O you my friends, you all I mean that fear
The Lord with me, pray join your helping hand,
That we the sooner may obtain the Land.
Come then, I say, we all that are combined
To God in Christ, hence let us be refined
From all our Ephesians. 4.^2.
former vanities; from hence
Let us shake off those menstruous clouts of sense,
Which erst we were polluted with, and now
Be clothed Ephesians. 4.23, 24.
anew with Christ; hence let us vow
Our selves as holy to the Lord, that we
May still Verse. 13, 15
grow up in fai^hs sweet unity,
Till we be perfect men in Christ. Come, come,
Let others do they know not what, go on
Still reu'ling in their ills, let them ^ke up
The seeming sweets of sins impoys'ned cup;
Let them carouse in vanity, and draw
Iniquity with ropes, never stand in aw'
Of future judgments; Let them Ier. 5.28.
prosper still
As they suppose, by adding ill to ill;
Let them be careless of themselves, and spend
Their precious days, never thinking on the end.
Let them make flesh their guide, taking delight
In their own lusts, still glorying in the hight
Of their ambitious titles, and their wealth,
Got by obliquitie, and lawless stealth:
Let them Esaias 3.16, 17 18, 19, etc.
be-pride themselves in rich attires
And robes of State, burning with lawless fires
Of lusts not to be named; let them be fed
With choycest meats, and glutted up with bread,
Ier. 5.7, 8.
Like pampred Horses to the full: I say,
Let them spend all their happiness away
In these and such like vanities, nor think
On death at all, thou standing at the brinke
Of their uncertain graves, and heavens high hand
Of vengeance over them does always stand
Ready to strike them down to hell: but we
Will joy alone in this sweet liberty
We have in Romans 8.1. 1. Cor. 7.22.
Christ, we will delight, I say,
Our selves in him, in him we will vow, and pay
Our dues of praise unto our God; in him
We Will hence Rom 8.37. Our safety and sweet privileges in Christ.
triumph over all the powers of Sin,
Of death, and Hell: in Him we will express
Our utmost thanks by lives of Ephesians. 4.24.
holiness,
And Psalm. 116.9.
walking in his ways, till by the hand
Of his Psalm. 143.10
good Sprite, hee'th brought us to the Land
Of righteousness where we would be: on Him
We will build all our confidence, and clim
To Ioh. 1.51. referred to Genesis 28.12.
Heaven alone by Him, Psalm. 91.4.
under his wings
We Will always shroud our selves, nor shall the Kings
Of the earth be able do us harm, though they
Psalm. 2.1, 2.
Rage ere so much. Our foes shall melt away
Like Snow against the Sun: and 'cause wee'ue made
The Ps. 91.1, 9.
Lord our dwelling place, under his shade
We shall be surely safe; ye^, Psalm 46.2.
though the earth
Be moved, with all the powers thereof, though death
Triumph on Verse. 7.
every side of us, yet we
Shall surely be preserved, and live to see
The wondrous riches of his love, wherein
He has endeared himself to us: through him
We shall pass all these nether-stormes, and spite
Of all with-stands, walk onwards in the light
Of his sweet countenance, still singing praise
Unto his Name, till he at length shall raise
Our Muses to a higher pitch, where we
Shall sing his praises to eternity,
In his ne'r-ending place of bliss, even there
Where he himself remains, where neither fear,
Nor grief shall interrupt our joys, but we
Shall have our fills of all felicity,
And glory inexpressible; the hight,
And chief of which is in the In beatifica visione Dei, as Divines say.
blessed sight
Of this our glorious God, 1. Cor. 13.12. 1. John 3.2.
whom we shall see
There face to face, even as he is; yea, be
Made like to him: what would you have me say?
Mine eyes are dazzled at this glorious day;
And reason stands amazed, when it would reach
This wondrous hight; how shall a Mortal preach
Of this immortal state? O had mine eye
But one sweet glimpse of this, how should I tie
Your ears unto my tongue, when I should speak
Of what I saw? 'twould make your hearts to break,
With earnest longings after it; and you
Would scorn from hence so much as take a view
Of these inferior vanities, which be
But toys as 'twere, not worth your thoughts, and flee
Away almost as soon as come; withal
Leaving behind them naught but cursed gall,
And bitterness, to vex, and gripe, and grieve
Those foolish souls which did ere-while believe
Their false pretended sweets: but here alone
Is Psalm. 16.11.
fullness of all true delight, where none
Can ever be deceived, unless it be
As that wise 1. King. 10.
Queen of Sheba was, when she
Heard of the glory of King Sal^^on,
And of his happiness; but when anon
She came and saw it with her eyes, she than
1. King. 10 5, 6. Verse. 7.
In great amazedness thereat began
Confess, that all was true; yea sure the fame
Said she, came far too short. If then the name
Of Solomon were such, behold, here is one
That Is Mat. 12.42. Luke 11.31.
greater far then was King Solomon:
What shall I say of him! sure, my report
Will speak but truth, and yet come so far short,
As finite does of infinite: what then
1. King. 10.8
She spoke of Solomon, and of his men,
So may I speak to thee, my God; O how,
How happy are thy Saints, which fall and bow
Before thy Majesty? Happy, I say,
Are those that have the privilege to stay
Continually with thee, there to behold
Thy glorious face, wherein, Psalm. 16.11.
as David told,
Are joys at full* and sit at thy right hand,
Where pleasures live for evermore; where stand
Thy blessed troops of glorious Saints, that sing
Eternal Revel. 19.1, 6.
Halleluia's to their King,
To thee their King, to thee alone; for thou
Art only Revel. 4.11.
worthy, O my God. And now
Here do I crave to join with them, even I,
Though yet on earth, here do I thankefully
Fall down before thy glorious Throne, and here
In humbled confidence and holy fear,
I offer my poor mite to thee of praise
And thankfulness, in these my lowly Lays.
All glory be to thee, my God, to Thee
And to the Lamb (which Revel. 5.9.
has redeemed me
By his dear blood) and to the sacred Sprite,
The Ioh. 15.26.
Comforter, and pledge of true delight,
Which has been with me hitherto, and brought
My soul into thy peace. Sure I have naught
That Is worth thy great acceptance, Lord; for I
Am poor, thou know, and full of misery,
Happy in nothing else but thee, I mean,
By being thine; and yet I (...) unclean;
( Leuit. 13.45
Unclean, alas, unclean well may I cry,
Come thou and wash away my Leprosy,
And make me fit for being thine) O then
What shall I pay (who am the worst of men)
To thee for all thy mercies, Lord? Why here
I Will pay thee with 1. Chron. 29 14. 1. Cor. 6.20*
thine own, the case is clear;
I offer up my self to thee, with all
That here I have; hence may it please thee call,
And count me wholly for thine own: for now
I bid farewell unto the world, and vow
In thy sweet aid, eternal enmity
To all my wonted sins, to vanity,
And every luring bait of hell. And here
I humbly do deuote my self in fear,
And holiness to thee, my God, that I
May still be praising thee until I die,
In all my thoughts, and words, and acts; and hence
May walk along by faith, and not by sense,
Still gladded with thy countenance, till I
Have ouer-past the present misery
Of this short life, and till my soul at length
Being clothed upon with that immortal strength
Of my blessed Phil. 3.21.
Savior Christ, shall sweetly flee
Into thine hands, there to remain with thee
In thy expreslesse happiness, till thou
In that last day shall swiftly come, and bow
The heavens, and raise my body up (though dead
And rotned dust) and join it to my Ephesians. 1.22.
Head
And Savior Christ, where it again shall be
United to my soul, Job 19.26, 27.
and I shall see
My Savior with these very eyes, even I,
Together with that blessed company
Of glorious Saints; where our immortal Lays
Shall never cease to celebrate thy praise.
Mean while, my Muse, here take thy longed for rest
On this sweet shore, here live amongst the blessed
In ever happy Sympathies, and be
Vr^ ab (...) and Heaven, quasi ^sa C^el^s^.
Celestial, like thy self. Here cease with me,
Thy wonted tearie strains, and let thine eyes
Be solace'd still in holy Theories
And contemplations of thy God, till he
Shall raise thee up beyond mortality,
To join with his celestial Quire, and sing
Eternal Halleluiahs unto Revel. 5.13
Him,
And to the Lamb for evermore: Till when,
Cease not to pray, Revel. 22.^0.
Lord Jesus, come. Amen.
FINIS.

