A marvelous combat of contrarieties.

Malignantlie striving in the members of man's body, allegoricallie
representing unto us the envied state of our flourishing Common wealth: wherein
dialogue-wise by the way, are touched the extreme vices of this present time.

With an earnest and vehement exhortation to all true English hearts,
courageously to be ready prepared against the enemy. by W. A.

Concordia paruae res crescunt, discordia maximae dilabuntur.

Printed by I. C. for Thomas Hacket, and are to be sold at his shop in Lomberd
street* under the sign of the Popes head.

Ann. D. 1588.

To the Right Honorable M^ister George Bond, Lord Mayor of London, much
health, and happy success through out his whole government.
I Have read right Honorable, Virtutem esse bonum commune patriac, that
virtue is the common profit of our Country, and that he is not to be honored
with the noble name of virtue, which does not wholly apply his mind freely to
profit many, and to seek the commodity of others: which made Cicero to say,
that if there were a question, or comparison, to whom we ought to show most
duty, our Country and Parents ought chiefly to be regarded, unto whom we
are bound by many benefits: And Cicero did not alone say it, but by his own
example confirmed it, when being Consul of Rome, through his singular
diligence, and painful watchfulnes, he both preserved the City from the
secret conspiracies of Catiline, and also repressed his violent attempts, that
fully purposed the overthrow of his Country: so that he might justly say of
himself as he did, O fortunatam natam me Consule Roman; O happy Rome in the
time that I was Consul. Your self (right Honorable) may in these dangerous
days, and doubtful times, worthily deserve Ciceros praise, that are so
carefully occupied, painfully busied, and watchfully prepared, not only to
prevent by wary foresight all privy attempts that noisome vipers, and hurtful
Traitors, either by night or day shall practice against this honorable and
famous City, but are ready bent valiantly to defende^t, though with loss of
your own life, rather then it should in the least part be harmed, or the
inhabitants thereof (...) ways iniuried.

The valor of your antique predecessors, are yet to be seen in the arms of
your honorable City, and shall for ever remain in the minds of all
posterity, whose glory we see you emulate, and to which, your watchfulnes
and painful diligence will make you equivalent, if in these stormy
tempesteous times, you shall (like a wary and heedfull Pilot) skilfully (as
you have begun) continue to hold the helm in this Ship of your government,
and happily guide it from blustering vvindes, and wallovving waves of secret
malicious enemies: which the more they are, does make you more careful, and
the more secret, far more watchful.

The time wherein you govern, may well be compared to the time of Catiline, but
that in this point it is far more dangerous, for that we have not one Catiline
that purposes the ruin of our City, but many: and as Cicero said at that
time, Crescit in dics singulos hostium numerus, so may we say, the number of
our enemies do still increase, yet will not we stand upon that which he
did, neither do I think you of his mind, that either our nightly watches
(which God knows are but slender) the garrison of our City, the strength of
our people, the unity of our minds, the counsels of your Senate, or such like
can preserve us, but that our God, even for the glory of his name, and for his
mercy sake will defend us, that neither their counsels or conspiracies shall
ever be able to hurt us. And albeit they do intestinam aliquam quotidie
perniciem reipublicae moliri, devise daily some secret and deadly destruction
of our common wealth, yet I doubt not but first by Gods mercy, and then
through the provident care of you and our Magistrates, not alone this City,
but the whole land shall be preserved from their malice, and they themselves fall
into the pit that they have dug for others, as Catiline did, with his
conspiratours.

I have printed your Honors name in the forehead of this my Book, not because
I wanted patrons to defend it, (for who in this time will not esteem the
faithful good will of a loving Subject, that zealously seeks the profit of
his Country) but for that I hear and see your honors care, and vvatchfulnes
deserves it, and to deprive the virtuous of their praise, were nothing else but
mere envy and secret malice. Wherefore as I willingly dedicate this unto
your Honor: so I beseech you gratefully accept it, and defend it against all
the malicious tongues of envious and slanderous Papists, whose mouths either
I desire the Lord God to stop, and convert their hearts, or else confound them,
that they may never see their desires.

And so wishing your Honor to prosper in all your counselles and that you take
in hand. I cease to trouble you any further.

Your Honors in all duty to command, William Auerell.

To the friendly and Christian Reader.
THREE sorts of people (courteous Reader) I know there are, that will dislike,
and discommend that which I shall write, the first are our proud Dares, that
are as far in love with themselves as Narcissus, and our wanton wives and
mincing minions, that all day pranke themselves at the Glass, like dainty
Misteris Acco. The second are our gluttonous Sanctrae that for their feeding
and unmeasurable drinking, may better be called Beotians then Englishmen: and
the third are our couchant Papists that privily lurk in corners, to bring
every thing in disgrace, that is not for their purpose, nor serves (as we say)
for their tooth. These peradventure being gauled, cannot abide to have their
sore rubbed, like to Phillip of Macedon that because he had but one eye
himself, was angry when any man talked of a Cyclop, or named a gogle eye, or
spoke of any that had but one of his eyes: Or like Hyrmeas, that being
himself an Eunuch, could not abide to hear of a Raser, or a knife, or any
man that was cut, because he was himself a gelding. Wherefore if we touch
these men, it must be figurate but not aperte, closely and cunningly, not
openly nor plainly, for if we do, we utterly lose their good will, but as for
these I count not, only I wish them better minds, with a sound amendment of
their lives.

The rest that are well disposed, I earnestly desire to bear with whatsoever
faults have either hastily escaped my hands in writing, or the Printers
press in printing.

I am not Roscius in Scena, I know many could better have handled this
Theme, yet I friendly request thy patience, and gentle acceptance of that I
have written, knowing that if thou have judgment, thou will not be a Lynx, in
prying too narrowly into my ouer-sights, but rather a Mole, in not seeing mine
infirmities. That I have written has been for thy profit and pleasure, my
self in laboring have felt the pain, all the reward I demand is thy good
word, which if I may have I am satisfied, and so reposing my self thereon I
end, wyshing thee health and long life, with the fruition of heavenly joys.
Farewell. ()

A Dialogue, wherein the extreme vices of this present age are dysplayd against
Traitors and Treasons.
The Tongue. Dear Brethren and fellow members, by what authority or right,
rather with what boldness, dare our Brethren the Belly and Back oppress us, and
so Lordlike command us? it is a shameful thing, extreme folly, and a thing
very unseemly, when the servant rules, and the Lord obeys, the slave
commands, and the Master serves: truly we are worthy of the greatest
torments, that like drudges will become a scoff and scumme to others. Like
fools we have made the Belly and Back our Lords, with great labor we get and
provide al things may please them: poor souls we have no rest, sometime the
Belly commands one, sometime the Back another, one says to y^ Foot, arise
sluggard, awake, the other to the hand, bestirre thee apace, get me some meat,
prepare me some dainties, fetch me some wine, lay the Table, the day passes,
the time goes, and I have eaten nothing: Hunger and Thirst my two enemies come
and threaten my death, the one on the one side, the other on the other, and
therefore except ye speedely help me I die, and these are their daielie and
usual complaints.


The Hand. Sister, you say truth, and amongst the rest no one has more
cause to complain of them both then I, for I labor sundry ways to maintain
the^. In the Winter I suffer cold, in the Summer I endure heat, my joints are
benumbed with the one, and dried with the other, I labor day and night to
procure for the^ both what I can and yet they are never satis-fied.


The Tongue. I know it, but yet your toil is not equal with mine, for I am
often a common Paratour and solicitour for them both. Many times I am feign to
braule for them, when I have small thanks for my labor, sometimes I am a
Patron or rather a Latrone to rob the Ministry by selling of lyuings,
sometimes a Judge, and eftsoons a witness, sometimes a Counselor, otherwhiles a
Merchant, and then after a retailour of wares, I counterfeit Laws, I tell
lies, I sewe seditions, I stir up Traitors, I slander Princes, under color
of truth I beguile and deceive, I ^weare and forswear, I break promise, I
allure to whoredom, to theft, to murder, and to all mischief: I make no
account so I may get them ought, whether per fas or nefas, by right or wrong.
If I come among Princes, I flatter, if among the noble or rich, I sooth them
up with sweet words, Si ai^rt aio, si negant nego, look what they say I
affirm it, and all this I do, that by flatteries I may feed the Belly
dai^^^lie, and clothe the Back bravely.


The Hand. And I pray you is my toil any less? are my deceites inferior
unto yours? am I not forced through their procurements (if I may without shame
open my follies) to pick and steal, sometimes by privy filching to make all
fish that comes to net? sometimes by open robbing violently, to lay hands upon
others? What treasons, what poysonings, what murder is it or what wickedness,
that I do not for their sakes accomplish? whose goods have I spared? whose
blood have I not spilled, to serve the turn of these my Lordly Masters?

Have I spared the Prince, the Father, the Child, the Sister, the Brother, the
Husband, the Wife? Nay what age, or se^e have I pitied, to please these
ouerruling and commanding Lords? I want no examples to confirm my sayings,
yet least you should imagine me to say more then I can prove, I will set down
a few for the maintainaunce of my cause. And first to begin with Traitors, did
not Curio (at first Caesar's enemy, yet afterward to maintain the Belly and
Back) sell unto Caesar for 26000. crowns the City of Rome? How unfaithfully
did Polymnestor of Thrace murder Polydorus King Priamus some, and all for his
gold to maintain his bravery, and to set him one degree higher in his
Kingdom. Aul. Posthumous Albinus, being sent to overthrow Iugurtha, was
corrupted with money, and in stead of war most shamefully concluded a peace.
How did Standley and York, two English Traitors in Flaunders, deal with the
most virtuous and famous Queen of England, whom God preserve long to reign
over us to the confusion of all foreign and domestical Traitors.

When the Romans warred against the Latins, Cassius a standerdbearer f^ue
Crassus Brutus his son, because for money he would have betrayed his Father,
and opened the Gates to the enemies.

Heraclius the Emperor, slew Phocas his Father to maintain himself in the
bravery of an Empire.

Richard the third, reaching with ambition of a crown, most unnaturally slew
his two little Nephews, his heart contrived it, but I performed it.

Frotho the King of Denmark had three sons, Haldanus, Roe, and Scato, who
when their Father was dead, strove all together for the Kingdom, by means
of which, Haldanus the elder, slew y^ two younger, that he alone might sway the
Kingdom.

Semiramis having obtained of her Husband Ninus, to sit but one day in the
princely seat, and for that day to sway the Kingdom, imprisoned her Husband,
and afterward slew him, that she alone might live in all daintines and
bravery.

These and infinite other, have the Belly and Back (...) me to destroy, making
me as a slave to serve their appetites.


The Foot. Seeing each of you have justly made your complaints, as Nature has
placed me lowest, so give me leave at last to declare my grief: I acknowledge
the Tongue is greatly enforced, the Hands meruailously troubled, and the other
members wonderfully oppressed, to serve the turn of two, not Masters by
Nature, but Monsters by abuse, yet consider my travail, and you shall find it
nothing less then the rest. How do I trott up and down, and as a Porter
together with my fellow, am forced to bear up the rest of the members.
Whatsoever must be had, I am the Messenger to fetch it, is there any dish to
feed the Belly? then must I run to buy it, is there any fine apparel
fashionable for the Back? be it never so far, I must trudge for it. And
albeit y^ the weight of the members which nature has given be sufficient to
charge and ouerburden my feeble force, yet must I have a load devised by art,
to oppress the weakness of my slender joints, so that I think my burden
heavier then Aetna, or the weight of the Heavens upon the shoulders of Atlas,
with grief heerof my boanes consume, my synnowes shake, my humors dry up, and
my joints quake, like as when two weak Pillars bear up the burden of a
heavy house. Besides, neither can the Tongue come to utter her speech, nor the
hands to execute their purpose, without it be by my help and furtheraunce, so
that if the Belly bid the Tongue deceive, I poast out to perform it, if y^
Back command the Hands to steal, or shed blood, then I haste to make them
finish it, so that in all actions I am a servant in most vile slavery to these
unjust oppressors, and therefore have as much cause to complain of their
tyranny in every thing, as either of you in any thing.


The Tongue. Certain it is we all do serve them dilligently, we labor for
them painefully, and yet are rewarded slenderly. The Tyrants of Sicilia never
oppressed their subjects with more violence, then they do^ us with their
exactions, and yet we have thereby no benefit, for had we any recompense, it
would assuage the burden of our travail, and make our labor sweet, but
such is the condition of these two, that albeit we daily give them, hourelie
labor and continually provide for them, yet they never cease complaining, that
we give them nothing.


The Hand. Yea, for though I labor to day to feed the one, and travail to
morrow to clothe the other, yet if I do not the next day, and the next day
also give them still, they complain of mine idleness, of mine injustice and
negligence: saying I am unnatural, unkind, slothful, and given to ease, and
that I forget the end wherefore I was made, which is, (they say) to serve them
in all necessities, what said I? nay rather in all superfluities.


The Foot. In the same state am I, and so they deal also with me, for though
I now fetch them in things not wholly needful, but for the most part curious,
it may be that a while they will be contented, but shortly after they cry it
is too little, and except I procure the one variety of dainties, and the other
diversity of suits, they are neither contented, so variable are they, and full
of alteration, so that I cannot tell what to compare them to, except to the
lake in the furthest part of Afric, among the people Trogloditae, which is
thrice in a day bitter and salt, and yet anon pleasant and sweet.


The Tongue. Nay rather they are like the gaping Gulf in Sicil, named
Charybdis, which ever deuoureth, and is never satis-fied, or like the fire,
that the more it has, the more it still consumes: for Polypus had never more
shifts, then y^ Back has suites, nor the Camelion more cullers then y^ Belly
Cooks.


The Hand. I think the Crocodil is not more greedy then the Belly, nor the
Leopard more variable then the Back. Their nature is like y^ stone Siphnius,
which heated in Oil wareth hard, but let alone becomes soft. The more we
pleasure them, the more they displease us, and the more we bestow upon them,
the more they are unthankful.


The Tongue. Will you see the pattern of a gluttonous Pantrey, then look upon
the Belly, for he is a smoking Kitchen of variable viands, Gurmand^se is his
Porter, and Gluttony his Cook, the lustful Liver like a flaming fire, boyleth
under the great Kettle and Cauldron of the stomach, the breathing Lunges, like
blowing bellows, (...) by the Liver as by a Forge, the Wealand pype as it were
a Cestern, brings in liquor to dress the cates, and the entrayles like a
sinck convey the filth down the Fundament. Now all this while who fares the
better for their co^kery, nay which of us are not the worse for the Bellyes
vntemperancie, and which of us smarteth not for the Backs prodigality?
Wherefore Brethren, and fellow members, let us not be subject to two such
Cormorants, which regard not our benefit, but their own profit, consider the
seruillity, they have long kept us in, what labor and pain, what carke and
care, they have continually put us to, if we cast off their yeake, we shall be
freed from slavery, if not, we live in continual drudgery, they rule not by
reason but by rigor, their lust is a law, and their will a warrant, and
therefore to stake off their oppression, were wisdom, and to live at liberty,
will be our only happiness.


The Hand. Sister, I promise for my part, to yield to your persuasion, and
whereas in times past I have wrought full hard for the maintenance of these
my jolly Masters, I purpose now to take mine ease, thinking it better to live
at rest, the^ to toil and have no thank for my labor, and therefore let them
work for themselves if they will, for I neither mean to feed the one, nor
clothe the other.


The Foot. Neither will I step over the threshold, to fetch in any thing for
the sustenaunce of the one, or maintenance of the other, but mean to take my
rest in mine Inn, expecting how these that have so long ruled as Lords, can
become now servant to themselves.


The Tongue. In this doing we shall abate their pride, and pluck down their
Peacocks plumes, so that though now they hold their heads full high, yet
within these two or three days, I am sure my gluttonous Master the Belly,
will sing a new song, for I promise for my part to be no instrument to feed,
nor no servant to serve him, and as for our gallant youth the Back, I do not
doubt but y^ want of your service, will make him in short time after beshrew
himself. But hushe, Lupus est in fabula, behold where they both come of whom
we have long talked, let us shrink a side to hear their communication, till
opportunity serve for us to speak.


The Belly. What greater misery can happen in this life, then when as in a
natural body, where the members should serve each others necessity, and
mutually help and succor one another, they shall not only deny their aid
unto the body, but conspire also the death of the same: by means of which, not
the body alone does consume and pine away, but the members themselves do
consequently perish: and yet are they so blinded with envy, and led on with
self love, that they cannot perceive their destruction at hand, till present
perrill do teach them, and their own smart do warn them, what folly it is
to be led by envy, whereby to make a mutiny in a natural body, in which
there ought to be a cordial consent of amity, and a tuneable harmony of love.

I know not what has moved my fellow members to this conspiracy, for my
part I have naturally fed them, and lovingly nourished them all, yet they
complain, and not of me alone, but of the proud Back also, whose pride and
prodigality, has oftentimes (indeed) deprived both them and me of our due
sustenaunce and natural nourishment, even this stately and lordly Back, the
pyllar of pride, the waster of wealth, and the window opening to all wickedness,
a leader unto luxury and unclean leacherie, a bulwark to beat back
chastity, and the root from whence all presumptuous pride does grow, for
whose faults, it is no reason I should suffer the malice of the members, that
not only in mine office foster y^ rest, but am nearest to him in all things.


The Back. Brother, I have heard your unbrotherly speeches, in which, though
you would to clear your self, make me the cause of y^ members variance, yet
if you justly examine your own condition, you shall find that your gluttony,
and vntemperancie, does not only distemper the members, but also consume that
should serve for my maintenance: and therefore good cause have the rest of our
Brethren to condemn your excess, and dislike your extortion: for they serve
an evil Master, who is always craving and never contented, ever feeding, and
never filled, for what is more insatiable then the Belly? that is this day
crammed, and to morrow craving? Who when he is full, can dispute of temperance
and continency, yet presently after does shake hands with all virtue. You
say that I am the pillar of pride, but it happens then through your
vntemperaunce, you affirm that I am the waster of wealth, but you forget your
own delicacie, that consume more at one banquet in a day, then I do upon
apparel in a year. You make me a leader unto all leacherie, but you
remember not that Sine Cerere et Baccho friget Venus, and that I am but the
effect, you the cause, I the flame, you the Oil, I the mean, but your self
the matter, you say I am the bulwark to beat back chastity, but you consider
not that y^ full Belly is not able to keep continency, you make me the root
of pride, but it is your self that is both root and trunck, to foster the
brauest branches of pride, and to cherish all wickedness, and vice: and therefore
you suffer not for me, but for your own faults, and your disorder in
feeding, has made the members break, and my garments bare.


The Tongue. Now the matter begins to work, when Thieves attache one
another, true men come by their goods, but of both, there is neither barrel
better Herring.


The Belly Why, had ever Prometheus more shapes, then the back suits? or y^
Hydra more n^w heads then the back new Garments? not so variable for their
matter, as changable for their fashion: this day French, to morrow English,
the next day Spanish, to day Italianate, to morrow for fashion a devil
intarnat, O tempora, o mores! To day you shine in suits of silk, to morrow
you iet it out in cloth of Gold, one day in black for show of gravity, an
other day in white in token of bravery, this day that color, the next day
another, now short wasted, anon long bellied, by and by after great Buttoned,
and straight after plain laced, or else your Buttons as strange for smalnes, as
they were monstrous before for greatness, this year bumbd like a Barrel, the
next shottend like a Herring, now your hose hang loose like a bow case, the
next day as strait as a pudding skin, one while buskind for lack of
stocks, another while booted for want of shoes, and thus from you that are the
graund Master, do the inferious members fetch their fashions, and these be
the mutabilities of men.

As for women, you make them through your pride in looks like Lais, in
fashions like Flora, in manners like Thais, more wavering then the wind, and
more mutable then the Moon: in Gate and iesture most dainty, in the Church
most angelical, in the streets modest and amiable, abroad among men in
finenes superficial, but at home by themselves most sluttish and bestiall. Yet
I mean not all but the worst, and such as entertain your pride, who from the
top to the toe, are so disguised, that though they be in sex Women, yet in
attire they appear to be men, and are like Androgini, who counterfayting the
shape of either kind, are in deed neither, so while they are in condition
women, and would seem in apparel men, they are neither men nor women, but
plain Monsters.

Their heads set out with strange hair, (to supply nature that way defected,
or rather by their periwigges infected) do appear like the head of Gorgon,
saving that they want the crawling Snakes of Medusa, to hang sprawling in their
hair along their faces, and yet they retain the property of this Daughter of
Phorcus, for they turn a number of their beholders into stones, who while they
affectionatlie gaze on their painted pride, do lose the reason of men and
become like stones, without any feeling of a virtuous mind, the only Image
of a man.

But as they are Venerian Dames, even so in their flatteries to beguile fools,
they imitate the nature of the Cyprian women, who coming into Syria and
serving in ye Court, would coure down and become footestooles for the Ladies,
thereby to ascend into their Coaches, for which cause they were called
Climacidae, of Climaca, which ye Assirians name a Ladder: but heerin only
they differ, in that our Phrynae, and Cytherean Damsels, become not Ladders for
Women, but footestooles, yea and pillowes for Men. And therefore it is not
without cause that Tyresias said, (being chosen an Arbiter between Jupiter
and Juno,) that there were In viro, tres amoris vnciae, in femina, nouem, in a
man three ounces of lust, in a woman nine: for what means else their outward
tricking and dainty trimming of their heads, the laying out of their hayres,
the painting and washing of their faces, the opening of their breasts, and
discovering them to their wastes, their bents of Whale bone to bear out their
bu^mes, their great sleeves and bumbasted shoulders, squared in breadth to make
their wastes small, their culloured hose, their variable shoes, and all these
are but outward shows. As for the rest, least their rehearsal might rather
hurt, then profit the honest ears, I will cover them with silence, but all
these are your prouocations, these are the fruits of your pride, the signs of
your waste, and the abridgment of my fare, for while you spend so freely upon
your Back, the least share falls to the Belly, nay* I am feign oftentimes to
^ast, to bear out the prodigality of your pride, and then ^anting nourishment
to feed the members, I am complained on for your fault.


The Back. I perceive you can Arcem facere ex cloaca, and Lapidem e sepulchro
venerari pro Deo, make much of your painted sheath, and make a Mountain of a
Molehill. You can love your self best, and spy a mote in another eye,
forgetting the beam in your own, I am not so variable in my suits, as you are
in dainties of diverse sorts, nor so sumptuous and gorgious in garments, as you
are costly in cates, but you count al too much that goes besides your own
belly, and thereunto you bend the sum of your talk, like Pithonicus, y^
when he gave answer of the Oracle, so spoke, as the voice seemed not to come
from his tongue, but from his belly.

What should I speak of your two greatest Gods (...) and (...), gluttonous
feeding and excessive drinking, by which you make a number not men but beasts,
that have their souls but in stedde of salt, to keep their bodies from
noisome stincke, who though they appear men, are indeed but Ventres, that
place their pleasure in long feeding, and their delight in strong drinking.

I am not so changable in fashions, as you are choice in dishes, what boiling,
what baking, what roasting, what stewing, what curious and dainty conseruing,
what Syrropes, what sauces, with a thousand devices to move an appetite without
necessity, and charge nature without need. Did you not make Demetrius
Phalerus consume every year two hundred talents, in needless stuffing of your
bottomless bag?

And how moved you Heliogabalus at every sitting down, to spend no less
then an hundred Sestertij? Made you not Philoxenus to wish that he had ye neck
of a Crane, that in feeding on delicate meat, and drinking sweet wine, he
might feel the greater pleasure?

With this you made the Sodomites to abound, Ezech 16
which was the cause they were consumed with fire.

You made the Isralites heerin to offend, Exodus 32
that after they had glutted their bellies fell to Idolatry.

You infected Esau with this greedines, Gene, 25
that he sold his birthright for a mess of pottage, yea, infinite others have
perished by the Belly, and more by the Belly then ye sword.

The King of the Cooks (that is the Belly) overthrew the walls of Jerusalem,
(says Gregory,) for while the Belly is farced with Gluttony, the virtues of
the soul are destroyed by Leacherie, for Vicina sunt venture et genitalia.
There can be no order in living, where there is no measure in feeding, and as a
wild Horse if he have the bridle will cast his ryder, or carry him whether he
lists, so an intemperate Belly, leads the soul to all sin, and the
members to sickness and sorrow. Or as the Earth by too much rain becomes
barraine of all good fruits, and brings forth nothing but thistles and
thorns, so the Belly ouercharged with two much food, is utterly void of all
virtue, and wholly barraine in well doing, producing nothing but pricking
thistles of ill example to hurt others, or choking thorns of beastly life to
destroy it self. How many does the Belly make Epicures, that say, Ede, bibe,
post mortem nulla voluptas, eat and drink, Philip. 3
there is no pleasure after death, who make their Belly their Gods. Such are
like Acephalus, whom the Mathematicians place before one of the wandering
stars, with his head and mouth kissing his belly. Or the Fish named Asinus,
who alone of all living things (as Aristotle says) has his heart in his
belly, a number of which Asses the Belly makes, that eat not to live, but
live to eat.

As for unmeasurable drinking, Authors have written, and experience does tell
us daily, that through abuse thereof* many not only live not out half their
days, but therein consume that which should serve to clothe both me and the
members. Archesilaus Pytaneus dyed by excessive drinking of wine. Andebuntus a
King of England at a Supper drank so much wine, that being overcome with the
abundance thereof, in casting and strayning himself he suddenly died.

Anacreon the Poet, a lover of wine, was suddenly strangled with a Grape. And
many we see through your surfeiting and swilling, are rouled into the grave
before their natural time, that else might live in happiness and health. But
now I remember Cato the elder, when he accused y^ gluttony and laciuiousnes
of the people of Rome, said it was very hard verba ventra facere (...) non
habet, to talk to the belly that has no ears, or else I might tell of a
great many more, that indulgentes abdomini farcing their bellies out with
fat, through fulness of feeding by day, and gorging their guts full of wine with
late drinking by night, are right Antipodes that never behold the sun in his
rising, nor see him in his going down: such do viuere ad faces et cereos,
spend their time by torche light, while they consume ye night among their cups,
and snorte all day upon their beds. And these are your Lucifugi, or
Lychnob^^, that live contrary to Nature, who are as well known by their
colors, as the gluttonous Estriche by his feathers, some of them being more
pale through distemperature, then those that are sick of a fever, others more
ruddie then the Rubie, and more deeper in die then the reddest Grape, but with
the most pinguis aqualiculus prepense sesquipede extet: their fat paunches like
a water trough stands out a foot and a half.

I talk not of other effects that accompany your gluttonous belly when it is
farst with wine. What lasciuiousnes in words, what wantonness in gestures, what
filthiness in deeds, what swearing and blaspheming, what quarrelling and
brawling, what murder and bloodshed, nay what wickedness is not an intemperate
belly subject to, and most ready to accomplish?

Besides, how does your gluttony change Natures co^lines, into foul
deformednes? how do the eyes flame with flerines, the face flush with rednes,
the hands shake with unsteadfastness, and the feet reele through drunkenness? the
head swimmes, the eyes dazell, the tongue flammers, the stomach is ouercharged,
the body distempered, and the feeble legs ouerburdened, which, being not
able to bear an unruly Lord, (...) lay him in ye dirt like an an over ruled
slave, and so through your distemperature, your self not alone weakened, but
the other members so diseased, as to reckon up the sicknesses and sores, of
which the Belly is cause, were to purge the stables of Augea King of Elis, or
to set them down which were never known to Auicen, Galien, Hippocrates, nor
all the Physicians that ever lived, so that by these means it may be said,
that a gluttonous Bellye makes rich Physicians and fat Churchyardes.


The Belly I had not thought the Back had been so good an Orator: you have
taken great pains to decipher my gluttony, forgetting your own pride and
prodigality, but you know the morrall of Esops Ante and his Fly, he that
speaks what he will, must hear what he will not, I will not say ye Back is a
Monster, that can carry upon his shoulders, Lands, Castles, and Towns.


The Back Nor I show, how the Belly deuoureth, not only Lordships,
Revenues, and great possessions, but whatsoever flies in the air, is bredde
on the earth, or engendered in the Sea, all is too little to fill the insatiable
Belly.


The Belly Your shining out in Silks, has brought many a man into the Mercers
Books, and wrapped more in the Vserers bands. How many has the Back made
Banqueroutes, that to maintain their outward iollitie, have been feign to
gage not Lands alone, but plate, goods, or whatsoever was ought worth, and in
the end, either to take Ludgate for their lodge, or some worse prison for their
harbor, and then their Wives, Children and household live after in pennury,
through your former pride and prodigality, yea I and the other members hunger
for that, which the Back has before most vainly spent. Besides, you make the
Landlorde to maintain your bravery, so stretch his poor Tenant in rent, that
to serve your turn the Belly must fast, the Hands labor, the feet to
trudge, and the other members toil to their great grief and sorrow.


The Back But think you that the Back alone is cause of all this misery? no
no, the Belly has herein his portion, and that the greater part, how soever
you would shift the matter upon me, for although (as Plinius says) Simplex
cibus corpori vtilissimus, the simplest meat is most profitable for the body,
yet the Belly being not herewith contented, must have diverse and dainty
sorts of fruits, beasts of the earth, fowls of the air, fishes of the Sea,
and those not common but rare, besides, banqueting dyshes of sundry sorts,
made of sweet conceits to please your appetite. Moreover, gold and colors
to adorn them, and sweet spices to savor them, then the fattest and fairest,
the youngest and sweetest, a cunning Cook must be sought to dress the^, and
daintilie to prepare them, who turns the substance into an accident, and
nature into art, that the full belly may become hungry, and the stuffed
stomach renew his appetite, and while all these things must be provided, the
stock wastes, the Lands are gaged and morgaged, and rather then the Belly
shall want his superfluities, the Back and members shall want their
necessaries, so shortly after follows a topsituruey downfall of the whole
state, which must be laid upon the Back, though wrought by the Belly, and
shifted to me though cheefely effected by your self. But behold where they
are, who can give equal judgment whether of us twain do most exceed or
procure greatest wrong to the members. Do you not see them?


The Belly Yes full well, and better should I think of their company were it
not for the malicious tongue, who has contrary to nature made them enemies to
me, that am by nature a friend unto them.


The Tongue. We are espied, wherefore to decide this controversy we will go
to them, as though we came but now within their hearing, but it shall not
need, for they approach to us.


The Belly. Dear Brethren and fellow members well met, I cannot choose but
marvel, what hellish fury worse than Megaera has sturred you up to be at
enmity with me, that have always tenderly loved you, and what should move
you to withdraw from me my nourishment, that am a servant to feed you all, in
ministering to every one so much as nature requires.


The Tongue. Because rather thou art a lawless Lord (howsoever thou cover thy
extortion with the colorable gloss of a servant) always craving and ever
commanding, still feeding, and never leaving, thou art a bottomless
whirlepoole of all gluttony, an insatiable sea of ceaselesse gourmandie, a
ravenous cormorant that greedely deuoureth, an idle creature that never
labors, thou set the whole world upon vntemperaunce, making the rich a
Nabuzardan, that rather bestow more upon Cooks to fill the belly, than on the
learned to instruct the mind. Thou teach the poor (...) not (...), to live
after their lust, not according to virtue, co^suming without care, not only
what should maintain their family, but that also that might otherwise pay
their debtes, O belly most beastial, thou causest all uncleanness: O monster
most unreasonable, that workest all filthiness: through thee come murders,
robbing and theeuerie: through thee come contentions, treasons and villainy:
through thee Kings reach at others crowns to increase their treasure, and
Popes at Princes rule to enlarge their honor, through thee comes pride, war,
and deceit, envy, hatred, and slander, to conclude, thou art the chaser away
of all virtues, and the haler in of all vices, and in thee as in a Troiane
horse, is included not the overthrow of one City, but the ruin of infinite
Countries and innumerable people, thou art the bellows to kindle all lust, and
the sack that contains all filth, the plague of us the members, and the
utter overthrow of the soul it self.


The back. She has nipt you very near, and meetelie well painted out your
gluttony.


The Tongue. And as much may I say to thee thou proud pecocke, the porter of
pride, the bait of bauderie, the lure of lechery, thou root of all riot, and
beginning of all iniquity, thou art the sturrer of strife to maintain thy
pride, and the nource of war and all sedition, through thee Countries fall at
jar, and kingdoms are turned topsituruie, for thy bravery false subjects
forsake their Prince, and vilanous traitors betray their Country, thy
leaprosie infecteth all the world, corrupts every age, and defiles every
sex, thy pride makes the rich loath the poor, the child disdain the Father,
the neighbor contemn his neighbors, the wife despise her husband, and the
servant to make no account of his master, all which being trickt up in thy
ornaments, think that Vestis virum facit, Apparel makes a man, but they
forget Simia est simia, etiamsi aurea gestet insignia, that an Ape is an Ape,
though he be clothed in gold, to conclude, what vice is it whereof thou art
not cause, nay what sin whereof thou art not the beginning, the midst, and
the end.


The belly. As well has she decyphered your pride, but what should I say
unto the tongue, as I have patiently heard her, so dear brethren and fellow
members, give me leave to answer her again. You know dear brethren, that
the tongue is but a little member, but it is nimble, and quickly slideth, yea,
hardly may it be restrained, and therefore has it no measure in talking, for
of a spark it will make a flame, and of one coal kindle a great fire, her
words are but light, because they lightly fly, and although they fly
swiftly, yet they wound deeply, sting grievously, and pearce inwardly, she
may well be called Lingua, for she can Lingere adulando, smoothly flatter, as
she has done you, but she has bitterly bitten and slaunderouslie belied me,
she persuades you that I am your Lord, and she tells you that I am your
enemy, but I know I am your servant, and entirely love you as a friend, the
great creator of all things when he framed the world of one lump, made both
you and me one substance, and joined us together in one body, knitting us in
mutual league, to the end we should be linked in friendly love, he would have
all things common amongst us, that none should challenge any thing proper to
himself, so far as concerns the use of these natural things, he has given
us every one our proper office, to be helpers and ayders one to another, he
has made me your servant, and ordained me your cook to dress for you that
should serve for your nourishment, for as the Cook by his art does make the
meat meet for the mouth, so do I by my natural heat, boil the same meet
for the members. I conserve (at his pleasure) both your life and mine, and
little is it that I keep for my self, having ministered to you that which is
needful, if you give me ought, I take it, and whatsoever it is I am therewith
contented, I digest it, and divide to every one of you his portion, what is
needful, that I retain, what is hurtful, that I cast out* I am your poor
servant, and therefore can give you nothing, for except you give me, my purse
is always empty, it is not much that I demand, neither do I by nature
desire that is dainty, for as I am placed in the midst, so do I naturally
love measure, if you give me too much, your selves are cause of my
distemperance, and of your own sorrow, if you ouercharge me you drive me to
belching, to drunkenness, to lechery, to sickness, and many diseases, if you
give me too little, you make me an image of death, my looks heavy, my face
pale, my skin loose, and my body weak. If sufficient, a cheerful
countenance, a merry and sober mind, a happy life, a quiet rest, and a sound
body.

Therefore ye rich must beware of too much, and ye poor provide for a little,
and that little will serve me, for Natura paucis contenta, nature is content
with a little, wherefore ye must take heed of measure being temperate, and
sparing in giving unto me, for I distribute according to the quantity and
quality you give.

I know the tongue will persuade you that I am never content, but that you
always give me, but it is for your own cause, you give me often, for that
you will be often fed, for hereby you live and have your health, if you keep
me long fasting, then I desire no meat, but as the Physicians say, I draw
from the entrails and bowelles certain filthy vapors, of which matter are
ingendered worms, yea the gall is thereby troubled, and spreads his
bitterness through the inward parts, by this means in thinking to profit,
you hurt your selves. But whatsoever ye hateful Tongue says, good brethren
regard her not, for she is the sower of dissentions, and the causer of all
discord, she is more slippery than an eele, more pearcing than an arrowe, she
delights to make strife between friends, and to make all men enemies, she
raises braules, procures bloodshed, causes wars, stirs up treasons, and
provoke traitors, it is she that sets the subjects against their lawful
Prince, and makes mutinies in a peaceable government, it is she that would
overthrow a happy state, in making the members at deadly variaunce, but dear
brethren, though ye be simple as doves, yet be as wise as the serpent Aspis,
that to avoid the charmer clappeth one ear upon the ground, and her tail
upon the other, so hearken not you to her persuasions, but stop your ears
against her flatteries: for if you continue in this hatred toward me, you
will speedely procure your own destruction. And me thinks even this small time
wherein you have denied my nourishment, has made you heavy, faint, and
slothful.


The Hand. Brother, I see thy reasons are good, and I perceive now the
malicious tongue has lead us awry, I well understand that thou art no Lord,
but in truth a servant to the meanest of us all, and that which has most force
to persuade me, is, the feebleness and faintness that I now feel, I know now
that without thee we cannot continue, but that thou art the nourisher and
feeder of us all, wherefore I hate the bitterness of the tongue that has so
unjustly accused thee, and I well find by experience, that thou art no
troublesome creditour, but art content with a little, if we give thee that which
we ought, not so as much as we can: but what can the Back say in his behalf?


The Back. As the Belly has proved, and by reason declared that he has been
maliciously accused of the Tongue, showing that in deed he is a servant, no
Lord, a natural friend, no enemy, a preserver of you all, no destroyer of any,
if you moderatlie minister to his necessity, and do not ouercharge him with
superfluity, so I say, that the tongue has enuiously touched and falsely
burdened me with untruths, for albeit in deed I cannot allege so much for
my self as the Belly, by reason he has a greater charge, and therefore
deserves the more praise, yet cannot mine office be wanting, nor my service
missing in many respects, whereby it shall appear that I am no Lord, but a
helping servant to you all, for as we see that in a politic state diverse
men have diverse duties, whereof some are of greater importance than the
other, for some are wrought by subtlety of wit, others by agilitie of the
members, others by strength of the body: so in a natural body, each member
has his several duty, and one may serve to diverse and sundry ends, the
head as it is the highest, is occupied in matters of wit, and is therefore a
guide to the rest of the members, having the most of the senses placed about
it, to the end it should warily provide for the profit and commodity of the
others. The hands are busied in laboring, and ordained to work for such
things as may serve to the maintaynance of the whole man. The feet made to
travail and with their agilitie quickly to fetch what so is needful, yet has
not nature given them such strength as she has placed and settled in me, that
where the other members cannot for feebleness, there I with my force do bear
out their weakness.

Beside, whereas the tongue would persuade you that I am the author of pride,
and causer of all wantonness, I would dear brethren, you should know that it
is not in me, but in your selves, for look what you put upon me I wear, and
am therewith contented, I seek not for that is curious, but that which is
necessary, Crimen non est in rebus sed in vsu agentis, I take no pride in
silks, no more than in cloth, if any pride be, it is not in me nor in the
garments, but in the vanity of the eye and the lust of the heart, that are
better pleased with the one than the other. If you give me that will defend me
in the winter from cold, and in the Summer from heat, I am pleased, but if
you withdraw from me to cover my nakedness, the one of those my two enemies
will not only bring me to sickness, but you all in like case to death it
self, and therefore dear friends and fellow members believe not the
unfaithful tongue, that swells with envy at your peace, and therefore would
feign disturb your tranquillity, not caring to harm her self, so she may
hurt you, thereby to bring destruction to you all, her allurementes have
already wrought you some smart, enfeebling your selves by withdrawing from the
belly and me our necessaries, so that without you return unto your former
amity, there is nothing to be expected but present death.


The Foot. Brethren, the deceitful tongue has beguiled us all, and has
intended thereby nothing but our overthrow, and that do I too well feel in my
feeble fainting joints, that through want of strength are scant able to bear
up the body, wherefore let us renew our former friendship with the Belly, by
whom we have hitherto maintained our health, and without whom we cannot
continue, let us not hereafter be lead by the tongue, but as Nature has
enclosed her in with a double wall, and shut her up as in a prison, so let us
charge the teeth and lips to lock her up, and according to their office set a
bolt before her for walking at large, and if these cannot contain her in
duty, then will we make the hands helpers by violent force to hold her in,
and not without cause does it behoue us so to do, for by her means we see
(through this contention) the hands are weakened, the head bedulled, and the
face apalled, the heart pants, yea the Tongue her self is silent, what will
follow now but a final end of us all, if we do not speedely minister to the
Belly wherewith to feed us, and to the Back to keep us warm, and therefore
I promise for my part, as fast as my fainting lims will serve, to trudge for
somewhat for their maintenance.


The Hand. And as ready am I to relieve them, as I was before forward to pull
from them, being sorry that I lent any ear to the dissentious Tongue, whereby
to displease natural friends, promising hereafter not to forsake them, for the
persuasions of any crafty enemy.


The Belly Then dear brethren bestirre ye, provide some thing with speed,
and you shall find how I will refreshe your fainting members, for as Nature
has made me your servant, so will I not fail in doing my duty, and let this
your smart warn you hereafter to live together in mutual love, that as we
are all fellows and members of one body, so we may violently and voluntarily
withstand all subtle entisementes of unnatural enemies, that shall go about to
disquiet our peace, so shall our amity in a natural harmony be maintained,
our bodily health the longer preserved, our quietness and peace still
established, and our hateful enemies inwardly grieved, to our continual joy,
and their unspeakable grief.


The application, briefly declaring the sum of this Dialogue.
THis excellent frame and most beautiful order of visible things in the
world, this position and placing of bodies, the heavens, the air, and the
earth, environed and spread about with the great Ocean, this order of heavenly
mouings, which makes ye courses and change of times and seasons, days and
nights, Summer and Winter, to conclude, the whole form pertaining to the
heavenly and elementarie nature, is called among the Grecians (...), a greater
world, or more excellent beauty, and from thence have the Latins named it
Mundus, of the neatness and comeliness of these visible creatures, which
frame bears in his natural harmony, an apt similitude of a politic
magistracy, and therefore they were said among the Lacedaemonians (...), that
bore a kind of office or authority in the common wealth. In this order we
know there is a continual Sympathy, no show of contrariety, for if there
were, it could be no order but a disorder, no Sympathy but an Antipathie, so
yt ye whole course of natural things should either be dissolved, or unnaturally
be meruailously confounded, and therefore as this order has been created of
God, so is it still conserved of him, to teach man (being (...), a lesser
world, in respect of the greater, participating both of the heavenly and
terrestrial matter, and bearing also a simililtude of the heavens and elements
likewise) what a natural agreement there should be among the fellowships of
men, to the making up of a politic body, knit together in the unity of
minds.

A marvelous concord is there among the heavenly bodies, for as the writers
of nature teach, if our gross ears could hear their surpassing harmony,
wrought by their equal and orderly motions, we should find their tunable
melody far above the sweetness of any mired music. No less ought the
unity of men's minds to be tuneable in amity, without any jar of dissona^t
discord, because they bear a lively similitude of the heavens, in their
terrestrial bodies, for as the heaven which they call Coelum Empireum,
contains and includes within it the Angels and Saints of God: so the body
of man concludes and shuts in it the soul, and heavenly virtues, memory,
understanding, and will. Wherefore as in the heavenly creatures there is with
men a plain rese^blance, so ought there among earthly creatures to be a
heavenly representation in agreement of minds, and hearts.

As in the Firmament be seven Planettes and four Elements, so in the head of
man be seven holes or issues, and and in the body four principal members.

As the Sun and Moon are two lights placed in the heavens: so are there two
eyes made for lights in the head.

The body carries a sumilitude of the elementarie matter, for the heart has
a strie spericke likeness, being most excellent of the members, and the seat
of the living soul.

The breast of man is as the air, wherein the vapors of the stomach and
belly being congealed, do cause coughs and yexings, with such like.

The stomach is like a great sea, in which arise all grievous diseases, as it
were flowing tempests, and to which the humors of the whole body, as all the
rivers of the earth, do eb and flow.

The feet as the centerie of the heavens and elements, bear up the weight of
the body, and thus we see what a fit similitude there is between the greater
world and the lesser, between the superior creatures, and man's earthly
members.

This consent has God left in nature between the heavens with their elements,
and our humane members, that we might learn what agreement ought to be among
our selves, that are tied together in a politic state. For look what
similitude is between these twain, the like may be and is in most points
between the natural body and a eiuill policy, maintained in a well ordered
City, or wise government of a common wealth.

For as the head is by nature placed in the top of the body, so ought the
Prince to have the highest room over all causes in her common wealth and
Country, being superior and supreme head of all others, not excepting Popes or
their authority: and as nature has guarded the head wish most of the senses,
s^ does she teach us what defense we ought to yield to our Queen, and how to
succor her in all extreamities.

The heart being the place of understanding, and only seat of wisdom is
enclosed and fenced about with the body, to instruct us* y^ in our politic
government, we ought stoutly also to countergard our nobles, counsaylours, and
magistrates, from whom we receive through their wisdom, the peaceable state
of our happy policy, as the members receive their life from the heart.

The whole trunk of the body, may be compared to the state of the body of
the common wealth, unto which nature has conjoined and combined two strong
members, the arms and hands, to help and defend both the head and it from
all hearts and dangers, which declares that this ought to have a strong defense
and succor, for that the ruin of this is the overthrow of all the rest.

The legs and feet as the lower and poorer sort, though not endued with
policy as the head, nor stored with understanding as the heart, nor able to
execute the function of the hands, are yet furnished with greatest strength,
because they bear up the whole mass and frame of the body, as also the other
members thereunto pertaining: and teach us thus much, that as they are only
endued with most might and natural strength, so they ought to be governed by
the other members, (who by their policy can rule, by their wisdom direct,
and their agilitie further the^, in that they know not.) And to aid them also
with their strength against them that shall attempt the ruin of the whole
state. Where this consent remains, and natural harmony has place, there as
in the body, so in a common wealth or Country, if one be joyful, they all
generally rejoice, if one be sorrowful, they altogether lament, for as if the
finger be hurt or grieved, the heart presently feels pain, or when the head
is troubled, the other members are disquieted: so in a common wealth there
ought to be that unity, that the Princes joy should be the delight of his
commons, and the commons groans should be the Princes grief, which GOD be
thanked, as a mutual amity we enjoy among us.

But as there is no body wherein are not some infirmities, so is there no common
wealth wherein there are not some enemies: yet among all the enemies of a
common wealth, there is none more pernicious than the envious tongue of false
and lying Papists, who when they cannot by their open practices prevail to
harm or impugn our happy government, go the^ about by false lying speeches,
not alone to slander our state, and to persuade others to dislike of our
government, but also labor by surmising reports and colored lies, to strike
a terror in the hearts of the common people, or else to make them dislike of
those that are in authority, whereby to steal away their hearts from
faithful love and reverence of those, whom for their trusty hearts and noble
virtuous minds, we ought to esteem and honor.

Thus played the Tongue as you have heard, with the members of the body, in
seducing them one to envy and malign another, thus would our Papists deal
with us, to set us among our selves at variance, especially to bring us in
disliking of our magistrates, but it shall be profitable for us. If we take
this oath with our selves, which the youth of Athens were wont to take, which
for the pithinesse thereof and the state of our time is (...) agreeing to our
purpose, and that every one may know it thereby, to be instructed, I will
record it as I have found it written.

I will speak no evil of these wars, but count them sacred: I will not forsake
my Captain to whom I shall be appointed: I will fight for religion, and also
for these things we have in common among us, whether I be alone or in company
with others: I will not forsake my Country, nor leave it in a worse state, but
in a better than I found it, if I can.

I will ever obey my Prince and Magistrates, which are justly ordained over me:
I will obey and yield to the laws, and whatsoever decrees set down by consent
and (...) of the commons. If any go about to break these laws of my
Country, or will not obey them, I will not yield to him, but will revenge him
even by my self, though I have no company or help of others, these things to
perform, I call the Gods to witness.

If we have as much care in keeping our vow made in Baptism, wherein we
promise to fight against all enemies of our Religion, as the Athenians had in
perfourming their Paganish oathe. If we be as duetifull in obeying our
Magistrates, whose authority is confirmed unto us out of the holy Scriptures,
as they were careful in honoring theirs, although the force thereof proceeded
but from custom and instinct of nature. If we be as ready to defend the
Laws of our Country, as they were willing to maintain theyrs, there is no
traytorous tongue of any subtle sly Papiste, which shall be able to
disturb our state, or empayre our quiet government, but that we shall be as
safe from all their conspiracies, as the young Storkes under the wings of
their dammes. And rather than our adversaries shall hurt us, if we live
together in unity, and agree in one heart and mind, fearing GOD, bewayling
our sins, and amending our wicked lives, we shall be more sure and safe
than if we were enclosed about with the strongest bulwarks, or environed
round with invincible rampires, nay rather than the subtlety or spite, fraud
or force of our enemies shall wrong us, our dear redeemer Christ Jesus, who
loves us as the hen does her chickens, will save us in all extremities from
their rage and violence, and if he see our enemies still pursue us, will do
with us as the Whale does with her young ones, who perceiving them, fiercely
followed, and not by any means to escape, does swallowe them up into the
wide chambers of her spacious belly, and so will Christ to prevent the
tyranny of our enemies, rather than they shall too far execute their
malicious purposes on us, take us into his own tuition, and hide us in his
own bosom, which he grant for his name sake, Amen.

TO ALL TRVE ENGlish hearts, that love God, their Queen, and Country.
I Know you are not ignorant dear Countrymen, of the fable of Icarus, who
presuming upon his waxen wings beyond his reach, had them melted with the
Sun, and so was drowned in the sea. But more presumptuous may I appear, that
without wings, (I mean without knowledge) dare fly so far into your
conceits, as that I dare presume upon your favors in acceptance of this my
rude exhortation to be friendly favored, and generally taken in good part: yet
relying upon the goodness of your natures I have pend this Pamphlet (most
loving and natural Countrymen) not with suspicion, much less knowledge of
any discord among you, for with unspeakable joy I know it, you are fast
linked in love, and tied together with infringeable faithfulness, the cords of
which your concord shall be so hard for the enemy to break, as I hope they
shall break their hearts (before they vnioynt your hands) that would go
about to disturb your peace: but for because I see, and you all do generally
hear, what seeds of sedition are here daily sown amongst us, and to be more
and more daily expected, as sent over by pelting Priests from that peddler ye
Pope, that continually vnleadeth his pack to make some sale with us of his
Popish trash, whereby to increase his mart, as he has lately done with his
Bulls, brought hither by some of Balaams calves, with other Libels most
slanderous to our state, dangerous to our peace, and infamous for their
untruth: I have therefore (most kind Countrymen) as it were by the way put in
a caveat by this my Exhortation, to warn you to be circumspect hereafter, as
you have been wary before, that no subtlety of the enemy shake your amity,
nor secret new persuasion, alter you ancient love and sincere religion, but
that as you have been in time past, stable in religion, and steadfast in love,
whereby your foes have been afraid, so your continual unity may daunt the
enemy, and be your strongest bulwark of defense, against both their secret
policies and open violence.

The things that I would persuade you to (loving Country men) are, constancy
in your unity, and courage against your enemy, few things in number, but
great in nature, small in sight, but of much force in effect. For as touching
concord, it is a certain infringeable band and fast tying together of men's
minds in agreement of truth, the cause of which is that divine love, being a
fire to burn up the stubble of dissension, a light to illuminate the mind with
peace, the honey and sweetness of man's life, a comfortable wine to cherish the
heart, and the cheerful Sun, that not only gladdeth every eye to behold
it, but that norisheth every one yt retaynes it. From this as from a fountain
of happiness flow infinite benefits to man's life, for hereby are kingdoms
maintained, commonweals governed, houses and private families well ordered,
riches and treasures increased, health and long life prolonged, and both the
the foraine and domestical enemy grieved. If I had as much art as Zeuxes in
paniting Penaelope, Tymantes in coulouring Iphigenia, Appelles in drawing
Venus, or Amulius in counterfaiting Minerua, I could then portray forth to your
sight the amiable face, and passing excellency of concord, the sweetness of
whose countenance, though she were naked without ornaments, were able to allure
you to persist in increase of your friendly love, and the majesty of her
virtuous looks enough to move you to inward hatred against al dissentious
enemies. But what should I need so to do, for the present happiness you do
now and have long felt, under the most virtuous Lady of concord and conseruer
of peace, your gracious Queen, has for these thirty years made you famous
for your government, happy for your peace, a wonder to the world, and gauled
your enemies with envy at your state, in which so long as you continue, it
shall be a brazen wall to defend you, and a strong fortress to shroude you
from all their Popish rage and tyranny. Agesilaus king of the Lacedaemonians,
being demanded why the City Sparta where he was resident, was not enclosed
with walls, showed his Citizens Armatos and Vnanimes ready armed to fight, and
all of one heart and mind, these (says he) are the walls of Sparta* meaning
that a Country or common wealth cannot have any surer defense than the courage
and concord of the Citizens.

Lycurgus thus answered his Citizens that sent to know how they might repel the
force of their enemies, if (says he) you shall cover your riches by faining
poverty, and lay aside contentions, entertaining concord. Knitting up in a
word that great riches, and especially discord, are means to work the
ruin and overthrow of Countries.

But what should I multiply examples, the experience of the contrary in other
Countries, is yet manifest unto your eyes.

What misery has discord and dissension brought the flourishing Countries of
France and Flanders unto? It is a common saying, Happy are they whom other
men's harms can make to beware. But from what root has grown the fruit of
their mishap? Has it not sprung from the same pestilent root (the Pope) that
would feign plant it self even amongst us? O dear Countriemen, beware of
Papists, hate their conspiracies, avoid their counselles, they will make you
believe they are friends, but they are deadly enemies, Non possunt esse very
amici qui religione dissentiunt. They cannot be true friends that do differ
in religion: there is no beast more like a Mule than an Ass, nor none more
like a friend than a Papist, but Nunquam te fallunt agni sed vulpe Litentes,
Dulci sub melle, saepe Venena latent.
Beware the Fox that shape of lamb retains,
In honey sweet there poison often remains.


They would be sheep, but they are wolves covered in sheep skins, who
although they same simplicity, like the sheep, yet are they known first by
their voice, for they houle and rore against the heavens, in seeking to destroy
ye Saints of God, when the sheep bleateth down to the ground: next they
delight themselves in blood, wherewith they love to besmeare their teeth, the
sheep rejoices in no such food, but is content to feed upon the green
grass. These counterfaite sheep, these papisticall Jesuits, or rather
apisticall Iebusites, are dispenst with by ye Pope to wear sundry habites,
you cannot know them by their Priestly garments, for sometimes they iet in
Lions skins, but you may discry them by their asses ears, peeping out from
under their hoodes. They will feign unto you outward holiness, when inwardly
they are very hypocrites, they will persuade you they seek the salvation of
your souls, when they mean to bewitch you with that enchantment, that has
already wrought the destruction of their own. They will give you Popish
books, and poisoned Pamplets, but at first make squeamish and dainty to lend
them, praising them for their goodness, godlynes, and learning, when within
them there is nothing but mischief, popery, and error, they will incense you
that you have no Queen, no common wealth, no Church, no government, but (dear
friends) believe not their persuasions. You are all knit together in one common
wealth, as it were members in a natural body, beware therefore of the envious
tongue that labors still to confound your peace, and learn to know these
subtle Seminaries and privy Papists, and knowing them lay hands upon them,
let them be discovered, examined, imprisoned, and if they be obstinate,
presently dispatched, so shall you have no vipers to gnawe your sides, nor no
greedy wolves to lap your blood, whom as your Country by nature will not
breed, nor feed, so do not contrary to nature nourish any of a foreign
brood, especially Romish, for they are in nature most ravenous.

Then dear Countrymen, being thus minded, friendly and brotherly to join
together in concord and unity one with an other, that your enemies may have no
gap whereby to enter, add to you concord, courage, and fortitude to your
friendship. Consider the ancient fame you have often won in the field, when
your Kings have been crowned in foraine lands, and you renowned for your
martial prowess, where are now the noble hearts that have so much honored
your English land? Shall the enemy think they are gone, and changed from
their wonted nature? No, no, they shall I hope find them redoubled in increase
of their former deeds, to their ignomie, and your continual glory.

You are called Angli quasi Angeli, Psalm 7. 8
and in deed you are as it were Angels, John. 6.
for the Lord has fed you with Angels food, he has given you Christ and the
pure knowledge of his word, 1. Cor. 10.
even the true bread that came down from heaven, long have you had it and
inioyed it among you, which is a singular token of Gods mercy, wherefore take
unto you the faith of Angels, as you retain the hearts of men, steadfastly
trust in the Lord, and stoutly fight for the defense of his word. The Almond
tree the older it is, the more fruitful, so the longer you have had the word,
be you the more faithful. If you die in the defense of this, you shall live
for ever, if you live without this, you die ever.

Strangers have written in the description of your country, that you are in
bello intrepidi, unfearful in war, that you will dimicare ad internitionem
alterius partis, fight it out to the last man, and that you only seek after
victory, then add your valor to their censure, and let your courage show
your Country. Plinius writes, that the nobleness of the Lion is best seen
in dangers, for being persued of the hunters, and hard followed by the hounds,
he hides not his head in holes, nor shroudes himself among bushes, but gets
him into the open fields, and there most nobly expects his enemies. Loving
Countrymen, you know the princely lion, is the arms of your famous Country,
retain then his nature, and keep his courage, faint not nor fly from your
enemies, but most valiantly beard them to their faces, that they may know the
Lion will not shrink in dangers, nor English hearts faint in troubles.

Again, there is this Antipathia, between the Lion and the Wolf, that the
Lion is an enemy unto him by nature, and will soonest of al others tear him
in pieces, according to ye verse, Torua leaena lupum sequitur, etc. You have
now rightly to deal with wolves covered humana specie, they seek your blood,
and not yours alone, but of your wives and children, wherefore like Lions
encounter them, and as like wolves they thirst for blood, so let them justly
wallow in their own. Doubt not of victory, it is Gods quarrel, the Lion of
Judah will be your helper, you shall but hold the weapon, he will give the
stroke, you shall but give the onset, he will prosper the end, only be
faithful and doubt not.

You have had a long peace, God will try you now with war, you have had much
pleasure, he will prove you now with pain, you have had the sweet, now taste
some sower, Dulcia non meruit qui non gustauit amara. He not deserves the
sweet, that will not taste the sower. The great and long prosperity you have
inioyed, has been unworthily bestowed upon you, if now you cannot be content
with a little adversity. The Eagle tries her birds by opposing them against
the Sun open eyed, so God tries his children by the eyes of their faith
firmly set upon Christ, wherefore like noble Eagles, fasten the eyes of your
soul upon this true Son of righteousness, and first with repentant hearts
for your sins, and then with assured hope of the promises of God in Christ,
persuade your selves of most happy victory.

Defend your most gracious and sovereign Queen, by whose means you have
happily inioyed a long and flourishing peace, unto whom in respect of natural
clemency, and passing motherly love, you owe your selves, your lives, and all
you have: Let no traitor nor enemy, either foreign or domestical do her
wrong, or but go about to think her il, whose blood you would not be willing
to shed, though with loss of your own lives: she is your most lawful Queen,
and therefore lawfully to be defended, not unlawfully to be wronged by any
traitors, or their accomplices whether foreign or domestical.

She is your true and natural Queen, bred, borne and brought up amongst you,
and as she has naturally loved you even from the beginning of her reign, so
do you most naturally like English men, like true hearted English men, like
courageous English men, defend her, fight for her, and not only guard her with
danger of your lives, but also aid her with your lands and liuinges, and as
God has blessed you by her means with gold and silver, which are but a red
and white earth, and nothing in comparison of a gracious and virtuous Queen,
so willingly, not constraynedly, freely, not whiningly, liberally, not
niggardly, open your purses and bestow largely upon her now in time of war,
by whom you have filled your cofers richly in time of peace. Consider to what
end God has enriched you, and wherefore you have more lent you than other me^.
If you hoord it up now in time need, you shall have not only your consciences
to accuse you of unthankfulness, and unworthiness of so good a Queen, but
Gods judgments one day to light upon your selves and your riches, so that it
shall not foyson with your heirs, that was so unjustly detayned from your
natural and most loving Sovereign, through whom you have received so many and
infinite benefits.

Remember how many dangers her sacred person has sustained and often
endured, for defending both you and yours from Popery, and keeping you still in
peace and tranquillity. What forcible invasions have been proved? What secret
treasons attempted, not only to diuest her Majesty from crown and dignity,
but to bereave her Highness also of life: wherefore as she has ventured her
life, crown, and honor in defense of you and that you have, so bountifully,
kindly, and thankfully, do you again naturally requite her, and manfully
defend her, with lives, lands, and goods, that she may think her self
happy of so good subjects, and you not unworthy of so gracious a Queen,
that has been a loving mother unto you in her carfulness, and a diligent
nurse in continual painfulnesse.

You are not ignorant, Neruos et robur belli omnes pecu^^^^ esse. That money is
the sinowes and strength of war, and as Demosthenes that famous Orator and
wise Captain said to the Athenians, Pecunia certe opus est, nec quicquam si^e
ea in bello perfici potest, Certainly money is needful, neither may any thing
be done in war without it. Wherefore as you see the necessity thereof in
this action, and the opportunity of the time, so be not slack to bestow that,
which may be not alone the defense of her royal person, but the ordinary
mean also for safeguard of your own lives.

Pugnate pro patria, fight for your country, your dearest country, wherein you
have been bred, borne, nourished, and brought up, toward which you ought to be
as inwardly affected, as you are naturally moved to your mothers. It is your
native soil, and therefore most sweet, for what may be dearer or sweeter
than your Country? No gold nor silver comparable to your Country, no
pleasures nor delights like to your Country, for what so is nearest to nature,
that thing is sweetest to life, and as Plato says in Critone, Et patri et
matri et progenito^ ^bus omnibus patriam esse anteponendum, Our Country ought
to be preferred before Father, Mother, or else our ancestors: for though our
fathers, mothers, and kindred die, yet our Country does nourish us, cherish
and preserve us.

When the people of Tegea in Arcadia made war with them of Pheneum, the
battle being set and ordered on each side ready to join together, they took
counsel each to send three brethren valiant and stout men, who should
contend for the victory They of Tegea sent the sons of Rheximachus, they of
Pheneum of Demonstratus, these six met, and in fight two of Rheximachus sons
were slain, and the third named Critolaus overcame his enemies with this
stratagem, he fained to fly, and as each of the other pursued him, he
severally slew them all, and returning with victory was joyfully received of
all save of his sister Demodice, and though he had saved the City by his
valor, yet because he had by chance slain her lover, she envied at his
victory, and rejoiced not at his triumph, which the young man disdayning, as
an enemy of her Country, he slew her, and being after accused of his mother,
was notwithstanding by the Citizens freed.

If there be any among us that be such envious traitors, that regard rather
their own pleasures or commodities, more than the safeguard of their country,
be they fathers, mothers, sisters, or brothers, I would they had the reward of
Demodice: and famous had thou been Critolaus, in the memory of all ages,
that preferredst thy Country before thy kin, and the honor thereof before
thine own life, had thou not filed thy hands in womanish blood. Into this
your Country your enemies boast to set foot, they count upon your riches and
treasures, your lands and possessions, your wives and fairest daughters, and
to dispossess you not only of your pleasures, but of your dearest lives, but
I remember the fable of Hermogenes, that the Apes seeing the commodities that
men had by Cities, how the couerings of their houses and penteises kept out the
rain and wind in Winter, and shut out the hot Sun in Summer, their walls
and doors shut out thieves, and their defenced towns and great gates defended
them from wild beasts and enemies: certain of them (especially those that
liked this civil life,) concluded to call a counsel, and in open assembly
(as the nature of Apes is apt to imitate every action) they persuade to take
from men a piece of ground, whereon they would build Cities as men do, they
reckon up the commodities, that the walled towns would keep out wolves, and
their houses wind and wether, but they add this, that they would build theirs
more commodiously, for they would have their orchards and gardens all within
their Cities, the fruits whereof should maintain them: Also they would have
their Theaters and plays for pleasure, but they should be al within their
walls, this they persuaded, the counsel was liked, and with the remembrance
hereof they were delighted, it was soon contrived in thought and easy to be
spoken, but not so soon done, for when the wood was to be hewed, the stones
to be squared, the boords to be sawed, and every other thing to be prepared,
they saw then their Apish counsel was frustrate and too hard for them to
accomplish: even so the proud Spaniards like Hermogenes Apes have consulted,
and determined to enter your Island, and therein to enjoy both their pleasure
and commodity, but I doubt not (dear Countrymen) when it shall come to the
push of the pike and dint of the sword, but that our God will so frustrate their
purpose, as through your valiant minds and hardy deeds, they shall find
their counsel but vain, and return home again like Apes without tails.

They play with us as Iulianus the Apostate did with the Christians in his
time, who (as Theodoritus in his 6. book and 44. Chapter tells) after the
Parthian wars, made great preparation against the Christians, who^ he
scornfully termed Galilaeans, threatening he would race them out, and set up
deuillish images in their Churches. At that time Libanius a singular Sophist,
but an enemy to the truth, and a follower of Julian, looking and longing after
his masters victory in regard of his threats, came to a godly Schoolemaister
and teacher of youth in Antiochia, and scoffing at his religion, scornfully
asked him, Fabri filius quid nunc putas agit? What think thou now does the
Carpenters son? But he inspired with the spirit of GOD, foretold that
which presently followed, saying, O thou Sophist, the creacreator of all
things, whom thou call the carpenters son, Loculum Juli^ ^o concinnat, is
making a coffin for Julian, and in deed (according to his prophecy) within
few days after, this Apostate died, was put in a coffin, and being laid in
the grave, for all his swelling pride, came short of that which he proudly
threatened.

I might tell of Sancherib, of the Philistines against Saul, and diverse others
that have threatened the Saints of God, 2 Chr. 32.
which because they boasted against the Lord, 1. Sam. 17.
were overthrown. But because I have fallen in hand with Julian, I will not
let pass the apt Antithesis, that is between the Spaniards and Julian with
his followers. They bragged to overthrow the Galilaeans (as they termed them)
so do the Spaniards the Protestants, or the Lutherans as they name them, they
threatened to set up Idols, so do the Spaniardes images, they protested to root
and race out Christians, so do the Spaniards the true professors, they
threatened to shed their blood most spitefully, so do the Spaniards beast to
spil ours most cruelly, but doubt not loving Countriemen, but that Christ Jesus
whom you serve, is making their coffins, and that either the sea or a strange
land shall be their graves, that cannot be contented with their own, but
proudly seek to oppress the Saints of God.

Therefore I exhort you, as Hezechia did those of Judah, Be strong and
courageous: fear not, neither be afraid for the force of Spaniards, nor for all the multitude that is with them, for there be more with us than with them,
with them is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to help us, and
to fight our battles.

They do (...), fight against God, we do fight in defense of his word, they
seek after spoil, we after the building of Gods Church, they seek wretchedly
to rent from us that is not their own, we seek valiantly to defend our
own. Think therefore (sweet Countrymen) upon true religion, your Country,
your wives and children, your lands and riches, your friends and kinsfolks,
and upon your own lives, let the cowards buy it dearly, and with price of
their blood that they get. Fall down upon your knees before the Lord, humble
your hearts in his sight, come unto him with fasting and prayer, in sackcloth
and ashes, let every one turn from his wicked ways. Let our Priests leave
pride, covetousness, and s^^^nie: let Lords and Magistrates rule by justice,
not usurp authority: let stinking pride cease to be called pretinesse, and
whoorish lust forsake the name of louingnesse: let greedy avarice be no more
termed warines, let the gluttonous belly eat but that which suffices, the
dronken throat devour no more than needs, pluck from the back to cloth the
naked, and from the belly to feed the hungry, weep for your sins, and
lament for your misdeedes, amend your lives and do no more amiss, fly unto
God in Christ Jesus, and steadfastly comfort your selves in his mercy, then
rise with boldness, meet your enemies with courage, let there come thousands
and ten thousands, they shall fall upon your right hand and upon your left, and
never be able to do you harm: and that this may so come to pass, let us all
beg it at the hands of God for Christ's sake, that he will forgive us our
sins, and give us grace to amend our lives: that he will defend his little
flock, that he will fight our battayles both by sea and land: that neither
the fraud nor force of our enemies hurt us: that he will advance his Gospel
and give it the upper hand, that the wild Bore wast not his vineyard, nor the
bloody wolf devour his flock, but that we may still hear the Trumpet sound in
Sion, and the golden bells ring in his Sanctuary, that our gracious Queen may
long live among us, perfectly to restaure his decayed Temple, that her aged
counsaylours may counsel wisely, to the glory of God and benefit of our
Country, that the Ministers and Preachers may utter the word zealously, and
perform it in their living also effectually, that our common people may
embrace penitencie, and faithfully live to Gods glory, so that we may praise
him for ever in his congregation, to the propagation of his truth, and
confusion of Antechrist, Amen.

A MOST NEEDFVLL Prayer for this troublesome time.
HOW are we able (most dear Father) to render due thanks unto thee for thy
wonderful blessings bestowed upon our sinful land? Our tongues are not able
to utter, nay our hearts cannot think, the exceeding mercies which thou haste
from time to time poured out in full measure upon us, who by the multitude of
our transgressions have not deserved thy favor, but justly merited thy wrath
and indignation, to consume us utterly from the face of the earth.

For albeit in pride we exceed all nations, and in drunkenness, whooredome,
and covetousness, with other vices, surpass all others in our time, so that
our sins may be matched with Sodom and our iniquities with Gomorah, Gen, 19.
(for who is it among us that does not abuse himself in pride and abundance)
yet have thou not as a rigorous judge executed thy justice in our condemnation,
Esaias. 3.
but as a merciful Father spared us, when we deserved not an easy rod gently
to correct us, but a smarting whip severely to scourge us, nay, eternal death
and hell fire to torment us, with a most just deprivation of all fatherly
benefits: Notwithstanding thou have hitherto blessed us with the fruition of
thy holy word, sincerely and clearly sounded forth as from a silver trumpet,
thou have purged our stinking channels of Popery, thou have taken away our
stinking waters of Nilus, Iere, 1.
and given us the crystal stremes of the clean water of life: John. 7
The golden bells of thy Gospel ring every day in our ears: Apo. 21.
superstition and error are bannished our Churches, Exodus 28.
so that we may all serve thee in purity of spirit. Thou have given us a most
religious, virtuous, and gracious Queen, who as she has till this time been a
mother in England, and like a Deborah in Israel, Judge 4.
so we beseech thee make her a Iael to foil Sisera, a Judith to vanquish
Holophernes, Judge. 5
and an happy Ester, to confound proud traitorous Haman with his posterity.
Judith 13.


Thou have bestowed on us a godly, ^^t. 7.
grave, wise, and prudent counsel, who^ we humbly entreat thee to make to her
Majesty, 2 Samuel 7.
as Nathan to David in counsel, 1. Sam. 18.
or Ionathas in comfort and love. 1. Sam. 20.


Thou have endued us with faithful and zealous Ministers, 2. Tim. 2
that rightly divide unto us the word of truth, who as they are to us the
messe^gers of light, Mat. 5
so we beseech thee their light of good life may shine in such sort unto
others, that they seeing their good works may glorify thee our Father which
art in heaven.

We have had a long and prosperous peace, wherein every man has eaten of his
own vine, and drunk the water of his own well, Esaias. 36.
we have had no war in our gates, nor danger in our houses, but that we
might each man sit under his vine and under his fig tree, and eat the
labors of his hands in peace. Mich. 4.
And when thou scourgedst other nations about us, thou fatherly sparedst, Psalm.
128.
and mercifully with-heldest from us thy rod. These thy blessings (dear
Father) we have not regarded, nor thought upon the afflictions of our brethen:
and now for our unthankfulness thou shakest thy rod against us, and show
us the signs of thy displeasure, thou have brought against us the Moabites,
Ammorites, and Agarims, they have consulted together and made a league against
thee and us, 2 Chr 20.
they have gaped on us with their mouths, Psalm. 83
they have sharpened their tongues like a serpent, they have laid a snare for
us, Psalm. 140.
and spread a net with cords in our way, they have bent their bows, whet
their swords, and go barking at us like dogs, Psalm. 59
they have laid wait even for our souls, Psalm. 79.
but Lord how long will thou be angry, O let not thy jealousy burn like
fire, let our sighings come before thee, and according to thy mercy and mighty
power, preserve us that are but children of death. Psalm. 108
O give us help in these our troubles, for vain is the help of man, remember
not our sins and our iniquities, Psalm. 79.
but let thy mercy prevent us: O let not our enemies say where is their God:
save us from the hands of bloody Papists, and from Spanish enemies that rise
up against us, for we put not our trust in the bow, neither can our swords
save us, Psalm. 44.
but save thou us from our adversaries, and put them to confusion that hate us:
suffer not the wicked to have their desire, but keep us from their snares, and
from the grinnes of these workers of iniquity, make them to fall into their
own nets, Psalm. 141.
while we escape their bloody deceits, so will we praise thy name for ever,
and laud thy mercies in thy congregations, so shall they see it and be ashamed
that go about to overthrow thy truth, so shall they confess thy power, and
stand in fear to rise against us, and we thy servants will never forget thy
mercies, but sound forth daily new songs of thanksgiving: grant O dear
Father, these our petitions, not for our merits, but for thy mercies in Christ
Jesus. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be al honor and glory, world
without end, Amen.

FINIS.

