A Commemoration or Dirige of Bastard Edmonde Boner, alias Savage, usurped
Bisshoppe of London.

Compiled by Lemeke Auale.

Episcopatum eius accipiet alter.

Anno Domini.

1569.

Imprinted by P. O.

The Preface.
MAtters being yet in doubt, may with questions and reasons, be brought out
of doubt: but things being without doubt, ought not with the subteltie of
words, be brought into doubt. As without all doubt Edmonde Boner, late
usurped bishop of London, was a bastard, and also the soonne of a Bastard:
that is a Bastard in gross, and a Bastard can not, neither may not be a
bishop. Boner was a Bastard, ergo no bishop, and this is a true conclusion.
This is not true said an old Dunsticall fellow, sittyng at the table with a
grave learned Lawier of the common Law, and an eloquente Ciuilian, that were
all three together: the one frouned, the second did bite his lip, the third
in a great rage said: men may say what they will now a days, and belie the
truth as you have done, he was a blessed confessor, although a bastard, and a
true bishop, both by Gods Laws, the Canonical laws, and the laws of this
realm of England. To this they said all Amen, Prove you the contrary said
they, and we will yield unto you: will you q he, then will I prove him no
bishop, when he lived, which you grant to be bastard by these three Laws.
Make proffe said these three, I will by Gods grace quod he, prove that neither
(...), nor Boner, were any bishops of London, but usurped, because they two
were bastardes: and all bastardes be under the same predicament. For the book
of Wisdom in the. iiii. Chapit. making a difference between two generations
of the lawful, and unlawful. Of the lawful it is said: O quam pulcra, and
casta generatio. etc. O how fair is a chaste generation with virtue: the
memorial thereof is immortal, for it is known with God, and with men: when it
is present, men take example thereat, and if it go away, yet they desire it:
it is always crouned, and holden in honor, and wins the reward of the
undefiled battaill. But the other generation, that is unknown among men, that
are called the children of the people: thus much is spoken of in the same
book. Multigena autem impioru^ multitudo non erit vtilis, and spuria
vitulamina non dabunt radices altas, nec stabile fundamentum constituit. That
is. The multitude of the ungodly children, are unprofitable children, and the
things that are planted with whoredom, shall take no deep root, nor lay any
fast foundation, though grene for a time in the branches, yet they shall be
shaken with the wind, for they stand not fast, and through the vehemency of
the winds, that is Gods vengance they shall be rooted out, for the imperfect
branches shall be broken, the fruicte shall be unprofitable and sower, mete for
nothing. For why (...) demanded of their parents, that is, who were their
fathers, or mothers, do witness against them, and declare their abomination,
and do disclose their sins, as did that wicked Cham, the son of Noe,
which uncovered his fathers secrets, for which cause, Noe asked vengeance
upon the offenders son, that thereby the offender might (...) more grieved,
then with his own mishappe. Therefore the law that punishes thoffe^ders
issue, (...) more prohibit sin, then that which plageth the offender alone:
by this it may be considered, with what zeal the law of England abhors
unlawful conjunctions, depriuyng them not only of lawful parents, but also
of Ecclesiastical dignity, and te^porall inheritance. The Civil Law,
speaking of the birth of children, says: Quod non potest arbor mala fructus
bonos facere. etc. An evil tree, say they, can not bring forth good fruit:
nor a good tree bear evil fruits, and by the consent of the laws it is
agreed, that every plant yeldeth to the nature of the ground, wherein it is
planted. The child also has Leges Ciuiles dicu^t filium naturale^ tuu^ esse
fill. um populi.
much more certain, and sure knowledge of the mother, then of the father.
Therefore says the Civil Law, your natural or bastard soonne, is the soonne
of the people: and when such a bastard is, having no certain, or known
assured father at the birthe, as it is daily seen, and so judged by law. How
can he come by a father after: as example. If one woman should bear two
children, of two fornicatours, and one of these fornicatours, after do marie
with this woman, which of these children should this marriage make legitimate?
This would partly help Tunstall by the Civil Tunstallwas a Bastard.
law, because his father reconsiled his mother into marriage, but long after
his birth: this is not Boners case (whose father was never married to his
mother) fa^tasy would some what persuade: but reason can not find, seeing the
time was ones, when both these children were bastardes, and the sons of the
people, and did not know their fathers: it were therefore against all reason,
that a child afterward borne in the same Matrimony, being lawfully Genes. 16.
borne, should lose the inheritance, and place Galla. 4.
the bastardie in the same, as lawful heir. The laws of England agrees
with the scriptures. Ismael did not inherit with Isaac: So no bastardes do
inherit lawfully, by the laws of England, neither is equal to the lawful
begotten in the inheritance, which by the Civil laws can be divided, but
only among the male children. Saint Augustine in lib. xvi. de Ciuitate dei,
says, Abraham gave all his substance unto Isaac his soonne, but unto the
soonnes of the Concubines, he gave gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his
soonne. Whereupon he meant that to bastardes, there is no inheritance due, but
only necessary living, and under the name of a bastard. Saint Augustine
understand all unlawful issues, and so does holy scripture also, and
thinks no small difference between the succession of the lawful begotten,
and the bastard in te^porall things, or worldly inheritance, much less in
the church of Christ, in that, that it admits them not into holy Orders:
and that is proved in the Popes Laws, against the bastardly Papists: and if
the Pope dispe^ce with such a one, yet he permitted not him to have a
dignity, or pre-eminence in the Church, as to be a bishop. Et ecclesia que
eos a sacris repellit ordinibus. etc. Et si tale dispensauerit non eni^ tum
permittit dignitate habere in ecclesiae dei.
Therefore it is convenient, that man's laws should cut them short, in the
benefit of worldly succession. When the Church do judge the^ unworthy of
orders, of ministry, of pontifical dignity: yea, whom the holy scripture
do thrust down, and greatly embace for though some, that is, one, among a
thousand is good, yet most are not only given to wickedness, and
persecution. etc. Example of Ismael, some to murder. Example of Abimelech,
Iudicu^. ix.
the bastard soonne of Gedion, which Gedion had lawful begotten sons. lxx.
and but one bastard, which bastard Abimelech with one stone, traitorously
killed al his brethren, one excepted. So there is more abominatio^ in one
bastard, then in. lxix. lawful sons. Many examples I can bring forth of
histories, repugnant to bastards, of their filthiness of life, whoredom,
idolatry, extortion, treason, murder, glottonie. etc. For it is thought that
they do draw a certain stain from the volupteous lust, mutual of both
their filthy pare^tes, which in lawful chaste marriage takes no place: Note
this.
and then knowing them selves to be bastardes, hates all them that are
lawfully borne, inuentyng mischief against them as traitors would have all men
traitors: this base borne Bocher Boner, like Abimeleche, has slain a great
number of the legitimate children of God: whose blood asks the same crewell
vengeance, that holy Abels do still in the presence of God, against his
brother Cain. So you shall not doubt, but by Gods laws, the laws of
England, and also the Canonical laws, that bastardes are all (...) of
lawful parents, therefore of inheritance Temporal: also not lawful to take
Orders, therefore no ministers of Spiritnall dignity, Ergo.
therefore no bishops. Judge of this your selves, Ergo.
and then make answer, when it shall please you. Sir, we will depart, quod
they, referryng this matter till an other time. Here is one, quod he, with
plain Music Dirge like, in the next chamber, sings to a dull base Lute I
pray you let us hear him, it will not hurt us, my think he sings of D.
Boner, some merry vanity, of that vain man, which spent his days in vain
Papistrie: we are content said they, to hear this matter, and then to depart
hence, when he has done: we pray God it be merry, for we have talked of sad
matters, peace a little, silence my masters, quod he, agreed said they. Then
the fellow on the other side of the wall, read in the Bible to himself
alone, and that being dooen, he song in rude rhyme, against rude Boner, the
Papist bastard.

The fellow do read.

I will send a curse upon you, and I will Malach. (...).
curse your blessings, yea curse them will I, if ye do not take heed: behold
I shall corrupt Deute. 26.
your seed, and cast dunge in your faces, even Markerehell, mark Papiste.
the donge of your solemn feasts, and it shall cleave fast upon you. You are
clean gone out of the way, and have caused the multitude to be offended at
the law of the lord. You have broken the covenant of Leui, says the lord
of the host, therefore also I will make you to Ezech. 13.
be despised, and to be of no reputation among (...). 8.
the people because that you have not kept my ways. My hands shall come upon
the false Prophets, that look out vain things, and preach lies: they shall
not be in the counsel of my people, nor written in the book, because Ezech,
34.
they have deceived my people. The best (that is the martyrs) have ye slain,
the flock have you not nourished: but churlishely and cruelly have you ruled
them. Therefore woe and vengeance be unto you, says the lord God. All these
places of holy writings, cries out against Boner as much as to any false
pastor, that ever has made spoil like a Wolf in Christ's flock: and the
souls of the slain, who^ Apoea. 6.
he burned for the word of God, and for the testimony which they had: (...)
still cry with a loud voice, saying: How long (...) thou lord, (...) and
true, to judge and avenge our blood on the^, that dwell on the earth? Well
ones it will fall out thus: That the righteous shall stand in great
stedfastnes, again such (...). 5.
as have dealt extremely with them, and taken away their labors, when Boner
with his wicked companions shall se it (as they shall in (...)) they shall be
vered with horrible fear, and shall wonder at the hastines of the sudden
health, gronyng for very distress of mind, and shall say within them
selves, having inward sorrow, and mournyng for very anguishe of mind. These
are they, whom we sometime had in derision, and iested upon, we fools thought
their lives very madness, and their end to be without honor. But lo, how they
are compted among the children of God, and their portion among the saints?
Therefore we have erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness
have not shined unto us. (...) ways have we gone, the way of the lord we
have not known: what profit have our pomp brought us: such words shall
such as have persecuted their brethren speak in hell. Let the persocutours
mark this well. Well, well.

^ Boner speaks.

My soul have cleaued fast to the ground, (...) pauimento (...) mea.

I have fed like a swine, and lived like a hou^de
My thought it did me much good,
In broilyng the christians, and (...) blood
I have she wed my ways, I have she wed my ways
How well I loved the Romish kaies Vias meas annu^ciaui.

The relics of Rome were my delight,
I was a maiden priest, and our ladies knight.
Justification I could not abide, (...) iusti (...)

Specially if it came on Christ's side:
I will clime heaven walls with Scala coeli,
And follow Alkoc, quondam bishop of Elie.
My soul now sleep in dreams and (...) Dormitat (...) mea.

My corpse is buried among false thieves:
For my body and soul, th'apointed place,
Abusyng mercy, and refusyng grace.
The way of wickedness, I loved well, Viam iniquitatis.

In missyng of Purgatory, perhaps to hell:
I beshrowe Dorbell, and Dunses heart,
Would I had been no bishop, but gone to carte.
The way of truth, I did once take, Viam veritatis.

Which of malice, I did for sake:
And never since I did repent,
In despisyng the eternal testamente.
I did stick ones unto Gods laws, Adhesit te (...).

But to forsake it, I had no cause:
And hardened my heart, and stopped mine ears (...).

And could not weep repentant tears.
The way of thy co^maundme^t I might not bide Viam (...) tuorum.

After that I was drunk with ye cup of pride,
But waxed lothly, foul, and fat,
Like to cardinal Wolsey, with his red hatte.
Boner end.

Deus (...) in Synagoga deorum.
His lordship would play the Justice of Little
In the place of judgment, it did him good,
To accuse the martyrs, and shed their blood.
O Clemens.
There is no man within the city,
Professyng Christ's Gospel, that he would pity
Much mischief this verlet, did begin
Therefore his prayer is turned to sin.
O Pia.
He had a cancred proud look,
With bell and candell, and Popish book:
In cursyng Gods people with hellishe grace,
A way graundpanche, with thy greasy face.
O Crux.
Now a piece of your Dirige I will begin,
I care not whether, I lose or win:
You were no great state of honor,
A bastard, no bishop, but bloody Boner.
MOurnyng in black, wailyng with care and woo,
Wryngyng of their hands, they began with Placebo.
Dilexi q master Papist, I loved well Boner,
That was boshoppe of London, and lived in great honor.
Quia inclinauit aurem suam, to our good father the Pope,
I am iacit ille cinis, alas gone is our hope.
Circumdederunt eum dolores mortis, now rotten in grave,
Well, well, said the (...) well rid of a. k.
Perhaps cu^ pericula inferni with Chymerus fell,
Or Cerborus the triple hedded dog of hell.
Tribulationem and dolorem inuenit, that bastard thief.
That have spoiled Christ's flock, with spite and grief.
O domine libera animam meam, from this Basan Bull,
That the innocent lambs did tear and pull.
Custodiens paruulos dominus, the Lord has helped Sion:
And taken away this mad dog, this wolf, and this Lion.
Quierupit animam de morte, and my heart from sorrow,
Now gentle master Boner, God give you good morrow.
Lord surely, thou have given the^ eternal rest, Et lux (...).

Whom Boner in prison, most sore oppressed.
Placebo. Bo. Bo. Bo. Bo. Bo.
Heu me, beware the bugge, out quod Boner alas,
De profundis clamaui, how is this matter come to pass.
Laeuaui oculos meos, from a dark deep place.
Now Lazarus help Dives, with one drop of grace.
Ne quando rapiat vt Leo animam meam, drugga^rde, (...),
To defend this matter, came Ihon Avail, and Miles Huggarde.
From the gates of hell, quod the rebels, dedefende B. Boner,
That with S. Fissher and Becket, he may have honor.
Amen quod R. C. B. H. and L.
Deliver him from this pains of hell.
R. Do begin the first lesson.
Parce michi domine.

SPare us oh sweet lord, our (...) are all gone,
Our holy father dear Boner, has left us alone.
Now enclosed in tomb, wrapte in earth and claie,
Ecce nunc in puluere dormit, do rot and fade away
We hoped that he should have done, as he did before,
Come forth of prison ones again, and burned more and more.
Who shall trust temporal powers, in whom is no health, Nolite co^fideri in
principi.

Fare well our spiritual father dear, our comfort and wealth.
Now help, Dominicke, Becket, Dunston, and saint Line,
Gregory with thy Trentals, Antonye with thy swine.
This father was heavenly minded, and never carnal,
Therefore defend him from the flames infernal.
Responde.
Pray for Boner B. and D. souls,
You that walk in the Popish ilde of Poles
Ye pray for them, and think no skorne,
The like of Boner was never borne.
Boner.
Et in carne mea videbo, the bones that I have burned.
And also Jesus Christ, against whom I have sporned.
I have not one dog trick of legarde maine,
Posuisti me tibi contrarium, heu me, great pain.
I cry to man, child, and wife,
I abhorred much the book of life:
And loved most the Popes laws,
And regarded not Christ two strawes.
Ue miserum michi therefore,
Saint Peter have locked the door,
And bid me go the wrong way,
Because I had not the right way.
I will make an other shifte,
Seeing I am driven to this drifte,
Now help holy father the Pope,
With skalyng ladder and rope:
Chance what chance may fall,
Now will I scale heaven wall.
L. Do read the second lesson.
Tedet animam meam.

OH his soul was weary here, in the life that he had,
His food was bread and water, his lodgyng was to badde.
Clothed in here, slepyng against the hard stones,
That through fasting, his skin claue to the bones.
Watchyng in prayer, lamentyng both day and night:
Subduyng fleshly affection, and walked in the spirit,
Meek in mind as a Wolf, and simple as a Fore:
As chaste as the he Goat, as slender as the Ox.
As liberal as the she Bear, as sweet as the Brocke,
Of all kind of linen clothe, he loved well a smock.
As wholesome as a mad Dog, as cleanly as a Bore,
He loved well a fat Pigge, so he did a h.
Paale as the Turkey Cock, as gentle as a Snake.
The like is not in all hell, if you seek him with a rake.
Responde.
Speak you of Boner?
God save his honor,
Some said they heard him say,
In bed as he lay,
Noli me condemnare,
Dum veneris iudicare,
Ante te erubesco,
Comissa mea pauesco.
Qui Lazarum resuscitasti, from stinking grave
Farewell, farewell, you Popish k.
Te decet deus hymnus in Syon,
Boner was as cruel as a Lion:
For if he had lived, and the world turned,
Many a good man, he would have burned.
Per ignem with fire,
That was his desire.
T. The third lesson.
Manus tue dn^e fecerunt me.

THe hand of God framed him ones in goodly shape,
Then transformed like a Boore, and conditioned like an Ape:
From a Bishop to a Butcher, most bloody of kind.
Which often in Bastardes, (...) like you may find:
There is a great decree made by C. the pope
That no Bastard should wear staff, miter or Cope:
Neither has any dignity, under a Cathedral steple,
Because he is fatherless, and the son of the people:
Abraham left inheritance, to Isaac his son by right:
To his bastardes he gave gifts, and put the^ from his (...).
So if bastardes be unworthy of Temporal inheritance,
Much less in Christ's Church, to have any pre-eminence:
This Boner was a bastard, of bloudde and condition,
And departed from this life, without (...).
Responde.
Lord how he would pullam,
When he was at Fullam,
With fire, rodds, and chains
He put them to pains,
And that was well seen,
By M. and Bartlet green.
O Lord I pray thee in what place Vbiabsco^datfaciam suam.

Shall bloody E. Boner, past al grace
Hide his greasy block hedde,
When he shall judge the quick and dedde.
Quid hoc reiest?
Mary he shall rise like a beast,
Among the Romish pied coats,
On the left hand among the goats
He would not (...),
Nor say Mattens that (...),
But swell and pante,
If victuals were scante.
But red wine and a Pigge,
Would make him lepe and frig
And say diligo vxores vestras,
Ab ortu solis ad vesperas.
The fowerth lesson.
Quantis habuit iniquitas.

How sore was this bloody beast, fraught with sin,
So fat was his flesh, scante hold would the skin.
Incrassatus, impiguatus, dilatatus, Symoniacus,
Gross, fat, and puffed up with a great patus,
Sacrificium deo nostro, cor contritum
Tu autem argenteos lebetes, was thy delitum,
Cur facia^ tua^ absco^disti like an oule in the night
Refusing the blessed Gospel the word of light
Thy cursed acts, in parchme^t shall be inrolde,
Against God and thy prince, thou were to bold
Thy bloody crimes shall be in mind, now thou art gone and paste,
Thou shalt make a dreadful count to God, for them at the last.
Responde.
Iam fetet, quia putrifactus est,
Which made the Papists many a feast
But in his cole house, he gave no meat
But in Smithfield most cruel heat,
Now death his power do invade,
Like rotten donge, his flesh do fade,
I do not quarrel,
His guts filled a barrel.
Alas quod the Papists and well away,
He was buried in the night, not in the day,
Where were the Papists that hour?
Some in the Flete, some in the Tower,
And many paste all grace,
Be in every Popish place,
God send them such honor,
As has their dadde Boner,
Qui vomuit nigrum, post fata cruorem.
The fifte lesson.
Homo natus.

HOmo natus,
Came to heaven gatus:
Sir you do come to latus,
With your shorn patus.
Frequentia falsa Euangelij,
For the love of your bealie,
Cumauro and argento,
You loved the rules of Lento,
Which the Pope did inuento
You are spurius de muliere,
Not legittimate nor lawful here
O quam venenosa pestis,
Fur, periurus, latro mechus,
Homicidus tantum decus,
De salute animarum,
Of Christ's flock thou hadest small carum.
Thou art filius populi,
Go, go, to Constantinopoli,
To your master the Turk,
There shall you lurk:
Among the Heathen souls,
Sometime your shorn brethren of Poules,
Were as black as Moules,
With their cappes four forked,
Their shoes warm corked,
Nosed like read Grapes,
Constant as she Apes,
In nature like black Monks,
And shoot in Sparowes trunkes
And boule when they have dinde,
And keep them from the wind,
And they which are not able,
Doc sit still at the table,
With color Scarlet pale
So small is their good ale,
Thus from God they did turn,
Long before their church did burn
Then when rich men were sick,
Either dedde or quick,
Valde diligenter notant,
Vbi diuites egrotant,
Ibi currunt, nec cessabunt,
Dcnec ipsos tumilabunt,
Oues alien as tondunt,
Et perochias confundunt.
These fellows pilde as Ganders,
Much like the friars of Fla^ders,
Which serve Satan about the cloisters,
They love red wme and Disters,
Qui vult Satanae seruire
Claustrum debet introire,
And ever have such an hedde,
As bastard Boner that is dedde:
He would for the Pope take pain,
Therefore help you friars of spain:
You enquisiters take pain,
It is a great maine.
Unto the Pope your hedde,
That Boner is thus dedde,
And buried in a misers grave,
Like a common k.
Lo, lo, now is he dedde,
That was so well fed,
And had a soft hedde.
Estote fortis in bella.
Good Hardyng and thy fellow:
If you be Papists right,
Come steal him away by night
And put him in a shrine,
He was the Popes divine,
Why, shall he be forgotten,
And lie still and rotten:
Come on and do not fainte,
Translate with speed your saint.
And put him in a tomb,
His heart is now at Rome.
Come forth you loughtes of Loue^
And steal away this (...),
You are so fuil of Ire,
And Popish desire:
And Romish derision,
And hellishe division.
Therefore I am sure,
Your kingdom will not dure.
Crescit rancor, crescit ira,
Crescit and inuidia,
Totus Louen in errorem,
Voluiter in caligine,
Nullus curat obidire,
Verbis Jesus Christi,
Fides i^ Roma no^ apparet,
Totus Louen fide carit.
Thus he must turn to duste,
In Louen there is none to trust.
As slipperie as Eles,
The world do run on wheles,
Now help old friends of Poules
And pray for our souls:
This is our desire,
From these flames of fire.
I am in Purgatorij,
Oh. L. R. G. and F. be sort,
Breuis eius dies sunt,
He breathed over Poules Funte
Ridiant me inimici,
But all you that be wiste,
Beware of Papistrie all,
The Chequer, and westminster hall
And all the Innes of Court,
I do not scoff nor sport.
And all this great city,
It is great pity:
That I Edmonde Boner,
Against Gods great honor,
Have drawn you from truth,
Oh this is great ruthe.
Comissa mea pauesco,
Et ante te tremesco,
Dum veneris iudicare,
Quare, quare, quare, quare.
Fremuerunt Genies.
I beshrowe the Popes dentes
In cathedra Moysi impij sedent,
Therefore repent, repent, repent
Tempus est vos reuertendi,
Tempus est nobis non penitendi,
Tempus est vos redeundi,
Ab errore falsi mundi
False Papists, and false thieves
Shall iuer have pains and greues,
Thus did Boner sore lamente,
Mouyng Christ's to repent.
Responde.
Ne recorderis peccata,
He was full of hata
Regardyng non estata,
Et quasi flos,
with his great nose,
Fugit velut vmbra,
They morn for him in northu^bria
The sixte lesson.
Quis michi hoe tribuat.

ONe alas in dreadful dream, poor Boner did behold:
In woeful weed attired soul, sometime was brave in gold.
With fiery stroke sore beaten was, that sometime had smitten other:
He was as sore turmented there, as Cain that slew his brother.
His salt tears ran down apace, with bloody hand he struck his breast:
A worm about his heart bewrapte, that reaued him of his rest.
About this gooste flocked a rablement, of Friars fat and foul:
Then cried out a little spirit, like a shrikyng Oule.
Ve, ve, and out alas, thy vengeance do now begin:
These flames and floudes, and dungeons daepe, are wages all for sin.
Come drink thy fill in Lethae flod and then to Styx return:
Forget thy self, denaye thy God, lo, this is a place to burn. Syllius lib.
13. Call this the floudes of hell, that spue forth blood, (...). etc

The wicked ones, which ordained were, as chafe cast from the corn:
So in this bloody Cocytus, thou shall be rent and torn.
Quis mihi tribuat quod Boner tho shall I in this place dwell:
Let me be cleansed in Purgatory, away you fiendes of hell.
Donec, donec, my trentals are done in the Church of Rome:
Tarry here said the Monks black until the day of do me.
With that he swelde with lothly look, criyng, now have I need:
Where are become my Romish friends, where is good Henry Creed?
Miseremini mei, miseremini mei, if merits may me save:
Such measure as you have measured othermen, (...).
such measure shall you have.
Quis potest facere mundum, a bastard were thou borne:
De immundo conseptum semine, now art thou rent and torn.
Burnt and dround and never (...) we have none other place:
Spes impiorum peribit, we are exclude all from (...).
Non remittitur ei in hoc seculo, neque in alio.
You are (...) by the Judge, to dwell still in our (...).
Et sicut dies marcennarij, thy days are made an end:
An enemy to the Lord thy God, but to the Pope a friend.
Then cast they him in Melas flood most darcke and black in sight
In dreadful sleep a man did se, this vision in the night.
Responde.
Ne recorderis peccata,
But open heaven gata
(...) Peter with your kaies,
Show my (...) the right ways
He dwelt ones at Poules,
And had cure of our souls:
(...) wisse he was not a baste,
But holy, meke, and chaste:
It is a great pity,
That he is gone from our city:
A man of great honor,
Oh holy saint Boner,
You blessed Friars,
That never were liers:
And you holy Nuns
That never had sons
Set this child of grace,
In some Angels place.
Dum veneris iudicare,
Help, help S. Marie
N oli cum condemnare,
He burned many in
the days of (...) Marie.
Sicut Leo querens praedam,
animas deuorauit.
If this was not a blessed deed,
Ask L. R. S. P. and H. Creed.
The seventh lesson.
Spiritus meus.

MY spirit God wotte, is feeble, weak and sore:
and so shall we Papists, daiely more and more.
Our time of Papistrie shall be short, foolish and vain.
Ab aquilone penditur omne malum, the Papists took pain.
Now Mars our bloody Boner is laid in earth full cold:
Whose life and liberty, would have made us bold.
With bloody hands, and cruel hearts was our desire:
To have burned the Protestants, with hot flaming fire.
Set up (...) crounes (the stews) and (...) kes in boots:
And destroyed Christ's doctrine clean by the roots.
Brought in Idols, Latin service, and ryngyng of belles.
(...) Chauntries, Masses, Abbaies, and Celles.
Thus we would have dooen, in Tindall, and Comberlande.
And brought Romish service, again into Northumberlande.
There are a remnaunt left, I may them call
The children of Antichrist, and of God Ball.
Rumor super rumorem, while the storm do last,
Antichrist and his, are now at the last cast.
And Boner is, rotten, and stinketh in grave:
Well rid is Christ's flock, of so Woluishe a (...).
Si veritatem dico, quare non creditis michi?
The Responde.
Dies eius breuiabuntur,
Boner was a great hunter:
Per ignem with, fire hot,
Nunc in putredine God wotte
Ubi est ergo nunc
Either Friar, Nonne, or Monk,
That can for a little space,
Put him a purging place:
Now good man sir Pope,
What do your worship hope:
In inferno nulla est redemptio.
The eight lesson. Fo. read it.
Pelle mei consumptus.

MY flesh is consumed, there is but skin and bone:
In (...) Georges Church yard, my grave and I alone.
My tongue that used lewd words, and lips away are rotten:
Take pity upon me. R. L. and H. let me not be forgotten.
Regester me in with a Leaden pen, among the Romish roules,
And make some Obsequi for my sake, I would it were in Poules.
Say Dirige for me (...) T. H. U. R. L. and B.
Say you the Mass, mo^urne you in black, W. F. and C.
Ryng you the belles, hold you the lighles A. P. S. and N.
A. B. the Crosrowe of Papists, show your selves like men.
For if your merits do not help, then come I very late:
Like the foolish virgins five, which knocked at the gate.
To whom he said, I know you not, depart from my sight:
You wanted faith, and watched not, when I came in the night.
Let living wightes, watch therefore, though it be pain and grief:
For suddenly the Lord do come, un wares like to a thief.
O Boner, Boner, ones again, in thy skin thou shall be clad:
And have such members in degree, as in this life thou had.
Then shall thou see the Martyrs all, in judgment stand upright:
Whom in this world thou did abuse with murder, and with spite.
And called them (...) all, and now in great honor:
Such was the blindness of Papists hearts, and specially of thee Boner.
The Responde.
Uaine, vain, vain, vain,
All bloody Papists do live in vain.
There is no mean, but heaven and hell
In doing evil, and workyng well.
Each soul shall go unto his place:
The brande of hell, and child of grace.
(...) transit hora,
Redeamus sine mora,
(...),
The hour of death, drawyng on a pace
Pray for mercy, joy, and (...):
V ade and non amplius (...).
The nineth lesson.
Quare de vulua. (...).

ALas from my mothers womb. why have thou brought me out?
I have lived like a Butchers dog and died like a (...).
I stopped mine ears against the truth, Gods word I would not hear:
And hardened my heart against the Prince, in person many a year.
There (...) my life in (...) delight, my soul did feel no care:
In soft bed, and choice, of wine, wantyng no dainty fare.
False hope I had to come for the as ones I did before:
But still despair, said I should (...) and persecute no more.
One morn betime I looked forth, as often as I did before:
And did se a pulpit, in churches (...), made by my prison door.
A Preacher there was, that Crowly hight, which preached in that place,
A mean if God had (...) me, to call me then to grace.
Hodie sivocem, was his theme, and harden not thine (...)
As did the fathers the rebels old that perished in desarte,
Thus protestants, have me slain with the power of the word:
But if the world had served me, with fire, and with sword.
I would have (...) and burnebal more then I did before:
But now farewell you papists al from hensfor the (...).
Would no (...) had me known nor eyes me never seen:
Then should I have been in such sort, as I had never been.
The Responde.
In die illa tremenda,
Who shall my lord defenda:
Neither Pe. Was. Nor. Mar.
Traitors Tempest that blow up war,
Slinge. Hill. nor Swineburne,
Or any traitor, that gape for a turn.
They shall have horror inhabitans,
God send them mischaunce.
Onine regnum diuisum. etc.
Against the Queen they risum,
Per aliam viam reuersi sunt.
Papists are traitors, as they are wont.
Rumor super rumorem erit.
Between Doncaster and Perith,
Be many Popish hearts,
Would their heddes were in carts.
And their bodies in graves:
Rebels are thieves and knaves.
Ardiet pugnas vicio parentum,
The rebels beyond Trentham
Shall quickly repentham.
Sepulchrum paten: est venture eorum.
They abhor doctrina Apostolorum
Sepe expugnaueru^t you knowit well
Northren storms are sharp and fell
Snow, Hail, Ise, and Froste,
All their hope is but lost.
Dies magnae and amara.
They are now in sorrow and cara
They will never have such honor
As had this bastard E. Boner.
Although (...) were a Po. k.
Yet buried he was in a grave,
Pluet super proditores laquios.
The'nde of Boners Dirige. Per ironiam Erat vir ille simplex and rectus, ac
timens deum, and recaedens a malo.
Here after do follow a liniall Pedigree of Boners kindred, by the mind and
judgment of many Doc. a man of a great house, long before the captiuitic of
Babylon.
Bastard Edmonde Savage, being a great lubberly scholar, was supposed to be
the soonne of one Boner.

Which was the son of a Iugler or wild roge
Which was the son of a villain ingrosse.
Which was the son of a Cutpurse.
Which was the son of a Tom of Bedlam
Which was the son of a proctor of a spitle
Which was the son of a theffe or a rebel
Which was the son of a wild Irishe.
which was the son of a Stoic Philosopher
which was the son of Agarion.
which was tho son of a Patriside.
which was the son of a Sectuarie.
which was the son of Appelles.
which was the son of Anabaptiste.
which was the son of (...).
which was the son of Almerichus.
which was the son of Aetius.
which was the son of Adamiani.
which was the son of Alepheli.
which was the son of Appolinaris.
which was the son of Ammonus.
which was the son of Aquary.
which was the son of Arrius.
which was the son of Barbara Sigismundi.
which was the son of Angelici.
which was the son of Anthropomorphius.
which was the son of Beelzebub.
which was the son of Bisylides.
which was the son of Berillus.
which was the son of Carpocratis.
which was the son of Cataphrigius.
which was the son of Caluthus.
which was the son of Cazinzarius.
which was the son of Catharides.
which was the son of Caparnaitis.
which was the son of Cherinthus.
which was the son of Donatus.
which was the son of Ebion.
which was the son of Elindius.
which was the son of Ennopus.
which was the son of Ennomius.
which was the son of Euthices.
Which was the son of Ecrastines.
Which was the son of Gnotiques.
Which was the son of Iesebel.
Which was the son of Faustuti.
Which was the son of Helchesate.
Which was the son of (...).
Which was the son of Iouinianus.
Which was the son of Manacheus.
Which was the son of Mahomet.
Which was the son of Martion.
Which was the son of Messalianis.
Which was the son of Montanus.
Which was the son of Monothelete.
Which was the son of Nouatis.
Which was the son of Nestorius.
Which was the son of Nicolaus.
Which was the son of Nectages,
Which was the son of (...)
Which was the son of Praitas.
Which was the son of (...).
Which was the son of Petrus Lumbardus.
Which was the son of Photius.
Which was the son of Pollo.
Which was the son of Sabinus.
Which was the son of Roganus.
Which was the son of Sabellicus.
Which was the son of Sarahatis.
Which was the son of Simachcus.
Which was the son of the Sodomites.
Which was the son of a Templarij.
Which was the son of Theodorus Coriarus
Which was the son of Tatian.
Which was the son of Sargius.
Which was the son of a Benedicte monk.
Which was the son of a Carthusian.
Which was the son of a Cistertian.
Which was the son of a Canon Reguler.
Which was the son of a Barnardine.
Which was the son of Cluniacke
Which was the son of Dominicke.
Which was the son of a Celestin.
Which was the son of Jesuit.
Which was the son of an Heremite.
Which was the son of a Minoret.
Which was the son of a Charmilet.
Which was the son of a Bomson.
Which was the son of an Anchor.
Which was the son of a Buggerer.
Which was the son of a Limiter.
Which was the son of a Balamite.
which was the son of a Coniurer.
which was the son of a Dispensator.
which was the son of a Pardoner.
which was the son of a Romish comissary
which was the son of a Doctor Canon.
which was the son of a master of plukalites.
which was the son of a Suffragham.
which was the son of a Romish bishop.
which was the son of a Courtisan.
which was the daughter of a (...).
which was the mother of the Pope.
(...) also in the (...) of Babylon, did bear three (...). (...) Magus, Judas
(...), and Mahomette, by Antichriste the son of the Devil, of iniquity, and
perdicion the cause of al ignorance, infidelity, Simonie, Treason, Idolatry,
persecution, Rebellion, Tumulte, wicked assemble, and finally everlasting (...).

A prayer to the holy Trinity, against ignorance of Gods word, and Wolves.
Almighty and eternal god the father, the soonne, and the holy spirit, one
God in trinity, and the trinity in unity, which art always more readier to
hear, then we are apt to pray: and do give unto us, more then we can
desire, or deserve. We most humbly pray thee, to have mercy upon us,
according to thy great mercy, and perdon us good Lord for our sins: that we
have rebelled against thy divine Majesty, in thought, word, and deed,
mouyng thee to cast upon us sondrie plagues for our offenses: As pestilence,
dearthe, rebellion with other grievous calamities, unto our miserable bodies.
But oh my good Lord God, thou haste taken greater vengeance upon us, the
which with mortal eyes ca^ not well be seen, but felt: that is, the
ignorance of thy blessed will and commandment. Ignorance oh Lord GOD, the
guide and pathe way to all deadly sins, death, and finally dampnation,
banishement from thy glorious Majesty, world without end. Have mercy have
mercy and pity, oh Jesus Gods only son upon thy flock, thou great
Shepherd of the Sheep. Regard thy fold, defend thy flock, whom thou have
redeemed in thy most precious blond. Deliver thy Uineyard of England, from the
Bore of Room, and thy Lambs, from the mouth of Wolves, as bloody Boner was.
Oh let God a rise, and let his enemies be scattered, let them also that
hate him fly before him: so that we that are the Sheep of his pasture, may in
the unity of his word, be fed in the pleasant fields of his holy
scriptures, to life everlasting: Through Jesus Christ our lord.

Amen.

