A Dyall for dainty Darlings, rocktin the cradle of Security.

A Glass for all disobedient Sons to look in.

A Myrrour for virtuous Maids.

A Book right excellent, garnished with many worthy examples, and learned
aucthorities, most needful for this time present.

Compiled by VV. Auerell, Student in Divinity, and Schoolemaister in London.



Imprinted at London for Thomas Hackette, and are to be sold at his shop in
Lumbert street, under the Popes head. 1584.

To the right worshipful, and his singular good friend, Master William
Wrath, Warden of the Worshipful Company of the Mercers, W. Auerel wishes
health of body, happiness of soul, and continual prosperity, both in this
life, and in the life to come.
Having long time studied (well beloved Sir) which way I might show the fr^^ies
of my good will, by gratifying your worship, with some sign of my affectionate
heart, and having by opportunity this book ready finished, I could not tell
on whom I might better bestow it then on your worship, whose affability,
gentleness, courtesy, virtue, and other commendable gifts, I have not only
heard with mine ears, but judged by mine eyes, as having had experience
thereof from the beginning of my remembrance, whom therefore I have made the
sole supporter of my labor, in bestowing this handful of paper upon you,
knowing that you will courteously take it, thankfully accept it, and freendly
defend it, being a matter virtuous, against all the scoffs, and girdes of the
vicious, whose envy and ignorance, so dimmeth the seat of their affections,
that being blinded with folly, they loathe wisdom, and every virtuous
exercise, for which cause I study not to please them, nor care not to content
them, considering that to please the wicked, is to displease the godly.

I have rather selected you out as a patron of my pains, then any other, for
that I hope you will more graciously take them, then accustomablie the greater
sort do in these days, whose ingratitude is grown so great, that the
studdies and toils of men, which in times paste were in great favor
regarded, and with lyberallytie rewarded, are now so coldly esteemed, and so
vnthankefullie received, that the learned are now a days, rather bent to
studdy for their own gain, then by writing, to procure the public profit
of others.

By means whereof, learning grows in contempt, and men wexe cold in the
studdie thereof, seeing virtue lacks her reward, and learning loses a
freendly countenance.

Yet I know there are that favor good letters with cheerfulness, take the
gifts of the good Students, that both receive their labors., and reward
their virtues, and such are truly virtuous, and duly noble, how inferior a
calling soever they possess, for virtue is true Gentillitie, and the only
badge of renowned Nobillitie, which does more nobillitate the name of a
Gentleman, then treasure, and more advance his fame, then riches.

Among whom I account your vvorshippe, hoping that you will with a good
countenance accept my travails, and with freendlinesse esteem my labors,
which if you do, then am I as fully satisfied, as if I had reaped a greater
benefit, accounting your good will my suffycient recompense, and your
favorable acceptance, a friendly requital: And thus committing you and
yours to the government of the Almighty, I end, desiring God to bless you in
this life with all happiness, and in the life to come, send you perfect
felicity.

Your poor friend and well willer. VV. A. Schoolemaister.

Amen.
To the friendly and courteous Reader.
GEntle and friendly Reader, if thou think him to be thy friend that
bestows upon thee frankly, and with a lyberall heart, some costly jewel to
delight thine eye, or some golden gift to pleasure thy mind: then think me no
less, that give thee not a materyall thing alone to feed thy fancy, but a
costly comfort for thy hearts delyght, which albeit it seem small in show, and
bear a slender bulk, yet may thou, of what condition soeuet thou be of (if
with judgment thou read it) pick out such wholesome lessons, as may pleasure
thy mind, and profit thy life. Here shall thou learn in prosperity, to
beware of pride, and to avoid security: if thou be a Father, how to bring up
thy children with discretion: if a Son, how to reverence thy Father with
wisdom: if thou be single, how to choose thy wife, so that thy life may be
happy, and thy time spent in quietness: if married, how to govern thy self
and thy mate in all seemelynes and virtue: here may wives learn wisdom, and
maidens gather modesty. To conclude, the commodities are many, the examples
pleasant, and the practice thereof profitable, and therefore, to the end that
thou might be pertaker of that which may be thy future profit, I have
compyled this small Book, not wearying thee with long discourses, least thy
mind should (being queasie) wexe loathsome, and so disdain it before thou
read it: but in short and brief Treatise, I have packed together that which
if thou can rightly use it, shall be as gain some as pleasant, wherefore, if
thou bring with thee a thankful heart, and a virtuous mind, thou wylt
thankefully take that which I have freendly written: but if thou have an
envious eye, thou wylt soon carpe at that by envy, which the Printer by
ouersyght, and I by infirmity have committed.

Learned Homer sometime sleeps, and the fastest foot somety me slyppeth, the
wisest tongue may catch a tryp, and the wariest pen commit a fault, error
is as natural, as the correction thereof commendable.

Wherefore that which remains is, I commit my self and my labor to thy
good lyking, if thou like it, commend it and use it, if thou dislyke it, amend
it, or refuse it, do not Nodum in scirpo querere, seek a knotte in a ryshe:
For many will find fault, that cannot amend a work, and some disday ne others
labors, that are themselves loytering idle lyuers, that either cannot do any
thing worthy commendation, or if they be able, consume their time in scoffing,
or else in idle living. But knowing I shall not be so fortunate as to escape
some such altogether, seeing that under every Stone lies a Scorpion, I
commend me to the virtuous, despising the envious, and so gentle Reader,
wishing thy well fare, I end, committing thee to him, whom I beseech grant
thee to read with profit.

Farewell.
A Dyall for dainty Darlinges, that are rockt in the Cradle of Security.
HErodotus says, that Hugo in libello ad socium voleatem nubere.
when a Woman puts off shamefastness with her garment, and that she
walks without her vesture, she walks naked, forgetting her self to have
done any such thing: so that shamefastness once lost, she drowneth her self
in the Charibdis of all vices, and falls into the Scilla of all outrageous
mischeefes. And therefore says Cicero in his book De oratore, Custos omnium
virtutum verecundia est, Shamefastness is the preserver and keeper of all
virtues. And Valerius Maximus says: Verecundia parens est omnis honesti
consilij, Shamefastness is the mother of all honest counselles. But where
shamefastness remains not, there enters pride, whoredom, vntemperaunce,
and the sink or puddle of all pestiferous vices: so that beholding an
unshamefast woman, we may justly imagine, we see a naked strumpette, openly
showing her close and hidden secrets. This vice of unshamefastness, is
continually matched with pride, yea, they are so united and joined together,
that evermore they walk arm in arm, like sister and german, and are never
found to be separated a sunder: after pride, follows forgetfulness of God,
contempt of man, and utter disdain of all virtue. But especially pride so
transformeth the inward ornaments of the mind, that it leads the body to all
abuse, and brings the soul to utter ruin, inchaunting the wits with such
unnatural passions, that it alters the shape, as it were with Circes
illusions, the spectacle of this outrageous fury: you may evidently behold,
in the example of a Captains wife of Constantinople, whose detestable pride,
was so loathsome in the eyes of the Lord, that it procured his justice to work
revenge upon her stinking carcass. The report whereof as I have breefely read,
so the discourse thereof, I will shortly write, trusting that all these in
whom the sparks of virtue are kindled, will by her example grow into a
greater increase of virtue, and they whom the water of folly has quenched
their good desires, will warm themselves at the flames of wisdom, to dry up
the moisture of their vicious minds.

A notable and excellent example of Gods judgments, in his most severe
punishment, of the rare and strange pride, of a Captains wife of
Constantinople.
THere was within the famous City of Constantinople, a Captain over a
certain band of Venetians, when, if he could as well, by wisdom have governed
his wives infirmity, as he could by policy conduct and rule his army, his
memory had been obscured, with blotte of oblivion, and his wives example
drowned in the suddes of silence.

But there is no art can change the spots of the Leoparde, no labor wash
off the color of the Morian, nor force of the hammer break the Adamant, nor
no Art nor strength resist a wicked woman, but that if she once let loose the
raines to pride and pleasure, shaking of the grace of God from of her careless
shoulders: If the fear of her creator* can not reduce her from sin, nor the
worlds report convert her to shame: it is neither wisdom nor policy,
persuasion nor counsel, force nor fortitude, can alter the course of her
corrupted nature.

But returning to the discourse of this Venetians wife, so tenderly, so
delycatelie, or rather so dyssolutelie, she spent the course of her ungracious
life, delighting her self so supersticiouslie with artificial pleasures, that
she disdayned to wash her soft and dainty skin, with the necessary use of
common Conduite water.

Like to a number of our curious Dames, that are more wanton then wise, more
pretty then profitable, and more finishe, then either wisdom wylleth, or the
state of their husbands allows, not contented with things necessary, but
always seeking that is superfluous.

Thus lothing the licquor ordained by Nature, she sought to procure her some
other by Art, and therefore caused her servants, by their continual toil,
to gather for her, the dropping deaw of Heaven: by the which their no small
labor, they procured for her, a bathe to wash her tender lymmes.

O monstrous Pride, O insatiable nature, O execrable furye, that not contented
with Natures simple use, would seek for things of dainty arts device.

But as the Myrre, though it be sweet in smell, yet is it bitter in taste, or
as the Water in Leontinis, though it quench thyrste, it presently kylleth, so
her present use of pleasures, though a while they were sweet, yet at last they
were sour, when the anger of God was kindled against her pride.

If the Lion bite of ye woorme Leo^tophon, inco^tinently he dies: if a man
drink of a certain red water in Ethiope, he wereth mad: and certainly,
who so tastes of this detestable vice of pride, it leads them either
presently (without grace) to everlasting death, or brings them in short time
to such madness of mind, that they utterly forgette whereof they are made,
from whence they came, and whereunto they shall.

This impe of Venus, or rather companion of Lucifer, was so rooted in pride,
being Lerna malorum, The dunghill of mischeefes: that she continually devised
to satisfy her lust, and disdained that which was common to natures kind,
acquainting her self with such contemptible quallities, that she lothed to
touch her meats with her white and delycate fingers, and therefore found out a
rare and strange invention, to satisfy the appetite of her queasie stomach,
causing her Eunuchs (being certain gelded persons) to minister unto her in
little morselles, her necessary use of her needful nourishmentes, which she
received not at their hands, which scorned to touch them with her own, but
from off a golden flesh hook, with her two foreteeth, she daintelie conveyed
the same into her mouth.

But as each disease, if it be not taken in time, creeps by continuance into
every part of the body, or as the water that breaks out of his bounds, if
it be not quickly stopped, gathers at length into a mighty flood: So this
malladie of her mind, being let at liberty, ouerflowed the banks of reason,
and drowned her quite in the swallowing gulf of surquedrie.

Her bed chamber was garnished with such diversity of sweet herbs, such
variety of fragrant flowers, such change of odoriferous smelles, so perfumed
with sweet odours, so stored with sweet waters, so beautified with tapistrie,
and decked so artificially, that I want memory to rehearse it, and cunning to
express it, so that it seemed, her Chamber was rather some terrestrial
Paradise, then a mansion for such a matelesse mysteresse, rather a tabernacle
for some Goddess, then a lodging for such a loathsome carcass.

But the stroke the higher it is fetched, is of greatest force in falling, the
wound, the longer it corrupts, brings greatest smart in curing, and the
judgments of God, the longer deferred, are the more severe in punishing, for
though his patience procure sufferaunce, yet his justice yields vengeance,
though he have leaden feet, yet has he iron hands, though it be long or he
come, yet at last he pays home, as may evidently appear in the myrror of
this woman's misery, upon whom the Lord showed the severity of his Justice, as
an upright reward of her unshamefast offenses.

Draw near you wanton woorms, that lean your lofty heads, upon the dainty
pyllowes of pride, you that have periwigs to curle your heaire, colors to
paint your face, art to square your shoulders, bolsters to fashion your wast,
inventions to change nature, and devises to alter kind, consider what Cyprian
says: De habitu virginis, quod natum est, ex Deo est, quod mutatu^ est ex
demone: That which is borne, is of God, that which is changed, is of the
devil. Your washing in sweet waters, your anointing with sweet odours, your
musk, your ciuitte, your baulme, and a number of devises, to make the body
sweet, when your pride and whordome, with the rest of prides companions, do
make your souls to stincke, as the Poet Martial says: Non been olent, qui
semper been olent, They smell not well, that always smell well. Behold how
the Lord punished the pride of this woman, which had sold her self to
unshamefastness in his sight, for with the shyning sword of his divine
judgment, he rotted every part of this her pampered body, so that no member,
no joint, nor part thereof was free, from the mouldred plague of putrefaction.

Her Chamber was filled with such an intolerable stincke, that no man could
abide the smell thereof in his nostrelles: thus was she hateful to God,
disdainefull to man, and loathsome to her self, but that most might increase
her grief, utterly forsaken of all company, her Eunuchs which had fed her
daintelie, disdainde to cherish her simply, her Maids which had served her
curiously, refused to nourishe her poorly, scarcely one Maiden servant,
who by her flattery and fair persuasions, by promises and fair allurementes,
intised with hope of gain, and assisted with sweet perfumes, ministered to her
want and supplied to her necessity, till the twisted line of her miserable
life, wasted with the corruption of weakness knapped in sunder, and the full
time of her fatal Glass expyred, she yielded her self to the wonted course
of nature, and finished the race of this her ruthful pilgrimage.

Quickly was this languor digested of her friends, the end of whose grief
increased their gladness, her complet moan, procured their mirth, and her
finished sorrow brought unto them sweetness of contentation, rather
rejoicing at her delivery, then sorrowing at her departure, who in her life
time was a myrror of misery, and at her death a glass of ignominy, in her
prosperity the pray of pride, and the vewe of vanity: and therefore justly
in adversity, the play of Fortune, and the blotte of Infamy.

Behold here dear Dames, the end of prides presumption, and in this myrror
conceive her last conclusion: learn by this example to avoid curiosity, and
crave of God with tears, for true humility, the which shall make you most
acceptable to God, most like unto Angels, and best beloved of earthly
creatures. Where contrariwise pride, as it is the greatest misery, so does it
transform men to monsters, Angels to deuilles, and reasonable August. ad
quendam comitem.
creatures, to internal furies. To which purpose Augustine says: Humilitae
homines sanctis Angelis similes facit, et superbia ex Angelis demones facit,
etc. Humility makes men like to holy Angels, but pride of Angels makes
men deuilles. And as I may plainly say, she is of all sins the beginning, the
end and the cause, for that not only pride it self is sin: but also no
sin has been, or can be, or Gregory* in moralibus.
shall be without pride. Gregory says, Radix cuncti mali* et regina omnium
vitiorum superbia est, etc. Pride (says he) is the root of every mischief,
and the princess of all vices: Of which the Scripture witnesses, saying:
Pride is Eccle. 10.
the beginning of all sin. Seven principal vices spring from the venomous
root of pride, namely, vain glory, envy, wrath, sadness, covetousness,
glutteny, and lechery, with the which seven vices of pride, the devil often
holds us captive. I remember, Hugo Victorinus makes a notable description of
pride, saying: Quatuor Hugo, victori. in lib. de claustro, animae.
sunt quae trahunt elationis currum* etc. There be four horses (says he) that
draw the wagon of pride ( Videlicet) desire of rule, love of proper praise,
contempt, and disobedience: the wheels thereof are boasting of mind, and
arrogancy, gloriousness in speech and leuitie: the driuer of this wagon is
the spirit of pride: they which are borne heerin, are the lovers of this
world: the horses are unbridled, the wheels easily turned, the carter
froward, and they weak which are carried. Very well therefore was it said in
Ecclesiasticus, that the original of all sin is pride, so hateful in the sight
of the Lord, has it always been, that in all ages and all persons, it never
went unpunished: how proud was Nabuchodonozer, which in the Dani. 4.
midst of his glory cried out: Is not this great Babylon, which I have built
for the house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of
my majesty. But ye same hour was he punished, for he was cast out of men's
company, and did eat grass like Oxen, and his body was wet with the deaw of
Heaven, till his heaires were grown as Eagles feathers, and his nails as
birds claws.

O how many has pride been the destruction of, which have suffered
themselves to be carried away thereby? yea and what mischief is there, which
has not been through pride provoked? hereby was Absalon intised to expel 2*
Sam. 15.
his Father forth of his kingdom, by this Romulus slew his brother, that he
alone might rule as King, through this Julius Caesar pursued Pompei unto death,
with whom he had many battles, and all through pride and covetousness of
rule. Of this, Marius the Roman not contented that he had six times been
Consul of Rome, would violently keep the same the seventh, whereby came a
great slaughter between Marius and Silla, who withstood him therein: through
this, Alexander the great moved battle, and vexed all the Orient with wars,
through his unjust pride and ambicious desire.

But to turn again to examples in Scripture, because upon the truth thereof
we build our belief: Lucifer, through pride was thrown out of Heaven, Adam
through pride, was thrust out of Paradise, the tower of Babel was thereby
overthrown, Goliath the Phylistian was thereby slain, Aman was hanged,
Nichanor killed: And to resemble the History whereof I entreat, Antiochus for
his pride was so plagued, that his bowelles by Gods just judgments rotted,
yea, and from thence issued woormes in such abundance, that the smell of his
carcass was to every man annoyaunce. Herod aduauncing himself in his royal
estate, would for his glory be esteemed a God, but the power of the Lord
suppressed his pride, that the stinking woormes consumed his carcass. Thus
may we see, how pride has caused the wrath of the Lord to be kindled, so that
in men, nay, in Angels, it has not scapte unpunished: and to question
against the vain pride of some women, what became of Eues presumption, what of
Iezabelles pride, the one desyring to be as God, was thereby to the devil
subjected, the other for her wickedness, was of filthy Dogs devoured. O
vanity of vanity, O fond and fickle beauty, nay, O stinking fleshly glory.
Inquire of an old and wrinckled creature, what is become of her wonted gifts
of Nature by age defaced, by sickness changed, by sorrows and cares altered,
and by times continuance wasted: why then art thou proud, earth and ashes,
where is Helen of Greece? Polixena of Troy? Dido of Carthage? Arotonica of
Syria? Venus of Cypres? Cleopatra of Egypt? Lucrece of Rome? with Faustin and
the rest: Where is their beauty? Where is their pomp? Where is their Princely
apparel? Their costly chains? Their precious iuels? Their ringes? Their
bracelettes? And the rest of all their glory? Is it not in the earth? Is it
not forgotten? What remains thereof to them? But as a certain man had
written on his grave, Hoc solum mihi super est Sepulchrum, Only this Sepulcher
remains unto me. Even so, of all your pride, of all your beauty, and of all
the rest of your worldly pleasures, wherein you fix your chief felicity:
nothing but earth remains to your delycate body, and for your naked soul,
the ritchesse of Gods mercy: cast away therefore these fading shadows, and
cleave to the substance of assured things: consider with your selves, that
whatsoever you possess, or whatsoever you use in this life, it is but a vapor
that swiftly slydeth, and a false flame that quickly fades, only your good
conscience shall be a brazen wall, and a tower of defense for you, at the day of
judgment, before the presence of the omnipotent God, unto whom if you will
live well, account all worldly things but smoke, so shall you not be pressed
down with the vanities of this life, but that you may without fear of
conscience, lift up your eyes, to behold the presence of your redeemer, and
rain with him in that everlasting place of pleasure.

The punishment of disobedience, showed upon an obstinate and stubborn Son,
who most miserably and unnaturally, withheld from his Parents, the needful
noutishmentes, of their necessary sustenaunce. A notable spectacle for every
disobedient child, to see therein the plagues of God, upon unnatural
children, that withdraw from their aged Parents, the duty and love that
they ought to show.
A Among the works that nature has framed, we count it great deformity, for
any thing to be repugnaunt to the kind, whereof it took increase, in as much
as in those sensible Creatures, separated from rational understanding, and
being but led by sensual government, we see an inward duty and secret
love, that causes the root of thankfulness, to yield forth lively fruits
of plentiful good will, to repaye the passed pains of their seellie Parents.
Both bird, beast, fish, or whatsoever receives life, is in some part endued
with a certain knowledge, and love of those, from whom they had their being,
or essenciall substance: and therefore those children, unto whom so little
regard of natural love remains, that they not only derogate that duty from
their Parents, which God and nature has commanded, but also pursue the life
of their progenetours, even to their graves, being led on with a covetous
desire, rather of their substance, then any willing wish of their lives
assurance. I know not whereunto I may resemble them by similitude, but to the
Vipers brood, most full of ingratitude, who not tarying their timely
maturitie, eat out their Mothers sides most cruelly, preparing their timely
passadge, to the untimely death of their miserable mother: and as both the
Male and Female receive their death, by the increase of their unnatural seed,
(the one by bearing, the other by ingendring) so fares it with a great many
impious children, (that like these Vipers, unthankful to their Parents for
their being) desire not only the death of their Fathers, but, (if any richesse
or substance, is growing to them by their Mothers departing) like detestable
seed, do also procure the death of both, to the end (that like the Vipers)
they may procure their present being, though it be to both their Parents
undoing: Example of this you shall perceive in the sequel of this discourse,
as also the vengeance of God, upon the vice of disobedience, being left as a
clappe to dismay the minds of such rebellious persons, before the bolt of Gods
vengeance, be shot to their further punishment.

In the parts of Normandy, there dwelt a man, more renowned for his
ritchesse, then fortunate in his issue, who, though by birth he was to some
inferior, yet for substance, to many men superior: so that, I know not
whether he were more happy in his wealth, or unhappy in his Son, such
contrariety was there, in both these gifts of fortune: that for the one, he
was to her beholding: for the other, to accuse her of disdain. But such is the
vnconstauncie of fortunes gifts, that amidde many pleasures, the aucthour of
fortune, sends some displeasures, least the forgetful nature of man should
decline from the remembrance of his omnipotency.

This man had but one only son, whom therefore he tenderly and delicately
brought up to man's state, not bending the wyeth while it was green, nor
propping the plant while it was young, by reason whereof the wyeth grew stiff,
and the tree crooked: so that it passed Arts integrity, to alter the course of
natures deformity, Quo semel est imbuto recens seruauit odorem: The vessel
being new, was at first seasoned with stinking loathsome licquor, so that it was
to hard afterward to remove thereof the savor: they that will have fine
Spanielles, teach them being small: they that will have good horses, bridle
them being young: and they that will have virtuous Children, do correct them
being Infants: otherwise the dog will not hunt, the Horse will not bear, nor
the Child live in honest behavior: but the one will snarle, the other will
kick, and the third will stubbornly spurn at his duty.

There was adjoining to this man, a certain Knight, who noting the wealth of
this unfortunate Father, to return to the possession of this his only Son:
thought that such a mass of money, as he possessed, would counterpayse the
simplicity of his stock, and bear out the base ignobillitie of his birth:
and therefore having a Daughter of comely countenance, adorned with the
gifts of natures lyberalitie, purposed to contriue a match, betwixt this rich
man's son, and his fair daughter: and waiting opportunity, brought certain
of his friends, to persuade this seely man to an unprofitable match, and thus
he framed unto him his speech.

Sir, muse not at my words, but freendly way my meaning, which I intend to
utter, the end whereof tends to the advancement of your stock and kindred:
So it is, that fortune has given unto me a Daughter, of birth well borne, of
beauty sufficient, and of goods and virtuous government, her will I bestow
in marriage upon your son, which if you like, shall (as I hope) not only
redound to your great comfort, and further help while you are here, but also
hereafter exalt your posterity, and bring your stock unto high renown and
gentry: This will I do conditionally, that you will make a present delivery
of all your possessions, into the hands of your only son, who though by
nature he shall be moved, to your sufficient maintenance, yet will I see,
that to your necessity shall be ministered abundantly, the commodities are
diverse that may induce you here unto: first consider, that your age requires
rest, which you may take, having once accomplished this thing, then what joy
may it be unto your aged mind, to behold with your eyes, your son assured
lie placed in your possessions, who though he be your only heir, to succeed
you in the same, yet may be thereof prevented by death, or by accident of
adverse fortune.

This simple man, heard attentively this sugared tale, not considering, that in
smothest streams, is most dangerous wading, in shallowest waters, most
perilous sailing, and in greatest places, most hurtful sleeping: the Be
carries honny in her mouth, and a sting in her tail, the Sirens sing sweetly,
but their song is the Sailors sorrow. So this flattering Knight, though in his
speech appeared an outward show of truth, yet was it but the hook to catch
this seely fish with all, to the end that his Daughter might come to the
possession of his wealth. And therefore I may liken the simplicity of such men
(that cast not the disprofite of each cause, as well as the commodity) to the
folly of the fish Sargus, whereof Aelianus speaks, Aelia. in li. 11. cap.
19. de not. animal.
which so vehemently loves the Goat, that the fisherman when he purposes to
take her, puts on a Goats skin over his head with horns, prepares his
nets, the Sun shining at his back, and dispearseth in the Sea: Wheat
sodden in porrage, made with Goats flesh, the savor thereof when the Fish
perceyueth, she draws nie, delighting in the sight of the fained Goat, and
so is taken in the net to her own annoyaunce: even so, these men delighted
in the shaddowe of outward truth, are deceived with substance of inward
deceits.

Thus this old man, trusting to the glorious words of this wily Fisher, was
caught in the net of vain belief, that such ease and contentation should
redounds to his desire, as should cause the small course of his future life, to
be spent, in fullness of all delyght, and therefore (though loathe to depart
from that he firmly loved) yet persuaded thereto, by the professed friends
of this glorious Gentleman, was induced to condescend to their desires.

The marriage day therefore appointed, the solemnities thereof were shortly
accomplished. The Son and the Daughter the first year, ministered to the
necessity of their aged Parents, plenty of all things: the second more
sparingly: but the third most vnshamefastlie: the fowrth year, through the
suggestions of his Wife, he prepared for his woeful Parents, a little lodging,
opposite against his stately building, where he might yield unto them, a bare
scantling of necessary sustenaunce.

Thus these odious children, as time increased, began to immitate the nature
of the Pellicanes younglings, who after their mother has brought them up to
some bygnesse, begin to strike and pecke her in the face, for which she being
vexed, in her fury kylleth them, and afterward being sorry therefore, she
pearceth her sides with her boisterous beak, till the warm blood issuing from
her breast, renueth her younglinges to newness of life: In which similitude,
is comprehended the entyre affection of a mother to her children, and the small
requital of children to their Parents.

This aged and unfortunate Father, with his croaked old Wife, suffered in this
state no little need and necessity, yea, scarcely durst they set foot
within the doors of their ungodly Son: but commanded those things, yea,
and requested the same, which they could not want, from the hands of a
household servant. O miserable servitude, nay, O intolerable slavery, that he
which had authority to command the son, was now at the pleasure of a
servant.

In this case, these two crooked Creatures, passed a great part of their
toylesome time, until, it fortuned the aged Mother, out of her cottage
window, espied one day, in the house of her Son, meat spitted, and laid
to the fire, ready to be roasted: the sight whereof, procured unto her some
hope of better fare, then accustomable use did yield unto her. But seeing that
delay of either sending for her, or to her, did drive her in doubt of the
least part thereof, she came unto her aged husband, the only copartner of
all her grief, saying unto him.

O my well beloved husband, the ancient companion of all my pains, thou
see in what hungerie state, we spend our withering time, which requires
greatest sap of nourishment, as for me, I am but a miserable mother, and an
unhappy woman, whom fortune has taught, to be with fewest things content. But
go thou to the house of our Son, where it may hap thou shall fill thy
hungerie body, with part of that meat, which mine eyes by chance espied.

The old man hearing these words of his friendly Wife, leaving his aged
lymmes upon his staff, hasted to the house of his unnatural child, hoping
to find that fare, that his hungerie heart did wish.

But this wretched and accurssed child, having intelligence of his Fathers
approach, caused the meat to be taken from the fire, and privily conuaide the
same into a secret place, least the eyes of his aged Sire should, but be fed
with the sight thereof, and hastily running to meet his croaked Father, in
steed of reverent speech, gave him froward language, and for honor to his
silver heaires, obstinatelic showed him a frowning countenance.

Which when the seely simple man perceived, how frustrate he was of his longed
hope, dissembling the matter, he presently returned to his former abode, whose
sorrowful heart, I refer to the mild consideration, of every lenious and
gentle Parent, that have felt the discourtesie of such bastards and unnatural
slips: which degenerate from the virtue of their ancient root, from whence
they took their off-sppring.

See here the nature of a dunghill byrd, once matched in alyaunce with the
noble Eagle: behold the nature of this crabtree slip, being once grafted
into the dainty Pearetree stock. Mark well the nature of this carren Kite,
being entered in society with the fleeing Faulcone, and consider the quallitie
of this vpstart Gentleman, matched in affinity with this new alyaunce: Set a
beggar on horseback and he will gallope, set a fool on a bench, and he will
knock his heels, make a cobbler a Courtier, and who more scornful, make a
iauell a Gentleman, and who more disdainefull. This young youth, advanced to
this state, forgot the place from whence he had his original, disdaining his
Father, contemning his Mother, and withholding from them sustenaunce and
reverence, which had given unto him substance and essence. But behold, the
punishment of God upon disobedience, how severely he revenged, this lack of
earthly duty, which by his word he has commanded, and let it be a myrror to
all virtuous children, that they withholde not from their aged parents, that
love and affection, which nature has required: This haggard son, his father
being gone, commanded the meat to be laid again to the fire, the which was
no sooner done, but suddenly a monstrous ^uglie Tode, violently leaping up
and down the Chamber, approached the fire side, and hastily shipping upon this
accurssed meat, cleaued to close to the same, that force nor strength could
beat the same away. The maid crying to her young master, with a shriking
voice, caused him quickly to discern the matter, who assaying by stripes to
repulse the same away, wrought (by Gods just judgment) his own punishment:
for this filthy Tode, contrary to natures temeritie, which has taught the
same to fly the sight of man, with forcible strength, reuerted from the meat,
and respringing from the same, leapt suddenly into the face of this Lordly
son, cleaving so fast thereunto, that no art nor council, no force nor
fortitude, could drive the same from his accurssed flesh, but that sticking
thus unto his face (many years) punished the wickedness of this ungracious
impe, that contrary to law and nature disdayned the duty due to his
withered Parents. But that which is most myraculous, when any man touched any
part of this hateful monster, or endeavored to drive the same from of his face,
the terror of torment so assaulted his heart, that it pinched the same with
most intolerable pains.

The fame of this wonder, was spread throughout all the uttermost ends of
Normandy, and France, the strangeness whereof, did amaze as many as heard
the same, causing in many children some fear and duty to their Parents, and
in many Fathers more careful regard of their children.

Yet as there is no offense so bainous, but by contrition auoideth Gods
vengeance, so is there no sin so grievous, but is pardoned by repentance,
for though the fire of Gods wrath, be often kindled against our transgression,
yet the waterie tears of submission, quenches the consuming coals of his
anger, and obteineth present remission, and so though this obstinate son had
both offended his earthly Father, and also incensed his heavenly Creator, yet
his mind melting in humility, provoked the Lord to accustomable pity, so
that after long, patient, and sufficient sufferaunce, the Lord sent unto him
speedy delyueraunce.

Draw near you dallying Daddes, that mar the minds of your children, by
excessive and overmuch cockering: behold the judgments of God, that
punishes you in those things that you cheefely love, because you make them
your Gods, who ought to be their guides, you adore them like Saints, which
should serve you like Sons, you let them run at liberty, which you ought to
keep in straightly, you minister to their needless youth, which should labor
for your needful age, you give them all things, and deny them nothing, and yet
you complain that your children are graceless, when you your selves are not
therein blameless.

O Fathers, remember you have been children, remember that in your childhood,
the flesh did assail ye, letchery did burn ye, lust did inflame ye, the
world did provoke ye, and the devil did tyse ye, and since thou art a Father,
and have been a son, since thou art old, and have been young, let not thy
child live so in youth, as may make thee weep in age, neither let him so
follow his affection, as may cause thee wayle thy want of discretion. Hark
what the Wise man says: If thou bring up thy son delycatelie, he shall make
thee afraid: and if thou play Eccle. 20.
with him, he shall bring thee to heaviness: laugh not with him, least thou
weep with him also, and least thou gnash with thy teeth at the last: give him
no liberty in his youth, and excuse not his folly, bow down his neck while
he is young, hye him on the sides, while lie is but a child, least he wax
stubborn, and give no more force of thee, and so shall thou have heaviness of
soul.

Saint Augustine recites a notable example of Cyrillus Aug sermo. de
d^testatione ^^^^^tatis. ^^^. ^3.
a Citizen of Hiponenses, who having a Son, which he superfluously loved,
for that he was his only son he possessed, he brought him up so delicately,
that he wanted nothing, but had it of him willingly, denying nothing that he
demanded, but granting him all things that he required, being as slow to
correct him, as he was loath to displease him: this youth consumed a great part
of his fathers goods, in luxurious living, (as a number do with us in these
days, which frequent the Tavern before the Temple, visit their harlottes
with letters, before their redeemer with tears, delight rather to sippe the
cup of their concubine, then to taste of the comfortable cup of Communion:)
but behold the glory of foolish Fathers, and mark the fruit of unbridled
children: for being one day dronken with as much wine, as his Sire was with
superfluous love, he killed his Father weak with age, oppressed his Mother
great with child, would have defiled his sisters, and wounded two of them unto
death.

O miserable and detestable impe of the devil: but see here, O fathers: what
comes of your too too foolish affection, and superfluous love, which blinds
your judgment, that you cannot, and will not correct the faults of your
children, as the Philosopher says: Amor et odium sepe faciunt 1. Rh^.
iudicium non cognoscere, Love and hatred oftentimes pervert judgment. The
cause of which makes you to nussel them in such nicenes, that they are unfit
for labor or study, through corruption of idleness: the Emperor Octauian, set
Policra. in lib. 6. cap. 4.
his sons and daughters to labor, to the end yt they might if fortune failed,
obtain a mean to live in honest behauior: he taught his sons the exercise
of chivalry, and his daughters to work in wool painefully. Licurgus, taught
his Cicero in lib. Tusenlan. quest.
young children to suffer harm patiently, and to do good willingly. Many
examples may be heerin inserted, in which I should seem too tedious, if I
should prosecute them with prolixitie, but because I will not be too long, I
will therefore conclude with brevity, showing how this want of correction, and
this too fond affection, has caused Parents to be punished in their children.

David, for as much as he was too slack in correcting his childrens abuses,
was therefore plagued in their oppressions, how was he expulsed by Absalon? How
was he shamed in Amon? And to be short, Hely for his negligence in not
correcting the offenses of his children, was punished 1. Reg. 4.
of God, so that in one day his sons were slain, he brake his neck, and his
daughter in law for sorrow thereof, travailed with child and died.

Boethius recites a History of Lucretius, that was nourished Boe. in lib. de
doctri. scolarim.
up of his father without discipline and correction, until man's state, who
consumed his money at dice and harlottes, and being many times redeemed by his
Father out of prison, fell notwithstanding to ill company and conversation,
till on a time being taken for some great offense, and led unto the gallows,
his father following him, he requested at the place of execution, that he might
speak with his father, and that he might but kiss him before his departure,
and fayning the same, most sharply bitte of his fathers nose, saying: Father,
justly by thy means do I suffer this, for had thou but corrected me, I
never had come to this misery.

Behold here O fathers, the fruit of slack correction, what foolish pity
procures in graceless children, what little lack of vice, and what great
want of virtue, corruption has sown in the hearts of your younglinges, bring
not your selves therefore under the yoke of your children, for your shall
find it a painful burden. The Wise man says, Trust not to their life, nor
regard not Eccle. 16.
their labors: For common experience teaches us in these days, that the love
of Fathers to their children is very great: but the affection of children to
their Parents very small: we see what care Fathers have over the state of
their children, and what negligence children have ever their Fathers: and
therefore it may be said very well, that love by nature does descend, but
not ascend, it descends from the Father to the Son, but it ascends not
from the son to the Father, wherein the love of the Father appears more,
and the love of the child less: but what is the cause, that the love of the
Father is more effectual to the child, then the childs good will to the
Father? the reason is, Quia radix citius putresceret quamque, ramus remitteret
sibi influentiam, Because the root shall sooner rotte, then the branch shall
send back his influence unto it.

But somewhat to amplify, as well the duty of children, as to quallifie the
vain affection of Parents. I wish all children, to print this passed pattern
in their hearts, and to write the same in the table of their thoughts, that
they may learn thereby, to honor their Parents, and to cherish them in their
latter years: The Wise man says, My son, make much of thy Father in his
age, and grieve Eccle. 3.
him not as long as he lives. And again: Honor thy Father from thy whole
heart, and forget not the sorrowful Eccle. 7.
travail thy Mother had with thee. It is written in the book of Tobias:
Honor thy Mother all the days of Tob. 4.
her life, for thou ought to remember, what and how great perilles she
suffered for thee in her womb. This did that Heathen man Coriolanus remember,
of whom Valerius makes mention, who being Consul of Rome, Valor. in lib. 5.
cap. 4*
and depressed thereof, being driven into exile by the Romans, went unto the
Volscans, of whom being freendly entertained* he was made their Captain
against the Romans: and after many Cities taken, he approached unto Rome, and
coming within a thousand paces thereof, they sent unto him Orators from the
Senate, to entreat of peace, but he would not hear them: again, they sent
their Priests with their Insignes adorned, but he refused them: at the length,
his Mother named Veturia, coming to the camp, and being suddenly espied of
her son, he cried out. O matter, vicisti iram mea^, scio quid vis, O mother,
thou have (says he) overcome my anger, I know what thou would have: whereof
happened peace, only through the love of his mother, insomuch as he said, more
has the love of my mother done, then the strength of the Romans. The
Philosopher Aristotle says: Dijs, parentibus et magistris, Arist in lib. Eth.
9.
non potest reddi equiualens: To God, to Parents and masters, no man can yield
recompense. Valerius rehearses a notable history, of a mother in Rome, which
had a daughter Vale. in lib. de subuentione filiorum ad Parents.
married, the mother had committed a fault, for which she should be burned, her
daughter came to the Emperor with her little child, and bowed her knee,
desiring life for her mother: the Emperor said, the case committed required
death, and that she was worthy the same: the daughter replied, O mighty
Emperor, Princes should be merciful, not suffering their suppliants to depart
without comfort, yet, I beseech thee, O Emperor, let not my mother be
publiquelis put to death, for how filthy will that be, and how full of
confusion, so to die before the people: but if that no pardon may redeem my
mothers life, yet grant I beseech thee, that she may be condemned to perpetual
prisonment, there to finish her last farewell. The Emperor considering ye
meeknes of the daughter, gave sentence that the mother should be condemned to
die in prison, without any nourishment to her given: the daughter yet craved,
that she might naked descend unto her mother in the dungeon, which being
granted, she visited her mother in this wise, O mother, I came naked out of
thy womb, and naked unto thee I do descend, to bring thee bread or food, was
not to me permitted, but as I being young did suck thy breast to maintain me,
so thou being old, suck mine to sustain thee, thus lived the mother eight
days with the milk of her mild daughter: this being shown to ye Emperor, how
that she was yet living, moved him to wrath, in so much yt he would have slain
the Jayler, for that he suffered not her to famish with hunger, who swear that
nothing was by him administered to her, the Emperor therefore marked secretly
the egresse of this kind and loving daughter, and heard her sweet and mild
communication, and seeing her giving unto her mother her breasts to suck,
commanded this daughter to be drawn forth of prison naked and weeping, and
seeing the compassion of the daughter to her mother, said; daughter I give unto
thee thy mother, whose tender and intyre good will has deserved her
deliverance. A most worthy and rare example, for children in these days to
immitate and follow For as says Raven, Auelle a sole solis radium, et Peter
Ra^i^* quodam sermo.
no^ lucet, rinum a font et arescit, ramu^ ab arbore et exiccatur, membru^ a
corpore, et putrescit, separa filium a deuotione paterna, et iam non est
filius, sed frater et collega illorum de quibus dicitur, vos ex patre diabolo
estis. Take away from the Sun his beams, and it shines not, from the
fountain his river, and it waxes dry, from the tree his bough, and it will
wither, from the body his member* and it will rot* so separate a son from
fatherly love, and then is he no son, but a brother, and a fellow of them of
whom it is said, Ye are of your father the devil.

To conclude, let all children, or they (of what age, state or calling so ever)
which have Parents think them worthy of all honor, reverence, love, and fear,
endonoring to requite as much as in them lies (though fully they cannot) the
labor and travail, the cost and care, the love and loss, that their Parents
have passed for their preservation, that they may say, they have nourished up,
no Woolues to worrie them, but well-willers to cherishe them: that beasts in
their nature, exceed not their love, whom reason has framed, Ambrose in exame.
hom. 5.
to excel all creatures: As the Storke^ that succor their parents in their
aged time, recovering them with their wings, supporting them in flying, and
also administering to their noriture and necessity.

Moreover, let them consider but the tender nature and kind affection, that
they ought to bear unto them, being strongly urged thereto by reason of their
being, for by their Parents they have the same, without whom they had not
been. And herein let them consider the careful love, and the notable
thankfulness: but of Aeneas (which Virgill. ^. Aenid.
may only endure them to careful kindness) who being a noble Prince of the
Troyans, disdained notwithstanding (at the subversion of the City, wherein he
might have prayed upon great substance) to carry his aged Father, whom (as he
was) he counted his greatest treasure, upon his shoulders, and bearing him
through the midst of his enemies, from flaming fire and bloody weapons, he
cried: Parcite nunc o Graeci nulla enim erit vobis adoria, si decrepitum senem
interfeceritis, mihi vero maxima, si parentem carissimum liberauero: Spare now,
O you Graecians, for no glory shall you get, if you kill a crooked old
creature, but unto me great glory remains, if I shall deliver my dearest
Parent. Whose Christian example proceeding but from an Heathenish heart: if
children follow; they shall obtain that reward which God has promised the
obseruers of this commandment, namely, long life upon earth, the which
though it be abreuiated in this life (as sometime it happens by Gods
appointment) shall be prolonged and performed in the true life everlasting: in
respect whereof, this is but a death, and a continual threatening the change
of our mortallitie.

The rare virtue of a Maiden, and the singular discrecion of a young man, the
one in her good and godly government, the other in his wise and prudent choice
of his Wife. An excellent example to all Maidens, how they should exercise
their golden time: and a perfect platform to young men, not to run rashly
to the bayte of their pleasures, least they be caught in the hook of folly,
to their own harm and hinderaunce.
IN no one action that pertains to the life of man, ought there to be so
great care, study, or foresight, as in the choice or election of a Wife,
because that therein consysteth, either the pleasure or pain, the gain or
grief, of him that endeavors to enter that state of life, neither may the
same once taken in hand and accomplished, be revoked, except by the dissolution
of that bond, the destruction (or at least the continual grief) of either
part be procured: And therefore, as he that betaketh himself to the Seas, must
abide the storms or tempest: or he that enters wars sustain of life the
danger, without reuersion, till fortune finishe their trouble in bringing a
happy end to their taken enterprise: So, who so attempteth marriage without
aduisement, running rashly upon the reckes of their own ruin, and entering
the combersome conflict of cares, where the gunshotte of calamity shall batter
their brains, and the assaults of sorrows over master their minds, such
must patiently bear the brunt of their own breeding, abiding the bitter
blastes of unquiet brawling, till death make a division of their fortunes, by
disioynting of their bodies, conglutinate together by the free consent of their
headdy minds: To avoiding therefore of such dangers, as may be the unsavory
sance of the whole life, it behooves each wise man to enter the garden of
discretion, there to pick out the purest herbs of wisdom, which may serve
him as preservatives of knowledge, before choice to make right election, or as
plasters of remedy in choice to heal the heart with contentation.

And that example of right choosing, might appear unto those unskillful in
choosing, whose tender years, or hasty heads drives foreward their posting
minds, to experience of marriage, before wisdom have taught them what it
means: I have breefely, though bluntly laid a platform thereof, in the
consequent that follows unto their open construction.

There was sometime a rich man, of great possessions, of large revenues and
ample substance, having a son, whose wisdom surpassed his fathers wealth,
whose reason, his ritchesse, and whose good government, his fathers
hereditament: so that if the Father were fortunate in his wealth, yet his good
hap succeeded in his heir, which more adorned the life of his Father by his
virtue, then the same was garnished by his treasure, so that if the same were
luckie by the inheritance of the Father, yet was the Father more renowned by
the virtue of his son: a great contrariety in the gifts of fortune, for as
much as where she commonly gives wealth, there she withdraws wisdom, where
she yields usually beauty, there she wi^dome places continency, and where
for the most part, she lends strength, there many times she withholdeth
humility, yet here it pleased her to bestow both the one and the other, as a
large mystrisse of her heavenly gifts.

But as the unchaste mind is never satisfied, nor the dry ground never
suffised, so is the mind of the rich and covetous never contented, but that
he daily contriueth how to increase his stock plentifully, how to marry his
children wealthily, and how to advance his kindred ritchly, as this Father,
that albeit his own lands and substance were sufficient, to the maintenance
of his successiue heir, yet his musing mind continually compassed, how to
accuimulate and heap up riches for his son, by insinuating this branch of
his body, into the stock of some noble kindred of affinity, rather regarding
the valor of the presence, then the virtues of the personage, more esteeming
the wealth, then the wisdom, the dowry, then the deeds, the riches, then the
renown: and having espied a match meet to his mind, for mucke, though not
measured at the meatwand of wisdom, for womanhead, namely, the daughter of a
rich Knight, whose pulchritude so pleasant, whose beauty unblemished, whose
feature well framed, but chiefly, whose dowry delightful, he thought might
content as well the fantasy of his son, as it lyked his covetous appetite:
brake therefore upon a time with his son, as concerning the same, laying
first the beauty of her body, as a bait to allure him, and afterward her
treasure, as a trap to train him.

But he, whose wisdom ouerwaide his Fathers greedy will, considered that
the sweetest Cedar in smell, is bitter in sent, that the fairest fruit in
touch, is not the best in taste, that the goodliest Oak in sight, is not most
sound and safe, nor the ritchest state, on virtue cheifest stayed.

But that the Spider may lurk in the Rose, the rotten woorme in the fair
fruit, the stinging Adder in the green grass, and heaps of vice in high
Estate. And therefore discreetly answered his Father, that as duty did
drive him to esteem his good will, so reason reuokt^ him from his unseemly
choice, which his fancy grounded on virtue misliked, for that he saw not in
her actions, the things that might draw his dear affections. And albeit she
were endowed with temporal treasure, concordaunt to her corporal beauty, yet
virtue being a habit of the hidden mind, appeared not in her external
deeds, the valor whereof, he esteemed above the mass of mouldred muck, for
as much as it so far exceeded wealth, as the mind surpasses the body, and
as the superior element, the inferior creature.

But as the Mole, unto whom the whole meddowe is scarcely sufficient, rooting
up every furrowe of the feeld, to satisfy her greedy nature, therein
destroying the earth, hindering the owner of the ground, and little profiting
her self, except in contenting her wastfull mind. So this covetous father,
not content with abundance, having his mind as much upon gathering money,
as the Mole in rooting the meddowe, increasing his riches peradventure by the
decay of others, having no profit thereby, except in beholding the same, to
suffice his covetous heart: was incensed against his son, in that he
condiscended not, to the conclusion of his choice which he had made, as much
and more to the pleasure of himself, then the affection of his son,
considering he had determined the same with the father of the Maiden, the
consent of the virgin, but most especially, the agreement of her dowry, the
quantity whereof so tickled his hoording heart, that upon the refusal
thereof, he cast his son out of his favor, willing him to avoid his sight,
with most bitter threats of his displeasure, loss of his heredetaments, but
chiefly, the lack of his blessing.

Yet this sober youth, giving place to the passions of his Father, and
ouercomming his anger with quiet sufferaunce, knew that though the impatience
of his Father, was for a time somewhat troublesome, yet time might both appease
the same, and yield better fortune unto him, that his Fathers covetous mind
did wish.

He well remembered that the herb Scamone, although it be venomous, yet it
purges collar, though Southernwoodde be unsavory, yet it expels venime,
and though Rue be bitter, yet it cleanses the brain, clears the sight,
purges fleame, and brings many commodities to the body: So thought he, that
albeit the avoiding of this match, and the abiding of this brunt be bitter, yet
future profit, may repaye the same with double pleasure, and therefore to
avoid the collar of his Father, to dissipate and make void the devise of his
brain, and to accommodate unto himself some better fortune, he fled the sight
of his aged Sire.

And tracing his journey through many a wild wilderness, walking through
unknown woods, uncouth paths and weary ways: the Sun withdrawing his
lyghtsome beams, and the night approaching with his duskishe clouds, he
declined into the house of an aged man, to rest himself after his taken
travail.

And entering into the doors thereof, he found the daughter of the old man
(being his only child) with lyfted hands, bended knees, and open mouth,
yielding praise unto the Lord, for his great benefits bestowed upon her, and
making her prayers unto him from the bottom of her heart, to grant her his
grace to live in his fear, to the reverence of her Father, the discharge of
her duty, and the quiet contentation of her own conscience. A worthy
president to fire before the face of all modest Maidens: she was not here
occupied, neither in trimming her head, in glaring in the glass, in fingering
her Lute, in singing of Sonnets, in denising of Letters, in daunsing with her
Lovers, nor in any such lewd and unseemly pastimes, but like a chaste
Virgin, a mild Maiden, and a good Christian, was occupied in heavenly
contemplation.

This routh musing at the rare exercise, and no less admyring at the godly
prayers, stepped unto her with friendly salutations, requesting to know
whether these divine orations, were her continual study and frequentations,
and considering her poverty (which appeared in outward show) how and for what
cause she yielded such thanks unto God, for great received benefits.

The Maiden meekely beholding him a while, although at first abashed with his
sudden sight, yet at last, she wisely and discreetly framed unto him this
answer. Sir, I see you marvel, that my poverty should not be an obstacle
to my prayers, for as much as to your judgment, it contains few worldly
benefits: consider with your self, that as a simple medicine, does more
often cure great diseases, then large compoundes curiously framed: so poverty,
though in apparaunce simple, yet to a contented mind, the very schoolemaister
of virtue, and the perfect path unto perpetual pleasure, more excellent to ye
godly, then the glistring state of golden riches, which though in outward
appearance it seem glorious, yet is it the hook of hurtful security, covered
with the bait of worldly felicity, a log to virtuous life, a stop to quiet
state, and the very block, whereby worldlinges stumble into the pricking
perils of choking cares. And although I am not indewed with abundance of
worldly treasures, yet do I think that the Lord has left unto me great
riches, in as much as he has granted me the only company of my aged Sire,
unto whom (as in youth) he showed me love, so in age I may yield good will,
being unto him in age a staff, that was to me in youth a stay. And think you
good Sir (quoth she) that I have received but small benefits at the hands of
God, who has made me a reasonable creature, that might have made me a
senseless thing by nature, who has given to me a soul, that might have
co^stituted me only of a body: who has made me a christian, that might have
made me an infidel, redeeming me by his blood, that might have perished in mine
own, and sanctifying me by his spirit, that might have been possessed by the
enemy: These caused considered, I do twice every day make my prayers unto ye
Lord for my soul, as I do twice every day feed my body, lest if I should
cherish my body, and not nourish my soul, the one might grow disdainful, and
the other sinful, and if I should not thus repay him with thanks, that has
fed me with benefits, I might appear more ungrateful to him for his mercies,
then he beneficial for mine vndeseruinges.

O myrror of maidenhood, O glass of true virginity, O mind endued with
modesty, O heart fraught with true humility: See here you gadding girls, that
gape after every gaude, and prease after each peeuishe pastime, you that can
dance with the daintiest, smile with the smothest, and laugh with the leudest,
you that wa^der to weddings, thrust in at Theaters, and trip into Tauerns, you
that take more care to trick your bodies to the pleasure of men, then to deck
your souls to the will of God, you that had rather spend two hours at ye
glass, then a minute at the bible, taking more delight to view your faces, then
to behold your consciences, rather hardening your heels with dau^cing, then your
knees with praying. Behold the exercise of this virgin, note her life, and
follow her example, begin in virtue, and end in the same, be not like a number
of foolish damselles that begin hotly, after a while are luke warm, but in
the end stark cold: like to the monster Chimera, whose upper part was a Lion,
whose middle a Got, but her nether part a Serpent. Be not like to the Jews
that bowed their knees unto Christ, and yet buffeted him in the face, neither
him that prayseth a man now, and yet slandereth him by and by after: follow not
the example of the usurer, who on the one side prays, and on the other side
notwithstanding takes usury: but if you will be true prayers, and perseuerers
in deed, follow this virgins example, pluck out the rustie yro^ out of your
wound, before you proceed to take a plaster, and purge your souls of
corruption, that you may be healed, and persevere.

But to return to the sequel of this History. The young man having impressed
in his memory, the wise and virtuous answer of this rare and godly Virgin,
thought that time thrice happy, that he directed his steps into the doors of
this old man, and passing the time with her in common conference: found her
wisdom such, and her government so godly, that his affections which before
were his own, were now alyenated and estraunged from him so far, as his
whole delight was fixed how to draw unto him her good lyking, purposing not to
pass any further, till he had made a trial of her good will: and although the
consideration of her poverty, might some what discourage him from his
pretended choice, yet thought he, that greater riches could not remain in
any, then the true possession of a virtuous mind, the which he found to be so
abundantly placed in the breast of this young Maiden, as he thought it as
hard to find her match, as to get a black Swan.

By this her father (who usually after supper, walked abroad into the feeldes)
returned home, and finding a guest in his house more then either he knew or
expected, was not a little abashed, for as much as through the suspicion of his
poverty, his poor cottage was but smally frequented, yet being wise and well
acquainted with courtesy, bade him welcome: unto whom this young man, after
humble thanks for his good entertainment, requested of him that he might but
find so much freendship at his hands, as for his money to tarry and refresh
himself in his house, till he were more apt and able to pass forth the rest
of his unknown journey.

Unknown journey (quoth the old man) why, are you out of your way good Sir
(says he) or know you not the name of the place whereunto you are bent, either
have you forgotten the same, or did you never heretofore travail this ways.

Good father (says the young man) for so both your age and state requires, I
am not out of my way, but rather in the same, and thrice happy do I think my
self, that fortune guiged me into this pathe: the name of this place I never
knew, and therefore have I not forgotten the same, neither did I ever before
travail this way, but I so bide mine unknown journey, in as much as I am
ignorant, whether it will please you to grant me abiding within the compass
of your cottage, which if you do, then is not my journey unknown, but at an
end, for as much as since my arrival at your house, I have found the place,
which I hope fortune decreede I should atchieue.

Gentleman (quoth the old man) what good hap is that, that you harp on so
much, that has guided you hither, I know not, but if you shall receive any
good by the means of your coming hither, I shall be right glad of the same, as
for the use of my poor cottage, although it be but simple, and not worthy
your entertainment: yet least I should seem to deny you the same, use both it
and me I beseech you at your pleasure, taking such fare as you find and see,
agreeable to my poor state and calling.

Good father (quoth the other) the good I have got, and the lucky hap I have
had since my coming, I shall in time to come (I hope) make known unto you, in
the mean while, I am to yield you most hearty thanks, that being a stranger
altogether in these parts, you have notwithstanding deined to proffer me such
courtesy, as greater can I not find among my best acquaintance, and as for
your fare, were it never so simple, if I should mislike the same, proceeding
from a frank and willing heart, I might be counted an ill guest, that would
esteem more of the meat then the man or more of your fare then of your
faithful heart, I account the dwelling good, that is not dangerous, and the
cheer great that is willingly bestowed.

Gentleman (says the old man) the good behavior and courtesse that I see
apparaunt in your outward habit, makes me to judge thereby, the manners of your
inward mind, and therefore your none acquaintance, is quitted by your modest
demeanor, for virtue makes a stranger unto every wise man a familliar,
neither have I ever seen that young man heretofore, unto whom mine eye,
upon so small acquaintance, has drawn my heart more nearer, and therefore I
and my poor cottage are to use at your pleasure, tarry your time, and depart
at your leisure.

Thus tarried this youth in the house of this old man, noting the outward
poverty of the Father, and the inward virtue of the Daughter, no less musing
at the one, then meruailing at the other: but especially, the Virgins godly
government, her modest manners, her words placed with wisdom, her looks
without lust, and her deeds ruled by discresion, so that it seemed unto him,
that her life was a lamp to the lend, a lantorne to the loose, and a light to
the laciuious, governed by grace, ruled by reason, and bridled with the bytte
of Gods holy word, wherein he saw her so continually occupied, that her whole
delight seemde to be placed in the meditation thereof.

On the other side, the old father marking the godly life of this young man,
noting his courteous iesture, his wisdom, his humility, his sobriety, his
speeches familiarly spoken, yet wisely placed, his mind stored with mirth, yet
used with modesty, his contentiue mind, his patient sufferaunce, his earnest
prayers for his Father, though he might have grudged at his unkindness. And
knowing his Father, his kindred and friends, yet more regarding his virtue,
then his fortune, or any part of his hoped wealth, was wunne unto such an
inward affection toward him, as he studied how to bring that to pass, which
the young man did most secretly desire.

Noting also, the honest and mutual freendship, the virtuous and faithful
love, that daily increased in the minds of these two younglings, he thought
that match could not be made a miss, where love was the beginning, and virtue
was the end, and therefore breaking one day the matter unto his daughter, was
desirous to know the affections of her mind, at which he aimed by ye
dispositions of her body, and she whom simplicity had nourished with the milk
of truth, having her face stained with the vermillion of virtue, with blushing
countenance revealed that love, which her outward iestures could not conceal,
desiring therein the consent of her fathers mind, from whose body she had
received the substance of her being, showing him that she was more drawn to
love him by the view of virtue, then any affection dimmed with the veil of
vanity, requesting him, that as he had been a Father of her body, in giving
to her those things necessary for her use, so he would be also a governor of
her life, in not denying her him whereon her ioies did rest: which the good old
man did as willingly grant, as she did heartely desire, persuading her that as
she had been a comfortable staff to stay up the weight of his aged lymmes, so
he would be a careful father in providing her a mate agreeable to her mind,
as soon as time would permit the accomplishment of the same.

Shortly after the old father espying an apt occasion to perform his promise,
brake with the young man in the demand of this match, requesting of him to
know, how he liked the rude demeanor of his daughter, and for as much as he had
moved the question of marriage unto her, of which she had certified him at
large, was desirous to know what he saw in her, that should draw him to
lyking of so unseemly a choice, persuading him, that if he shot at wealth* in
steed thereof he should find want, for as much as his state could yield no
supply to his necessity, but if he aimed at virtue, he thought her able to
bring him a sufficent dowry, in that his study had been, to make her
therewith sufficiently endued.

The young man replied unto him, that he gaped neither after gold nor goods,
for as much as he saw by sufficient appearaunce, that there was no such gain
to be gased after, within the compass of his cottage, but that he had found
already an inestimable treasure, in an obscure corner, the possession whereof,
if it pleased him he might quietly enjoy, he acknowledged himself ritcher
then Cressus, and his substance more then all the golden sands of Pactolus,
or the silver streams of Ganges, more happier in his conquest then Alexander,
and far more more fortunate then Policrates.

This good old man (espying the virtuous end of this young man's desire, and
seeing that virtue was the only mark whereat he did Jeuell the shot of his
affections) could not any longer dissemble his hidden state, neither the good
will that he bare to his virtuous mind, and therefore taking him apart into a
privy corner of his cottage, he showed him a huge sum of gold and silver,
not gathered by his care (who was rather addicted to contemplation, then to
heaping of treasure,) but bequeathed by the death of her Uncle, a man of great
substance, who noting the hope of her virtuous heart, that shined forth in
the image of her face, delivered to her Father to keep for her use, a homely
coffer in outward show, farced within full of gold and silver, all which (for
so much as he saw, he desired not wealth, but wisdom, nor the body of his
daughter, but her mind) he gave him, calling unto him his only child, and
joining their hands with the free consent of their joyful hearts, he blessed
them, praying God, that as virtue was the beginning of their love, so it might
be the end of the same, that they might live together here in all godliness
and felicity, and end their days in peace and tranquillity, that such issue
might spring of their seed, as might be the common wealths commodity, to
their comfort and Gods glory.

Thus lived they together in all honesty, godliness, and quietness, breaking
all brawles with humility, and quieting every discord by love, the one not
being proud through rule, the other not checking her husband for wealth, look
what he lyked, she loved, look what he loathed, she lusted not after, in
pleasure she would be his partner, in sorrow his companion, her honest mirth
was his mellody, and her freendly heart his harmony, in health his delight, and
in sickness, his Physician, and in brief, the pillar of his life, and the
only pattern of a virtuous wife.

O how many wives have we in our City, that follow not the example of this
Damsel, but rather run with maine strength the contrary way, whose lives if
they were noted, would rather deserve a sharp inuectiue, then a plausible
praise, against whom I will not inueigh, least I might be rather unjustly
accused of some of envy, then thought to write of judgment and experience. I
will therefore strike sail in such a tempest, rather then striving with
contrary winds, run against the rocks of women's venomous tongues, and so
put in peril the ship of my safety, accounting this only example sufficient
to encourage the good, and to gaul the wicked, the one burning with the praise
of virtue, the other blushing at the want thereof.

Wherefore, let all Maidens learn by this Virgins example, how to wear out
their golden time of virginity, not by spending the same in wantonness,
wildness, l^senesse and liberty, but in shamefastness, discreetnesse,
chastnesse, and sobriety, which as Valerius says, is, Custos castitatis, The
preserver of chastity. Moreover, let them be silent, not coveting by words
rather to be seen, and so to show their eloquence, then by shamefastness to
declare their honest silence, as a number do in these days, who make their
tongues sweet instruments, to delight the ears of trifling talkers, and count
it a great gain to flourish in glorious speech, so that if nature had made them
for that use, I think some of them would prove gallaunt Orators to plead,
and as sutle Sophisters to deceive.

Let them learn also to keep their feet from gadding, and to exercise
themselves at home in virtuous doing, of which, the one will blotte their good
name with infamy, but the other adorn their life with glory.

This Maidens modesty may be their myrror, and her government a glass for
their behauior, how to consume their time in godliness and prayer, and to
bridle their loose affections from vicious demeanor, whose example if they
immitate, they shall find more faithful lovers of their virtue, then foolish
doters on their beauty, more suitors for their honesty, then lykers of their
braucrie: and above all, they shall be sure that God will provide them such
husbands, as shall be trusty lovers, and honest lyuers.

But for so much as I promised in the Exordium of this history, to set down
somewhat, whereby the unskillful youth may be warned, how to make a right choice
in the chosing of a Wife, or having chosen, how their life may be spent in
quietness, I will breefly perform it, and so draw to an end.

Chrysostom, persuades him that will marry, to censider Super. Math.
whether the Parents be both good, or both evil, or whether the one be good,
and the other evil: if they be both good, then may he safely make choice of
her, if both evil, then to refuse her: if the one be good, and the other
evil, then may he be doubtful what to do: yet if the Father be good, and the
mother dishonest, unquiet, or without government, he ought rather to fear,
then contrariwise: and the reason is, because Maidens have been more
accustomed to be conuersaunt with their Mothers, then with their Fathers: and
therefore more inclined to follow their manners, whereupon rose the proverb,
Qualis matter talis filia, Such a moher, such a daughter.

But especially let him beware that intends to marry, that these things
concur and meet together, namely, that in their states there be an
equallitie, for where there is no equallitie of condition, there can be no
quietness of life, for as much as two contraries are never found in one
subject, nor one heart in two contrary fortunes, for wealth in a woman without
wisdom, and poverty in a man without great government, do never make up a
quiet marriage.

Moreover, let there be a likeness in their manners, and a unity in their
minds, least if there affections be variable, they become seperable: for where
there is no likeness in manners, there can be no soundness in freendshippe:
where is no soundnes in freendship, there is no faithfulness in love: where is
no faithfulness in love, there may be no quietness of life, and where the life is
unquiet, there is the life but a death, and the marriage a myserie.

But above all, seeing that Natura nihil solitarium amat, And that those that
have not the gift of continency must marry, (albeit that in marriage are many
discommodities, yet of evils the least is to be chosen, For better it is to
marry, then to burn in fleshly desires:) let every wise man have a special
regard therefore, that her Parents be honest, she virtuous, and therewithal
Religious, seeing that the lack of Religion is the want of good life, and the
open gappe to all ungodliness, and surely, this lack of foresight in choice,
leads many a man to ill chance, making the whole life unsavory, that else
might be spent in sweet and pleasant quietness, and ended in mirth, joy and
happiness.

In brief therefore, good education is better in a Maiden then riches, albeit
I will not dissuade any man from profit, so it be not wholly respected: for I
deny not, but that wealth and wisdom may be coupled, and virtue and riches
conjoined, that there may be as much vice in needy poverty, as pride in
glistering riches, for Marcus Cato had a wife, who although she were poor,
yet was she proud, po^tifical and peevish: yet is a poor Maiden virtuous,
better then a rich that is vicious, and poverty with glory, is better then
riches with infamy.

But now to use Apostrophe, to those that are married, as in the choice of a
wife, there is to be used discretion, so must thou govern her by mildness and
wisdom, austeritie of words, must be mingled with gentleness of speech:
fear must in her be turned into love, and bitterness in thee, into sweetness
of behavior, seeing that she was not made of the head nor the foot, but of
the ryb and side of man, which shows, that as she may not be a mystresse, so
must she be no maid, as no sovereign, so no servant, but an equal
companion, and a freendly fellow, to participate with thee of every fortune.

With this mildness of government, must be matched, secrecy of chastisement,
that every fault be not openly corrected, nor every offense public detected,
every light fault must not be found, nor every infirmity sharply noted, for as
a discord in music, being a harshe and unpleasant stroke of mixed soundes,
sharp and flat, is unpleasaunt to the tuneable ear: So the public
disagreeme^t of cooples, being an unsavory noise of iarring words, is
grievous to the honest godly mind, therefore if any occasion of offense fall
out, (as it cannot choose but even among the best, it may sometimes happen, for,
Vnicuique dedit vitium natura creato, To every one that lives, has nature
given a fault,) there ought to be great cyrcumspection, that it be not only
reproved, least a small offense unwisely handled, breed a gaul in the mind,
and a grief in the heart.

Last of all, accustom thy self to freendlinesse in speech, and louingnes in
communication, to honesty of life, and vertuousnesse of manners, that going
before in government of life, she may follow in obedience of behauior, let thy
life be a lantorne to light her, and a guide to lead her, an example of
virtue, and a pattern of honest demeanor, that she beholding thy virtue, may
immitate thee in every godly action. These notes duly observed, will profit
thee in singleness, and ease thee in wedlock, make thy whole life
delightful, and thy death joyful, that departing from the shaddowe of this
short life, a good conscience may accompany thee to the life eternal, and a
good name remain for thy eternal memory. Amen.

FINIS.

