A joyful new tidings of the goodly victory that was sent to the Emperor,
from the noble Captain Marcquis delgasto, showing how and in what manner all
the Fre^chme^ that were in Italy with all their Captains be overcome and
destroyed of the valea^t Prince of Salerne.

Yet another new tidinges, showing how that Barbarossa the great Turks
Leueten^^ and Admiral of the sea, is gone out of France with a great army,
taking many noble Lords and Galleyes, as ye shall heat hereafter.

Ieremye. ix. THe LORD says thus: Let not the wise man rejoice in his
wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, nether the ritche man in his
rytches: But who so will rejoice, let him rejoice in this, that he
understands, and knows me: for I am the LORD which do mercy, equity, and
righteousenes upon the earth.

Imprynted in Botulphe lane at the sign of the white Bear by Ihon Mayler for
Ihon Ghoughe.

Cum priuslegio ad imprimendum solum.

battle scene

OUr Lord Jesus Christ yt ordeyneth al things after his godly will,
punysshynge the wicked, many and sundry ways, and preseruethe them that fear
him, from all manner of perelles, pluckynge down the proud men, and exalting
the meake and gives to al men after there worckes. This mighty Lord I say has
now of late begone to pour out his plages upon the French King, as it
daily does appear more and more, and all the cause thereof is sin and
vnrighteousenesse.

For like as ye Israelites were plaged for ye sin of David there King, with
Pestilence. Also be the Frenchmen now destroyedde and punysshed of God the
Lord for there sin, in despising of god and his word, for the light is now
come into the world, but men have loved darkness moore then ye light, because
their deeds be euel neither will they comme to the light less their deades
should be reproved.

Now when ye French King considered and marked well that the Emperor would
set upon him with strong hand of the borders of Artoyis and Loreyne. So has
he ymagined and practiced after his old use and custom how and after what way
he should break this his purpose and let him from it, and to prolonge it as
long as he might, to the intent that ye Summer might be spente or he should
have any power, so that the Winter might come, when ye cold and wette should
drive the^ out of the field.

Now has the French King thought that he would set upon the Emperor in
another country far of to make the Emper. with his army to get them thither.

Whereupon the French King sent the Dolphyne into Italye, through Sauoye with
a very great Army.

And many Earls, Lords, and Knights, as the eldest son of Mounsieur
devendome, and the eldest son of Mounsieur deguise and such other, with many
Capitaynes, for to destroy the Dukedom of Myliaene,

But God the gyuer of all victory has ordained it otherwise. For as they went
toward the Mountains of Italye, they had great lack of vytayle so that for
lake of food, many of them dyed. And when they came into Italy, so did they
destroy al before them whereby the land sustained great loss, and all this was
done to cause the Emperor to come thither and help the Italyans, and that in
the mean time the Summer should be spent and the Winter to come on them or
they should begin to do any thing. Now the Frenchemen being in Italy wrought
all the means the ^^id to take towns and Castells^. And so they beseged a
town called Caringi^en, the which they stormed thenkyng to win it and to
destroy it. But when they marked that it cold not be won they thought to
have famyshed them. But the gentle Lord and noble Captain of the Emperor
called Marcquis delgasto, has with all speed gathered an Army to defend the
Emperoures country. And is come against the Dolfine, to the same for to
vittayle it, for ye frenchmen had laid seage to it before his coming the spare
of.v. wekes so that all that while no vyttayle cold come to the town.

Wherefore this noble Captain Marcquis delgasto entending to socoure, help
and rescue the town with all his your and strength and to vy^^ple it.

Therefore he mente his awn^ person in the forward. And the main battle were
the most part hye douchmen, which played the men as hereafter shall be declared.

Now when they were come neat to the town and in the sight of the frencht
Armey, so shot they at the french oost most fearsly, so that Marcquisdelgasto
with his Sod yars (the which were most part Spanyardes and Italians) ran
fearsly upon the frencheme^ and fought long with them, and at the last the
Frenchemen were put to flyghte and all their first Army (that is to say
Lauangarde) be all slain.

And when the main battle of the Frenchemen were fled, then the Italians and
Spaniardes begone to gather their spoil among them that were slain and so
went clean out of their array, and thought of no another thing but every man,
for himself seakyng after riches, thinking that the field was all won, where
upon the Frenchemen seeing and perceiving the Italians and Spanyardes out of
there array and order, gatheryng the spoil. So the main battle of the
Frencheme^ came on them withal the have the cold, to sleye them as they did,
for the Spanyardes and Italyans seeing them come on the^ so fearsly did their
best to come in their array, and battle again but ye Frenchmen came on the^
so strongly defendyng them that with great force the kept the Spanyardes and
Italyans that they cold come in no array, nor battle and so the forward of
Marcquis delgasto were conquered and overcome, the cause there of was their
couetousenes and for lack of better taking head. And Marcquis delgasto was
sore wounded, and when he saw that the Frenchemen had gotten the upper hand,
so recolde he back with his halbardes to his great Army ye which were most part
Douche men.

And the Frenchemen followed him but when his Army saw him coming, being
their chief Captain and sore wounded, the opened their Ledger and received him
into them and closedde their Ledger again, and sought forth with against the
Frenchemen which assailed them fearslye, and so the recolde back a lytyl and a
little syghtynge with the French men till they were come to ye next town, and
like valiant men of war spite of the Frenchemen, brought they their
Captain in to it and so saved his life.

Of this feate the Frenchemen were not a little glad, thynkyng that they welde
over run al Italy and win the town also of Caringiaen by keeping their
vittailes from them, and the Frenchmen did much myschefe in all parties where
they came. And there is an Earl in Italy, called Picus Mirandula which
favors ye frenchmen greatly, and so he took up many Soldiers to the
number of.xxiiij. M. to help the Frenchemen with all, he thynkyng yt they
should win all Italy.

Now when Marcquis delgasto hard yt they robbed, burnt, took and destroyed the
land, the^ he caused a great number of men of war to be made redye, and sent
them, being of great power with his principal Captain of Salerne. When
this great Army was come in to the Dukedom of Myllaene for to fight with the
Frenchmen, and to stop them of their myschefe and destruccio^ yt they daily
did to the countreye. And so it happened yt on the.iiij. day of June last past
at.v. of ye clock at after none came the Prince of Salerne with his people in
goodly order, and being all ready to fight, set upon the Frenchemen between two
Cownes named Noule and Sarauair Now the chief Captain of the Frenchemen, was
one Peter Destrossy, brother to the wife of the Dolphyne of France this
Captain made unto his people before they should fight a great oracio^, in
couraging the^ after the best wise he cold and holdened the^ to fight
manfullye through which they were greatly encouraged to the battle. And
when they came and met together they fought long time so that much people
were slain on both the sides.

Yet at the last God gave the victory to the noble Prince of Salerne so that
he wan the field, and with force of Arms overcame ye frenchemen, so yt the
most part of them were slain. And many Lords, Earls, Capitaynes and
gentil men were taken presoners as hereafter follows.

First of all the chief Lord of the field of the Frenchemen, yt is to sayz
Peter Destrossy the Dolphynes brother in law which is wounded in flyeng away
with a half haecke and after that is taken.

The Earl George Martiningo Bressiano a Captain of great might is also
taken and wounded in the face.

The Earl Hercules his brother is also taken the which had great rytches with
him.

The Earl John Iacques Triulsio is also taken.

The Lord Camillo Triullio Captain of.iii. vanes or sta^derdes of soldiers
is also taken.

The Lord Cornelles, Ben^u^illa the chief and Leuetena^t of Peter Destrossy is
also taken.

The Lord Ipolitus Leuetenant of the Earl of Mirandula is also taken.

The Lord Ipolito Gonzaga Capiteine general of the Lord under Peter de Strossy
is also taken.

The Earl of Pitillano son is slain.

The Lord Ulysses Orsinos eldest son of Peter Colo^na Captain was slain
fighting.

The Lord Charle his brother is taken.

The Lord Roberte Malatesta Captain is also taken.

The Lord Flaminio Orsino, Captain is also taken.

The Lord Camilio, Orosino Captain is also taken.

The Duke of Sum is also taken and sore hurt in his face.

Yet also is there taken a man of great personage of the house of yt Vistonce of
Milaene.

Yet more.lx. Captains with.lx. sta^darde bearers be also taken.

Ite^ yet more two hundred Ge^tyllmen of the which the pourest of them is able
to bring for his Ransom two. M. Crounes.

Here throw is it good to be merked yt a mighty Army has been one with another,
where as al these ge^tleme^ be taken beside those which beslaine, yt which be
yet unknown. For there be of the Frencheme^ slain to the number of.xxx. M.
men beside those which be taken and those which be wounded the which is a
great number. Here by may we well mark that God our Lord is always with
the righteous, and unto the meke he shows his louinge kyndnes, bu^ the proud
and the vnrigteous will he bring low: Therefore let all men give thanks unto
the Lord for all his benefits, which he showed to all them that fears him,
and that it would please him to keep and defend both the Emperor. With our
most excellent prince King Henry the right of that name the which has also
a great company of people lyenge now among his enemies the which Jesus preserve
save and keep from all evil. AMEN.

The copye of the going away of the chief Captain of the Turk called
Barbarossa, onte of France.
AFter this Barbarossa, understood how that the aliantes and Leages of many
Princes, was broken, which held with France, and they had forsaken to aid
the French King, as the Duke of Cleave on the one side, and the Duke of
Loreyne of the other party, which was never before against the french King,
but because the Kings desire was to destroy his country burning vyllages and
towns and to bring it in to great pouertye, because the Emperor should have
no lodgise nor yet find any by talles there. Therefore ye Duke considering all
this, thought it better to hold with the Emperor, than to have thus his
country destroyed. And also that the Scots now on the other side having to
their Leage. Now Barbarossa hearing all this, thought all men falls of from
the French King, wherefore I will provide for my self be times and get me
away. And so is Barbarossa departed out of France and has taken his vyage
toward Turkye, and taking with him perforce and with strength, very many
Galleyes once of number lade^ with great rytchesse, Iewelles and all manner of
treasurye, among which were.vi. of ye best Galleyes that the French King
had. And out of the rest of the Galleyes that he would not have with him, he
took out all the things that was in them, that would do him any service, as
Gonnes, gone powder, gonstones, moryshspikes, harnes, Helmettes, Halbardes, and
such other like ordinance for war of all manner sorts of weapons.

And above this also this Barbarossa has taken with him many prisoners Lords
and other Ge^tyll men of great birth among which.viij. were men of great
power, and has also taken many Captains prisoners with him perforce and
agenst their wylles for ye which there was made great lamentacion on the
borders, and many a heavy heart has he made there. And a boue this he has
robbed.vij. Vyllages and taken away with him into Turkaye all the people
Prisoners that was therein. When all this news came to ye Prince of Doria, how
ye Barbarus was gone to ye see after this manner, he sent in all the have after
him, his neve John Doria with xxx. Galleyes, which were ordained and appointed
with all manner of Artyllarye, gonneshot and other weapons great plenty, and
also men of Arms, to make that he should not do any hurt or myschese on the
borders of Christendom which they manfully defended. For Barbarossa had taken
his course and journey through ye kingdom of Cecilie.

Thus this Noble Capieayne Doria let the Turk from doing any more hurt to
Christendom, and has also taken part of his Galyes, and chased diverse of
them, where of the Emperor was very glad with all his Lords and people.

Of this it is euydentlye to be marked that our Lord fight the all ways for
all them that fear him, and turn from al there wickedness. For to them that
fear ye Lord, may no manner ill chasice but when they come into temptacion
they shall be delivered. But the wicked and ungodly which has hardened their
hertes as an Adamant stone and stopped their ears because the would not hear
the words of God their Lord, which he has sent into all the world so
plenteously, unto al such I say he sends his plages and some he scatters
among the He then where they be sold and entreated like as they were beasts
and have great scarsenes both of meat, drink, and clothe. etc.

And some he destroys with the swerd, some with honger, some with Pestilence,
and after this world, they he tormented, with everlasting fire, as we may se
by euydent tokens, of gods fearse wrath how that he destroyed the Sodomytes,
and destroyed all the world with water save Noe and his children which should be
an example to all them that live ungodly and without the fear of God, lest
they perish and be destroyed as other have been both of old time and now of
late days in Italy as you have hard, where the French king has lost the
most part of the nobles of his Realm with a great number of his people and
Artyllary and other ordynaunces perteyning to war, wc his Galleyes and other
treasury taken away by Barbarossa so ye the French king has loost the most
part of his power, through which he may well mark that god is angry with him,
and has punyshed him for his despysyng of his word and for his wicked living,
for what a poyntme^t lege peace other wise that he makes with any prince is
never on his party hold nor yet kept. As apart you shall hear. For wha^ the
Emperor began his rain in the year of our Lord a M.CCCCC.xvi. the Emperor
sent his legate to the French King for to make an everlasting Peace between
them, the which was done cousented and fully made on both parties and a strong
lege was made on both sides, which was not long kept of the Frenchekynge as
his manner is, to break all his couenauntes and to perform none as near as be
can, but went and destroyed the Emperous land and Towns within short space
after and desroyed his countries where he might or cold, and seized not to
work such myschefe till that the Emperor had taken him prisoner a foore
Pauien, where many a man lost there life and most pytyously murdered and
drowned, among which the chief Captain of France lost his life namedde
Laydowycus Dela Truuoille with many other.

And not withstanding that the Emperor had him Prisoner, yet would he not
go forth to win and destroy his land which he might well have done if he had
would, and had thereto good occasion given him of the French King, to have
taken in much of his country, the which was tha^ easy for him to do, the la^d
being without a head and gouernoure

Butte the Emperor was so good that he (after that he comened of the matter)
was content to hear the treatye of peace the.xiii. day of Ianuarye the which
was concludedde at Madryll in Spain, and above that to make the frendshyp more
greater) has given him his own sister to be his wife, trusting that after
that he should have everlasting peace between them during their lives.

But all this notwythstanding he was not long in France again but he brake
his couenasites of peace and would not keaps his promise, although he had
bound himself so strong thereto as any man might, which was that he should
deliver to the Emperor all the Emperors Lordshippes towns and land that he
with held in Apulia, Cecilia, Lo^bardie, Burgon, Flaunders, Artoise and
Dornicke, upon al which couenauntes he received the Sacrament and made a
solom oothe, that he should perform the^ and suffer every prince to enjoy his
own land by him peceably all which he never performed, but shortly after in
the year of our Lord a M.D.xxviij. the.xxij. day of January ye french King
sent his Legate to Burgois in Spain where the Emperors was that same time
and has made him there desyaunce proclaming open war against the Emperor
both to fire and sword, with most spytefull and proud words thretenynge him
greuouslye to the which the Emperor mekelye answered as here after folowethe.

It does not make me a little to marvel, but much above measure to wonder yt
your lord my prisoner sometime was will thus begin a new war agenst me, the
which I thought full little that he would have done. It is also a strange
thing to me, to hear now this defyaunce, seeing that he warred upon me moore
then.vj. years continually without any defyaunce sendynge. Also he knowethe
what answer I sent to him by his Legate that was with me and how I answered
to him so reasonable that all men may perceive that no fault is in me.

For after the consyderacion of the conclusion and agreemente yt we made at
Madryl, is very many of my subjects taken Prisoners and set them in his
Gallyes against all truth and promyses made to the contrary, for which causes
sake I have taken again of his people prisoners, now if he will deliver my
people free, I shall also deliver his without any fail and led the^ home
again.

Let your King are his Legate what answer I made him at Granaten, and he shall
well find that I have done much better, than I had promised to him at
Madrylen.

And after that the Emperor had spoken these words he commanded to his
Secretary that he should be we^l entreated, and yt they should be brought to
their lodgyng and that they should tarry for their answer, which thing they
did. Now to consider the gentle answer of so noble an Emperor, to his enemies
spiteful and proud words, many men may learn to refrain themself from
folyshe hastynes and rash judgment, by this man being so hy in degree and
mighty of pour, having so great a cause, and yet does recompense good for ill
but no doubt therbe many men that be much ^oore prouder of heart then this
noble Emperor, which will be ave^ged for every trifle, the Lord give to all
such better grace.

Now while that the Legate tarried for his answer, came unto him the Emperors
chefest Secretary named M. John Aleman and delivered to him in writing his full
and sufficient answer saying hear is the full answer, go and show it to
your King where in he shall plainly se that he does fare otherwise with his
works, the^ he did promis with his words at Toleten and Madryll And show him
that from the beginning of his Kyngedome he never ceased from war to shed
the Christen blood most vnrighteouslye.

Now when al this came to the French King and had read the answer of the
Emperor, he was exceadyngelye full of wrath and angery thereat, so that
incontinent he begone a new to war upon the Emperor in the year of our
Lord a M.D.xxvij. causing his see robbers and other to do all the myschefe the
could both by water and by land.

And when the Emperor saw this he did his best to wythstand him and to
preserve his pour subjects and because he would stop his tyrany that ye
Christen blood should not be shed, he sent to the French King to have peace
and truse, saying he had spilt the christens blood long I noughe, wherefore he
prayed him of truse, which the French king granted at ye last, and so the
truse was proclaimed the first day of July. Anno. Dn^i. M.D.xxvij. for.viij.
years Not long after this the French King made alyaunce with the Venecia^s;
to the intent they should also be hurtefull and noisome to the Emperor; and had
consented, and agreed together, to be seage Naples, which was in the year of
our Lord a M.D.xxix. because they would drive the they would drive the
Emperor Emperor out of Italye. But God did ordeyne it other wise, for their
hole Army was destroyed; some through Pestilence dyed, another part were
stayne among which was the Lord Lotrechte their Chiefest Captain and Lord
of the hoale Army, with many other ge^tyl me^ so that very few escaped ageine
in to Frasice: Thus was the frenchemen with all them that took tyer parts,
most shamefullye destroyedde, where by men may well mark it was no another
but the very plage of God for their wicked Imaginacions.

When the Frenchekynge saw this he held him more styller the^ to foore, and
consentedde to have peace and quietness, where upon ye frenchekynges Mother came
to Camerike. An. Dn^i. M.D.xxix. Whose name was Ludouica, and met there with
the Emperoures Aunte Lady Margrit, and there was moved on both sides many wait
and difficultye matters and so at the last the concluded on both sides to have
peace, which was proclaimed in Camerycke, the.v. day of August a M.D.xxix.

Now men hoped that this peace should continue and not be broken, for as much
as the French Kings Mother had consented thereto and was partly cause thereof.
But with in short space thereafter that is to say in Anno. M.D.xxxv. When the
Emperor was purposed to go war upon the Turk, he thinkyng yt the peace
should never be broken again between the french King and him, and also
preparyng all things for his Journey the therward to sight against the Turk
the utter enemy of al Chrinstendo^e, and to deliver the Christen Prisoners
which were in his hands most cruelly handeled, where upon the Emperor taking
his Journey from Spain toward Afryka, for to put the Turk to flight and
so he did and wan the hoole Kyngedome of Tunis and put Barbarossa to flight ye
which is the most Tyraunte that ever was to the Christen people.

The frenchekynge markynge that the Emperor was far of out of his land, his
falshed and disceyte to declare that lay hyd within him, raised a great Army
and took his iourneye toward Italy and took the town Genua with much land,
and many other towns he destroyed with the cou^treyes round about them, and
burnte Sauoye. The Emperor hearing this, is incontynente with all speed come
back into Italy and drove the king out with all his Armey. And he made all
his wippes in a redynes with all other ordinance ready against the next
Summer, to set ageane upon the Turk, the which the frenchkyng had let many
times to sore for the Emperor knew well that there was a great leage between
ye fre^ch-Kynge and the Turk, against him and all Christendom.

What should a man say to this wicked King, whom the Bishop of Rome callethe
the most Christen King, but his deades declare him to be the most
vn-Christen King, like as the Bishop of Romes worckes declare him to be
very Antechriste. For these two, that is to say the fre^ch-Kynge and the
Bishop of Rome has taken upon them the name of Christen Rulers, but yet there
be nomen moore against Christ's doctrine and his flock then these men are.
But the book of wysdo^ say the. Eccle.xlj. The children of the ungodly are
abhomynable children; and so are they that keep company with the ungodly. Thus
the french-kinge has done wyckedly to forsake his God, and has vaynely
Imagyned to trust unto the Turk for help and aid, and has not rather turned
him from his wicked ways and deades, unto the almighty God, for the man is
blessedde in dead that has his hope and trust only in God the Lord of all
Lords, and king of all kings, for a king is not helped only by his great
power, and a strong man is not delyue red by his stre^gthe. For it is god yt
gives ye victory. Therefore cursed in any man or i^ any creature. But blessed
and happy is ye man, whose help is ye God of Jacob, and whose hope stands
upon ye Lord his god.

Now to proceade forth. The Emperor wtin short spare after in the year a
M.D.xxvi. came to Rome in Lent, where he received the holy Sacrament, and
washed the feate of.xii. pour men a also gave them food and rytche gifts
both gold a silver, whereat his enemies marueled, to le ye goodness of the
Emperor. And the morrow after the Emperor came before the French
Embassadoure and Legate and has spoken these words followynge openly that all
men might hear them.

I believe and know of a (...) that it is not known, how that I have always
is spoken and labored for peace, and quietness that we should be of one mind al
Christendom together, and that there soulde be no war among the Christen,
but that we should al together war upon the Turk the enemy of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And it is also well known how that this Fraunces the French king,
has been always froward and ouertwart, using always no another against me
nor against my forefathers, but craft and dissimulacio^, as against Marimilia^
and likewise Fardina^ders, to whom he never kept any promise that he made to
the^. For Marimilianus last words were these, when that he made peace the last
time with the frenchekynge: Behold (says he this is now ye leauenth time yt I
have made peace with him, the which never kept any of his promyses.

Also it is well known, how that he did break his promise at Naples and at
Nauerne contrary to his oothe and couenauntes. and what confederacion and
alyaunce that he has made with ye Turk, and how he aided him when we were
with our great Army in Hungry, where as God bid give us great vyctory, forwe
put to flight an excedyng great number of Turks, and also flew many of them.
And so I desired three times of him prayenge him earnestly, that he would help
and aid me, as all Christen Princes duty is. To drive the Turk out of
Christendom, and help and defend the poor Christen, from his cruel tyranny.
And so he made me an answer that it was not possible for him to help or aid
me any thing, because of his great mysfortune that he has had.

The second time, I have desired him of his aid and help against the Turk,
to the which he made answer again, that he could not in so short time
deliver such a great Army. The third time, yet ones again when I should
tourney to Tunis I prayed hi to le^d me some of his shyps, and he made answer
ye he might not do so because he was at peace and united with Barbarossa and
become together fre^des. And above this I gat certain letters ye was taken,
which came from Barbarossa to ye French king ye which I have yet in store.

And all this has he done because he would have Myllaene. Yet never thelesse
I delivered his Children that were pledges for him, francke and free because he
should never desire again any tytyll to Myllane but be contented that I might
quyetly keep it with Italy and Florence.

And because noma^ should think that I have consentedde to do this out of any
fear, he knows how that I sent moore than. L. thousand men of war befoore
Tunis, for to help a king to his kyngdo^e again which was driven perforse the
route, and should not I have been able to have brought forth twyse so many men
of Arms to defend my self with all thoro we gods help. And farther I
say. If it be so that the french King will point to make Camp against Camp
wepened or vnwepened by land or by see that we may try it together I am and
shall be always troy to perform it, because that for his vnryghteousenes sake
no moore simple and innocente Christian blood should be spylte. And because he
should take hear in good counsel, and make his answer discretely, therefore
I give him.xx. days truse. And with this I make an end saying ones, twyse
and thryse, peace, peace, peace I desire. From that time forth the french king
began again to burn, rob, and destroy the Emperoures land and pryncipally
ye Dukedom of Sauoye, and so sone as the Emperor hard that, he sent his
warryers forth withal, again into his land, and has almoost marred and
destroyed al Pykardye, and took and won Guisen, and He sdyne and likewise
burnte the Cowne of sint Poule, and murtheredde all that was therein. And
likewise got the Emreroure Monstrust and burnt all the Town, and wend from
those to Terwin, to give assaute thereto but when the french king perceived
that his land went thus to wrack and was destroyed, knowing that the
Empetoure was a gentyl prince and easy to entreat, desired of him truse,
because ye war should sease incontinent, the which be obtained, for the
Souldyars were sent home incontinent and truse proclamedde, through the which
many noble men desiring and prayenge that there might a peace be made, which
was concluded at Genua so strong that men thought it would never have been
broken, but a continued for ever, where upon the Emperor made and prepared al
things redye to set a fresh upon the Turk both by water and by land, thyn
king now that he had surely peace for ever with the frenchkyng.

But the wynd turnedde yet a geane contrary, for the frenchekynge sought with
great dylyge^ce to begin a new war again and secreetly concluded with
diverse princes and specially with ye Duke of Cleave against the Emperor who^
he had brought thereto with his flatterye and fair promyses, and made him to
bring in suddenlye his warryars into Braband, which did there much harm
through a Captain that they had named Martyne of Rossen, which thought to
destroy much of the Emperors land. But God which defe^deth always the
ryghteous, has broken all the aliances that was made and conspyred against the
Emperor so that now they that were the frenchekynges friends have lytil pour
to help him and sum be become his enemies.

Of the which number the great Turk was one, with whom he had made the most
wicked and vngodlyest co^sedaracio^ ye ever was hard being between an Heathen
Tyrant and one ye has taken upon him to be the most Christen King.

Therefore I fear ye the curse of God hang the over him and his realm which
is spoken by the prophet (saying.) Woe be unto them that go down into Egypt,
seakynge for help of the Heathen, and trust in horses, and confort them selves
in Charettes, because they be many, and in horsemen, because they be lusty and
strong. But they regard not the holy one of Israel another do they seake help
and comfort of hyme ye is ye almighty god.

Therefore set us all that will be Christen people, pray together to our Lord God,
ye he will preserve the noble Emperor and our most victorius King, with all
there noble Captains and Soldiars with all other their subjects that it will
please yt living God to give the^ ^^ctory over there enemies, ye we may have a
spedy end of ye war and ye we may live in peace and rest all the days of
our life after, and also al Christendom the which grant to us the Father,
Son and holy Ghost. So be it.

Imprinted at London in Botulphe lane and translated out of Doutche into
English or Thou Mayler.


