The cruel assault of Gods Fort.
By Edward the sixth, of England king,
A Fort was made gods truth to shield
In whose life time / by good rulyng,
Both friend and so to it did yield.
But when for sin of his own flock,
The Lord in wrath took him away:
Leaving the Fort to his next stock /
The enmies then sought out their pray.
Then blew up tru^pets of Papists sou^de
Soldiers to call / and wages gave:
Come who so would / was armed round,
None they refusde, but dressed them brave.
The field was pytcht of Papists part,
With corned caps, tippets, and gowns.
Their ordnaunce lay ready in cart,
To beat the fort of gods truth down.
The general Gardner / brave and stone
And Captain Boner, marched forth amain,
Bourne with standerd, cried out,
Al arm / al arm, our shauelinges train.
The Ancient which that Bourne bare /
Were fierce wolves teeth, with blood besprent
Fire and Faggot, which did declare,
Their ravenous hearts to Christians meant.
Then doctor Martin, as clarke of army
With Doctor Story, the master Gonner:
These two in office, were as trusty,
As Gardner, Bourne / or bishop Bonner.
A cry was made, throughout the host:
With fire and hemp, all to destroy:
Where ever they were, in all the cost,
That did the Popes power seek to noye.
The Fort thus sieged on every side,
With cry so fierce, to kill them all:
^^^te for fear durst not abide,
But from Gods Fort to them did fall.
Then might ye hear the Canons rore /
Which Bourne and Watson falsely shot:
Yield, yield these cryde, from heretics lore
Or batter we shall / both wall and fort.
No / no (quoth they within the Fort)
We yield us not Gods truth to stayne:
Though you destroy us in this sort /
God shall our Fort / with force maintain.
With that they all the Fort within /
With sighs and sobs to God out cryde:
Thou Lord of hosts, way not our sin,
But aid thy flock so woe betyde.
For though with sum, we causde this day
That our good king you should thus take:
Yet Lord with bitterness of soul we pray,
Strength us against this firye lake.
This done they blowde a chereful blast,
Unto the soldiers in the Fort:
Arm ye / arm ye, in all the have,
Our enmies now to Fort resort.
The Ancient which was spread on wall,
Had a white Lamb, with red spots thick:
And in gold letters were these words all,
Why do ye Saul's, against me kick?
Forth came Rogers, Hooper and Sanders
Upon the walls the Fort to fend:
We yield not (said they) to such destroyers,
But fight we will unto the end.
To these Steven Gardner, gave onset,
And laid on lode, as wolf on pray:
He took them prisoners, with his false net /
And sent them to the fire straightway.
Then Story the master of the shot /
On Papists rampire brave and proud:
For spilling blood he cared not,
Assault / assault he cryde aloude.
These were no sooner of the wall,
But up lept Rydley and Latimer:
To rescue Gods fort, so nere to fall.
And did with force, the foes encounter.
And bishop Cranmer / though with gyle,
The enmies stole him from the Fort:
Yet boldly fought with them a while,
And followed his mates, in like sort.
Then doctor Weston, at these out shot,
The pellets of Rome, and them did mayme:
So that away they passed not,
But were destroyed with fire and flame.
But Bradford then on wall up lept,
And Philpot eke by him did stand:
Cardmaker and Taylour also up crept,
And these by truth did neytheyr band.
Bishop Boner, on these laid hand,
And to Smithfield sent them in have:
But to the death / these did withstand,
And would not yield to enmies blast.
Then blewe the Papists to assault,
And set a watch about the Fort:
Of knights and yemen to find some fault /
To make them yield after this sort.
And sworen men in every cost,
They did compel to watch and spy:
If any did resist their host /
They must present them for to dye.
The Fort with enmies laid round about,
And all the captains so cruelly slain:
The soldiers thereof with courage stout,
Kept yet the walls with might and maine.
Now scale the walls (quoth Boner then)
Behold the captains we have slain:
Ransacke the Fort / destroy all men /
Both women and children let none remain,
Then scaling lathers were up rearde,
And John Auales on them with targe:
His knees had crosses because he fearde,
The steps would break and hang him large
Up came Beard, by Vales his man /
Armed al round as dronkardes use:
His head was closde, with goodale can /
And in his hand a Tauerners cruse.
But they in Fort / did with them play /
And cast them bribes, which made the^ yield,
They striving who should have the pray,
Fought one with other in their own field.
Yet battred was this Fort full sore /
With vehement shot on Papists part:
The walls they bet still more and more /
But yet the fortmen would not start.
Then pusshed the Papists with their pikes,
The Hargabusses shot out amayne:
And dyms the air and many strikes /
Of them that did the Fort sustain.
The Holberts and the Bowmen eke,
Came preasing toward the Fort with speed:
These were the rakehels that did seek,
To have men's goods playde Cains deed.
There might ye see the Fort about.
Great streams of blood and bodies slain.
The hands of all the host throughout,
With blood of Saints they did them stain.
In this assault the infants out cryde,
And eke their mothers as wydowes left,
To see their friends before them did /
And al their goods from them bereft.
Though thus the Fort, was almost gone,
By cruel assault of enmyes bold:
Yet some within the Fort alone,
To God did cry / Lord keep thy hold.
The^ God did send his slave Death down
Into the Papists host among:
Which slew the chiefest in all the town /
And greatest captains in the throng.
By this great stroke of mighty Jove,
The vehement force of Papists fell:
And sent this Fort (which is his Love)
A godly captain to keep it well.
Which when in Fort she did appear /
And flag of truce spread in her hand:
Aloud she cried, cease now your ire /
And yield to me right heir of England:
Then scattred were the Papists host /
Their flags of fire to ground did fall.
Their flaming brandes which often they tossed,
Were clean out quentch at our Queen's call.
Cry was then made to God on hye /
Of all the soldiers in the Fort:
Oh praise the Lord for victory,
In helping us after this sort.
Now yield (they cried) our brethren dear,
Which have against Gods truth so stood:
Behold our Queen does profer here,
To grant ye peace to change your mood.
Which if her clemency you refuse /
And plead not for your lives grant:
The law of arms she must needs use /
On such as are to her repugnaunt.
Yield, yield therefore ye chief captains
Example give to all your host:
Or else will God revenge with pains /
The blood of those whom ye have roast.
And all ye Christians of this England /
Your trumpets sound to Gods hie praise,
On Gods head set a Bay garland /
For your triumph of all these fraies.
Yield now your lives after such sort,
As God may not this Fort so plage.
Strength now your selves in this gods fort
That ye yield no more to enmies rage.
So God will spare us our Queen long,
So God will make our land increase:
So God will build our fort so strong,
That no enmies dare to it prease.
To this say al right Christen men,
God save our Queen. Amen. Amen.
(...). ^ I. A.

Imprinted at London by John Awdeley, dwelling by great S. Bartelmewes beyond
Aldersgate.


