ECCLESI. XX.
Remember Death, and thou shall never sin.
YE Adams brood and earthly wightes, which breath now on the earth.
Come dance this trace, and mark the song of me most mighty Death.
Full well my might is known and seen, in all the world about,
When I do strike, of force they yield, both noble, wise and stout.
Of living things which breath and bray, I reign as puisant Prince,
No sooner take they life, but I, pursue it to convince.
In Mothers womb the Babe I slay, in birth sometime I strike,
No place nor state may me exempt, to me all is a like.
The Prince with Beggar to grave I take, the young eke with the old,
^^e wise grave men with fools and dolts, I lodge them in one fold.
(...) courtly Dames, and town wives fine, though never so trim they be,
^^th Malkins, Sluts, and sloyes they trudge, in grave I make the^ gree
The seming brave fine Courtiers, which square it out in gate,
With Hob and Lob I close in clay, and bring them to one state.
The tchuffe with tchinckes and ruddocks red, wherein is all his trust,
In moment I with mysers poor, do hyde him up in dust.
The Judge severe, and Counceller sage, with me they all must trudge,
I force not for their hye estate, nor fear their hate or grudge.
I waiting am on every one, as shadow with body am I.
And when the mighty God does bid, I slay them by and by.
Sometime in game, sometime in mirth, sometime in sleep I kill,
In eating, drinking, and in sport, I many times them spyll.
No place so sure, no food so good, no exercise at all,
Me Death can bar, but at Gods beck to earth I make them fall.
And yet behold how each one thynckes, to escape me and my dart,
Though never so nere I come them to, and grype them to the heart.
My Minstrell Sickness pipes each hour, by aches, stitches and cramps,
It sou^des my dance still in their ears that they must to my damps.
The lusty Brute with snuffing looks, by manhood does hope ^o live
The Coward out, yt fears to fight, though wounds him daily grieve*
The Coward again thinks long to live by sleeping in a whole skin,
With shunning wars and foreign broils, which countries often be in.
The rytch by gold, the wise by wit, do think to shift me of
To Beggars that starve, and careless fools, but yet them selves they scot*
For one with other I take them all, fear they, or fear they not,
The desperate tool and fearful one go all into my pot.
The youthful Lads by stout courage, think to drive me away
To crooked age, yet many times by riot I often them slay.
And old old age hopes still to live, by keepyng a merry heart,
With youthful sports and wanton toys, though it be to their smart.
Yea my nere Syb and Beldam Trot, that croompled is for age,
By youthly tire and wanton tricks, thinks deaths power to aswage.
It makes me laffe often times to see, their gate, their looks, their walk,
How halting tryps, and fine wryde iestes they counterfeit in talk.
They would ine blere and make folks think, they were to young for me,
And yet forsooth if stripped they were, fair Notamies might ye see.
What shall I say to these old folks, when nature cannot them teach?
By fu^bling spech and pains each where, which death at hand does preach.
Nay usual is it with all states, though senses all be gone,
And I at hand to strike the stroke, yet think they not thereon.
Thus all would shift and drive me of, though I them follow and trace,
And daily send unto the grave all states before their face.
But fools they are that dread me so, which cannot be avoided,
Sith God the maker of all things to life has so me joined.
Yet need they not to shun me so, if all were wayde aryght,
For I the worldly griefs do end, which vex them day and night.
Yea and besides the guide am I, to heaven and joyful blys,
Of those that virtuously do live, and fear to do amys.
And to these folk welcomde am I, though never so sharp I pere,
Because with Christ they shall then reign, and see his glory clear.
But as for those that wicked be, and so still lead their life,
Good cause they have to dread me sore, for I begin their grief.
With death I bring an endless woe, which never shall have end,
Wherefore if me you would not dread, your ill lives then amend.
For precious is the death of those, which dye in Christ their Lord,
Who has saved them from sin and hell, and ended their discord.
FINIS.
Quoth Ioh. Awd.

IMPRINTED AT LONdon by John Awdeley, dwelling in little Britain street
without Aldersgate. 1569. The.xxx. of April.


