CERTAIN SELECTED SPIRITVALL EPISTLES Written by that most Reverend holy man
Doctor I. de Auila a most renowned Preacher of Spain

Most profitable for all sorts of People, who seek their salvation.

Benedictus Deus qui talia dona dedit hominibus.
Blessed be Almighty God, who has given such gifts to men.
At Rouen by the widow of Nicolas Courant.

Permissu Superiorum. 1631.

THE PREFACE.
IT is an excellent saying, which we find in that divine book entitled THE
FOLLOWING OF CHRIST: The felicity, which is to be obtained in this life,
consists not, in the being able to prevent or avoid miseries, and crosses,
which daily occur; but in the patient and humble acceptance and sufferance
thereof. For indeed, there is no such thing as the not being encountered and
crossed, some in one kind, and some in another; some, by desolations of mind;
some by infirmities of body; some by want of temporal means, some by
unkindness of friends; some by detraction against fame, some by suites in
law; and some by persecution for Religion. For these things lie as so many
snares, whereby to intrappe our patience, in this great Hospital of the world;
and some men are subject to more of them, and some to fewer; but there is no
man, who at one time or other, is not subject to some. The business therefore
must be, to supporte both such as Almighty God, shall either send for the
punishment of our other sins, or for the greater purification and perfection
of our own souls; or for the aduanceme^t of his own glory otherwise; and
such others also, as for the greater punishment of wicked men, he shall permit
them to inflict upon us; and to supporte them so, through the favor of God, as
not only thereby not to forfeite heaven in the next life, but to enable us in
the midst of all our miseries, to obtain a kind of heaven, even in this. For
I account it to be a kind of heaven in the crowde of trouble, not to be
ouerweighed with the burden, but to accept, and be content with the good will
of God, and to aspire toward an imitation of the Passion of Christ our Lord,
and to know and feel in our very hearts, the substantial and sauorie truth of
that divine saying of S. Iean Chrysostom: It is a more glorious thing for a
man to suffer for Christ, then to reign with him.

But now, as this doctrine is divine, so the lesson, whereby we are to learn
it, is hard; and therefore we shall do well to use the best means, we can, to
take it out. And for my part I must confess, that I have never met in any
Author, with so many, so weighty, so easy, and practicable considerations,
and inducements toward not only the patient, but even the joyful sufferance
of all those crosses and afflictions, which can find the way to us in this
world, as are delivered by FATHER AVILA in his Epistles; whereof I have
selected the chief, and choice, and made them speak with our tongue; to the
end, that we may be the better taught, to bear those burdens of affliction,
which may otherwise prove too hard and heavy, for our soft shoulders of flesh
and blood. And I am confidently persuaded, that besides the entertainment,
which the reader will find therein otherwise, for his delight and gust; it
will be impossible for him, to have had, or have a cross of any kind, for
which he shall not here find store of remedies, and comforts brought to his
hand. So that he will owe a diligent, and devout reading to this Collection; if
not for the Author's or Translator's sake, yet at least, for his own.

A LETTER OF THE Author to a dear friend of his.
He shows how great blindenes it is to loose eternal bliss for temporal
delights.

THE peace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be ever with you. I received a letter of
yours some days past, written in Seuill; whereof though I were very gladd, yet
should I have rejoiced much more, to be there to enjoy your conversation, which
I have so long desired. I beseech Christ, that we may see one another in
heaven; where all our desires will be at an end; possessing him who is the true
fulfilling of them all.

Sir I would extremely desire, that the smo^ke of these temporal things, did
not blind our hearts, and hinder us from the sight of such as are eternal.
What an ill exchange does he make, who Looses that which may be interiourly
possessed, and which indeed is the true fruit; for that which is exterior,
and which is noe better then the shell, or crust. Woe be to that man, who has
more care of his goods, then of his conscience; and who puts the soul in
hazard, to secure the life of his body. Not so, Genesis 39.
o you men, not so, but rather as Joseph did; who to secure his chastity,
left his vper garment in the hands of her, who would have robbed him of that
treasure. It is the sentence of Christ our Lord, Matthew. 5.
that if our right eye be an occasion to us of sin, we must pluck it out and
cast it from us. The right eye, is the love which we carry toward goods, or
honor, or life, or friends; which, if by the inordinate abundance thereof, it
be an occasion to us of sin, we are to estraunge our selves from it, and to
cut it of, least otherwise we be estraunged from God.

We must love nothing so well, as that we may not tread it under foot, if
it hinder us from being well with God. There is noe such thing, as holding
freindship with that sovereign king, but only such a man as will confess,
that heaven is had very cheap, though it should chance to cost him his life.
They who will think to comply both with their own proper affections, and with
the love also of our Lord, are mightily deceived. For these men love not God,
but so as they also love many other things, whereas God will be loved, above
them all.

O error of the sons of men; and who has thus deceived them, and who shall
be able to vnbeguile them? who has plucked out their eyes to lead them
blinde-fould, in a ringe like another Sampson, Judges. 16.
living according to the suggestion of vice, and in the displeasure of our
Lord? Who shall be able to make them understand that they are straungely
deceived in seeking riches in the first place, and virtue, in a second. Yea and
if it so fall out, that both of them cannot be kept, men are content to be
without virtue, so that they may not be without money. And thus put they
light, into the place of darkness; and darkness into that of light. O that our
Lord would open the eyes of these men! and how bitterly would they weep,
seeing how badd exchaungers they had been? Is not perhaps the freindship of
God, which is obtained by the exercise of virtue, of more value, then all the
rest of things, which can be wished? Are not perhapps the commandments of God
more worthy to be desired then thousands of gold and silver? where shall we
find a true pair of scales to weigh every thing out, for just as much as it
is; that so we may not thus for ever live in lies.

Men fly as far as they cann from being deceived, in their temporal states.
But why fly they not with greater diligence from being deceived in some what
else, which imports them more? They complain if they be cosened in half the
worth of any thing, which they are to buy; yea and there is noe means to
appease them, but they will needs be seeking a remedy against that abuse. And
yet they are very ready, to loose their souls for a little gain, or for an
act of murmurring, or some other sin. And we cannot so much as prevail with
them, to the end that they may have some feeling of it, and say I am deceived,
let so great a wrong as this, be removed.

That soul, O men which you are loosing, is more worth then all that which can
be given you, in exchange thereof; what do you get by gayning it all, if you
loose your selves alone? what does it profitt you to see every body good, if
withal your selves be wicked? what does it profitt you, to gain and grow
great in point of fortune, with prejudice to your souls? and to be mighty in
the sight of men, but not to be acknowledged in the sight of God?

The day will come, infallibly it will come, when God will destroy all them
who work iniquity; and for what then will that serve, to which they have most
pretended here? O day of giving accounte for all the days of our lives, how
little art thou considered, and therefore how little art thou feared. And men,
in the mean time run with the bridle loose, and in their teeth, for the
gathering of this little miserable flower which so quickly Fades, and they see
with their very eyes, that it is even slipping from between their fingers; and
yet, there is never want of some body, who has a mind to hold fast this
world, whilst still it is flying speedily from them.

Sir our true repose, and our kingdom, is not to be had in this world. What is
this life, but a way from our own houses reaching to the place, where thieves
desire to cut our throats; since every day we walk on more and more, and it
is noe whether else, but toward death. Now who would be so absurdly
inconsiderate, as that when he were to be conducted to execution, and that much
have were used to dispatch him, the delinquent should yet, fall into great
aflictio^, because lie were not sumptuously cladd; or who in such a case, would
attend to busy himself about hearing some relation of the lives of others, or
would delight himself, with looking upon some public entertainment and
pastime? Or would put himself to study what the reason might be, why men put
not of their hatts to him, with a good graces And yet how many do we see
(through our sins) deprived of all sense, who (goeing, as we all do, to that
resting place of their graves; yea and running faster thither, then any arrow
flies out of a bow,) do yet detain themselves foolishly, some upon fine
clothes; others, upon a certain paltry smoke of honor, and others, who grow
angry at the heart, because just that which they desire, is not done. And yet
those very things which they desire, are neither such as help them to obtain
true felicity, not hinder them from falling into eternal misery.

What in the name of God, is this which has so blinded us, as that we should
make Time of Eternity, and Eternity of Time? For so have men despised that
eternal bliss, which God has prepared for them in heaven, as if it were but
temporal; and so have they lodged all their love upon this transitory world,
as if this were the thing which is eternal. How few are there on earth, who
pass through it, like strangers, as S. Peter says we must; 1. Pete^ 2.
and who fasten their hearts upon the Future, as upon their City, and true
place of rest? Let the tongue say what it will, but our works proclayme us to
be Citizens of this world, since we extremely desire, to be accommodated, and
exalted here, and so take noe care though we should be but as strangers in
the next world. Perhaps we are grown to be of opinion, that the kingdom of
heaven may be obtained without any great labor, or care. But the truth is,
that even they who take most pains, will find that still they have enough to
do, and that still they must continue in doubt, whether it will serve the
turn, or not; and what then will become of the rechlesse person, but that he
will be sure to loose it?

Our life is a very match of wrestling, and he who wrastles as the Apostle
says, must wholly untie, and dis-intangle himself that he may gain his
crown. 1. Cor. 9.
We are running for a wager, and the Prize, is noe less then the kingdom of
heaven. Yet not all they, who run, are to have this Prize, but they only,
who run best. What a madd man were he, who should shackle his feet, and
then think that he were to carry the Prize, which must be given to that man
who runs a pace. And it is not a less absurd strange thing, that a man
should ensnare his soul, with the heavy aflictio^s of flesh and blood, which
permit him not to fly up, toward God.

God commaundes that to him who should strike thee, upon one of thy cheeks,
thou should turn the other, Ma^^ 5.^
which is as much as to say; that not only thou must not revenge thy self,
for the injury received, but that thou art to keep thy heart prepared, to
endure an other, if it be given, and still if another blow be offered to turn
the other cheek; that is, to prepare thy self for enduring injuries, more and
more, in such sort, that the other may be sooner weary of doing ill, then thou
of suffering it, for thy goodness is to be greater, then his malice. But how
then shall he be able, to make a speedy course in this way, who is fettered
in the chains of worldly Honor which requires that we revenge the injuries
which are done us. For as S. Gregory says, Noe man feels the weight of
dishonor, but he who loves his own honor. And therefore if this love be not
laid a side; how shall we be ever able to run.

If God command that we must rather dye then committ a mortal sin, how
shall we be able to comply with his will herein, if we cast not of the
chains of that inordinate love which we carry to this life. Covetousness is a
Chain, which permitts us not to live in good neighborhood with others. Envy
is a Chain, Anger is a Chain, and the love of our selves is a Chain, and
root of all the rest. What a sottish thing is it therefore, for a man to
think that he, who affects those things which his own will suggests, is
able to run that carriere, wherein the servants of God must run, and who
because he contents himself, thinks that God will also be contented with it,
and who living after his own fashion, will yet conceive, that he may live so
with God.

Away, away, let us awake at last, for the love of God let us awake, before
hellfire awake us. And let us know, that the kingdom of God is a hidden
treasure; and that he who finds it must bestow all that he has, upon the
purchase thereof, esteeming himself more happy and rich in this alone, then in
all things else. A man who has a mind to gain this kingdom, is not bound to
become bankrupt, or to be a beggar, but that which he needs is, that for the
love of this kingdom, he cut of all occasion of inordinate love which he may
carry to riches, and to honor, and to a delicate and delightful life, and in
fine to his own proper will. Christ our lord will have us all naked, that so
we may run on apace to him, who dyed naked for us. That man is naked, who
houlds his life, and his honor, laid under, and in subjection to the will of
Christ our Lord, doing what Christ will, and not that, which is suggested by
pleasure, or honor; and who makes as light account of these things, as if he
had them not; and is ready to cast them all into a light fire, rather then to
go against the freindship of our Lord God, by committing so much as one
sin. And though perhaps a man may attend to the improuement of his estate; it
must not be for the love, which he carries to it; but because God commands it.
If he live, it must not be because he loves life, as making that the end of his
care; but he must keep it, for the service of God; and sooner throw it away,
then offend him. If he be to aparell himself, he must not take counsel with
vanity how he may be esteemed for his clothes; but with the word of our Lord
which commands that we use them not with superfluity, but for the supply of
just necessity. And so this kind of man, does not hold himself to be his
own, but as one who belongs wholly to God. He cares not, for what himself
desires, but for that which God commands. He lays all things, and himself
withal, to be trodden upon, under foot; for so he may hold God above his
head. God commands and he obeyes; God directs and he submitts; and as the
shadow follows the body, so he follows the will of God.

These are true sons of Obedience, to whom it is promised, that they shall
sit at the table of God; And that, as the true son suffered by Obedience,
and entered so into his kingdom, so the adopted sons must also enter in,
by the same means. There is noe color of reason why a man, for having obeyed
the orders of the great Turk, should go to ask a reward of the Christian
Emperor; and yet if he should it would be easy to make him this answer, Let
him pay you, whom you have served And so will God answer them, who lived
here in obedience to their own appetites when they shall ask him that reward
of glory.

Great thanks do we owe to Christ our Lord, for having warned us of this so
long before, that so if we will think thereon, we may not find our selves
deceived by him, who so dearly loved us. His aduertissement is this. Not
every one who says to me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven; but he shall enter in who does the will of my Father, who is in heaven.
What need have we of any more, since the word of Christ our Lord can never
fail? And who is that man, who will not awake with this. For the question is
not now, concerning any earthly kingdom, but the kingdom of heaven; since noe
man enters thither but he who shall have done the will of God. Let this
therefore, be our study, let this be our discourse, let us counsel men to
this, and let us in fine observe vigilantly, if we do any thing which carries
not true conformity, with the will of our Lord. And because our own
watchfulnes will not suffice, let us call upon our Lord, that he may assist
us. Let us acknowledge our own misery, and let us cordyally implore his
mercy. Our lord who must help us is noe such person, as that he can deny
himself to such as seek him, with their hearts. And if we did indeed knock and
call upon him, infallibly he would anfweare and open to us. And he knocks
indeed; who knocks both by prayer, and by the practice of virtue. And he shall
be heard when he calls, who was content to hearken to his neighbor, when he
was called upon by him; and who assisted him in his necessities, and who
pardoned his errors, and who neither did ill to him, nor refused patiently to
suffer ill from him.

This is the generation of them who seek our Lord, Psalm. 13.
and they shall find him. Let us therefore go, and run this carriere. For
happy are those labors, which are endured for the obteyning of this Crown.
And they shall soon pass away, but their reward is to last for ever. Let us
lay up our treasure there. It will be highly enough for us, to possess God;
and let us not loose our time, for it was not given us to be lost. But let us
live, to the end that we may ever live; and so we shall pass on, from
contumely to glory, from poverty to plenty, from banishment to our own
country, which we shall possess through the eternities of all eternities. Amen.

A letter to a certain person, wherein is treated of the Love of God toward
man, and of that which he is wont to do toward the releife of our misery.
THE Infant Jesus who was borne for our good, make you partaker of the
blessings, which he brings, since he took those miseries upon him to which we
were subject; I beseech him to give you that lively fire of his love, wherein
you may burn up with a quick flame; since to kindle this love in us, he came
into the world; so poor, and so frosen with cold. How much more cold this
Infant suffers, so much more warm does he cloth our hearts toward the love
of him. And by how much the more, we love him, so much the more do we desire
to suffer for him. For love flies from taking ease; as from a thing which is
very contrary to the intention and end thereof. For whilst others are seeking
for liberty, and delight, he who loves abhors this, and desires to be
eternally a slave, and to be ever laboring for whom he loves.

I pray you tell me, who constrained Almighty God to become man? noe other
thing but only Love: Who constrained him (since there was noe remedy, but that
he would become man) that he must needs be borne in so hard and so bitter a
time of the year, and in a country where he was a stranger, and insteede of a
house, that it must needs be in a stable; and all this in so great poverty,
and baseness, that he well deserves compassion at our hand. Certainly noe other
thing but Love could have brought him as it were, all bound from heaven, to the
most pure womb of our Blessed Lady, and from that womb, it brought him to
that hard manger, and from thence, to many other afflictions, and so at last
to the Cross, where loving us with much truth of love, he procured that we
might truly love him, as himself had said before. If I be exalted from the
earth, I will draw all things up to my self. John. 3 ^um. 21.
Exalting from the earth, signifies to dye upon the Cross as he did. And then
drew he all things to himself, by means of that mighty love, which he kindled
in the heart of man. For, looking toward this true lover, some have been
content to forgett their countries, and to live in continual pilgrimage;
others to forsake their estates, and to live in poverty; others have offered
themselves to several afflictions, yea and to death it self, desiring rather
to suffer for Christ our Lord then to be delighted any way but in him. And let
his mercy be praised for ever, for that amongst them, who through the noble
love of the Crucifix have forgotten all their fortunes and themselves withal,
your self is grown to be one, not of your self, but by him who works his
own glory in you. And therefore he will not leave you in the weak hands of
your self alone, since he, and not you, begin the work.

You therefore my good lady, may well rejoice, you may rejoice in God, since
you are well protected under a mantle which is both so soft, and so strong.
Strong to defend you from your enemies, and from your self, who are the
greatest enemy you have; and soft or sweet to comfort you in your aflictions;
and to feel them, as if they were his own, and to give you part of his heart,
which is so greatly wounded with love for you. How could our Lord have
expected and drawn, or guarded, or sustained you, if he had not loved you with
great truth of love? How is it possible that your sins would not have
provoked him to wrath, if there had not been as much love in him, as served to
make him shut his eyes toward them, and to open them toward the doing you
favor?

But you will say, How come I to be so happy, as that the eternal king
should love me, and for that reason should endure me, and do me so much
good insteede of ill. I will answer you, when you shall first have told me,
why the fire burns; and why the sun shines; and why the water refreshes; and
why every thing is endewed with his own nature. And if you say the fire burns
because it is fire, so do I also tell you, that because God is God,
therefore does he love us freely, and shows mercy to such as deserve it not.

Our pride has nothing, noe it has nothing, whereof to glory; but the shame,
and dishonor, must be ours, and the honor his. The good we may enjoy; but
the glory must be his. Luke 2
For so the angels sunge when the blessed Infant was borne; Glory be to God
in the heavens, and peace to men of good will. Let us give the glory to the
Lord of us all, for the mercies which we have received at his hand. Glory be to
him, because he has delivered us with so much power, from the hands of them,
to whom we had delivered our selves, with so miserable a resolution. Glory be
to him, who drew us to grace we being out of his grace; and who sustaines us,
and crowns us with mercy, and with many mercies, and who gives us to
understand, that he will finish that in us, which he has begun. For he is
wont to have the charge and care of any business, to whom the honor must
result; and he who reapes the honor, must be content to take the care. And
now since this Blessed Lord of ours, will be glorified in us, and will take the
honor of our victory to himself, he will also take the care of our combatt,
and he will enable us to pass through it to him; and will tie us to himself,
with so strong a knott of love, that neither life, nor death, shall divide us.

He will enable us to look upon himself with open eyes; and to shutt them
toward all other things, and he will imprint himself so fast upon our hearts,
that, for the love and memory of him, we shall forgett not only all other
things, but our very selves also. This will he do, who is so pittious, and
so powerful, and his name is holy, and he it is, who loves us more then we
can either say, or think. For his works exceed all created understanding. To
him be glory for the eternity of all eternities. Amen.

As for that which you ask me, concerning my health, it goes ill with me,
since I am unworthy of sickness. For if I were not very unworthy, our Lord would
not have taken my pain from me, so soon, as he has taken it. And as for
the rest of your letter, I answer that a great fire, by how much the more it
is shutt up and concealed, so much the hotter it burns. Christ our Lord make
you his true and faithful disciple, that so you may, in some sort correspond
to that unspeakable and divine love of his, as I cordially desire of him for
you.

A letter to a reverend and religious person, encouraging him toward the
perfect love of God; and representing to him some means for the obteyning
thereof.
Reverend father, Pax Christi. Since our Lord Jesus Christ is not pleased that,
at this time, I should be where I might enjoy the communication of your self,
and of those my Masters the Collegialls, as I had wished, let his name be
blessed for all, and in the mean time I must endure it with patience. Wherein
yet, me thinks, I shall not be performing a small penance, for it is a hard
thing for us to endure to be divided from the persons whom we love. And in
very truth I did never so much desire to be assisted by you in some things as
now, For I conceive, that it might have proved greatly to the service of our
Lord. But yet since by one that loves, all things are well taken, I will speak
a little to you in absence, till our Lord ordain that we may be present.

Sir I much desire that we may seek God who is our total Good, and that, not
after any ordinary manner, but like some one who seeks a great treasure,
which is much esteemed, and for love whereof he sells all that he is worth;
accounting himself rich in possessing that a lone, insteede of many other
things, which he had before.

O God, o Lord, o thou the true repose of the most interior part of our
souls; and when shall we beginn, I say not to love thee, but at least to
desire to love thee? When I say shall we conceive a desire of thee, such a one
as may be worthy of thee? When shall verity be able to prevail more with us,
then vanity? beauty, then deformity? repose, then restles care? the Creator
who is so richly full, and all-sufficient, before the creature, who is so
very empty, and poor? Dear Lord, and who, at length, will open our eyes,
that we may know that there is nothing out of thee, which either has any
countenance in it self, or is able to give any true contentment to us? who
will make some little discovery of thee to us; that so being all enamored of
thee, we may go, may run, may fly, and may remain eternally with thee?

Woe be to us, for we are extremely far from God, and we are in so little
pain for that distance, as that we can scarce be said to feel it. What is
become of the profound, and tender sighs of those souls, which had tasted
once of God, and were afterward estraunged a little from him? what is become
of that holy affection, Psalm. 31.
wherewith David said: If I shall give sleep to mine eyes, or slumbering to
mine eyelids; till I have found a house. wherein our Lord may dwell. And this
house we our selves are, when we destroy not our selves, by scattering our
hearts upon variety of things, but recollect them to the unity of one desire,
and of one love, and then it is, that we find our selves, and are indeed the
house of God.

For my part, I believe, that he said true who affirmed the cause of our
tepidity to be this, That he who has not tasted yett of God, does not know in
very deed what it is, either to have hunger or saciety. And so we are neither
hungry after God, nor are we entirely satisfied by creatures; but we remain
as certain frozen things, being neither here, nor there;,full of dulnes, and
discouragement; and without all taste of spirit; and fit to cause a vomitt in
his stomach, who likes not servants who are Luke warm, but desires to have
them inflamed with the fire of love. This fire himself brought into the world,
Luke. 22
and desires nothing but that it may burn; and to the end that it may do so,
himself did burn, and was consumed upon the Cross, number. 19.
like that redd Cow, which was carried out of the camp. And this he did of
set purpose, to the end that we, taking of that wood of the Cross upon our
selves, might make a fire, and might warm our selves, and keep correspondence
with so great a lover, with some love of ours, considering how just a thing it
is, that we should be wounded by the sweet dart of love, since we see him not
only wounded, but killed by it.

It is but reason that we be taken by the love of him, who was taken thereby
for us; and delivered over for our sakes, into such fierce hands. Let us enter
into that prison of his love, since he entered into the prison of ours, and
thereby was made as tame, as any lamb, before them who treated him so ill.
And this prison was that, which made him remain quiet upon the Cross. For
more strange, and rude, were those ropes, and prisons of his love, then the
nails and ropes which restrained his person. These later, laying hold but
upon his body, but his love being that which seized his soul. And therefore
let our hearts be tied by his love (that tie of salvation) and let us not
desire such liberty, as may carry us out of his prison. For as he is very ill
in health, who is not wounded, and made sick of his love: so is he very ill at
liberty, who is not restrained in that prison. Let us now resist him noe
longer, let us yield our selves conquered by his arms, which are his
benefitts, whereby he procures to kill us, that so we may ever live with him.
He desires to burn us up, that so the old man who was conform to Ada^ being
consumed, the new man who is conform to Christ our Lord may rise again by
love. He desires to melt our hardness, to the end that as upon metal which is
made liquid by heat, that form is imprinted which is desired by the
worke-man; so we (being softened by that love, which makes us melt by hearing
our beloved speak to us) may be ready, without all resistance, that so Christ
our Lord may imprint upon us, what figure shall be most pleasing to him. Now
that figure, which he desires to imprint, is noe other then that of Love. John.
15.
For Christ our Lord is very Love it self; and he commanded that we should
love one another, as he loved us. Gal. 2
And S. Paul tells us, that we must so be in love with Christ our Lord, as he
loved us; and delivered himself up for us. So that unless we love, we are
unlike him; our countenance has noe resemblance to his, but we are poor,
naked, blind, deaf, and dumb, and dead. For love a lone, is that which
quickenes all things, and love is that, which is the spirituall-cure of our
souls. For the soul without love is just such a thing as the body is, without
the soul.

Let us therefore love, and we shall live, let us love and we shall grow like
God; nay we shall wound him, who is to be wounded by love alone. Let us love
and all things shall be ours, since they are all to serve us, as it is written,
They that love God shall prove well in all things. If we love this love, let
us apply the axe of diligence, to the root of our own self-love, and so
bring this enemy of ours to the ground. What have we of our selves! let us
hedge our selves in God, and make noe account at all of any thing else. Let not
our own losses trouble us, but the losses of God, which are the souls who
depart from him. And because it is a hard thing, for a man to leave to love
himself, let us shed many tears, whereby it may be made easy for us, to dig
up this earth. Let us groan out to God, from the very profoundest of our
hearts, for our tears do even wound almighty God, though they be so weak,
and soft, and though he be omnipotent.

Let us entertain good thoughts, for as David says; Psalm. 38.
My thought is a very fournace. But above all let us place our selves, and not
come quickly out again, but make our habitation, in the wounds of Christ our
Lord, and particularly in his sacred side. For there his heart being divided and
peirced for us, will receive ours into it, and so it will grow warm, through
the greatness of his love. For who can remain in fire, and not grow warm, at
least to some proportion? O that we could dwell there, and how happy should we
be therein? what is the reason that we depart thence so soon? Because we take
not up those five lodgings, in that high mountain of the Cross, where Christ
our Lord was transfigured indeed, though not toward beauty, but toward
deformity, baseness and dishonor: which lodgings are granted to us; nay we are
desired to take them, though those other three tabernacles which S. Peter
desired, were denied to him.

If some little spark of this fire be kindled in our hearts, let us take great
care, that the wind blow it not out, since it is so little. Let us cover it
with the ashes of humility, let us hold our peace and hide it, and so we
shall find it still alive. Leuit. 6
And we must, daily add some wood to it, as God commands his Priests to do.
And that signifies to us the doing of good works: and the not loosing of any
time, and, above all things, we must approach to the true fire which may kindle
and inflame us, and this is Jesus Christ our Lord, in the Blessed Sacrament.

Let us open the mouth of our soul, which is our desire, and let us go all
gaping toward the fountain of living water, for so without doubt, if we take
honey into our mouths, we shall have some taste thereof. And in fine if the fire
be in our bosom, it will heat us. But both before and after we communicate,
we must use some preparations, and reflections; and there cannot be any better,
then a lively Faith, that we go then to receive Jesus Christ our Lord;
together with a consideration, and love of his passion, since that mystery was
instituted, in memory thereof. Being thus refreshed, let us then provide our
selves for our communicating the next time after. For he who only prepares
himself, for the present time, shall seldom find himself well prepared.

Let us therefore run after God, for we may be sure enough, that he will not
fly from us. He is nailed upon the Cross, and infallibly we shall find him
there. Let us conveigh him into our hearts, and then shutt the door, that he
retire not thence. Let us dye to all visible things, since there will come a
time, when we must leave them perforce.

Let us renew our selves in newnes of spirit since we have lived so long
according to the old man. Ephesians. 4
Let us be growing in knowledge and love of Christ our Lord, who is the
sovereign good. And all this is to be obtained by humble prayer, and
perseuerant endeavor. More is received into the soul from without the soul,
then does proceed of the soul. It is more for it to be moved and disposed,
then to work when that is done. And therefore let us remove all impediments,
and compose our own hearts within our selves, expecting Christ our Lord there;
who enters when the gates are shutt, to visit and comfort his Disciples; and
so without doubt, he will come to us. For David says of him, Psalm. 144.
Our Lord heard the desire of the poor, and his ears harkened to the
preparation of his heart. And since Christ our Lord is principally he who must
work this in us, Psalm. 9.
we have noe reason to distrust, but taking courage and confidence in such a
conductor as he is, let us begin to run that course with fervor, which
ends not, but in the obteyning of God.

And if we cannot so soon, make our hearts as subject to us as we would, let
us yet endure it with patience, till God rise up and so our enemies may fall,
and till he awake, and command this sea to calm it self. But then on the
other side, his express pleasure is, that we have confidence in him, even in
the greatest temptations, yea though our little barks should be upon the very
point to sincke.

Let us not therefore be disturbed, or dismayed. Let us not put others to
pain, for the trouble which this continual war gives us, in threatening that
we shall be overcome. The day will arrive, when God will put this country of
ours into peace when we shall sleep, without any body by to wake us. And now,
since this peace cannot be obtained yet, it will be a better course for us, to
go sweating and striving to root out our passions, then to keep our selves
in ease, and to content our selves with leading a tepid life, for the avoiding
of that pain which the seeking of perfection would put us to. But first let
us utterly distrust ourselves, and confide in God, and let us begin in the
name, and power of the omnipotent. And this beginning of ours shall be
humility, which is figured in the ashes that we take; and our end shall be love,
which is figured in the resurrection of our Lord; and so we shall inioye both
a good lent, and a good Easter.

In the mean time I kiss the hands, of all my Masters your Collegialls, and I
recommend my self to their prayers. And say you to them in my name, that I
beseech them that we may love both God, and our neighbors, in great measure.
That so at the day of judgment, we may know well how to answer; and that we
may be made doctors, and be received into the College of the Angels, and
Saints, where we shall ever, study the book of life, which is God himself,
who will for ever stand open before our eyes, that we may know him, and love
him, and for ever be in possession of him. Our Lord Jesus remain, ever with
you. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a certain lady,
He shows, how the hunger of our heart cannot be satisfied but by the spirit
of our lord, who that he may lodge himself therein, requires that it be free
from all affection to creatures. And how, tepid and negligent persons greiue
that spirit, and how the Feast of the holy Ghost is a very good preparation for
the Feast of Corpus Chisti which follows.

MADAM, I desire to know how your heart stands affected at this time. For if
we look to the week, wherein we are, it is belonging to the holy Ghost,
whose property is to give light to the understanding, and to infuse love into
the will; and even strength into the body also; by means of which three
loaves of bread, we shall have some what to set before our friend, who comes
hungry, and weary from the high way. For the hunger that our heart feels (which
walks as it were out of it self whilst it imployes it self upon creatures)
this holy Ghost is wont to take away, and to give us the bread of fulness, and
satisfaction. And woe be to us, if we feel not that great defect, which is in
things created; and if we convert nor our selves to god in our very hearts; at
least now when they are weary, with finding imperfections, and wants, in those
things, wherein we hoped that they might obtain repose.

O my dear God, and when shall we maintain our souls in perfect faith and
purity toward thee, and be sincerely loyal to Jesus Christ our Lord, who is
the spouse thereof, giving him our love, all intyre, and wholly free, from
mingling itself with the baseness of creatures? When shall we be able to
understand this truth, that he who is to own our souls, is Christ our Lord,
and that he created us for himself, and that he only is fit for us? Is it
not enough, that we have tried so often by experience, how ill the world is
wont to serve us; and that our soul could never find any true repose or
peace, but only when coming to know her own misery, and poorenes, it went to
God, and was embraced by him. Is not one of those short fitts of time more
worth then their whole life, who sacrifice themselves to vanity, and to the
confusion of this ignorant world, wherein they live? Or shall it not now at
length be time to say to all things created, I know you not, that so I may
provide a clean and ready place, for the reception of him, who created you all
of nothing?

I am extremely glad, that we have to do with a Holy ghost, which is so very
holy, as that he would not come even to the disciples them selves of our Lord,
till even his own precious body were taken out of their sight. That so we may
know the condition of this holy spirit to be such, as that we must provide a
temple for it where noe other thing may dwell, or else it will not enter there.
And I am highly glad, that you by the grace of this spirit, will have prepared
your self; and that you will have received him, and that you, and he, are well
content with one another. Rejoice you with this Holy ghost, for he is Joy it
felfe. And remember, Ephesians. 4
that the Apostle S. Paul requires us, not to contristate the holy spirit of
God, whereby we are marked out, for the day of redemption, which is of the
judgment of the latter day.

He contristates this Spirit, who with a dull and dejected heart, goes faintly
and negligently about his service, and who does things, which displease this
most sovereign guest, who as himself is fire, so will he have his servant
full of fervor, and requires that he go about his work, with great life. And
that he ever be casting on the wood of good works, and blowing it with holy
thoughts, that so this celestial fire, may not be quenched in us, since our
very life consists in keeping it alive. And so if we maintain this fire in
us, it will maintain us in him, though yet still it be true, that he first
gives us that, which afterward we give to him. So that, in this respect, your
ladyship will have been fedd at a good table, this week; since you will have
celebrated, the Feast of the holy ghost, not according to flesh and blood, as
they do, who use to content themselves ^vith the talk and tumult of great
Festiuities, but you will have celebrated it, in Spirit, according to the
advice of our Lord, John. 4.
who requires to be Spiritually adored.

Let us now consider how it stands with you, concerning the sent and odor of
the Festiuitie, of the Body of our Lord, which is now near at hand. For it
will be an extreme shame, for a Christian heart, not to hunger and aspire,
toward this holy bread, Matthew. 2.
before the Festiuitie it self arrive; since the three kings those wise men of
the Gospel, had a sent of it so far of; yea and the Prophetts, and
Patriarcks had the like a long time, before his Incarnation. What more happy
news can there be, then to see Christ our Lord, pass amongst us in our
streets, and through our hands communicating, and conuersing with men? And to
have him set before our eyes; and to find him (whom neither the whole earth,
nor all the heavens can comprehend) shut within the narrow ^urtaine of the
accidents of bread, and after all ^his, to make his entrance into our unworthy
woeful breasts.

Take heed you hear not this news with deaf ears; but awake your heart, and
require it to be very attentive to so great a favor, and work of God; and
that it instantly cast up, whatsoever other meat it may have swallowed; that
so being full of hunger, it may grow all full, of this celestial bread, where
upon the Angels feed. And bid it be sure, to watch now, that so it may not
then fall a sleep. And since it is the work of the holy Ghost you must beg
grace, whereby you may be able to find the effect of that Feast of the body of
our Lord* which was conceived by the same holy Ghost. And so when that Feast
of his most holy body shall be come, the Holy Ghost will also come with it;
because the Holy Ghost descended into the world, through the meritts of Christ
our Lord. And when his Body shall be given us, we shall receive the holy Ghost,
together with it; according to the rate of that good disposition, which we
shall have. So that one Festiuity must help and be a preparation for another;
and must give us hunger to feed upon the fruit of the other. For it is not
here as it happens in the banquets of this world; which are made by flesh and
blood. Where they who have fedd full, at noone have noe mind at all to their
meat at night. But the soul goes feeding with afresh appetite, from one
Festiuitie to another; and so that is accomplished, Leuit. 26.
which God promised. The threashing of your corn shall last till you go to
vintage; and till the new time of seed, and you shall eat your bread in
abundance.

The goodness of God be blessed, which so liberally prouides for us; and that,
not in any mean fashion, but by giving his very self to us. The son is
given to us, and the Holy Ghost for his sake; and these two persons; giving
themselves; the father cannot choose but be also given. In fine the Father,
the Son and the Holy Ghost are ours. We already begin, even here, that
mutual contract, which we are to perfect in heaven. Let us give him humbly
thanks, for his mercies. Let us prepare our selves for the receiving of new
favors and with hearts exalted above the earth, let us celebrate the
Festiuities of heaven, to the end that we may pass from these temporal Joys;
to those eternal, wherein I humbly beseech our Lord that you may one day see
your self. Amen.

A letter of the Author to a virgin lady, who asked of him what Charity was.
He answeares to her demand; and shows her the Love, and Charity, which she
is to have to God and her neighbors, here on earth, by that love and
charity, whith the saints have in heaven.

DEVOVT spouse of Christ our Lord; you ask me in your letter, what Charity
is; to the end that you may guide you whole life thereby. For the saying of the
Apostle S. Paul is true, 1. Cor 13.
and whatsoever we do without Charity, is nothing worth, though we should
deliver our bodies into the fire. Your demand is very great, and I could
wish, that the same Apostle S. Paul, whose sentence moved you to ask me the
question, might enable me also to make the answer. For I know not what
greater thing then this, you could have asked me, since the sublime part of
all our christian religion, consists in it. 1. Cor. 13.
And as the same Apostle says, He who lives according to it, is a fulfiller of
the whole law. So that you o devout spouse of Christ our Lord, must beseech
the holy ghost, whose proper attribute is Love, that he will teach, and write
that thing in your heart, whereof you ask, as he taught it upon the day of
Pentecost, Act. 2.
when he infused it, into the hearts of his Apostles. For know; that this is
the true teacher of this language, and so as there is none but he.

For alas! what can my tongue which is made of earth, express of that which is
only used with perfection in heaven. This is a celestial language, and they
who speak it perfectly, are the blessed spiritts, which attend to nothing
else, but truly to love our Lord God, with all their strength; and all that
which his pleasure is, that they shall love. How shall I be able to speak to
you of that Love, which is subject to noe interest, and is accompanied with noe
self-love; and looks toward noe other mark, and aims at noe other scope,
but only God? How I say, shall I speak of it, whom my father Adam has left
all wrapped up in mine own interest, and who apply my self, to seek my self
in all things. See how much. For even in those things, which concern the
service of God, we do so hang toward our selves, that many times we
perform them for our own interest, or end. And though the works themselves
be holy, yet the love wherewith we do them, is impure. And the difference
does only consist in this; that when we seek our selves by evil works; our
Love runs through a conduit of clay; and when we seek our selves by good
works, it runs indeed through a co^duit of gould, but in fine it runs
toward our selves. John. 6
I beseech our true doctor Jesus Christ our Lord, ( who ever sought the honor
of his Father; and whose love abased him to this world, not for the
accomplishing of his own will, but his who sent him) that he will vnty my
tongue, to the end that I may tell you some part of that which you demand.
For certainly, if your good desire did not oblige me to let you know what I
have read, my poorenes would oblige me to hold my peace.

And now to the end that you might better understand, what Charity is; and how
you may ever go, employed therein, I could wish you knew, some part of that
Love, which the Blessed spiritts have in heaven, to the end that you may know
thereby, wherein true Charity does consist. For how much nearer we shall come
to that love, so much the more perfect, will our love be, you must know that
the love which is in heaven, does transform the Saints, into the same will
with that of our lord God. For one of the effects of love, as S. Dionisius
says, is, to make the several wills of such as love, to be but one; I mean,
that they should have the same will, and the same not will, which the other
has. And now since the will, and love, which our lord has, is but only of
his own glory, and of his essence which is supremely perfect, and glorious,
from hence it follows that the love of the Saints, is a Love; and will,
wherewith they love, and desire, with all their strength, that our lord God,
may in himself be still as good, as glorious, and as worthy of honor as he
is. And for as much as they see all that, to be already in him, which they can
desire, there follows there upon; Gal. 5.
the fruit of the holy ghost, which is an unspeakable joy, to see him whom
they love so much, to be so full of treasures, and felicity in himself, as
they desire.

If you will have a touch; or at least some little sent of this divine joy,
do but consider how great that joy is, which a good Son receives; in seeing
his father whom he loves much, full of honor, beloved by all, rich,
powerful, hoble, and very much esteemed by the king. Certainly there be
sons so grateful, and well disposed to their parents, as to esteem, that
nothing can be compared to the joy, of seeing their fathers so esteemed; which
reaches indeed so far, as that to whatsoever necessity, or affliction
themselves may be subject, it serves not to deprive them of that great joy,
because they aspire to noe other end but only the honor of their parents.

Now if this joy be so great what do you conceive, that the joy of the Saints
may be; when being transformed by love, into that true lord of theirs, the
universal creator of all things; they shall see him, so full of goodness so
holy and so rich in beauty; and that he is a Lord, and creator, so
infinitely powerful, as that by one only act of his will, all that which is
created has his beauty, and his being, and noe one leaf of any tree, can so
much as wagg, but by his will? Infallibly this is such a joy, as noe eye has
seen, nor ear has heard, nor can such an unspeakable knowledge as this,
ever enter into the heart of any man, but such a one as enioyes and possesses it.

You see here the love which the Saints have in heaven, speaking according to
the poorenes of our understanding. And from this abundant swelling River,
which delights the City of God, does flow that love which the souls in heaven
bear to their neighbors. For as all the desire and joy of the Saints
consists in their seeing God (who is their true love) full of honor, and
glory; from hence they grow to love, with a most fervent love, and to desire
with an excess of appetite, that all the Saints may be as full of glory, and
beauty, as they also are. And they joy in this, to a strange proportion,
because he is honored, and glorified in them whose honor and glory, they
only seek. And in reguard that this is the cause why they love the Saints,
from hence it grows, that they joy more, and do more desire the glory, and
beauty, of the greatest Saints, then of their very selves, because they see
that our Blessed Lord, is more glorified in those others, then in them. And by
this time, you may perceive how fart this holy company is, from self-love, and
from envy, which springs from that root.

But you will tell me perhapps, that it follows from hence, that they will be
subject to some disgust, because themselves are not so grown in sanctity as
others are, since thereby the glory of God would also have increased in them.
This does not follow, considering that first effect of love, which is the union
of two wills in one; for they are transformed into the will of God, and would
have nothing done, but that which their lord will, and they see, that this
will, is the cause why one has more glory then another, and from hence they
grow to be highly content, with that which he assigns to them, as also,
because the diversity of the degrees of glory, in the blessed, does more
beautify the whole City of God, then if they were all, of one rank; as the
music of a vyall, is much the sweeter, because it has diverse strings, and
distinct soundes, then if they were all, but any one. And since it is so, that
because there are different degrees of glory and diverse mansions in the
triumphant Church, 1. Cor 13.
it is of greater beauty, then if they all possessed but one, John 14.
and the same degree of glory, by this they see that our Lord is more honored
in them, then if they were all equal, and consequently they are not troubled
for their own being less in glory, then those others are. For they in their
colors, and others in other colors of a deeper dye, do all concur, to
manifest the infinite goodness, and beauty of him, who made them.

Here you see, Apoc. 22
that river which S. John discovered, in the Apocalypse to issue out of the
throne of God, Apoc. 19.
and of the lamb, whereof all the blessed spirits in heaven drink. And being
inebriated by this love, they sing an everlasting Alleluia admiring, and
glorifying our lord God. And you will have discerned a little of that enamell,
wherewith those precious stones are accompanied, whereupon that temple of the
celestial mountain is founded.

And now after the resemblance of this temple, Apoc. 11.
which you have seen in that mountain you must build a dwelling place in your
soul for our lord; Exodus 25.
just as they said to Moses, that he should provide to make the Tabernacle,
after that form which he had seen in the mountain. You must my good sister,
(if you mean to go through the way of this life, in perfect charity, and
love of our lord) procure to carry about you a continual desire, (or at least
the most continual that you can) whereby you may ever wish and like that our
lord God (in whose presence you are still to walk) may be in himself, as
good, as holy, and as full of glory, as indeed he is. And so with great joy,
and complacence, in all the attributes of almighty God, you are to go
rejoicing, and your soul is to seast it self, inseeing that your lord and
your true love, possesses himself, who is infinitely good, and powerful,
from whom all creatures receive their being, and their beauty, and who in
himself is so full of glory, and goodness, that all creatures have need of
him, and he none of them.

This must be the whole scope, at which your love must aim. S. Tho. 1.
And herein S. Thomas says that perfect charity does consist. As for the
love which new deuotes, call Charity, which is when they are kindled in
devotion, and in loving our lord te^derly, though this be a holy thing, yet is
it not of so high condition, as that other most holy love, which transformes
souls into the beloved. To this love, the holy scripture inuites us in many
places saying; Ps. 96. Phil. 4
Rejoice you just persons in our lord. And S. Paul says; Rejoice in our lord.
And conceiving that this advise was worthy to be given more then once, he
repeates it saying, yet again, I tell you that you must rejoice. The Prophet
David expressed the same, when he said, Ps. 36
delight you in our lord, and he will give you whatsoever you shall ask. This
is that joy, wherewith the most holy virgin rejoiced, when she said, My spirit
reioyces in God my Savior. Luke 1.
And with this joy, did Christ our lord rejoice, when S. Luke said, that Jesus
rejoiced in the holy Ghost. Luke 10.
And the royal Prophet says, that his heart, Ps. 83.
and even his flesh rejoiced in the living God. This happe^s when the soul
with the will, (for there the heart signifies the will) are actually loving, and
desiring that our lord, may in himself be, what he is. And from the great
redunda^ce, which proceeds sometimes from this joy, of the soul the very
flesh it self, is kindled in the love of our lord. And because this love, is
so excellent and celestial a thing therefore does the Church (which is
directed by the holy ghost) inuit us in the beginning of Mattins, with a
persuasion to love our Lord saying thus. Come let us rejoice in our Lord, and
sing canticles of praise, to God our salvation

If you will find the excellency of this love, put it in practice, and you
shall see that the soul does not satisfy it self, but in praising God. For
when it sees all that to be accomplished in God, which it can wish, it breaks
instantly out into thanksgiving to him; for having perfected the desire it
has to praise him, which is the same effect, which flows from the love they
have in heaven, as the Prophet David says, Blessed are they O Lord, Psalm. 8.
who dwell in thy house; for they shall praise thee, for ever, and for ever.
S. Augustine was inflamed with this love, when speaking to our Lord, he said,
If thou O Lord were Augustine and I God, I would make thee God, and my self
Augustine.

I think there is noe need to bring testimonies, which may prove the
excellency of this Love; for even plain reason tells us, that this is the
love which draws a man out of him self, and transformes him unto God, who is
his beloved. And out of this love, it must follow that all your works, and
devotions, and prayers, must be made by you, to the honor and glory of this
God, who deserves to be adored, and served, for his own pure goodness, by as
many creatures as he has made; without carrying any respect at all to the hope
which might be had of a reward from him. For though it be good, and holy to
serve our Lord, even for retribution, Psalm. 118.
yet is not this an act of so perfect charity as that which seeks noe kind
of interest, but only the honor, and glory of our Lord God. If at any time
you place before your soul, the reward, which they will give it, for the good
it does, to the end that it may be animated toward good works, let not this
be your last end, but the will which you have, to serve our Lord. For the more
glory you have, the more honor and glory shall our Lord God receive. So that
the last aim of all, must be, to glorify our most blessed Lord. And in this
manner, if you will, you may incline your heart to the commaundments with
respect to the retribution, as the Prophet David said. Psalm. 118.


But perhaps you will ask. Who is he that can have his soul awake to go ever
cheerful, and in delight, rejoicing still in her God; since many times she is
so tepid, and so sad, that by noe means, she is capable of any joy? what
remedy may then be thought of, that we may not fail of this perfect, and
supreme love? For this, it was, that I told you, that you were to carry with
you a desire whereby you must wish, that our Lord might still be what he is in
himself; because Char^tie consists in this desire. Which desire a soul may
have, though it be never so tepid, dry, and sad; as a man may desire, that his
father may live happily though himself feel noe joy. And herein I only take
for granted, that we must suppose man to have the grace of God which our Lord
will never deny to one, who strives to walk by this way. I mean that although
your self be sadd, you must desire that our Lord may be what he is. And as for
the delight, and joy in our Lord, which uses to follow heerevpon, this indeed
is a fruit of the holy Ghost, Gal. 5.
which grows from this charity when our Lord is pleased to communicate
himself more familiarly to a soul. When his Majesty bestows this favor let
us bless him for it; and when he does not, let us yet persevere in that other
exercice of ever blessing and adoring him, who is so worthy of infinite glory,
and praise. For it is a very great error, into which they fall, who think
that when there is noe sensible joy; that act of the will is worth nothing;
whereas Charity does yet consist in that act. And for as much as the devil
knows this well, he is ever procuring to give us great tepidity and drynes;
that so we thinking that we loose our time, may give over this holy exercise.

You must therefore persevere in it, and grow deaf to those temptations of the
devil. For if you persevere not, you will not arrive to enjoy that crown, and
heaven, which such as are proficient in this holy love grow to obtain, even
here on earth. You must consider and look with a hundred thousand eyes, that
the end and scope of your love be to glorify our Lord in whatsoever you do.
For so great was the wrench which our nature took by the sin of our ^^st
father in wholly procuring our own ^^terest and good that if you stand not
well ^wake in the watchtower, you will find ^any times, that you do but
seek your ^^lfe, even in this very devotion, hich pre^ends wholly to cast out
self-love. And you shall take your self in the manner, with re^oycing that
you love our Lord, after this sort, because you shall acquire great rewards in
^eauen thereby, and because your soul ^eceiues much consolation, and for other
^easons, of proper interest, which though ^hey be not ill, yet are they acts of
Charity which is imperfect.

You see here in short, the Love of God, which you are to carry in your soul;
a Copy of that Original which the Blessed Spiritts, have in heaven. It now
remains that I declare to you, the love of your neighbor, which grows out of
this other profound Love. The love, my good sister, which you must carry to
your neighbor must be, by desiring and loving all that good, which you see in
him: because thereby, our Lord God is glorified and adored. And the more that
is, the greater must your joy be; as on the other side, any offense or sin
which you shall discover in your neighbor must be abhorred by your soul,
because he is offended, whose honor and glory you desire. And so as I told
you that the love of God consisted in our applause, and will, that our Lord
should be the very thing which he is; and that the joy which is taken thereby
is a particular gift of our Lord; so also does the love of your neighbor
consist in the application of your will, to desire the good of your neighbor,
which is to rejoice in his true good, and to feel much grief, for the sin
which he committs.

This is a very particular favor of our Lord, which he bestows upon whom he
will. So that if you have observed the matter well, you will have seen, that
the mark at which both the love of God, and of our neighbor shootes is, that
God may be glorified and adored. And hereby you will also perceive how short
he falls of true love, who greiues to see his neighbor grown up apace, in
devotion, and virtue, considering that himself is not so grown up. For though
it be true, that the true lover of our Lord, will not fail to carry a knife
about him, which peirces him through at the very heart, because he serves not
our Lord so well as he ought, and might; yet follows it not from hence, that,
by seeing another servant of God thrive, faster in spirit then himself, he
must therefore be sorry for it or dismayed by it. But rather, the ease, and
comfort, which is to serve you for a remedy against that much grief, which
your soul receives, because your self do not serve our Lord, so well as you
should, must be to consider, that though you (through your weakness) do not
that, to which you are obliged, yet there are others, who comply with that very
thing, which you desire; which is, greatly to glorify, and serve our Lord.

But as for that other kind of dismay, to which some are subject; I conceive
that it grows but from self-love, for it is certain, that if the end why a
true lover of our Lord, desires much to serve him be, that his God may be
honored, and glorified, (who is glorified, as well by the sanctity, which is
in the soul of another, as if it were in his own) it follows, that he is to
have much joy, to see that others go increasing in the service of our lord,
though it be true on the other side, that he may be in pain, because he serves
him not so well.

You see here my good sister, what that is to which you must attend, in this
paradise of the millitant Church, (where our Lord placed you, when he called
you to his love, and to his grace) if you will also go on to enjoy the fruit
which is gathered from his hand, in the triumphant Church of his glory. In
which I beseech our Lord, that we all may glorify him, and praise him, and
enjoy him for all eternity. Amen.

A letter of the Author to a certain poor man, who was called John of God,
He was of Granada; and begged alms for the poor,
He animates him to the love and service of poor people; but yet so as that
he must not forgett his own particular devotions.

I Have received your letter, and I will not have you say, that I acknowledge
you not for my son. For if you say that because you are wicked, you deserve
it not; for the same reason, I deserve not to be your father, and therefore I
may ill despise you, who am my self more worthy to be despised. But since our
lord houlds us all for his, though we be so miserably weak, it is but
reasonable that we learn to be merciful one toward another; and that we
support one another with Charity, as he does.

I have my good brother a great desire that you should be able to give a good
accounte, of that which our lord has recomme^ded to you. For the good and
faithful servant must look to gain five other talents, to the five which
were given him at the first. That so, he may hear from the mouth of our lord.
Rejoice thou good and faithful servant thou have been faithful in the few
things which I have recommended to thee, Math. 25.
and I will place thee over many.

You must take care of that which is recommended to you concerning others, in
such sort, as that you forget not your own soul. But yet know that the man,
who of all others is most recommended to you, is your self. For it will
profitt you but little though you should draw all the world, out of the dirt;
if, the while, your self remain therein. And therefore, I once again
encharge you, that still you seek out some fit of-tyme, wherein you may
dispatch your own devotions, and that daily you hear Mass, and upon every
sunday, the sermon. And especially, take heed, that you converse not much,
with women. For you cannot be ignorant, that they be that snare, which the
devil setts, for the fall of such as serve God. You know how David sinned, 2.
kings 11.
by looking upon one of them; and Solomon, his Son, sinned with many, 3.
Kings 11.
and he walked so far out of his wits, as to place Idols in the temple of
our Lord. And since we are so much more weak then they, let us be afraid to
fall, and take warning by the misfortunes of others. Deceive not your self
with saying, I desire to do them good. For under the mantle of these good
desires, do those dangers lurk, when prudence accompanyes not the same. And
God is far from desiring, that I should procure the good of another, with the
Spirit ^^ll hurt of my self.

Concerning those temporal necessities to which you are subject; I have
already written to you, that there is every where such abundance of wa^ts, as
that when we ask any releife, they say that they have enough more near at
hand, whom they are to remedy. And I thought that my Lord the Duke of Sessa
had sent you that, which might serve the turn, because they told me, you had
solicited him for some releife. If he have not done it, desire it of him a
second time, for he will send it. He loves you much, for the care you have of
the poor, and if he do not, our Lord will provide, though he make you stay a
while.

I have rejoiced much in the charity which you have found, in that other
house, whereof you speak. Return my salutations to him, who sent them by you
to me. And because I am now in my journey, I write noe more at this time; but
only that you must remain all fixed in Jesus Christ our Lord, who will
protect and favor you. And that you look well to your self, and that the
devil may have noe cause to rejoice by having induced you to sin, but that
God may take delight in your penance for that which is past, and in your
amendment for that which is to come; And so the holy ghost be with you. Amen.

A letter to one who had some desires to serve God but not the courage to
beginn.
He animates her greatly to confide in God. He teaches her how to love certain
persons who had offended her, and he gives remedies both against scruples, and
vain glory.

I do much rejoice, at the holy desires which you have to please our lord, but
I am in pain to consider your pusillanimitie, in executing the same. For I
hold it to be a strange ill thing, that one should presume to remain in the
vanity of this life, and not presume to adventure upon the making of a new
match with God, confiding in the same God. For what man was there ever, since
there were such things in the world as men, who hoping in God, and procuring to
live according to his comaundments, was forsaken by him? who ever inuoked him,
with an intyre, and perseuering heart, and was not heard by him? Nay he goes
seeking us, and inciting us to serve him. What possibility therefore is there,
but that since he is good, and true of his word, he must come forth to meet,
and cast his arms a bout our necks, an do us favor, when we make toward
him. He will, infallibly he will, and that incomparably more completely, Heb. 9.
as S. Paul affirms, then we know how to think.

Begin you servant of God, cast your self upon him, and confide, that he
who gave you the desire, will give you strength to work, and courage to make
an end. For he calls not upon such as sleep to wake them, but to the end that
he may do them many favors, when they are awake. Begin with diligence, and
fervor, yea and with a kind of strife; for there is not a worse thing then a
faint beginner, who still takes much care to regale him self, and to content
the world. Shut your eyes, against both human praises, and dispraises, for
you shall quickly see both the prayser, and the praised, turned in to dust, and
ashes, and him also who is honored, and dishonored. An we shall all be
presented, before the tribunal of our lord, where the mouth of wickedness shall
be stopped, and virtue shall be highly exalted. In the mean time lay you fast
hold on the Cross, and follow him who was dishonored, and lost his life
upon it for you. And hide your self in those wounds, that when our lord comes
for you, he may find you there; and may beautify you with his graces, and may
give him self to you as your reward, for having left all things, and your
self with them for his sake.

But o how little does he leave, who even leaves all! since he leaves but that
which he must quickly leave whether he will or not, yea and even the enjoying
it, is a great misery; since all that which is not God, is but weight, and
sorrow to the soul. God only, is sufficient for you open therefore your heart,
and enjoy him, you shall find him more sweet, and much more full of love,
then you could have thought.

Sometimes I wonder within my self, to think how one either does or can wish
ill to another, since Christ our lord is in the midst between them both. How
can he be disgusted with the body, who loves or ought to love the head? do you
not know that when our lord rose from death to life, and appeared to his
disciples, he placed him self in the midst of them, Luke. 24.
and not at the head or else where. And this upon what reason, but to make us
understand that he is in the midst of us, and that we cannot do, yea or even
desire to hurt any body, but that first it must pass through him. He who loves
not his neighbor, loves not Christ our lord, and as for him who loves not
Christ our lord it were better for such a one not to have been borne, since he
arriues not to know for what he was created, which was to love our lord.

Conceive that your neighbors are a certain thing which merely co^cernes
Christ our lord, that they are his Images, and the creatures for which he gave
his blood. And therefore say, How shall I wish ill to him, whom my lord loves?
How shall I be able to desire death to him, to whom my lord will give life. My
lord dyed for those persons, and would yet again return to dye for them, if
it were needful; and shall I then fail to love that man, who is so much
b^loued by him? what does it import me, if they do me ill offices, for I love
them not for what they are, nor for any thing which they do to me; I love
them for Christ's sake; and what then have their ill deeds to do, toward the
making me take that love from them, which I carried to them, for Christ's sake.
I beseech God they may be great in his presence and that they may enjoy him,
and he them that so there may be more temples, wherein my lord may dwell, more
souls which may praise and serve him, and more hearts which may love him, for
he deserves them all. And whenever you see them say. O lord do thou possess
those souls, and let them be only thine. O lord let them enjoy thee, for
thou have a mind to communicate thy self to all. O lord they are so many
Images of thee, make them like to thee more and more, and both to them and me,
and to all give pardon, grace, and glory. If your tongue will not say this, yet
let your spirit say it, and lift up your heart to our lord, demanding succor
of him and saying. O lord for thy love and not for theirs, and by little and
little, you shall find your self in peace. And if there chance to be any
war, be not overcome therein, and do not say, or do any thing which may be
against their good, and consent not to any thing in your heart which be of
disadvantage to them.

The scruples concerning your co^fessions, are a temptation wherewith the
devil torments you, and depriues you of the sweetenes of your soul, and
leaves you without gust in the things of God. For the creature who is
scrupulous, is not fit either to love God, or to confide in him, nor does he
like the way which God houlds with him, and then he goes to look other ways,
which may please him self better, because he finds not that, in Gods ways,
which gives him gust. And this scrupulous person has the fault of all, for he
raises the storm, where there was a calm, and he found it in his own way,
and not in the way of God, which is very smooth and plain.

Make you a Jest of such things, and submit your self to that which, your
ghostly-father shall ordain; and be not carried a way with scruples, nor with
your own conceit, but say, my lord God is not scrupulous, John. 4 Psalm. 17.
I do that which they comaunde me in his name, and I am to accounte to him for
noe more. Shall I be plain with you make have, make have to love, and these
scruples will fall away, which rise but from a fearful heart. For perfect love
casts fear out of doors. Pray to our lord and say Deus meus illumina tenebras
meas. And confide you in his mercy, that serving him he will be good to you,
and will daily be giving you to understand your faults, that you may mend them.

I would also have you laugh at the temptation of vaineglory, and say to it.
Neither will I do it, nor leave to do it, for thee. O lord to thee it is,
that I offer what souer I can do, or say, or think. And when, vaineglorie
comes again, say to it thus. Thou come too late, for it is already given to
God. It is a good advise, that beginners are to do nothing exteriourly which
may seem to be of much sanctity, for being young and tender and all their
business being but yet in flower, the wind will do them hurt; and it is better
for them to hide their graces, then to show them. And so must you do for as
much as possibly you can; and that which you cannot conceal, do freely and
without fear. And strait cast up your heart to our Lord, and say, Non nobis
Domine, non nobis, sed n^^n^ni tuo da gloriam. Or else you may say, Gloria
Patri^, and Filio, and Spiritu^ sancto.

And for conclusion, I recommend to you, that you cast all that out of your
heart, which is not God, and that in this world you love tears, sollitude,
humility, and penance; and let your eyes be ever turned to our Lord, that
your feet may be delivered from the snare. Put the law of God in practice, and
you shall see how he will sweeten your way, and how he will cast your enemies
under your feet. And by working you shall grow to understand that, which you
know not how to conceive, either by speaking or hearing. For in this way of
God, these tepid and talking people learn little, and they who are diligent
in putting the hand to work learn much. Our Lord lesus Christ goes before
you, follow him here with your Cross; and one day you shall be with him in
heaven.

A Letter of the Author to a friend whom he animates to serve God in good
earnest.
He shows the vanity and misery of the world, and the happiness which is
obtained by serving God.

AS he, who hoping for the good success of what he desires, reioyces when he
sees some likelihood thereof; and although that likelihood be not very great
yet it gives him noe little joy, through the excess, of his desire: so my
soul is filled with comfort by your Letter; for me thinks the words
contained therein, give me a hope and taste of somewhat which has reason to
make me gladd, and which if it might once take full effect, would breed a joy
in me so very great, as would be equalled by few others.

My good Sir, I desire to see that soul of yours vnbeguiled and discharged
from the many vanities, which are affected, and frequented in this world; and
that you would believe with a faithful heart, that your true repose consists
not in any other, then in him whoo created all things, and that you would go
up and down full of care, in search after this good, and be so wounded, with
the love of him, that all this world, with the beauty and flower thereof, might
seem but a smoke to you, which vanishes, as a shadow which has noe bulk or
body, and indeed a mere device, how to make men fools, working such as love
it, to be the enemies of God, and to prefer the temporal before the eternal.

Was there ever seen any mischeife so great as this? was there ever seen,
any exchange so pernicious as this? where are those eyes, which see not this?
and that heart which has noe feeling of this? And yet so great is our
frailty, that if Christ our Lord did not awake us, and make us understand this
truth, it would be noe more possible for us to be delivered from error, and
deceit then it is possible, in nature for a blind man, to see, or a dead man,
to live. O thou miserable man, who art worthy to be lamented with a flood of
tears! who art so vehemently inclyned to that which hurts thee most, and yet
conceiuest withal, that it is good for thee. Thou think that all has gone
well, and that thou art grown happy, when thou art accommodated with the
things of this life, and thou have hardly any feeling, nor do thou think it
worth the lamenting, to be in enmity with almighty God. Thou know how to
regard, and value the honor of this world, which passes away, at sea-full
speed, yea and even whilst it lasts, it makes not the owner thereof, one
hairs breadth the better, in the high presence of God; and thou have noe care
at all whether thou be honored or dishonored, in the Court of that divine
Majesty. Thou fear some little affront, which here may threaten thee; but
thou seek for noe remedy, against that huge affront, which is reserved and
threatened at the latter day, to all such as shall not have done honor to our
Lord, with a lively faith, and true obedience. Thou make much account of thy
self, and little of almighty God, for thou fulfillest thine own will, in
dispight of his. And any trifle which concerns thy self, offends thee much;
and the while, thou have noe care at all, of that which highly concerns the
honor of God. Thou live after thine own fashion, that thou may be wholly
miserable; and thou live not as God would have thee, who is supreme felicity.

One of these two things is infallibly true. Either that the light of the holy
ghost, must be that which vrges and enforces this blindness upon us, which
cannot be, or else, that the great torment, which is provided for sin will,
one day, open the eyes of such deceived persons, when there will be noe remedy
for their misery. For as S. Gregory says, The eyes which sin shutts, pain
opens. And therefore Sir, if you love your soul, if you fear almighty God,
if your heart be not of flint, look carefully upon the shortness of this life,
and how many you have known, who being well accommodated and supported here,
God has commanded to go hence, and that not with so much contentment and
joy, as they would have wished, but complaining that the world had deceived
the^, and that for love thereof, they had neglected the service of our Lord.
That which they were, we are, and where they be arrived, we shall arrive, and
the same earth must receive us all, and convert us all into it self.

For what therefore do we stay? By what are we deteyned? What is that, which
deceiues us, and makes us so profoundly careless, of a business which so
highly imports? What makes us think that it concerns us little,
notwithstanding that noe other thing imports us at all, in comparison of this?
And if we shall confess, that we hold it to be highly important, why then
do we labor so little for it? why do we spend so few hours about it?
Why do we try so few conclusions to obtain it? why do we ask so little
advise, how we may contriue it: Is it reason that any little fit of time,
which we employ about this business, should seem so great a matter, whereas
yet we never think much, and be never weary, how much soever time we spend
upon the business of this world? If any question be moved, about expense to be
made upon some present occasion of vanity, how magnificent are we wont to show
our selves: but how miserly, on the other side, in any thing which it concerns
us to do for the honor of God, and the good of our neighbors. In that former
case noe consideration is had, either of children, or provision otherwise for
the house, but all that, is laid aside, for the respect which is had to some
curiosity. But in the latter, such a heap of considerations, and reasons are
brought into discourse, as serve to shutt the purse, and to tie up the hands
from that good work.

But what shall I say of this other proof of our frailty? Our whole life
proclaims with a loud voice, that we value the present world, more then the
future; the exterior, then the interior; riches, then goodness. For that thing
do we love best, which we desire most to obtain, when we want it, and which
we labor to get with most anxiety; and wherein we joy most when we have
it, and for which we sorrow most when we loose it. And if the case arrive,
wherein we must loose the one or the other, we put our good conscience in
hazard, for putting that in execution, which the honor, or profitt or pleasure
of this world suggests.

The day will come, and that quickly, when those worldly persons will find
themselves straungely disappointed, and having lost all their labors, and
leaving the fruits hereof behind them they shall be presented all naked and
poor, and in the extremity of confusion, before him, who sent them hither, not
to the end that they should go fooling after vanities, but that they might
pass through these temporal things, without staying or setting their hearts
upon them, and that having their bodies here upon earth, their souls might be
aspiring to heavenly things. And that though they live in flesh; yet they
should not live according to the desires thereof, and though they dwell in the
world, yet not to have the conditions of the world; but that like children who
imitate their father, they might be pure and true, and pious, and humble, and
meek, and that they might seek after the glory of God, and the good of their
neighbors.

What will he be able to do at that day, who shall not have performed the
thing, for which he was sent, into this world? what will he be able to do, by
whose thought it has not so much as passed, that he must once begin to
attend to it, but who forgetting the purity, and perfection of a christian
life, whereby he was to imitate almighty God, has defiled himself, in the
mudd of earth, and has proceeded like some foolish boy, who, being sent about
business, would needs stay to pass his time, and play with other boys; or else
loyter for seeing of some vain show, and neither did that which he was
commanded, nor so much as remembered where about, he went, till returning home
at night, without any answer concerning his business, he is received with
reprehensions, and stripes, by him who sent him.

Let us awake, whilst we have time, and let us have an eye to that which
imports us most, and which is to last for ever. And let us leave vanity to
vain persons; for both it, and they shall perish. Let us raise our eyes to
wards him, who gave us the life and being, which we have; and afterward gave
his own life, to the end that we might not loose ours. And with great labor
he taught us the way, whereby we were to walk; and by a death which was full
of torments, and reproaches, did he encourage and strengthen us toward the
purchase of virtue; and he obtained grace, for us, whereby we might be able to
serve, and please almighty God.

Let us search into the most hidden corners of our hearts, and let us cure
that in it, which is wounded. Let us untie the fetters of our sins. Let us
procure to redress our selves in that which gives us most cause of fear. And
let us appease the clamorous remorse of our Conscience, with doing that which
God commands by the Dictamen thereof, that so all things being once well
ordered, and agreed, we may like true and watchful servants expect the coming
of our Lord, and that we may be found with tapers lighted in our hands, and
with our loins girt, and that we may hear that sweet word. Rejoice thou good
and faithful servant, Luke 12 Matthew. 25.
who have ben^ faithful in lesser things; I will place thee over greater.
Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord,

That is the day for which good christians hope, and in co^templation whereof,
they, who live here in pain, do in time pass through it, with much
patience. And this expectation of that crown, gives them heart, to endure the
combatts of this world, and of the flesh. Making election of abasement here,
for that eternal advancement; and of this short lamentation, For that delight,
which shall have noe end; of loosing their will here that they may have it
everlastingly united to the will of God, in heaven. Where they shall have
nothing which may disgust them, but all that shall be done, which may content
them. For they shall possess almighty God, as their most rich treasure, in
whom is contained all Good.

If our Lord have yet begun to visit that soul of yours, you will understand
what I say, and you will profitt by it. If not (which God forbidd) it will be
but the hearing of a story, which is instantly forgotten. I desire that Christ
our Lord, may be the Love of you, and of my lady your wife, whose desire to see
me, I pray God reward. But think no more of your coming this way, till first
God shall have so disposed, that I may go thither to you, the rather because
I also desire, that it may be so.

A letter to an afflicted lady whose sickness hindered certain devotions which
she had been wont to use.
He teaches her how to find peace, and true repose which is nowhere but in
God. And of the great care, wherewith she was to provide that the forbearance
which she used of her exercises of spirit in her sickness, might not proceed
from tepiditie.

THE best comfort in those afflictions which come upon us against our will, is,
not to have committed any fault; which might occasion their coming. For a
conscience which stands right, will easily bear any weight which you can lay
upon it, but to a conscience which is impure, any little burden is
intolerable. If men knew as well how to seek the means of true repose, as
they know how to desire the thing, they should enjoy it, and not remain with
the sole desire thereof. It is the express law of God, that they who have
desires of any other thing then him, shall be subject to torment, whether the
thing be obtained or not obtained. For supposing the thing be had which they
desired, yet can they not compleately enjoy it, through the remorse which
their conscience brings, and if it can not be had, they are racked by the delay
of the thing desired.

The pure desire of God, is very contrary to this. Psalm. 104.
For if David say, Let the heart rejoice, which goes but even in search of God,
what kind of thing will it be to find him out? If the hunger of seeking give
them joy, what will the being satisfied, at that table, do? He therefore who
desires to find peace, and true repose, must resolve to forgo his own
appetytes, and must boldly and faithfully lodge himself in the will of our
Lord; and so he shall neither be tumbled up and down in the dark, nor be
afflicted otherwise, by the arrival of strange events.

But who will now procure that the sons of men may attend to that, which God
exacts at their hands? How long will you be heavy hearted, and love vanity,
Psalm. 4.
and seek after lies? who shall vnbeguile such men, and free them from their
blindenes as go seeking peace and find war, yea and by the same way wherein
they seek it, they loose it. Let the whole world understand once for all, that
as there is noe more then one God, so is there noe more then one true repose.
And as, without the true God, there is noe God; so out of his repose, there is
noe repose. Certainly the mountains were liars, and so was the multitudes of
the valleys, and only in our Lord God there is true salvation. This say they,
who after they are well wearied upon the experience of their own vain
desires, arrive to know at length, both what God is, and what he is to them
who seek him.

Madam, we have not in our house a bitt of bread, which we may give our friend
to eat, who is coming from abroad unless we go borrow it of our neighbor,
who is God made man, and one who withal is so near us; as that he is our
head, and both our father and our brother. He who will lift his eyes up to him,
and depend upon his hand; he who will be a beggar at his gate; he who will be
in desire of him and grow even fainte through hunger after him, shall be
refreshed by the abundance of him, which does as far exceed the
satisfaction which creatures give, as God him self exceedes them. But out of
God, let noe man presume to have any hunger. For as S. Augustine says where
soever flesh and blould shall expect to finle a su^^nes amongst the creatures,
it will find it self deceived. So that a man may understand by experience
what difference there is between the Creator and the creatures, and so being
untied from them, (since in them he found not what he sought,) he may go at
last with an intyre heart to him; who alone is able to impart more to the soul,
then it is able to receive. Your ladyship must not therefore be carried away,
by that great error which yet is embraced by many great ones of this world,
who are mightily affected to their own will, and who abound with particular
appetites, and who think belike, that they are to abound as much more then
others, in desire of things, as they are here of more eminent rank and state;
but for my part I see not what they gather from hence, but greater torments.
For after the rate of the desire, is the pain. And as S. Bernard says, Let
our proper will cease, and there will noe more be any hell. And so we may
say, let this proper will cease, and there will not be in the world, either any
sin or any sorrow. For that which comes to us, is not, in it self, the thing
which gives us pain, but the coming of it, when we would not have it come. And
therefore does God require our hearts of us, that so he may free them from
many miseries, and may give us in exchange, his own, which is peaceable,
reposed and Joyful in tribulation. And a gross fool is he, who had rather
live in his own straitnes, then in the latitude of Almighty God; and who had
rather dye in himself, then live, in life. And if at any time, or in any
thing, we have committed this sin, and have enlarged the raynes to our own
desires, let us humble our selves before the father of mercies, acknowledging
our sins, and hoping for pardon at his hands, and taking that pain which
grew upon us, by the inordinatenes of our appetite, toward the discounting and
discharging of our fault. For by this means, God is wont to take away our
sins like one who should take the boughs or branches of a tree, and setting
them first on fire, should apply them afterward, to the tree it self, and so
burn it up, by the roots.

Much better it is for a sinner, that he should grow into ^aine by occasion of
his sin, then into peace and rest. For as S. Augustine faith, there is not a
more woeful thing then the temporal felicity of a sinner. And as for us let
us learn hereafter, to give all our desires to God. And as a stone falls
downward, and as fire flies upward, and as every thing in sine, makes toward
his proper place; so let our hearts fly at full speed, toward the center
thereof, which is God.

Who would not be amassed, to behold a great rocky Mountain hanging loose in
the air, without falling down to his proper place; and who will not wonder to
see a heart which was created to repose, and rest in God, detain it self, in
the air, and less then air? Therefore whether it be that we cannot take
true rest in any other then in God, or because this Lord of ours, deserves, of
himself, all our love, (since he is the loadestone to which all spiritts
look) let us not fall hereafter, into such a folly, as that whereof I spoke,
let us not spott our honor, let us not committ such a treason against such a
lord, as that hereafter, any other desire may enter into our hearts, but of
him, or for the love of him. And so will the sadd clouds of these
vnprositable hart-breaking melancholies, and these both vain hopes and vain
fears fly from these hearts of ours, and in their place a new morning will
rise, which will give us Joy. For to see the light of heave, is the cause of
Joy, but the blind man cannot discern it. Tob 5.
For this did Tobias say, what joy cann I have in this life, since I cannot see
the light of heaven. It is a great truth, that noe man who is not indeed
vnbeguiled concerning this world, can have any true joy of heart, for though he
thinks he sees, yet indeed it is but a sight of earth, and not a light of
heaven. But after this other sight a man grows cured at the very root.

It will be fit that your ladyshipp do not think, to make the like exercises
of mind, in the way of spirit as before, now that you are subject to an
unlike disposition of body. And many have ignorantly afflicted them selves, for
not having been able to weigh, what their strength and state would permit. It
is clear that with this condition of body wherein you are, you must not think
of keeping the same method which you held before; nor does our lord ask any
such things at your hands, since his will is very wise, and tempered also with
great mercy, and demands nothing of us, but that, for which he gives us
means; And not only he will not reap where he does not sow, but even when
he sowes, he is content to reap less, then he has sowed. Your ladyship
must not be discoforted for that which you are not able to perform, for you
might as well put your self to pain, because you have noe wings where with to
fly. Do not place the joy of your heart upon having consolation, or upon
making Prayer, but upon the accomplishment of the will of our Lord. And since
his pleasure is, that the time which before you spent in praying shall now be
spent in vomiting, let it be so in the name of God; and let his contentement
be ours, and let us more esteem that he be pleased, then we would to possess
heaven and earth. And if we be troubled with any scruple, that such or such a
punishment came to us for our having committed such, or such a sin, and that
God chastises us now for the thing which we inordinately desired before; in
that case, what have we more to do then to cast our selves at his feet,
desiring both correction and pardon. And our lord will either give them both,
or else the pardon, without the correction, but never the correction, without
the pardon, if the fault be not our own. We must therefore take any
tribulation, as an earnest penny, or introduction to peace; and provided that
there may be peace between God and us, let any thing come which he will send.

One only thing we have to fear in this case, which is least we should
slubber over our negligences, under this occasion and pretense, of, I can do
noe more. We must here look upon our selves with many eyes; for this EVE,
which lives within us, is so desirous to be cherished, and regaled, and to be
walking up and down the garden, and to be eating of the forbidden fruit, that
she wants not a thousand inuentios to make reason believe, that she demands
not any thing of superfluity, but of meare necessity, and she is in a mighty
chafe if they believe her not. Madam there is need here of two things; The
one that when we clearly see, that we are able in such cases, to perform our
spiritual exercises, we must not omit them, by any means. Be not faint in
laboring for the love of our lord, since true love knows not, what it is to
be remiss, and as you are to be compassionate, and pious to wards your
beloved, so are you to be severe, and nothing delicate toward your self.
Your ladyship shall do well to call to mind, what heroical acts the love of
Christ our lord has wrought in this world, in those hearts where it has dwelt.
It has made them endure prisons, torments, dishonours, and that with much joy,
whilst the great worth of the beloved has been placed before the eyes of the
lover. And since it has wrought so great effects in others, let it not be so
weak in your ladyshipp, as that it cannot enable you to pass through a little
affliction, for the pleasing of so high a Lord; by whom you shall be so much
the better accepted, as you shall come to him with more affliction. Yet so, as
that our Lord is not desirous of our pain, but only of our love, but yet it
is still true withal, that the truth of love is hardly known, but in somewhat
which puts us to pain. Eccl. 6.
For the friend who stands fast in time of tribulation, he is the true friend
indeed. And though God do well know, what we are, without making any
particular experiment, yet he loves to try us, that we may know it too; that
so we may have comfort in finding our selves faithful to him, in point of
love; and so may live in hope, that we shall go to enjoy our beloved for
Patience breeds Hope, Romans
as S. Paul says.

So that this must be your method, till you have perfect health, that when you
are free from your vomitts and pains, you may exercice your mind in
spiritual things; and at those times you must also beseech our Lord, to give
you light to know, when it is the flattery of flesh and blood, and when it is
Just necessity, which hinders you. For he who uses the knowledge well which he
has, shall obtain light, for that which he knows not. But as for others,
with what face can they ask new light, since it may be answered them thus,
why desire thou to know further, what my will and pleasure is, since in that
which thou know already, thou complyest not. And when you are in any ease,
though it be not much, let your mind also be in some exercise of spiritual
things though it be not much, nor with much attention, but only recording your
desires, and presenting your self before our Lord. And by this, and withal by
not letting your heart sincke (for even the very life of the soul consists in
that) your ladyship shall pass on, until that God provide otherwise.

The woman of Samaria asked where she was to pray, John. 4.
and our Lord answered her, that it was every where to be done, and that in
spirit. And so is the christian to do, who in all his works, is to pray to
our Lord, not in the mountain or in the temple alone, but in eating, drinking
and sleeping, in health and in sickness, referring all to God, and ioying in all
things because he receives them from that holy hand.

Your ladyship is to have great care, that you straighten not the goodness of
God, since he is immense. Do not think that you are to seek him, and to
find him but only in such an express place, or determinate work. He is
every where, and you are with him, and if you seek him every where, Sap. 7.
you shall every where be sure to find him. I rejoiced (says the wise man) in
all things, because this wisdom went before me. And so does he also
rejoice, who in all things behoulds God, performing that which he commands,
and ever keeping the heart in attention toward him, and from the contrary
flows sadness, and disgust, and deiection of mind, which is a thing to be
avoided, Eccl. 30.
with much diligence. For (as it is written), There is no profitt in such
sadness. Nay it brings much hurt both to our body and to our soul, and to our
neighbor. Whereas joy, and comfort give strength, and perseverance makes our
spiritual enemies grow sadd, it cherishes the spirit of God, which dwells in
such as are his servants, For his spirit in cheerful.

Besides this, your ladyship shall do well, to receive the Body of our Lord,
now and then, And since the lodging which he takes up, is in the heart, you are
not to be in pain, for that your body is noe better. And though there may be
some impediment, why we cannot labor, yet there can be none, why we may not
love. So much the more must we love our Lord, because he is both omnipotent,
and very desirous to give strength to that heart which seeks to love him, for
this tends to the accomplishment of that very thing, which he likes best of all
others both in heaven and earth, and that is Love. Wherewith I desire that your
ladyship may so abound on earth, that you may deserve to be lodged near our
Lord in heaven. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a Lady, whom he had greatly in charge, and who
feared, her self to be troublesome to him.
He takes all fear from her, and animates her to persevere in the way of
virtue, which she had begun; and adnises her to the service of her neighbors,
as a good means, whereby she might obtain the gift of Contemplation.

IF you knew how great joy I have felt in my soul, by your letters, I believe
you would write often to me, how careful soever the devil might be, to
discourage you. And if you knew how great favor you do me, in letting me
see, that you are c^ofident of my truth to you, and if withal you would be
pleased to make trial of me, I believe you would cast away a great number of
those imaginations, which the devil brings to you, about the making you
think, that you are troublesome to me. I, for my part, have not taken upon me
so in jest, that charge of you, which our lord has put into my hands, as that
any difficulty could make me weary of it, how great soever it might be; and
how much less can I be weary, when the thing it self is not painful to
me, but delightful. I beseech you, for the love of our lord, that you will
ask him, whether I love you or not. For I hope for so much favor at his
hands, as that he will tell you I do, forasmuch as he is a friend of truth,
and he knows that the thing, indeed, is so. Do you not already understand,
that this is but a trick of the devil, understand, that this is but a trick
of the devil, whereby he would pull down weak persons? Do you not know, how
much hurt this conceit does to some of your neighbors, when they believe it?
you know well enough, how to chide them, who will not conceive, that they are
beloved by their friends, and how to take the part of such as are absent. But
now why take you not that counsel for your self, which you give to others?
why will you needs tire me out, with your incredulity, as others do? For the
love of him, who was crucified for us, let not things pass in this manner; but
be confident that our lord loves you, and imparts true love to me, for the
doing of all that, which is necessary for you; and that this must last till
you shall have gained the crown, to which our lord has called you: which is
not to be any little one, nor do I find in my self, any little joy, that I
am helping you to gain the same.

You must also forbear, both to say, and think, that the state wherein you
are, is a state of condemnation. For that is a mere temptation of the devil,
who desires nothing more, then that you may leave your manner of life, that
so, he may carry you away with him. And if it seem to you, that you have not
that recollection, which you ought, for my part I am glad that you desire it,
and sigh for it. But yet you must not do it so, as withal to conceive, that
you are not pleasing to God, in doing what you do. Many times men serve God
more, whilst they have noe recollectio, (so that yet withal, they procure
it), then with having it. For sometimes, yea and many times, the pleasure of
God is that, to the end we may use Charity to his children, we shall forsake
the sweetenes of attending to himself alone. And the Patriarch Jacob was
enamoured of Rachell, Genesis 29
who was fair, and he served seven years, that they might give her to him,
for his wife; and at the end thereof, they gave him Lia, the sister of Rachell,
against his liking. And when he complained thereof, they told him, that it was
not the fashion of that country, to bestow their youngest daughters first, as
he desired. But they wished him to marry this other at that time, and that if
indeed he loved the younger as much as he said, he should labor seven years
more for that, and then they would also give her to him, and this he did, and
so he obtained her.

He who has a mind to give himself, as it were, in marriage to the
beautiful life of recollection and devout prayer, desires that which is very
good. But he must bestow himself in marriage, to the life of action, and
labor. And first he must employ himself upon the good of his neighbors, and
afterward by perseverance, he shall obtain the other, when our Lord shall
find it fit for him. But in the mean time he is contented with us, if we
will sigh for this, and if we will attend to that. Neither is he in the right,
who is gladd of business, and employments; neither yet is that other in the
right, who when he is in the midst thereof, goes still complaining. But he
alone complyes with that which God commands, who bestows his hands, and
works upon the service of his neighbors; and his desires upon the service of
our Lord, with more desires upon the service of our Lord, with more
recollection. Yet still I say, not so farr^, as that this desire must make him
complain, or be disgusted. But he must have patience in his business; and in
his desire and love, he must have quietness; his hands in one of them, and his
eyes, upon the other. He obeys in the one, and he sues for the other. And as I
have said else where, God serves himself of some, in the first life of labor,
rather then in the second life of repose, because we use to disguise that
desire, which indeed we have to be at liberty, and to follow our own will,
and not to be put to endure the impertinences, and vexations of others. under
the color of giving our selves to Contemplation.

Our Lord therefore, who knows so much better, then our selves, what is good
for us, and sees that the desires of our heart some times are such; as I have
said, has care to conduct our life, according to that which he judges to
import us most. And so, his servants must yeilde obedience to him and accept
of that, with thanksgiving, which he imparts. And if any man confess, that
the employment which he has, is good, but that he, for his part, is weak,
and that he serves not God therein so well as he ought, or as he would; I
acknowledge that he says true; and I desire, that he will belecue and say so
still. For woe be to that soul, which presumes to think, that he may contest
with God, any other way, then by begging mercy.

Know you, your self, for wicked, and God will wrapp you up warm in the
mantie of his goodness, and mercic. And every day, he will grow, in doing you
greater favors. And conceive, that (such as you are even now,) our lord
vouchsafes to like, and love you, but see that you must continue in the war
without turning your back to his service, and then youst must esteem that
both he and I are contented with you. And since both your father who is in
heaven, and your spiritual father who is on earth, are contented, with you;
you must also be contented with your self. Not so, as that you may give
over, to proceed, and profitt in the service of our lord, but that you may not
be discouraged, or dismayed, in the manner of life which now you hold. And dee
you also confidently believe, that our Lord is served, by your aboade where
you are; and this I declare to you, in his name; and that he will comfort you
much, and vouchsafe to do you very great favors. And remember this word well.
Be faithful to God, and turn not your back toward him. Believe not the
counsel of the devil, nor yet of flesh and blood. Be bold to trust, and to
offer your self to dye for God; rather then to forbear what you have begun.
For you shall quickly see, how well God deals with them, who stand fast in
fighting for his honor. The holy ghost be your conseruer, and comforter. Amen.

A Letter to a devout friend of his, wherein he shows how weak, man is
without God, and how full of strength when he is placed in the hidden part of
his face, and what this face is.
THE peace of our Lord be ever with you. So great is our weakness, and so
crafty and strong are they who wage war against us, that it is noe marvel,
if some times we be overcome, but it is rather strange if we overcome at any
time. Or rather in very deed we never overcome, but Christ our lord ouercomes
in us, Apoc. 5.
who is the strong lion of luda, and who if he should leave us, we were
instantly to be swa^^^wed up, Psalm. 17.
as Da^id says. But he forsakes us not, because he loves us, and especially
such as place men hope in him, as the same David says, Ibidem.
Thou art the defender of all such as hope in thee. And if at any time he hide
him self from us; Cant. 2.
it is not because he departs; but like a Jealous spouse, he stands looking
through the cranyes, to see what that soul is doing, when he has absented
his imbracements from her. Especially he considers, if the soul have lost her
confidence, which his desire is may remain so rooted in our hearts, that noe
wind of temptation may pluck it up, but may rather strengthen and settle it,
believing that how much more we are tempted, so much more we are beloved by
him and how much more we are persecuted by our enemies so much more are we
cherished by almighty God, whose care and vigilance is imcomparably more for
our desence, then the subtility of our enemies can be for our prejudice. The
cause hereof is, for that he loves us more, then the devil abhorres us and he
is more powerful then our flesh is frail, and he has a blessed place of
retreat; wherein as in a most secure haue^, and as in the bosom of a mother,
he gives harbor, to such as being wearyed with the tempest of tribulations
endured for his sake, have recourse to him. Psalm. 30.
Of this David said, Thou shall hid? us in the hidden part of thy face.

Do you not think. O my beloved brother, that you shall be well hidden and
secure, and joyful in the face of God? But you will ask, why it is called a
hidden part. Cer^^nely with great reason. For as the face of God is not dark
but bright according to his divinity, so yet the face of Christ our Lord, as
God and man, is said to be dark and hidden, according to his humanity. But
this not when his face shined like the Son, Matthew. 7.
in Mount Tabor, and his garments like the light; Mark. 9.
but when he was disfigured upon Mount Caluary; when his garments and flesh
were dyed redd with the blood which proceeded from him, as the price of our
redemption. Luke. 9
If you well consider his face, grown yellow with his long fasting, and redd
with the buffetts and swelling, which their blows had made; and full of tears
descending from his eyes, and of blood distilling from his crown of thorns,
you will be sure to say, that his face was hidden, he of whom David says,
Psalm. 44.
that he was fair beyond the sons of men, and that grace was diffused
through his lips, and that therefore our Lord did bless him for all eternity.

Certainly, the most beautiful of men, was hidden, and more tormented then
man ever was; and so far disfigured, Esaias. 53.
that Esaias says, He has noe beauty, nor grace; we saw him, and he had no
figure of a man. And again, afterward he says, That his face was as if it
had been hidden, and despised, and that therefore they esteemed him not: He
indeed, did suffer our infirmities, and our sorrows, and we took him for
some leprous person, who had been stroocken and abased by our Lord.

Well then my dear brother, in this face, which seems to be so deformed,
(but which indeed is rarely beautiful to such as behold it with the eyes of
faith and love, considering that it was love which deformed it, to the end that
he might beautify our deformity) does God hide them, who labor that they may
not depart from him. And he gives them light wherewith to look him in the
face, and to receive such strength, and comfort thence, as to make them feel,
that he said true, who said Show us thy face and we shall be safe. Psalm. 79.


This face is beheld by the eternal father, and out of that sight, do result
to us, the beams of his bounty and light, for by means thereof do all those
blessings come to us which God sends. Psalm. 83.
And David knowing this, besought God saying. Look, upon the face, of thy
Christ. For by looking upon that face, he lays down that wrath to which he
had been moved by looking upon our impudent faces, and he will remove the
deformity of them, by that other beauty. And to the end that this face of his,
might ever stand before his father, Hebr. 9
Saint Paul says, that Jesus Christ entered into heaven, to appear before the
face of God for us. And now since the eternal Father looks into this glass,
that he may come to us, let us also look into it to the end that we may not
depart from him.

We have not any other remedy against our weakness, 2. Cor. 13.
but the weakness of Jesus Christ our Lord, of which S. Paul said that he dved
with infirmity, but that be lives by the power of God Consider how great things
he endured that so our souls might be taught to love that weakness of his,
and that we might not give them away to strangers, they having been purchased
by their proper Lord, at such a painful and precious rate. And do but weigh,
what weak brains we have, in departing from that joy which recreates the
angels, to obtain this base delight, which is possessed by beasts. And how
inconsiderate that soul is, which exchaunges honny, for gall, and the
Creator, for a creature.

Wretched creatures that we are, and whether shall we go, and what shall we
seek, out of Christ our lord? Shall we peradventure be able to find out any
other Lord like this; any other so dear companion, and so true friend, both
in prosperity and adversity? Where is any other so mild in pardoning, so
beautiful to behold, so wise to consult, and so good to love? where is
there any other, who can find in his heart, to dye for me, with such tears
and with such love? and who still remains with a disposition to dye yet
again, if I could have need of his second death? O how sincere a truth was
that, which Saint Peter delivered when he said, Whether shall we go O Lord,
John 23.
for thon have the words of eternal life.

We are well, my dear brother, where Christ our Lord, has by his mercy
placed us. Let us take heed, that we try not what kind of woeful thing it
is, to be without him. A very bitter thing it is, and it costs soundly, the
setting on. Let us look upon the afflictions which he suffered for us, and
with them let us comfort our selves in ours; and by them let us beg his
grace, and favor; and he will give it to us, that we may thereby, overcome the
world, the flesh, and the devil; and so we shall live in God, since he dyed
to kill our death, and to give us life.

A Letter of the Author, to the same Lady Whom formerly he had animated, to
bear her afflictions with patience.
MY soul loves yours because God loves it, and because I am to have noe little
part in your happiness. S. Paul says, that they to whom he preached, were his
joy, his honor, and his crown; in respect that receiving the word of God from
his mouth, they had changed their life to the better, and had begun to walk
in the way of God, and so gave much joy to S. Paul. For, besides that he
rejoiced in their good, he also hoped to receive a reward at the last day, for
having been that instrument, by means whereof, God had gained those souls,
and therefore did he call them his crown. Because, as a crown does beautify,
and honor the head of such as put it on; so they who are saved by means of
any man's preaching, will be a means of honoring and ioying that man, as some
beautiful crown of rich stones might do.

Now this being so, I confess you owe me not many thanks, for my wishing well
to your soul; because the good thereof is mine, in regard that God has done
me the favor to bestow you upon me, for my spiritual child, and will impart
you to me as one of the precious stones of that crown, which one day he will
vouchsafe me, if I continue faithful in that vocation, by which he has
called me. And now because you are a stone, which he will set in a crown, it
is the pleasure of our Lord to work, and polish you, very well. For, it is noe
way fit, to put such stones in a crown, as are either rough or of noe worth;
but such as these will be thrown into hell, since they received not their
being wrought, and enamelled by the spirit of our lord. But those living
stones, whereof the celestial Jerusalem is built, are wrought here, with so
many blows, that (...) seems as if our lord would break them, and that
again he gives them new blows, without compassion, even before the pain of
the former be gone. But yet, he has noe intention to break them, but to
polish them, nor to destroy them, but to beautify them; and to make them such,
as that by how much the more they seemed to be ill handled here, so much the
more brightly they may shine, at the latter day, in the high presence of
almighty God. Then will that appear to be mercy, which here seemed cruelty.
And God will see those precious stones which he has wrought, every one in his
proper place, and that, so full of bliss, that the meanest of them is to be
inco^parably more esteemed then kingdoms, and empires, and whatsoever other
earthly things, which can be conceived.

O happy strokes, which are to end in such a high repose! O happy labor,
which shall be paid, by the imbracements of God himself! Wound us here, O
Lord, as much as thou will, so that thou cherish us there. Here make us
weep, that there thou may wipe away our tears. Discomfort us here, in all
things; so that we may enjoy thee, who art all things; and be rigorous to us
here, so that there, thou have mercy for us, in store. In this world, we are
as banished men, and crowded up into a corner; and we are as it were, upon an
Easter eve. Heaven is our country, and our liberty, and our festiuity. And
therefore, howsoever things happen, we will make a shift to pass it here, to
the end that when the glory of God shall appear, we also may appear in
glory; and that we may celebrate that joyful Easter, with so many Citizens
of heaven who first celebrated the vigill upon earth.

Madam, you must give thanks to our lord; for he treates you, as he has
treated, and as he means to treat his best friends. And as for that only
begotten son of his, who is the principal stone of all stones, do but see
what blows they gave him. For they wrought, and bett upon him, from head to
feet; and these very blows, did also work upon that other second stone of
heaven, which is the most Blessed virgin, our Bl. Lady. And so according to
the place, which every one is to have there, he must be wrought and polished
here. Now if this be necessary, even for just persons, what shall become of us
sinners, but only that we must bow down the head, and say, O Lord thou
punishest me little in comparison of the much punishment which I deserve. All
that which I can suffer is little, though I alone should suffer all the
afflictions of the whole world. For to him who deserves hell, what temporal
pain, can seem great?

Let us know, that God is full of pity toward us, even then, when he seems
most rigorous; without doubt he is full of pity, since whomesoeuer he punishes
here, he will not punish, but comfort there. For it is written, That God does
not punish a man for the same thing, Nahum. 1.
twice. All that which we endure, we deserve, but yet God is so very full of
pity that for the stripes which he sends us, he pardons our sins, and he
accounts it so, as a piece of service from us, as that he gives us a crown
for the sufferance. And since the afflictions of this world prevent Purgatory,
and entitle us to heaven, who will not love them, when they come, yea and beg
more of God, then yet he had, and even be sorry, when he has them not. He who
knows Christ and his kingdom, has noe compassion of himself, in this world,
because he knows himself to be more fit for God, the more afflictions he
endures for his sake. And so did that enamoured Ignatius say Fire, Cross,
fury of beasts, cutting, quartering, breaking, and destroying of every part of
my whole body, and the scourges of the devil himself; Let all these things
come upon me, and let me only enjoy Christ our lord. There is nothing in
this world, which can do me good; not so much as even a kingdom. It is more
happiness for me to dye for Christ our Lord, then to exercise dominion over the
earth, from one end thereof to the other. This says that Saint, as one who
knew well and did much love our lord Jesus Christ; and who saw that all was
well employed, which could be disbursed for the gayning of him.

In this manner, I desire that you would encourage your self to suffer the
Purgatory of your sins; yea and though you should not have committed sin,
you should yet apply your self to endure affliction, for the pure love of
Jesus; who endured so great things for you, without having given the least
shadow of cause in himself. And I would have you say to him, that howsoever
you are bound to suffer what he will send, yet out of a free heart, you would
gladly suffer, for the pure love of him, though you were not bound to it. And
thus according to the intention of your heart, our Lord will accept it at your
hands, as an Emblem which you carry for his love. In the loves of this world
men use to make other Emblemes; but in the love of God, the Emblem, is
sufferance in affliction. And he who is not of a strong heart to suffer much,
let him never stand telling me that he loves much. For in this world there is
noe love without grief. I hope in God, that as here he gives you grief, and
trouble; so he has provided a place of rest, and joy for you, in the other
world. Though indeed, the very suffering for such a Lord, is reward enough.
And so that as there is nothing so much to be desired, in the other world, as
to enjoy that kingdom with Christ our Lord, so neither is there any thing in
this, which may be compared to the excellency of suffering with him, and for
him. Suffer therefore with a good will, since you are to be crowned, for the
same. For the afflictions which you endure, come to you but as a fit means,
whereby you may obtain that crown.

A Letter of the Author to a Cauallero his friend.
He shows how that person who feels himself grown could in the way of
virtue, has reason to apprehend it much, and to greiue much, for the present
ill, and for the danger wherein he is of falling into greater mischeife; and
namely of a hardened heart which is the next door to hell. That usually this
decay of spirit, grows either from ingratitude, or negligence. And lastly he
speaks of the remedies.

HE who in some former time, has seen his soul, a proficient in virtue; and
at the present finds it to be in decay, has much cause to be in pain, and to
procure remedy, by all the means he may. For, if a man be apt to feel the
diminution which he may suffer, in his temporal goods; how much more ought we
to apprehend the decay of the goods of our soul, which are goods indeed? Job
said with a deep sigh, Job. 29
that he wished to be as he had been, in the time of his youth, when our Lord
protected him, and when he made his candle shine over his head. These and other
things, which he affirmed himself to have possessed before, and were wanting
to him then, at the present, must rather be thought to have been certain
choice, delightful, and devout communications, which formerly he had received
from God, and then were missing; then that he was then in present want of his
former virtues. For since he gave so good account of himself, in that time of
trial, which is true time wherein indeed it may be seen, what strength one
has, he is found to have had noe cause to complain, as if our Lord did not
then protect him, or carry his light over him; and therefore he says upon the
former ground, who will grant that I may be as I was before etc.

Now if he complain of this, what will that man have reason to do, who finds
himself wasting in point of virtue it self; and who perceiues that his soul
goes estraunging it self by little and little not only from those
communications which he had enjoyed, and wherewith he comforted himself, in
former time; but even from the very custody of God's law, and from conformity
with his holy will. And although this mischeife be great, even for the present,
yet is it greater by much, for the future loss, which may be feared. For a
little fall, in relation to a great one, lies as close as the eeue does to the
holy day; Apoc. 3.
and as near he is to be vomitted out, who leads a life of tepidity.

God, for his precious passion, keep every mortal man, from this misery which
is so great as to make Saint Peter say, 2. Peter. 2.
that such men as they, had been better, never to have known our Lord, then
after they had known him, and walked in his way, to have forsaken him and to
have betaken themselves to wicked courses. And that was not without great
mystery, which our lord said. to the man who had been sick, eight and thirty
years: Now thou art whole; but take heed thou sin noe more, least a worse
thing happen to thee. These words are to be weighed, and feared withal, for
they contain a rigorous threat, and are delivered by the mouth of Truth it
self, and are wont many times, to be executed, upon such as fear him not, nor
take a course to prevent their falling into them.

There happens a wors thing to them, because the sins into which they fall
afterward are more highly qualifyed, and more deeply rooted, then the sins
committed in former times. As there is a difference between a man when he
falls with his eyes open, and when with his eyes shutt; or between a man who
has wit, and yet does the works of a fool, and another, who either has no
wit at all or very little; or between a man who ought his life to another in
the way of gratitude, and service, for great favors received, and another who
had received noe such favors. One thing it is to meet the king in the
street, and (seeing and knowing, who he is), not only to do him noe
reverence, but to proceed irreuerently toward him; and another thing it is,
not to know him at all, or not very well; or at least, not to consider who it
was, that passed.

A great favor it is which God does to them, to whom he gives both the
knowledge of their sins; and of his divine love, but yet withal he obliges
them to much thereby sin^e according to the gift he says t^a^ ^he account
must be made. Luke. 12.
And if it be ill done, not to pay good with good; what will it be, to render
evil for good received, and to answer with offenses insteede of services?

There happens a wors thing to them, since they are wont to sin more, and
with more faulty circumstances then before; and they come by little and little,
toward a hardness of heart; and to dry themselves up, in such sort, that they
are not in disposition, to do the good which they did before; I mean not,
when they were so prosperous, and happy in our Lord, but even before that,
when yet, he had not called them to his service. Then do they sigh, though it
be with a hard and untoward heart, to obtain a little spiritual good again,
and they find it not. But that which they find is, That heaven is to them
made of brass, and the earth of iron; for there is not a dropp of water to be
found, which may soften their souls, or yield them any fruit, whereby they
may be sustained. And they, who in former times, were visited and watered,
with many good inspirations, to which they vouchsafed not to answer, do now
desire some one, and cannot compass it.

Thus are negligent and fastidious rich men punished, by being killed with
hungar; as the rich covetous man was afflicted with thirst. Luc. 16
And it is not many miles, from this hardness of heart to hell it self, since
the Scripture says: It shall go ill with the hard hearted at the latter day.
And the being cured of this evil, costs dear, and it is a thing which is of
great privilege and grace when it is granted by our lord, as S. Bernard
says. Noe man of a hard heart did ever obtain salvation, unless God, did in
his mercy cure him first, and did take his stony heart from him, and give him a
heart of flesh, insteede thereof.

These are the iourneys ends of those wicked sons, who after that they were
received for sons, and treated after that rate, Deuteronomy. 32.
do forgett their Lord who possessed them, who made them, and who created
them. And he who trembles not at this, does already give testimony enough, that
he is hard hearted; and has reason to fear so much the more, as he fears the
less. And therefore Sir, let us consider these things, as sign^s of that,
which is like to follow. When we see that the foundations of a wall fall away,
it is time to apply some remedy, since we are advertised of the danger. Let
us greatly fear the goeing backward in spirit, of one only day, and let us
not suffer a defect, though it may seem small, to pass away, without
punishment. And I say though it seem small, for in very deed, none at all is
so, for the very least of them does us much hurt, though some of them be
greater then other.

Let us resolve that this mischeife proceeds from one of these two causes;
either not being thankful for the good received, or being negligent, in
conseruing it. Saint Bernard says, That the cause why God imparting great
benefitts to many, without even so much as their asking, does yet deny them
other inferior benefitts which they asked afterward, is because they were
ungrateful for those greater benefitts; and thereby make themselves unworthy
of the lesser. Nor is it any new thing, that he who uses ill the great blessing
which he receives (as if there were noe need of taking pains, to conserve
that which is already gotten) should loose them. So that we must now thank
God again, for the benefitts which we have received; and let us employ them
well, (forasmuch as now remains in our power), least we utterly loose them
all, and our selves with them. Let us be the more remiss in other businesses,
that so we may be attentive to this, with all our power. When a man diuides
his estate, into very many parts and payments, it grows to be in effect
nothing. And he who has received particular blessings from heaven may content
himself with keeping them, and growing rich in them, though he be not so
prosperous in the goods of this world. If he have a mind to comply very
punctually with the desire of temporal riches, I fear that it will be upon
the price of somewhat else which is more worth. For the world is so full of
malignitie, 1. John. 5.
and our forces are so weak, that we are like some little poor candle, in
the midst of many winds, and if we fail to be very diligent, to keep it
in, they will blow it out. Such is the misery of us who live in this exile.
And therefore they, who have any brains, are wont to fear, and sigh, and
groan, with desire to be gone from hence.

Make you account that this is your chief estate, your honor your safety, and
your life; and place your right eye upon this and your left upon other things.
And if somewhat must needs be lost, let it be that, which will one day be
lost, whether we will or not, how carefully soever we may think to keep it.
And let that remain in safety, which, if our selves do not loose, we shall
be saved for ever: Jacob disposed of that wife and those children whom he least
loved, Genesis ^
into the fro^t or foreward of his company, desyring, that if any ill accident
should arrive it might rather fall first upon them, then upon that wife and
children which he loved better. And every day we do the same, in marshalling
the parts of our temporal estate. For we dispose our selves to loose that
which is less, and to save that which is more.

Let us therefore resolve that it is better to have a good conscience, then
much temporal riches; and to have credit with God, then with man, and so in
the rest. And procuring to appease our Lord, by penance, and confession, for
that which is past, let us begin to make new purposes; and lead a new life,
with fresh courage, being very much offended with our selves, for having been
so ungrateful, to our great benefactour, and so negligent in that, which
concerned us most. Give not over the exercises of penance, of prayer, of
reading spiritual books, of frequentation of the Sacraments, though you
perform them but dryly. But above all let there be noe w^nt of humble prayer,
and of a wounded heart. For our merciful Lord who stands expecting, that we
should go toward him, to do us good, will come out upon the way, to meet
us; and will cover us close with the mantle of his pity, and goodness. And will
give us new strength, that now we may again, begin to serve him, and procure
new meritts for his kingdom. I beseech his divine Majesty, that he may so
proceed with you, for the eternal glory of his goodness.

The books about which you ask, and which I take to be convenient for you,
are the Confessions, and Meditations of S. Augustine; the Moralls of S.
Gregory; the Sum of the mysteries of our faith by Tit^leman, and Dionifius
Carthusianus. God almighty keep you ever.

A Letter of the Author to a Canallier his friend, whom he persuades to do
his dewry, which is to fight the battles of our Lord against the enemy of
God, which is the self-will of man.
I Have understood the reasons, whereby you would persuade me, that it is more
securely fit for you, to dwell in the City, then in that town. And though
indeed they be subtle, yet they do not move me much. For the most certain
of all is that, which we do, after the example of Christ our Lord; and which
we obtain at his hands by prayer; and which we see clearly by experience,
and not that, which on the other side, we take to be convenient for us,
through a mere human and perhapps a perpetual kind of judgment. Who can
doubt, but that you, as being an Inhabitant of that City, and withal a great
favorer of my meandness, and desiring much, that I should continue to live
there, are both Judge and witness, in your own cause. And therefore the time
which you spend in seeking reasons, were better employed, upon making devout
prayers. And it will happen to you as Saint Bernard faith it does between the
preacher and his hearers, If thou will persuade, says he, thou must do it
more by sighing then by exclaming. And though in that which I have said, me
thinks you have committed some excess; yet in another thing, you have the
better of it, and you edify me; Namely, in your having written three letters
to me, without having received any one answer of mine. I esteem this
favor, as much more then speaking by word of mouth, as there is difference,
between doing, and saying. And it is a thing, which I desire much, at his
hands who writes to me. For I find so many who are impatient with me^, upon
this occasion; that I had rather ^hey wrote not at all, then that they should
be offended with me so soon. And so much of this.

What shall I now say to you, or what shall I beg of you, since you are so
much my good Lord; but that (forasmuch as you are a Cauallier of honor,) you
resolve to fight; and that you be not called by a wrong name, a thing from
which a christian ought most to fly, for such a one must love sincerity, and be
that very thing, which he appears to be. I know well, that the vigilance of
our mortal enemy the devil, is so great, that, for the drawing us to be of
his party, and for fear least we should gain that, which he has lost, he
will often make you feel, ^ob. 7.
That the life of man here on earth, is a continual warfare; and now and then
will make you groan under the affliction of his extreme importunity, and cry
out to our Lord, from whom succor comes. D^^^^^ (...) patior, Esaias. 38.
responde pro me. O Lord I suffer violence, do^ thou answer for we. And now
since you have one already, who makes you remember that you live in war, I
will put you in mind in what sort you are to wage it, that so you may
overcome. For we cannot expect, as a frui^e of this war, but either great
felicity, or great misery; since the triumph of this victory is to be, God
possessed for all eternity; and the loss by being vanquished, is the loss,
and that for ever, of almighty God.

O that a man were able to thunder out so strong a voice, as that it might
reach to the ears of all mankind; and might astonish them with the fear of
hell, and encourage ch^^^ with the hope of heaven! O you Sonn^^ (...) Adam, how
long will you be so blind as (...) to see this? how long will you be so
deaf, as not to hear this? how long will you be so insensible, as that this
truth will not be able to penetrate to the very lowest, and most inward part of
your hearts? Tell me; why have you rendered your selves so basely, under the
fee^e of your enemies; and why do you run after them, with your hands tied
up, without either fear or shame? Do you not know that be who suffers
himself to be overcome by sin, John, (...).
us taken prisoner by the devil? Do you not know that the wages which sin
gives is death, both of body and soul in hell, and that for all eternity? why
do you wish your self so ill, as to go hunting after Your own mischeife;
giving stabs as it were to your own souls, by being so mightily enraged for
every little offense which may be offered you? And why have you not a feeling
of the loss of God, and of his freindshipp; since you have so quick a sense,
when there is question of a little riches, or honor, which whether it be kept
or lost, it makes you, in very deed, neither more nor less? what will you
answer in the day of visitation, and anguish, which is coming toward you,
when these shadows being past, and this sinoake being vanished, you shall be
summoned to leave that flesh, which you loved so much, and to forgo this
present world, which you so esteemed, and you shall be presented before that
rigorous Judge, whom you will find so much the more severe against you; as
he has found you less obedient to him?

What would you have him do? would you have him know you for his Caualliers,
you who have gone fighting in his enemies camp, on their side? And whilst he
mainteyned you with his blessings, and even with that very life, whereby you
live, you would needs obey the laws of his mortal enemy, when, the while,
you detested his? what would you have God do? would you have him pay you for
the service which you have not done? Into what reasonable mind can it sincke,
that I should serve one man and demand my pay of another? with what color can
I, who have offended a man ask him a reward (when I have do^^^) as of a
faithful servant? Let us not be deceived, O men, in this; Noe man shall reap,
Gal. 1 2. Cor.
but according to that which he has sown. He who sows in flesh, shall reap
corruption; and he who will reap life, must sow in spirit, for grapes grow
not out of thernes, nor figgs out of thistles.

I had forgott my self for I was speaking to dead men, as if they were alive.
What does it profitt to sound a trumpett to him who is in the profundity of
deafenes? what does it profitt me, to say Hear this, to men with whom it
enters not, even by the very first gates, of their heart. What shall we do, O
Lord? for now I se^ that the threat which was made by the Prophet Esaias is
fulfilled. Hearing you shall bear, and (...) understand, and seeing you shall
see, Esaias.
and yet not see. For neither words nor scourges, nor swee^^e usage cann
suffice to waken those miserable creatures out of their deadly sleep; till
their end arrive, when they must hear the sentence which sends them to Hell,
and then must feel eternal torments, without any remedy thereof. A great
misery is this, and he is happy, whom our Lord has delivered from it; giving
him notice of his wicked ways, and a will to walk afterward, in such as are
good. Remember you therefore that day, wherein God called you, and know that
then God opened your ears, and eyes, to the end that you might both see, and
hear; ^^verely and as truly, as if he had cured some person, who had been
blind, and dumb. And remembering it, give great ^hankes for the same; since a
gift was then given you, if you disposed your self well to receive it, which
is more worth, then all things else; since freindshipp with our Lord, was given
you, to which noe other thing may be compared. And let the sign of your true
gratitude, be a faithful care of perseuering to keep your eyes, and cares
open toward Almighty God. For he would be much more blameworthy, who should
fall when his eyes were open, and might see that he were falling; then another
who had noe eyes in his head. It is one thing for a soul to do absurd
things; another thing, for a man, who is of judgment. And so the fall of one,
whom our lord has raised, and placed upon his feet, and given him light,
wherewith to see; is more displeasing to his divine Majesty; then they which he
took, before they knew or loved God. I beseech you therefore admonish those
new Caualliers of the king of heaven, that they undertake not this business in
jest, since both the punishment of negligence, and the reward of due care which
is taken in it, is noe matter which indeed endures jest. God is a great Lord,
and he will be served with much diligence; and he inflicted noe less
punishment upon the sloathfull servant, then to cast him bound, hand, and
foot, into exterior darkness; which signifies a being excluded, from all the
blessings of God, and of his house.

And since to the end that we may be fauorits with an earthly king, and to
acquire the possession of a little earth, there is a necessity of taking care,
of watching, of troubles, yea and sometimes, even of shedding blood; let not
them grow faint, in the combatt; since God whose cause it is, will be their
captain in the strength of whose arm, they shall infallibly go victorious
out of the field.

The enemy whom they are to overcome, and the City which they are to subdue,
is their own proper will. Let them place that will, before themselves; and
against that, let them level all their shot; and to that let them say. Thou
art the enemy of God, since thou desire that which is contrary to him, and
therefore thou art my enemy. For I wholly belong to God. I am the fre^nd of his
friends; and the enemy of his enemies. I will have noe peace with thee, that
so I may have noe war with God. Let God reign in my heart, and not mine
own disordered will. I will govern my self according to that, which he
commands, and not according to that I list. I will beg of my God, that he will
be pleased to show me his holy will, and that shall be my law, though mine
own will would feign have it otherwise. Let it pain me or let it please me,
I am resolved to ^^e my self fast to God, since besides that I owe to him
otherwise; he was fastened to the Cross for me. Nay I am undone if I go not
to him, since all that which comes not to him here, with love; shall be
divided from him, in the next life, by his hate. Let it cost me my blood, N^^b.
25.
so that I may not loose my God, but that I may hear this word from his
blessed mouth. Rejoice thou good and faithful servant, enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord. In fine, all that which passes is very short; and all this is
temporal; and the rest eternal; all this is light, and that, is full of
weight. And therefore let us say from the heart, with David. Ps. 26.
One thing have I desired of our Lord, and that will I seek, that I may dwell
in the house of our Lord for ever. And let this be our conclusion, that heaven
did never cost dear. Our Lord grant it to you, and to us all, even by his
own de^re blood. Amen.

A Letter to a great Lord wherein he treates of the knowledge of God, and of a
man's self; and how he was to proceed toward his vassalls.
THE peace of our Lord Jesus Christ be ever remaining with your lordship* The
holy S. Augustine desired two things of our Lord, saying, Grant to me, O
Lord, that I may know thee, and that I may know my self. These two are things,
which we must all desire, and noe man is to be found without them, unless
withal he desire to be found without salvation. The Temple of Solomon
consisted of two parts; Both of them were holy, but yet one of them, was more
holy then the other. That part which was less holy, was the way, to the
other, which was more holy. The first is the knowledge of a man's self; which
certainly is a holy thing; and it is the way to that Sancta Sanctorum, which
is the knowledge of God; where our Lord makes answer to our demands, and
remedies our necessities; and where we find the fountain of life. For this,
says our Lord, is true life, that we know thee, and whom thou have sent,
Jesus Christ.

But now, this so high thing, namely the knowledge of God, is not to be
obtained, without that other, which seems so low, namely the knowledge of
ones self. It is most certain, that noe man ever saw God, unless first he
saw himself. Nor is it safety for any man, to fly high, unless he have the
counterpoyse of knowing himself, which makes us think basely of our selves.

Amongst all the other favors of our Blessed Savior, there is noe doubt, but
that his disciples would be standing to look at him, with exceeding great
gust, whilst he was ascending up to heaven upon Ascension day, since there was
noe remedy, but that they must needs forgo his conversation; that
conversation which can carry noe disgust with it. And they found great comfort,
in looking upon the way by which he passed, and toward the place to which he
went. But what did our lord command them? Not certainly, that they should be
still casting up their eyes to heaven, though that seemed to be an excellent
thing; But he said thus to them; You men of Galilee, why do you stand looking
up to heaven? Giving us thereby to understand, that although it be a very
sauoury thing, to look toward God, yet it concerns us also to study our
selves. First for the reverence which we owe to God upon whom we cannot
look, but with great confusion, considering how unworthy we are thereof. And
secondly, because when a man forgetts himself, he is instantly apt to become
wanton; and not seeing his own faults, and frailty, he grows to loose all
holy fear and he proves light, and giddy, like a ship which being without
ballist, looses the ankar, when any tempest rises, and the end thereof is to be
carried hither and thither, till at last it be brought to suffer wrack. I never
saw any soul remain in safety, but by the knowledge of it self. Noe building
can be sure without deep foundation; and that time is well employed, which is
spent upon the reproof of a man's own soul. It is full of profitt, toward
the amendment of our faults, if we will examine them. What kind of thing is a
man who examines not, and knows not himself but a house without a window; but
the son of some widow ill brought up, who for want of correction, is grown
wicked; but a measure, without all measure, and rule, and which therefore is a
false measure. And finally, what is he but a man, who is indeed noe man? For
he who considers not himself, does neither govern himself like a man, nor
does he understand, or possess himself; but why lest he is able to tell many
stories of other things, he can give noe account of himself, at all. These are
they; who having forgotten themselves, take such pains to understand the lives
of others; and having shut up their eyes to their own defects, have yet more
then a hundred eyes open, which stand in continual watch over the error of
other folks. These are they, who observe, and aggrauate the errors of their
neighbors, and neglect their own. For in regard those errors of others are
beheld by them, more continually, and more close at hand; they seem greater to
them, then their own, upon which they never look but from far of; and so,
how great soever they be in themselves, they seem little to them. From hence
it proceeds, that in their conversation, they are so intractable, and so
rigourous; for just after the rate of their having noe consideration of their
one infirmities, they have noe compassion of others.

I never yet saw man, who was curious in the consideration of himself, who
would not also, easily pass over the fault of another, and whatsoever that
man be, who is severe against another when he falls, gives strong evidence,
whereby it is proved that he considers not his own defects. So that, if we
desire to fly, from this so dangerous kind of blindenes, we must be sure to
view and reuiew; what kind of things our selves are, that so when we find
how miserable we be, we may cry out for remedy, to our lord Jesus. Because
indeed, he is Jesus, that is to say a Savior; but yet of noe other, then
such as know, and bewail their own miseries, and who receive ( indeed, if
they can; and, in desire, if they cannot) the holy Sacraments of the Church,
that so they may be cured and saved. And although for the making us know our
selves, God, and his Saints, have declared, many and many things to us, yet he
who shall attentively behold that which he may observe to pass within his
own heart, will find so many things for which he must despise him self,
that, with horror, he will cry out, from the bottom of that Abisse, and say,
there is noe end of my miseries.

Who is he that has not erred, in those things wherein he thought him self
most sure? who has not desired, and searched after things, as concerning that
they were good for him; which yet afterward, he found to be full of prejudice?
Who will presume to know any thing, since he has been deceived innumerable
times? what thing is more blind, then a man, who knows not so much, as what
he is to ask of God, as S. Paul tells us? and this comes to pass, Romans 2.
because we know not so much as what is good, for our selves, as it happened
even to the same S. Paul. Who begging of God, that he would free him from a
particular temptation, Romans 2. Cor. 12.
conceived that he had asked a right; but it was given him to be understood,
that indeed he knew not what he asked, nor so much as what was good for him.
And now who will put confidence in his ability, to know even so much as what
he should Judge, and desire, concerning himself, since he, whom the holy
ghost inhabited, did ask that, which was not good for him, to obtain.
Certainly, our ignorance must needs be very great, fince we err so often in
those things, wherein it imports us so much not to err.

But now though sometimes, our lord should teach us to know what is good, yet
who does not see, how very great our weakness is; and how we fall flat upon our
faces, in those things, wherein it concerned us to stand up right. To whom
has it not occurred many times, to propound the doing of some good thing, and
yet to find himself overthrown, and overcome, by that wherein he took
himself to be most invincible. To day we lament our sins with tears in our
eyes, and we purpose to refrain them afterward, and yet, even whilst the same
tears are still wett upon our cheeks; some new occasion of sin is offered,
and weeping because we fell, we committ that very thing, for which we may have
cause to weep again; receiving the body of our lord Jesus Christ, with much
cause of being confounded, for the irreuerence which we have committed. For the
time having been but short, since we harbored his precious body in our
bosoms, it happens sometimes, that by some sin, we drive his grace out of
our souls. What care is so weak, and light, which chaunges so often, upon
the warning of all winds, as we? Sometimes merry and sometimes sadd; now
devout, and then distracted; now full of desire tending to heaven, and then
following the world, and even dropping down to hell. Now he abhorres a thing,
and instantly he loves that, which he abhorred. He casts up that which he had
eaten, because he found it charge his stomach, and presently he eats it up
again, as if he had not cast it before. What thing can there be, with such
variety of colors in it, as a man who is made after this sort? what Image can
they painte with so many faces, and so many tongues, as this kind of man?
How truly said Job, Man never remains in one and the same state. Job. 14.
Job. 7.
And the reason hereof is because he is ashes or dust, and his life, a wind.
Now what a sott should he be, who would seek for any repose or rest,
between dust, and wind? I do not think that there could be a more hedious
thing, then if we were able to discern to how many several dispositions one
man is subject, in one only day. His whole life is a very mass of mutability,
and frailty. And that, which the scripture says, agrees well to him, Eccl. 27.
The fool is as chaungeable as the Moon.

But now what remedy shall we find hereof? Certainly we can have none
better then to know our selves for Lunaticks. And, as in former times they
carried a Lunatic person to our Lord Jesus Christ, that he might cure him; so
let us go for cure, to the same lord Jesus. The scripture says, that the
evil spirit tormented that man, and that sometimes he cast him into the fire,
and sometimes into the water; and the very same happens to us. Sometimes we
fall into the fire of covetousness, of wrath, and of envy; at other times into
the water of carnality, of tepidity, and of malice. And if we consider, upon
how large accounts we stand obliged to almighty God, for the time past; and
how little amendment there is in the time present, we will be sure to say, and
we may do it with much truth. The sorrows of death have environed me, the
dangers of hell have hemmed me in.

O danger of hell, which is so mightily to be feared! And who is not he, that
will not watch with a hundred thousand eyes, that he may not be put to welter
in that profound Lake; where he shall eternally bewail the temporal delight,
which he has unlawfully enjoyed? who will not take care of his way, least
otherwise he be found wa^dering from all happiness? where are the eyes of that
man, who sees not this? where are his ears, who hears not this? where is his
palate who tastes not this? It is a clear testimony of death, not to perform
the actions of life. Our sins are innumerable, our frailties are great, our
enemies are stout, crafty, and many; and they hate us home. That whereof we
are in question, is either the gayning or loosing of God, for all eternity. How
comes it then to pass, that in the midst of so many dangers, we can esteem
our selves secure; and under the weight of so many wounds, we do not feel
the pain thereof? why seek we not for some remedy, before the night steal
upon us, and before the gates of all succor, be shutt up against us? when
those foolish virgins shall cry out, Matthew 25. 1. Cor. 11.
and it shall be answered thus, I know you not.

Let us therefore know our selves, and we shall be known by almighty God. Let
us judge and condemn our selves, and so we shall be absolved by almighty God.
Let us place our eyes upon our own faults, and so there will be mercy
enough for us, and to spare. Let us consider our own miseries, and we shall
learn to have pity upon those of others. Eccl. 31.
For as the scripture says, By that which is in thy self, thou shall come to
know that which is in thy neighbor. If I see my self fall sometimes by
frailty, I shall think that it may happen so to my neighbor, and as I shall
be gladd to have my fault pitied, so will I have pity upon other men. When
my betters do me a disfavor which I feel much, I must think that my
inferiors will be troubled after the same manner, if I disfavor them. If I be
sadd, I desire comfort; and my neighbors case is the same. I am troubled at an
ill word which was spoken to me, and I say. That I am made of flesh and not of
iron; and this serves me for a proof, that my neighbor is also made of
flesh, and feels the like affliction, upon the like occasion. The ill
conditions of some men, give me trouble; and I wish that they would mend them,
that so they may not occasion me to sin, and my neighbors desire the same
of me. We are all made of the same metal, and there is noe better rule by
which I may live with my neighbor, then to mark attentively, that which
passes within my self, since he, and I, are one.

He who practices this point of mercy with his neighbor; may safely pass on
to the knowledge of Christ our Lord to be releiued by him. Mat. 5.
For the merciful, shall obtain mercy. But otherwise, he will hear that,
which the scripture says, He who shutts his ear against the voice of the
poor, Pro. 21.
that man shall cry out, and not be heard.

All man kind is poor; nor is there any one of that race, who is not subject
to some necessity. Let us consider well, if we be deaf to the miseries of
others, for so will God be to ours. Mat. 7.
Let noe man think, that Christ our Lord, will measure to us with any other
measure, men as we measure to others. Let noe man think, that he shall
obtain pardon, if he afford not pardon. The untoward man, shall meet with
untowardness; the troublesome man, with troubles; the offensive man, with
injuries, and the charitable man, with mercy. For, to sow thorns, with a
man's neighbor; and to think of gathering sigges, at the hands of God, is
wholly impossible.

Now because we consider not this, there are very few who find themselves
enterteyned; by almighty God with sweetenes; and there are many who complain,
that God forgetts to releive their miseries; and they marvel how he can send
them such store of troubles, both within, and without; especially since his
very name, is, Merciful, and the shewer of mercies; and since he inuites men
to seek for succor at his hands. They beg, they seek, and they find noe
remedy; and from thence comes their complaint. But if they were not deaf to
that law, which God published in his gospel, saying, with the self same
measure, wherewith you measure to others, Mat. 7.
it shall be measured to you again, they would plainly see, that themselves
are they, who are wanting to their neighbors, and consequently are wanting to
God in their persons; and therefore it is, that God may seem to be wanting to
them. Let them complain in themselves, in that they have noe charity with
their neighbors. For God, is full of Charity, for his part; but it is not
reason, nor will he exercise it, toward such, as are wanting in it to their
neighbors. And if at any time he impart temporal blessings, to such a one as
is uncharitable toward others, what good will those blessings do that wicked
man, if withal he loose himself. But God will not give him any such thing, as
may make him indeed the better by it, but upon condition that he carry
himself as he ought toward his neighbors.

Let us therefore know our selves, and let us be toward others, as we desire,
they should be toward us; and so let us pass on toward the knowledge of
God, and from the Sancta to the Sancta Sanctorum. And let us lift up our eyes
to our Lord, who was placed upon the Cross, for our salvation, and in him we
shall discern, both more, and greater blessings, then we discovered miseries
in our selves. And if by thinking what we are, we grow sadd, through the
consideration of our greiuous sins past, and through the dangers which are
at hand; we shall be refreshed by looking up to him, when, we consider, both
how truly, and how superaboundantly he paid that, which we owe, and purchased
that strength for us, whereby we might subdue our enemies.

It is he who secures us, but, upon condition, that we rely on him. And what
O Lord, shall he fear, who follows thee? At what shall he tremble, who loves
thee? Who shall be able to set upon that man, who takes thee for his defense?
How shall the devil be able to carry him away, who is incorporated in thee? Or
how shall the eternal father forbear to love that creature whom he
perceiues to be in his son, as the b^aunch is in the vine? Or how shall the
son fail to love that man, whom he perceiues to love him? Or how shall the
Holy ghost forsake that creature, who is the temple, which himself inhabits?
we possess greater benefits in Christ our lord, then we are full of miseries
in our selves; and we have more cause of hope when we behold him, then of
distrust when we cast our eyes upon our selves. Nor is there any comfort, or
resting place for such a one as is disco^forted in himself, but to look up to
this Jesus, upon the Cross; whom God ordained for the remedy of all such as
should be wounded, with the bitting of spiritual serpe^ts. For as anciently God
commanded that they should erect a Serpent of brass; that all such a should
behold it, might be cured of the wound of those corporal serpe^ts, so he who
shall behold Christ our lord, with faith and lone, shall live, and he, on the
other side, who behoulds him not, shall not fail to dye. He who finds himself
all afflicted, and wounded, shall be refreshed, if he look up hither, as David
did, when he said. My soul, was troubled within me, Ps. 41.
and therefore will I remember thee, and the land of Jordan, and Hermo^, and
the little hill.

He who behoulds himself, and there discouers so many abominations, is
troubled at himself, and he has reason. And not finding one hour exactly
well spent in his whole life, but seeing his sins to be many and great, and
his good deeds to be so few, and weak what should he do but be troubled,
when he finds himself so unable to make a good accounte, before so strict a
Judge? Only he must remember Christ our lord, considering what he wrought in
the land of Jordan, and upon that little hill: and bewayling his sins, and
receiving the holy Sacraments, he must live in obedience to the commaundeme^ts
of God, and of his Church; and so as a son, he may hope for the inheritance
of heaven.

He must also call to mind, that which was wrought by our lord in those hills
of Hermon, which are many and in the little hill also. Which whether it be
that of Horeb, where God gave the law, or whether it be some other hill, does
not so much import us, who are Christians; whose understanding Jesus Christ
has opened toward the conceiving of the scriptures, and he understands them,
who understands Christ our Lord in them, who is shutt up therein, as a grain
of corn may be, in an ear, or as wine, is in the grape. And therefore the end
of our law is Christ our Lord; for all the law rests in him. Cor. 10
The hills of Hermon, both they which are within the land of promise, and
without it, as also the little hill, do all signify but one hill, which may
justly be said to be a little one, and to be of Herman. And this is Mount
Caluary, where our redemption was wrought, by the shedding of the blood, of the
son of God.

Now to the end that we may know, how well this name may be applied to Mount
Caluary, it is to be understood that Hermon signifies malediction. And how can
Mount Caluary be better expressed, then by the name of malediction; since it
was the place to which they carried malefactors to be executed; whom the
scripture calls accursed, because they were to be so punished. And because
Christ our Lord saw, that we were to be accursed, and adjudged to everlasting
malediction, he was pleased, through the immensenes of his Charity, to take
our maledictions upon himself, I mean the punishment of our sins, that so
his benediction might descend on us. S. Paul, expresses thus much after this
manner. Gal. 3.
Christ was made malediction that so his benediction might be communicated to
the Gentiles. He was blessed, and we were cursed: But now the case is altered,
and we change persons, with one another. He took the place of the accursed,
in being tormented upon the Cross, which was dew to us; and we are admitted
to the freindship of God, and to be his sons, and the inheritours of the
kingdom of heaven, with a thousand other benedictions, which came from our
Blessed lord Jesus Christ, in whom they remain for ever.

O wonderful exchange! that life should dye, to the end that death may live.
Benediction is accursed, that so malediction may be blessed. The sound man is
wounded, that so the wounded man may be cured. The son is treated as a
slave, that so the slave may be adopted for a son. They most cruelly handle
him who deserves all pity; and all the favor and Regalo falls upon that
person, who deserved hell. In fine what shall we say? They apprehend the
innocent, and they release the guilty. The just man pays for sins, Innocence
is condemned, and the wicked man is justified. What did Christ our lord choose
for himself? Our afflictions, and our miseries, to be his recreations and
delights. What shall we say to such a charity as this; but that we are to
praise and bless this lord, day, and night, who has wrought our redemption;
and salvation by a way, which put him to so much cost.

This is indeed that hill of Hermon, that little hill; and this so truly, as
that he was esteemed by the relation of the Prophett Esaias, Esaias. 53.
for the meanest amongst men. And for this reason our Lord himself says, Ps.
21
I am a worm and noe man but the dishonor of men, and the abasement of the
people. O thou honor of men, and angels! and how can thou be the dishonor
of men? Thou, who art the advancement of thy people, and who art the glory both
of heaven and earth, what could make thee grow to be the abasement of thy
people, but only thine own great Charity. For thou to honor us, did
endure so great dishonor, that as we are wont to say of some very base
unworthy man, that he dishonours his whole stock, so did they also say of
thee, that thou dishonouredst the whole race of mankind. Be thou Blessed
without end. For all the honor, which all the race of mankind possesses,
comes from thee, and through thee. Thou gave it by the conjunction of thy
self to them, making thy self man, and dying for men and exalting them to an
equallity with Angels, and even with Seraphins, if themselves will; and
ordeyning, that the sons of sinful Adam, they may become the sons of
God. and the heirs of thy Father, and coheyres with thee; as being thy
brethren, and yet thou; O Lord, art called the dishonor, and abasement of the
people. Thou did abase thy self O Lord to exalt us; thou did abase thy
self below all men, that thou might raise us, about the Angels.

What shall we render to thee O Lord, for so great favors; but only that we
must tenderly, and profoundly know, that if we have any thing, if we be fit
for any thing, and if we be any way acceptable to almighty God, it is wholly by
thee; And we must yield thee all thanks, and praise, for that thou being what
thou art, would yet vouchsafe to offer thy self to sufferance of so great
afflictions, for such wretched things, as we are. Thou diminishedst thy self
in that little hill, that thou might exalt us to that great hill. Thou
dyedst on Mount Caluary, to the end that we might live in the mountain of
heaven. And by the malediction which fell upon thee there, thou did
purchasse, and thou will impart to us that happy benediction of thine. Come you
blessed of my father, possess, the kingdom which is prepared for you. They
cursed thee, O Lord, and thou blessedst us. Thy death gives us life, and thy
affliction, ease; Since thou were content to be judged, it is reason that thou
also be our Judge. Let us therefore rejoice since he who loves us so much,
is to be our Judge; and we will go confidently to judgment, since the Judge
is of our own flesh and blood.

If we know not what we may do, for the pleasing of Almighty God, let us
look up to Christ our Lord, and he will teach us meekenes, from that Cross.
Who being amongst wicked persons, did not curse them, who cursed him; nor did
he revenge himself, though he had power enough, over such as did him
mischeife: He despised honor, and to be rich, and to be regaled. And to obey
the will of his father he offered himself to the Cross. He who wants
knowledge, let him come to here this Doctor, as he is sitting in this Chair.
He who will hear a good sermon, let him come to Christ our Lord, being in the
pulpitt of the Cross, and he shall be free from error; because Truth which is
Christ our Lord himself, shall free him. And if we be chaungeable, and weak,
in working, let us look upon this author of our faith, and see how he is
nailed to that Cross, both hand and foot; and that immoueably, to the end
that, by his grace we may be constant, and perseuerant in doing well. He who
will go to Christ our Lord, for the cure of his inconstancy, shall obtain a
perseverance, like that of Anna, 1. kings 1.
the mother of Samuel, of whom it is said; That she turned her countenance
noe more toward several ways. He who dwells in Christ our lord, does not
wander hither and thither, but stands fast in goodness, according to the
Scripture which says, that such a one is ever clear, like the sun; Eccl. 27.
and that his light is not diminished. For he who is in Christ, participates
of Christ. And so as Christ is Just, he is also Just, if Christ be firm, he
is also firm, though in a far inferior degree. For, as in one body, there
is but one spirit, which diffuses it self, through all the parts of that
body, and they all live by one humane life; and not one of them by the life of
a man, and another by the life of a lion, or any other beast, so all they who
are in Christ our lord, live by his Spirit, as the branch lives by the life of
the vine, and as the members live, by the head. And he who possesses this
Spirit, is like to Christ our Lord, and partakes of his conditions; although
(as I said), it be in a far inferior degree. And he who has not the spirit
of Christ; Romans 8
let him hearken to S. Paul who says, If any man have not the spirit of
Christ, that man is not of Christ.

Let a man therefore view and reuiew himself, to see if he find a conformity
of his soul, with that of Christ our Lord; and if he have it, it will be easy
for him to keep the commandments of Christ, since he is of the same
condition with him. And though he be not yet, of conformity with Christ let
him go to Christ, and beg his spirit of him, whereby he may be strengthened,
according to that which David desired, thus, Confirm me with thy principal,
or chief spirit. For it will profitt me little, Psalm. 50.
that Christ came into the world, if withal he come not into my heart. Christ
brought down goodness, peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost, with many other
benedictions. If I live in wickedness, war, ungodly melancholy, or inordinate
delight, Christ our Lord dwells not in my soul. And it is in effect, with me,
as if he had not come into the world at all, saving that it will turn to my
greater misery; for I shall be punished so much the more, because I would not
admit of that salvation, which was offered me, with so good a will.

Christ our lord dyed for us all, and is ready to receive us all. Let us make
toward him; though it be but to do him curtesy; and let us not permit that
so great, and precious labors and afflictions of his, may remain
fruitelesse. The price of them are our souls, if we will carry them to
Christ. Let us cast our selves down at his feet, detesting our sins, and
our former wicked life; distrusting our own knowledge, and worth, and
strength; and so, perseuering to beg, to knock, and to cry out, he will fill us
with knowledge; how to address our selves, and with power to work; and with
perseverance, that we may not fainte as it is written, Esaias 40.
They who confide in our Lord, shall proceed from strength to strength, they
shall take the wings of an egle, they shall fly, and not faint. And since there
are more excellencies in Christ our Lord then there are miseries in us, let us
go on toward him, acknowledging that he is our only remedy; for by this
means we shall not despair through our own miseries, but take comfort and
partake of his excellencies.

This my lord, seemed sufficient to me, for the address of a person who has a
mind to draw near to God. But because in your lordship, there is the capacity
of two persons, your lordship will have need of two rules. That which is said,
may suffice forasmuch as co^cernes your own particular person; but in respect
that you are a man, who have so great charge over so many others; it will be
necessary for you, to have more and more care of your self. For there are
many, who for as much as co^cernes their own particular conscience, are good
men; and yet they fail in being good Lords, and good Magistrates. And this
second part is more hard, and it is the work of one who is a kind of perfect
man; for it takes that first kind of goodness for granted, and then passes
further on. For he who forasmuch as concerns himself, is not Just, will not
be Just in what he ought to do toward others. But yet it suffices not for one
who has charge over many, that he be Just, for as much as concerns only his
own particular person. Ely. for his own part was a good man, but he was not
good for as much as concerned his sons, since he for boreto punish them; and
therefore he was greiuously punished by almighty God. So that, great lords have
need of a manyfold kind of goodness, since they have a manifold kind of
person.

As for this second part, which to be, concerns a common or public person,
me thinks there is noe better glass, wherein a man who is a lord over others,
ought to look, then upon that lord of men and angels, whose person he
represe^ts. He who sitts in the place of another, it is but reason that he
have the properties of him, whose place he holds. A lord of vassailes is a
Lieutenant of God who ordaines, that some shall govern and command, and that
others shall obey. He who resists those former, does by the testimony of S.
Paul, resist she ordination of God, Romans 13.
who disposes of all things according to subordination.

Now therefore let a man consider, what office God exercises toward man; and
so a great lord shall know how he is to carry himself toward his people.
God chastises such as err, without any acceptance of persons, and in this he
is so strict, that he has not any, who is so great a fauourit of his, but
that he shall pay soundly for it, if he give just cause. Nay he pardoned not
so much as his own son, though he own nothing for himself, but only
because he obliged himself, to pay for the sins of others. Without fail he
must needs be far from acceptance of persons, who punished with so great
severity, his only begotten son, and such a son, and so dearly beloved,
and that for the sins of others. There is nothing which should have power, to
make him who gouernes, forbear the doing of his duty; but he is to stand like
the stalk of a balla^ce which leanes not, either to the one scale or to the
other, that so cuery man may have his own. There is noe state but it would
perish and be undone, if public business should be ledd, after the pace of
particular affections. And at an instant does that person leave to be public,
when he hangs never so little toward the particular.

Now since the respect of private profitt, must not bend him who gouernes, much
less must the respect of any other man's profitt make him bend, since he owes
more to himself then to any other. Christ our Lord is the pattern which is
made for all; not only forasmuch as concerns the private conscience of a
particular man, but forasmuch also as concerns any public person. For he
was a king and so he is, though not after the manner of this world. But being
in the chair of his Cross, he said to his mother, Woeman behold thy son.
To give us to understand that he who is in the place of a public person,
must renounce all particular inclinations, though it should regard his very
Mother. And the same example, he also gave us, when at some other times, he
would speak with less te^dernes to that Blessed Mother of his. To teach us how
careful we must be, to keep our selves clear from particular affection,
though some be angry at it, and though our selves endure pain by it, rather
then to cherish them, with disgust to God.

There is nothing, to which great lords ought to attend so much (that so they
may be well, both with God and man) as truly, and cordially, (and like men who
live in the presence of God) to remain ever faithful, and firm to him, with
out hanging either to this way, or to that. And this will be easily performed
by that great man, who shall attentively consider, that he is but the Minister
of God; as one who but merely executes, and must not exceed the commission
which is given to him. God places not great. Lords in the world, to the end
that they may do, and undo, what they list; but to execute the laws of his
holy will. And though they may account themselves lords, yet are they still
under the universal Lord of all, in comparison of whom, they are more truly
vassailes, then their vassailes are theirs, and their power is as truly
limited as their vassailes power is forasmuch as concerns the dispensing with
what they ought to do. So that he is to be more favored, and beloved, who
has most right on his side, and he is to be most punished, who deserves it
most. And thus may any lord resemble the true lord of all, if without
acceptance of persons, he give to every one according to his works; yea and
if sometimes he punish most, such as are most favored by him. Both because
reason would require, that they should offend him least; and for that also
they must not think that because they are beloved by him, they may take
occasion to do what they list, and that which reason allows not. Freindship
should last as long as virtue does, and enmity, or opposition, as vice; For if
it be otherwise, woe be to ihem, who call good, evil, and evil, good.

Your lordship must consider besides, that God has placed you, in the eyes of
many; who take that to be a rule of their lives, which they see you do. Make
account that you are seated in a high place, and that your speech and fashions
are seen by all, and followed by the most part of men. If such a fashion be
taken up in Court, if such a manner of speech be used there, all men procure to
follow it. And if it were the custom amongst great lords, that when one should
give them a buffet upon one cheek, they would tender the other, and if it were
the fashion for thim, to abhor sin, and to take it for a point of
greatenes, to obey the laws of Christ our Lord, without doubt, inferior men
would hold it an honor, to do that which they saw practiced by great
persons. And for this reason, I believe, that the Prelates of the Church, and
the lords of the world, are a cause of perdition, to the most part of souls.

I beseech your lordship, that as you are a particular man, you will look into
your self with a hundred eyes, and that, you will look into your self, with
a hundred thousand, as you are a person, upon whom many look, and whom many
follow. And take care, to carry both your person, and your house, so ordered,
as the law of Christ requires; that he who shall imitate your lordship, may
also imitate Christ our Lord therein, and may meet with nothing to stumble
at. The vulgar, is without doubt, but a kind of ape. Let great men consider
what they do, for in fine that will be followed, either to their salvation, if
they give good Example, or for their condemnation, if it be evil. And this
consideration alone should suffice to make great lords live like so many
Saints, though it might cost them some trouble; considering how our lord Jesus,
the son of God, would not be a king, but resolved by his labor and sweat, to
give rest, and peace to his subjects. And he fledd from prosperities and
honors, least otherwise, he might have given occasion of sin to his
servants, who would have thought, (if Christ our lord had followed them) that
is would also have been their part, to pursue the same. All things are to be
thought little worth, so that we may procure thereby, that God be served. And
let this be the final conclusion; That so much the more attentively, a man
shall consider, and imitate Jesus Christ, so much the better man, and so much
the better Lord he shall be. For in him we began, and so also we will end
in him.

A Letter of the Author, to a Lady in the time of Aduent, and upon this
occasion he persuades her to dispose her self to receive the Infant Jesus, and
to love him with fervent love.
HOw busy will your ladyship be, in this holy time, preparing a lodging for
that guest, who is coming to you. Me thinks, I see you as earnest, as S.
Martha, and yet as quiet as S. Mary Magdalen; that so by your endeauours, both
exterior and interior, you may do him service, who is drawing near, since
he is so worthy both of the one and of the other, and is, in fine, your lord.
O blessed time wherein is represented to us the coming of God in flesh to dwell
amongst us, Luke 1.
to illuminate our darkness, and to address our feet in the way of peace, and
to adopt us for his brethren, and to design us for the enjoying of the same
inheritance with himself.

It is not without cause, that you desire his coming, and that you prepare your
heart for his habitation. For this lord was desired long before he came, Agge.
and the Prophet called him The desire of all Nations; Psalm. 9.
and indeed he gives himself to none, but such as desire him. God hears the
desire of the poor, for his ears are laid close to the sighing of our hearts,
and he cares for nothing else in us but that. To such a heart he comes, and
cannot deny himself, as it is said in the Canticles. Cant. 4
Thou have wounded my heart, O thou my sister, and my spouse; thou have wounded
my heart, by the cast of one of thine eyes, and by a hair of thy head. Is it
possible for any thing to be more tender, then that which is wounded, by the
sight of a single eye? Is it possible for any thing to be more weak, then that
which is tied fast by one single hair? where now are they, who say, that God
is hard to be obtained, that he is rigourous to be dealt with, and insupportable
to be endured. We must quarrel with our selves, since, because we will be
looking many several ways, we place not our sight upon God; nor will we
shutt that eye of ours, which behouldes creatures, that so with all our thought
we may consider God alone. He who shootes in a Cross bow, shutts one of his
eyes, that he may see better with the other, how to hitt the white; and we,
the while, will not shutt up all that sight of ours, which hinders us from
being able to hunte and wound our lord with love.

Let him recollect, and make sure his love, and let him lodge it in God,
whosoever has a mind to obtain God. For as God is love, so is he only to
be hunted, and taken with love; and he will have nothing to do with them, who
love him not. And if they say, that they know him already as they ought; 2.
John. 4.
S. John will tell them that they say not true. But our lord who is wounded
with an eye, is tied with a hair. For that which love takes, the recollected
and reflected thought conserues, that it may not be lost.

And to the end that men might be put into confidence, that they should be able
to arrive to almighty God, and that he has noe mind to slipp away, he makes
himself one of them, and lays himself in the arms of a virgin, swathed up
hand and foot, without power to fly from that man, who is disposed to seek
him. O celestial bread, which descendest out of the bosom of thy Father, and
art laid in the public places of this world, inuiting as many as will, that
they may come to enjoy thee, and feed upon thee. And who is he who can
endure to withhould him self from goeing to thee, and from receiving thee,
since thou give thy self, upon noe harder condition, then only that we be
content to hunger after thee? For do thou peradventure ask more of us, then
only that a soul may sigh for thee, and confessing her sins, may receive,
and love thee?

Great is the misery of those men, who when bread comes to seek them in their
own howses, they choose rather to dye of hunger, then to stoop to take it up.
O sloth what a deal of mischeife thou do! O blindenes, what a deal of
benediction do thou loose! O sleepines, what a deal of advantage do thou
steal away! since considering the promise, that whosoever seeks shall find,
Mat. 7 and 21 Mark 11. Luc. 11 John. 14. and 16
and he who asks shall obtain, and to him who knockes it shall be opened; it
is clear that if we prove not well, the fault is ours.

But what? shall things pass still after this manner? Though God himself is
come to cure us, shall we still continue sick? He being at the gate of our
heart, crying out and saying, Open to me, O thou my friend, and my spouse,
shall we being all wrapped up in vanities, Cant. 4.
suffer him to stand calling there, and not so much as open him the gate?

O my soul come hither, and tell me, for I ask thee on the part of God,
what, in fine, is that thing, which detaines thee, from goeing all, with all
thy forces, after God? What do thou love, if thou do not love this Spouse
of thine? Or rather why do thou not love him much, who did so mightily love
thee? He had noe business on earth, but to attend to the love of thee, and to
seek thy profitt, with his own loss. And what have thou to do in this
world, but to exercise thy self, all, in love of this king of heaven? Do
thou not see, how all that which here thou see, must have an end, as also
all that which thou hear, which thou touchest, which thou tastest, and
wherewith thou do converse? Do thou not see, that all this is but
cobwebs, which cannot cloth thee, and keep thee warm? Where art thou if thou
have not thy being in Jesus Christ our lord? what art thou thinking? what
account art thou making? what do thou seek, out of that only, one,
complete God?

Let us rowse up our selves at last, and break of this badd sleep; Let us
awake, for it is broad day, since Jesus Christ our lord who is the light, is
come. Let us do the wookes of light, since there was time wherein we did the
works of darkness. O that the memory of that time, wherein we know not God,
might serve us now for sharp spurrs, to make us run greedily after him. O
that we could run, O that we could fly, O that we might burn, and be
transformed, into him. What must a creature do, when he sees his creator made
man, and all for love of him alone? who ever heard of such a love as this, that
one loving another, should by love be converted into that other. It is true
that God loved us, when he made us after his Image; but a far greater work
it was to make himself after our image. He abases himself to us, that he may
exalt us to him. He makes himself man, that he may make us Gods. He desce^des
from heaven, that he may carry us thither in his company; and in fine he dyed,
that he might give us life. And now shall it be possible that in the midst of
these things, I should lie sleeping and without any sense of gratitude for so
great love? O lord illuminate mine eyes, that they may not sleep in such a
death as this And thou who have done us this great favor, Ps. 12.
give us also a right feeling of it. For otherwise, the greater the benefitt
is, the more hurt it will do us in the end.

O Lord open thou mine eyes, that they may consider thee, descending out of the
bosom of thy father; and entering into that of thy virgin mother, that I may
give thee great thanks for this benefit. Make me able to humble my self for
thee. Make me able to consider thee lying in a maunger, insteade of a bed,
crying out, through could and being oppressed with poverty; and make me learn
thereby, how to cast all delicacy far from me. Make thy tears and sighs
show and sound themselves forth in mine ears, that so they may mollify my
heart, and that so it may deliver it selfcouer, as wax, to every inclination of
thy will. And do not thou permit, that God should weep, and that man should
have noe feeling of it; for I know not at which of these two things, we might
wonder most.

Seal up, O lord, thy words in my soul, that I may never sin against thee.
Let the blood which thou did shed for me, be gathered up into my heart, and
be thou all, my only love, that so thou may not repent thy self, of all
these great afflictions, which thou enduredst for me. It is I, whom thou
soughtst, and whom thou seek still; and for me thou have made all those
tiltings, and triumphs, and showed forth all thy liueries, and undergone all
that cost. Let me never see my self belonging to any other then thee, since
thou have deserved me so well.

Come Madam, let that heart of yours, now prepare it self for God is upon the
point of being borne; and he has neither house, nor bed, wherein to lie. Let
your heart be all inflamed with love, for the Infant suffers much cold. And yet
if your heart be but even so much as luke warm this Infant with his cold, will
give it greater heat. For how much the more cold he suffers for us, so much the
more love, he shows to bear us; and where I find my self to be more
beloved, there am I obliged more to love.

Exteriourly he suffers cold, and yet, through the great love he bears us, he
can endure noe clothes; but he lies naked as soon as he is borne, and naked
they lay him upon the Cross, because in his bearth, and in his death, he
showed the greatest excess of love.

Madam, you must provide a cradle wherein you may rock him a sleep, which
signifies the repose of contemplation, and see that you tend, and treat him
well, for he is the son of a great high king, and he is the son also of a
virgin, and he takes much gust to lodge himself in the heart of virgins; for
the meat he eats is flesh, which is crucified and dead. And because he has a
great deal of poor people, amongst his kindred, whom yet he loves dearly
well, you must be also sure to love them, for they are the brethren of our
creators. As soon as he is borne in your heart, you must take care to nurse
him; and I beseech him to keep and save you, for his mercies sake. Amen.

A Letter to a certain Lady, who is taught with what disposition she is to
receive Christ our lord, into her soul; and with what care she is to keept
him, and of the great misery where into that soul falls, which committs
mortal sin, and what a great treason it is, to leave God, and follow the
devil, especially for such as have been particularly favored by almighty God.
THE grace and peace of the holy ghost, be in your heart, and assist you in this
holy time; that you may prepare your soul, for that Infant who is now to be
borne. For he has noe house, but in those souls which are well disposed to
receive him. He comes as a stranger, and in great poverty, Give him your
heart, Mat. 25
that so he may say in the last day, I was a stranger and you received me.
But yet consider withal, that as there is nothing so much to be desired by you
as to lodge this Infant in your soul, so is there nothing which requires more
care and diligence, then to prepare, the lodging ready, in such sort as he
desires. He comes in humility, and poverty; and they who receive him must be
humble, and poor. He comes to undertake great labors, and with labor that
house must be adorned, wherein he voutchafes to dwell. He is chaste, and he
loves such as are chaste. And though he be very little, and a very Infant; yet
withal, he is very great, and he is God; and so it must be no little thing to
prepare a lodging for a great God. Our lord is choice and nice, and by reason
of some-one mortal sin which some man makes little difficulty to committ, he
refuses to enter into the soul. And if he be there already, one mortal sin,
sends him away. And when he is gone, he comes not back again so soon; but
makes it plain, by the difficulty which he has to return, with how great
diligence he is to be kept, by us; when we have him there.

O my good lady, and how rich is he who possesses God, and how often in the
day were he to look down upon his heart, asking our Lord if he be there? What
chains should he cast about him of humble petitions and tears, begging of him
as David did, in these words, Psalm. 21.
O lord depart not from me. How full of caution ought a man to walk, least he
should do somewhat, which might offend our Lord, and least being offended, he
should be gone. For, if he be all good, what shall it be to loose him, but to
fall into the Abisse of all miseries? They are sadd things, which a soul
feels, when it has lost God; and such, as will hardly be believed, though all
the world should speak of them. This appears well in our first parents Adam
and Eve. For Eve, looking upon the fruit of the forbidden, tree, it seemed
very beautiful to her eye, and that if she might eat thereof, it would prove
very pleasing to her, and give her great contentment. But as soon ast she had
eaten, her eyes were opened, to behold those great miseries, which came upon
her by that means, and experience taught her, that the bitterness of breaking
the co^maundment of God, was greater, then the pleasure to have eaten the
fruit. And then she saw, that the appearance which the forbidden fruit had, of
being so very fair, and full of gust, was but a deceit of the devil, who
made a false glass, for her to look through. And he also gave her a
loathing, of those other fruits which God commanded her to eat. So as they
seemed unsavory to her, and she thought that all the gust, and hidden good,
had consisted in that which God forbad.

O how many have been deceived by the devil, through false imagination; he
promising them contentment, and gust; and they afterward, making bitter
lamentation, for giving credit to him, whom even before they knew to be a liar,
and the father of lies: and some, after the end of many labors, and tears,
have sweat hard, to return into the freindshipp of God, though, through all
their life, they continued with this dagger in their heart, of, How have I
offended God, having vouchsafed me so many blessings! And it seemed to them,
as if they enjoyed not the benefitt of his pardon, through the continual grief
and shame, which they had for committing the offense. Others there are, who
being once gone away; never turn again; like ill made hawks, who flying
from the fist of their Lord, fall to feed upon carryon; and being so fleshed,
return noe more; and having formerly tasted the food of Angels, Luc. 15
grow to take delight in the husks of swyne. Of these S. Peter says, 2. Pet
2.
That it had been better for them, not to have known the way of our lord,
then to leave it after it was known. And it happens to them as to the dog
who returns to eat, what he had vomitted, and as to the hogg who wallowes in
his mire from side to side. And our Lord himself said, Luc. 9
That he who puts his hand to the plowgh, and looks back is not fit for the
kingdom of heaven; but returns to be worldly again, and is both made an
object of scorn to the devil, and is also placed as a mark to fright others
from offending God.

In this sort did the wife of Loath undo her self. Genesis 19.
For God having vouchsafed her so great a favor, as to deliver her from the
fire, which came from heaven, upon Sodam and Gomorrah, where she dwelt, and
commanding her not to look back again, she obeyed not his voice; but
turning her head back, was transformed into a pillar of salt, which beasts
lick up. And here it is to be considered, that if God punished her so
severely, who had not been a sinner in that City, but only because she
obeyed not his commandment of not looking back for what can the sinner hope,
who is delivered from the punishment of God, through his great mercy; if yet
dispising that excessive goodness, he turn back his heart, toward the flesh
potts of Egypt, and his sins past.

I beseech God even for God's own sake, to deliver every soul, from falling
down into so great a misery as this. For as S. Paul affirms, Heb. 11
it is a fearful and horrible thing, to fall into the hands of the living
God, and what is man, that he should be able to endure the wrath and fury, of
Almighty God? For as any huge fire, is able to devour some little woeful
straw, so does the mighty wrath of God, swallow up the souls and bodies of
all such persons as depart from him. And as when some wife, who had been
dearly beloved by her husband, committs the foul sin of adultery, that
husband is enraged so much the more against her, at she had been more beloved
by him; so that wrath of God is very insufferable, which he expresses against
that soul, which he had formerly drawn out of the captivity of sin, and of
bound had made free, and being naked and void of grace, had made rich and
rarely adorned with the same grace, and of a wicked slave, had exalted to be
his most honored and beloved wife. What would such a woman deserve, who being
ungrateful for so great favors; I say not should committ adultery, against
such a generous and pious husband, but through whose heart, any such thought
should once pass, though she were a thousand mile off, from the fact.

Who could ever think of giving a buffett, to one that had endured so many
for him; and to put fresh dishonours, and to crucifye a second time that
person, whose former wounds, it were much more fit for him to bathe and dress
and assuage, then to add new ones to the old? What kind of wickedness shall we
call it, (which is able even to amaze, and astonish the world) for one to leave
God for the devil, and having been walking in the way to heaven, to go
thrust his very feet into hell; and to like better to have to do with God
enraged, then with God all gentle and appeased?

Madam, I have not written this, as thinking that this misery will lay hold on
you. For my confidence is not in you, but in him, who, with so much mercy,
and pity, redeemed you, out of the captivity wherein you were, and taught you
so well, what belongs to his love, as to have given you clearly to understand
thereby that he meant not to undertake the business in jest, neither will he,
that either you, or I, shall make a jest thereof. In this lord who loves with
so great fidelity, do I place my confidence; and not in you, who have kept
so ill correspondance with his true love. But I have written this, to the end,
that of your self, you may hunt out a little sent, of the danger wherein you
are; and that you may reco^mend your self more and more, to our Lord, and in
fine, that you may be so discreet as not to cast away your time, in the
admitting of unprofitable thoughts. Our lord will clear up these things, and
will finish that which he has begun, and will not take this Crown from me,
and therefore am I in patience and hope, that you shall not deprive me of that
which God has given me. You have here many servants of God, both men and
women, who recommend you to his mercy, with much care, and I beseech him to
grant it most completely to you. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a Lady, at the Feast of the Epiphany or three kings.
Wherein he shows how she is to go and adore the Infant Jesus; with those
kings; being guided by the star of faith; and that she is to offer him the
gould of divine love.

I Wrote to your Ladyship this last Aduent, of the great favor which our Lord
did us, in vouchsafing to come to us, and of the happiness of that soul which
disposes himself to receive him. I hope in his mercy, that he is come home to
you; and that you have received him with faith and love. And therefore now,
there remains noe more, but that you offer your self, in perpetual sacrifice
to him, who has vouchsafed to offer himself to you as a dear guest, and that
you imitate the faith and presents which were made by those wise men to the
Blessed Infant as soon as they found him out; as you have already imitated
them in the care they had to find him. It will do well, that you contemplate
how this great lord is so humbled, in that poor open stable, and that
maunger, where the natural discourse and human reason of those kings, was
far from thinking that they should find him. But the star which, with us,
is Faith, refuses expressly to pass any further on, and declares with most
resplendent beams as by so many tongues, that he who is above all reason,
and knowledge, lies in a place which is hidden from all discourse of reason;
that so we may learn to belceue, that most firmly, whereof we find least
certainty.

For if as the star guided them, so they had been guided but by their
reason, they would have gone to look for this newborn king in some royal
palace; for a person and a place wherein he dwells, are to carry proportion to
one another: Our lord vouchsafes to show a great favor to them, upon whom he
bestows a star, which is the gift of faith; that so they may seek God,
both when he is wrapped up as well in those swadling-cloutes, in the poverty of
his birth, as in the contempt and torment of the death of the Cross; the kings
find him in one of thofe places, and the good thief in the other. For both
they, and he, had the eyes of Faith, and that made them prostrate themselves
all along and adore him, protesting that they were as nothing in his divine
presence. For if they had known him but for a temporal king, how great soever
he had been, it would have suffized for them, to have done reverence to him,
as one man uses to another; but for so great men to prostrate themselves,
before an Infant, betokens that they had interior faith, whereby they knew the
high Majesty, which lay hidd in that Infancy.

But now your Ladyship must be sure, that you appear not empty before this
Lord, and that you think not that you give him any thing, if you do not give
him your love. Nothing but God is able to make your Ladyshipp happy; and
nothing but your self is able to keep him contented. This love of his is not
joined with any interest which regards himself, or the value of the presents
which are made to him; but it is a true and perfect love, which requires an
union of hearts. And this is that language, as S. Bernard says, whereby God,
and the soul communicate themselves and speak to one another, in the same
tune. If our lord threaten and punish me, I am not to do the same; but my
duty will be, to humble my self so much the more, as he does more exalt
himself; but if he love me, I must be like him in that, and I must love him,
saying, with the spouse; My beloved to me and I to him.

O great dignity of a creature, Cant. 2
which is abled thus to draw, in the self same yoke with his Lord, and may
answer him like, for like, for love is that thing, which abases hills, and
rayses valleys. Offer your love to him; who for love of you, did, though he
were so great, become an infant, and being God became man; and shedd the blood
of circumcision for you, within eight days; as being not content that he had
shedd tears, for you, when he was borne. Steal not your self away from this
lord, since you are so truly his, least you grow to be of them, of whom the
Prophett Jeremy faith; he went like one who runs away with him self. Where
are you engaged more deeply? where can you employ your self more profitably?
where can you exalt your self more highly, then by loving Christ our lord, who
loved you, and washed you with his blood, and gives even himself to such a one
as loves him, and makes him of a man, grow to be a kind of God.

Be very careful of your self in this business, and so that you offer gould
to the Infant Jesus; For as a little gould is more worth then a great quantity
of other metal, so a little true love, is more precious, then much copper,
and such other mettalls of fear, and proper interest, or any other succh
affects as rise from these. Many are wont to measure themselves by their doing
many good works, and they never consider that God respects nothing in them,
but only the heart from whence they rise; and that one man shall please God
more who does less good works, then another who does greater, if he who did
the less, have the greater love. Some man by fasting from some one meal, or
by giving some very little alms, shall be more pleasing to our lord (as the
widow was, Mark 12.
then many others who gave great alms) because he does it with more love then
they. And herein appears the greatenes of our Lord, since noeseruice which
we can do him, how great soever it may be, is great in his sight, if the love
of the party be not great. For he who has need of nothing, and cannot
possibly increase at all in riches, or any other good, why should he care for
ought which can be given him, but only to be beloved, which is so acceptable
a present, as cannot be refused by any. And so much is God in earnest when he
requires it of us, as that he punishes with eternal death, the person who
grauntes him not his love.

What thing is so far from self love in the desires of any thing, as he
who needs noe service which can be done him thereby; and who again has so
much desire of any thing as he who so requires a man's love, as to punish him
with the torments of hell, who will not give him that love and give it truly,
yea, and that so as it may exceed all other loves. And therefore Saint
Augustine might say with reason, O lord what account do thou make of me,
since thou commaundest, me to love thee; and do threaten me with huge
miseries if I love thee not. Let his be therefore your prime care, to attend to
the love of our Lord. For this very purpose, he made himself so very little.
For by how much the more he conceales, and as it were dissembles his Majesty,
so much more does he declare his goodness, and thus does he the more inuit our
love; which looks more at ease upon the littlenes which he took, the upon the
greatness which he naturally possessed.

His wisdom lies hidden by his being made an Infant who could not speak.
His power is also bound up by certain swathing-cloathes, and he endures
bitter cold. And all this to the end, that the more of his other attributes he
hides from us, the more he may declare his love to us; that so we also may
love him the more, as we find him to have suffered more for us. It is certain
that to see him tremble with cold does kindle us much more, then if we saw
him well, and warmely cladd, and if he felt noe pain. And therefore he shall
do very ill, who denies him his love, since it was bought at so much cost of
this Infant; and after the rate thereof, will it cost that man who shall deny
to give it.

He who offers this love, offers the boloca^st with the marrow to our lord,
Psalm. 65.
as David says. For as fire burns up a whole beast; so does love consume
the whole man, both within and without. The fire of true love, will not endure
that the straw of exterior vanities should remain unburned. How shall that man
be able to love pompes and shows who cordially loves the Infant Jesus, being
laid in a poor maunger, if it be true that love must make lovers like to one
another. It is a great blessing and light, which makes us able to see God here
beloue, that so we may know how to walk for the pleasing of his divine
Majesty. And since he walks in a very contrary way to that of the world, let
us resolve to make our choice of that guide, whom we mean to follow; since
we cannot walk in both; and since the world runs headlong upon error, and
since Christ our Lord is the truth which saues such as believe and follow it.
John. 14


And let his ^^locaust have marrow in it, for marrow is a soft thing, and does
soon melt. And so does that heart which loves our lord; and whether the matter
concern the scruice of the same lord, or else the good of a man's neighbor,
such a one will not express either drynes, or harshnes, but sweet mildenes,
be also has care to keep his love as safe, as the marrowe is within the
bone. But before you can arrive to that marrow, it is guarded first by the
skynue, and then by the flesh, and lastly by the bone it self. The man who
loves, places all things which he possesses, and desires, before that which he
loves; that he may sooner loose all that, then that the person beloved by him
should once be touched. And he has a strong and firm purpose as if it were
made of iron not to venture the love of our lord, though it should cost him
whatsoever he either is, or may ever be.

Such gould as this it is, which you must offer to the Infant, who is borne so
poor; and you must open your treasures, for that purpose, as those kings did.
For if this heart be not opened, which is the treasure-howse, all the labor is
lost. For in that case whatsoever it be, Mark 2.
which is offered, is not gold but counterfect stuffer; and he takes the best
to himself, and gives the worst to Almighty god. Open therefore your heart, and
conueigh the Infant newly borne into it, since that heart alone lives, in which
he is. And since he is of so little weight, do not lay him down; but wear
him in your bosom, like that handful of Myrrh, whereof the spouse speaks.
Converse with him with all reverence because he is God; Cant. 1
and yet take courage to communicate freely with him, because he is an Infant;
for within he has his heart as serene, and sweet, as you may well conceive by
his exterior appearance. Take heed you let him not fall, for he must be kept
with great care; but if your love be not great, you will either forgett him
quickly, or else lay him soon aside, as thinking that he weighes too much. And
so that you negotiate with him in such sort, as that you give not over, till
you perceive by good conjectures, that both you love him, and are beloved by
him. For till a soul feel this, it ever lives in fear, and sadness, and as
under the burden of a law, but when it comes to this pass; there is nothing
which can casily trouble it, when it considers that God loves it, and it loves
God. I beseech him that it may so happen to your Ladyshipp. Amen.

A letter of the Author to a Lady wherein he shows what the coming of the
holy Ghost wrought in the Apostles, and what it works in them who dispose
themselves to receive it, and how they are to dispose themselves.
GOd send you a good Feast of whitsontide, not by hearesay, but by experience;
and that, in this solemnity your heart may feel that which the faithful
servants of Christ our Lord, when they were assembled in that meetingplace did
feel, by the infusion of him into their souls, who deprived them of their
weakness, and delivered them from their ignorances, and fulfilled the bosom of
their souls, with so great joy, as might well give the world to understand;
that the blood of Christ our lord was not shedd in vain, nor his prayers to
his Father made in vain; since by means thereof, a participation of the
divinity, was communicated.

O how often, when they saw themselves so deifyed, and that they were made so
richly the lovers and beloved of God, did they sing a world of praises to Jesus
Christ, their lord and Master; as knowing well, that he had sent them this
gift as he was God, and had deserved it for them as he was man. For according
to what our lord himself had ptomised, the holy ghost as soon as he should
become, was to make known Jesus Christ, our Lord, and to give testimony of
him, John. 16
that so the Disciples, and the world might know him, and by knowing him
might understand withal, that all good was to come to them by his means, and
that they were to render him service, and express all gratitude to him, as to
their true and abundant benefactour; and that so, they might remain faster
tied to him by the cords of love, in his absence, then formerly they had been
in presence; and might know by experience, what a puissant love the holy ghost
is, and how ardently he makes that Blessed word of God, to be beloved, from
whom himself proceeded, and in whom he reposes, and that they should make
noe difficulty to publish and proclaim him to the world, though it should
cost them their lives.

If we had a part of this solemnity here within our very hearts, we should be
sure to celebrate it exteriourly as we ought. And if our soul were bedewed
with some dropp of the water of this plentiful River which issues out of the
throne of God, Apo^. 20.
and of the lamb, the thirst of this whole world would be soon quenched in
us, and we should be refreshed by this heavenly dew from that drynes, and
stiffnes wherein we yet remain so negligent, so barren, and so accursed.

O how much would we find our selves obliged to our Redeemer, when we should
sensibly feel, that we were indeed redeemed by him, and that our sins were
drowned, that our sorrows were spent, and abundance of joy imparted insteede
thereof. We would not then complain of pains, of banishments, of absence
from what we love, of wanting those things which seem most necessary to us,
and in sine of any inconuenie^ce. For so powerful is this spirit, and the
fire thereof, that it strives upward, and makes us so love and confide in God,
that noe water of sorrow, and affliction has power to quench it, but it
remains ever quick, and conveyed with such strength into the bowels of the
soul (which are so mightily inflamed) that it kills that which lives ill; and
causes, that even death it self cannot conquer him, who is mortyfied by the
coming of this holy spirit.

This is that dear guest, who cures the wound, which the absence of Christ
our lord had made in their hearts who loved him, and fills up that empty
place, which was made therein by his departure. And now if he were able to
comfort and free men from that sorrow, which was caused by the absence of
Christ our lord himself, more easily will he be able to comfort us, in case
of the absence of creatures, if we be in any pain thereby. This is he, who is
so full of care of his orphans, who ouershadowes them with strength, from on
high, and who covers and keeps them warm under the mantle of his protection,
and makes them know that they have of in heaven whom they may with confidence,
but without presumption call Father; he repaires that which is ruined, he
illuminates that which is dark, he heates that which is cold, he straightens
that which is crooked, be refreshes that which is over wearyed, and he is daily
giving us new strength, which makes us fly up toward the mountain of God.

Madam, it will be reason that such an excellent present as this, should put us
into great appetite, and that we sell all the affections of our heart, for the
purchase of this Jewel, which only is able to make us happy. The news of it
passes before our doors, and the noise sounds in our ears, of how he comes
down to men, and is glad of a habitation in their hearts; Let us not suffer
him to pass by, but let us constrain him to visitt, and comfort us, that we
may serve him yet more. And considering in whose name we may desire him to
stay with us, he will not need to be much entreated; for the Father sends him,
through Jesus Christ his son our Lord.

Christ our Lord is he who obtained the holy ghost for us. For otherwises, what
had that most high spirit to do, with coming down to us, who are but so
much flesh, which is impure, and weak, and inclined to all kind of ill. This
spirit exceedes us incomparably more, then the heavens exceed the earth, if
it were not for that, he who is of heaven, being engendered by the Father, did
abase himself so far as to become man, the signification of which word is
to be earthly. And so God being humaned, and tempored with our weakness, did
labor and sweat, and, upon the cost of his life, did obtain for us, that
this spirit which created the heavens, should abase it self so far, as to
dwell in those potts of clay.

Let us give thanks to Jesus Christ our Lord, and let us gather the fruit of
his labors. And since the holy ghost comes down willingly to dwell with us,
in contemplation of the meritts of Christ our lord, let us not be so
ungrateful for either of these two great favors, as thereby to loose them
both. The most high will abase himself to these mean persons, that he may be
their Father, and their guide, and how then can we be such woeful sotts, as
to say Noe, to him. Let us go forth to receive him with love, who comes with
love, and let us do it with great desire, for where he is desired he is well
content to stay. Let us be like him who said. say. 26
My soul has desired thee by night, and in spirit; and with the very bowels
of my soul, I watch toward thee in the morning. By night he desires to enjoy
thy holy Spirit, who finds himself to be afflicted, and places not his
confidence in his own arm, but sends out sighs to this spirit, as to the
comforter of the sorrowful, and the easer of all such as are in pain. And in
the morning he will be content to watch, who makes it not one of his last
cares, how it may be fit for him to furnish up that inward house; but the
chief of them all is to consider, how he may be able to obtain this favor of
our Lord. And being thus desired, and inuoked, infallibly he will come; for so
did Christ our lord himself, who was called the Desired of all the nations;
Aggae. 2.
and he loves all such as desire to possess him.

Let us call upon this holy Spirit, with the speech both of our tongues and of
our souls; but, we must be sure that the house be not ill furnished, and so
without provision, that after he shall be invited, and satt down at table, we
may have nothing for him to eat. Let us mortify our flesh, for that is the
food whereon he feeds, and which he likes so well. For as for the flesh
which lives, he flies from it, as far as he can, and it stinckes worse to
him, then a dead dog would to us. Let us mortifye our own opinion and
judgment, that so we may be ruled by his; for two heads will never govern a
house well, if that which knows least be not swayed by that which knows most.
And let us renounce all our self conceits, for these are the Capital enemies
of this heavenly spirit, which teaches us to say, Matthew. 26.
Not my will but thy will be done. Let us be diligent to cleanse our conscience
by penance, and confession, from all impurity, and every grain of dust, how
little soever it may be. For this guest is most pure, and clean; and it is
not fit to lodge him in such a house as may disgust him. Let us keep peace,
both at home and abroad; for even unquiet and wrangling folks, are wont to
dissemble their little brawles, for the honor of some principal guest.

Having lodged him in our house, let us give him good attendance, since he has
made it a palace. For he is a mighty king, and it is against all reason, that
having him with us at home, we should be gadding abroad to see vanities. Let us
then shutt up the doors, and cast our selves prostrate at his feet, and let
us tell him with truth, that there is nothing which shall draw us from him, and
that we have given this answer to all the world, that it must leave us, and
him alone together. And so let us enjoy him; for he is able to make us
happy, and so as that nothing can deprive us thereof. If you carry the business
thus, you shall be comforted in all that, wherein yet you have discomfort; and
you shall drink of the River of the delights of God till even you be
inebriated thereby. And I shall also be comforted when I shall see you in the
hands of him who knows so well how to keep you, and instruct you, and
eternally to save you. It is he, whom I beseech to be your succor.

A letter of the Author to a certain Priest.
He shows how he may prepare himself; and what considerations are most
profitable, when he goes to celebrate at the Altar.

Reverend Father; I beseech our Lord that the delay which I have used in making
my answer, may be recompe^ced with being true, and profitable to you, for
your demand is of great importance; and so would the answer also be, if
it were such as I have said. You ask me what preparation is best, and what
consideration is most profitable, when you go to celebrate the mystery of the
body, and blond of our lord and Savior Jesus Christ; because you fear that
the thing, which of it self is so helpful, may yet prove hurtful to you,
for want of due preparation.

You know already, that there are different complexions of men's bodies; and so
is there variety of inclinations, in their minds, yea and so also are the
gifts which God imparts to men, very different. Some, he leads by one means,
and others by another, and therefore there can be noe such common rule given,
as may square well with the generallity of all men, concerning the
consideration which may be most profitable for the aforesaid action. But this
is certain, that that consideration will be best for any man, which God
imparts, and whereby a man finds himself to be moved most. And he who has
any knowledge such as a man may have in things like these, (whereof there is
noe certain faith, nor clear evidence that his Preparation, or consideration
grows from the impulse of God), has noe reason to change it for any other,
till our lord change it. And this is to be tried, by giving account thereof,
to some person, who has experience in these things, together with prudence;
and so to take the resolution.

But now there are others, who find not themselves particularly moved, to
use, this, or that Consideration. And yet it is also necessary, for these men
to impart the notice of their inward disposition; so to try whether they have
need to be carried by the motive of Love, or fear, they being either sadd, or
cheerful; and the remedy is to be applied, according to the necessities
wherein they are. And because I incline to think, according to the relation
which I have received concerning you, that the state wherein you are, is of a
person proficient in virtue, and that it is fitter for you to exercise your
self, upon he considerations which may provoke you to the fervor of love,
with reverence, then upon others; I say, that to this purpose, I know of none
better, then that which may give us lively to understand, that our lord with
whom we go to treat, is God and man, and what the cause is why he comes to
the altar.

Certainly Sir, it is a blow of great force, toward the awaking of any man,
to consider, and say this to himself, in good earnest, I am now goeing to
consecrate Almighty God; to hold him in my hands, to have audience of him, and
to receive him into my bosom. Let us ponder this well; and if it sincke into
us by the grace and spirit of our lord, it will be sufficient, and
superabundant, for the making that result toward us, whereof we have so much
need, that so (according to our frailty,) we may perform that office as we
ought.

Who is he that can choose but be inflamed in love, by thinking, I go to
receive an infinite Good? who will not tremble, with an amorous kind of
reverence, at his presence, before whom the powers of heaven tremble? and who
will not resolve, never to offend him more, but still to praise him, and do
him service* Who will not be confounded, and even mourn with grief for having
offended that Lord, whom he has present there? who will not confide, upon
such a pawn? who will not take heart, to go through this desert, by the way
of penance, with such Provision? And finally, this consideration, (when the
hand of our Lord helps it on) does wholly change a man, and taking him from
himself, does even swallow him up; some times by reverence, some times by
love; and at other times, by other most powerful affects of the mind, which
are produced by the considerations of his Presence. Which affects, though they
do not necessarily flow from these Considerations, yet are they a most ready
help thereunto, if the man, as we use to say, will not be a stone.

So that you shall do well to exercise your self in this thought. Make
account that you hear that voice, Ecce sponsus venit, Matthew 2.
Deus vester venit. Behold your spouse is coming, your God is co ming. And
shutt your self up in your heart, and then open it to receive that, which uses
to stream from such a lightning. And desire you, of the same Lord, that for
that very goodness of his, by which he has vouchsafed to put him self into
your hands; for that same goodness, I say, he will give you a true feeling
thereof, that so you may esteem, reueare, and love him, as you ought.
Importune him that he permit you not to be in the presence of such a Majesty,
without fear, reverence, and love. Accustom your self to think as you
ought, of the presence of our Lord; although you should then entertain noe
other consideration but that.

Consider them who stand in presence of kings, who, though they say nothing;
yet see the modesty, the reverence, and the love wherewith they stand, if they
stand as they ought. But it is better to consider how those great ones assist
in the Court of heaven, in presence of that infinite greatenes all trembling at
the reflection of their own littlenes, and burning in the fire of love, like
persons who are, as it were, consumed, in such a furnace. Make account, that
you enter amongst those Graundes, who are so richly adorned, and so well
behaved; and so diligent in doing service to their Lord. And then being
placed, in such society as that, and in the presence of so great a king,
think of it as you ought, though, as I was saying, you have not, at that time,
any other consideration then that.

My meaning is, that it is one thing for a man to have what to say to the king;
and it is another, to know (which may be done with scilence) how to stand in
his presence, and there to carry himself as he ought. And this is that union of
the soul with our lord, which a man shall do well to procure during the time
of Mass, and to hang wholly upon him, just so as when he is in his Cell,
united with our lord, in the most secret retired corner of his heart. And this,
in such sort, as that the words which he reads, may not be of any distraction
to this union; for he shall reap more fruit by it, then by them; though yet,
it be true, that he is to have regard also to the words; but he is to
accustom him self whilst he has his heart united, and present with God, to
carry that attention withal, to what he does, and says, as is convenient.

Dear lord, and what does the soul of that man feel, when he carries him in
his hands who made election of our B. Lady, and enriched her with celestial
graces, that she might be made fit to live and converse with God made man. And
when he compares her hands, and arms, and eyes, with his own, what confusion
does he grow to have? How straightly will he hold himself to be obliged, for
such a benefit? what caution will he use that he may keep him self wholly for
him, who has done him so much honor, as to put himself into his hands, and
to come to them by them words of Consecration.

Sir, these things are noe bare words nor noe dead considerations; but they be
arrows, shutt stiffly out, from the strong bow of Almighty God, which wound
and wholly change the heart, and which make it desire, that at the end of
Mass, it may at lardge consider that word of our Lord, Scitis quid fecerim
vobis? John. 13.
Do you know what I have done to you. Dear lord that a man could conceive
quid fecerit nobis Dominus, What our Lord had done for us in that hour. That a
man might taste him with the palate of his soul. O that a man had true weights,
where with he might weigh out, this great benefitt. How happy should he be,
even in this world; and how, after the end of Mass, would he loath even the
sight of creatures; and would esteem it to be a torment, that he must treat
with them. And his joy and life would consist, in pondering, Quid fecerit ei
dominus, what our lord had done for him, till the next day, that he should
return to say Mass. And if our Lord do at any time give you this light, you
will know what sorrow and shame you ought to carry in your heart, when you
approach to the Altar without the same. For he who never enjoyed it, does not
know what a misery it is, to want it.

You may add to this Consideration of the person who comes to the Altar, the
reason why he comes; and you will there see a resemblance of the love, of the
Incarnation of our Lord, and of his holy Nativity, and of his life, and death;
renewing that which passed heretofore upon his sacred person. And if you shall
enter into the most inward corner of the heart of our Lord, and if he vouchsafe
to teach you, that the cause of his coming, is a violent and impatient kind of
love, which permitts not him who loves, to be absent from the party beloved;
your soul will even faint under such a consideration as that.

A man is indeed moved much, by pondering after this manner, Here I have
Almighty God. But yet, when he considers, that he comes merely out of the
great love which he bears, (like one betrothed who cannot live a day, without
seeing and conuersing with his Spouse), the man I say, who feels this, would
be glad to have a thousand hearts, wherewith to correspond with such love, and
to say with S. Augustine O Lord what am I to thee, that thou should command
me to love thee? what am I to thee, that thou should so much desire, to
make me a visitt; and to give me an embracement, and that, being in heaven,
with them who know so well how to love, and serve thee, thou yet vouchsafest
to descend to this creature, who knows very ill how to serve thee, but very
will how to offend thee. Is it possible that thou can not content thy self,
O lord, to be without me. Is it possible that thy love of me, should draw
thee down? Blessed may thou be for ever, who being what thou art, have yet
placed thy love, upon such a creatures as my self? And is it possible, that
thou should come hither, in thy royal person, and that thou should put
thy seife into my hands, as if thou would say; I dyed for thee once,
already; and I come to thee now, is let thee know, that I repent not my self
thereof; but if it were needful, I would dye for thee yet, a second time.
What lance could remain in the rest, after such a dear expression of love as
this? Who, O lord will ever be able to hide himself from the heat of thy
heart, which warmes ours with thy presence, and the sparks fly out to all them
who are near it, as out of some mighty furnace. And as such a lord as this,
(my good Father) does the God of the heavens, come to our hands, and we being
such wretches as we are, do yet converse with him, and receive him.

Let us now conclude this good subject, which is so sit to be felt and put in
execution. And let us beseech this lord of ours, who has already done us one
favor, that now he will do us another, forasmuch as his blessings, unless we
value them, and thank him, and serve him for them, will not be of profitt to
us. Or rather as S. Bernard says, The ungrateful man, by how much the better
he is, by so much he is the worse. Let us consider well how we live,
throughout the whole day; least else our lord punish us, in that time when we
are at the Altar. And throughout the whole day, let us carry this thought in
our hearts, I have received our Lord. At his table I sit; and to morrow I shall
be with him again. By this meane^, we shall be able to avoid all ill, and we
shall take heart, toward the practice of all good. For that which is done from
the Altar, our lord is wont to reward, at the Altar.

To conclude, I say you must remember how our lord complained of Simon the
Pharisee, for that, Luc. 7
entering into his house, he gave him noe water for his feet, nor any kiss to
his cheek. To the end we may know that he desires, that in the house where he
enters, we should give him tears, laid at his feet for our sins; and love
which makes us salute him with the kiss of peace. I beseech our lord to bestow
this peace on you, both with your self, and with your neighbors; and so as
that it may spring from perfect love; which I desire may torment you here, for
the offenses, which your self and others committ against our Lord. And in
heaven I desire, that he should make you enjoy it; esteeming the good of God
for your own, and more then your own, because you love him more then your
self. For his love, I beg of you, that if in this letter, there be either
little, or much, which needs amendment, it may not want your help; and if
there be any thing good in it, give the thanks for that, to our Lord, and
remember me when you shall be at the Altar.

A letter of the Author to some dear freindes of his, who were afflicted by a
persecution, which was raised against them, he animates them much, to a love of
the Cross, and the imitation of Christ our Lord, whereof he speaks with
great tenderness.
BLessed be God the Father, of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor 1.
the father of mercyes, and the God of all consolation, who comfortes us in
all our tribulation; in such sort, as that we also, are enabled to comfort
them who are in any kind of affliction. And this we do, in virtue of that
consolation, wherewith God comfortes us, For as the tribulations of Christ
abound in us, so through Christ, see our consolation is also abundant.

These are the words of the Apostle Saint Paul. 2 Cor. 11
Three times he was scourged with rods; five times with whipps; and once he
was stoned, in such sort as that he was left for dead; and persecuted by all
the generations of man kind; and tormented withal sorts of afflictions, and
troubles; and this not in any small number of times, but as himself says
elsewhere, we are ever, even drawn to death, for the love of Jesus Christ,
that so his life, may be made manifest in us. And in all these tribulations,
he does not only not murmr, nor complain of God, as weak persons are wont
to do, nor does he afflict himself otherwise, as is used by them, who love
their honor and their case; nor does he importune God to remove them from
him, like such as know not the value thereof, and therefore desire not such
company, as that; nor does he esteem them as some slight, and little
favors, as they do who love not to suffer much; but leaving all ignorance,
and weakness far behind him, he praises our lord in them, and gives thanks
for them, as for an extraordinary blessing, Esteeming himself happy, to suffer
somewhat for the honor of him, who suffered so great dishonours; that so he
might draw us out of that true dishonor wherein we were, being slaves to the
baseness of sin; and he beautified, and honored us, with his spirit, and
with the adoption of the sons of God, and he gave us an earnest, and a pledge
that we should enjoy the kingdom of heaven by him.

O my brethren, who are so very much beloved by me, God will open your eyes,
that you may consider, how great favor he does us, by that which the world
thinks to be disfavor, and how much we are honored, in being dishonored,
for seeking the honor of God, and how high honor is reserved to us, for that
abasement, wherein now we are, and how sweet, delightful and dear arms, our
Lord extends toward us, to receive such as are wounded in the war for his
sake, whereby those very wounds do incomparably outstrip, and even make
sweet all that gall, which the afflictions of this life can give. And if we
have any true understanding, we shall conceive a vehement desire of these
imbracements.

For who will not desire that, which is wholly amiable, and desirable, but
only such a one, as knows not what true happiness is. But know you for
certain, that if those festiuities of heaven please you, and if you desire to
see, and enjoy the same, there is noe way to it more secure, then that of
suffering. This is that path, whereby Christ our Lord, and all his servants are
gone before us; Matthew 7.
and which he calls straight, and says, thas it leads men to lise. And he
left us this instruction, to the end that if we should have a mind to be
where he is, we might walk by that way, where he went. For it is against all
reason, that the son of God, having gone by the way of dishonor; the sons
of men, should go by the way of honor, since the Disciple is not greater then
his Master, no^ the slave, then his Lord. And God forbidd, that our soul
should repose, and rest, in any other thing, or should desire any other life,
in this world, but only to suffer, under the Cross of Christ our lord. Though
yet, I know not, if I have said well, in calling that affliction which is
suffered under that Cross. For to my seeming, it is as the delight of a soft
bed, full of roses.

O thou Jesus of Nazareth (by which word it is signified that thou art all full
of flowers), how sweet is that odor of thee, which awakes in us, those
insatiable desires, of eternity; and makes us forgett the afflictions, which we
suffer here, whilst we consider for whom they are endured, and with what
reward they shall be paid. And who is he that can love thee at all, and yet
does not love thee crucified? in that Cross, thou did seek me, thou
did cure me, thou did deliver me, thou did free me, thou did
love me, giving thy life and blood for me, by the hands of base and cruel
wretches. And therefore in the Cross, will I seek thee, and upon that I find
thee; and finding thee, thou helpest me; and thou deliuerest me from my
self, who am the creature which contradicts thy love, wherein mine own
salvation does consist. But now (being free from the love of my felf, which is
thine enemy) I answer thee, though not with equallity, yet with a kind of
poor resemblance, of that excessive love, which thou carryedst to me upon thy
Cross; I loving thee, and suffering for thee, as thou by loving me, dyedst of
love for me.

But woe is me, and what shame couers my face, and what sorrow seizes upon my
heart, who having been so much beloved by thee, which thy so great torments
do well declare) I yet love thee so little, as may be seen by the little,
which I endure for thee. I easily confess, that all men deserve not so great
happiness, as to be marked out for thine, with the mark of the Cross, but yet,
consider what a sadd thing it is, for me to desire, and not to obtain; to
ask and not to receive? How much more, when I beg not delight, and ease; but
affliction, and pain, for love of thee.

Tell me, since thou will have me to be both thy Herald, and the Ancient,
who am to carry the flying colors, of thy gospel, why thou do not
apparel me, from head to foot, with thine own livery. O how ill does the
name of being thy servant belong to me, who find my self naked, of that
garment, wherewith thou did so cordially, and so continually, and so
abundantly go apparelled? Tell us, O beloved Jesus, (even by that sweet
Cross of thine) was there peradventure, any one day, when thou did put
off, that robe of sufferance, to cloth thy self with repose and ease? Or was
there any one day, wherein thou did put off that rough coat, which so
wrought into the very roots of thy heart, as to make thee say, My soul is
heavy, Marth. 26.
even to the death? O noe, thou were far from resting, because thou were far
from leaving to lone, and this love made thee always suffer.

And when they stripped thee of thy clothes, they cut out, upon the Cross, (as
if it had been upon some table) another garment for thee; and that so long a
one, as to reach from thy very head to thy feet; and there was noe part of
thee, which was not dyed, with thy most precious crymson blood. The head Crow
ned with thorns, the face, laden with buffetts, the hands peirced with two
nails, and the feet with one; a bitter one to thee, but dear to us; and all
the rest of thy body, embrodered over, with so many stripes, as that it was
noe casye thing, to nunber them.

He who beholding thee, shall love himself, and not thee, shall do thee an
extreme wrong. He who seeing thee, in such a plight, shall fly from that,
which may make him like to thee, and he who has but little desire to suffer
for thee, does not know thee with perfect love. For he who so knows thee,
does even dye for love of thee, when he considers that thou dyedst for him, and
he more desires dishonor for thy sake, then he esteems honor, and then all
that, which the whole world, (which is both a deceiuer and does deceive) can
give. Away with it, away, let it all hold his peace, in comparison of thy
Cross, whatsoever it be in this world, which florishes most; and yet is so
soon withered. And let worldly people, be even confounded with shame, since
thou, so much to thy cost, have fought and overcome, by thy Cross. Yea and
let them even also be ashamed, who are held for servants of thine, and yet
rejoice not in that, which is contrary to the world; notwithstanding that thou
were so reproached, and abandoned, and contradicted by this blind world,
which neither does nor yet can see that Truth, which is Thy selse.

For my part, I am resolved to hold thee fast, though all other things be
wanting to me (which yet in true account, can neither deserve the name of all
things, nor indeed, of any thing, but of perfect misery and a mere nothing)
rather then I will remain of any other color, then thou art; though otherwise
the world wherein I live, might be all mine. For all those things, which are
not the thing, which thou thy self art, are rather affliction, and burden,
then true happiness, but in thy being ours, and our being thine, consists our
true joy, and riches, for thou alone, art all our true good.

I had forgotten my self my dear brethren, in that whereof I began to
speak; and to beseech, and admonish you, in the name of Christ our Lord, that
you be not troubled, nor brought to wonder, (at a strange thing, and not
familiarly known by the servants of God) at these persecutions, or rather the
shadows thereof, which are come upon us. For this has been nothing but a
trial, and examen of that lesson, which we have been learning continually, by
the space of five or six years, saying, that we must suffer, we must suffer.
for the love of Christ our lord. Behold we are now, at the very gates. Let us
not be troubled like children, who are not willing to repeat their lesson. But
comfort your selves, in our Lord, and in the strength of his power, who loves
you, and who will defend you. And though he be but one, yet he can do more,
then all the rest, for he is omnipotent. You need not also fear, that he
wants knowledge, how to do it; for he can be ignorant of nothing. And now
consider, whether it be reason, that any man should be moved, who is tied to
Almighty God, with those three so hard knotts, of an infinite power, an
infinite wisdom, and an infinite love.

Let not the menaces of them who threaten you, breed you any trouble. For I
for my part, give you to understand, that I vallew not all their threats, at
the weight of one single hair. For I am nowhere, but in the hand of Christ
our Lord; and I have great compassion of their blindenes. For the gospel of
Christ our Lord, which I have preached in that town, is hidden from their
eyes, 2. Cor. 4.
and S. Paul affirmed, that the God of this world, which is the devil, did
blind the souls of the Infidells; to the end that the glory of the gospel,
might not shine upon them. But I desire much, and I cordially beg of our Lord,
that he will have mercy on them, and that he will heap benedictions upon them,
in liew of the curses which they cast on me; and glory for the dishonor,
which they do me, or (to speak more truly) for that which they desire to
do me. For as for me, I am fixed in this, that there is noe honor for a man
upon this earth, but to be dishonored for Christ our Lord.

Do you also, my dear friends, after the same manner; and be Disciples of
him, who gave a kiss of peace, to that person, and called him friend, who had
sold him, Matthew 20.
to his enemies. And upon the Cross he said, Pardon them, Father, Luc. 23.
for they know not what they do. Consider in all your neighbors, how they are
the creatures of God; and that God desires their salvation; and then you will
take heed, of wishing ill to that man, to whom God desires so much good.
Remember how often you have heard from my mouth, that we must love our
enemies; and that, with great repose of mind, and without speaking ill of any.
Pass over this fit of time; for our Lord will quickly bring on another. And
be very well awake, that you may not go back to reuerse any one lot of that
good, which you have begun; for this would be extremely ill done. But settle
this truth in your hearts, that he whom you have followed, is the lord of
heaven, and earth, and of life, and death. And that in fine, though all the
world should say nay, his truth must prevail. Labor you to follow that truth,
and whilst you are doing so, do not only forbear to fear men, but fear
not devils noe nor even Angels, if it were possible for them, to be against
you. Be very careful to be silent amongst men; but be sure that your hearts,
speak much in prayer, to God, from whom all our good is to come. And his
pleasure is, that we should obtain it; and especially by meditating upon the
passion, of Jesus Christ our Lord. And if you suffer any thing, by the tongues
of evil men (for, in fine, you suffer nothing else) take it in discharge of
your sins, and as a particular favor of God, who will make you clean, by
the tongues of those evil men, as it might be with some brush or rubber; for
those tongues will be foul thereby (since they utter foul things) and your
self will grow clean by suffering, and you will be sure of happiness in the
other world.

But in the mean time, I will not, by any means, that you esteem your selves
for better, then them, whom thus you see to go in error. Because you know
not how long your selves may continue in doing well, nor they in doing ill.
But work your salvation in fear and in humility; and so hope that your
selves shall get to heaven, as not to judge with all, that your neighbor is
not to go thither. And so value the favors which God has done to you, as
that withal you touch not upon the imperfections of your neighbors. For you
know what happened between the Pharisee, Luc. 18.
and the Publicane, by which example we must be warned.

There is noe sanctity assured, but in the holy fear of God, wherein, Eccl. 2.
I would have you even grow old, as the holy Scripture says. So to give us to
understand, that we must not only fear God, when first we come to his
service, but even to the very end. This fear is noe sadd, or irksome kind of
thing, but full of savor and gust; and it takes away all leuity, and effusion
of heart; and it makes a man not venterous, to approve his own actions as good;
though perhapps in themselves, they be well done. But he leaves the judgment,
both of himself, and of all the world, to Almighty God. As S. Paul said, I
judge not my self, but he who judges me, is our Lord. This is he, whom you
must fear, if you will persevere, in doing well; and if you will not have your
building fall, but stand safe, till it may rise and reach to the most high God.
But now this must be done by love, which I beseech our lord Jesus Christ, to
give you. Amen. Pray for me very cordially, as already I believe you do. For
I hope in God, that he will hear you, and that he will give me to you, for
your service, as in former times.

A Letter to a Lady who was grown a widow.
He comforts her in the death of her husband, and animates her to carry her
afflictions with patience.

I Have deferred to write to you, out of a belief, that my letter would be of
little power, toward the mitigating of that great sorrow, to which they said,
you were grown subject. And I thought I should take a better course to be
uttering my self to our Lord who is the Lord of all comfort, and to be
recommending you to him, then to be speaking to you, by my letters. But yet
because they have been demanded with so great instance, which serves to
assure me, how much they are desired, and because our lord has power enough
to do what he lists by the means even of dead letters, I would not fail to
do as I was commanded, and that to which I was obliged, beseeching our lord
that by means thereof he will be pleased to breed that comfort in your heart
which I desire.

Our Lord has so disposed, as to have you try what taste these afflictions
have, which are gathered in this vale of tears, and they not of the gentler
but ruder sort. Let his name be blessed, his judgments adored, and his will
obeyed, since that which the creature owes to his Creator, is all reverence
and subjection, not only in those things which are delightful, but in those
others also, which are most painful. Now to make try all of this obedience,
God is wont to teach us, in that which lies next our hearts. To the end that we
may understand, that for so great a lord, we must be content both to do, and
suffer great things.

Abraham carried excessive love to his son Isaac, Cenisis 22.
and God was pleased to try him in that. A great love it was which Job carried
to his seven sons, and yet God took them all away, in one day. And after
this manner, is he wont to proceed with such as he loves. For by this means
both they are made capable, of testifying their love to him, and by the same
he takes occasion, to do them great favors. I know well, that flesh and
blood have noe understanding of this language, and that they only employ
themselves, upon feeling the grief and loss, which they sustain, without
caring for other things. But if God be in us, we must restrain our sense, and
make it obedient to reason, and to the will of our Lord. And though it trouble
us much, yet must we not let this flesh of ours overcome, but remembering the
anguish of our Lord, which made him sweat dropps of blood, and say. Father,
not my will, Luc. 22.
but thy will be done, we are to say the same, if we mean to be known for his
disciples; since he will know none for his vassalls on earth, nor for his
companion in heaven, but the man who carries the cross upon his back, Matthew
10.
and who will follow him as the sheep his sheapheard, though it should cost
him his life.

Tell me of what we can justly complain in our afflictions, since by them
our sins grow to be discharged, and our selves made to ressemble the son of
God? For what a bold irreuere^ce should it be, that slaves would not pass, by
that law, by which their Lord did pass, and that adopted sons should not be
content to endure that, which the natural son endured; who was more beloved
by God the Father, then his first begotten son? and who was more laden with
variety of pains then he? Esaias. 53.
He was the man of grief, and be who knew by experience, what belonged to
affliction. And if you be able to count the dropps of the sea, you may also
perhaps count his sorrows. Will it then seem reason to you, that the son of
God, being so in anguish, and all wounded with grief, even to the death, we
should pass all our lives, without drinking once of vinager and gall? Matthew.
26.
What is become of that shame, which we ought to have, if here we should
let him suffer alone, and yet pretend to reign with him in heaven?

Let all creatures be at last vnbeguiled and know, that if the king of heaven
did enter into his kingdom by tribulations, we also must enter in by the same
way. There is noe other way but Jesus Christ and he crucified; and whoesoeuer
seeks any other, will not find it, and whosoever walks by any other, will
loose himself, and he will see, that though it may be a kind of unsavory
thing, to suffer in this life, it is worse to suffer in the next. O blindenes
of the sons of Adam, who take noe care of the future, so that the present
may pass to their contentement. Not valewing that which brings in true
profitt; but that which gives us gust. Not looking toward reason, but passion.
And therefore do they lament when they ought to think themselves happy, and
they rejoice when they have more cause to mourn. What is all this present
prosperity, but a smoke, which by little and little will be dispersed, in such
sort as that we shall see nothing of it? And what are all the years of our
life, but a short sleep, out of which when we awake, we find our selves but
to have been abused. And upon any little trouble, which arriues, we are drawn
to forgett our former pleasures; yea and it gives us, a kind of pain to have
enjoyed them.

If then, we find so great in constancy in this why do we not seek that
other? And since we see every day, that this is slipping out of our hands; why
do we not seek that which lasts indeed, and will make our felicity
eternal? If hitherto we have been in blindenes, let us now at length open
our eyes. And if prosperity did once tell us, that there was somewhat here,
which might content us, let now the gall of tribulation be applied to our eyes
and give us light to see, that, in this world, we are truly miserable, and
that we are not in our own Country, but in a very painful banishment; and
so raising first our hearts to heaven, let our conversation be also there.

This is the end why our Lord has punished you, that you may make more, and
more account of him, the more you see your self, in want, otherwise do not
conceive that God takes pleasure in your pain, but because he is merciful he
has a tender feeling of your tears. Only he will put this touch of wormwood
into your cupp, that so having discharged your heart, of all human comfort,
you may have your leaning place upon him alone. God has taken one comfort from
you, but it is to give you another, for so he is wont to do. He has made you
a widow, but it is that he may make himself your Father, since, Father of the
forsaken, Psalm. 67.
is his name. Many afflictions will not fail to offer themselves to you, in
this widowhood; and in many things you will find the want of him, who was wont
to remedy you in them. And in many of your friends, you shall find little
help, and little fidelity and less gratitude; but in all these things, God
will have you make recourse to him, and confer with him, about the troubles
you shall be in, and that, as with a true Father, you ease your heart, with him.
And if with that heart you call upon him, and trust your self in his hands
infallibly you shall meet with a sure refuge, in all your difficulties, and a
perfect guide in all your ways. And in any times without your knowing by whose
means, or how it comes to pass, you shall find your business done, to your
hand, much better then you could have imagined; and you shall then understand
by experience, how great a friend God is, to the afflicted; and how truly he
dwells with them, and makes himself a solicitour of their causes.

And if at any time, he do not give you that, which you desire; it will be to
give you that which shall be fit. For so does this celestial physician
proceed, with them, who go to him for their recovery; and who have a greater
desire, to be cured, then that their taste be pleased. Depart not you, from his
hands, and cure, though it should put you to much pain. Desire him not to do
what you will, but what he will. Let your weapons, be your prayers, and your
tears, and they, not lost tears, for that which our Lord has taken from you,
but living tears, for that our Lord may be pleased to pardon him and to save
you.

For what does that superfluous pain serve which they tell me you give your
self, but only, for the adding of sin, to pain. But now you know, that as
we have no liberty to laugh, idely or vainly, so neither have we any to
weep superfluously. But both in the one, and in the other, we must be obedient
to the holy will of our Lord. Why do you complain? why, I say, do you
complain? Either you are a sinner, and then you are to be cleansed by this
affliction; or else you are a just person, and then you must be tried, that you
may be crowned. whether it be the one or the other, you must give thanks to our
lord, with your whole heart, and resolve to love the end and reason of this
correction, though the thing it self be unpleasing. This we are taught by holy
Scripture, Hester. 5.
which relates how Hester kissed the end of Assuerus rod.

Let not your time pass away, in glutting your eyes with tears; but for the
love of our Lord, apply your self to send your heart up to him, and to prepare
your self for that passage, whereby you see others march before. It is enough,
Lady, it is enough, that you have already made so large a feast to flesh and
blood. Dry your eyes at last, and let not that time pass in bewayling death,
which was granted you for the gayning of life.

Call to mind, that our Lord drove them out of the house, who lamented the
death of a young maid; and he said that she was not dead, but that she slept.
For indeed amongst Christians, to dye is but to fall a sleep, till that day
come, when we shall awake again, to take our bodies, and so to reign with
Christ our Lord, both in body, and soul. And confider, that he for whom you
weep, is not dead but sleeps; and that, in a sleep of peace, since he both
lived end dyed a good Christian.

Why should it trouble you so much, that our lord would draw the man whom you
loved, out of this place, which is so miserable, and would carry him into the
way of salvation? And if he have left some troubles to you, take them up with a
good will, so that he may go on to his repose. And if his absence afflict you
much, yet be comforted with this, that shortly you shall see him again; since
our days in this life are so very few, and one of us has so little
advantage over the other, in dying a little sooner, or later. You shall do
also well to conceive, that our Lord took him away, because he was well
prepared, and that he has lest you here, to the end that you may well prepare
your self. And since you served our Lord with alacrity, in the state of
matrimony, serve him now in the state of widowhood, and in the trouble of that
state, with patience. That so, if then you gained thirty fold, you may now
gain sixty. And so you shall lead a life, if not of gust, yet, at the least
of great profitt, toward the purging of your sins; toward the imitation of
the Crucifixe; and toward a most certain purchase of his eternal kingdom.

But for the obteyning of all this, you must demand grace of our Lord, with
prayers, with tears, with using to read devout books, and with receiving the
celestial bread of the most Blessed Sacrament. And so lift up your dejected
heart, and walk roundly on. For before you can get to heaven, you will have a
long way to make. And if you be to enter there, this will not be the last
affliction, which you shall have. For the Jewel which you expect, is of so
inestimable a value (it being God himself) that how much soever it cost, it
can never be dear. And since you are one day to possess it, you are now to
rejoice in the hope thereof. And complain not of your afflictions, but say,
so great is the good for which I hope, that I feel not the misery which I
have. Let Jesus Christ our Lord, accomplish all this in you, as I desire, and
beg of him. Amen.

A letter of the Author to a virgin who was disposing her self to leave the
world, and to consecrate herself to God:
he animates her in that purpose; and shows the great blessings which she
would find, both in life, and death, by the espousalls which she meant to
make with Christ our Lord.

Devout servant of Jesus Christ. The contentment which my soul took in
understanding of the new purpose you were grown to have, of taking the king of
heaven for your spouse (you who might so well have matched your self here on
earth) was so very great that I know not with what words to express it. And
though when it was told me, it were new to me, as not having understood
thereof before; yet neither was it wholly new; for already I had in a manner
eyed you out, for that lord, who created you, and I had begged of him as a
particular favor, that he would bestow you upon me, for himself. Blessed be
his holy name for ever, who has now done it so very completely, as I knew
not, so much as how to wish. But that joy which your soul found before in
seeing it self so disintriqued from all the baseness of this earth, and finding
it self already to have received that pledge, and pawn of love from that
heavenly king; what was it else, but a clear sign, that this mutation which
you have made, proceeded not from any inco^stancy of your humor, but from the
work of God, who has conveyed his hand into your heart, and therein has
produced that desire of heaven, which now you have. And he also gave you that
great joy, as a testimony, and earnest penny of those many, and great, and pure
joys, which if you prove faithful to him, he resolves to give you in heaven;
the least whereof, is inco^parably more to be esteemed then a husband of this
world, and children, and estate, and whatsoever else the whole earth can give. O
if you had but tried, how sweet God is, to that soul, which turns her back
to the world, to place her eyes upon her Creator. O if you did but know, what
that sweetness is, of the celestial spouse, toward the comforting of those
souls, who cast all transitory delight away, and like chaste turtles refuse to
take comfort upon earth; but send up sighs for love of their Lord, who is in
heaven; and who are like the dove which returns home to the hand of the owner,
as clean as she went forth, without touching any dead body; so much as with
her feet.

What is there so flourishing in this world, which is any better then a dead,
and stinking carcass? And for what then does it serve us, to join our selves
to that which will infect us, and which may leave us thirty thousand times
more disgusted with the bitterness which follows, then with the pleasure which
it yielded for the present. You must render Christ our Lord many thanks, who
has given you light, whereby you know how to distinguish between that, the
precious, and the base, between eternal and-temporall, between an immortal
God, and a mortal man. And for having given you grace, to make so happy an
election, as whereby God is accepted, and man despised; and in that for the
love of that heavenly bed of state, the care of any earthly bed is thrown
aside^, how rich soever it might have been. Be therefore faithful to him,
who takes you for his spouse, and who will be sure to be so faithful to you,
as to make you find by experience, that he is not in jest, when he calls
himself the pure Spouse of pure Virgins; for you shall find the assembly of
all bliss in him. Nor can it prove like the marriages which are made between
flesh and blood, wherein usually the little contentment, which is had at first,
is followed by the bitterness of repentance. But this work of ours gives not
only contentment at the first, but the more you converse with this Lord, the
better you shall know him, and the better you know him, the more you will love
him. For he is not like men, who, when they are more frequented, let us easily
see that they have more faults; and he who was a good husband upon the marriage
day, within a year proves such, as that there is noe living with him. But in
Christ our Lord, you shall see nothing which may disgust you, and as little in
that Blessed mother of his, who is the mother in law, to all the spouses of
her son: O blessed hour wherein that good purpose was sowed in your heart,
and much more blessed, will that other be, when you shall find your self so
visited by your spouse, as to make you say, O my Lord, and when could I deserve
these favors of thee, that I should find this hidden treasure, for the
purchase whereof, to pay the price of a thousand lives, were to buy it very
cheap.

O how happy and prosperous is this marriage to be, and of how excessive joy,
both to heaven and earth. God the Father is pleased to see, that there be
souls on earth, who love his only begotten son so well, as that for his
love, they leave the loves of flesh and blood, not only those, which are
forbidden by his law, but even those of marriage which are lawful. For it is
a sign of greater love, when for his sake, we forbear that which we might
lawfully use. The son is he to whom the soul is espoused; and for this he
dyed, that he might have some souls which would love him at least with
spiritual purity; and others who might do it not only spiritually, but even
with the body also untouched. The holy Ghost is most pure, and far
estraunged from flesh, and when he finds a soul which resolutely despises
carnal delights, there does he lodge his eyes; and fills them with spiritual
comforts, and will never permit that the soul be empty, which shall refuse to
feed upon carnal food. Our Blessed Lady is the mother of the spouse, and
they are very like one another, for she also is all amiable, benign, a
beginner, a protector, and an advocate of virgins, and she highly reioyces
that there is virginity upon earth, for that is the flower which she planted.
There want not pages to give attendance at this marriage, for the Angels are
servants to the king of heaven, and ready for all that, which the spouse shall
need. Neither yet is there want of children which the world is wont to desire
so much; and they come without throws of travail, and without pain in
bringing up, and without that grief which grows, when either they live not
well, or dye too soon.

The children of this marriage are good works, which be rightly called a man's
or woman's fruit. What comfort will he feel, when for the love of Christ our
Lord, he conceiues a good purpose, to give an alms, or some such other thing;
and when afterward he shall put it in execution, what pleasure will he take by
the birth thereof? These children give both ease, and honor to their mother.
This Spouse has noe need of a dowry, for the children which she brings, will
bring it; and that so richly, as wherewith she may gain, and purchase heaven
it self. And they make their mother live in so perfect ease, that I give you
my word, that when you compose your self to sleep at night, you shall find
your self in greater peace, and rest, then if you were Mystres of the whole
earth, and whatsoever can be desired therein.

And tell me now what can be thought of in this world, which may arrive or even
approach to the least of these advantages? For if there be any little paltry
pleasure here, every hour of such pleasure carries with it the counterpoyse
of more then a hundred hours of grief and pain. And if here there be any
pleasure without pain, it will at last have an end, and either the spouse will
dye before her fellow spouse, or else he before her, and so all proves pain.
And besides the death of children, it is a grief to a mother to part from
them, even upon other occasions, in such sort, as that they enjoy not one
another.

But rejoice you O virgin in Christ our Lord. For your spouse shall never dye.
And when you dye you will be hemmed in by your children, which are those good
works that you have wrought; and they will not put you to pain by your
leaving them, for they go with you, into the other world; and they accompany
you even to the very throne of God, and they will plentifully repay all the
labor and charge, which you have been at with them, and the mother shall be
made happy for the love of the children. More over death makes noe divorce in
this case, but rather puts the spouse, and her fellow spouse together. And he
shall deliver us, for he is the Lord of life and death. And noe devil shall
presume to steal her away, whom God has taken under the protection of his
favor; and has honored with the name of his spouse. Then will the Angels
come and serve, and present her before Almighty God, singing praises to him,
and pouring forth benedictio^s upon her, and saying to her after this manner.
Come O spouse of Christ, receive that crown which is prepared for thee by our
Lord. The virgin mother will not then absent herself, being accompanied with a
world of other virgins, who have done in this world that which you are doing
now, and are far from repenting themselves thereof. In fine you shall go out
of this world, in company of your Peers, where our Lord has already prepared
that celestial bed of state for you, that you may eternally be full, and
rich, and royally provided for, in the house and presence of our Lord God,
contemplating that infinite beauty of his, from one moment to another, one
hour whereof is so high a reward, that by way of recompense it far exceedes
the proportion of what you suffer, yea and all those afflictions which all the
men of the whole world did ever suffer, in time past, or can ever suffer, in
time to come.

There shall you possess all good, and there shall you have obtained all that,
for which you were created, and you shall be so very full of God, as that it
cannot be expressed nor so much as thought. For there shall you find the
whole bosom of your soul, even to regorge with joy, like one who were
ingulfed into a whole sea of unspeakable sweetenes, whereby he were environed
on all sides. Then shall you see, and exclayme, and enjoy, and possess the
Lord of all things, and say, whom I have loved I have obtained; and whom I
have sought I have found; and he for whom I left the world is grown my pay,
and my reward, and him will I praise, and love, through the eternity of all
eternityes. Amen.

A Letter written to a devout person wherein is treated of Humility and Pride,
and of the perfection of the love of God.
GOD give you Sir a good Lent, and that so you may exteriourly take ashes, in
the beginning of this holy time, that the virtue of holy humility, which is
signified thereby, may ever have a resting place in your soul. For to whom
our Lord gives true knowledge, and grief for what he was, at that time when he
went estraunged from God, him has he delivered from the dangerous blindenes
of pride, and him does he make capable of all those spiritual blessings which
it may concern him to have. The holy Scripture says, The beginning of all
mischeife is pride, and he who is possessed by it, shall be possessed by all
manner of maledictions, that is, of vices. For as kings are not wont to go
alone, so is Pride accompanied with many sins. And so also on the other
side, humility is never alone, since according to Saint James. God gives his
grace to such as are humble, which Grace is the Mother of all virtue.

The proud man seeks after honor, and afflicts himself when he is contemned
but the person who is humble, is out of countenance when he is well treated,
and is glad when he is despised, because he finds that Justice is done
thereby, which Justice he loue^, as a person who is truly Just. The proud man
is ever in want of somewhat, because how much soever he have either of his
own, or by the gift of others, he still conceiues himself to be worthy of
more, but the humble man is always in abundance, yea and in superfluity, for
he acknowledges himself to be unworthy, even of the very earth whereof he
treades, yea, and he esteems hell it self, to be a punishment which comes
short of his sins. The proud man cannot endure nor live with any body, noe
nor even with himself, in peace. But the humble man can live with all the
world, for he abases himself to all, he endures all, esteeming them for his
betters, in his very heart; To the proud man it seems an unsupportable thing to
obey the will of others, whether it be of God or man; but the man who is
humble submitts and diminishes himself, and so is enabled to go in, by the
strait gate of doing the will of others, whether it be of the Creator or of
the creatures.

Great are the blessings which comes to us in these ashes of humility, and men
must take heed, that they be not found without it, unless they mean to be
without God. For S. Augustine says, How high art thou O Lord, and yet ^he
^umble of heart are the house wherein thou choosest to awe^! And the holy
Scripture says. Upon whom will I look? or upon whom shall my spiri^^ rest,
but upon the person who fears, and trembles at the voice of my words? This
humility, which makes a man think basely of himself, is far from being
abase thing, nor is it a fruit which grows on earth, but in heaven it is, and
God impartes it to such as digg deeply in their own dunge, raking up and
ruminating upon their faults and frailties, with great diligence: for amongst
those pouerties and miseries is this precious Jewel wont to be found. And
through our sins, we have so much matter to work upon, by way of examining,
and bewayling the same, that, unless it be some man who will absent his eyes
from looking upon himself, there is none, who may not be sure to find cause,
and cause enough, not only to be humbled, but even confounded.

Woe be to us! if we be found to be of them, of whom God says, Thou art
become as the face of a strumpet, nor would thou blush. For what thing is
there more deformed then the impudent boldness of such a person, as has so much
reason to be full of shame? And who is he that dares once cast up his eyes to
God or his creatures, if he consider well, how he has offended him, and made
himself unworthy of them? who is there amongst us, who fails not in the
perfect love which he owes to God? since we love him not with our whole
understanding, beleiuing his truth with that firm constancy which is fit; and
enterteyning those considerations, those thoughts, and purposes, by means
whereof, we might do him more faithful service? who is he who loves him with
his whole heart, not giving any part thereof to others, yea or to himself, but
only in God and for God? and who renouncing all proper interest, has
proceeded to love God, for God himself? And he who shall consider, how little
he has mortified his passions, and what a stiff war he makes against the
kingdom of the love of God, will easily discern that he loves not God with
all his soul? And our Lord commanding us also to love him with all our
strength, we are yet content to do it, with such a deal of tepidity, as we
may well desire him to pardon. For, the strength which we employ upon
complying with the love of our selves, and appetites being so alive in us,
makes us mightily fail in the diligence which we owe to the service of God,
and to the fervor of our love of him. S. Augustine says, that the increase of
Charity in us, is the decrease of our own appetites and desires; and then
will our charity be perfect, when there shall be noe such desires in us at all.
Now by the name of such desires, he understands that inordinate self love
which every one bears to himself. And because amongst all them who desce^d of
Adam, there is noe one, (excepting only Jesus Christ our Lord, and his most
sacred Mother) who has not found in himself, some excess of this self love;
therefore is there none of them, who has not fay led somewhat of perfection in
the love of God. For when the love of my self is wholly alive in me, the love
of God is dead; and then is a man in state of Mortal sin. And when the love
of God liue^s and reigns in me (in virtue of which love I fully purpose not
to offend God mortally) then am I in state of grace, though I may fail
somewhat, of that perfect love of God, because still I comply in somewhat with
the love either of my self or of creatures. And from this want of divine love,
does grow our faultines in our other works, because that is the life of them.
From hence also proceed the faults we make in the love of our neighbors, by
our not having compassion of their miseryes; nor taking joy in their blessings,
as concerning persons who are very straightly joined to God, and adopted in the
Sacrament of Baptism for his children. And we also fail in our works
toward them, because we fail in our love to him who said. That which you have
done to any of my little ones, you have done to me.

Now from the defect of these two Loves, of God, and of our neighbor (which
are the roots of our good works) many other imperfections grow into those
very works which we do, though sometimes such works themselves, are not
sins, nay being performed in the state of grace, they are meritorious of
eternal life; But of such as these (if we mean to live in the way of humility
and truth) we are to give the glory to God, and to yield him humble thanks,
who help us to embrace that which was good with our free will, and ordained,
that it should be meritorious, by that Grace which through his mercy, he
bestowed upon us.

Now we must not, upon this reason, forbear to sifte out those faults with
care, which we comitt to these actions of ours; but it is a much more secure
practice, to consider very particularly, that which is faulty in us, then that
which may go for a point of virtue. And be well assured, that how much soever
you shall consider, and sifte, yet still there will much lie hidden from you,
in regard whereof you shall have reason enough to say, with deep sighing to
our Lord, O cleanse me from my hidden sins.

Hence comes it, that we love not our neighbors, in such sort, as God would
have us, or at least, not so much as he would have us. Hence comes it, that
we tolerate not their imperfections, nor fly from giving them disgusts. And
in fine from hence grow all those other faults, which defile our souls like
filth, which is ever dropping as from a sore. Our sins are greater then any
thought of man is able to understand, and only he who created our heart and
clearly penetrates to the bottom of it, is able to comprehend what our
frailty is. And many times does that discover it self to be filthy before his
judgment, which seems, in the sight of ours, to be very perfect. Therefore as
Job has showed us the way we must fear all our works, how good soever they
may seem to us, and we must not take pleasure in our selves by reason of them,
nor delight our selves therein, even in the most secret part of our hearts. For
he only is pleasing to God, who is displeasing to himself; he only is Just
in the sight of God who knows that grace and Justice proceeds from the mercy
of God. There is not a thing, from which God is more auerted, then a heart which
carries liking to it self. For God in such a one finds noe vessel empty,
into which he may power the riches of his mercy, and so such a heart remains
with the natural poverty, wherewith, and wherein it shall still continue,
because it would not abase and empty it self, that so the waters of Grace
might run into it, and so it might live contented in God, and might bring
forth fruit, as a garden would do, wherein there were abundance of water.

All our good comes from God; and he who beleiues that of himself he is able
even to move his tongue toward the saying so much as Lord Jesus, that person
makes himself God since he attributes that to himself which only belongs to
God. And God gives himself to us upon condition that we must acknowledge this
truth: That in him, and of him, comes all our good, and not from our selves.
And the more good we have, the greater debtors of his we are, and so much
more we have, whereof to accuse our selves, as not corresponding to greater
favors by greater services, and to greater benefits by greater
acknowledgments. He who is taught by the divine truth, attributes nothing to
himself, but Not being and sinning. For if we remove all that which God gave
us when he created us, and which every day he conserues in us; we shall not
find any being in us, but only a nothing, and that to nothing we should
return, as of nothing we are made. And taking also away the favor of God
which through Jesus Christ is communicated us, what should become of the
greatest Saint on earth, but that which became of Peeter, when he denied his
Lord, and of Paul who persecuted him, that had redeemed him; and that which
every one finds by experience, that himself was, before our Lord carried his
hand over him, taking from him his old heart, and giving him a new one in place
thereof.

Justification is nothing else, but a resurrection of the soul which was dead
in sin, and now lives by the spirit of that life, which God infused into it,
by the death of his blessed son. And as that body should be both madd and
foolish, which would attribute life and motion to it self, and not to the
soul which dwells in it, and gives it life; so is that soul deadly blind,
which esteems that the life of good works, which she finds her self to
have, does proceed from her self, and not from the spirit of that life, which
was infused into her by Almighty God. And sometimes God punishes such souls as
these, by taking away that which formerly he had given them, to the end, that
observing that they can neither see, nor hear, nor taste, nor in fine, do
that which formerly they did, it may be plain to them that it was some other,
who imparted that life which was in them; and that they did but receive it; and
that the soul is noe other thing without the grace of Jesus Christ, then the
body is when the soul departs from the same.

And therefore my friend, be sure that thou see noe other thing in thy self,
but faults, and know that thou have nothing else of thine own. If our Lord
discomfors thee, consider how weak and poor thou growest, and with how little
conformity thou receiuest that, which thou do so well deserve. If he
comfort thee, consider with how little humility thou receiuest it, it being
reason that thou should so much the more abase thy self, as God honors
thee; and that by so much more thou should be confounded with shame, as thou
see, that God treates thee, as though thou were good, when indeed thou art
not so. Consider how little profitt thou make of the inspirations, and
inward speeches of our Lord; and how often our Lord says somewhat to thee, and
how soon thou forgettest to put it in execution; it being reason, that every
word of his, should last with thee all the days of thy life; without any need
of repeating it. How often does our Lord infuse precious liquor into thee, and
thou, having a heart all full of holes, do suffer that to be spilt; which in
reason, thou should keep a long time? And though it would be sit, that how
much more God comforts thee, so much more thou should forgett and neglect
the comforts of this world, and so much more unite and shutt up thy soul, to
the end that thou might again and again receive God into it, it happens
sometimes, that by the comfort, which he gives us, we are made more giddy,
through our own lightness, and we scatter and power out our hearts more then
before. What shall we say of our frailties, but that every thing being well
examined, we find, that we do nothing right, and that it were much reason,
that we should rather be confounded, by considering how faultily it is
performed, then that once it should pass by the least part of our thoughts,
that we had done any thing which were worth the looking on.

It is certain, that if a Page serve a king, and that he make him not due
reverence, they will punish him. If he answer not, or do it not soon
enough, or give not a quick account of any message, they will also punish
him. And in fine they whom we serve are not contented, though we do what they
bidd us, but withal we must do it well, if we mean not to be reprehended and
reproached.

And tell me now my friend, which of us is he, who carries such a profound
reverence to our Lord as is fit? where is that adoration of such an
incomprehensible Majesty, and such a profound internal kind of trembling, as
they have in heaven, of whom it is said in the holy Mass, That the Powers
tremble? Where is that confusion and shame; which we should have, to appear
before that infinite wisdom, which well does see what kind of things we are,
and which discouers us to the very bottom? where is that so exact obedience,
as that we should not need to have the same thing commanded twice? where is
that discretion, wherewith we ought to serve such a thing as God? where is the
gratitude which is due for so innumerable and so unspeakable benefitts? And
lastly where is that service both of body and soul, which is deserved by so
high a lord, and so great a God?

Certainly he who has eyes to see, will never discover in himself any thing
else, but a profoundity of miseries and faults. And when in the evening he
takes account of himself, what kind of man he has been all that day, he
finds nothing, but errors which he has committed, in thinking, speaking, and
doing, and he finds diverse good works which he has failed to do, by not
having loved and being thankful to God, and by not having loved and not having
supported the weakness of his neighbor as he ought to have done, besides
innumerable other things, which he should have performed, and has omitted. And
if with the favor of our Lord, he have done any thing which was good, he
sindes that he spotted it with pride, or vain glory, or tepidity, or with not
answering God as he was bound to do, or with two thousand other faults which
God makes him know, and with two thousand others which yet he is not able to
discern, but yet he beleiues that there they are; and for so wicked does he
esteem himself, as that the least part of his sins he holds to be that,
which he discouers. For as he knows that God is more good, then he is able to
conceive, so also does he believe, that himself is more wicked then he can
arrive to understand. And though God do him favors, yet does he not attribute
to himself any part thereof, but only the faults which he committed, in not
answearing, and profiting thereby, as he should have done.

And this is to walk according to truth, giving that to God which is his; That
is to say, all manner of good, without the least mixture of any ill. And by
this consideration being rooted well in the bowels of a man's heart (as a truth
which were delivered by the very mouth of God) a man rises, from leaning upon
himself; as from some broken reed, and he ever goes leaning upon him, who
vphoulds all things. He behoulds himself, and he sees nothing, but that which
is to be lamented; and he behoulds God; in whose goodness he confides; without
any fear to be forsaken. And for as much as God is so faithful, as that he
never leaves them who go to him, and for that he has so great care of them;
as that infinitely sooner, there will be want of water in the Sea, and of light
in the sun, then of mercy in him; therefore do they run, and fly, because
God carries them, and they fall not, because be sustaines them, and they
wander not, because he directs them, and they shall not be condemned, because
our Lord gives his kingdom to such as become like little children.

Be therefore sure, my friend, that thou understand thy self right, since our
Lord does so much expect it of thee. And of all that which passes in thee, lay
the glory aside for God, and take the shame and dishonor to thy self. And
place thy hope, of being able to proceed, as thou have begun, in that Lord who
put thee in the way; with noe meaning, I assure thee, to leave thee in the
midst thereof, but to carry thee on, to enjoy the society of his spouses in
heaven. There does he intend to do thee extraordinary honor, and therefore
procure not thou to be honored here. For being taken by the sent of such an
excellent feast as that, it is utterly against all reason, that thou should
glutt thy self, with the baseness of any thing, which this world affoardes. For
there is nothing upon earth, which can savor well in his mouth, who has
tasted, though but a little, of that celestial food. Turn thy back to all
things, which thou art soon to leave, and place not thy heart on that, which is
so instantly to pass away. It is very little, which here thou art able to
endure for God, yea though thou alone should endure all that, which can be
endured here. For considering hell, which thou have deserved, and heaven with
which he means thou shall be rewarded (since he has placed thee in the way
thither) and again, waighing that which here he has endured for thee; it is
not to be accounted of, noe nor so much as to be greatly considered, which
thou either do, or may endure for him.

Esteem thou God for so precious a thing, that whatsoever he grows to cost
thee, thou may still believe it to be very little; yea though he cost thee
thy life, yet do thou buy him very cheap. In the next world, thou shall
see, that thou were not deceived, in the exchange which thou have made, but
finding them to be treated like madd fools, and miserable persons, who lodged
their hearts, and besotted themselves, upon this present world, and forgot the
promises which God made concerning the future, thou will give praises to our
Lord, in that thou being once deceived, he vouchsafed to vndeceiue thee, and
whilst thou were casting thine eyes down to earth, he was pleased to raise
them up to heaven; and thou being a slave to vanity, he made thee a son of
his own; and when thou were living without any hope of divine promises, he
grew to place thee in that way, wherein thou may hope, that he will help
thee now to live well, and afterward to dye well. And that when this exile is
ended; he will conduct thee to the land of the living; which is the clear
fruition of the face of God. Where thou shall enjoy so great happiness, that it
belongs to God alone to know it perfectly, as to him alone it belongs, both to
be able, and to be willing to give it. And this will our Lord do, not for thy
sake, but for his own, because he is good, and his mercy endures for ever. To
whom, for all, and of all, and in all, be glory and praise, for all eternities
of eternities. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a person, whom he exhortes to be grateful and
careful to preserve the gift of the Grace of God.
It seems, he was in some fear, that the party was returning to sin.

I Remember you often; and the love I bear you, makes me never think of you
without some fear and trembling at my heart, considering the many dangers,
wherein your soul may be, for which our Lord has done so much, that if he
were still in case to be weary, without doubt he would now be very weary. But
he was weary, once for all, when he took our mortal flesh upon him; and from
those wearynesses of his, does result that care, which now without any
weariness at all, he takes of such, as he is drawing to himself.

O Sir, how much reason have you, to be grateful for the good which you have
received; and careful, at the least, to keep it; and fearful, least it
should slip out of your hands. And I said Careful at the least to keep it;
because he, who can make conjecture, that he has received the gift of
Justification, must employ himself, like a diligent negociatour; that with
five talents he may gain other five, Improuing that good, which God began in
his soul, and getting, every day, a new part in heaven; since the gate is
open, for our getting more, and more in every minute of our life.

It is most certain, that if we should tell a man, that there were a very long
way, in the steps whereof there were great felicity to be obtained, yea and
that, for the making of one single pace, they would give him the worth of a
whole kingdom; and that though a man should go all his life time, in that
way, they would never deprive him, of his reward, but that still it should
hold on, after the rate, of the first pace, which he had made; I do not
think, that in the whole world there is any one worldly man, who in this case,
would not be so great a walker, as that he would hardly be ever persuaded to
sit still. Now, if covetousness of visible things be able to work so great
effects; what will it be fit, that the love of that, which is invisible and
eternal, should work in our souls, but a vigilant care, to be still walking
on, in the way of God, with resolutions as lively, and more, then they were,
which we entertained the first day, when we entered into his service.

Who is he, that can be so absurdly inconsiderate, as not to hold himself a
deep debtor to Almighty God, for the many gifts, which he has received from
him, in recompense (as I may say) of so many sins of ours, as that he will
not serve so benign a Lord, with all diligence? who is he, that considering
whence our Lord has drawn him, will not resolve to be daily further and
further of from hell, and from the impiety of sin? He seems not to have been
sorry for his offense, who procures not with diligence to be far from the
like. He does not sufficiently thank our Lord for this gift, who has laid
aside the memory thereof, and with whom it decays with time; not stirring
himself up, to give new thanks, and to present new services, knowing more and
more thereof, every day, as a person, who has received increase of light: This
is so great a favor, that David calls it the Benedictions of sweetness. And
it is great reason, that we should grow strong with that new grace, Psalm. 20.
which our Lord gave us, and not content ourselves still with being little ones.

I said, that at least we must be careful in the continuance and conservation
of this gift; because according to good reason we should be encreasers thereof
daily more and more. And from hence it grows, that when I see, that the light
of your soul is set upon by so many winds, and when I consider your
weakness in the midst of so many, and so great, and so subtle enemies, I
find my self to be all trembling over you, as any mother would be over her
son; who adventures not to rejoice for the good she sees him enjoy, through
the fear she has, that he may chance to loose it.

Tell me, good Sir, how is it with you? are you still on foot in the presence
of your God? do you live, in the presence of true life? is God lodged in your
heart? is there an union of love between God and your soul? Or is there not
perhaps, some little dryness or disagreement grown between you, which your
much care of this world, and your little care to please your Lord, may have
caused? I fear to hear the answer, which you may chance to give; and yet I
cannot content my self to be without hearing it. If you give me good news, my
soul will rejoice in our Lord, and I will give him thanks for having
conserved, what he has gained. But if you tell me otherwise, I must be
extremely sorry; and yet still howsoever, I must needs know it. For I will not
remain without grief, if you be subject to any spiritual loss, or
inconvenience. I hope to have a part of your Crown; and I submitt my self to
bear a part of your pain.

If there be any thing of this kind, take heed you suffer not the wound to
fester; and make no intricate knotts upon the swathing-bands of your sins.
Make haste to break that quickly, which is ill tied up; for you can have no
leave to divide your self from him; who fixed himself to that Cross for you
with so cruel nails. Say alowde to all things; Depart from me; for neither
am I yours, neither ought I be so much as mine own. Let the thing be what it
will, let the person be who it will, and let the interest be as great as it can
be; no other can have Title or justice to carry you away, but only Jesus
Christ, who created you, and took you for his son; and after you had been a
prodigal admitted of you again, and honored you, and gave you a new garment,
and a sweet embracement of peace; and keeps a state of great repose prepared
for you in heaven, if you will keep his commandments.

That man, namely your self, belongs to this Lord of ours. Though every man in
this world, should putt in his claim for you; there is none, who has so
dearly bought you as he; to whom you also belong by another title. For what
is it for God to dye for us, but to repurchase that, at an extreme rate, which
was already his, by the benefitt of Creation, and to dra^v us out of hell, and
again to admit us to his freindshipp? what is this, but to multiply diverse
Titles to the same thing? and those so very great, that every one of them, has
reason enough, to carry the whole man after it. O treason of the sons of Adam
what is that, which you do, when somewhat else preuailes in your heart against
Jesus Christ? how are you able to say No to him, whom you are so bound to
serve, though it were with the loss of your lives? Shall any small title,
which any thing may make toward you, be able to carry you away, and so blind
you, as to make you forgett so many and so great benedictions, as our Lord
lays up in heaven for you? Let the world depart, even now, from our hearts;
since it is so soon to depart from our eyes? And when we shall see anything
therein, which flourishes, let us bury it under ground, and tread upon it
there, in the sepulcher. For by the consideration thereof, we shall obtain a
true relation of it, and such a one as will deliver us from it, and free us,
from the care of all that, which here is sought, with such a pestilent kind of
desire.

What better weights or measure can you desire, that so you may not be
deceived, nor be drawn to take one thing for another, then to carry it
instantly to the Passion and death of Jesus Christ our Lord, who then condemned
that, which the world esteemed; and to carry it also to the hour of our own
death, which conducts us all naked, solitary, and defeated, and to be trod upon
by the seete of our servants. And you in particular may do well, to remember
this point; since, besides the fear, which we all ought to have of that
passage, your self have another particular reason for it; because you have a
more particular knowledge of death; for lately you wanted not, as a man may
say, a fingar's breadth of passing through it, to eternity.

Take heed, take heed, that you be not deceived by those false apparances,
and by those painted maskes; for they are no better then maskes, which enueagle
and deceive our souls. And if you like these shadows so well, raise up your
heart to heaven, where the Truths of these things are; whereof here there is
but some little resemblance. And so you will neither conceive any envy against
him, whom you find to prosper in warldly things; neither yet will you have
any great appetite, to possess that, which in fine, you must be forced to
leave. Do not entangle your self with this earth, since God, has given you
some good hopes, and pledges, that he means to carry you to heaven. And those
are, his most sacred death, the knowledge, and love of the Crucifix, the
receiving of the holy Sacraments, whereby in the holy Church there is given a
pardon of our sins; and the adoption of the Sons of God, and consequently
of heirs. Let him seek for shadows, who has no hope to lay hold, on things
of substance. Let him respect a short time, who has had no taste of spiritual
benedictions, which last for ever; And let him triumph, like a sott, in the
prosperities of this world, who has not felt in his heart, how delightful a
thing it is, to shed tears for having offended God; and how happy a man is, in
relying upon Christ our Lord, and in living to him. And since our Lord, has
called us to his mercy, and has given us the knowledge of his Son Christ
Jesus, let us not live according to the flesh; nor allow of any counsel
against this counsel, That in a thing so manifest, as it is, that we ought to
seek, and esteem the contentment of Christ our Lord, despising the world, and
all that is therein, there is no need of taking any man's opinion; and we must
not be moved by any vanities of the world, how many, John. 2.
and how usual, and how well received soever they may be. The world passes
with the delight thereof as S. John says; but he who will do the will of our
Lord, shall remain for ever. Who relyes upon that which is unstable, shall
fall down together with it; and he, who will adore an Idol, shall grow like
that very Idol; but he, who loves Christ, our Lord (and that man loves him who
hates the world) he indeed is wise, and worthy, and shall be exalted to sit
in that kingdom, with the same Jesus Christ our Lord, as he sittes at the
right hand of his Father. It is much more worth, to be the least there, then to
be the greatest here: If therefore it delight us to reign let us desire to
do so, in that eternal kingdom. I beseech Christ our Lord, to bestow it on
you. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a devoted religious Friend of his, who animates him
to seek God by obedience, and humility, and he teaches, that recollection of
mind, must not be tied to any certain place.
I Have received your letter, and that which I am to answer is this. You must
know, that there is not any one in this life, who can think to live without
troubles; and that to complain of them, is to complain of being a man, since
we were borne to bear them. And if it seem to you, that when you were shutt
up, you carried your soul more recollected; you are to consider on the other
side, that Obedience in doing those things, which displease ones self, and the
humility of performing mean offices, is noe small fruit to the soul. And
believe you this truth, that the man, who is careful to recollect himself, and
who puttes his confidence in God, does many times find himself more
recollected in streets, and public places, then if he were in his Cell. And
they who tie their devotion to any particular kind of place, do insta^tly
loose it, when they leave the place, yea and many times in that very place, it
fails them. And this grows in regard they are resolved to have it there, and
strive not to find it in all places, and in all those works, to which they
attend by their Obedience; upon this Obedience, you must greatly procure to
ground your self, without choosing this, or that. Since Obedience is a thing
so acceptable to God, that it exceedes all that, which a man may do under the
conduct of his own will, how good soever it may seem. Father Lewis of Granada
will pass shortly by you, and I would have you do that with great confidence,
which he shall advise you. The Holy Ghost be ever with you.

I am such an enemy of these changings of place, and I hold the very desires
thereof so fit to be suspected; as that I am made slow in giving answer to
what you write concerning them; till by your prayers we may get more light to
guide us. For otherwise, we shall go as bad as blindefould; and perhaps you
may fall upon worse encounters, then they are, which you would avoid. I beseech
you solicit the matter with our Lord; and when I shall have satisfied mine
own heart, I will impart it unto you, In the mean time I recommend to you
much, that you keep your soul in peace. For it happens to some, that they
both loose their time, and the good opportunity, which God gives them, by
thinking much upon that other, which they desire to obtain; and so they grow
to loose, both the one, and the other.

Make you account, that there is but one day of life left, for you; and that
that day is the morning, when you awake. And spend you that, as if it were your
last, with all the care that possibly you ca^. And when the desire of doing
any other thing occurres, make this answer. Do not think of to morrow; and
exercise your self, in breaking your will. For when a man flies from the
opportunity, which he has to break it, it is like flying out of the feilde.
And because such a one flies like a coward, and carries his weakness in his
company; therefore when the occasion presents it self afterward, he finds,
that he is as far from strength, as before; the reason hereof is, because he
changed his place, but not his mind: give you a good account of that house,
and of the opportunity, which there you have; and so you shall get a tongue,
wherewith you may ask a better, at the hands of our Lord; For otherwise they
may say unto you, that he who conducts ill that which he has already in his
care, to what end should one trust a greater matter, in his hands?

A Letter of the Author to a devout Lady, animating her to fight against the
Devil, and to resist his temptations.
I Beseech our Lord, that you may find your self as I desire; for it was not
said in vain, that love is full of a careful kind of fear. But in fine, I
have confidence, that our Lord (as he says to us by the Prophet Jeremy) will
regard that love wherewith he espoused himself in those beginnings of his, and
will remember how the people followed him, without any high way in the Desert,
which was full of affliction to them, and carried a kind of resemblance of
death. God is very thankful, to such as serve him with love; and in the time
of our weaknesses, and when our strength is even upon the point to fail, then
does he look back, upon the time when formerly we had been in vigor, and
to that amorous intention, which we had in former time, releiuing our misery,
with the abundance of his mercy. Continue therefore with a heart full of
courage; and, as S. Paul says; do not loose your confidence; Heb. 10
for there belongs a great reward to it And this is that, which the Devil
would feign, either take away from us, or weaken in us, so to pull us down,
who pull him down, and much more, you, being a woeman; by whose hand he would
esteem it, Judges. 9.
more dishonor, to be overcome. As Abimelech said to his second, do thou kill
me; that so it may not be said, that a woeman killed me; for a woeman had
cast a piece of earth stiffly down upon him from the fortress. Thus must you
do, when the Devil shall offer you combat. Cast Christ our lord at him; and
so break his head (for Christ our lord being man, is called earth* and so
the enemy shall dye. And if notwithstanding, it seem to you, that still he
must be a live; know yet, that he remaynes in extreme trouble, and even as
dead, to see himself overcome, and to be the occasion that you shall gain
crowns, whereas he thought that they would have proved fetters.

To what greater misery can an enemy be subject, then to see, that he helps
him, to be great, in the eyes of God. For if you saw the treasure, which you
have gained, by resisting the Devil, so very often; there is noe doubt, but
that it would sufficiently temper the bitterness of your troubles to consider
the beawty and riches of those crowns. Now so many precious stones have you
gotten, wherewith to enrich your crown, as you have resisted, times, those
counsels of the Devil; and so much have you gained of eternal rest, as you
have with patience, endured several times, the sadd afflictions, which he has
brought upon you. Be not therefore weary, of getting still new precious stones,
though whilst they are thrown at you, they hurt you a little; but then
instantly after, they are your own.

And see that you resist that unprofitable sadness, which is the beginning of
many mischiefs; and confiding in our lord, and being cheerful in the hope of
his love, tread all under foot; and let it seem little to you, as S. Bernard
says, My afliction is hardly to be counted afliction for one half hour, and
if it prove any longer I feel it not, through the force of my love. Tread you
upon the dragon, and upon the lion, and let him fear you, Psalm. 26.
and not you him. And say you to your self. Our lord is my helper, and whom
them shall I fear? Our Lord takes care of me, what then can arrive, which may
afflict me? Our lord gouernes me, and I am safe Our lord serves himself of
me, and I aspire to no other happiness, how much soever it may cost me. And
thus, the Devil finding you full of courage, and well armed, shall not be
able to pull you down, but rather fear, so much as to assault you. Our lord,
who called you, conserve you, and make you such, as I beseech him that you may
be. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a Cauallier his friend.
THE news of this messenger, who is parting, takes me by night, and without
paper, and full of my ordinary indispositions. I beseech our lord, who is
omnipotent, to tell you that by himself, which he was to have told you by my
pen; since in me there is noe ability to do it, nor have I indeed any
opportunity. The co^plaintes you make against your self, upon the opinion which
you had of your own prudence, are just. You must admit them, and do them
justice; ever esteeming that opinion for a crafty enemy, and counting up every
pace it makes, that so you may understand the deceites thereof. For in these
temptations, to know them, is to overcome them. Make that very account with
your self, which was made by that Monk, in this namer; I came not to judge
any, but to be judged by all. Say thus to your self; I came not to have zeal
of others but of my self. God places not me in the office of a guide, but in
the duty of being guided. And who is so maddly impertinent, as that he will
think to hitt right, in that, where God puttes him not; since every plantation
which is not made by the heavenly father, shall be rooted up.

But now, if by Obedience you be commanded to deliver your mind, first beg
you light of our lord, and then declare it, but not without fear, and as a
thing which you do but offer, to the end that it may be examined by others.
And you are not to shoot it out, with such a kind of resolution, and auctority,
as if it must needs be approved, and executed, because forsooth you thought it
fit. Noe nor that it ought to have any force at all, upon that reason; but
only, that things may so be done, as others may take to be most convenient,
whether they approve or disallow your opinion. And you must conceive, that by
doing thus, you comply with the duty of your Obedience, and that you have
nothing more to do in that business.

They, who either be endwed with light from heaven, or have else been taught
to see, by the many falls, which they have taken; do noe less fear, even
some good desires of particular things, then the executing of some desires,
which are not good. Yea, and in some sort, they apprehend them more because of
the two, it is harder to understand and master the deceit, which lurkes in
them. Now this fear, takes order that they run not instantly to entertain
them, but to keep their stand; recommending that desire of theirs to our lord,
and asking council of him. This fear is the beginning of wisdom, and it is
also the end thereof. It is hard to declare this point by letter but for him
who has a superior, whom he obeyes, it is easily declared, by putting the
case, and following his counsel.

When you shall be come to know, that such a business concerns the service of
God, and that it is fit to be dispatched, yet still even that must be done in
such sort, as that his Majesty be not offended, for whose service the business
it to be undertaken. For if the heart be thereby filled, with cares and
distractions, and especially if they come at wrong times, the thing it self
may well be just, but the manner of doing it, will not be so. It is a good
thing, for a man to carry himself like a person who is at the comaund of
another; and not as a guide of the business. Not as if you were some great
master, but rather like some young fellow, who were bidden, either to come, or
go when the care of any particular shall put it self unseasonably upon you;
say to it, to this effect, Our lord commaundes me nothing, about that matter at
this time; For my part, I have nothing to think; all will go into error, if
it be done after my fancye when our lord shall command me to do it, I will
do it, and I will both hear, and speak. For this purpose it is good to set
out some determinate time, to think of these things, which require care; that
so they may not come upon a man, in troops, when he were to be in silence
with God. If they bring any affliction with them, which much disquiet; we may
well conceive that that is not the way, wherein God walks: nor do we comply
with his word, which says, Nolite solicit^ esse, labor enim exercendus,
sollicitudo tollenda: you must not be over careful, for pains must be taken
but solicitude is forbidden; and for the taking of it away, our lord wills us
to confide in our heavenly Father.

He who has this confidence, perceiues well, that the business dependes upon
God; and that his divine wisdom, knows how to address him, and therefore a
Christian man, is to be persuaded, that it gives noe advantage, even to the
very business it self, if we fall into any unquiet kind of anguish; or even to
superfluity of thinking of it, which is thus forbidden, by holy scripture. Ne
affligas temetipsum in consilio tuo: Do not afflict thy self in thine own
counsel: but say thus to your self, It is God who must do it, and not I.
Perhaps our lord will not have it remedied by this means. And if he will, yet
his will also is that it be done with peace, and with my spiritual gain, and
without my loss. And so procure, that your heart may ever go, in celebration
of that. Christian Sabbath, whereof S. Paul speaks; and then we may say to
our lord, Descend ^hou into my heart, for it is all free for thee: and it has
nothing which may distract me from hearing thee, and from speaking to thee. You
have reason to desire the help of prayers to this purpose: for it is not so
easily obtained. I beseech our lord, who called you to his own service,
continue you in his grace, and carry you afterward, with himself to eternal
rest.

A Letter of the Author to a Virgin who lived in Recollection.
Of the value of a soul, and the care wherewith it is to be kept from falling.
And that if it fall, it must have hope, and so rise again.

I Know not with what words, I may be able to express the fault which accuses
me, and the punishment which I fear. I look back upon the much time which
has passed without writing to you, whilst yet you were recommended to me; that
so by means of my care, you might proceed and proffit, in the service of our
heavenly king; since he was pleased to receive you for his, through that word,
which I preached unto you. And I in the mean time, like an ill servant of
Christ our Lord, have been negligent in negotiating this business which he
held to be so truly his; as that it filled him full of care, and so full, as
to make him give his life, for the dispatch thereof. And not only have I
sinned against him, but against you also. To him I have been an ill servant,
and to you I have been an ill Father, since I have not preserved the stock nor
sustained you with the food of his word; his, who made me his steward, to the
end, that in the true time, ^.4
I might wisely and faithfully dispense it, ^12
to every one, according to that which he should need.

I am much grieved for my negligence, as it becomes a guilty person; and I
apprehend the punishment of my fault. Not that I fear so much, least our Lord
should punish, or scourge, or afflict me for it, with vexations, and torments,
as that, he may permit your soul to receive some disadvantage thereby. For
when a man has noe knowledge of what belongs to children, nor cares how he may
bring them up; it is but reason both that he see them dye, and that they may
also continue dead in his sight; that so the grief thereof, may be a
torment to him, and may keep those eyes open, which his carelesnes had shutt.

My good sister, (for I will presume to say, that you are mine, because you are
the Spouse of my Lord) O how happy were he, who might know how it is with you;
that so he might either be delighted in your good, or receive the torment of
sorrow, for your ill? how happy were he, who might know, if those fervent
tears of yours still continue, which washed your soul in the high presence of
your Spouse, and which watered it with devotion, that so it might give fruit
to the Lord thereof. And if your long watches last, wherein you were wont to
treat in secrecy and solitude with him, whom your soul loves. Reflecting upon
those sorrows, which he endured for love of you; and, you, desiring to endure
somewhat like that, for the love of him.

I beseech him of his mercy, that you may not have lost that holy silence of
yours, which was discourse with God; your rich poverty, which gave you more
full satisfaction, then all the wealth of this world; That contempt of your
self, which gave you price and value in the sight of our Lord, and that holy
change of your life, which cast them into wonder, who saw you, and praised God
in you. Let it not please him, that mine ears may ever hear, that the servant
of Christ, is other then she used to be. Let it never come to pass, that
she should live with any other, nor regard any other, nor think of any other,
then only Christ our Lord; to whom she offered her self. Make noe exchange;
whereby, you may be so deceived; as that having tasted of that heavenly
gift, and having fed upon the cru^mes of the table of God; you should now
afterward, come to taste the bitterness of Egypt; and those meat which are
devoured by me^ cast of from him. Who when here, they shall have satisfied
themselves with the food of swine, shall burn hereafter, in the company of
devils.

Servant of Jesus Christ, how is it with you indeed? tell me, how it is with
you. I beseech Jesus, you be well in his sight. S. Paul said, that even his
very life, consisted in the good of his children; and even I, though not with
that great fire, but with the little, which God gives me, do yet adventure to
say, that my life consistes, in that you be well, in the sight of God. I can
take noe pleasure in this body, if the soul of my daughter, be dead; nor shall
delight have any place in me, til I may know, that your Spouse, whom I lodged
in you, does still inhabit your heart. If it be any otherwise, it is I, who
have made the fault, and I will perform the pe^nance; but yet see that you be
not angry with him.

Do not my good Sister, afflict me more then already I am afflicted, through
mine own fault, by the love, which I carry to your soul; and if you be
offended with my negligence, be appeased by this co^session which is full of
shame and grief. And believe that through the favor of our Lord, you shall
well find, that I will mend. And upon this motive, you must forget that I have
been an ill Father to you; since upon the same, God forgets that we have been
ill sons and ill servants to him. And if yet you will require further
satisfaction, be your own caruer; and require of me what you will. Only
return to the way of God, if you should have left it, or else make me know,
that you continue in it; that so I may be sure that things go well with you;
and that I may have strength to bear that pe^na^ce which you shall impose upon
me for my negligece. Negligence, I mean in writing to you; but not in
remembering you. For in this our Lord, has not permitted that I should be
forgetful. For so great was the love, which I carried toward you, upon
seeing that you were grown to be the true servant of God; and you entered so
deeply into my heart, when I considered those mercyes, which our Lord had
vouchsafed to you; that it never parted more from thence, though it have
failed, to strengthen and comfort you in this way as it should have done.

Pardon me my good Sister for the love of Jesus Christ; and be not cruel
against yourfelfe, but be as cruel against me, as you shall think fit. Be
sure to love our Lord, for he deserves not to be ill used, for the negligence
of his servant. And if you should have forgotten your duty to him you know his
condition already well enough, and, that he has promised to receive the soul
which will return and that if you will forgive me he will pardon you. And he
will show you such mercyes, as he showed before, and will enable you to sing
those Canticles to him, which you sung in your first beginning, and birth, to
Christ our Lord.

Do not now give cause of joy, to those infernal spirits, since there was a
time, wherein you wounded them with sorrow. Do not greiue your good Angel,
since he has given God much praise for you; and has rejoiced at your
vocation. Do not reuerse that solemn Festiuity, which was celebrated in the
kingdom of heaven, upon the day of your conversion. And if through my sins
any of these things should have happened, yet still you must not be dismayed.
For our Lord will stretch forth his arms, and will receive you; since he
stretched them out for you upon the Cross. And it is usual with him, to love
that person more, who having runn away out of the war does yet return to
fight with greater courage, then that other, who though he never forsook the
field, yet was never but slack in doing him service.

This is a kind of war, wherein the loss of the victory consists not in the
not receiving any wounds, but in flying out of the battaille, and rendering
himself to the enemy, in the quality of a man who is overcome. Take courage,
and begin yet once again, for you shall find Christ our Lord close at hand to
help you. And seeing your humility, and how much you are ashamed of yourselfe,
he will not put you to confusion. Nor when he shall perceive, that you are
lying prostrate at his feet, will he cast you off, or kick you out of his
sight. And if you call upon those intercessours, of yours, who are in heaven,
they will not make themselves deaf to the cries which you send up from hence,
As for me because I have made the fault, whereby you have incurred the
inconvenience, if there be any, I will also perform the penance as I said
before. And I will beseech our Lord to restore and raise that up, which my
negligence made fit for ruin. Let all your thoughts beat upon his having
begunn the work, and not upon my having neglected it. And then he will put
things in good order, because he is the true lover of souls, and pretends not
to see men's sins, that so they may retract them by sorrow. I beseech him
even by what himself is, that he will keep you in close protection, under his
wings; and make you gracious in his sight, and that he will punish me in
whatsoever sort he shall think fit. And I beg of you by him that you will write
to me, though I confess myself to be unworthy of your answer.

A letter of the Author, to a woman, who was afflicted with grievous, and
dangerous temptations.
He encourages her to suffer, and shows that the fraite of afflictions is
great, when they are well borne.

BE comforted, Esaye 40.
be comforted, O you my people, says the lord your God: speak to the heart of
Jerusalem, and call her hither; for her punishment is ended, and her sin is
pardoned. Confide, my good sister: for these words are spoaken to you, and they
command you to be comforted, through his favor, who will defend you: though
your own infirmities, and those infernal powers, strive to pluck you down.
But if they, be careful to persecute you: more careful is Christ our lord, to
ouershadow you, and to defend you, and to fetch you of from this combatt,
adorned with new Crowns, which are incomparably more to be esteemed and
rejoiced in, then your tribulation deserves to be lamented.

What is the matter? what is that, which afflicts you? what is that which
frights you? your God is the curer of these wounds: be not troubled there at.
For at the instant that he closes them, he will shine to you as a sun, seven
times more bright, then before you were subject to this affliction, your
spiritual prosperities, will incomparably excel, those which are past: since
that which you suffer now, does so far exceed in bitterness that which
formerly you suffered. For these flowds of anguish, use to serve but for a
preface, to an abundance of spiritual delight as the tribulations of Job were
messengers to him, Job 24.
of a doubling of his estate and comfort, which God bestowed upon him. God
afflicted him first, and then he comforted him, he tried him, and then he
crowned him: he hid himself from him a little: but afterward he showed himself
more dear, and sweeter, then he had seemed before to be offended.

This is the style, which our lord holds with his servants. He mortifies them
so far, that he seems, as if he would place them, in the very torments of
hell: but then instantly again he draws them out, and putts them into perfect
ease: and so, as that the whale is neither able to retain him, nor yet so much
as to touch him with any offense, whom she had swallowed. Our adversaries,
the devils, Jonas 2
are full of pride, and they threaten, to devour us: but let us say to them,
in their teeth: Come and spare not, for you shall be overcome. Take what
council you list, it shall come to nothing, for God is on our side. Let it
not, my good sister, pass once so much as in your thought, to be afraid of
these infernal wolves: For he, who conquered them once upon the Cross, has
conquered them in you: and will do so again; and will despoyle them, to their
great shame. And how soever it may seem to you, that the encounter is fierce,
and the enemy so strong, as to fright you; be not yet dismayde. E say 19.
For it is our lord who says: Shall perhaps the prize be taken out of the hand
of the strong man? And shall that, which was seized by the mighty, be resumed?
Most certainly the captive shall be taken out of the hand of the strong man;
and that shall be rescued, which he had taken by violence. And this shall come
to pass; because the hand of God, will fight for you; and will ouershadow you,
as birds with their wings spread abroad, defend and cover those young ones of
theirs, which they love so much.

O that our eyes could once but see, that zeal of God, wherewith he keeps our
souls, and how safely he claspes them in his hand, even when they think, that
they are already lost. Some are wont to throw down a glass, with speed, to
show, how dexterously they can receive a brickle thing in safety, which is
cast, though never so speedily, from on high. And if the glass could feel and
know, it would tremble to see it self cast down so far and so fast, and to
be falling toward hard stones, where it were likely to be broken, into a
hundred pieces. But then comes to succor it, the other hand of him, who threw
it down; and so it is received without any hurt at all. And thus you who see
your self so drawn even out of yourself, assaulted with such sharp fyres, and
afflicted by so fierce pains, do tremble and fear, conceiving that you shall
be broken all to pieces, by falling into offenses against our lord. But you
must know and consider, that our lord, who has brought you into this trouble,
he himself will bring you out: and he, who hides himself a while from you, that
you may suffer, is yet very near you for your defense. For otherwise, you had
been swallowed up ten thousand times over, by your enemies. He throws you
down, and yet he receaues and saues you from falling. He moves the tempest,
but yet he it is, who keeps you from drowning. For in that, which you feel,
it is not you, who do any thing, but you suffer it. He who does it, is the
devil, and he shall pay for it.

God sees your heart perfectly well, and that you are a lover of his
Commandments, and one, who abhorres any thing, which is offensive to him. I
beseech him to keep you, as he has done hitherto, for as for those things,
which the devil representes to your mind, be not troubled at all thereat. For
though it be full of deformity, and afflicte you much, yet you will not be the
worse for that. These are things, which happen to many, and not only these, to
which you are subject, but others also which are incomparably greater, and
which seem indeed, to be a very copy of the true hell, and of that
language, which there they hold.

But not for all this, does God forsake his souls; but even when all human
counsel, and power fails, then runs he toward them: with a mighty hand,
taking away the cup of bitterness, even from their mouths, and in exchange
thereof, he gives them ten thousand comforts. And, the while, a man comes to
know, that he is weak, by having understood his great misery through
experience. He knows also, the strength, and malice of his enemies, and
procures to fly from them, and leanes closer upon God, whom he finds to be
only able to deliver him, out of such bitter pangs as those. And thus, out of
his former miseries, he both fetches light, whereby he may esteem less of
himself: and repose greater confidence in God; and he learnes to live with
greater caution, and reservation, having discovered the treacheries and
malicious proceeding of the devil. And we are not to account little of this
benefitt: because as our true life consistes in knowing, and loving Almighty
God: so also is it a thing of great moment, if in the strength and virtue of
good spiritual directions we may have some knowledge of the deuilles ways.
Not to the end, that we may love, and honor him, (for that belongs from us to
God) but that we may fly from him, and escape from his snares; which are
discerned, and known by few men, who yet conceive, that they have some
knowledge of God. Nay, therefore we are to make great account of the fruit,
which we gather out of these difficulties: because thus the soul grows to
gain experience, in the war, against this subtle enemy. And these things,
and maine others, does our merciefull lord, draw out of these hard encounters,
whereby our adversary pretendes to make us fall. And so we make him loose,
that which he hoped to gain, and we putt a scorn upon him: whilst we profitt,
and purifye our souls, by that very means, which he used, for the
disadvantage thereof.

And forasmuch, as you have offered your self, to the service of Christ our
lord: and are now no longer your own, since the day, wherein you were made so
happy; do not conceive, that this pastor of your soul, is liable to the
fault of being forgettfull. For if he would forgett you, he would not call you,
nor court you, nor pass so sweet promises to you. ^ccle. 11.
In the day of adversity, let your mind look back to the day of prosperity,
which formerly you enjoyed: that so your present condition, may not draw you
down, when it is tempered, with the memory of those favors, which were
imparted so you in time past. And be sure that if Christ did not love you, he
would not have raised you up, nor given you that Jewel. And since you know,
that you began to walk in this way for his sake: and that you have desired
to please him: and that, according to your frailty, you have procured to do
it: lay not such a spott upon your honor, as to fail of confidence in him,
from whom^, when you remained in separation, he drew you close to himself; and
conveyed a sweet, and meek spirit into the bowels of your heart; and set you
out, with his own mark; to the end that both you might be his, and that you
might know your self for such.

And now, if the infernal woolfe, have presumed to set upon her, who was set
forth by the mark of jesus Christ and who desired to serve him, do not wonder
at it; for these are the trials of our Faith, and love; to see if we will be
dismayed, and so turn back. There is no true virtue, unless it be tried; and
the trials of Faith are dangers, and discountenances of God. But even then, if
that faith be pure, and fine, not only it is not dismayed, but how much the
more it is vexed, so much the more strength it takes, and even fetches society
out of solitude. For we know, that it is the custom of our Lord, to place his
servants, even upon the very horns of the bull, and to hide himself, when he
has done, to try their faith. And forasmuch as their sight, is only bent upon
the goodness of our Lord; they care not for what they feel, nor from what
quarter the wind comes; but a confidence is engendered thereby, that as the
anchor of a shipp at sea, does fix it self to the earth; so will a faithful
soul, lay fast holde^, upon the Crucifix, and fix his thought, and say; Thou,
o Lord, dyedst for me, before I was borne; and thou soughist me with the sorrow
of thy heart, when I sought thee not nor desired thy ayat; but now I call upon
thee, and I love thee, and therefore now forsake me not. If thou did
receane, and shelter him, who was thine enemy; thou will never drive him away,
who desires to serve thee; and whom thou have accepted for thine own. And in
this faith, you must live, and remain secure amongst, all the waves, and
tempests, which the sea can show; though it may seem to you, that the shipp is
even sinking; and you must labor, that so your heart may not fail; least else
our Lord awake, and chide you, as he did his Apostles, saying: Why fear you ^o
men of little faith? whereby you may see, Matthew 8.
how much in earnest our Lord is, when he requires us to be full of courage:
since even, when the waves are entering into the little shipp to swallow it up,
even then did he reproach them, because they feared. And this he does, because
he will not allow them to be afraid at all, who embarke themselves with him.
For they go with the true Lord of souls; who is our faithful helper out of
the greatest straytes.

And now, since you are one of them, who have quitt the shore, and embarked
yourself with him, by entering upon his service: what can that be, which you
should fear: since you have walked, and do so still, in company of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Remember, Matthew. 14.
that S. Peter, whilst he had faith went treading with his feet upon the
waters; but as soon, as he saw the wind stiff, and the waves high, he
feared. and then presently began to sink. To give us to understand, that
with a faith, which was firm, he went secure: and by growing tepide, he began
to be drowned, and heard this word from the mouth of our Lord: O thou man of
little faith, why did thou doubt? And in the same manner does he say to us, if
he see us fearful of any visible danger whatsoever.

And if our Lord took such care to deliver his disciple from a corporal
death: much more will he take care, to free you from the death of your soul:
and to secure you, that the tempest, which is risen against you, may not drown
you. Only be you sure, my good sister, that you be not dismayed, and forsake
not the war: for here the Crown is lost, not because men are tempted, but
because they either fly, or be overcome. Offer your felfe to suffer pain, and
even fire, for his honor, who suffered so much for you. And by how much the
greater your afflictions are, esteem them for so much the more certain to
ken, of the love, which passes between Christ our Lord, and you. Beseech him,
that he will strengthen you, toward sufferance, and not that he will take away
your afflictions. For it will be a Purgatory to you, whereby you may be wholly
purified, in the sight of God, and the Cross of your beloved lord will keep
you company. This Cross is that thing, which all the lovers of our Lord
desire, and by means thereof, you will remain like goulde, in the Crusible;
so much or the more resplendent, as you ^ere more afflicted.

Consider, that every lover, is to endure somewhat, which may declare himself,
for the love of his beloved. And since you are entered into the war of Love,
do not turn coward; but consider, how great things, even weak women have
endured for Christ our Lord. Some by fire, others by scourges, and others by
having had their flesh torn from their bones; and they held themselves happy
in suffering for the love of their Lord.

Now you also suffer for him. For if you would forsake him, your enemies would
not persecute you; but you are passed over to Iosue's side, Iosue 10.
and therefore do they move this war against you. And if amongst men, there
be want of base, and bloody executioners, the devils come, in their place,
who are both more cruel, and are not so soon weary, as the other; and with
grates of iron they torment you; and more in the soul, then in the body; and
you are to esteem, that you are in martyrdom for the love of Christ our Lord,
since you are martyrized for his service.

Do not omit your devotions of Confession, and Communicating, though you
should do it without any great sensible appetite, and though the devil should
seek to hinder it, as he is wont to do, so far as to strike your tongue
dumb, so that you cannot Confess your sins, as likewise he gives you to
believe, that you have eaten, at such a time in the night, that so you may not
Communicate the morning after. Tread that enemy of yours underfoot, with all
his craft: and pray to our Lord, upon the Cross; and take that Cross in your
company; and arm your self therewith; and offer your self so truly to any
state of sufferance, that if our Lord were pleased, that it should last upon
you all your life, you would yet be content therewith. And how much the deeper
you shall cast your self into his will, so much the more speedily, will he
relieve you. For he drives not them from him, who strive toward him.

And remember, that there is no love without grief; and that we are to enter,
into the kingdom of heaven by many tribulations. Where, for one only hour
that you may see God in his beauty: you would think two thousand years of
that sufferance, to which now you are subject, to be well employed. And since
God is to carry you thither, as you have reason to hope he will; be not
cowardly in suffering nor tepide in loning; For he, who dyed for you, and
called you to himself, will not forsake you. I beseech him to be your comfort.
Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a person, who was much afflicted, for seeing that he
profited so little in virtue
He teaches the difference, between self-loue, and the love of God; and how
he is to do all things, for the love of God, and nothing in conformity with
self-loue.

THE peace of our lord Jesus Christ remain with you. The root of all our
misery, is self-loue; as on the other side, the love of God, is the root of
all our felicity; and so, as that he who loves God, meets with nothing, which
he can properly be said to suffer; (because he seeks nothing but the will of
God, and therein alone does he delight) so he who loves himself, finds all
things to be to hard, and to heavy, for him, and he is ever tormented, with
the variety, and trouble of accidents. True repose does not consist in any
thing, but in desiring little for the love of God, or rather noe one thing: and
to content himself, with any thing for his sake: to whom we offer, and
present, as much, as we forbear to desire, for the love of him. And if God
will vouchsafe, to open our eyes, that so, Psalm. 118.
with David we may consider the wonderful things of his law, we shall find,
that not only there is danger hanging over us, through this self leave, in
those things which are plainly and grossly visible, and exterior: but more,
and much more, even in those other things, wherein, many think: that true
sanctity does consist. And if you ask me, what those things are, I say that
they are noe other, then virtues; the peace of soul; the kingdom of heaven;
yea and even our lord himself. And thus you may see, how great our danger is;
since there is danger, even in that, which is security, and how great the
mischief is of proper, and inordinate love; since the stinge thereof, thrustes
it self, into such holy things. Not that it is able to make them ill, (for that
it cannot do) but in regard that by causing us to desire good things, as our
own last end, and for love of our selves, we make our selves ill; since we
inuert that order, which the love of God prescribes; which is, to love that,
which is good, and our selves withal, for the service of God, and for his
love, and all this in the same manner, and with the same measure, which is best
pleasing to his, Divine Majesty.

The love of God does not consist (whatsoever we will needs be saying) in the
desire of much virtue, noe nor even of God himself, if it be inordinately done,
and with excess of affliction, as we are wont to desire other things. For if
I be moved for the love of God, to desire any thing, my maine desire, to have
that thing, must be to have it, if God will; and how, and when, and to what
proportion he will, and not to be greedy of it for my own good, but to the
end, that the will of God may be accomplished though his pleasure were, that
my soul should remain without virtue, and that I should never enter into
heaven. I say though his pleasure should be so, for indeed it is not. But, at
the least, our will must so be lodged, in the will of God; as that it may be
prepared, to will any thing, which God would have us will, without any manner
of exception. For if our own self-loue be alive in us, that mischief is so
much the wors, and more inward, by how much the better the thing is, which we
desire. For, in these things, as seeming to be very safe, a man is wont to
extend his appetite as far as he lists. And whilst we say, that we desire
the love of God, we are full of self-loue which makes us desire him, for the
love of our selves, without any rule or measure; whereas, it ought to be, just
the contrary.

I remember some Doctors tell me, that Lucifer was the first, who committed
this sin; and how the thing which he desired, was good namely felicity, but
that he desired it not how, nor when, nor in whom, nor for whom, it was fit
that he should have desired it, but with an unbridled appetite, which aimed at
his own private good, as any covetous wretch, might desire much pelf, or any
ambitious man much honor. Certainly, if the ends and roots of our desiring
one and the same thing be different, the thing it self which is materialy
desired, falls out after a sort not to be the same. But rather (as I said
before) the better the thing it self is, the more dangerous is the inordinate
desire thereof. For there is nothing worse, then for a man to desire any thing,
as his own last end, for the love of himself This last end is that sovereign
God of Goods, which is God, who ought to be the aim, and end of all our
desires. And now, if any should say (by not understanding well, what I affirm)
that I seem to teach, that we must not be fervent, in desiring to become
more, and more virtuous; but that we must as well leave all to God, which
belong to the soul, as that which concerns the body: my answer is. That as
in these exterior things, we must be diligent, but not afflict our selves
with excess of care, and anguish, but must putt our selves wholly, into the
hands of God, and take with patience whatsoever comes: so in those things,
which importe the soul, we must be sure, to be more diligent: but yet with
condition, that if notwithstanding our diligence, we cannot have all we
would, we must not suffer our selves to grow impatient. For that would be a
worse fault, then the former, which gave us so much trouble. But we must
conform our selves wholly, to the will of God; to whom humility, and patience
in the midst of our frailties, is more pleasing, then a proud devotion, and
complacence, in the strength which we conceane our selves to have.

And if we cannot obtain at the hands of God, that we may live without
faults: yet let us render him most humble thanks, for having given us the
knowledge of them. For was perhaps any other thing, the perdition of that proud
Pharisee, but the co^tentment, Luc. 18.
which he took, in his own good works? And did any thing save the Publicane,
but the knowledge which he had, of his ill deeds; and the displeasur which he
conceived against himself for them, desiring mercy of our Lord? It is not the
case of every one, to conserve humility, in the midst of great virtues; but
there be very few, who are not disgusted with their own faults. And
therefore, though the former of these two ways, be higher: yet the later is
safer. All which is dispensed by our God, who is of sovereign wisdom, and
who guides us by several ways, to the same end, which is himself. And though
we be never so covetous, me thinks this ought to stay our stomach with a
sufficiency of comfort; that we may hope to go to heaven: whether it be,
whith the height, and perfection of virtue, as some go: or by the knowledge of
what we want, and doing penance for the same, as many others do.

But notwithstanding all this, we must not forbear to imitate the best we
see: since our Lord has given us a desire thereof: and since an account is to
be demanded of us, if we do it not. We must therefore desire, to be better,
(so that yet withal we loose not our inward peace) though we obtain not
all we desire. For otherwise, I do not think that ever there was a man, in
the world (leaving him only aside, whom every body knows) who desired not to
be better, then he was; but yet this did not take their peace from them,
because they desired nothing out of any particular appetite, which never
confesses that it has enough; but only for the love of God, with whoes
distribution, and portion, they would be well content, though he gave them
less; esteeming that to be true love, which contents it self with what he
gives; more then to desire to have much; though self-loue tell us, that we
desire it, but for the service of Almighty God.

And for my part I believe, that there is noe peace to be had in this world,
but by patience. Nor do I think; that it is true patience, when a man is
content to bear, with his neighbors; if withal, he be not content to bear
with himself. Not to the end, that he must fail to punish, and to mend his
faults; but that his heart may not be dejected, and he unreasonably afflicted;
and that whatsoever happen, he may be able to keep himself content, both
within, and without; but so that yet withal (as I was saying) he still do
his diligences, to mend himself. Which yet if he should not wholly do, it is
better that he be sorry for it, and that instantly he rise up, with new
alacrity; which uses to increase, and double our strength; then that, whilst
conceiues himself to lament his faults, for the love of God, he should indeed
displease the same God, by serving him with a sour kind of heart, and with
fallen wings, and such other branches as use to rise from this root. Let the
Conclusion be that, which S. Paul delivers. Let us frequent prayer, in all
things, giving thanks to God, These. 5.
and so we shall be sure to do well? Our Lord Jesus be with you, and with
us all. Amen.

A Letter to a Cauallier his friend wherein he teaches how the afflictions
which God sendes to his servants are to put good men in hope and wicked men in
fear.
Thanks be given to Christ our lord for having made you a partaker of pain
and trouble for it is the most certain title to heaven which can be had upon
earth: since it does enable us to be like our lord who descended from heaven to
give us light that we might love him, and strength by his example, and grace by
his merits. Let not the dispensation of the works of God seem cruelty in
your sight: for as the reward which he gives is not light so neither must the
means be light whereby it is to be obtained. Nor is there any thing further of
from being a matter of toys or jest then that which our lord has prepared for
such as love him Now to the end that this may be known and rightly understood
it is fit that they who are to enjoy it may be so treated as he was that so
the world may be vnbeguiled if it still conceive that by living in jest they
are to enjoy that great reward in earnest.

Our lord gives advise to his servants, and he threatens such as will needs be
strangers to him. For to the former sort of men he says that they must think
highly of his reward: since he will not give it but upon high terms. And as
for these other he asks them how they think to escape the rigor of his
hands, they who are his enemies: since even his children be strictly treated
who are yet elected for so great a good. If we cast our eyes toward this
beam of rigor and justice which are the afflictions whereof we now speak, we
shall find that they conteyne great occasions both of hope and fear. And on
the one side the mercy of God is much glorified thereby and his justice on the
other. Let trouble expect to find repose and let him fear affliction
hereafter who does not feel it now. For since in any man how just soever he be
there are many things which may deserve punishment though not in hell: (and
this punishment is to be personally endured if it be not purged with so great
an excess of love as that the contrition may stand for the punishment as it
did in S. Mary Magdalen and some others) it is plain that either here or in
purgatory they must pass through fire And though they who find not in
themselves so great love of God as to cause this grief which may stand for a
satisfaction, may think perhaps that they receive hard measure in being saved
by fire whilst others shall be saved without it yet indeed they are much
deceived in their account.

For the great love of God even here on earth when men see that God is
offended does cause greater grief then that to which you are subject. And that
truth is seen by this then when one loves God greatly he would be glad of the
pain you suffer so that he might be free from that which he feels for the
offenses which are committed against God. And at this we must not wonder since
there are persons who even to free you from the pain wherein you are would
endure themselves. And this also may serve for a proof that the love which one
bears to another puts him to more trouble then the pain it self would do
which the other feels: that if your self love another very much, you would
not be ridd of your own pain if it were upon condition that the other must
endure it for you; which proves as I was saying that it would trouble you more
in the person of that other then in your own.

Now if the love of a creature can reach so far, how much more will the love
of the creator be able to do, it being infused by the most holy spirit of our
lord which far exceedes all other force. And thus it grows to be a most
certain truth that either in this fashion or in that there is noe means to
escape from suffering before we ariue to enjoying. And tell him who would
complain of this law ather complain that he is a man, and that he was not
made an angel; and let him complain against justice and reason which do
absolutely require that virtue must be obtained with labor and the reward must
correspond with the virtue.

But who o lord who shall ever presume to complain of thee as if thou did
treat them with rigour^ since instantly thou stoppest their mouths with
showing that thou so loved the world as to give thy only begotten son, to
the end that in the strength of these afflictions and sorrows and death which
they charged upon him, the world might escape the torments of hell and might
triumph in heaven. Who I say o lord will presume to complain when he shall see
thy best beloved freindes to be so severely handeled, and observe that in thy
court it is hard to say which of these two have the pre-eminence either
afflictions or favors; and that it was said by thy commandment to one of thy
favorites. Because thou were accepted by God it was necessary that temptation
should try thee.

Do not permit your heart to sink under your crosses but remember that
heretofore you have desired to do and suffer somewhat for the love of God God
is not deaf to the desires of our hearts. He has given that which he knew to
be best for you; and if you think it heavy confide that he who sendes it, will
give you shoulders wherewith to bear it. That which afflictes will have an
end, and that which gives repose will succeed; but the latter will not be like
the former, but incomparably greater. And if you tell me that you will renounce
this later upon condition that you may not endure the former, it is not well
said nor does it become a noble mind which desires, more to see it self in
difficulty and trouble for the obtaining of virtue then to be idle and without
exercise. Nor is it fit that you who have carried so much courage in your heart
through these wars of the Emperor should have it faintely affected in the
war of God. We demand not of you here that you should conduct a whole army
like some Captain general but only that you traile your pike well and give a
good account of your perso^ne, and of the place where you are put. Be not a
coward in the less occasion who are so valiant in the greater.

Put your self wholly into the passion of our lord and learn thereby how much
he endured and how great love he bore to you; since being able to redeem you
by other means yet he would not do it but upon the price of his excessive
pains and sorrows. And so it comes to pass that as he in one hour did more
love his father then all mankind put together in all their lives, so in one
hour did he pass through more bitter sorrows then all mankind; and there
was not in the whole lives of them all to be found either any love or any
grief like his.

Strain your self to a desire of enduring somewhat for him. Be not a slave
since he loves you and treates you as a son For the father correctes the
son and you may hold your self for his son since he correctes you. Love
your father depart from your self and give your self to God. Say to him I
will follow thee though it be by the way of sorrow I will present thee with
this suffering. I will not give thee any thing of little value; but that which
may cost me my blood, that so thou may to me as thou did to Abraham, Quia
fecisti hanc rem and non pepercisti vnigenito tuo propter me etc. Now if God
take it so well that a man give his son for the love of God how much reason
is it that man should be very grateful to god for the giving of his son for
man. And he only is indeed thankful for the benefitt who in recompense
thereof gives his own son to god; namely that thing which his heart would
most be troubled to leave and this because God will have it so.

Consider the true Original of love which God did bear you, but let it be
with fetching this resolution from thence that as they drew blood from him and
gave sorrows to him he may give them to you; and as they gave him pain so he
may give pain to you. For infallibly if so you shall answer to the sorrows
of God with your sorrows he will answer to those sorrows of yours with such
a reward as shall make you esteem your self happy for having endured them.
And though our flesh believe not this yet faith must supply that defect and you
must sing. Laetati sumus pro diebus quibus nos humiliasti annis quibus vidimus
mala. So God grant it may be. Amen.

A Letter of the Author, to a holy Religious woman written in a time when she
was subject to some perturbations, and persecutions, about a book which she
was wished to publish.
He declares how she is to carry her self in spiritual things; and which is
the sasest way, how to treat with God, and to use that gift of Prayer, which
she had.

THE grace and peace of Jesus Christ our Lord be ever with you; When I
accepted, to read that book of yours, which was sent me, it was not so much
out of any opinion, that I was able to judge, of these things, which are
contained therein; as because I thought, that, with the favor of our lord, my
self might profitt, by them. And I thank Christ, that althought I have not
read it with that repose, which had been fit; yet I was comforted thereby;
and may also be benefitted otherwise, if the fault be not mine own. And
truly, though I might receive comfort by reading it, without reflecting upon it
otherwise: Yet me thinks, the respect I owe both to the matter it self, as
also to the person who commendes it unto me, despenses not with me, in
forbearing to say some part of what I think thereof: at least, in general
terms.

The book is not fit, to come into the hands of many. For the words must be
reformed in some parts thereof, and declared in others. And some things may be
profitable to your spirit, which would not be so, if they should be followed
by others. For the particular ways, whereby God guides some, are not fit for
all. These, or the most of them, I have noted down, and I will putt them into
order, as soon as I can: and I shall easily find means to send them to you.
For if you saw my infirmities accompanied with my other necessary imployements;
I believe they would rather move you to compassion, then to any accusation of
me for negligence.

The doctrine of your prayer, for the most part is good: and you may very
safely believe it: and practice it, and in your Raptes, I find these signs
which true Raptes have.

The way of God's teaching a soul, without the use of the imagination, and
without either interior, or exterior words, is very safe; I find nothing
therein, whereat to stumble: and S. Augustine speaks well of it.

Those interior and exterior words, have deceived many in our times: and the
exterior are the less safe of the two, To discern, that they proceed not
from our own spirit is an easy matter: but to find whether they grow from a
good spirit, or from a bad is more hard. Men give many rules, whereby to know
if they be of our Lord: and one of them is, if they be spoken in some time of
great spiritual necessity: Or if a man profitt much by them, whether it be by
way of comforting him, when he is in temptation, or desolation: or for the
prevention of any d^ger etc. For if even a wise good man, will not speak a
word which is not of much weight: much less will that be done, by almighty
God. And considering both this, and that the words must be agreeable to holy
Scripture, and the doctrine of the Church: I am of opinion that these words,
which are mentioned in your book, or the greatest part of them are of God.

That, whereof there is more doubt are the imaginary, or corporal visions,
whereof you speak. These must in noe case be desired; and if they come without
being desired, ye^ must you avoid them, as much as you can. We must beseech our
lord, that he will not suffer us, to walk by the way of seeing; but as for the
good sight of himself, and of his Saints, that he will keep it for heaven;
and that here, he will be pleased to conduct us, by the plain way, as he does
his faithful freindes. And by other good means, we must also procure to avoid
those things.

But yet, when all this is done, if the visions last, and if the soul reap
profitt by them: and if the sight thereof induce it not to vanity, but to
increase of humility; if that which they say be agreeable to the doctrine of the
Church; if they continue any long time and with that interior kind of
satisfaction, which may better be felt, then declared; by this time me
thinks, I see hoe ^^use why we should fly them any longer. Though ^^t noe
body is to trust his own private opinion h^^rein: but he must instantly
communicate the matter* with some person, who is able to give him light. This
is the general course, which must be taken, in all these things; and we may
well hope in God, that who has humility to submitt himself to the judgment
of others, God will not suffer him to be deceived, since he procures to walk
in the right way.

But the while noe man should easily condemn those things, upon the only
reason of observing that the person to whom they b^ vouchsafed are not
perfect. For it is noe new thing, for the goodness of our lord to draw men out
of ill delights, and even out of sins, (and they great ones) by giving them
very sweet consolations of his own, as I have seen him do. For who shall
limitt the goodness of our lord? especially since these things are not
vouchsafed for the meritts of the party, or because he is better grown in
spirit then another but sometimes to such as are most weak, And as they do
not necessarily make a man more a Saint, then he was; so neither are they
always given to greatest Saints.

But yet they have noe reason, who discredit such things as these, because
they are very high: and for that it seems to them incredible. that so
infinitt a majesty should abase it self to such an amorous communication, with
a poor creature. It is written that God is love, and if he be love he must
needs be infinitt love, and infinitt goodness. And from the hand of such love,
and such goodness, it is noe marvel, if some souls receive such excesses of
love, as may trouble others, who understand them not. And though men may
understand by faith, that the^e are such things in the world, yet the
particular experience of this amorous, and more the^ morbus proceeding, which
God houldes with whom he will: this I say, unless it be possessed, a man
cannot well understand, to what degree or point, it arriues. I have seen many
scandalized at the heroical acts of the love of our lord God toward his
creatures. And because themselves are very far from receiving those favors,
they cannot think that God will do that to others, which they find him not
to do toward them. And though it were reason, that even because it is an act
of love, and such love, as castes us into admiration, it should be taken for a
sign why to think it were of God, (since he is wonderful in all his works
and much more in those of his mercy yet from thence fetch they reasons why they
should not believe them, from whence they should fetch reasons to believe them;
provided always that there be a concurrence of other circumstances, which show
that the thing in it self, is good.

For your part, my opinion is that, by what I can perceive in your book, you
have made resistance to such things as these, even more then it was fit you
should. Me thinks they have profitted your soul, and especially they have
made you know your own misery, and faults, and enabled you to mend them I
find that they have lasted long, and that ever they have been with spiritual
profitt. They incite you to the love of God, to the contempt of your self, and
to the doing of penance. I see noe reason why I should condemn them, but I
incline to think that they are right. But yet ^uer with this condition, that
you use great caution, and that you go not with entire confidence, especially
if that which happens be not usual with you, or when it requires you to do
any particular thing, which is not very plain, but subject to some question.
In all these cases, and the like, you must suspend your belief, and instantly
ask counsel.

I also think good to let you know, that, though these things be of God, yet
the enemy may mingle somewhat with them; and therefore you must never be
without care and fear in such things as these. And you must further know that
though they be of God you must not yet reflect upon them with too much
estimation; because sanctity consists not in these things, but in the humble
love of God, and your neighbor. And as for these others, they are to be
feared, even when they are right; and you must pass from the thought thereof,
to the procuring of humility, and other virtues, with the love of our lord. You
must also be sure not to adore any of those visions, but only adore Christ
our Lord in heaven or in the Sacrament. And if it be a vision of any Saint, you
must lift up your heart to heaven, and to that which is represented in your
imagination; and you need noe more, but that the image may serve to carry you
up to that which is represented by it.

I must also tell you, that these things contained in this book, happen to
many others in these times; and this, with great certainty that they are from
God; whose hand is not shortened, to do that now, which he did in former ages;
and this in the weaker sort of vessalls that so he may be glorified the more.

Go you on, in your way: but so as that you be ever in fear of thieves; and
that still you be asking, if the way be right. And give thanks to our Lord,
for that he has bestowed upon you, the love of him, and the knowledge of your
self; and a love of penance, and of the Cross. And as for those other
things make noe very high account thereof; though yet on the other side, you
must not despise them, because they are signs which show, that many of them
are sent by our lord; and even the^y which are, not, cannot hurt you, if you
ask counsel.

I know not how to believe, that I have been able to write this by any
strength of mine; for I have none at all; but your prayer has done it. I
beseech you even for the love of our lord Jesus Christ, to lay it as a charge
upon yourselfe to pray for me. For he knows, that I ask it as being urged by
great necessities; and I think, this word alone will suffice for the obliging
you, to do what I desire. And now I beg leave of you, that I may end this
letter, since I am under promise to go write another. Jesus be glorified by
all, and in all. Amen.

A Letter written to a Lady, encouraging her to bear with patience, the
afflictions which were sent her, by our lord.
MAdam, I would feign ask your ladyshipp, what kind of taste the fruits of
the Cross carry with them, since you are feeding so abundantly thereon. Our
lord said thus, I will clymb up to the Palm tree, Cant. 7.
and gather the fruit thereof: and it seems that he has taken your ladyship
by the hand, and drawn you up with him: to the end, that if heretofore you
went up with him by contemplation, to consider how he fedd upon them: he is now
no more content, that you only accompany him, by having compassion of his
pains, but he will have you eat with him at that table of the Cross, and be
a witness by experience, of that which he suffered, when he was feeding upon
that fruit.

I dare confidently say, that that soul is happy, which stands at the foot
of the Cross of the Son, in society with the Mother of God, who fed at the
same table: and was suffering torment, yea and was even crucified in her soul
with him. For there is not a more acceptable thing in the eyes of the Father,
then to behold his Son, and to see them who accompany the same Son, in the
imitation of his affliction and Cross. Let noe man deceive himself, by
thinking that God is in love with fooleryes and conceytes; or that every absurd
idle fellow shall reign with him, in his kingdom. The favor of God, is
reserved for such as love tribulation. No man shall reign with him, but such a
one as is crucified: That, in fine the world may know, that forasmuch as he
settes that king dome at so high a rate, it is no ordinary place, but most
abundant in treasures, and delights, since God himself is the glory thereof:
and that they may resolve with fresh courage, to despise all transitory gust,
and to endure all kind of Crosses.

How would your ladyship have our lord proceed toward you, but so a he is
wont, and will be sure to proceed, with his beloved Children? What would you
have him do, but treat you as his Father treated him? John. 15.
As my Father loved me, so do I love you, says our lord. And now, if any man
will make a pawse, to consider how the Father treated his Son and such a
Son, he will patiently endure his own condition, how sharp soever it may
seem. Madam, have patience yett a while, for this tempest will pass, and you
will rejoice, that you had it, to pass through. Bow down that neck of yours,
to the will of your heavenly Father; for so did Jesus Christ our lord, when
they passed that rope over his head, which even flead his neck, and he, the
while, held his peace, both with his heart, and with his tongue, through the
obedience which he carried to his Father. What does that hard halter, upon so
delicate a neck: and that heavy cross, upon those weak, and weary shoulders,
declare to us; but that we must be obedient in suffering afflictions, though
they should even defeat us, and pluck our very hearts out of our bodies?

It is not just nor fit, that your ladyship should take upon you to dispose of
your own li^e, and to choose, and say, This I will, and that other, I will
not, do or have; since you have offered up your self so often, as the true
slave of our lord, to the accomplishment of every inclination of his holy will.
For it is against all reason, that now you should unsay that in your
affliction, which formerly you affirmed in time of peace. Eccl. 2.
Nor must you be like that counterfected kind of friend, who in time of
prosperity, is wont to make many offers, but when they would bring him to
performance, he vnsayes himself.

Woe be to them, says the scripture, who have lost their sufferance; employing
such persons, as being weary of enduring, and expecting, went headlong with
their hearts to the ground, as men who would no longer bear their burdens.
Madam, The Just man lives by faith, Act. 2.
and our lord requires to be expected, though he stay; for in fine, he promises
that he will come. But if a man have a clock, which goes too fast, and if the
time seem too long, before God give the remedy, that must then be said to
him, which is in Esaias: He who beleiues, let him not be too hasty; but let him
place his felicity in longanimity as S. Peter says. 2. Pet. 2.


Madam, our lord will come and comfort you. The sea is all in tumult, Matthew. 8.
and the waves will needs drown the ship: and our lord is in a profound
sleep, like one who throws a stone, and then hides his hand: or who strikes,
and flies It is he, who raised the tempest, and then instantly laid himself to
sleep. It is he and no other, who has designed your ladyship to these
tribulations. It is he who afflictes, and wounds, and without him nothing can
be done. And he who has known so well, how to strike, and has been so
diligent to afflict, is now fallen asleep, when they are seeking remedy at his
hands, and the more they beg comfort of him, the more he does sometimes
increase discomfort. And yet, notwithstanding all this, he will have us
possess a lively faith, which, in all these miseries, must not fail us. And
if we have not this faith, we shall be sure, that when he wakes, he will
reprove us, and say. Matthew. 8.
O men of little faith, why are you afraid.

You may see, Madam, by this, how lively our Lord will have our faith to be,
which may enable us to confide, in him; how fresh, how well tried, and passed
even through the very fire. For as chastity is tried by the temptations which
are contrary thereunto; as humility is tried by dishonours; patience by
afflictions; and charity by rendering good for evil; so is faith and
confidence, made evident, when God sendes such adversities, as may seem to
putt men in a manner, even out of their wits; and when he, the while hides
himself, and seems to add to them so much the more, as he is the more desired
to diminish them.

Even by this pace we must pass, if we will he are this word from our
Lord's mouth, O woman great is thy faith. Matthew 15.
In this match of wrestling, must we overcome, if we will pretend to the
name, and crown of such, as are perfectly, and truly faithful. And we must
accept of scourges, which may slice us even to the very soul; and yet we must
believe that they are embracements of great, and tender love.

In this which exteriourly may seem to be the wrath of God, we must believe
his divine heart, to be most peaceable, and his bowels most paternall toward
us, nor must we argue according to the feeling of flesh and blood, but
according to faith, which ouercomes and fools all such discourse. This, Madam,
is the wisdom of the Cross, which makes the soul, with shurt eyes, submitt
it self to the holy will of God. And by thus not judging, but confiding in
him, it grows wise beyond the wisdom of the whole world. For let him who
desires to know, and please God, not raise his eyes, but let him abase them,
with humility, and not sifte his judgments: and that man shall arrive to true
knowledge: and shall find that our lord of power, is entirely sweet toward
his servants: and does then endue them with the greatest blessings, when to the
eyes of flesh and blood, he may seem most to have forsaken them.

It is now long ago, since your ladyship has sung this song, My beloved to
me, Cant. 2.
and I to him. But it is now, that you should especially singe it; for these
delicate warbling notes, are best used in these tunes of trouble. Your beloved
looks upon you, and takes care of you: look you also upon him, and confide,
in such a taker of care. He is your Father, though he scourge you: be you his
daughter, in receiving his correction, with obedience and giving of thanks. And
if you be in much pain, whilst you feel the scourge, let it be tempered, by
considering the hand from whence it comes, your beloved he is: and he loves you
more, then he is beloved by you. He corrects you with love: and do you also
receive it with love, that so you may answer our lord in the same tune,
wherein he speaks. He has a mind to purify you by fire: do not fly of from
the Crusyble, whatsoever pain it may put you to. For it is better to become
pure from the uncleanness of earth, which is ones own will, and withal to be
broken in pieces; then to be whole otherwise.

Sing you thus to our lord, Ps. 16.
Thou have tried my heart and thou have visited me by night; thou have examined
me with fire and thou have not found wickedness in me. For thus does God
purify his elect; and he who is not proved, and purifyed thus, is noe Son,
and shall be noe heir of his. And for as much as it is now so long a time,
since your ladyship has so fair evidence, that you are borne to inheritt;
procure you to pay with readiness, that rent charge, which is laid upon your
land. This inheritance is very rich and glorious, but the heirs thereof must
suffer much tribulation in this world. They are to be untied, and taken of from
the Cross here, when they go up to reign there: and men must not think of
goeing from one pleasure, to another. The bulls which are of a generous kind
go all darted, and wounded, out of the Place; but such as are base and
cowardly, return home, in whole skins. Just so is the good Christian, who
is to be pierced on all sides. And when tyrants, and executioners are wanting,
they shall have enough to suffer, in their own houses, by their children,
their husbands, and their freyndes, who will by certain sweet, and and
smooth ways, torment them worse then those others.

It is most certain, that to see one suffer whom we love, is a very knife at
our hearts: and love is our executioner; and the more love there is, so much is
the executioner more cruel. Butt yett let us not turn away our face from
him. For this love, was the, executioner of Jesus Christ our lord, which putt
him to more pain, then all those visible executioners; and this was the
executioner of his blessed Mother also, and of as many elect, as God has had.
I would have your ladyship prepare your head to be cut of, and your heart to
be tormented by this executioner; and you must procure to fight stoutely, in
the presence of God, and of all his celestial court, since such an excellent
Crown of glory is prepared for you. Our lord, who sends you this tribulation,
knows the time which is most fit for comfort, and he will provide it for
you, when it shall be best. In the mean time I beseech him to give your lady
ship patience, and to remain with you for ever. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a Religious woman, who was his ghostly child.
Of the mercy which God shows to such as he calls to Religion, and of the
exercices and obligation of a Religious woman.

SERVANT OF JESUS CHRIST
I Have been thinking sometimes, whither our lord might not ere this have
taken you out of this life, to give you the fruition of himself. For to be
alive and to remain so long without letting me know how your soul does,
seems to me a kind of incredible thing. Though yet it be true, that our lord
some times, gives a soul so great feeling of himself, that it remembers
nothing else because it is wholly employed upon him, who is all things. I
beseech his goodness, that this may have been the cause of your silence. For
then, I shall not only, not complain, but greatly rejoice. For what other
thing, can I so well desire for your soul, which in our lord, I love; as to
see it all employed, in loving, and in being beloved by him. This is the end,
of all the pains which he has taken with your soul, and of all the favors
which he has bestowed upon it.

Tell me, O spouse of Christ our lord, how you do. Do you love him much, and
do you hold him fast, in your bosom? is you heart even wounded, with the
care you have, to keep him content; and to seek his holy will, though it be
in contradiction of your own? For though the love of our lord, be the joy, and
solace of our souls; yet, on the other side, it suffers them not to repose;
but like a continual spur, is soliciting and urging them on, that so every
day, they may please him whom they love, more and more. For this reason this
love, is compared to fire, which never is at rest; but the lively flame
thereof, is ever working, and striving upward. This love, will have nothing to
do with slackenes; nor knows it, how to take any rest, but in our lord. And
this is the love, of a Loyal sponse, which, it is reason that you be, in
performance, since you are so in profession; and since, you have an inward
vocation, to put that in practice, to which you were called.

Do not forgett the day, on which you offerred your self to your spouse, by
the hand of your Prelatt. Nor that other day, when your spouse conveyed his
hand, into your heart, making you understand both your self, and him. He said
in your soul, let light be made: and then all darkness, and sorrow fled away:
and now, like one who sees the light of heaven, you live in joy, because you
know which way you may go, without danger of falling. For if you be careful
to keep those days in mind, you will see, that by the former of them, you
were bound to lodge your love upon our lord after a very particular manner,
because the contract of marriage obliges either party, to love the other. And
on the second day our lord showed the love which he bore to you; and he gave
you strength to pay according, to your weakness, the love which you owe to him.
For what have you out of your own stock, but obligations? and what means
have you to pay any thing toward the coming out of debt: you, being a poor
engaged creature; who indeed deserved to be ever kept in prison, in misery,
and in chains, Psalm. 106.
as David says. But the rich Jesus Christ, has given you the plenty of his
grace, whereby you may know and love him, and may overcome your contraries; and
pluck down that strong Golias; which is the Devil, who biddes battaille
against all such, 1 king. 17.
as resolve to serve Christ our Lord.

It is not reason, I say, it is notreason, that you should forgett what you
owe, nor how God has enabled you to pay. And for that which God has given
you, you are much the more bound to serve him. For to be a religious woman is
the condition of many; but to receive so particular lights, and favors from
heaven, wherewith to serve our lord, is the case of few. Abraham, bestowed
gifts, even upon those children which he had by less principal wives; but
he left his inheritance, and estate, to the lawful son of that wife of his,
who was most beloved; that we may understand thereby the difference of the
gifts of God, which he imparteth, in this life, to several persons.

Our lord be thanked, for that your lines, and lottes, are fallen into the best
ground; forasmuchas grace was given you, whereby to make you change your state
of life, and to despise the world with your whole heart, and to despise also
your self; and to obey the superior, of your Monastery, as your mother, and
to love all your sisters, and Almighty God, more then the very apples of your
eyes. This is that caelestiall favor, which was done you, that you might be
rich, and well supplied with all things necessary, in Christ our Lord
crucified, and from thence comes this so hopeful and happy change, which you
have made, in the manner of your life, and that invisible beauty, wherewith
your soul is endewed.

And what now remains, but that you be like one, who has acquired great
worldly riches, and who instantly entertaines servants, to ^eepe it. And so
you must be careful, to keep that which our lord has given you, least else
your soul turn beggar, after it has been so rich; which is a kind of life,
of more affliction and grief, then theirs, who never knew what belonged to
riches. Remember what your spouse says; and conceive that he says it to you,
as indeed he does, Now thou art whole, so thou sin noe more, least a worse
thing happen to thee. Live with a holy doubt, and care, how you may keep that
safe, which our lord has given you; and how yet withal, you may gain fine
other talents, to the five you have; and whether or not you have oil in your
lamp, and that such, as may be able to last many years. And till the very
hour of your death, let this word sound in your ears, Behold your spouse
comes, Matt. 25.
go forth to meet him. For if you live with this care, you will still be well
employed, and you will not have leisure to cast your eyes upon any thing of
this life. For this alone suffices to give us enough to think upon; yea and to
grow weak withal.

The holy scripture says, that this alone, is enough to break our sleeps.
And if you have not this care, I shall be full of sorrow for it. For by the want
thereof, vanity and curiosity do straight enter in, and as many tales of the
lives of others, as they make who take noe heed to their own. And so by
little and little, a soul grows to be seven times worse, then it was before.

I expect not to receive such fruits, and so full of bitterness at your
charitable hands, but rather the fruits of benediction, and sweetness; like a
tree which is planted near the streams of water; which, with the leaves, and
with the fruit, gives that man a gladd heart, who took care thereof. But yet
if by humane frailty, you be fallen into any negligence, as it happens
sometimes: see that instantly you wake, and break of that sleep. least it
prove in^^tall to you. And beg pardon of our lord, who is full of mercy, and
benignity. For though he be angry with the defectes of such as have already
known him, and will punish them yet he drives not away his children: and he
gives them correction, not with fury, but with the rod of a Father. Go you
therefore instantly to him, though you know you have offended him, for perhaps
he may have showed you his anger, to the end that you should remove it from
him, by your humility, and purpose of amendment. He will instantly forgive you,
and sometimes he impartes particular favors, even as if it were in recompense
of our carelessenes.

Take heed you grow not stiff, and fixed in tepidity, for this is a disease
very hardly cured. And yet, on the other side, you must not be dismayed, if you
be not always in so great fervor as were fit. For you are but a woman, and
noe Angel: you are but weak, and not indewed with much strength. The greatest
courtesy you can do your greatest enemy, is to remain fallen, in the way (as
some cripple might be in a slough of mire) with the bones as it were, of your
soul broken through distrust, as if now you had noe more to do, with the
business of getting up to heaven.

Our lord's pleasure is, that you should think highly of his goodness: and that
he drives them not away, who knowing their own weakness, go, and seek for
strength, and remedy at his hands And indeed our pride is so very great that
for the cure thereof, he lettes us fall many times, to the committing of these
very things, which had formerly been very far from us, that so being
fallen, we may rise again. And then, knowing by experience, what kind of
things we are, we grow to thank our lord, for that which he is to us, and
from that time forward, we despise our selves, and we begin to live with
greater doubt, and care, and fear: least we happen to loose that, a second
time, which had been lost by us, once before.

Thus does our most wise physician, and most loving father, draw our cure, out
of our very wounds themselves; and life, out of our death, and he shows his
goodness, by our wickedness. And though we fight sometimes, against him, with the
weapons of sin, which gives him provocation, yet his goodness steps out like a
conqueror, and impartes a thousand millions of benefits to us.

Be sure therefore, that you serve this lord, with all the force you have. And
if hitherto you have done so, give him thanks for it, and if you have failed
thereof, see you return to him, with shame, and firm purpose of amendment.
Comfort your self also with the holy Sacraments of the Church, they being the
remedies which he has left. And put your self into a new way, and now, at
last, learn to trip noe more upon that, at which you stumbled most before. So
that you may be of their number, of whom S. Paul says that all things
cooperate to ^e good of them, who love God. For howsoever they may fall, Romans 8.
they are not bruysed to death, because our lord conueyes his hand under them,
to receive them In the midst of these things, I beseech you, call my
miseries to mind that you may obtain mercy for me of our lord. And deliver my
salutations to all those persons in your house, who serve our lord. I beseech
him to be your aeternall love. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a friend of his, whom God had called to lead a
spiritual life, by means of his preaching.
TO those many obligations into which you put me by your letters, I answer
late, and ill. And though I be confounded therewith, yet I hope Christ our lord
has given you some little crumme, of Charity. Now the first condition thereof,
is (by the testimony of him who had store of it, 2 Cor 1.
and who knew it well) Quia patiens est, That it is patient. I beseech that
immense fountain of Charity, to increase it in you, till you be enabled
thereby, even to lay down your life, for your enemies, as Christ our lord laid
down his for us.

You complain of dryness in devotion, though yet I conceive you speak it
not, by way of complaynt, but only, as relating to one who loves you, the
disposition wherein, you find your soul. And I say, that so long as this
drynes reaches not to weaken your desire or virtue it is noe such thing, as
ought to putt you to much pain. For that which is questioned thereby, is but
the loss of a certain sweetenes, in the things of God, though yet this is
wont to be a spur, to make such men quitt themselves, and to fly faster on
toward our Lord, who know how to make right use thereof. And because I desire
all good to you, whether it be in much, or little; I wish that you were
endewed, with a Love of God, which were both strong, and wise, and sweet also,
since a love with all these qualities, is due to him, to whom we owe our
love. But yet, if he impart that love alone, which is strong, and wise, it will
be, because he intends to do us other secret favors, by means which are
unknown to us, and to vnty us from our selves, and to exercise our virtue,
whereof there will be great need, for a man who treates with him, who is
infinitely wise and does extremely like, that noe man should be so in his own
eyes.

Your care must therefore be to follow on, according to that strength, which
our Lord gives you; for his grace, will not fail. And you must give him
thanks, both for that which you understand; and for that also which you
understand not; and in this does your safety consist. And as you grow elder,
and to have more experience, of the very little which any man is able to do,
toward the contriuing of things, how small soever they may be; you will be
confirmed more, and more, in the good custom, which you begin to take, to
hold your peace. And you will perceive, that a business will then be well
dispatched, when we speak at lardge with God, and but a little with men.

This ignorancy of ours, is an unspeakable kind of thing; and so is our
setting our selves out, and our ignorant kind of zeal, to do good. And we
have much, and much a do, to believe it, till we have bought this knowledge,
upon the price of many errors, which we shall have committed. For we
inherit, from our first parents, a certain fly, and secrett desire, of a kind
of divinity, Cen. 3.
which cannot be sought without theft. This makes us imitate our first fathers,
therein; and to deny that things may be done, how, and when we list; with
certain other deep, and most secret roots of pride, which are never to be
discovered, without light from heaven; and this cannot be obtained, without
much Prayer.

As for the particular of those souls, which you desire to reduce; I tell you,
as I did before, that you must cordially recommend the business to our Lord, and
hope well that you shall have good success. And be you not troubled, or
afflicted, since you know, that you have a father in heaven, who calls you
toward him, and he will be your guide, in the way. Spend your time, at the
present, the best you can, and as for the future, do not vex your self; but
make account that nothing, but your own negligence, cann take God from you.
Fight therefore, against this negligence; and if you overcome it, you will
find by experience, that the Exchange or Burse is a very Cel^ to you; and,
that business is but as a River, which may serve to wash you clean.

The way, wherein God has placed you, requires that more diligence be used
then that which your letter says you use, concerning the constancy of your
devotions. And if I were with you, I could tell you of strange things which
have happened to men, who had been slack in performing their good exercises.
Whereby you might perceive, that our Lord esteems it not as any small
infirmity, for a man to be a Lunaticke; sometimes doing his duty, and
sometimes, not. A clear sign it is, of a soul in subjection to selfewill, to
do a thing when the humor serves, and afterward, upon mere humor, to let it
alone. And forasmuch as such men want the abnegation of themselves, they are in
fault, both when they cease from doing any thing; and so are they also, when
they do it; because they live, butt in themselves. And the punishment, which
our Lord inflictes upon these men, is that he is not liberal of himself to
them, when they desire it; because they are not liberal of themselves to him,
when he requires it. We must therefore be sure, to ask pardon, for the little
constancy which we have used, in the service of our Lord; and to reform our
selves with an entire resignation into his hands, concerning the success of
our endeauours, whether they be more, or less.

Take courage once to loose your self, for the love of our Lord; obeyng that
which he commands; and never look, upon what is to follow upon it. For
whether it be drynes; or devotion, it cannot fail to be a favor, since it is
sure to be the pleasure of our Lord. And by how much the more, you shall be
able to live toward the contenting of him; and to be dead toward the seeking
of your own contentment, so much the more happy shall you be. Spend not time
at all, in thinking whether it were best, to accept, or else to refuse, that
business, whereof they wrott to you, that without doubt it would be done. For
this is the sign, of a heart not delivered up to recollection, and which easily
is induced to loose the present time, with care of the future. Forget it; and
beseech our Lord, that it may not prove a temptation to you; since he knows
your weakness.

And live without perplexity, or affliction of mind, solemnizing such a Feast
to our Lord, as that your heart being asked, what care it has, it may answer
you, none at all, but only that I may be so happy, as to give this little
time, to our Lord. All that swarues from this, is not sound, whatsoever
complexion it may carry.

And here it comes fittly in, to weigh, what it is to be changing from one
thing to another. All those are effects of a heart which is but slack, and not
employed about that, whereunto it was called; which is, a continual
intercourse with our Lord; who looks upon it in every moment of time; and
desires it to look as often toward him, and to open it self to him, because
indeed, it is his own: and to deny it self to all that, which is not God.

O base abominable man, in whose heart God desires to repose, and to give it
rest; and yet the man goes laboring here, and there; and God tells him, the
while, that to the end he may find rest, he must enter into himself, and must
dye there to himself; and that so, he shall find his true safety, and life;
and that a certain Sun shall then rise to him, which will discharge all
those former clouds, and sorrows, and he shall come to understand certain
things, whereof he knows nothing yet.

Humility, and diligence are needful here, for the keeping of our hearts shutt
up. And our Lord dyed for this, that we might have strength to dye to our
selves for his sake, and to keep our hearts recollected. Christ our Lord, be
your light. But take you heed of being desirous to know things concerning
Mental Prayer, more by speculation, then by practice. For our lord, is the
teacher of Infants, and abs^ondit se, and sua, a prudentibus: he hides both
himself and his secrets, from all such, as are but worldly wise.

A Letter of the Author to a Cauallier whom he sought to carry on to the
state of Religion.
THese great fishes are hard to be taken, and a man had need make many turns
with them up and down the river, till they be weary, that so through the
little strength they have left, the hook may quiettly fetch them up. And
therefore we must not marvel, if our lord give you so many knockes;
contradicting that which you had formerly in your thought, and desire. And the
cause of all I conceive without doubt, to be your own proper will and
judgment; which be hard things to subdue, and still are ready to rebel. We
have need that our lord should tire them out, with a multitude of blows, and
should kill them, to the end that they may noe longer live in you, but that we
may continue in the faith of our lord, and in obedience to his holy will: I
would have you understand what this curb means, and these tokens of reproof,
which our lord shows you. For as he is praised, who is an intelligent servant,
and grows acceptable to our lord thereby; so is he discommended, who
understands not, I say not only the words, but the corrections also of our
lord.

You must conceive, that there is nothing, which importes you so much, as to
be untied from your own opinion, and conceit; and that Omnis sapientia tua
deuorata sit, vt sic clames ad Deum, and de necessitatibus tuis liberet te.
That all your wisdom is at a non plus, and that so crieing out to God, he
may deliver you out of your necessityes. For what Idolatry is more
prejudicial, then that a man should rely upon his own opinion? And what
marriage is so monstrous, as for a man to be married to his own will? such
fearful and abominable monsters rise from hence, as that they precipitate him
who breeds them into the very bottomless pit of hell. If you believe not me, do
but take order, that a man may not follow his own opinion, and not love his
own will, and then I will undertake, that there shall be noe hell for him. You
must therefore offer your self, as a piece of clay, into the hands of that
sovereign Potter; and say that to him, Isay 64.
which is written Fictor noster es, nos vero lutum. Thou art our framer, and we
are not better then a piece of clay. Resolve that to be the best, which is
contrary to your own will. For so ill affected is our will, that for the only
reason, why a thing is much desired, a man may safely apprehend, and doubt,
that it is not good. For that which pleases it, is ill; and what confidence
can he then repose therein.

Have great care to consider, of the way, wherein God guides you; for you shall
be called to an account thereof; And when you have learned this science, you
shall be wise, in the sight of God. You must be enamoured of nothing under heaven
(how precious soever it may seem) but only with seeking the good pleasure of
God. And if it should so happen: that we should obtain noe part of that which
we particularly sought: yet that very thing it self, is all the riches both of
this world, and of heaven, for God is pleased thereby: and the contentme^t of
God, is God himself: and he who loves it, loves God, and he who professes it
professes God.

Concerning those co^plaintes, which you are making against your self, I well
believe, that you have reason: since you are a man, and not yet in heaven. And
you do well to reprove your self; for by this means the reproof which our
lord makes of sinners, may be removed from you; which reproof of his, would be
far greater, the^ we know how to imagine. For who can reach to understand
either the riches of the goodness of God, or our faults, and miseries? I
beseech our Lord give us light from heaven, where with to see these two
Abysses, which are so different; that so the sight of our wickedness dismay
us not but that we may be comforted by meditating upon the goodness of our lord.
For otherwise the stoutest gallant upon earth might say well enough, Cor meum
derel^quit me. My heart has failed me, Psa. 38.
to see so many debts incurred by himself, both past, and present, besides
the danger of such as are to come.

I know not what we should do with this miserable thing, which is called Our
selves; nor why we will take Our selves for our own, or stand charged with
doing what we list. Let us give itt to him, who will have goodness to tolerate
it, and wisdom to conduct and cure it. And certainly our lord would thereby
undergo the weight, as a man may say, of a heavy end insufferable burden, if
his love were not incomprehensible. It is a great help toward out denyeing of
our selves, when we consider that we are our own enemies: and our very being
so miserable, may well serve to keep us from being so covetous, to enjoy our
selves; and to make us cast our selves away, and turn our selves out of house,
whatsoever it cost us. And yet the trumpet of the divine goodness, soundes this
out in our ears, that David goes forth into the field, as being persecuted
without any fault of his; and that the poor people, who were much in debt, and
such as were in anguish, and bitterness of heart, joined themselves to him.
Blessed be our lord Jesus, Amen: who is so rich, and patient in goodness; that
his father thought fit to trust such poor sheep as we are, in his hands. But
that which is lamentable, is, that we are so blind withal, that he, begging
that we will be his, and binding himself to be ours upon that condition, yet
woe woe be to us) we still resolve to seek, Quae nostra sunt, non quae Jesus
Christi. Those things which are our own, 1. Cor 13.
and not these things of Christ our lord. And we will needs possess our
selves still, without any reason at all, but only through blind affection,
and without once resolving to try, how sweet, how just, and how profitable a
thing it is, to belong entirely to Christ our lord: and to walk in the way of
his holy will. Christ our lord give you light in all, Amen: and be wholly with
you.

A Letter of the Author to a great man, his friend, who entered into the state
of Religion in the Society of Jesus.
Having understood of the change which you have made, I have given many
thanks to the immense bounty of our lord, who has so earnestly taught you,
so mercifully found you, and so powerfully conducted you thither, where
without any impediment of other employme^ts, you may present him with your
whole heart, for a quiet and peaceable habitation, wherein he may converse, and
take delight, as he uses to do with his elect. These are not slight favors;
nor must we pass them over, without particular acknowledgment, and gratitude.
For this, I hold to be that sacrifice, which our lord expressly requires, in
recompense of his favors and for want thereof, he has deprived very many, of
those which formerly he had imparted.

So much more, must you have a care of this, as the favor was greater:
through the great dangers which threatened you, by reason of the greatenes of
your person, and the many employments which accompanied you, in the world. And
therefore, as our lord has not performed a less act, in giving you light,
that so leaving all things, you may go in pursuit of him, then he did, in
favor, of the three Magi, whom he enabled by a starr, to do the same: you
must be sure, to adore God, and to spread your self all prostrate upon the
ground, acknowledging your own nothing, before that high Majesty, and giving
him thanks, from the very bottom of your heart, for the favor you have
received: and offering your self as an everlasting present to him, whose you
are by so many Titles. As for me I esteemed it not for one of the least, that
he has voutchsafed to seek the Post child and that he has placed him, in
the ranck^: of them, who are most honored in his house and all this, through
his own only goodness.

What heart is there in the world, which would not melt into tenderness, by the
co^s^deration of such a favor as this: to see himself p^^euented by such a
hand, and so as if the question, and doubt had been, whether God's mercy, ^^r
our misery should prevail: but he has mightil^^, and happilly overcome. And
not being contented to send us messengers, both within, and from without,
himself takes us by the hand, like another Lot: Genesis 1
and draws us out of the place of danger, up the hill, where we may be saved.
Do not you forget this goeing out of Egypt; for it is a certain thing, where
many wonderful things of God are seen. And this departure of ours, is not
obtained for us, but by the bedding of the blood of the lamb, which ^ath cried
out, before the Father, with desire that it may be applied to our souls,
Cleansing them from all earthly appetites, and consecrating them wholly, to the
desire of his divine love. Christ our Lord has been heard, whilst he was
praying for you, as we may very well believe; Giving this stone to his Father,
that so, of vilde, and bas^, he may make it precious; and that it may be set
and worn in the head of Christ our Lord, as a fruit of those great
afflictions, which he endured, for the good of souls. Great was that war,
and he conquered therein; for he gives souls ^o his Father, who may run
after him, and adore him; vt, vinctis mambu: post ^^l^^ C^^iant.

Prepare your self to receive our Lord, since you are redeemed by him: you are
already belonging to him: you are the spoils of his victory, a piece of land
you are, which is come to him by lot, that he may c^ltiuate, and water it, and
make it fruitful. O how happy are you, if you can but value your own
happynes, and consider from whom, and through whom, it has proceeded.
Beseech him, that since he has done you so much favor, without all desert of
yours; his goodness, may never permit, that your heart should serve any but him;
nor your eyes behold any other beauty, then the beauty of. God, who has been
so good to you. A great burden it is, which herein, they have Laid upon you, in
exchange of those many other burdens, whereof they have eased you. For now,
you are grown a deep debtor, of a most profound, internal love; and of
diligent service, to that Lord, who has eased you of all those other
obligations: and given you the speed, of a slag wherewith to ^unne in his
ways. Think you upon this, and be thankful for this. Ab^^. 3.
And since you are as poor, toward paying, as you were unworthy toward
receiving; you shall make an act of renounciation of all your goods, into the
hands of our Lord. Beseeching him, that he will accept you all for his; and so
take you upon his own account, to serve himself of you, according to his own
gust; and desiring that he will dispose of you, as shall please him best.

I believe, I have already said too much, to a soul to which our Lord is
already speaking. For to such souls, all humane discourse is accounted
tedious, and troublesome, and it has reason to be so. But the joy, which, in
our Lord, I have conceived; and the commandment which you sent, that I should
write, have been the reasons of this letter. I beseech that soueraines
goodness, which has already vouchsafed you so much favor, that, to his own
eternal glory, he may finish the good work which it has begun.

You see in what fashion I am talking to you. I have laid aside those Titles of
honor, and rank, which, according to the style of the world, (now forsaken
by you) belonged to your quality. And I write, as to one, who is already
estranged wholly from the world; and in so plain a manner, as is convenient
to a domestic servant of Christ our lord, and as is fit for the Institute
whereof you are. And since your self desired it, and I have obeyed you in it;
be careful, that, now when you have abhorred the Tytles of this world, you may
also abhor the affections thereof; and that now you may pass wholly on, into
that age, cuius pater Christus est, Esaias 9.
whose father is Christ our lord. Which consists not so much, in whether the
time, be present or future, as itt does in Spirit, which comes after flesh.
For as the Apostle says, non prius quod spirituale, sed quod animale, 1. Cor.
15.
That is not first which is spiritual; but that which is animal. And therefore
the spiritual is called, seculum futurum a future age.

So much the more care must you take of this, as it will be more hard for you,
to do it, since he who has most to leave, does it with most difficulty. And
the man who has most impediments, is least able to run lightly away. And
this is the good which they get, who are the great men of this world, though
they come not to know it, till they putt themselves to run, after others,
who are before them. And then the faster he runs, the more he shall feel it.
And by his own experience, he will be able to vnbeguild himself, in that
which the world beleiues. Namely, that it is better to be great, then mean,
and poor. And so I believe, it has happened to you, if indeed you have
begun to follow Christ our Lord; or at least will find it, when you shall
begin.

The thing which must comfort you herein, is this, That, since our Lord
vouchsafed to take you for his servant, when you were most untoward, and
incapable thereof, he will give you greater strength, wherewith to serve him
now, then he would have given to another, who had not been so incapable. And
so must you represent your self before our Lord, who has called, and
accepted you; beseeching him, that howsoever it may putt you to more pain, and
shame, he will yet bestow that upon you, whereby you may serve him much, since
you owe him much. And consider your self, as a person who bringes but half
that means, wherewith to negotiate this business, which another bringes. And
beg pardon, for ill employing even your little stock, but yet with giving
thanks to our liberal lord whose works are great, toward his poor
creatures. That so living with fear, and trembling, to see your self so
unworthy of such a place, there may grow from thence, a due reverence to all
your neighbors; carrying them upon the top^e of your head, and doing for
them, as any slave would do for his lord, considering how mercifully Christ
our lord, has done the same to you, you may have good hope, to prove well in
your great business, if you obtain that knowledge of your self, whereof I have
spoken. And then shall you spend your life happily, when you hold every day
thereof, to be the last. Christ our Lord be with you. Amen.

A Letter of the Author, to some Disciples which he had in the City of Ezija.
THE peace of our Lord Jesus Christ be ever with you Amen. Since I parted from
your presence, I have ever had you all present with me, in my memory, for the
love I bear you, permits me not to do otherwise. Give your selves still to
God, since you once gave your selves to him, and I was a witness thereof, nor
will I by any means, that you repent the having offered yourselues to him,
since he offered himself to death for you. You shall be sure to have
battailles, and those sharp enough: for our enemies are in great multitude, and
full of rage. Be not therefore negligent, for if you be, you are instantly
undone. If they who watch best, have enough to do, to defend themselves; what
do you think will become of wrechlesse persons, but that they should entirely
be overcome?

Remember that the pleasure which sin presents is small, filthy, and short;
and the sorrow which it leaves behind is very great, and the misery which
grows to us thereby, is incomparably greater. What sorrow (how great soever it
be can equal that which we ought to conceive, upon our loss of Almighty God?
O misery, which should make us tremble, even in hearing it named! For if we
delight in sin, we shall have noe part in God. Let us therefore consider, how
we live, for we shall shortly be led before the Throne of God, to give account
of our selves. Let not the uncleanness of the flesh, nor the vanity of the
world, nor the subtility of the devil, deceive us. But let us behold Christ
our Lord, upon the Cross; and we shall see him tormented in his body, and
dishonored by the world, and that so he subdued the devil.

Who ever looked toward Christ our Lord, and was deceived? Infallibly there
was never any. Let us therefore never draw our eyes of from him, unless we
mean to turn blind. Let it never seem to him, that we value his love so
little; as that, although he died for us, we cannot find in our hearts, so much
as to be looking toward him. For he died for this, that we by looking up to
him, might strive to dye to our sins. Let therefore our old man die in us,
since our new man, who is Christ our Savior, died for us upon the Cross. Let
us approach toward his wounds; for by his, we shall be cured of ours. And if
we think it a heavy thing, to part from our sins; it was much more hard,
and heavy for his soul to part from his body, when he died, to the end that
we might ever live.

Let us therefore go on apace, and take heart to follow such a captain as
this; who leads us the way not only in doing, but in suffering Let us
crucifye our flesh with him, that now we may noe longer live according to the
desires of the flesh, but of the spirit. If the world shall persecute us, let
us go hide our selves in his holy wounds; and there we shall find those
injuries, as delightful to our hearts, as any music is sweet to the ear.
And so rude stones will be to us, as precious Jewels; and prisons, will be
palaces; and death it self, will be converted into life. O Jesus Christ, and
how strong is that love of thine? and how truly does it convert all things to
our good as S. Paul says; Infallibly that man shall never die of hunger, who
is fed by this love of thine. He shall feel noe nakedness, he shall never find
want of any thing, which this world can give. For, possessing God by love, noe
good thing can be wanting to him.

Let us therefore, O my beloved brethren, be taken with a great desire of
goeing to see this vision, of the bush, which burns and yet is not consumed.
That is, Exodus 2
how they who love God, suffer injuries, and yet feel them not; how in the
midst of hunger, they are full fed; how they are cast of by the world and yet
afflict not themselves thereat, how they are assaulted by the fire of fleshly
appetites, and yet they are not scortched by it. They are troaden under foot,
and yet they stand fast upright; they seem poor, and they are rich. They
seem deformed, but they are full of beauty. They seem strangers, but they
are citizens. They are not known to men, but they are familiarly acquainted
with Almighty God. All this, and more, is brought to pass, by the noble Love
of our lord Jesus Christ in the heart where it is lodged. But noe man can arrive
unto this, unless he put of his shoes* that is to say, his unmortified
affections, which spring up out of ^^lselou^. For this is the root of death, as
the love of God, is the cause of life. A life, which is spiritual and holy,
admitts to wear a^e ^h^es, that is to say noe desires of se^feloue. He who
loves Christ our Lord, must abhor himself. He who will not be cruel to
Christ our Lord, let him not be co^passionate to himself. They who dandle
themselves, show unkindness to Christ our Lord, and they who take so much care
of themselves cannot make God their business.

Let us therefore give, our All that which we are (which God knows is but a
little All) for that other great All, which is Almighty God. Let us give over
the following of our own proper will, and let us betake our selves with
diligence, to follow the will of God. Let us esteem all things as mere dung,
that so we may possess that precious pearl which is Christ our Lord. And to
the end that we may see him, in his beauty and glory; let us here be content
to embrace dishonor, and labor.

Infallibly, he shall never find himself deceived, who makes such an
exchange as this. But when God shall come with his Saints, and shall come to
reward every one according to hi^ works, then will that appear to have been
foolery which now is held in so great account; and then it will be their turn
to lament, who now shall have spent their mortal lives in delight. And he only
will be avowed by Christ our Lord, who shall have lived; according to his holy
will. O how great, shall the joy of good men be; at that day, when receiving
high honor at the hands of God, they shall be seated upon those thrones which
were prepared for them from all eternity; and when in society of all the quires
of Angels they shall sing praises to their Lord, and their God? O how great
will their joy be, who shall behold the king in his beauty. In the
contemplation whereof, they will be so happy, that noe one of them shall be
without even regorging, through his being so full of that precious liquour,
and that sovereign Balsamum; which created all good things. In comparison of
this, all beauty is deformity: and the very brightness of the sun it self is
direct downeright darkness, and the very topp of other delights, is the very
bitterness of gall. And, in fine, (that I may not reckon up every particular
thing by it self) in comparison of this beauty, all the things of the whole
world put together are not to be esteemed for any thing at all, neither are
they any thing in very deed. O eternal God, thou who art all things, and yet
who art none of these things, and when shall that day arrive, wherein we may
be so happy as to see thee? when is this earthen pott to be cracked, which
shuts us up, from enjoying so great a good. When shall these chains be
broken, which hinder us from flying up to thee, who art the true repose, of
such, as are to repose indeed? Let us not, my Brethren, look any other way
but only upon Almighty God. Let us call upon him, in our hearts, and let us
keep him close embraced by us: that so he may never part from us. For woe be
to us, wretched things; what shall we be able to do, without him, but only
to turn again into our nothing. Let us, now at last, cast this world behind
us, which yet, we carry before our eyes; and let us, at last beginn to try,
how sweet our Lord is. Let us runn after him, who came running down toward
us; from heaven it self, that he might carry us thither. Let us go to him,
who calls us; and who does it with so much love, from the topp of that Cross;
with his flesh all torn, and even as it were broyled with the fire of love, to
the end that it might be more sauoury to our taste. O that we might feed
thereon? O that we might even consume thereby? O that we were all tra^sformed?
O that we could grow, to be one, and the self-same spirit with God.

Who is he that detaines us? who is he that hinders us? who is he that
deceaues us so, as that we cannot persuade our selves to draw near to God?
If it be our goods, let us cast them away, if they be in our power, if they
be not, let us keep them, though only as so much dunge, which may be laid
up with diligence, for good uses: but yet still without any love at all to the
thing it self. If is be our wives, S. Paul lets us know, that we must have
wifes, as if we had them not. If it be our children let us love them, but for
the love of God. And let us even out of water be able to kindle a fire,
whereby all that may be burnt up, which shall pretend to divide us from
Almighty God. Let the tears of grief wash us; and the fire of love consume
us, and so we shall grow to be those holy creatures which were offered up
to God with fire.

O eternal God, who co^sumest our couldnes; and how sweetly, do thou
burn, and how dearly do thou inflame, and how delightfully do thou
consume us? O that we all might altogether burn with thee? Then would all our
powers cry out, and say: O Lord who is like to thee? For whosoever he be,
that says he knows thee, and yet loves thee not, is a liar. Let us therefore
love thee, and let us also know thee, since love grows from that knowledge.
And afterward make us able to possess thee; since they who possess thee, are
so rich, and possessing thee, let us be possessed by thee, and so let us
employ our selves, in praising thee; since all the powers of the heavens
confess and praise thee, for God Trine and One, the infinite king, wise,
powerful, good, and beautiful, the pardoner of them who are converted toward
thee, and the vphoulder of them who approach to thee; and the glorifier of them
who serve thee; and that God, of whose perfection there is noe end For thou
surpassest all tongues, and all understandings; and thou art only known in
perfection, by thy self. To thee be glory, through the eternities of all
eternities. Amen.

A Letter of the Author, to a Cauallier, who went to study at Salamanca, where
they made him Rector of the University.
He shows, that in the business of serving our Lord, faint desires are not
sufficient, but there must be deeds. He also shows the hurts, which
multiplicity of business brings, to such as are but beginning to serve God.

I Pray God, that both your goeing to that University* your abode there, and
your return from thence, may be happy to you: you know already, that in this
affair of serving Christ our Lord, it is not enough to have certain faint
desires, but they must be accompanied with solid works; and sometimes with
sweat, even as it were of blood. And I much fear, least the difficulty of the
way, should fright you, and least you might grow to loose the sweet of the
kirnell, because the skin, and shell, is bitter. The gate is strait, whereby
we must enter into the way of God, but after we are entered, Prou 4.
we find that to be true by experience which is written. Ducam (...) ^emitas
aequitatis, quas cum ingressus sueris non arctabuntur gressus tui. I will lead
thee, by the ways of equity; into which when thou shall be entered, thy paces
shall not be straightened. And then a man finds, that the yoke of Christ is not
heavy to him, since he reaches now his hand to the^, who have suffered
temptations for his sake: and he comforts them who are in tears, and cures
them who have broken hearts. A happy affliction is that (though noe other
comfort did succeed it) which is endured by us, because we hold the standart
of Christ our Lord upright, resolving rather to endure the sharp blows of
temptation, then to enjoy an ill peace, and to have war with God.

You must humble your self much before our Lord, and lament your own misery,
in the sight of his mercy. For there is not means, whereby any good may come
to us, but only by the favor of heaven. And there is noe way to obtain this
favor, but only the profounde knowledge of our misery; crying out from the
very bottom of our hearts to that lord, who dwells on high; and drives not such
persons from him as are ouerwrought with the burden of their miseries; and who
even swelt, in the lake, (as the Prophet Jeremy, says) with a weighty stone
upon their backs.

I like well, that you resolve to make acquaintance with those Fathers. For
that good opinion which they of your City do now conceive of them, that have
I conceived long ago. Only you are to look, that the good example which you
see in others, may not be unprofitable to you. And I beseech our Lord, that he
will be pleased to let me pass a little that away, though it be but to give
contentment to you.

The excuse which you make, for having accepted the Rectorship of the
University, is just, since you were advised to it by persons so well
qualifyed, and so many as that they did even oblige you to it. But I beseech
you Sir, be not negligent, now that you are putt to sea; since it was not
without cause, that you feared, even so much as to imbarke yourself. For my
part, I am full of thought, least our adversary have traced out this course,
so to hinder your proceeding, in the way to God, which you were taking. For
many employments (though even about good things) should not be committed, to
young beginners; because they use, to trouble such persons, as have not yet
set all those things in order which concern themselves. And so our Adversary
has done much hurt to many, by this means, and brought them to the pass of
some poor little swallow, which goes forth to fly before she is well in
strength; and then having not power, to prosecute her flight up aloft, nor yet
to return to her nest from which she went, she falls down into the hands of
boys; and they play with her a while, and then kill her.

This business is so much the more subtle, and perplexed, as it comes cloaked
with good zeal. And new beginners, must be watchful in this case, little
less then they would be, when there were question of their committing a
sin. For if there be any true zeal in them, it is fit that first they be
zealous of their own good. And zeal of others, which wants zeal of a man's
self, has been the fearful ruin of many souls. I desire that you will
conceive a very great fear, and care, in those things, which may seem good,
to you. For in such cases as those, does that devil, who is called Merid^an,
deceive them at high noone, Psalm. 90.
whom he was not able to deceive, in express darkness. And do not precipitate
your self, upon the making of great reformations; nor conceive, that you are
there, for that purpose, but rather fear, least it be for the punishment of
your own sins. And if your heart offer to give you, that you shall do great
matters in this Office; believe it not; but rather lay it prostrate before our
Lord, with fear; beseeching him to keep it still, and that he permit you not
to loose the little, which he has given you, of the knowledge of himself. And
if yet indeed, you must execute any thing, let it not be till first, you have
recommended it earnestly to our lord; and let it not be of that nature,
(through the difficulty thereof) as that you must probably think, it is like
to cost your mind much unquietness; and in the end, that the profitt will be
uncertain. Some other man may do those things, or else your self, at some
other time. But now, look you into your own soul, consider your ways well,
and direct your feet rightly in them. And because you have little oil in your
lamp, Matthew. 23.
answer them thus who shall desire oil of you, Ne forte non sufficiat nobis,
and vobis. I can spare you none, for perhaps there is not enough, for us both
And with this religious fear, even in those things which are good; and with
calling upon our Lord from your heart, and with plying your study hard, you may
perhaps go through this dangerous passages, without harm. I beseech Christ,
by the meritt of his blood, to grant you this favor. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a lady, wherein he tells her that of all those
things which a body might choose for the service of God, the suffering for his
love is the most high and safe.
MAdam, In this so great have which our life is making to leave us, it is but
reason that we make election of that, which may be best for our address in the
service of Christ our lord; and to put it in practice, with diligence, least
otherwise, we may have cause to repent our selves, for not having been
faithful servants to that lord, who has been so faithful to us, and at
whose hands we expect that he will be so still. Eccl. 15.
There are many things in this life, whereupon we may cast our eyes; since God
has given us liberty: that so we may lay hold either upon this, or that*
But amongst so many, what shall we choose? Shall it paraduenture be
pleasures, which pass away like smoke, and which leaves ten times as much
affliction behind them as they brought delight? Or shall it perhapps be the
dung of riches, which is wont to blind the eyes of the owners, and which makes
the entrance into heavens gate, so hard? Madam, Mat. 9
there is noe looking toward any thing of this life with hope that it will
make one happy. For though a man possessed them all, they would serve him but
fot an affliction of spirit, and for an impediment to his proceeding; Eccl. 1.
and in fine, it is vanity of vanities: and all vanity.

Happy therefore is he, who remoues his eyes, from that which makes such haste
to pass away and who places them upon that, which never ends, and where
delight is pure, and true, because it is taken in truth it self, which is God.
And where the treasures are certain, since they all consist in enjoying him,
who alone, suffices to enrich his possessors with inestimable beatitude.

But now to the service, of this God, there are many several ways and some
carry an affection to one, and some to another, every one according to his
inclination. Some like the active life, and others the contemplative. Some
excel in abstinence, others set up their rest upon Chastity. And so we
see, that diverse Saints have flourished, with several virtues, and gifts of
God. But Madam, amongst all the things of this world, wherein our lord may be
pleased by us, let us make choice of suffering for his love: for this is both
most high, and most safe. And this did the Master of truth, who is Christ our
lord, teach us, when coming into the world, he principally exercised himself
in this, and to this, he has invited us. This is a point of security, and
not a thing made of dust, or straw. For it is not of conformity with our
sensuallitie, but of contrariety thereunto. And only the love of Jesus, is
able to make affliction savor well in our mouths; and he alone is sufficient
to make us encounter, and embrace that, which of it self is unpleasant, and
drives men from it.

What did it signify that Moses seeing a serpent before him, Exodus 4.
grew into fear and began to fly: but that men, who considering what they
suffer actually, or else foreseeing what they are to suffer, are frighted, and
would not only suffer it but not so much as see it. But God commanded, that
he should return to that, from which he had fled, and not only return,
toward it, but to take it up into his hand. And he, obeying the voice of God,
found in those hands, noe more now a serpent, to bite him, but a staff to
support him. Thus does it daily happen to men, who in their afflictions obeying
the will of our lord who sends them, and taking them into their hands, that is
to say, taking hold of the occasions which are offered, and accepting them
with obedience, that they find noe such discomfort, or disquiet, as is wont to
weary the soul with complaining, butt comfort, and support, and strength:
Confiding, that since God sendes them tribulations, he will place himself
near about them, according to his promise: and that he lodges his love in
them, since he treates them like his beloved children, and as he has treated
as many freindes as ever he has had, in this world.

Thus does tribulation breed patience and patience, Romans 5.
is the proof of that love, and faith, which we have in Christ our lord, And
this patience works hope, because God has promised to make them participate
of his glory, who are participant of his Cross. And thus does tribulation
turn into a stay, and staff to our weakness, because it makes us confide in
our lord more and more; and it takes from us that kind of unquietness and
complaining; which, affliction, was formerly wont to give us, like a kind of
servant. Be you therefore well advised, by making choice, of that which is
pleasing to God, and be not one of them; whom the Apostle S. Paul reprehends
saying. Heb. 5.
It was reason that you should have grown great spiritual Masters, after
so long a time, wherein you had served God; and yet you still continue but
very babes, who have need of new instruction, in the principles of those
things which concern God, and you are rather fit to suck milk, then to eat
the bread with the crust, which is the food of such as are grown strong.

Madam, you must consider, that that scholar does not please his Master, who
having been taught a thing at many several times, is still as gross, and
rude, as at the first. And that physician grows weary, who finds that he
gives noe help, through the patients fault, by some receipt of physic, which
he has ministered often. And so our lord is not pleased, that we should still
continue in taking the milk of comforts, and delights; but that we should runn
nimbly toward him, although it could not be done, without passing the pikes:
and that the fire of our love must consume whatsoever shall stand before us:
since there is nothing which it imports us so much to have, as love; And this
love cannot receive so good a proof, as by tribulation and pain.

Now whosoever loves Christ our lord, should not desire to be without some
trial, or proof, whether indeed he love him, yea, or not. And though that
proof may pain one much, yet it gives him comfort, to perceive, That God has
examined him with fire, and that he has not found wickedness in him; Psa. 16
and that it made him not turn back, from the enterprise which he had in
hand. A great honor it is to stand constant, in that which much troubles us;
and we cannot yield a service to God which pleases him better, then when with a
very willing heart, we be afflicted for his sake: and when we drink that
challice in his company, who drunk so deeply of it, for us. Upon this you
must place your eyes, since God is pleased to choose this means, whereby to
bring you up toward him. Do not turn coward, in fighting the battles of
the generous love of the celestial king; nor hold you any time to be well
employed, but that, wherein you suffer something, for your beloved, which
alone, ought to give you comfort, and ground, to think that you love our lord.
For, as for other things, though you should be taken up to the third heaven,
you know not, whether you love your self therein, or him. For perhaps it is
but the delight, in having that fulfilled which you desire: and not purely,
because that is done, which is pleasing to God.

And since you are already dedicated to the love of God, and are redeemed by
him, see that you still be doing your duty exactly well, that so like a good
huswife, you may appear at the day of judgment all rich with love; and even
cut in pieces in this war, after the imitation of Christ our lord, who dyed
in this battle by the hands of love. Inuiting as many as love him, to suffer
of that which he suffered, and to answer with love to his love; and being
ready to give himself, as an eternal reward, to them who pass through these
amorous aflictions for his sake: and your ladyship shall be one of them, by the
great mercy of him, who has made election of you, for this purpose.

A Letter of the Author, to a Cauallier his friend, who was sick, and desired
to enter into Religion.
The Author shows, that the carrying of the Cross, in the company of Christ
our Lord, is exercised best in sickness, when it is borne with patience. He also
defends the Fathers of the Society of Jesus, aduifing him also to esteem them,
the rather, because he had been instructed by them.

YOu do well, in being contented to serve, in that house of our great Lord, in
the Office of being sick. For to pass from doing, to suffering, is a sign,
that Christ our lord aduaunces his servants, and raises them from below the
stairs, to attend above. Certainly, there is nothing in this exile of ours,
which is so fit for us, as to carry the Cross in company of our lord, who
did so love it, and who, for love, dyed upon it. Now this is better exercised,
in sickness, which is so unsavory to flesh and blood, and which cannot cause
vain glory in the patie^t; then in health, how well soever it be employed.

Great were the works, which Christ our Lord performed in this mortal life;
but in his sufferring, he exceeded them all, and all the world; That so we
might understand, what the Apostle S. James says, Brethren, ^. James 1.
esteem it as a reason of supreme joy, to see your selves in many afflictions.
And the same Apostle says, that the work of pat^ence, is perfect. So that,
you must be grat^full to our lord, for having sent you sickness; and if you
bear this Cross, and burden well, he may perhaps advance you to the carrying
of others, which are more interior, and irksome, and which he prouides for
such alone, as are his nearest friends; that so they may comforme themselves to
him, whose Cross was extremely great, even in that which was to be seen; but
incomparably more extreme, in that part thereof, which was invisible. And
though it may seem to you, that God has taken away your other Offices or
employments, because you gave him not a good account thereof; yet forbear not
to be thankful to him, who has ordered the matter, as now we see. For to be
corrected by the hand of such a father, and with so great love, puts us rather
into need of humility, for the moderating of our joy and comfort, then of
patience, wherewith to endure the punishment.

But yet nevertheless, I am in some fear, that perhaps, you may not profit by
this fever of yours. For some beginners, are wont to give liberty to the
soul, in the infirmities of their body, though yet, they be not such, as
threaten danger or death. It is a thing very contrary to reason, for a man to
turn Physic, into poison, and to take occasion of growing worse, by that
which was sent a man by our Lord, to make him better. Call therefore upon him,
with your heart and beseech him, that since he strikes you, Gen 33.
in the strength of your body, it may be, to make you go more lightly toward
him, with your soul. And forasmuch as this si^^enes, is sent you, that your
body, by the pain thereof may pay for that sin which has been committed by
the same body; you must not suffer it to be the occasion of your incurring new
debts, since it was meant that it should discharge the old.

You must live, with great reflection upon your self: and give noe credit to
flesh and blood in all that which it shall desire of you but offer it to the
Cross of our lord, in the company of his own holy spirit. And he, who was
content to let his Cross be sided, by the Crosses of two murdering thieves,
will not drive you from him. And since you cannot now continue, your custom of
meditation, or spiritual reading, as you would, yet fail not to be doing
somewhat, the best you can, so that it be without evident disadvantage to your
health. For our lord is so powerful, and so good* as that he gives strength
to such as have a mind to take pains. And sometimes, he bestows more favor
upon sick men in their beds, who cannot pray; then upon others, who spend many
hours in that holy exercise. And perhaps, he will vouchsafe this mercy to you,
since it costs him noe more, then his very will. And I beseech you, for the
love of our lord, Ephesians. 4.
Vt non circumferaris omuivento doctrinae, that you be not whirled about, with
every wind of doctrine, and that you esteem of those persons, by whose
means, our lord has showed mercy on you. Imitating the man, who was borne
blind in the gospel. John. 9
From whom noe persuasion of any man, could take the good opinion, which he
entertained of that person, who had cured him of his continual blindness. He
took that benefitt, for a great token of the goodness of his Master, when he
said, si peccator est nescio, vnu^ scio, quod cum cacus essem, modo video,
whether or not, he be a sinner, I cannot tell: but one thing I know, that I
who was blind, do now see. And though he said as we have heard, yet he
believed well, that his Master, was a just person, as may appear by the holy
kind of earnestnes which he used toward the Jews, and besides by our lords
making himself known to him, in the temple: in reward of that faith which he
defended. My self have heard some things, which are said by such as oppose,
and emulate those Fathers, but I find not yet, that any one of them is grounded
upon reason, neither do I believe, that there is any: but yet I like well,
that yet when you defend them, it be rather with meekenes, and few words, then
otherwise. For our lord has these things in great recommandation; and his
pleasure is, that they should be carried sweetly and with patience. I beseech
our Blessed lord, to remain with you, since he dyed for you.

A Letter of the Author to a disciple of his.
He treates of the security, which is greater when God is served in the way of
affliction, then when, in the way of Consolation.

I Have received some of your letters, and I have paid my thanks to our Lord,
both for having given you health, and his blessed help withal, to be in favor
with him, continuing that good, which already he had begun in you; and so you
must confide, that he will do even to the end, for his works are perfect.
This which he will do for you, is a favor of his, and noe meritt of yours.
Nor will he leave the care, and government of you in your own hands; But he,
for his glory, will take the business of your salvation to himself. Now this he
does as a most wise Physician, sometimes by making much of you, sometimes by
showing signs of disgust; giving you sometimes, the light of comfort, and at
other times the worme-wood of sorrow; Now hyding himself from you for the
trial of your faith, and then showing himself to you, for the increase
thereof. And by a thousand other means which he knows how to use, he will
give you your soul saved, without, in a manner your perceiving how you come by
it, till you have it.

Be not disordered in your judgment* either by way of valewing your self the
more, when you think your business goes well, or yet, on the other side, must
you give sentence of condemnation against your self, conceiving that all is
already lost, when you conceive that you have reason, to be disgusted with your
self. The heart of man is wicked, and cannot be searched, and sifted, but by the
wisdom of God himself: and to him, and to his judgment, you must remitt the
sentence concerning the case in which you stand. And you must walk on, both
with great confidence of his mercy, and with a religious fear, of his high
majesty. Depart neither to the right hand nor to the left. Do not believe that
there is any Sanctity at all, where there is any want of this chaste, and holy
fear, which makes a man grow humble. For thereby he knows, that the good,
which he has, depends upon another and it makes him hang, as it were, upon the
ears of God, beseeching him with continual prayer, that though he may,
without injustice deprive him of the good he gave him, yet that through his
goodness, he will not do it.

Nor must you believe any Spirit, which by means of any temptations, or
Spiritual disco^forts, may come to you: nor yet if any darkness or anguish,
which may be conveyed into your soul, shall pretend to dismay you, or persuade
you to disconfidence in our Lord, who loves you. But tell that Spirit, that if
it had wished you to disconfide in your self, it should have had all reason,
because you are nothing, but mere weakness. But, in saying that you must not
hope for safety at his hands who is the common salvation of all the world: tell
him he lies, and therein you shall but say a truth.

Christ our Lord loves you more then you can think: only it is fit
sometimes, that he hide it from you. For perhaps, if you knew it, you might
fall into a greater occasion, and danger of vanity, then the suspicion you have
of your not being beloved by him, may be of your despair; for without doubt
they are fewer who can enjoy prosperity, without any mixture of vanity, or
inordinate delight, in the sweet meats which are given them: then there are,
who can bear, the bitterness of tribulation, without despair. Conceive you
therefore that our Lord, keeps you safe, in the haven of security, under the
sharp rock of tribulation: to the end you may not putrify, with too much
sweetness: but be preserved by the bitterness of myrh. And at this, you are not
to be troubled. For of your self you should make election of that, which will
be good for you in Eternity, rather then of that, which may afford you some
little temporal gust. Yea and even in spiritual consolations, we reap not
sometimes so much profitt, as we do delight. Nor will you be demanded at the
last day, what comforts you shall have enjoyed: but what discomforts, you have
suffered, without failing, either in point of faith, or love And believe you,
that God receives that for service which being contrary to your sensuality, and
self will, you did yet accept, as being conquered by his love, and not that
which a man how sensual soever he might be, would be glad to enjoy. For if to
be regaled by Almighty God were to do true service to his divine Majesty, he
would not have so few servants: since there are so many, who by this way, and
that way, and every way are seeking comforts. But they understand not, how
far it is from God, to be able to abstain from comforting his afflicted, and
dejected servants, when it is best for them. And as far also he is, from
liking them, who taking of their eyes, from his tormenting Cross, send them
in search after Comforts as conceiving that the more they have thereof, the
more beloved, and more happy they are. And they never consider, how poor they
shall be found, at that day, when God will sifte Jerusalem with the light of
Lamps, and when he will call us to account, whether we love him from the
profoundest part of our hearts, Soph. 1.
and our selves for him, and in him, and through him: or else whether we have
loved him for our selves, and to our own use. And then will many of those
works appear to have been carnal, and infected with, self love, and
interest, which shined like so much fine gould, in their eyes who performed
them. You are therefore more secure from interest, or complacence, when such
things come to you as cause bitterness. But the^ let the love of God a lone,
persuade you to endure them, till he provide otherwise. In whom you must have
so much strength of the holy Ghost, as may make you abound in charity, and
peace, and joy: treading your passions under foot, and having your soul, even
all enbalmed with grace. Yet when you shall be in joy, do not enjoy it for
your self: but employ it with greater strength, upon him who gave it: fetching
also reason from thence, why it should make your love increase.

I beseech that Lord, who remembered you when you forgot him, to give strength
unto your inward man that so you may know how, to adore, obey, and love him;
and that he will send his holy Spirit into your heart, that it may guide you
into that land of Eternal light. Amen.

A Letter of the Author, to a Religious woman, a spiritual child of his.
He shows that it is noe assured sign of disfavor, for God to estraunge
himself sometimes: and that our safety depends more upon his goodness, then our
deserts: and he persuades her to have confidence in God.

I Have received many of your letters since I saw you last. And in some of
them, you told me, that your soul was troubled: and in others, that our lord
had begun to give you comfort. Yea, and I think you said, in some one of
them, that the peace, and comfort which formerly you had received, was entirely
returned. I answered none of those letters, either because my sins hindered
me, from the grace of giving you comfort; or else because I knew you had
sufficient confidence in me, without receiving my answeares. But now at last,
I receive a letter from you, whereby you tell me, that you are as much
afflicted, as ever, if it be not rather more; and you desire me to write.

I am in pain, through your pain, and this, has moved me, to entreat, that
for the love of Christ Jesus crucified, you suffer not your self to be blinded
by that darkness, which superfluity of sadness, is wont to draw over our souls,
but remember, how faithful that lord is, to whom you have offered yourselfe.
And, that it is an usual thing with his infinite wisdom, to save the souls of
his servants, by means which they cannot reach to understand; hiding his love
from them sometimes: and showing them a countenance of some rigor; and all
this, not because he is cruel, but out of pure, and perfect mercy. Because he
knows that our infirmityes are better cured, when we are laid under the
scourge of tribulation; then when we are carried up in the hands of prosperity
and comfort.

You tell me that desolation wherein you are, seems very bitter to you, and
that you cannot bear the rigor of that angry face of our lord, which you say
he shows to you, and that absence also from him, wherein you live. But I tell
you, my good sister, that though tribulation may be of as much danger to you
as you declare: yet the state of comfort, is still subject to as much. Nay,
prosperity, is much more to be feared, then adversity. For in the former, the
soul runs hazard, to depart from God: but in the latter though it suffer
pain, yet that very pain it self, incites one to draw nearer to him. And if
you say, that the great weight of discomfort, does sometimes put the soul in
danger of sinning through impatience, you say nothing but truth. But yet you
must know withal, that much oftener, and by assaults of greater danger, the
soul is brought into danger by the sweetness of gust.

Remember the Apostle saint Paul, who through the grace of him who was
crucified, did esteem it for glory, to suffer the afflictions of the Cross.
Cor. 7.
And though he were environed by wars without, and fears within: yet his
soul was safely kept, as in a haven most secure. But so great was the danger
which he rann by the fair and clear weather of consolations and revelations;
that if God had not permitted him, to be seized upon by the tempest, both of
inward, and outward troubles, which laid such load upon his neck, as made him
stoop, that great Saint might have been in danger, through the occasion of
comfort, whom so many discomforts could not once pluck down. 1. Cor. 12
By this means, the bitter, was the cure of the sweet: and the Angel of
Satan, was the occasion of benefit to him, to whom that great communication of
Almighty God, might have been the occasion of falling; if through humane
frailty, he had puffed up himself.

If now this might have happened to that vessel of election: and if it were
necessary for him to suffer, that so he might be freed from the dangers of
comfort; how can you marvel, if God have watered your joy with tears: if
your harp be set to sad tunes; and if those sweet communications, Job 18.
which you had before with Almighty God, be turned into such an unsavory
departure from him. His eyes, are able to discern, that, which your cannot.
And he knows full well, the vanity of that heart of yours, which would not
perhapps, be able to endure the weight of divine favors. Or else perhapps he
may see, that you are likely to suffer decay of health by the excess, of the
sweetness, of that divine gust which he gave you: Or else, that you esteemed
more of your self then you did of others, who want these comforts: Or else in
fine, it may have happened, for any one of many other faults, which may have
taken hold of the imperfection of your heart, Iere. 17.
and which cannot be thoroughly sifted by any, but by that God alone, who made
it.

Yea and if you should not be, in any necessity, of this kind of physic
(because, though our lord should comfort you still, yet perhapps you were not,
to fall into these inconveniences) yet there are many other reasons, why our
lord may think fit to treat his servants, after this manner. All which, are
grounded upon his love to us; though in the blind eye of flesh and blood, they
may seem to grow from disfavor. You know, it is a common saying, He who loves
thee, will make thee cry. And the holy scripture says, that a wound, given by
a friend is better then the treacherous kiss of an enemy. And believe you for
certain, that our lord loves you, and therefore does he treat you after this
manner. For it is written, Heb. 12.
our lord punnishes whom he loves, and he corrects such a one, as he receives
for his son.

And as in former times, God sent most hideous Martyrdomes to his beloved
servants, by the hands of base and bloody executioners, engaging them in bitter
wars, that afterward he might honor them with precious crowns; so now, when
those exterior Martyrdomes are ceased, he se^des others which be interior.
And these (how soever they are not visible) be yet as great, or greater, then
those. For then, men tormented them, and God gave them comfort; and by the
strength of this Omnipotent God; those torments were ouerwrought, and
maistered, which were inflicted on them, by weak men. But now, he who
discomforts, is our Lord, who hides himself; and the Devils, like cruel
executioners, do by a thousand devices, torment the mind, which is far more
sensible, then the body. And from that torment, does many times redound, a
torment even to the very body it self. And so the whole man, both within and
without, is laid upon the discomforts of a Cross And he sighs, and groans,
and asks succor of our Lord. And our Lord, the while, makes himself deaf,
and is more hidden from the soul then if there were seven walls, between him
and it. Yea and it does also expressly feel, that our Lord has absented
himself from it; and that, not only in the way of not doing it any favor,
Matthew. 15.
but rather expressly seeming, to disfavor it. As he proceeded with the
Cananean, when, at the first, he did but forbear to answer, but afterward,
he compared her to a dog.

That indeed is an hour, of mighty anguish, when the soul finds noe repose,
in any thing, to which it can apply it self. As when a man is drowning, in a
profound sea, without finding so much, as any little rest for the feet. Or
like one, who is bound fast, hand and foot, and would feign rise up, but knows
not once how to stir. For as he, who is highly comforted by Almighty God,
cannot be discomforted, by any pain, or torment, so can nothing comfort him,
who is discomforted by Almighty God. And yet must these servants, go after
their lord; through such a desert as this, which is even a very image of death,
and by such darkness, and distress, they must pass on, to the place of rest.

This Martyrdom I say, must be endured, for love of the Spouse, by that soul,
which desires to carry, the Emblem of Love in her heart; and amongst these
thorns she must make her nest, if she will be conform to her Head, who was
crowned with thorns. And these draughts must she swallow down; and into
these sweates must she be cast who resolves to keep that Lord company, who,
being in fierce agony upon that holy Thursday at night, did sweat drops of
blood, from his whole body, in testimony, that his soul, was truly sad, even
to the very death.

Did you think perhapps, that it was some dainty and delightful thing, to
serve Christ our Lord? or that you undertook some trifling business, when you
began to place your love on him? They who fight the battles of love, must dye
daily, as S. Paul did. And they must be even cruel, against themselves, (as
a man who were careless of so many base and broken pots) to the end, that
they may never fail of fidelity to the Love of our Lord. Which Love, was never
complied with well by any, who was either negligent, or inconfident. For the
former of these two, seeks his own Regalo, whereas it were his part, to seek
the contentment of his beloved. And the latter, faints in his love, because he
cannot believe that he is beloved. But Faith being joined to Obedience, frees
us from such mischeiues as these; making us believe that God loves us, and then
most, when he most hides his love from us; and when he seems to be most
rigourous, and cruel toward us. For the condition, and property of true
faith, is to believe not only upon those signs, and pawnes, which may be
given; but as well, without them; and not only without them, but even against
them. And herein, it does but resemble every other virtue, which then declares
best of what strength and beauty it is, when it is put on, by the fewest
helps; and when it is encountered, by the greater impediments.

That is true love, which loves a person, who even deserves not to be beloved.
And that is true Patience, which suffers impertinences, and endures wrongs. And
then does Chastity, deserve a rich, and gallant crown of glory, when in
despite of several temptations, it stands fast. And so, you must learn to
know, the true value of true faith, which beleiues and puts confidence, in the
truth, and goodness of God, against that distrust, or despair, which humane
reason, or the senses of flesh and blood, might pretend to cause. By this
Faith, we see that which is invisible, how deep soever it be hidd. And even
through the midst of these pikes, which are the disfavors of God, (the sharp
points whereof we feel sticking in us) we yet enter, and pass on, into that
most retired secret of the heart of our Lord; and there we find, that indeed
he loves us, though he show us signs, which look as if they proceeded from
disaffection. And then so we esteem, and use them, as we ought, when we
take them for the trial of our Faith; and for the exercise of our Love; and for
the increase of our Crown; and for matter, whereupon our Obedience to God,
must work.

If you believe me not, I pray you tell me, how shall the chaste woeman be
tried, but by contradictions, and combats against Chastity? And how shall your
Faith be tried, but by receiving these tokens of disfavor, which pretend to
deprive you of confidence. Be not troubled, to find that your Spouse is thus
resolved, to make trial of your fidelity to him. For this is a very usual
thing between Spouses; and the fruit thereof uses to be, but an increase of
love; which it is not fit to keep idle; for in our employment, and exercise
thereof, does our life and treasure consiste. And now God made choice of you,
to discharge this office toward him. And if indeed you would exercise it
well, it must be by loving him, though you feel not your self to be beloved
by him, and by following him, whom you conceive to be flying from you. For he
who loves not but only when he finds himself to be beloved, is indeed noe
true lover; but his respects, runn all toward himself. And hereby it will
appear, whether you be that true Cananean or not, if when you hear hard
language, and be cast of by our lord; you do yet importune him; and if
following him, who flies from you; and humbling your self to him, who treats
you noe better, then some base, vnre asonable creature, you do yet proceed to
love him, as sincerely, and purely, as if you tasted of great delights, and
Regalos, at his hands. For in the end, he will answer you thus, O woeman,
great is thy faith, let that be done which thou desire.

But in the mean time be you resolute, in continuing faith full; and say to
him with your whole heart, O Lord I will love thee, though thou should not
love me. I will seek thee, and look cheerfully toward thee, though thou fly
from me. Let me love thee still: upon that condition, do with me what thou will. By this means, the disfavors of our lord, shall be converted, into the
exercise of true love: and herein you are to remain more contented; then you
are to be in pain, for being disfauoured. Nor shall you only please our lord
by this means, but more over you will obtain a crown in heaven, which will
be straungely great. For by the measure of your discomforts, that robe of
glory, is to be cut out, wherewith you must be vested, in heaven: and from the
seed of tears, we must gather the sheaues of joy. And we are not to be
crowned, for having been in devotion, and consolation; but for having been
(as it were) threshed with variety of temptations, and for having been
content, with the taste of such gall, as carried the very image of hell with
it, and of the torments thereof: and for bearing all these things, with an
equal mind, and for beleiuing that they are light, and few, 2 Cor. 4.
in comparison of that superexcellent weight of glory, which is to be revealed
in them, who shall be humbled, and mortifyed after this manner. And we must
think our selves happy, in being obedient to the ordinance of our lord God,
not only, in that which gives us gust, but in the contrary also. For
otherwise, what wonder is it, to see the spouse, obey her fellow spouse, in
that, which gives contentment to her self: since for that, there is noe great
need of love: for the respect of proper interest is able to breed such
obedience as that. Nor do I know, with what eyes, Christ our lord will look
upon such a spouse as that: since he obeyed his Father, Matthew. 26.
for her sake, in cases of so extreme affliction, saying: Let it be, not as I
will, but as thou will. Whereas she says, just the contrary; Not as thou will,
but as I will: for she will be squared out by another rule, then her head was:
and will needs make the will of God, which is eternally good, to be crocked,
that it may conform it self to her will: which seeks not that which is truly
good for her, and which eternally is to be so but that which seems likely, to
give her, some little temporal delight.

A wake O Virgin, out of that sleep, wherein you are: for it is broad day.
Take the shield of Faith, Romans 13.
since God has armed you with it, and drive away these dismayes, believing,
that you are beloved, though you be not regaled by our lord. And turn your
complaint back upon yourself since a little present disfavor, is of more
power, toward the drawing you down; then the many favors, which are past, to
keep you fast on foot. You now, do just the contrary, of what you should. For
whereas it were reason, that in this time of tribulation, you should remember
your comforts of former times: beleiuing, that the trouble which now you have,
is but to try, what proportion of trust, you repose in God: You do yet call
it into question, whether his love were true to you then, or not: beleiuing
rather in the show, and leaf, then in the substance, and root,

You have noe just cause to be dismayed, though you be afflicted. For our lord
is nor gone from you: but he went away, with a meaning only to stand by, and
to see how you carried yourselfe, like a mother who hides herself behind a
hanging, to observe, and hear, what her child says, and does: whilst he
thinks that he has lost her, but then shortly she steps out and makes much
of him.

If you fear, that he has forsaken you, and given you a bill of separation,
for the faults, and ignorances, into which you may have fallen, you are much
deceived. For in far greater falls then those, Ierem. 3.
his course has been to comfort souls, by saying, Thou have committed
fornication with many lovers: but yet return to me, and I will receive thee.

Though God like well, that his servants should know, and weigh the faults,
into which they fall; yet it is not his pleasure, that they should be dismayed,
or too excessiuely afflicted by them. Nay he esteems this, to be of more
disseruice to him, then the very fall it self. Neither is it also his
pleasure, that a sin which is as little as a grain of seed, should be made
by us, as bigg as an Elephant, and much less, that we should make that to be a
sin, which indeed is none. So that if you have not fallen into sin, and yet
will needs be troubled, as if you had, you offend against his truth, And if you
had fallen, you should offend against his mercy, by not beleiuing, that he
has pardoned you. You offend also against his love by suspecting, that he
has forgotten you. And lastly, you offend against the Crosses, which he has
sent to you, esteeming them to be messengers, and signs of wrath, whereas
indeed, they are effects of his goodness.

Take therefore the courage, now at last, to sally out, from the own narrow
thought; and believe of God, according to his goodness; as it imports his
honor, that you should do. And live not still, in such blindness, as to
measure the large hand of God, by the rules of your own poor woeful heart.
Nor conceive you, that now he will be a rigorous judge, who, at others times,
and in your greatest occasions, has been, a most indulgent Father to you.

It was not you upon whom he looked, when he pardoned you, and called you; but
he regarded his own blood, which he shedd. Nor does he now, stand hanging upon
your hands, as if he loved you, for them; but you are placed, and written in
his, as he says, by his Prophet Isay. And in those hands, he loves you; and
with those hands he guards you, even then, when you think he gives you
buffets. But it is his mercy, which is your remedy, and safety, and noe
meritt of your own. You are a Daughter, and you are to possess heaven, by way
of inheritance, and not, as a mere day labourer. Confide in God; and give him
glory, in that he lodges his eyes, upon so unworthy a thing as you; and for
that he purposes, to exalt so base a creature, to such height of glory. And
know, that he has noe need of anything, in you; and that if he desire
anything, it is, but that you may offer him that sacrifice of praise for your
own good; confessing him to be your gracious pardoner and your piteous rayser
up, from your falls; and your Centinell who never sleeps when there is
question, either of doing you favors, or of drawing good out of your sins;
and your most wise conductour, who carries, and saues you, by such paths, as
seem, in the eye of your ignorance to be very far about, or rather quite out
of the way. And all this, he does, through his own goodness alone, considering
what himself is. Which carries a greater weight toward your salvation, then
your wickedness does, toward your condemnation; and you are bound to believe
that so it is. And it must not seem strange to you, that the greater,
surmounts the less: and the Creator, the creature. But let it stand for the
last conclusion, that as noe goodness in you, was the cause, why God loved, and
called you to his service; so will he take care, that your wickedness, and
weakness, shall not hinder the course of those mercies, which he resolves to
show you, for all eternity. Continue your Communions; and, I beseech our Lord
to give them his benediction. For my part, I like well thereof; and upon the
days which are set down, communicate, from time to time; and God will give
you strength, that it may do you no hurt: for he has noe quarrel to you. I
beg that he may be your Love, since he is your Lover.

A Letter to a Lady, who was a Religious woman and in great affliction.
He shows how troub^es are the proof of Faith, and Love, in the servants of
God, and how confident they ought to be of his divine Majesty, in the midst
of their troubles.

AS soon as I received your letter, I offe red thanks to our Lord, for having
given you a sign, that your vocation came from his hand, and this sign is,
that you have suffered tribulation. You must not be a little gladd of this,
since our Lord loves you. Nor yet must you be slack, since you are in the
midst of many dangers; but carry your eye toward him, who has called you
with so great love. You must also have a strong heart, For he called you not
with intention to give you over in the midst of your journey; but to guide
you under the protection of his own wings, till he may have conducted you to
heaven, where you shall see his face. Let not the faith of Christ our Lord, nor
the love you owe him sleep in you; for he never sleeps when there is question
of doing you any good.

These are tokens which he uses to send, to whom he loves, to try if they
also love him, in their afflictions, and if they confide in him in their
dangers: That Spouse is not worthy of thanks, who loves her fellow spouse, but
only when he is present with her; not does it cost him much to confide in him
when she finds her self regaled by him. But the matter is, that when he
absents himself from her, yea and when he seems to have forgotten her, she
must love him so much the better, as he is further absent from her, and
confide in him so much the more; as she has fewer exterior signs of his
favor.

It is enough for you, my good sister, to have known already by experience,
how loving our Lord has been to you; by his having drawn you to the
knowledge of himself. And be you, not craving new testimonies of his Love, but
making your self sure enough thereof, and be not troubled though he correct
you; and though it seem, as if he estraunged himself from you and forgott
you; but rather say thus; He has a mind to try me, and not to oppress me.
You must love our Lord, though he correct you, you must co^fide in him, though
you feel noe comfort from him. Seek him, though he hide himself; suffer him
not to rest, till you have waked him, and till he confess that you are
faithful in his absence. And thus you shall find him return to you, with so
much advantage, as that when you enjoy his presence again, you will esteem
your former afflictions well employed.

Procure great courage, wherewith to suffer; for after the rate of your
sorrows, shall your comforts be. Be not a lover of your selse, but be a lover
of God; loose yourselfe, and so you shall be sure to find your self. And if
once you would but trust God home; and if once you would offer your self to
him, with true love there could nothing happen which would fright you. All
bitter frosen afflictions proceed but from distrust in God. And for this our
Lord said, Let not your hearts be troubled, and do not fear. You believe in
God, believe also in me. So that faith and love is the cause of peace, John.
14
and quietness to the heart.

There is noe one thing, which is so necessary for you, toward the making
you able to arrive at the end of that days work, wherein God has placed you,
as to confide in him with love. Our lord has many proofs to make of you, and
many tribulations shall grow where you look least for them; but if you stand
armed with faith and love, you shall overcome them all. Do but remember how
the children of Israel, Number. 1,
when they were issued out of the land of Egypt, by the means of so many
miracles, and were passing through so many afflictions, before they arrived at
that land, which our lord had promised them, said thus, The people which
possess this land, is greater and stronger then we; they have mighty Cities
whose walis do even threaten the sky we cannot overcome such a stout nation
as this: to what end do we put our selves upon this journey? And though some
amongst them, who had faith, did encourage the rest, by saying that since God
was of their side, they should easily be able to overcome, as they had done
till then; yet fear prevailed so far, as that they offended our lord
thereby, and through their little considence, they lost the land, and God
destroyed them in the desert, without suffering them to enjoy that, for which
they had labored, and which himself had promised. Let us take warning, my
good sister, by the danger of others: and let us know, that our lord has
gust, Psalm. 147.
in such as fear him, and hope in his mercy; and is offended with such, as
do not so. It is he who drew you out of the captivity of Egypt, when he
inspired your heart with a desire of being his: and he leads you still,
through this desert, which is so impleasant: where sometimes you want the
bread of doctrine, for lack of such, as might break it to you: other times
you want company which may speak of spiritual things, that so your way might
be made to seem the shorter; At other times you want the trees of other
recreation, which might give you shade: and in steed of these commodities, you
have a thousand discomforts. Now temptations rise, against you from within: and
then from without; now from strangers, and then from domestics. But yet attend
you only to your business, for he who did that for you, which was more, can
never fail to do that for you, which is less. He who made you a friend, of
an enemy, will better keep you now, when you are his friend. He who did not
abandon you, when you fled from him, will much less fly now from you, when you
follow him.

Who is he that can say, with any truth, that God did not help him if he were
desired? See you have noe fear o you servant of Christ, in any thing which may
happen to you; but confide in him, who Loved you so well, as to dye for you.
It is true that you have but one, who protects you, but that one, is of much
more power, then all they who contradict you. Do not think, of how great the
giants, and how strong the Cities are, which you must encounter, for it is
not you, who must fight. Numb. 14.
But hold you your peace, and our lord will fight for you. Do not fly from the
war, nor abandon your self, as one who were overcome: and so you shall see
the favor of our Lord ^^wards you. For in this war, he only looses the
battaille, Exodus 14.
who quitts the field. It is true that you are weak; but in that weakness of
yours, God will show his strength. It is true that you know not much, but God
himself will be your guide. By your miseries, God will make his mercies
appear. Who are you, that you should be able to pass through such
difficulties? but yet say with Da^id, P^^. 17.
In the strength of my God. I will leap over a wall. Who are you that you
should be able to fight? but yet say with him again. Though thousands should
rise against me, yet my heart shall not fear. Believe, my good sister, Ps. 26.
that how much the harder this business is for you, so much the easyer is it
for Almighty God. And therefore you must have great distrust in respect of your
own weakness; but great confidence withal, in God's strength. Infallibly he
will crown you, if you continue in his love, and if you confide, that by his
grace you shall obtain that Crown.

Forget not this promise of Christ our lord, him who confesses me before men,
Man 10.
that man will I confess before my father who is in heaven; but him who denies
me before men, that man will I also deny before my father who is in heaven.
Can you think, that one is to esteem that for affliction, which he endures
for the confession of Christ our lord; since it is to have so high a reward,
as that, with so much honor, he shall be avowed by him at the day of
judgment, before his father? Happy is that suffera^ce, happy that dishonor,
and poverty, to which so high an honor does succeed. What kind of joy will
it be for you, O my ghost sister, to hear these words from the mouth of
Christ our lord himself, and that in presence of the whole world. Matthew 25.
Come you blessed of my father and possess the kingdom which is prepared for
you. What will it be, when the angels shall thus singe, to her, who has
been a faithful servant, of that celestial king, Come O spouse of Christ,
receive the crown which our Lord has prepared for thee; and that not for one
day but for all eternity. What will the spouses of Christ our Lord conceive,
when having passed through the sea of this life, and their enemies who
disturbed us, remaining drowned therein, they shall singe thus with great joy,
for having run through this dangerous world, without being overwhelmed by the
vices thereof, Psalm. 123.
The suare is broken, and we are delivered, our help is in the name of our
lord. What a day will that be, when that true Mary, the virgin of virgins,
shall go before with her Timbrell, which is her sacred body, praising God both
in body and soul; and singing thus. Psa. 31.
Come magnisye our Lord wish me, and let us exalt his name in mutual
sacietie with one another.

Happy are you, if you be found faithful to the Spouse who chose you. Happy
are you, if you have the courage to cast away that which is present, under the
most certain promise of Christ our Lord, for that which is future. Be
confident, my good sister, in taking his word; for you are not the first to
whom he has passed it, and fulfilled it; neither shall you be she with whom
that word shall want effect. He gave his word to S. Katherine, S. Agnes, S.
Barbara, and S. Lucy, and to innumerable other Lady virgins; and tell me now,
how completely he has performed it. They had the courage to despise, the poor
present world: and you see that now, they reign with God. They lived here in
trouble; and they are now in the eternity of repose. Through how many
combatts did they pass, and they now enjoy the everlasting crowns of their
conquests. They fled from spouses of the earth, and they brought the king of
heaven, to be in love with them.

If they had followed the trace, of this world, their delight had been already
passed: and their memories would have been forgotten. But they loved that,
which was eternal, and therefore their felicity shall not dye: and their
memory shall not decay. They were written in the book of God; and therefore
neither water nor wind, nor fire nor time, can make them waste; For that book
is incorruptible and so in the name which is written in it.

You must therefore procure to have a strong heart toward God, who is your
salvation, and do not think that he sells heaven dear to you, for you have
not yet shed your blood for him, as those others shed theirs. Our lord treates
you, like a weak creature; and you should be ashamed to have given him such
cause. If you had had more faith, and confidence in him, and more love to
suffer for him, he would have procured you more afflictions; to the end that
you might have purchased richer Crowns. Do not content your self with
suffering little, considering how great your rewards all be: and how much
Christ our Lord suffered for you. He gave his life for you, and he was deeply
tormented and despised. How then come you thus to complain of the touch of a
fly? do but love, and you will desire to suffer. Let your love be doubled,
and you will suffer sorrows which are doubled. The love of our lord, makes
such as possess it, more greedy of suffering, then the love of ones self, of
reposing. It makes that any burden weighes light, for love is stronger then
death. He who loves not, groans under the burden, like some lasy beast; but he
who loves runs, and flies; and it suffers him not to feel the weight even of
his own body, nor of whatsoever else they can lay upon it.

It is not my good sister, that the afflictions which we suffer are greater;
but that our love is little. The weight of a pound is noe great weight; but yet
lay it upon some little child, and he will say, O how heavy it weighes?
Whereas if a man took it up, he would scarce feel it. And so take you it,
for a sign, that if you love little your afflictions will weigh heavy upon
you; but if you love much you will scarce allow them to be afflictions. For
you will be so inebriated with love, that nothing can be able to distract you,
from the taste thereof. You will find a good savor in the very suffering, it
self; and you will draw water, Number. 20.
out of the rock, and honey out of the stony hills.

Do but love, and you shall not be subject to afflictions, but you shall be
Superior to them, as their Lady, and you shall praise him who delivers you
from them. If they threaten you with death, you will bid it welcome; that so
you may enjoy true life. If with banishment, you will say, That you esteem
your self banished wheresoever you are, till you may arrive to see the face of
God: And that it imports you little, whether you go to heaven, from this, or
that part of the earth; And that, if you have God in your company, wheresoever
you are, you shall be happy; and if not, your own country will give you misery
enough. If you see your self contemned, say, Christ our Lord is my honor and
he honors me: let the world despise me, so he value me.

Do not afflict your self, about the necessity which you may sustain of
present things: for of your felfe you must despise them, through the desire
which you have to ^liue in conformity with Christ our Lord, who made himself
a poor man for you.

What is there in the world, which ought to fright you? If the love of Christ
our Lord have wounded you, you will tread the devil under foot; you will
despise his threats; and you will pass with courage, through all your
enemies. Put your trust in him, who loves his lovers. There is nothing which
you will not be able to do, in him. Go and buy whatsoever you want, of him,
though he ask you all this world for it; and see that you be not found
without the love of him, though it should cost you your life. He is a hidden
treasure, but he who finds him, sells all to buy him. For in him alone, he
finds himself more rich, then with the multitude of all other things.

And now if it concern every one of us to love him, how much more does it
import that she do it, whom he has chosen for his spouse. It becomes the
servant to fear his Master; and the son to honor his father, but the
spouse, to love her fellow spouse. See you love our lord, and take noe rest
till he have granted you this gift. Love him with reverence, for that is the
kind of love, which he likes. Esteem not him the less, because he
communicates himself to you; but wonder, how so great an altitude as his,
can stoop to such a profounde business as yours. It is the property of ill
natured and ill mannered servants to value their Masters at a less rate for
vouchsafeing to descend and become familier with them, then if they had lived
which them like lords. But they who live in true light esteem that lord so
much the more, as he does more vouchsafe to diminish himself.

The true love of Christ our lord carries this badge with it, in token that it
is indeed of him; That as it apprehends, and highly esteems the goodness of
God, so it also apprehends, and profoundly disesteemes, the wickedness of man.
Therefore love, adore and serve our lord, with joy: but yet rejoice with
tre^bling. Not a tre^bling as of a slave, in the midst of torments, but as of
a true, and tender hearted child, who highly fears to give any disgust to her
father, how little it soever may be.

Of your self you can do none of these things; but if you humble your heart in
the acknowledgment of your own miseries, if you present your self often in
prayer, before Christ our lord, if you lodge him in your breast by the
Communion; if you hear him speak to you in your spiritual reading, and in
fine if you will but give him leave to help you, you are to have confidence,
that by little and little he will be healing your soul, notwithstanding all the
harsh encounters which may occur.

Do not start out of his hands, though the cure put you to pain; for, in
fine, he will work the cure at the fittest time. And for the afflictions
which he sends you, and the delights whereof he depriues you, he will give you
his own most plentiful delight; which shall inebriate you, as if it were with
some swelling river; and you shall be in full Joy, for all eternity, without
the want of any good, and without the fear of loosing what you have. You shall
there find your self to be highly well content, and paid; and more felicity
shall be imparted to you, then your self could tell how to desire. Which
felicity is not a creature but a Creator himself of all things; that true God
who live and reigns for the eternity of all eternities. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a disciple of his who was grown a Priest.
He shows that exterior afflictions must be desired for the service and love
of God.

RIght Reverend Father, I have received your letter, which has wrought in me
the same effect, with those others which formerly I had from you; Namely
rendering of thanks to our lord, for the gifts which he has bestowed upon
you, according to the testimony which your words give, of that which dwells in
your heart. It wrought also great confusion in me, to see you call me the
Master, and Father, of him, to whom I should think it a great favor of our
lord, if I could deserve to be a Son, and a Disciple. And especially I was
confounded, yea and put to pain, to hear you say in the end of your letter,
that you would have written me many, if it had not been for the Decorum, which
you thought your self bound to keep, of an Auditour, and a Scholar. This is
not a course wherein you must proceed with me; for there is noe reason that you
should put me to loss, only because I desire, to serve and profitt you. And
if you treat me in this manner, you will make me hear, and hold my peace.

I know not, if I wrote not to you the other day, of an error, which I have
discovered in some, who yet hold themselves to be spiritual. And it is, that
they despise, the corporal afflictions, and troubles, which are undertaken,
for the love of our lord. If I wrote to you thereof, there will be nothing lost,
though I say it over again; and if not, it is necessary, that I write it.

Since, that light of our eyes, Christ our lord, lived in this world, under so
many afflictions, and died with so many torments, his servants remain so
hungry, of suffering somewhat, that it exceedes the appetite wherewith men of
this world, run after ease. And not only are they content to suffer
affliction, when it comes upon them, (and much more that kind of affliction,
which may be necessary to them for the avoiding of sin) but they seek it
out, by all the ways they can, and so they make proof thereby, of the love
they bear to Christ our lord, considering how he was in so much pain by the
afflictions which he endured, for the love of us.

For, as the faint and tepid kind of man, would of himself be glad to suffer
noe afflictions, but yet he bears them with patience when they come, least
otherwise he may offend our lord; so the fervent lover of Jesus Christ, would
feign take noe ease at all; and if perforce he must take any, he endures it,
but with patience, because so Christ our lord, does command. In such sort
that as he who is but slack, in the service of God, has delight and ease in
his desire, and takes affliction but with patience, so the true Christian is
but patient to see himself at ease, and has affliction, in his desire.

This grows from the spirit of Christ our lord; and when this is perfect in a
soul, it works that, which it wrought in him: which was a love of affliction
for us, the better to show us his love. And thereupon it also follows, that
when men would comfort one who is but slack and negligent, upon the arrival of
any affliction, they must do it just so, as they would comfort a good
Christian, when he happens to be in repose and ease. For the one of them
suffers ease which he loves not, and just so, is affliction sufferred by the
other. Now this is part of that, which Christ our lord delivered, when he
commanded us, to take up the Cross, if we meant to be his disciples. I say it
is a part thereof: for the other, and chief part whereof this Cross
consistes, is the mortification, and death of our self conceyt, and will; and
of our passions and powers.

This is that old man, who must die, as Christ our lord died upon the Cross,
what is this old man? the body, which is passible and mortal; and that other
inward man, whereof I have spoken before, must be also dead in us.

But although this be the chief part of carrying the Cross, we must not put
away that other part, howsoever it be less principal then this. And though S.
Paul say, Timoth
Exercitatio corporis ad modicum vtilis est, yet the servant of Christ our
lord, will not leave to please him, even in the least things which can be
thought. And least we should fall into error, the same Apostle says elsewhere.
1. Cor. 9.
Castigo corpus meu^ and in seruitutem redigo I conceive not that he said this,
because he was tempted with the flesh, as some understand the difficulty
whereof he complaynes; but that he would punish and so cure himself, by way
of preservative, using this exercise of his body, least his mind might
otherwise grow sick. And elsewhere he says, when he recountes the afflictions
which he endured. 2. Cor. 4.
Semper mortificationem Jesus Christi in corpore nostro circumferentes, where
he calls that the mortification of Christ: which is the very Cross of
corporal afflictions. In another place he says also, Psalm. 5.
Qui Christi sunt, carnem suam crucifixerunt. And if he had meant this only,
of crucifing the affections, it had sufficed to say, Cum vitiis and
concupiscentiis, but by saying carnem, it proves, that he meant afflictions of
the body.

This he explicates very well, in his Epistle to the Corinthians where, amongst
other things, Cor. 6.
wherein men were to exercise themselves, he reckens up corporal afflictions,
namely fasting and watching, so that the whole man, must undergo the Cross,
since Christ our lord, died upon it. Our soul must dye, by the compassion and
memory of Christ crucified, and by the mortification of the old man, as has
been said: and the body also must dye, upon the Cross of corporal
afflictions, that so the whole man, may be conform to Christ our lord, as he
is in pain, and misery; since hereafter, he is to be conform to him, as he
is in glory.

I have said thus much, that you may take a scantling, of those forces, which
God has given you, and that so you may employ them, upon doing, and
suffering, all you can. And this, not only considering that it may be
addressed to some other good intention, but even though it be for noe other
reason, let it be done, to the end that you may be in conformity with Christ
our lord as he was afflicted; and not upon necessity, but for love. And though
neither the hairecloath, nor hard bed, nor such things as these, howsoever
they be used for the love of Christ our lord, should save us, (sola enim Crux
Christ's, est saluifica) yet at least let us use them in imitation of that
extreme poverty, and sharp affliction which Christ our lord endured, in being
crucified, which consideration, will not be lightly esteemed by us, if we be
not wholly void of the love, we owe him. Gloria enim magna est sequi dominum.
And thus much of this matter.

There were two other points, of which I thought to have written, but there is
noe time for them now. I will note them down, least I should forgett them:
upon condition that you write me word, what there is to be amended in this
letter.

A Letter of the Author to a Lord of great quality, who was sick, and very
fearful of death. He teaches him how he is to carry himself.
I Have received your lord-ships letter, I have read it, and I have understood
it; and I hope, our lord has mercy for you in store. For it is noe great
wonder, that his greatness should do favor to one who deserves it not; since
he has done it so often, to such as have deserved the express contrary. I am
not sorry a whitt, that your lord-ship is affrayed of death; for although this
fear be a thing paynefull, there is noe hurt for a man to apprehend it; and
many times it is sent by our lord; to the end, that, by the spur of fear, we
may be urged on to do that, which we will not do, for the spur of love.
And he as being a father of mercy, useful to guide those affairs, in such an
admirable manner; as that, both fear, and hope, may help us to ride that way,
which it is necessary, for him to prepare, and to make plain; and in fine thus
fear, serves for many good purposes, and it is hurtful for none.

I desire, that your lordshipp, would command that house to be built, where
your pages are to be lodged. As also, that you would defrey the cost of those
arms, and horse, wherewith those towns of yours are charged. I wish more
over, that you would not cause any sumptuous clothes, or furniture, or such
like things to be provided now. Besides if you remember any thing which you
may have won ill at play, which either is not restored, or else not lost
again to the same parties, I advise you to make restitution thereof. And,
forasmuch as the men, who are Lords of states, as your Lordship is, are not
able to reach to the knowledge of all the wrongs which may be done to others
by you, noe nor yet your servants (through their negligence) I could wish, you
would command it to be published, in all the Churches of your state, that
whosoever had received any wrong by you, should de clare the same, and that
satisfaction should be given him. And you shall do well, to appoint the Prior
of Saint Dominique, and the Pastor of your Church where you dwell, and some man
learned in the laws; who knows the affairs of your state, to hear, and see
what were fit to be done. Some particular causes your Lordship shall do well
to hear your self, (though it should be of some trouble to you) that so they
may not say elsewhere, that this course puts you to more pain, then it does. I
desire by all means, that all this may be done; for it seems to me to be a
fit remedy of all those wrongs, which may concern your neighbors; and now,
it is as easy to do it well as it vill be hard, if it be adiorned, till after
this life. Let it be noe impediment to this, that the world may chance not to
like it; since he, who respects the pleasure of God, will easily despise, that
of the world.

As for that person, with whom your lordship willed me to speak, I have not
done it yet: for, I have now kept my bed ten or twelve days together, But
yesterday, I rose, and I will take great care to do what you command very
shortly: and you shall know what I find.

Since you went from hence, our lord has been pleased to give me a much more
particular care to recommend you into the hands of his mercy. I did not then,
understand the cause, it is like to be this that there is more need thereof.
Be it what it will, your lordship is to animate your self with new courage, to
offer your self up to the will of our lord: like one who performs service to
his father who is some great man, whom he loves much: your lordship was not
borne for your self, but for God. For even before you were borne, you were
already purchased by Jesus Christ, who bought us, with himself (a price of
inestimable valewe) to the end that we, who live, might as S. Paul says, not
live to our-solues, but to him. Who is he, that will pretend to remain his
own, now that he sees himself to have been bought, by Almighty God, and by
the price of God himself?

There are men, who offer themselves to the loss of their lives in some war
for slight causes: and shall we be so destitute of courage: as not to give
our-selues to God? he gave himself for us, into the hands of those base
executioners: and shall not we adventure to putt our-selues into his? He did
it, that he might die: and we are to do it, that we may live.

I would not have your lordshipp to be nigardly herein, but make now this
account. There is a God; and for that misery, which he has endured for me;
and for those sins which he has forgiven me, and for those blessings which
he has vouchsafed me; I owe my self to him, three thousand times over. If
hitherto I have not given him, the entire dominion over my self, I am sorry for
it. From this instant I give my self free; and without any impediment, or
obligation otherwise; that he may treat me wholly, according to his will; and
that mine, may submitt it self, to his, as well in the doing of any thing
which he commaundes, by his holy law: as in the suffering of any affliction,
which he shall either continue, or add to me. Where can I be kept better, then
in the hands of God, into which I putt my self? since he suffers not his
creatures to be lost: and was content to loose his life, that I might be
enabled to do this. He would not ask it of me, if he did not like it: and he
would not take pleasure in itt, if he did not desire it. For it is not a
proceeding for God to use, to desire us to give him that, which he has noe
mind to receive, any more, then it is his custom, to command that we ask,
and yet he forbear to give. And since he has notified his dear will to us,
wherewith he desires our good, and consequently that we may be his: let us
not doubt to belciue, but that he, (who is so careful to demand, and he who
demands with the menace of hell, if it be not granted, and with promise of
the kingdom of heaven if it be) will not be slack in receiving that very
thing, which he demands.

Let it not seem to your Lordship, that the sins of your former life, ought
to divert you, from this amorous embracement of Almighty God: since he stands
crying out to a sinner, with his arms all open, and since he does so, before
the sinner calls on him. For thus he says. Fornicata es cum amatoribus
multis, Ierem 3.
tamen reuertere ad me, and ego suscipiam te. Thou have committed fornication
with many lovers: but yet return to me, and I will receive thee.

The shepherd will not easily be weary in seeking his lost sheep, nor the
falkoner in procuring to recover his hawk; and when he finds her, he takes
her: and returns home, with much joy.

I say this, because by what I conceive of your lordship, you are endewed with
a greater measure of the knowledge of your self, then of the knowledge of God:
and therefore, that you will be more subject to fear, then to hope, and love,
I wish you not to retract the ill opinion you have of your self: confess, and
believe, that you have cause: and do not seek to remove your fear, with
false hopes, and lies: to diminish your miseryes, by that means. This would
not indeed prove any diminution, but an addition of one mischief, upon the
back of another, and the latter, would be worse then the former; and an
impediment, in steed of a remedy: since God never graunts his pardon and mercy,
but to such a one, as understands his own misery.

But believe, that as we are more wicked, then we can arrive to know: so is
God more good, then we can possibly imagine. Another kind of heart has he,
then we conceive, and especially in pardoning: which men know very ill how to
do, because they know not well how to love. And from hence it grows, that
they are not able to reach, to that height of mercy, which God vouchsafes to
sinners. For as they know nothing by experience of themselves, but anger,
against such as offend them (and if they pardon, there yet remaynes a thousand
relics of the disgust, and withal a great cooling of their love) therefore
do they judge of God, as they would do of themselves; and if they say with
their mouths, that there is difference between God and man, and that they
forgive as well as they can, yet their hearts do not beat to the same time.
When your lordships sons shall be more grown, and shall have given you some
disgusts; you will have had some sent, and taste of this.

The father does not vnloue the son, although that son make him angry; but
he correctes him, and still carries the heart of a father toward him. And so
is our lord wont to proceed; and whenever the sinner has a mind to return
to him, he refuses not to receive him into his paternall heart.

Yea and even when he retournes not, he is desiring that he would return: and
all his sins are not able to quench this desire in him, fort his love is that
which still exceeds.

Now we gain this love, and this retreat, in to the heart of God, by him, who
is the Mediator between God, and men Jesus Christ our lord. Who being the
natural son, did gain the adoption of sons for us: and that God should
have the heart of a father toward us, his sons; whenever we would dispose
our selves to enjoy this benefitt, by means of penance, and the Sacraments.
This love, is as the root, from whence it proceeds, that Almighty God is
content to expect us, to call us, to receive us, to pardon us, and to save us.
For if we consider well, the heart, and love, wherewith this favor is done us;
it will enamour us, and oblige us more to him, then the favor it self, which
he affordes, what a thing is it, that God does so much love man, as through
the much love he bears him, and notwithstanding the great offenses which man
committes against him, he yet does not take this love from him; nor does it
ever make him say, I will love such a one noe more, though he come to me
again: I will not seek him out, nor will I send to entreat him; that he may
return to my house. He says noe such thing as this. But that perseuering
love, does still burn with a lively flame; and this so very clearly, that as
these great waters of his torments, could not so quench them, as to make him
forbear to dye for us: so neither can the much greater waters of our sins,
extinguish this enflamed charity of God toward us. But it remaynes ever
conqueror, both in his pains, and in our offenses: sussering there, and
forgiving here. He who shall wonder at this, will have reason. For it would
be a wonderful thing, if this kind of love were showed, even from an
inferior, to a superior; or at the most, from but an equal, to an equal.
Butt now, this love from God to man, is more then wonderful. And yet, on the
other side, he who shall not believe it, in respect that it is so strange a
thing, putts a great affront upon Almighty God, since he beleiues it not,
because it is so wonderful a work.

Whereas, on the other side it is as clear way whereby to know the works of
God; if they be so great, as to make such wonder, as know them. For if he be
wonderful, his works are also to be so. And if the rest of his works be
wonderful, these of his love, are wonderful in the highest degree: forasmuch
as they spring, out of his goodness: in the manifestation whereof, he takes more
delight, and glory, and uses it more, then in the manifestation of the other
attributes. As the Prophet David says, Psalm. 144.
Miserationes eius super omnia opera eius. His mercyes are over all his works.
How ill therefore are they advised, who refuse to believe that which God does,
because it is much; and who refuse to expecte, and hope, because that which he
promises is much: comparing, and parallelling the great acts of God, by the so
short measure of their own poor understanding.

The woeman of Samaria, cannot arrive to know, how Christ our lord can come by
any water: and much less, John. 4.
how he can bestow any such water, as that whosoever drank thereof should
thirst noe more. But our lord says, that the wo^man knows not the gift of
God, nor who it is that aduises her to faith, and penance: and who is ready to
infuse the holy Ghost, into her heart. And so, there are still, men so
cowardly, and weak in faith, that they cannot believe any thing of God, but
only in conformity with their own poorenes. Placeing their eyes upon their
little strength, and their little desert: and so like beasts of earth they
creep upon the earth, and rise noe higher.

But he that looks upon God, who gives us his son, who is his love, and who
sweetness God to wards us; and in whom he is so highly content, and in whom
his divine eyes take delight, how can he doubt, of that heart, but that it will
be favorable to us, when we call upon it, with penance; and pitiful in all
those necessities, which may occur to us. He therefore who knows this, and
desires it as he ought, may well hope, that he shall have it. And with having
that, he has all good; and will have nothing to fear, as that slave must do
who wantes love.

Make therefore haste, to love this Lord, who loves you so much; and has
conserved you so well. And if ever you had a desire to reform your self, and
to follow our Lord yet closer, besure that you renew it, and increase it now.
For our Lord commanded twice, that his people should be circumcised. Genesis 17.
Once when he enjoined Abraham, to do it; and the second time, ^osue 5
when he brought Iosue into the land of promise. The first, signifies the first
coming of a man, from a worldly, and wicked life, to follow the way of the will
of God, which is the straight way; especially in the eyes of the world. The
second is, when God will carry a soul to his kingdom, and then he commands
it, to behold it self with new fervor; and to amend it self, and to cut of
all superfluity; to the end, that, with purity, and joy, it may expecte that
crown of a kingdom, which the goodness of God has prepared for his servants.
Your Lordship must use to confess and communicate often; for it is a thing,
which gives most strength, and comfort, to hear the sentence of our
absolution, and to receive our Lord Jesus Christ into our bosoms. You must
pray, and read, and give alms, and do whatsoever other good work, our Lord
shall inspire you to. And let me know how the world goes with you. And if
your Lordship recover your health, we will yet remain with having put our
soul well in order; and with having gotten strength against fear. The Holy
Ghost, that great comforter, which through Jesus Christ our Lord, was given to
such as are well disposed, to receive it, dwell ever in your Lordship, and
teach you how you may best please him, and guide you, by the right way. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a lady who was sick.
He comforts her in her afflictions, and animates her to bear them for the
love of Christ our lord, who was so afflicted for her.

MAdam I have understood, that you are sick, and I am not sorry for it. For if
it come to you through any excess of penance, the punishment is well
employed, and if you be sick upon noe other reason but only because our lord
se^des it to you, let us bid it welcome in a good hour, as being a part of his
Cross. And though in some respect, your pain puttes me to pain, as our lord
knows, yet on the other side, I am glad of it, because I cleary discern the
profits which will be made upon this occasion, by one whom I so much desire
to see improued. They are not comforts which I wish to my children, but they
are corrections; the time of comfort comes afterward. For the present, take not
your eyes from of the Cross, nor your heart from him who placed you on it.
Give not over till you find that sufferance is of a sweet taste, for that is
the true touch of love. Take noe compassion upon your self, for there are both
in heaven and earth, who have compassion on you, from their very hearts, and
that which is laid on you was very well considered of before; and it passed
through the hands of one; who loves you with most perfect love.

Let not your faith grow weak in these necessities, and dangers, nor your love
by the feeling of these afflictions: when the fire is great, the wind does not
only not quench it, but inflame it. And so when a soul loves God but in
jest, any little blast of air puts it out, as it would do a candle. But true
love grows up in affliction, for it applies more strength wherewith to endure,
the more weight, it sees coming toward it. And because that love is of God,
it conquers affliction: and noe water could serve to quench that fire, which
comes down from heaven.

Our lord called you, that you might love him, and this love is noe such thing
as must give you reason to regale your self. But you must abhor your self
for the love of Christ our lord, and deny your self, to confess him: and be
cruel to your self, that you may be sweet and acceptable to his divine
Majesty. If you love and desire to enjoy your self, you must resolve to loose
your self. If you desire to see the face of God, you must pass toward him
through the pikes. If you care to lodge him in your heart, cast your self away,
with all other creatures upon him. Our lord will have you all alone, and all
afflicted, not for any ill will he bears you, but because since his own
natural son, was so afflicted, he likes not to see his adopted sons
apparrelled with any other livery then that. There is nothing so beautiful in
his sight, as to see the image of his only begotten son in us. And as there
is nothing, upon which a soul can so gladly look, as upon our lord Jesus
being tormented for love of us upon the Cross, and the more afflicted and
deformed we see him there, the more beautiful he seems to us, so the more
we suffer for God, the more beautiful we shall seem to him.

Nor is it much, that a soul which desires to seem handsome in the sight of
God, should adorn it self with such curious cleansing waters, as may enamour
his divine Majesty by his seeing her, since the women of the world do many
things which put them to no small trouble, and charge, so that they may
content the sons of men. Madam we must cast our skins, before we shall be
pleasing to Almighty God. Gould is purified by fire, and the terrestrial part
being consumed, it comes resplendent from the Crucible.

Let us be ashamed of being so weak, in a business which is so great, as to
import the pleasing of Almighty God: and if we understood this point well
indeed, we should get heart even to shed our blood for him, that so we might
appear fairer in his sight. As a certain holy Eremite, considering this very
thing, and seeing a woman of the world go so gallant, and so well adorned,
he began to weep and say, Pardon me, O lord, pardon me I beseech thee: for the
curious dressing, which this woman, bestows upon her self in this one day, to
please the eyes of the world, ouerstrips all the pains which I have taken many
years for the pleasing of thine.

So that, my good lady, this entreprise of love is noe matter of words, but
of sorrow, of bitter torments, of the dishonor of the world, of being
abandoned by the creatures thereof, and sometimes even of the seeming absence
from the protection of the Creator. And notwithstanding all this a man must
carry a good countenance, and not be subject to complaints, or deiection of
heart: but he must resemble that Martyr, whose bowels they drew out of his
body, and whose flesh they tore from his bones, with iron combs: and yet there
sounded noe word out of his mouth but the name of Jesus, nor was there any
thing in his heart, but Blessed be God, together with a purpose to endure yet
more, if God should dispose himself to send it.

To suffer for Christ our lord, is great glory, and God impartes not that, but
to such a one, as whom he loves much. A great mercy it is to give a guilty
person fillips, and to release those scourges, which were his dew, and if that
wherein we stand obliged to the justice of God, may be satisfied by what we can
suffer here, in the name of God let us fall to work, and let us pay
whatsoever his divine Majesty will impose, so that being gone from hence, we
may instantly by behold the face of God. Let us labor in this banishment of
ours; for instantly upon the end thereof, we shall be landed in our own
country. S. Augustine says that he wrongs a Martyr who prays for him when he
is dead for Martyrdom makes a soul fly straight up to heaven. Let us
therefore labor to be Martyrs by our patience in affliction, for though our
persecution be not so greiuous as theirs was for the time, yet it lastes
longer. And we should indeed desire, that this life might not be too
recreatiue, but a mere Martyrdom. For such was the life of our Lord, and such
does he desire that ours should be.

There have been many martyrs for the faith of Christ our Lord, but in fine
many are gone to heaven, who were not so. But we all must be the Martyrs of
love, if we mean to go thither. This love must torment us, and put us to
pain, both because our selves offend God, as also because others do it. This
love must deprive us of the comforts of this life, and must load our shoulders
with a Cross. This love must make us first embrace affliction, and then pass
over it, in the flame which was kindled by our love of God. This makes us
endure dishonours without feeling them as wine does a drunkard. This love is in
this, like all other love, that whosoever possesses it seeks not himself but
his beloved, who in our case, is God alone and his holy will. But this love
which now is so cruel, how full of compassion will it be afterward, to him
who has bowed down the head to receive. Martyrdom at the hand thereof?

A man cannot easily feel the force of love, wherewith it torments here, nor
that wherewith it comforts afterward. Let us believe it, since God has said,
it; and let us walk on in the faith, which we have in his words; for we have
yet a long way to make. Choose which you had rather have, either long
afflictions, or else very great ones, for noe man can escape suffering much,
either in one fashion or another. Be not sorry for this, for if God give you
much affliction, it is because your many sins deserve it; and so you are to
make your payment here, and I beseech our Lord that you may do so. For if I
should dye, before you want to Purgatory, perhaps you might want a friend who
would carry so much compassion to your soul as my felf; and would take so
much care to free it, and if you dye first, I shall have pain enough, in
thinking of you.

Excuse me, for it is not fit, that either you or I, should have an eye to
our own ease; but that although we should know, that after this life we must
suffer pain, yet here we must also take courage to suffer afflictions for
love, and love is content with nothing, but love. Christ our lord suffered for
our love. Christ our lord carried the Cross, and let us help him to carry it
on. Christ our lord is dishonored, and I renounce honor. Christ our lord
suffered torments, and therefore they shall be welcome to me. He was subject to
many necessityes, and I submit my self to the same. For me he made himself
a stranger, and I desire not to be the owner of any single thing, wherein my
heart may rest. He dyed for me, and let my life be a continual death, for the
love of him. Gal. 2.
Let me live yet now not me, but let Christ our lord live in me, and that
Christ, who was crucified, exhausted, abandoned by all the world, and received
alone by Almighty God.

This Christ I love; upon the Cross will I seek him, and from thence have I
noe desire to find him. Let him dispose of me, how he will, for my part I will
suffer affliction for him. Let him choose whether he will give me any reward or not; for the very suffering it self, is an abundant reward. And if he would
grant me a great suite, I would desire noe other, then to have afflictions:
for thereby I may know that I love him, and that he also loves me, since he
lays me upon the Cross, where himself lay. For though I have noe aim at
mine own profitt, yet I know full well that if I continue upon the Cross, he
will carry me to his Crown. To him be glory, through the eternity of all
eternityes. Amen.

A Letter of the Author, to one, who formerly had been a disciple of his, and
then being of the Society of Jesus, was grown to be, at the point of death.
He congratulates his departure hence, and his goeing to enjoy the fruits of
his labor in his Order; and he gives him great hope, of the eternal kingdom,
by means of the blood of Christ our Lord.

THE grace of the holy Ghost, be ever with you. Though here they say that you
are upon the point of passing into the land, of the living, so as a man may
think, that whilst I am writing this, you may already be enjoying, the dear
imbracements of our allswcete Jesus; yet I thought it not amiss, to venture
this letter toward you; congratulating with you, your promotion to that
Prebe^d, in the Church of the celestial Jerusalem; where, without all ceasing,
God is praised, and seen, face to face. Go in a good hour, most dear
father, go I say, in a good hour, both to see all Good, and to possess it,
for all eternity. Go in a good hour, to the bosom of the celestial father,
where he entertaines those lambs of his, with glory; which here he fed with
his grace, and corrected with his discipline.

Now my good Father, shall you see the favor, which God did you, in calling
you to a Religious life, and in giving you grace, in the strength whereof, you
dispising the world, might follow him, by the way of the Cross. For now in
recompense thereof, he will give you heaven for your Religious Order, and glory
for that Cross, which you have borne for his sake. Blessed be our lord Jesus
Christ, who has goodness enough, to induce him to give such glory, to such
worms of the earth; raising up the poor man out of the dust, that he may sit
amongst the Princes of his people. Happy is the hour of our corporal death,
since thereby we are exalted, and entitled to take our seat, amongst those
princes, who live eternally, in the high presence of God. O day, which is the
end of labors, and the end also, of sins, and in which, we ascend to serve
our Lord, in good earnest, and not as we are wont to do here below, where
we are all discomforted, through the imperfections of those services, which we
perform to God. For here a man goes halting, and faynting with hunger,
through his desire to please that divine Majesty, and to serve him with all the
soul. But in heaven, this desire is perfected, and that, in so co^pleat a
manner, that all the whole man, is employed in the service, and praise of God,
without being subject to the least impediment, which may interpose it self

Blessed be God, who has, so soon been pleased to gather you up, into his
granary, least malice might else have changed your mind, and to show you the
riches of his bounty, Sap. 4.
who for so few years of service, imparts an eternity of reward.

Sir, this is God, this I say is God, this is the fruit of his passion, this is
the value of his grace; this is our happy encounter, to have fallen into the
hands of such a Lord, to know him, and to love him, though it be with many
imperfections. But he washes them away by his blood, making us partakers of his
Sacraments. And the paternall love, which he bears us, both makes him easily
incline to pardon our faults, and to be very copious in rewarding our services.
And he co^ducts us through the midst of the red sea, Psalm. 102.
to the land of promise dividing us, from our sins as far of, as the East,
is from the West, and drowning them in his blood. So that although we may see
them still, yet we shall see them dead, and they will serve but to give us
matter, and reason, to praise our Lord, Exodus 14.
who has cast both the horse and horseman, into the sea.

Go Sir, with the benediction of our lord God, to enjoy the riches of your
deer Father, which he gained for you, with the lance in his hand, and by
shedding his own blood, who never fay les to succor all such as place their
hope, and love in him. It is true that we shall miss you, and that we shall
think our selves to be all alone when we are here without you, but since God
has desined you to this great happynes, let us, who love you, hold it for our
own. And we who in our own right, shall lament, will yet rejoice with you in
yours, like the brothers of Rehecca, who is goeing to be espoused, with Isaak,
which signifies i^. And therefore, we say to you, you are our brother, and we
desire that you may increase to thousands of thousands, Genesis 24.
and that your seed may possess the gates of your enemies.

I do not pretend to tell you, how you must prepare your self, for this Feast,
for there you have them, who can do it, and who will help you to pass on,
out of the hands of men, into the hands of God. And let our lord who came into
the world for you, and who ascended up to the Cross for you, Ps. 22.
be he who succors you in such sort, that though you walk in the midst of
the shadow, of death, you may yet fear noe ill. See you call upon him, for
though you should be in the whales belly, yet he harkenes to his servants,
even when they are there. Call upon his Blessed Mother, Jonas 3.
who is also ours. Call upon the Saints, who are our Fathers, and our brethren;
for with such helps as those, you cannot fear to loose the celestial
kingdom.

And if our lord, will have you pass through Purga^ory, let his name be
blessed still; for so that you may have hope to see him, you shall gladly
endure any thing, which may be imposed. I beseech Christ our Lord who dyed for
you, to accompany you at your death, and receive you into his own arms, when
you depart out of this life. Say you to him, as he said to his Father, In
manus ^uas Pater, commendo spiritum meum. Luc. 23.
And I confide in his mercy, that you shall be received by him, as a son; and
treated as the heir of God, and coheyre with Christ our Lord.

A Letter of the Author to a Religious woeman, who was near her death.
He encourages her, and shows how she is to carry her self, at that time.

Devout servant of Christ our Lord; you sent me word, that you were in the
last days of your life; and that this, was the time, wherein you desired me
to remember you. So I do. And though the news you give me, is not pleasing
to flesh and blood; yet when I look upon you, with christian eyes, it is to
recreate my soul. And so is it also to recreate yours, as our Lord says in
the Gospel; when those things begin to show themselves, Luc. 21.
look about you, and lift up your heads, for your redemption is near at
hand. For though Christ have freed you by his goodness, and the merit of his
blood, from mortal sins; yet still you are in danger of committing even
then, and you actually committ venial sins; and you are still in the
captivity of your body, which is so subject to misery, as that it makes, even
a S. Paul and others, who are like him, sigh and groan; and say, as him self
relates it, Romans 8.
that they lived in expectation of the redemption of t^eir body.

But there, you shall neither sin mortally, not venially. For by means of
the blood of that lamb, which was shed for us, hell, where they ever sin,
shall have nothing to do with you; but only Purgatory; where though they
suffer, yet they sin not. And from thence, you shall go forth to see your
Spou^e, to enjoy that bliss, which he won for you, with the nails in his
hands, and with his feet fastened to the Cross. And forasmuch as, it is a
stranger thing, to see God nailed upon a Cross, then to see you placed in
heaven; I confide in his goodness, that, since he had mercy enough, to make him
do the more, he will not want it for that which is the less.

Thither will he carry you, thither, I say, will he carry you, to remain with
himself. For the espousalls, which here were celebrated between you, when you
sole^nely made Profession, that you would live and dye in the state of
Religion, was one day to be concluded, by that being, together both of him the
spouse, and of her, his fellow spouse in heaven. There shall you see your self,
in so great liberty, and abundance, that you will esteem your enclosure, and
afflictions, here, for well employed. And there will they give you, a body,
which though in substance it shall be the very same, which here you have; yet
shall it be very different, in health, and life, and other things. And you will
incomparably more rejoice in it there, then you have suffered in it, here. All
entire, all entire, in body, and soul, are you to be blessed there; and so
beautified, as is fit for the honor of him, who took you for his spouse
Jesus Christ the lord, both of this, and the other world. Be not therefore
dismayed, when you are to dye, by thinking of what your own sins deserve.
Christ our lord, can do all things, and he loves you, and will not forsake
you. And since he has preserved you; in this time of your navigations, amongst
all the tempests of this life; be sure, that he will not suffer you to perish;
now that you are goeing to disinbarke.

Putt your self wholly into his hand, offering your self entirely, to him, both
in life, and death, and to whatsoever he will. And beg pardon of him, by his
blood, for all that, wherein you have offended him: and being confessed, and
communicated, cast your self headlong at his feet, and desire of him, one drop
of his blood, whereby you may be washed, and have great confidence, that you
shall be so.

Be as reserved, to yourselfe, and as free from all conversation, as the state
of your sickness will permit. For our Lord, before he was to die, left his
disciples, that he might pray in solitude, to his father, giving us so to
understand, that in this trance, we must rese^ble him. And let your discourse
be with Christ our lord, and with his Bl Mother. And to the end that your
infirmity divert you not, from them; it will be well, that you behold an image
of the Crucifix; and of his Mother standing by him. Give thanks to our lord,
with your whole heart, for the favor he has done you, whether they be
general, or particular; and cast your self into the wounds of Christ oul Lord,
which is that Sanctuary, out of which, his Justice, must not draw such
malefactors, as are repentant. And repose you there, and conceive strong hope,
that by means of his blood, and death, you shall go, and enjoy, that life in
heaven, which never is to have an end. Our Lord JESUS be ever with you. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a woeman, who did greatly feel the absence and
disfavor of our Lord.
He animates her to confide in our Lord; and he assigned diverse causes, why
God afflictes his servants; and of the fruit, which his Divine Majesty reapes
from thence.

Do not conceive that to be anger in our Lord, which indeed proceeds from
true love. For as he, who bears ill will to another, does flatter sometimes,
and fawn upon him; so true love sometimes corrects and chides. And the holy
scripture says, That the wounds, which are given by him, who loves, are
better, then the false kisses of him, who hates. And therefore we do him an
extreme wrong, who reproues or punishes us out of the bowels of his love, if
we think or say, that he persecutes us, as if he loves us not. Do not
forgett, that the Mediator between God the Father and us, is Jesus Christ our
lord, by whom we are beloved, and tied with so strong a bond of love, that
nothing is able to undo it, if man himself do not cut the knott, by the guilt
of mortal sin.

Have you so soon forgotten, that the blood of Jesus Christ cries out in the
demand of mercy for us? and that his cry is so loud, as that it drownes
the cry of our sins, so that it cannot be heard? Do you not know, that if
our sins should still remain alive, notwithstanding that Christ Jesus dyed
to defeat them, his death should be of little worth, since it could not work
that effect? Let no man set a light price upon that, which was so highly
valued by Almighty God; that he holds it for a sufficient, yea a
superaboundant discharge, forasmuch as concerns his part therein, of all the
sins of the whole world, and of a thousand worlds, if there were so many.

They, who are lost, are not lost for want of payment, but for want of serving
themselves thereof, by means of Faith and Penance, and the Sacraments of the
holy Church. Settle once this truth in your heart, and do it soundly, that
Christ our lord took the business of our redemption to his own charge as
verily, as if it had been his own; and he calls our sins, his: by the
mouth of David, saying: Long a salute mea, verba delictorum eorum; And he
demanded pardon for them, though himself committed none; and he desired with
a most profound internal love, that his servants might be beloved, as if he
had desired it for himself: and as he desired it, John. 17.
he obtained it. For, according to the ordinance of God, he and we are so much
one thing, that either he and we must be beloved, or he and we must be
abhorred. And since he neither is, nor can ever be abhorred, neither can we
also be so, if we be incorporated into him, by Faith and Love. But indeed,
because he is beloved, we are also beloved, and that justly: because he weighes
more, toward the making of us to be beloved, then we do, to make him be
abhorred. And the Father loves his Son, more, then he abhorres such sinners,
as are converted to him. And as one, who was much beloved by his Father, he
said to him to this effect: Either love them, or love not me; for I offer
myself in pardon of their sins, to the end, that they may be incorporated
into myself. The greater love overcame the lesser hate, and we are beloved,
pardoned, and justified: and we have great hope not to be forsaken there, where
there is so strong a knott of love.

If through our weakness we be afflicted with excessive fears, (as now you
are, conceiving that God has forgotten you) our lord has provided you a
comfort, saying thus by the Prophet: Isai. 49.
Shall the mother perhaps be able to forgett to take pity upon the child of
her womb? well, if she do, yet will not I forgett thee; for I carry thee
written in my hands. O writing, which art so firm, whose pen be hard nails,
whose ink is the blood it self of him, who writes, and the paper is his own
very flesh: and his word says thus: I have loved thee with an eternal love,
^eve. 31.
and therefore I have drawn thee toward me with mercy.

Such a writing therefore as this, must not be little esteemed, especially when
one finds in himself, that his soul is drawn by the sweetness of good
purposes, which are signs of that eternal love, where with our Lord has
chosen and loved him. Be not therefore scandalized, or afflicted for any of
these things, which happen to you: since they all are dispensed by those very
hands, which were nailed to the Cross for you, in testimony of the love he
bate you. And if you desire to understand, what you get hereby, in the
inte^tion of God who sendes them, you must know, that they are trials, whereby
you may be examined: that afterward (as one, who has been faithful in the
conflict) you may be crowned by the hand of our lord, with a Crown of Justice.

And to the end, you may not think, that the particulars, which you endure,
are signs of reprobation: and that they are sent by our Lord to none but
wicked men, hear what David says in his own person, and of many others, who
walked in the way of God: I said in the excess of my soul, Psalm. 30.
that I am cast of before the countenance of thine eyes. And though this dismay
of heart, and the disfavor, which we find in the midst thereof, be a thing,
which does much afflicte, and that the soul can take no aim of how it stands
in the sight of God, nor how it shall stand, nor what end that Cross shall
have: yet nevertheless there are few things in the world, which are so
forcible to purge sins, or which teach a man so many t^ut^es, as does this
dark obscurity, and inward affliction, which makes the soul sweat drops
of blood.

Our lord sendes this to his servants, that they may not depart this life,
without feeling, what crosses and tribulations are, And therefore he wounds
them in the spirit, wherein they live: For, if he should but wound them in
temporal things, to which they are dead, they would have no sense at all
thereof. You must therefore be sure to give a good account of that dangerous
passage, wherein God has been pleased to bestow you: and you must adore his
judgments. And being comforted through confidence in his goodness, bow down
that head of yours, without any more sifting into the matter, and open the
mouth of your heart, to swallow down this pill of darkness, and desolation,
and disfavor of God, through the obedience, which you owe to the same God. And
know for certain, that unless you have a mind to break your word, and
unsay your self in this trial, which God sendes to you, you must resolve to
make yourself strong, as the Angel did Iosue: Io^u^ 1.
and you, must live, dying every day, 1. Co^ 15.
as S. Paul did.

You must be baked in the fire of tribulation, that so you may grow hard, like
any brick: and fit to resist the raynes, and winds of temptation, and
troubles, and that you be not soft, like the dawbing of a wall, which is
instantly dissolved by water, and no way fit for a strong building. For the
people, who are to be placed in that house of heaven, must be beaten, and
hammerd here on carth by the knockes of many tribulations and temptations, as
it is written: Our l^^d^ry^d them, and found them worthy of him self. Sap. 3.
Learn you therefore to sustain your self with strong food; and strive to
convert these stones of tribulation into bread, if you desire to have the
testimony of being the child of God. And if he give you an appetite to eat
the white, and new bread of consolation, remitt it back again to the will of
our lord: and be content with being sure, that you shall have so much of that
in the next world, as that the sweetness thereof, will far and far exceed
the recompense, which might be due for any bitterness sustained in this. And
in steed of those hard bones, which here they gave you to be gnawed upon, by
your soul: you shall there be employed in feeding upon that most sauorie bread
of life, which is God himself: and thereof there will never be an end. And
therefore hope for this, and comfort yourself with this: for the business,
whereof we are now in question, is not fit for them, who are either of a
delicate life, or a weak faith.

You will see yourself many times in such a kind of state by these
afflictions, as that if you consider them with the sense of flesh and blood,
you will think them to be the very marks of hell, and even a beginning
thereof; but yet you must suffer it with patience, though it be without comfort
yea and though you do not so much as feel your own confidence; that so you
may know, what it is, to suffer in good carnest. For as long as a man's
confidence is very strong, there is nothing, which can afflicte him very much,
but when God hides his face, and shows the soul no favor, but disfavor; and
when it is persecuted by enemies, and yet feels not the help of her good
friend, then indeed is it pure suffering, and has a taste even of the very
torments of hell. You will not then discern any hope, which you may have to
escape, but you must content yourself with this, that you despair not; and let
that discomfort be accepted by you, in penance for your sins, wherein once
you took delight, and let it at length serve to make you clearly see, how
little that is, which you are able to do of yourself. It is but reason, that
he, who sins by loving and liking himself, should pay for it, by being
inwardly and profoundly disgusted with himself; and that he, who had confidence
in himself, may see, to his cost, that he is good for nothing.

Through this fire must you pass, if you desire to enjoy the rest of heaven.
In this war must you overcome, if you will deserve the Crown of that
kingdom. Consider, how the holy Scripture says: Blessed is the man, Jacob. 1.
who suffers temptation, for when he shall have been tried, he is to receive
the Crown of life, which God promised to them, who love him. If the Crown
content you, let not the trial displease you; and there can be no trial
without temptation; and no temptation of troubles can be coming toward you,
which passes not from the hand of God, who is your father; and who measures out
so much thereof, as may be fit, and neither to fall short in respect of your
profitt, nor to ouerflowe in respect of your weakness.

Fear not to drink with patience, of that, which God drank with love. And
God himself says to us; My son, do not cast thyself into anguish, Prou. 3.
when thou art corrected by Almighty God. For he corrects him, whom he
loves, as the father does the son, in whom he delights. And elsewhere he
says: Heb. 12 Eccl. 38
Do not despise thyselfe in thy weakness, but pray to God, and he will cure
thee. And now, since we are commanded, on the part of God, that whatsoever
happen, we must not be dismayed, let us make our recourse to him, upon the
confidence, which we have in his word; and let us beg his favor, which he
cannot fail to afforde.

O sister, and if we could but see, how dear and precious we are in the eyes
of God! Oh that we could but see, how deeply he holds us lodged in his heart,
and how near we are to him, when we may perhaps conceive our selves to be cast
furthest of! Blessed be our lord Jesus Christ, for he it is, whom with a full
mouth we proclaim to be our hope. Nothing can so fright me, as he can secure
me. Let me be changed from devout to slack, and tepide: from goeing toward
the comforts of heaven, to go toward the darkness of the black pit of
hell. Let me be environed by my sins, which are past, and by fears, which
may be to come: let the devils accuse me, and lay snares for me: let men
persecute and fright me, let them threaten me with hell and, lay ten thousand
dangers before me, and yet after all this, by sighing, and sobbing for my
sins, and by casting mine eyes up to Christ our lord, desiring help at his
hands, (that lord, who is so meek, so benign, so full of mercy, and that
most firm and faithful lover of mine, even to death) and I cannot be
persuaded, to disconfide; especially when I consider, that I was valued at so
high a rate, that God himself was given for me.

O Christ, thou haven of security for all them, who being bruised and battered
by the tempestuous waves of their own hearts, and fly to thee for succor! O
thou fountain of living waters, to those stags, who are embossed, and pincht
by those spiritual dogs, which are the devils, and their own sins. Thou
art that profound internal rest, the hope, which never failed, Psalm. 103.
the protection of orphans, and the defense of widows. Thou art that firm
house of stone, which give receipt to those porcupines, which are so full of
roughness, and sharpness, through their sins, if with groans, and desire
of pardon, they fly toward thee. Thou defendest us from the wrath of God, to
which we are subject. And although sometimes thou commaundest thy Disciples to
enter into the sea without thee, that so they may be weaned by little and little
from thy sweet conversation; and though, when thou art absent, such tempests
of the sea may rise, Mani. 6.
as to putt the soul into hazard of being lost, yet still thou forgettest them
not. Thou biddest them depart from thee, and yet even very then, thou go to
pray for them. They think, thou have laid them aside, and that thou sleep;
and then art thou upon thy knees for them. And when three parts of the night
were already past, and when it seemed to thy infinite wisdom, that then thou
had kept them long enough in pain, through thy absence, and that then they
had continued in that tempest long enough, thou descendest from the mountains;
and as the true Lord of those unconstant waves, thou walkedst upon them, (for
all is firm under thy feet) and thou drewest near thy servants, when they
thought thee farthest of from them; and thou vtteredst these words of
confidence to them: Matthew. 14.
It is I; be not afraid.

O Christ our lord, thou diligent and careful pastor of thy sheep, and how
much is that soul in error, who will not confide in thee, and through thee,
from the most profound internal part of the heart; if withal he can be
content to amend his life, and to serve thee? O that thou would but let men
know, how much reason, they have, who come to give themselves to thy service,
not to be dismayed, under the conduct of such a Captain; and that there is noe
accident, which ought to putt any servant of thine, into so great affliction
and fear, as the news of what thou art ought to give them comfort. If thou, O
lord, were well known, there is no soul, which would not love thee and
confide in thee, unless it were strangely wicked.

For this it is, that thou say: It is I, therefore do not fear. I am he,
who kill, and give life: I cast men down, as low as hell, and I draw them back
again; that is, I afflict a man till he thinks, he dies and then again I
refresh, I recreate, and I give him life. I cast men into certain discomforts,
which seem hell to them: but when they are there, I forgett them not, but I
fetch them from thence, and they are but therefore mortified, that they may be
quickened. I send them not thither, to remain there, but that their entry
into that shadow of hell, may be a means to make them escape the substance of
that true hell after death, and that they may fly up to heaven. I am he, who
can deliver you from all affliction, for I am of infinite power. And I am he,
who will deliver you, for I am of infinite goodness; and I am he, who know how
to do it, for I am of infinite wisdom. I am your Advocate for I embraced your
cause as mine own. I am your surety, for I have made myself subject to all
your debts. I am your Lord, who have purchased you with mine own blood; and
with no meaning to forgett you, but to do you honor, if you will serve me,
because you were bought at so high a price. I am he, who have so profoundly
loved you, that for the love of you, I have been contented to be transformed
into you, and to become passible and mortal. I, who in mine own nature, was
very far from being subject to such misery. I am he, who delivered myself
over to innumerable torments of body, and far greater torments of mind,
that you might take heart to endure some for love of me, and to confide, that
you shall in fine, be freed from them, since I am he, who undertake it. I am
your Father, as I am God, and your elder-brother, as I am man. I am your
Christ, and your redemption, and what fear can you then have of your debts, if
by penance, and Confession, you demand a general release of them? I am your
reconciliation, and of whose wrath can you then be afraid? I am that
true-loues-knott of friendshipp, and how then can you think, that you are
fallen out with God? I am your defender: and what opposites can you apprehende?
I am your friend, and how then do you fear, that you can want any thing,
which I have, unless you will needs depart from me?

My body, and my blood is yours: and why then do you fear hunger? nay, my
very heart is yours, and why then do you fear to be forgotten? yea and my
divinity is yours, and what doubt can you then have of misery? For
accessories unto that Principal, my Angels are yours to defend you. My
Saints are yours, to pray for you. My biessed mother is yours, to be the
careful and indulgent mother of you all. The earth is yours, that you may
serve me upon it. The heaven is yours, for you shall enjoy it, and me in it.
The devils, and hell is also yours, for you shall tread it and them under
foot, like slaves, who are chayned up in that prison. This life is yours,
because with it you get another, which shall never end. Your honest
entertainements and delights are yours. For you direct them to my glory. Your
pains are yours, for you endure them for my love, and for your own true good.
Your temptations are yours, because they are occasion of your meritt, and of an
everlasting Crown in heaven. Your death is yours, because it is to be the
immediate step to your eternal life.

And all these things you possess in me; and by my means; For neither did I
gain them for myself alone, neither will I enjoy them alone; for when I putt
myself into your company by taking your flesh upon me, I did it, to make you
partakers of all the meritt, which I should acquire by my labors, my fasting,
eating, sweating, weeping, and by the enduring of all my torments and death, if
the fault be not your own.

Now, you cannot account yourself poor, who possess so great riches, if you
do not wittingly throw them away, by your wicked life. Be not dismayed; for I
will not forsake you. It is true, that you are no better, then some thin
glasses; but I will hold you fast in my hand. Your weakness setts of, my
strength the more. From your sins and miseries, I draw the manifestation of
my goodness, and mercy. There is nothing, which shall be able to hurt you, if
you will love me, and confide in me. Think not of me according to your own
opinion, and the judgments, which are made by flesh and blood; but think of me
by a strong faith with love; nor by the appearance of exterior signs, but by
that heart of mine, which was opened for you upon the Cross, that you might
dismiss all doubt, whether you are beloved by me or no, forasmuch as concerns
my part; since you see such works of love without, and a heart, which was so
wounded by that lance within; John. 18.
and yet more wounded by my love.

How shall I deny myself to them, who seek me, to do me honor; since I went
out to that way, where those others sought me to offend me. I offered myself
to ropes and chains, which afflicted me; and shall I refuse myself to the heart
and arms of Christians, where I desire to repose? I yielded myself to those
scourges, and to that hard pillar; and shall I deny myself to that soul,
which will be subject to me? I turned not away my face from him, who struck
me; and shall I turn it away from him, who will hold himself happy, that he
may behold and adore me. What little confidence is this, that seeing me to be
voluntarily torn in pieces by the hand of dogs, for the love of my children,
yet those children should be doubtful, whether I love them, or no, though they
be confessed to love me?

Consider, o ye sons of men, and tell me, whom I ever despised, if he
desired to be well with me? whom have I abandoned, if he called on me? from
whom have I fled, if he sought me? Matt. 9.
I conuersed, and I fed with sinners: yea I called, and I justified them, who
were forlorn, Matt. 11.
and even foul in sin. Nay, I am importunate to win their hearts, who love
me not. I make myself a beggar to all the world, and what cause is there then
to suspect me of forgettfullnesse toward my children, when there is so great
diligence used both, to love me, and to make expression of that love? And
though I may co^ceale it sometimes, yet do I not leave to love; but even for
the very love, I bear to my creatures, I cover it; for whom nothing is so
good, as not to know any thing, which concerns themselves, but to remitt
themselves wholly to me. In that ignorance, does their knowledge consist; in
that suspense, their strength, and in that subjection, their dominion. And it
ought to suffice a soul, that it lies in no other hands but mine, which are
also hers, since for her they were nailed upon the Cross. Yea, they are more
hers, then mine, since they labored more for the purchase of her good, then of
mine own. And to the end, that I may draw her out of all self conceit, and
make her follow my direction; it is I, who conduct her into this darkness,
that so she may know nothing of herself. But yet still if she putt her
confidence in me, and depart not from my service, I will deliver her, and I
will glorifye her; and all this will I perform to her. Be faithful to death,
Psalm. 90.
and I will give thee the Crown of life.

This says our Lord to all faithful souls, and this he says to yours, which
I pray God to keep. Amen.

A Letter to a Lady, who was a Religious woman, and in great affliction.
He shows; how troubles are the proof of Faith and Love in the servants of
God; and how confident they ought to be of his Divine Maiesly in the midst of
their troubles.

AS soon as I received your letter, I offered thanks to our lord, for having
given you a sign, that your vocation came from his hand; and this sign is,
that you have suffered tribulation. You must not be a little glad of this,
since our Lord loves you. Nor yet must you be slack, since you are in the midst
of many dangers; butt carry your eye toward him, who has called you with
so great love. You must also have a strong heart. For he called you not with
intention to give you over in the midst of your journey; but to guide you under
the protection of his own wings, till he may have conducted you to heaven,
where you shall see his face. Let not the Faith of Christ our Lord, nor the
love you owe him sleep in you; for he never sleeps, when there is question of
doing you any good.

These are tokens, which he uses to send, to whom he loves, to try, if they
also love him in their afflictions, and if they confide in him in their
dangers. That spouse is not worthy of thanks, who loves her fellow-spouse but
only when he is present with her, nor does it cost her much to confide in him,
when she finds herself regaled by him. But the matter is, that, when he
absentes himself from her, yea and when he seems to have forgotten her, she
must love him so much the better, as he is further absent from her, and confide
in him so much the more; as she has fewer exterior signs of his favor.

It is enough for you, my good sister, to have known already by experience,
how loving our lord has been to you, by his having drawn you to the
knowledge of himself. And be you not craving new testimonies of his love, but
make yourself sure enough thereof, and be not troubled, although he correct
you, and though it seem, as if he estranged himself from you, and forgott you;
but rather say thus: He has a mind to try me, and not to oppress me. You
must love our lord, though he correct you; you must confide in him, though you
feel no comfort from him. Seek him, though he hide himself; suffer him not to
rest, till you have waked him, and till he confess, that you are faithful in
his absence: and thus you shall find him to return to you, with so much
advantage, as that, when you enjoy his presence again, you will esteem your
former afflictions well employed.

Procure great courage, wherewith to suffer; for after the rate of your
sorrows, shall your comforts be. Be not a lover of yourself: but be a lover of
God: loose yourself, and so you shall be sure to find yourself. And if once
you would bud trust God home, and if once you would offer yourselfe to him with
true love, there could nothing happen, which would fright you. All bitter
frozen afflictions proceed but from distrust in God. And for this our lord
said: Let not your hearts be troubled, and do not ^eare* You believe in God:
believe also in me So that Faith and love is the cause of peace and quietness
to the heart.

There is no one thing, which is so necessary for you, toward the making you
able to arrive at the end of that days work, wherein God has placed you, as
to confide in him with love. Our lord has many proofs to make of you: and
many tribulations shall grow, where you look least for them: but if you
stand armed with Faith and love, you shall overcome them all. Number 13.
Do but remember, how the children of Israel, when they were issued out of the
land of Egypt, by means of so many miracles, and were passing through so
many afflictions, before they arrived at that land, which our lord had
promised them, said thus: The people, which possess this land, is greater and
stronger, then we; they have mighty Cities, whose walls do even threaten
the sky: we cannot overcome such a stout nation as this: to what end do we
putt ourselves upon this journey? And though some amongst them, who had Faith,
did encourage the rest by saing: that since God was on their side, they should
easily be able to euercome, as they had done till then: yet fear prevailed so
far, as that they offended our lord thereby, and through their little
confidence, they lost the land, and God destroyed them in the desert, without
suffering them to enjoy that, for which they had labored, and which himself
had promised.

Let us take warning, Psalm. 147.
my good Sister, by the danger of others, and let us know, that our Lord has
gust in such as fear him, and hope in his mercy: and is offended with such,
as do not so. It is he, who drew you out of the captivity of Egypt, when he
inspired your heart with a desire of being his: and he leads you still through
this desert; which is so unpleasant: where sometimes you want the bread of
doctrine for lack of such, as might break it to you: At other times you want
company, which may speak of spiritual things, that so your way might be
made to seem the shorter: At other times you do want the trees of other
recreation, which might give you shade: and thus in steed of these
commodities, you have a thousand discomforts. Now temptations rise against you
from within, and then from without: now from strangers, and then from
domestiques. Butt yett attend you only to your business. For he, who did
that for you, which was more, can never fail to do that for you, which is
less. He, who made you a friend of an enemy, will better keep you now, when
you are his friend. He, who did not abandon you, when you fled from him, will
much less fly now from you, when you follow him.

Who is he, that can say with any truth, that God did not help him, if he
were desired? See you have no fear, O you servant of Christ, in any thing,
which may happen to you: but confide in him, who loved you so well, as to dye
for you. It is true, that you have but one, who protects you: but that one is
of much more power, then all they, who contradict you. Do not think, of, how
great the giants, and how strong the cities are, which you must encounter: Nu.
14.
for it is not you, who must fight, But hold you your peace, and our lord will
fight for you. Do not fly from the war, nor abandon yourself, as one, who
were overcome, and so you shall see the favor of our lord toward you. For in
this war, he only looses the battle, who quitts the field. It is true,
that you are weak, but in that weakness of yours God will show his strength.
It is true that you know not much: but God himself will be your guide. By your
miseries, God will make your mercies appear. Who are you, that you should be
able to pass through such difficulties? But yet say with David: Psa. 1^.
In the strength of my God I will leap over a wall: Who are you, that should
be able to fight? but yet say with him again: Psa. 26
Though thousands should rise against me, yet my heart shall not fear. Believe,
my good sister, that how much the harder this business is for you, so much the
easier it is for Almighty God. And therefore you must have great distrust in
respect of your own weakness: but great confidence withal, in God's
strength. Infallibly he will crown you, if you continue in his love: and if
you do confide, that by his grace, you shall obtain that crown.

Forgett not this promise of Christ our lord: Mat. 10
him, who confesses me before men, that man will I confess before my Father,
who is in heaven: but him, who denies me before men, that men will I also deny
before my Father, who is in heaven. Can you think, that one is to esteem that
for affliction, which he endures for the confession of Christ our lord, since
it is to have so high a reward as that with so much honor he shall be crowned
by him at the day of judgment before his father? Happy is that sufferance:
happy that dishonor and poverty, to which so high an honor does succeed.
What kind of joy will it be for you, O my good sister, to hear these words
from the mouth of Christ our lord himself, and that in presence of the whole
world: Mat. 15.
Come you blessed of my Father, and possess the kingdom, which is prepared
for you? What will it be, when the Angels shall thus sing to her, who has
been a faithful servant of that Celestial king: Come, o Sponse of Christ,
receive that crown, which our lord has prepared for thee: and that not for
one day, but for all eternity. What will the spouses of Christ our lord
conceive, when having passed through the sea of this life, and their enemies,
who disturbed us, remaining drowned therein, they shall sing thus with great
joy, for having run through this dangerous world, without being overwhelmed
with the vices thereof: Ps. 12^.
The snare is broken, and we are delivered: our help is in the name of our
lord. What a day will that be, when that true Marie, the virgin of virgins,
shall go before with her Timbrell, which is her sacred body, praising God
both in body and soul, and singing thus. Come, magnifye our lord with me, and
let us exalte his name in mutual society with one another.

Happy are you, if you be found faithful to the spouse, who chose you. Happy
are you, if you have the courage to cast away that, which is present, under the
most certain promise of Christ our lord, for that, which is future. Be
confident, my good sister, in taking his word: for you are not the first, to
whom he has passed it, and fulfilled it: neither shall you be she, with
whom that word shall want effect. He gave his word to saint Catherine, saint
Agnes, saint Barbara and saint Lucie, and to inmumerable other lady virginis:
and tell me now how completely he has performed it. They had the courage to
despise the poor present world: and you see, that now they reign with God.
They lived here in trouble; and they are now in an eternity of repose.
Through how many combats did they pass? and they now enjoy the everlasting
crowns of their conquests. They fled from spouses of the earth: and they
brought the king of heaven to be in love with them.

If they had followed the trace of this world, their delight had been already
past, and their memories would have been forgotten. But they loved that, which
was eternal; and therefore their felicity shall not dye: and their memory
shall not decay. They were written in the book of God: and therefore neither
water nor wind, nor fire, nor time can make them waste. For that book is
incorruptible: and so is the name, which is written in it.

You must therefore procure to have a strong heart toward God, who is your
salvation: and do not think, that he selles heaven dear to you: for you
have not yet shed your blood for him, as those others shed theirs. Our lord
treates you like a weak creature: and you should be a shamed to have given
him such cause. If you had had more faith and confidence in him, and more love
to suffer for him, he would have procured you more afflictions, to the end,
that you might have purchased richer Crowns. Do not content yourself with
suffering little, considering how great your reward shall be, and how much
Christ our Lord suffered for you. He gave his life for you, and he was deeply
tormented and despised. How then come you thus to complain of the touch of a
fly? do but love, and you will desire to suffer. Let your love be doubled,
and you will suffer sorrows, which are doubled. The love of our Lord makes
such as possess it, more greedy of suffering, then the love of ones self, of
reposing. It makes, that any burden weighes light, for love is stronger then
death. He, who loves not, groans under the burden, like some lazy beast; but
he, who loves, runs and flies, and it suffers him not to feel the weight
even of his own body, nor of whatsoever else they can lay upon it.

It is not, my good Sister, that the afflictions, which we suffer, are great;
but that our love is little. The weight of a pound is no great weight; but yet
lay it upon some little child, and he will say: O how heavy it weighes?
whereas if a man took it up, he would scarce feel it. And so take you it for
a sign, that if you love little, your afflictions will weigh heavy upon you;
but if you love much, you will scarce allow them to be afflictions. For you
will be so inebriated with love, that nothing can be able to distract you from
the taste thereof. You will find a good savor in the very suffering it self,
and you will draw water out of the rock; and honey out of the stony hills.
Number. 20.


Do but love, and you shall not be subject to afflictions, but you shall be
superior to them as their lady; and you shall praise him, who delivers you
from them. If they threaten you with death, you will bid it welcome, that so
you may enjoy true life. If with bannishment, you will say, That you esteem
yourself bannished, wheresoever you are, till you may arrive to see the face of
God. And that it imports you little, whether you go to heaven from this or that
part of the earth; And that if you have God in your company, wheresoever you
are, you shall be happy; and if not, your own country will give you misery
enough. If you see yourself contemned, say: Christ our Lord is my honor, and
he honors me; let the world desp^se me, so he value me.

Do not afflict yourself about the necessity, which you may sustain of
present things; for of yourself you must despise them, through the desire,
which you have, to live in conformity with Christ our Lord, who made himself a
poor man for you. What is there in the world, which ough to fright you? if the
love of Christ our Lord have wounded you, you will tread the devil under
foot, you will despise his threats, and you will pass with courage, through
all your enemies. Put your trust in him, who loves his lovers. There is
nothing, which you will not be able to do in him. Go, and buy whatsoever you
want of him, though he ask you all this world for it; and see, that you be not
found without the love of him, though it should cost you your life. He is a
hidden treasure; but he, who finds him, selles all, to buy him. For in him
alone, he finds himself more rich, then with the multitude of all other things.

And now, if it concern every one of us to love him, how much more does it
importe, that she do it, whom he has chosen for his spouse. It becomes the
servant to fear his Ma^ster, and the son to honor his father; but the
Spouse to Love her fellow spouse. See you love our Lord; and take no rest, till
he have, granted you this gift. Love him with reverence; for that is the
kind of love, which he likes. Esteem not him the less, because he
communicates himself to you; but wonder, how so great an altitude, as his, can
stoop to such a profound baseness as yours. It is the property of
ill-natured and ill-mannerd servants, to value their Masters at a less rate,
for vouchsafing to descend, and become familiar with them, then if they had
lived with them like Lords. But they who live in true light, esteem that Lord
so much the more, as he does the more vouchsafe to diminish himself.

The true love of Christ our Lord carries this badge with it, in token that it
is indeed of him. That as it apprehendes and highly esteems the goodness of
God; so it also apprehendes and profoundly disesteemes the wickedness of man.
Therefore love, adore, and serve our Lord with Joy, but yet rejoice with
trembling; Not a trembling as of a slave in the midst of torments; but as of a
true and tenderharted child; who highly fears to give any disgust to her
father, how little soever it may be.

Of yourself you can do none of these things; but if you humble your heart in
the acknowledgement of your own miseries, if you present yourselfe often in
prayer before Christ our Lord; if you lodge him in your breast by the
Communion; if you hear him speak to you in your spiritual reading; and in
fine, if you will but give him leave to help you, you are to have confidence,
that by little and little, he will be healing your soul, notwithstanding all the
harsh encounters, which may occur.

Do not starte out of his hands, though the cure putt you to pain; for, in
fine, he will work the cure at the fittest time; And for the afflictions,
which he sendes you, and the delights, whereof he depriues you, he will give
you his own most plentiefull delight, which shall inebriate you, as if it were
with some swelling river, and you shall be in full joy for all eternity,
without the want of any good, and without the fear of loosing, what you have.
You shall there find yourself to be highly well content and paid; and more
felicity shall be imparted to you, then yourself could tell, how to desire.
Which felicity is not a creature, but the Creator himself of all things, that
true God, who lives and reigns for the eternity of all eternities. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a Lady.
He shows how Christ our Lord, being placed upon the Cross, is that glass,
wherein we may see all the sports of our souls, and wherein we may also
find the cure of all our miseries. And that it is an enterprise of great
honor to be carrying a part of his Cross.

IF in the night of the Nativity of our Lord, they carried you to Mount
Caluary, and have given you compassion to the Crucifix, and tears wherewith to
wash his feet; it may well be believed that now, when you are in Lenit, and
near the time, wherein the holy passion of our Lord is represented, he will
keep you, as such a fixed Inhabitant of that hill, as to suffer you to depart
noe more from thence. This is such a thing, as that you may safely say with
Saint Peeter, it is good for us to be here; and it shall be a better suite to
our Lord, Mat. 17
then his was. For he desired to remain on that hill, where repose and delight
were to be found; but in this other, there is affliction; and therefore this
carries a testimony with it, of greater love. For not in resting, but in
laboring, and suffering, is the love of our Lord employed and showed.

Do you, Lady, remain in those wounds of our Lord, since for the cure of
your wounds he accepted his. And though you be not to endure the like for his
sake; yet let them serve you at least to make you thank him, and to lament
him, and to have compassion on him, since your sins, are they which placed
him, in so extreme distress. Continue there, and pass not on, with such
haste as you would do by some ill-prouided country inn. They who passed on
by their own way, shook their heads and blasphemed our Lord. But fix you
yourselfe close by the Cross, like that virgin mother, and like that beloved
disciple, and those other holy women. For they who runn over this so great
benefit, in such haste, do neither understand it, nor thankfully acknowledge
it; and there remain noe more with them, but the mere sound thereof. John. 19
And some (that is such as are Infidells) blaspheme him for it; because they
stay not to look, at leisure, upon this mighty wonder of love.

But the Christian, who has taken up his lodging here, says, and that from
his very heart, This is my rest for ever, and for ever will I dwell here,
because I have chosen it. And if the spouse, shall not remain with, at least,
her heart nailed to that Cross, to which the body of her fellow- spouse was
nailed; how will she possibly be able to escape the name of ungrateful, and
unkind? There shall you find remedy, against the poison of those false
praises, which men give you. And you will profoundly be ashamed to perceive
yourself honored, and proclaimed for good, when you see him, who indeed is
good, and holy, to be proclaimed for wicked, and false. There, shall you see,
how little reason you have, to think, that what you do is unworthy of
estimation in any kind; forasmuch as concerns your part thereof, since it is
so weak, and lame, when it is compared with that which Christ our Lord,
wrought upon the Cross; yea, and even with that which yourself, as you are,
ought to do.

Look into this glass, and you will easily be able to discern the spots,
which are in the face of your soul. For when you have been the most meek of
all, if you compare that meeknes* with his, your meekenes will be noe better,
then mere wrath; and your obedience compared with his, will be very
disorderly; and your humility very proud. Yet the blind world will needs
believe, that there are noe other sins, but those, which it conceiues to be
such. Whereas the eyes of God are of another kind, and he measures us by
another rule; whereby many times he finds that to be faulty which seemed in
the eyes of men to be excelle^tly, and co^pleatly done. When therefore they
shall deliver out any of these poisoned, and smooth-lying praises, say you
insta^tly in your heart, as S. Paul did, ^. Cor. 4.
he who judges me is our Lord. And make haste to call to mind, how our Lord
was proclaimed for a wicked person. And beseech him, not to permit that you be
published for one who is good, and be sure you hold your tongue, for our lord
will observe how the world goes. Nay procure you, and be careful that when you
are despised, you may be very glad thereof, and perhaps our lord does not now
permit any body to give you ill words, because he finds, that you have not
strength wherewith to bear them.

He who desires any part of the Cross of our lord, must receive it, as he
would do some precious Reliqu^, with great reverence, and giving of thanks.
And he must value it more, then he would all the treasures of the world. And
because there are so few who esteem of those Relics of the Cross as they
ought, therefore our Lord oftentimes does not impart them; whose-pleasure is
that they be honored, and beloved, and borne with joy. And for this reason it
is, that he leaves us still in our infancy, without putting us to the taskes of
men. But how much more then, are we to blame, if we be drawn down to
impatience, or superfluity of sorrow, for any of those things, which he sendes.

So that if you shall carry a great love to the Crucifix, he will give you a
part of his Cross But then see, that you embrace it, as an enterprise of great
honor, according to what he says to the spouse, Place me as a seal upon thy
heart: and upon thine arm; for love is strong as death. Came. 8.
And as for that pain wherein you are, because you may not receive the Body of
our Lord in the blessed Sacrament so often as you would; be not troubled
thereat. For I have already told you that our Lord is resolved that it shall
cost you some what. And it is but reason that it do so, since our souls cost
him so much. Do you think perhaps that by our Lords only saying, Let all
souls ^ee mine, they insta^tly render themselves into his hands. Do you
think that the love which you carry to our Lord, and the dominion which he
exercises over you cost him but toys? I can assure you it is not so. But he
shed his blood, as any slave might do, upon condition, that your souls might
be his, and he yours.

Just so, must that soul do, which has a mind to obtain him; that is, it
must sweat first, it must weep, it must importune him, it must endure ill
words, yea and also evil deeds at the hands of others; yea and it must
seem little to have endured this, but once. And if it be not put to endure
them, at least it shall have gained much in having disposed it self, to suffer
somewhat for him, and thus it proves, noe fruitless thing to seek God.
Negotiate your business with him, for if he say Yea, there is none who can
hinder it, and if any body offer to do it, it will not prove with him; but
yet, if it chance to prove, you may conclude thereby, that you have not
negotiated well, with our Lord. What shall I say to you? Cry out louder to him:
Follow my counsel; and whenever he gives you a great desire to communicate,
procure then to be, just as if you were communicating indeed. And beseech our
Lord, since he is omnipotent, that he will give you that, when you communicate
spiritually, which he would have given, if you had communicated Sacramentally.
For so, you shall be pleasing to his goodness; and he will not suffer you to
go empty from him, if you come well prepared, and it were not the worse if it
might be two or three days before. Yett now you must not think, that you may
therefore fail, to confess your sins afterward, to your Ghostly Father. But
till you have means to declare them to him, I advise, that you ralate them to
our Lord. And above all things, keep your heart in peace and conserve yourself
in the way of obedience, and humility, toward your Superiors, and Prelates.
For this is the way of our Lord, and you must take heed you leave it not. Take
courage to pass on, in your other devotions. For though, when you are in them,
you think you make noe profitt by them, I say you do; and afterward you
shall taste the fruit thereof. And our Lord will find a time to look back
with pittye upon such as shall have made much way after him. And one day, of
those, when our Lord vouchsafes to look back upon us, is worth more then
three, of those others, wherein we labored to go after him. The crown is
prepared for you in heaven. God will be your defendour, and will not forget
you. Persevere you in obedience, till you see our Lord of all Lord in Syon.
Psalm. 83.
I beseech him to make you dearly his; and that you may be kept safe, and prove
a saint. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a Cauallier, a friend, and a Disciple of his.
FOR what do spurs serve, if the beast be so lazy, as I am? And then adding
to this the burden, which lies upon me, of little health; it is no marvel, if
I neither write, nor answer. This letter is written in such straytes of time,
that I know not, whether it can be good for any thing, or not. I have rejoiced
much, that the Infant is weaned; though some dye at that age; as not having
strength, to eat the bread, with the crust. But since our Lord takes you, for
a Child of promise; Genesis 17.
as he did Isaac, I hope in Jesus Christ, that you will not dye of it, though
you should be putt to eat stones; but that you will feed upon them; as Christ
our Lord, fed upon the wine, with myrrh.

God will deliver you from consenting to sin, and your temptations shall
serve you, in steed of the torment of the Cross, for his glory, who dyed
upon it. And though our enemies may bid us come down, we will rather choose to
confess Christ our Lord, by continuing upon it; then to putt ourselves into
ease, by denying him. You are acquainted already, with that supreme omnipotent
goodness of our Celestial Father, whose power is such, as to draw good out of
evil, and heat out of cold. And therefore be not dismayde, though you see
yourself absent, from the protection of your spiritual Father, on earth; and
though you find barrenness, where you expected plenty, and abundance.

Be not afraid to be alone with Christ our Lord, not that you are to
undervalue help, when it may be had, by means of his servants; but we must
obey his ordinance, whenever he shall be pleased, that we remain in this
world, without succor. Because our Lord is usually wont in such cases to do
more visible, and greater favors, immediately, then he did before by means of
his servants. And such a man comes to learn, that, Non sum solus, quia Pater
mecum est. John: 16.
I am not alone, because my Father is with me. Then, Faith begins to
increase, and Prayer dilates it self by Love; which is set forward, by seeing,
how the soul is beloved. And thus it increases by that, by which it seemed,
and it was feared, that it would be diminished. And he finds society, when he
is alone; and he has learnt to walk without a staff, though he be but weak.

Let there be no want of care, to receive him, who is all our good; and be you
ever saying, and that with truth: Loquere Domine, quia audit seruus t^us, 1.
King 1.
Speak, Lord, for thy servant hears thee. Shutt up yourself in the castle of
your heart, which, though it be as weak, as glass, yet he, who comes to dwell
there, will make it so strong, that all that, shall prove glass, which can
assault it; and it self shall remain more firm, then st^ele. And for lack of
doing this, the soul is full of weakness, and it may say, that, Osee 10
which is written: Diuisum est cor eorum, nunc interibunt. Their heart is
divided, and they shall instantly perish.

There is no place secure, where your heart may rest, but in that secret place
of retreat, that most hidden corner, where none can enter, but Christ our
Lord, ^anuis clausis, the doors being shutt. John. 20.
For if it depart from thence, it runs as great hazard, as some light young
maid might do amongst dissolute men. And if some just punishment, were
imposed, and well executed, for every time, that the heart should be gadding up
and down the street, perhaps we should take warning by ourselves, as even a
very horse, or mule will do. Though indeed a man, who watches himself well,
shall instantly be able to find a punishment, which comes down from heaven,
^re. 14.
upon the very heart it self, quando diligit mouere pedes, when it has a nunde
to be gadding; and then that, which follows, is this: and Domino non placuit.

This gift of recollection, must be gotten with much practice. For afterward
the heart will stay within, even of it self, though we open the door, to let it
out; as a tame bird, will stay in a cage. And this is the root of all our
spiritual profitt, and at the feet of Christ our Lord, we must have it, if we
mean, that it shall be true profitt. Christ Jesus be with us all. Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a Lady, encouraging her to fight the battles of
our Lord.
He shows the subtilty of the devil, and how styly he temptes souls with
pride.

MADAME, because I conceive that you fight the combatts of Christ our Lord, and
do franckely offer yourself to all affliction, so that he may reign in your
heart: all encouragement and assistance is due to you, from such, as be the
servants of God, who are commanded to advertise the wicked man of the misery,
which is growing toward him, that so he may amend, and avoyde it; and to
encourage such as are good; and to go sounding the trumpett before them, when
they see them entering into the battle; that is to say, Esaias. 58.
they are to give heart by the word of God, to such, as they perceive to fight
for his honor. For otherwise, as account shall be demanded of them, for the
wicked, whom they had not warned, so also for the good, Ezech. 3
whom they had not encouraged. And so they should be punished both for the
evil, which were committed by the one, and for the good, which were omitted by
the other.

Take you therefore heart, in that combatt, which the ancient Serpent makes
against you, he procuring, to divide you from God, and you resolving to stick
close to him: you must be very watchful; for his chief aim, is at the heart.
And it troubles him not greatly, that a man serve God, by recollecting his
eyes, by keeping silence, by praying, by singing the divine office, and the
like; but to the heart does he convey his poison; which is a certain vain
kind of complacence, or proper estimation, and love of ourselves. The foolish
virgins, Matthew 23.
were virgins; but because they had not oil in their lamps, they heard this
sad word out of the mouth of our Lord. In the word of truth I say to you, that
I know you not. Now, what is this lamp, but the heart? and what is this oil,
but the spirit of truth, which maintaynes and feeds it with good works if we
mean, that they shall indeed be good, in the sight of God? And what is this
Spirit of truth, but that, which makes a man displeasing to himself, and to
seem ill in his own eyes; and that from his very heart, and soul, he may
conceive, that he is all ugly, and abominable, and that he is amazed to
consider, how God can suffer him upon the earth?

This is that truth, where in we must live, and without this, we live in lies.
And sometimes, the more virtue we think we have, and the better we esteem
ourselves in health, the more sick, and miserable we be, through the want of
this. For confiding in ourselves, we think we are somewhat; whereas indeed it
is not so, in his sight, who discernes our hearts, and says: Apoc. 3.
Thou have the name of one, who lives, whereas indeed thou art dead. He has
the name of one, that lives: who falls not into public sins, which the
world condemns for enormous. But if nevertheless, he fall into other sins,
which are condemned in the judgment of Almighty God; for what does it serve
him, to be absolved by the world, when he is censured by that just Judge?

The world, knows not, how to hold that man for wicked, nor to punish him for
such, who only has a good opinion, and complacence in himself with pride, or
at least is not displeasing to himself; but in the judgment of God, that man
is held for proud, and blind, who does not, even stink to himself, as if he
carried some dead dog, tied to his nose; and who has not a profound internal
shame, in the sight of his Creator; as here men use to have, when they are
presented before some Judge, having been taken, in the manner, with enormous
crimes. And if this pride arrive to be a mortal sin, then does it wholly
square, and agree to him, which was said before, in the person of God; and if
it be but venial, this suytes with him but in part. Thou have the face of a
harlott, ^ier. 3.
and know not, what belongs to the having of any shame. Now it is an ill
favored spott in a soul, to be void of shame, as it is even exteriourly,
when women want it.

The world condemns not a man's confidence in himself, nor the estimation,
which he may have of himself, nor a resolute will, which he may have to procure
his own contentmo^t. But in the sight of God, these and such other things are
great offenses, and they hinder grace, and our friendship with him, if they be
mortal; and if they be but venial, yet they hinder the profitt, which we
might make of the grace, we have; and it destroys all inward communication
with our Lord. The devil knowing this, it troubles him not much, that a soul
may be alive, after the large manner, if interiourly, and spiritually it be
dead. And many times he procures not, that such a person may fall into
apparent, and deformed sins; for if he should co^mitt any such, he would be
much confounded thereat. For, observing, that he had done things, which even,
in the eyes of the world were so wicked, he would take penance to heart, and
would be displeasing to himself, in his very soul; and so would mende. But the
devil desires to hold him tied fast up, in a deep interior blindness, and
so keeps him safe for himself, without inducing him to committ other sins.
For if he fell into them also, he would peradventure give over both the one,
and the other, and so escape out of his hand.

You therefore must be sure, to carry your eyes open, upon your own heart; and
when you find not there a profound contempt, and confusion of yourself, in the
high presence of Almighty God: be you well assured, that you are far from
knowing yourself; and that you have yet, no other eyes, but of flesh and blood;
and no true celestial light at all. For this light searches into the most
hidden corners, and makes the soul highly ashamed, even of those things, which
in the sight of worldly eyes, will seem to have been well done. After this
shame, tears of grief and true humility are wont to grow; whereby the soul
is wholly, and absolutely made subject to God, and to every creature for his
sake. Now, when this is wanting, all things go after another fashion, and the
wound is not cured, but only skinned. And in that case, we must call upon our
Celestial Physician, and not give over, till, by little and little, we may get
some small thread of light, whereby to enter, and see the retraites and dark
holes thereof, and find her faults even in those things, which have appearance
to be well done.

Our Lord does not instantly imparte this gift; but when himself is best
pleased to do it. And in the mean time, let us know, that we must be sure,
not to putt confidence in our own works; and if yet this virtue be now
wanting to us, let us confide in our Lord, that he will bestow it upon us, in
his good time. Matthew 7. Mark 11. Luc. 11.
For he, that promised That he will not give a stone to him, who shall demand
bread; and that our Father of heaven, will give a good spirit to such as ask
it. I beseech him to be your light, that so you may know him, to honor him;
and that you may know yourself, to despise yourself. And depart you, wholly
from yourself, that you may be wholly subject to him. You must also consider,
that you must not want some body, even here on earth, who may call you to an
account, therefore so you get great store of sanctity against the time, when
you shall go into another world. And, in the mean while, be sure, there be
nothing in you, for which it may importe me to chide you; and for which you may
have reason to be ashamed, as having been a cause of pain to us both. Christ
our Lord keep you ever, in that side of his, which was pierced by a lance,
Amen.

A Letter of the Author to a certain Preacher, against the temptation of
disconfide^ce, and of the benefitts which we enjoy in Christ our lord.
Do not, Sir, I beseech you, conceive any unkindness at my hands, but
forgive me as S. Paul says; since God has forgiven the offenses, which we
have committed against him. You know already, how full of faults I am, which
might suffice to make any man fail in the service, which he owes. Sometimes I
have wanted a messenger, as I did, where I have been of late, and do yet
remain; For if no body bring me word of any, I know not, where I am to seek
him. I beseech you, Sir, believe, that in a matter of more importance I will
have love enough for the doing you service.

I hold this distrust of Salvation, to which you tell me, you are subject, for
a most plain temptation, Nay, I hold it, not only to be certain, but
sottish also. For it deserves no better name, then that, if it will not be
discharged, by the consideration of those benefitts, which we possess in
Christ our lord, as if this business, were the work of our hands, or the
reward of our meritts; and not by the grace of God, through Jesus Christ. You
must therefore enlarge your little heart, toward the immensenesse of that love,
wherewith the Father gave us his Son, and with him, gave us himself, and the
Ho^i^-Ghost, and all things. Receive this grace, with giving of thanks* and
enjoy you God, since he bestows himself upon you. And if your demeritts fright
you, remember, that one of the benefitts, which the Father impartes to us in
Christ our lord; is the payement of our debts: and the sweetening, and
appeasing of that wrath, which our sins deserved.

Why do you doubt of a pardon, since you doubt not of that Passion, which he
endured for our sins?.Pet. 2.
What does it profitt you, to confess, that Christ our lord dyed for us ( be
who was lust, for us, that were unjust) if you believe not, that his death
killed our sins: and now, if they be dead, why do you fear them? For the
Children of Israel, Exodus 15.
whom our lord drew out of Egypt, seeing that their enemies were drowned in the
sea, did not fear, but sung praises to our lord: taking occasion thereof, from
those very enemies, who had persecuted them before; and whom formerly they had
feared. And though we have not so assured Faith, that our sins are pardoned,
as we are sure, that our lord, dyed for them, (because we do not so certainly
know, that his merits are applied to us) yet the new heart, which God gave us,
when he called us to himself, may be a good sign of his friendshipp, and
pardon, whereby we may well hope that our sins also are forgiven. And besides
that spirit of being his children, which he gave us, when he imparted his love,
as the love of a Father to us, may well be taken for a particular assurance,
that in the heart of God, we are esteemed as his sons, since in our hearts, we
esteem him as our Father. For it is blasphemy to affirm, that I loving God,
he should not love me: since that love wherewith I love him, is never given me,
but by his hand.

I beseech you, think not of our lord, Sap. 1.
with a short heart, and a strait, but in great belief of his goodness, as we
are commanded. And cast up your eyes, to that sign of our salvation, Curist
our lord; who is the assurance of our hope; and who is so acceptable to his
Father, and by whose participation, we are also made, acceptable to him, and we
have assured hope, through his blood, to enjoy eternal life, before the Throne
of God.

And if it seem to you, that your works are weak, and poor, it is reason
you should think so still. But what reason is this, why you should loose your
confidence? By Christ our lord, we were made friends of enemies; and by him we
are conserved in his friendshipp. We had greater impediments to be well with
God, when, we were subject to our sins, before we knew God: then now we have,
by the defects, into which we fall. So that, if our former sins, could not
hinder that grace, which was communicated to us in Christ our lord: much less
shall our present faults, be able to break of this friendshipp, we being now
incorporated in Christ, who is beloved by his Father.

A good thing it is for us to feel our poverty, and misery: but yet it must
be with condition, that withal, we believe highly of the bounty, and riches
of the mercy of God. And let us glorifye his goodness in our wickedness:
since with so much love he tolerates his children, who are so faulty, so
weak, and so miserable. Why should you deprive God of the glory, to have
great latitude of love toward his children? For by reason of the faith, and
love, which we carry to his son, he has patience, with the faults, which
we committ; when once we have bewailed them, and done true penance for them.

Believe therefore now at length, that as there is goodness enough in God, to
make you love him: so there is meritt enough in Christ our lord, to make you be
beloved for his sake: and live you with gratitude, for the benefitts, which you
have received, as also for the pardon of those errors, which you daily
committ. And be daily accepting of all good occasions, and fight the wars of
our lord with joy: as that Judas Machabeus did. And God giving you, that which
he gives, you may hope, you shall enjoy his kingdom, though perhaps you may be
putt to suffer in temporal fire, for the hay, and straw, and wood, which shall
be found in your soul.

Be you ever breathing more and more toward Profitt in spirit: but yet so, as
that it may be accompanied with quietness, grounded upon Confidence. For
though it should grow to be no more, then now it is, even that being carefully
kept, will suffice for your salvation. But if you look only upon yourself, we
are all so full of faults, that your soul will never be without dismay: nor
will you perceive, that you are greatly beloved by our lord. And then
proceeding after such a manner as that, how will you be able to serve him, and
give gust, to his holy spirit, which is dwelling in you. For this spirit is
cheerful: and we check it, by our anguish, and dismay: against which S. Paul
thus disswades us, saying. That we must not contristate the holy spirit of our
lord. The sum of all is this, that you must know, and consider your faults:
and that they must seem very great in your eyes: and you must bewail and
lamente them by Confession and Penance. But yet still you must consider, that
those benefitts, which we possess in Christ our lord, are greater: by reason
whereof, you must confide yourself to be beloved: and you must do it with much
thankefullnesse. And if God do no more, but continue that to you, which you
have already, even that may suffice, as has been said, to make you hope for
eternal life.

A Letter of the Author to an afflicted woman.
He declares, that afflictions come either through the fault of the partis, or
else for trial, and how one is to carry himself in tribulation.

THe grace and peace of our lord Jesus, be ever with you, Amen. The true love,
wherewith I love you in Jesus Christ, has caused so great compassion in me
toward you, in respect of what you suffer, that it has moved me to write this
letter, with desire, that it may serve you to some purpose. I know not, my
good* sister, whether I shall putt you into any comfort, or rather, whether I
shall not help you to weep. Nor do I know, whether or no, I should tell you,
that the trouble, which you have, is good, and that you are to carry it with
joy; and that I should not grant, that it is ill, as it seems to you, and
that as such you are to fly from it. I see, that if many good men endure such
accidents, as this, there are also very ill men, who endure the same. And if to
some, it be a sign of love, to others it is an effect of the wrath of God. Our
lord punishes some by these means, and to others, who deserve no punishment,
he sendes them as trials; and he presents them with an occasion of meritt.
And though the thing, which you endure, may proceed from either of these two
causes: vet I am not sorry, that you persuade yourself, that it is not so
likely to be a proof of your virtues, as the punishment of some light fault,
if that fault may well be accounted light, which deserves so heavy a
punishment. For if the saints themselves aknowledge, that there is no goodness
in themselves, but many faults, and much wickedness; how much more must you
do it, who know yourself to be far from sanctity, and so full of sin?

And now, if you hold it for more probable that these fruits grow from this
root, the remedy must be, that you examine well, if you have done any thing,
for which you may deserve punishment. And know, that for the most part, it
uses to be some little dust of vaineglorie: and if you see not the true reason
of it, esteem your case to be so much the worse, when not withstanding you are
so full of faults, you can discern none.

But now, since the blow is come, humble-yourself under the mighty hand of
God: as knowing, that you are worthy of greater torment. Beseech him, to have
mercy on you, and that he cast you not of from himself. Say: O lord, I have
sinned, and any punishment, how sharp soever, is in itself, too light for me:
considering the greatness of my sins. If thou be pleased to punish me, here
I am, extend the hand, o lord, discharge the blow: Cut, burn, and kill:
only permit not, that I be divided, and driven away from thee. If I have
sinned, let not thy punishment be, to let me sin any more, for the natural
punishment of a fault, is pain, and not a second fault.

But now nevertheless, I would not, that by your thinking your faults, to
have been the cause of your crosses, you should discomfort yourself, and be so
far dismayed, as to make you fall, and that as by some precipices into
despair. I desire, on the one side, that you humble yourself, beleiuing that
your sins have deserved them, and on the other side, that you be comforted by
remembering, that you are the child of God, and none of them, who are
forgotten, since your father has been careful to correct you as a child,
for fear least else you would have been worse. And believe me in one thing,
though I be no Prophet, that if our lord in his mercy, had not humbled you, as
he has done, you would perhaps have fallen into some part of Lucifer's pride,
which had been infinitely worse: and therefore has he kept you so humble,
that you neither dare, nor ever so much as can, hold up your head.

Give thanks therefore to our lord for this favor, and be happy in that you
have his grace. But already I know, you will say thus to me: If I could be
sure, that I were his child, and not his enemy: and that this were the
correction of a father, and not the punishment of a Judge: If I could persuade
myself out right, that I were in his favor, what could I wish for more then
that? But I verily believe, that unless it might be hell, there is not so
wicked a creature, as I am, to be found: and how then can I possess such a
thing as grace? This life of mine, is not a life of the sons of God: but it
is a life, or to speak more truly, it is a very death of the damned.

O my good sister, if you know the gift of God, and what kind of people they
are, who for the most part are putt to suffer such things, as these: you would
perhaps rejoice. If I saw, that the enemies only of God, did endure them,
infallibly I should be much afflicted: but I find, that his best friends are
tempted in this kind: and why then should I not be comforted thereby? Job the
holy man, Job. 7.
saw himself one day in so sad a case, that he said: I have despaired. Such
things had passed in his heart, that he seemed to be fallen into despair. But
to the end, that we may see, that indeed he did not despair, he instantly
goes to ask mercy: and he, who asks mercy, despaires not.

David said, as we all know, Psalm. 30.
that God had cast him clean out of his sight, and that he saw himself covered
with obscurity, and darkness, and environed even by the sorrows of death,
and the danger of hell. And he says, that such things happened to him, as no
man will understand, but he, through whose heart they had passed.

I will omit the tribulations of S. Paul, which were caused by Satan, and
which made him hang down the head; for of these you have heard many other
times. In the lives of those holy Fathers, I have read many things, which I
should never have believed, if the Author were not a man of much authority.
And even, at this day, we hear and see strange things, which arrive to
certain devout persons, and servants of our Lord; and he has drawn them out
of these temptations, with great spiritual gain. Whereby we gather: that a
man in such cases, Romans 4.
must, like Abraham, believe that, which he sees not; and hope, even against
hope itself.

Tell me, my good Sister, have you seen these potters heat their furnace?
Have you seen that smoke which is so thick and black? That kindling of fire,
and even the resemblance of hell it self, which passes there? who would
believe, but that the potts, which stand there within, would be mouldred even
to dust, by the rage of that fire? Or that at least, they would not grow to be
as foul as pitch, by the grossness of the smoke? And yet, when that fury
is past, and the fire quenched, and the time come, when they vnfurnace the
potts, you see, that though they were soft, and made of dirt, they come forth
as hard as stone; and they, who formerly were so very brown, show themselves
as white as snow; and so neat and dainty otherwise, that they become the
table of kings.

We are called by S. Paul, Romans 9.
by the name of potts of clay, and certainly with great reason; since we are
so soft, and weak in suffering the knockes of affliction. Make account, that
you also are some poor little pott, and that they have putt you out to bake;
For you were so weak, as that you could not well retain, and conserve the
liquour of grace, which was infused into you by Almighty God.

They will bake you, my good Sister, and you must have patience. They have
trust you into the furnace of tribulation. Endure now those fyres, those foggye
flames, and those obscurities, and by confiding in the wisdom and goodness
of our good potter, you shall not be turned into ashes, which may be carried
away by the wind, nor disfigured by any ill mark, which may be putt upon
you; but rather you shall become hard, in being able to suffer; that so, though
you should fall, you may not break yourself. And you shall be also purged from
that disgraceful color, which before you had; and finally you shall be made
fit, and capable to be a vessel of honor, and to be served up to the table
of Almighty God. Procure, not to come broken out of the furnace, least they
cast you here, and there, as a thing of nothing. Those potts are only broken,
which loose their patience in the furnace of tribulation; but I confide in our
Lord, that you will be able to come forth, without any hurt.

Suffer now a little, for quickly the whole business will be at an end. Be not
you dismayde, how busy soever the devil be. Let him persecute you as much as
he will, but confide you in God. It is a sign, that the devil has no part
in you, since he follows you so hard. For if he had you in his hand, he would
not follow you. It is a sign, that you are departed out of his kingdom, since
he has dispatched so many squadrons of armed men after you.

You are passing out of the darkness of Egypt, Exodus 12 and 14.
that you may go to the land, which our Lord has promised you; and now
behold, how Pharao follows you, with his whole army. You find all ways
shutt up against you. The redd sea is before you, and your enemies are behind
you; and you find not any means, whereby to escape. But fear not; have good
hope, and you shall see the wonders, which our Lord will work. Exodus 14.
Our Lord will fight for you; and you shall but hold your peace. Our Lord will
open a way for you, through the midst of the sea. The waves thereof shall serve
you for a wall, both on the right hand, and on the left; and you shall pass,
without so much as wetting your foot, through the midst of your tribulations,
and temptations, whereas your enemies shall be drowned therein.

Do but conceive, what joy that will be, when (all the people of God, being
passed through the dangerous sea of this world) the most Blessed Virgin Marie
(who was figured in the person of that other Marie the sister of Moses) shall
begin to sing that Canticle of so great triumph; Exodus 5.
and when you in company of other Virgins shall answer her.

And to the end, that you may be yet more comforted, know from me, that you
have no cause of any scruple; for your case is rather, that you suffer torment,
then that you co^mitt sin. For so that you consent not freely to those
temptations, nor delight yourself in those thoughts, which the devil offers;
and desire not, for your part, so much as to think thereof, what cause of
scruple can you have? And you shall believe me, as a man, who knows your
conscience well, that how soever you may think, that you have given consent;
it is but fear, which makes you think so; as it happens to them, who are
sick of feauers, or be subject to any strong passion. Let this serve to excuse
you, for that which is past; but not to discharge you from being diligent in
the future. And though some little thing should have stuck to you, and though
you had suffered some light hurt, yet so long as you render not, nor yeilde
yourself to be overcome, the very wounds, which have been received by any man
at arms in the service of a king, have beauty and glory in his sight.

The benefitt, and meritt, which you draw out of the victory, is greater then
the prejudice, which you suffer in the conflict, and therefore let nothing
trouble you. Be not deceived in beleiuing, that those imaginations, or
temptations are any things of yours; or wrought by you. Works they are of
Lucifer, and ^ordes they are of his speaking, and images of his representing.
Behold you all that business as a thing belonging to others, and wherewith
you have nothing to do. And carry yourself just so, as you would do, when
you should hear a man blaspheme, or speak any other foul deformed words;
for which, though you would be much in pain, in regard of the offense, which
thereby is done to Almighty God; yet in fine, it would be a kind of comfort
in some respect to you, when you saw, that it was not you, who offended him.

Let it grieve you, that the devil does both say, and do so like himself:
and let it comfort you to consider, that it is not you, but he, and that he
will smart for it. S. Paul says, that he gloried in his afflictions, and
tribulations: because the virtue and strength of Christ our Lord, shined more
therein.

My good Sister, if indeed you love Christ our Lord; you will rejoice, for
that glory, which he gathers from your infirmity. Does it not seem to you,
that God shows his strength in you, since by the weakness of a poor
miserable woman, who is indeed but a very child, and a sick creature, and a
kind of nothing, he ouercomes the strength, and courage of those infernal
powers? Will not you be then content to be assaulted, upon condition, that
Christ our Lord may be glorified? Yes certainly, I know you will, and that most
willingly. Nor can I believe less of that charity, which you pretend to
have, nor of that desire, which you carry, that our Lord may be pleased to
serve himself of you, whether it be in prosperity, or adversity, in sweet or
bitter, by way either of love, or grief, either in peace, or war. Our Lord
is pleased now, that you serve him in war, and under the incommodities of
heat, and cold, with your weapons by your side, both day and night: being
content with broken sleeps, and being subject to surprises, as if you stand
upon the top of a pike: yea and (though it will afflict you most) you must
content yourself to be far absent from your king. But after this season,
there will come another, and our Lord will command, that you shall serve him
in his banketting-house, where you shall enjoy as much, as you can desire. In
the mean time, you shall joy in this, that you are doing him service. And I
beseech him to strengthen your soul, that so it may be able to fight the
battailles of our Lord, and to make you a conqueror therein, that so you may
deserve that Crown of glory, which he has promised to such, as overcome,
Amen.

FINIS.

