THE COMENTAries of Don Jews de Auela, and Suniga, great Master of Aranter,
which treats of the great wars in Germany made by Charles the fifth Maximo
Emperor of Rome, King of Spain, against John Frederike Duke of Saxon, and
Philip the Lantgraue of Hesson with other great princes and Cities of the
Lutherans, wherein you may see how god has preserved this vvorthie and
victorious Emperor, in all his affairs against his enemies translated out of
Spanish into English.

An. Do. 1555.

Londini in Aedibus Richardi Totteli.

To his right honorable Lord and master, Edward Earl of Darby, Lord Stanley
and Strainge, Lord of Man and the Isles, knight of the most noble order of the
Garter. Your humble and obediente servant John wilkinson, wishes
prosperity, honor and health.
Gifts be commonly given to Princes and other benefactors (right honorable
Lord and master) of the most precious things that can be found by the
geuers. So I have consydred what thing I might give unto your Lordship to be
acceptable, as this which treats of the acts and deeds of the ^^ctorious
and most famous (now in our ty^^ Charles the fifth, most exeellente Emperor of
Rome, king of Spayn, who has spled his ba^ners from the East unto the west
part of the world: and not only against the Turks and Mores, but moreover
to subdue the diversities ofsectes as it appears in this Commentary of the
late wartes in Germany, newly translated out of Spanish into English to
certify the minds of such that are desirous to know what has followed the
doctrine of Martin Luther by the bearing of Iho^ Frederike Duke of Saxon, and
other great princes and cities of Germany.

The preface to the Reader.
Upon the sight of this Comentary in so^dry languages I have co^sidred what a
lack it has bee^ emo^gest so many English Books, as not to have so notable a
hystory as this is. Wherefore I have thought it good to be translated, and
although it be not so curyous as it might be, ne^^rthelesse it is of a truth
and wort^y of a more excellent style the^ this of mine, which yet may satisfy
the minds of such as be desirous to know the success and what has followed
the doctrine of Luther through the supportacio^ and mighty power of Duke Ihon
Fredderike of Saxon and Philip the Launtgraue of Hesson with other great
Princes, of the furious and infinite people of Germany, as it appears in this
and other stories which be written of the wars there made by Charles ye
fifth, Maximo Emperor of Rome, king of Spain. An. M. D.xlvi.

A COMENTARY OF the right Honorable Lord Jews, de Auela and high steward of
Ocanter, of the wars in Germanye.
GErmanye of late being in ye power of ye Protesta^tes and new religion: so
that it is clearly see^, how necessary it has bee^ for almightye God to put
his remedy therein: for as to the help of man there has been so many
difficulties, that there could no mean be found, by any discourse of reason,
how to remedy so much evil. For if it should have passed by counsels: there
has bee^ such a multitude of people. And so many Princes to be treated withal,
that in long time and with great difficulty it should have been brought to any
concord. And if by strength, ye difficulty had been much more, for the
confederacion of the league was so great: that there was no part in Germanye,
where ye Lutherans were not the most strong. Except Cleaues and Bauer, the which
although they professed to be catholics yet they tempered so with the
Lutherans in showing of friendship to the one, and the other part in such sort,
that they might be called rather newters, then catholics. All the rest not
comprehendyng the lands of the king of Romans, and a few cytyes of the
Empire, stood all in the leagues Malcaldo: so named by the Protestauntes)
after the place where it was made. And they which were not of this league, were
nevertheless called Lutherans. The pri^cipals of the catholics were these,
Colan, Metz in Loran, and Aquisgrame with few other. The pryncipals of the
league were these. August, Ulme, Argentine and Frankfort, rich and mighty
cities, and joined with them other infynyte. As Muremberg, Rotemberg, Norli^g,
and other, whose number be so great yt I omit to writ them, which were not of
the league, but yet Lutherans: so that the power of the one and the other was
the whole Empire. All the Princes and lords were entered into this league,
except the King of Romans, ye Duke of Cleues, and the Duke of Bauer, with
certain gentle men of which there were that daily turned to the Luthera^s. And
moreover they had abroad mighty and suspect friends. Now being in this power
which daily increased, and proudly presumed, to set out things not only to the
ruin of the Empire but also to the total destruction of the christian commonwealth, setting forth one new Empire with all newnes that could be devised to be
new.

At this time the Emperor beig in Flaunders and certified thereof, parted
toward Almain passing by Vtrike, where he kept the Chapter of his order of the
golden fleese. And there he gave it to certain knights, as Flemminges,
Hispamardes, Almains, and Italyans, After he passed into Gilderlande, which he
had of late gotten. And from thence he came to maistrique upon Mose, to the
which place there came ambassadors from the Lords of Almain, amongst whom it
seemed to be a slander of a fame devulged that his magesty would make an army
into Almayne, but they understanding that they were deceived in their own
co^ceites, did take no more ^cedence thereunto, for he brought with him but.v.
C. horses, with the which number he does ordinarily ride out of Flaunders into
Almaine, accompanied with these, he parted from Maistrique where he did take
his leave at his sister Queen Marye, which done: he removed with his court
toward the (...) of Luce^burge, likewise newly ^eco^^^ed of the Frenchmen. He
entered into Almain, where although it appeared yt his coming was nothing
suspect. yet nevertheless he assured himself to be out of their danger. But
he was fully determined, and removed to Sperse: where the countye Palatine and
the Launtgraue became suyters to his majesty, touching their affairs. The
Earl treated of the commonwealth, and the Launtgraue to prove conclusions for
his purpose pretended. The Earl could bring nothing to pass, nor the
Launtgraue obtained any thing to his intent, so the one and the other parted
from the court. The Earl in short time after joined him self with the^ of the
league. His magesty rem^^^d from Sperse, where he passed (...), trauesing
Sueuerla^d. He came to Tonauert, Inglestot, and to Ratisbone, where the
counsel had been conuocate ye year passed. Procurers were sent from the
Princes, and cities of Germany to his magesty being there where they began to
treat of many things touching the commonwealth.

At this time there was married the eldest daughter of the King of Romans,
named Anne to the son of the Duke of Bauer. The second named Mary to ye Duke
of Cleues Now I will be brief for to begin the wars yt the Emperor had against
ye Luthera^s whose power was great and mighty, but yet I will not write of every
particular procedi^g before, nor yet other perticulers touchi^g ye state of
religion for these shall remain to the^ who have i^ charge to write more at
large for I write but only those things which I have seen and can be witness
to say the truth.

Now ye cities of ye league and lords thereof begin openly to show how little
they were concluded in the counsel concerning that his majesty pretended, and
began to murmr because they understood that he ente^ded to set forth to the
honor of god and the christian common wealth, according to his office: for the
which he sent for certain upper captains, without making any great appara^ce
in respect of so great wars as might follow. But it was not so secretly done,
but that it came to the knowlage of the procurers, of the Lords and the cities
being there. For verily they lacked no power, craft, nor subtelty. So on a day
they came together before the Emperor, and ye sum of their saying was: that
as they did understand he had sent for certain Coronels and captains, for to
reise men of war. Beseching his majesty for to give the^ knowledge where and
against whom he would begin: and they would be ready to serve him as they had
been in times past. His magesty answered that he had sent for men to chastyce
certain rebels in the Empire. And they which would help to serve him therein, he
would repute the^ as good and true servants, and that he would be good
Emperor and gracious lord unto them, and they that would not: he would recko^
them in count with the rebels against whom the war should be made.

With this answer they of the league parted out of ye court to their
lodginges, and shortly after to their houses, and so to their Lords, and from
that time forth the wars began. Where of I will write as perticulerly as
shall come to my remembrance. But first it is needful to understand, where
ye Emperor was when it was declared and ye preparacio^ made at that time: you
shall understand yt he was at Ratisbone, which stondeth upon the river Danubia,
and is ye uttermost of the cities imperial stonding upon this river toward
Austrich. It is counted to be of Bauer it is a great city and of ye Lutherans,
from thence to August it is.xviii. Dutche leagues and Ingulstot ye last town of
Bauer.ix. leagues upon Danubia upward from Ingulstot to Culo^, al Almain except
some Bishops and a few tounes be Lutherans, and those which be not for their
safeguard, vitail ye enemies as ye other do. The Duke of Cleues although he be
catholic, has detracted his business so slowly (I do not say fearfully) yt
his taryig i^ determinacio^ has not a little e^creased ye difficulti of our
wars. For if he had shortly det^mined, his magesty might have made necessary
provision one month erst the^ he did, and not only this inco^uenie^ce, but
also ye kig of Romans, because of his business tarried one month longer then
his magestyes expectacion was. His coming being so necessary for diverse
causes. And moreover the^ this there came much damage by ye reason of scant
secretnes, and little regard of some ministers which by the reason of passion
or affeccion, could not keep silence. In so much that our enemies had knowledge
first and before our fre^des. His magesti had no thing in order for yet the
Almayns and Spanyardes lay still in three (...), of who^ we shall speak
hereafter: nor yet the Pope had not sent his men which he had appointed to
send, so that our strength was al in the determinacion of the Emperor and
power of ye catholics in Germany.

They of August were the first yt raised men and not named to be against the
Emperor: for at this time they suffered his servants to come and go into
their city, to dress their harneys, bye and sell. Now his magesty had sent
Alipzando brother to the Cardinal of Trent, and George of Ranspurge one old
Souldyer which has served him long in his wars and to Examburge he gave also
the charge of a number, and to the Marquis of Marena^, general of the artilery
that every one of these should bring.iiii. M. Almayns.

These. four Coronels according to their custom, made two regymentes, and
after there were divided emongst them egally.x. baners, sent by the bastard of
Bauer and other captains so that they came to be. L baners of duche men.xxv.
in every regyment. His majesty provided for Don Aliuaro de Sa^de, of Hu^gary
with his Terce which were.ii. M. and.viii. C. Hispanyardes. And ye Arce should
come out of Lu^bardye with three. M. The marquis Albert of Brandemburg sent in
haste for ye horses, wherewith he was bound to serve, which be two. M. and eight
C. The marquis John brother to ye elector of Brandemburg, rode and brought
eight. C. horses. The master of Pruse was appointed to brig one. M. horses. The
young Duke Henry of Brande^burg.iiii. C. horses. The Prince of Hungary. M. and
v. C. horses, but these horsemen were to be made in so many parts of Almanye:
that for to come together it was very hard, because the enemies were betwixt
them and his Majesty.

At this time the Pope sent his me out of Italy, so when he had provided these
thiges, he wrote into Flanders to the Earl of Bure, to send. x M. footmen
and.iii. M. horsemen of the Netherlanders. This camp together might suffice to
fight with any power. But being forced to come from so many parts: there
was none of it self able to fight with the enemies.

Now there went out of August xxii. Baners of the same City, and vi. from the
Duke of Vertemburg, and.iiij. of them of Vlme, one. M horses and.xxviii. pieces
of Artilerye, under the name against the Soldiers, which came out of Italy
which they said were sent by ye Pope for to destroy Almayne, and nothing
against the emperor. And so they went straight to Cluse, and because it may be
the better understand: that for to come out of Itali into Bauer they way lies
by Trent, and from thence to Inspurg is a wai: and from Inspurg to enter into
Bauer be.ii. one down by ye River to come to Rauesten, a strong walled town of
Tyrol for to enter into Bauer. The other lies above toward Suysa going through
a valley wheri^ stands a strong castle which shuts up the way not far
from Fessen, belongyng to the Cardinal of Trent, and so to Quintain emperial
and Lutheran, and Meme^ga^ likewise emperial and Luthera^s, both these
Lutherans and of the league with August. This first enterprise was because they
thought it convenient to have this passage beig next unto the^ and so they sent
thither.v. M fotemen and one. M. horsemen, with Sebastian Exertel, which had
been in times past haulberder to the Emperor. Sith a tauerner in Rome, and
after in the wars of Sandersay he was made a prouoste marshall, where he
became rich and in great estymacion in the city of August. Wherefore they
chose him to be their general, in this enterprice, and so co^tynued all the
wars after. So with these camp they came to Fiessen: which was taken by
Exartel, with out any contradiccio^, and the^ to Eluse where he entered without
shut or stroke: there were a little from thence, four or.v. M. Almains, for
the rest were at Rattisbone about his majesty. They showed themself wylling to
fight, but their captains would not suffer it, seeing the other to have so
great advantage. Then these our Almayns came by his magestyes commandment to
Rattysbone, and like so did George of Ra^spurg with his bend lying nere unto
the city of Vlme.

At this time the enemies which had taken the Eluse went streyghte to Insburg
intending for to take it, which was a enterprise of great importunitye if they
should have so done: then they might shortly have gotten the rest, for being
their they might have been lords of.ii. ways of the which I have spoken
lienge (...) Tyrol into Bauer, and more (...) the way which lies to come out
of Italy and Tre^t to Insburg, so that they might have shut up and maystered
the way, so that no men, Money, nor Victuales might have come to the emperor.
But they of Insburg provided so well, yt they would not suffer them to come nere
their town, for in.vi. or.vii. days they were.x. or.xii. M. men, Castelal the
inge their Captain. Now the enemies began to despair in this enterprice, and
turned back again leauinge Cluse and Fiessen provided. This Castelalt is one
of the eldest Captains in Almanye, belonging to the King of Romans, who
after in this war recovered the Cluse.

At this time the men which were sent by the Pope out of Italy be coming, and
likewise the Hyspanyardes of Lumberdy, and they of Naples had shipped in Pule
and were landed in the land of the King of Romans nere unto the Venisse^s, in
a town called Fume in Damacia and from thence to Corinthia and to Estria for
to come to Salebrug and so to Bauer. The enemies returned to August, after they
had provided the passage of Ratisbone with.ii. C. Hackebutters. This enterprice
was to them very Importunate, but more i^portunat it might have been: if yt
when they parted from August they had gone to Rattisbo^e for then they should
have found the Emperor so dispurueyde, that his remedy had bee^ to have gone
down by the river of Danubia, out of Almany, for as yet were not come the
bendes under the conducte of Madrucho and of George. But the Hispanyardes of
Hungarye came to the Emperor alone, and his number which is worth much in
Germany. This was our army, ordinance we had none, but we tarried for that
which should come from Viene, so that al things were unprovided, so that if the
enemies had come, they should have obtained their purpose without any
withstondyng. This was their first error.

At this time the Duke of Saxo^ and Launtgraue wrote a letter to his majesty.
The sum whereof was, that they did understand that he would chastise certain
rebels according to their deserts, and that they were much desirous to know
because they would be ready to serve his Majesty. And if he found himself
grieved in any thing against any of them, they would be ready at his
commandment to make satisfaccion according to reason.

To this letter his magesty made no answer, for not aunsweringe thereto was
his answer. For when they wrote this letter, a great part of their Camp was
on foot, and had sent to the Cities and Lords of the League to send their
number according to their pomises. And Sebastiane Exartel, was now go^e from
Auguste to Insburg, and from thence to Tonauert, as the names do sygnifie for
to defend Danubia for the defense of ye Duke of Saxo^ and Launtgraue being in
Tonauert with great provision for August for there was the Lordship of the
water of Lico, which is a passage through August and deuideth Bauer and
Sueuerland. Danubia is a passage for all manner of vituales from Vlme and
Vierte^burge, so yt the scituacion is sufficient to lodge an army: for all
things necessary. Shortly after Exartell with his Camp joined with the Duke
of Saxone and the Launtgraue so yt they al together made a mighty army gathered
of the Cities and lords of ye league between.iii. and. iiii^. score. M.
footme^ and ix. or.x. M. horsemen, a hundred pieces of Artilerie mounted.

At this time his majesty was in Rattisbone but with such a number as I have
spoken of before, nether Artilery but.x. pieces which he had borrowed of the
Cities there about, for his ordinance was not yet come from Viene. The news
that he had from his men was that Exa^burg had his Coronell in a redynes at
Mount Naegra, which with great difficulty must pass the Country belonging to
Vlme, an enemy a strong and a mighty City, and through Vierteuiburg the
strongest Prince of the League, and therefore must be fetched a great compass
by the Lake of Constance and by Cyroll a plain way and more out of peril then
the other. Also we had news that the Hyspanyardes of Naples were shipped, and
the Hispanyardes of Lu^berdi were co^mi^g and the Prince of Salmona Captain of
the light horsemen with.vi. ^ horses, and the artileri was coming in Barks, by
the River from Vie^, but the enemies being so nere it required a long time, in
the which the Duke of Saxone and Lau^tgraue might have come to Ratisbone, and
have found the emperor there with x. or.xii. M. me^ with litel ordenau^ce and
less victualles, nor yet the town so strong for to defend, and though it
had been yet it was not meite for the emperor to be set about, having no other
rescue the^ he had their. So that to my judgment: if the Duke of Saxone and
the Launtgraue, had come at that time: they had driven ye emperor out of
Rattisbone, and if they had so done: he had been driven out of Germanye, and
their coming had been light, for they had left nothing at their backs to
desturbe them, but one band of footmen lyinge in Rain. A town of the duke of
Bauer a league from Tonauert and.ii. baners of footmen in Ingulstat, which done
Peter Gushmane a Knight of themperours house, as for the people of Vauer there
was no trust in them, so that they left an enterprice to do, as I and other
thought well left. This was their second errors, that they came not together
to Ratisbone, but went to Ratyn, which was to them given without any battarie,
they suffered the garnison to depart with Baner and armor, and left one other
of theirs: and came to Newburge, where they pitched their Ca^pe. The town was
for them, for why it is belonginge to the Duke Otto, the first Duke of Bauer,
and to the cou^ty Pallatine a lord of ye Lutherans, the town is strong and a
passage upon Danubia.iii. leagues from Tonauert, and.iii. from Ingulstat.

Now the king of Romans was come unto Prague with the Duke Morres: according
to the^perours appointment, for to enter into the Duke of Saxones land
Elector. This Duke Morres is one of the Dukes of Saxone: for after ye custom
of Almayne, they part the inheritance amongst their lineage, he is a great
lord and ever has been at debate with the Duke of Saxon his cosyn, although a
Lutheran: but at the beginning of this war they were in peace: until his
majesty had set forth the banishment against the Duke of Saxone and
Launtgraue as rebels. This banishment imperial, is for to give the lands
and goods of the rebels to all that will go against them, and so the king and
Duke Morres came together to take Saxony, it came well to their purpose for all
his lands lie borderynge upon theirs.

At this time the Emperor had knowledge: that the enemies were determined to
take Lansente, a town of the Duke of Vauer standing in the way to
Rattisbone, for to go to Insburg by which ways he looked for his men which
should come out of Italye, and from Silua negra, for they had no other way
(Cluse gotten) for that taken it should be much to their advantage, for they
being there his Majesty might have been enclosed in Rattesbone, for they had
then bin in place where none of his could have come to Rattesbone, for ye
Hispaniardes and I talians must needs perforce have come that way. And
likewise the Almayns from Silua Negra, and they might have left the place
fortefied and turned again to Rattisbone. This done, his majesty had be^ in a
ruynous case, therefore he was very ernest to provide against this perell, and
in person went to defend the town, toward the which was set forth all the
force and strength of the enemies. He left in Rattesbone.iiii. M. Duche men
and a Baner of Hispanyardes with the artilerye and munycyon yt came from Viene.
And giving the charge thereof to Peter Colona. His majesty removed with the
rest of the camp: and in two lodginges they came to Landsen, he would not
lodge within the town, but he determined there to tarry for the enemies, and
for the footeme^ which were come out of Italy (if they might come in time.) The
news of ye enemies coming increased daily, with knowlage that they were passed
Ingulstat. The Emperor hearing these news, sent abroad for his me^. In the
mean time he chose a place for to fight: for this was his determinacion to do,
since there was no other remedy, or else to leave the^ Almain peaceably, the
which his majesty determined that he would never do. For I have heard hi
diverse times say, (in speaking of this terrible war,) that dead or alive he
would tarryin Almayne. And with this determinacion he abode for the enemies, in
whose parson and value was al our trust. And knowing that Rattesbone was set
in place where they could not pass, they remembered themselves and tarried.
vileagues from us, camping and interteining Minique and Ingulstat in the mean
time.

The Duke of Saxon and the La^tgraue sent a page with a trumpet to his majesty,
ye page brought a letter in a rod, as it is the custom of Almain, when one
makes war against an other. They were called to ye te^t of ye duke of Aluoy
captain general, ye which said unto the^. The answer of him to who^ ye be
sent, is, yt ye deserve to be hanged: but his majesty has pity upon your
lives, and will punish none but the^ yt make defaut, giving the^ the
proclamacio^ of their banisheme^t in print yt was proclaimed against their
masters. This me think was a direct answer. His majesty would not see the
letter to the shame and rebuke of the Lantgraue, to whom he had been good
master in time paste. About this time the footebende of Italy came unto
Landsen. It was one of the fairest bendes that ever I saw come out of Italy.
They were. x or xi* M. footmen, and.vi. C. light horses, their general was
Octauia^ Farnesse, neuew to ye Pope. Also ye duke of Florence sent* ii. C.
light horses, and one hundred from the duke of Farrer, to serve his majesty. At
this time came in the Hyspanyardes of Lumbardy, excellent souldyers, and a
little after, the good old soldiers of Naples. So these.iii. Terces were the
flower of the old soldiers of Spain.

Now the Almayns of Examburge assembled in Silua negra, be coming at hand,
but they had gone a great compass, and many times they have skirmished with
their enmies by the way. Now there was in our camp the form of an army: for
his magesty had then with them in Rattesbone.xvi. M. Almains, which were
received at ye pay xx. M as they be wont for to have emongst their
footebandes. They were about viii. M. Spaniardes, and.x. M. Italians, and now
came in.vi. C. horsemen for the marquis John from Boeme. The marquis Alberte
had viii. C. the master of Pruse had.ii. C. for all the other of the marquis
Albert, and of the Archduke might be.iiii. M. not yet come to the ryne, which
was kept with the enemies. Now his majesty, with the men that he had
brought out of Flaunders, with his court, and with.ii. C. horses of the
Archdukes, he had.ii. M. armed horses. But as to ye footmen, to my judgment,
I never saw the like. I did see the Almayns that his majesty brought to Viene,
when he went against the Turk. I. did see the Spanyardes which were there
the^. And likewise I did se the Italians, but none like unto these. I did see
the Almaynes, Hispanyardes, and Italya^s that his majesty led to Tunezey, and
those that he lead after i^to province, and those that he had when he took
Gilderland, and made the French king to retire with his camp from Cambersey.
But as I think there was none of these like unto this. Likewise say they,
which were with his majesty in the war of Sandasier, and have seen that
camp, they say that they were not like unto these, although they were well
chosen, the which I have not seen, I being absent. After that al these were
come together, he parted from Landsen, and went to Rattesbone for to take his
artillery and men that he there left, and from thence to go to seek his
enemies: and being at Rattesbone, he commanded to set forth six and thyrtie
pieces of artillerye, leaving three banners to keep the rest. Then with his
camp he took the way to Ingulstat, where the enemies intended to camp. It
is from Rattesbone to Ingulstat.ix. leagues, which.ix. were divided in four
iourneys, so he came with his camp to a place upon Danubia called Newstat,
there was a bridge, but he caused two other to be made of the barges which he
brought in his camp, for he determined to pass the river in any wise.

His majesty being thus purposed, he was enfourmed that the duke of Saxon and
the Lantgrane with all their camp, upon the other side of Danubia, had taken
the way to Rattesbone, an enterprise well undertaken. His majesty sent four
hundred Spanyardes, hackbutters horsed, and.ii. baners of Dutchmen, the which
by their diligence the same night yt they were sent, entered into Rattesbone,
the which was now sure. For if the enemies came not, it was safe. And if they
came, they might defend until they might have rescu from the ca^p, which might
well be had, (Danubia being betwixt us and our enemies.) But they seeing that
Rattesbone was provided, or because they perceived that his majesty would
pass the river, and lyi^g at their backs might take away their vitayles,
being within iii. leagues of Rattesbone, they gave a turn toward Ingulstat,
making great have to be out of the woods and streyte passages, where it was
thought they might have been well ouertake^. But we having no know ledge of the
country, so that they with extreme diligence did geat the plain field, so
that when our light horsemen had passed the wode: they were nere into Ingulstat.
His majesty in two days passed the river, and lodged his camp in a valley,
upon a little mou^tayn nere unto the river, and this lodgyng was two mile from
Ingulstat. This passage was of great importance, for it did not only cause
the enemies to be advised: but also to be drieuen together, and not to go
like Lords in the fields as they had done. For this showed them that his
determinacio^ was to fight when time and place might serve. There our camp was
fortified with a little trenche, for the duke of Aluoy had so taken the ground
that it neded not to make any other. There was alaru^, although it was not
true, our soldiers were so well ordered that it might be euidentlye seen, how
willing they were to fight.

At the end of two days the Emperor parted from thence, when he had news
that the enemies were lodged on the other part of Ingulstat six miles.
Wherefore he made speed to take their lodgyng that they had left the day
before that he departed from his. Now it was conueniente, that the Emperor
should make haste toward Jugulstat, and not to leave it in peril to be taken
with the enemies: For why, from thence they might lightlye have distourbed
monsuer de Bure from ioynyng with our camp, or else they might have taken
their lodgyng betwixt it, and the place where we had lodged. But the
Emperor consyderyng how much it did importe, being now so nere unto the
enemies to be ever their superior in lodgyng: he sent to view two lodgings,
the one was a league from Ingulstat, (which I have spoken of,) and in our
way. And the other near unto Ingulstat upon the other side, for it behooved to
take that next unto the town before the coming of our camp, the other in
our way was good to be taken. Before that his majesty should set forth
his camp, his intencion was to have these two, so that if he might not
occupye that next unto Ingulstat, yet that he might lodge in the other, and
therefore the day before, he had sent John Baptista Gastaldo, master of the
Camp general, for to be particularlye viewed* And he with all speed that
might be, the next day in the morning removed his camp, the which went in
partz vawarde and battle. The baggage and artillery upon our left hand upon
the river side. Our horsemen upon the right hand, and the footmen i^ the
midst. The duke of Aluoy did lead the vaward, and the Emperor the battayl.
With the Duke went the marquis Albert and his horsemen, and the master of
Pruse. And with the Emperor, the Duke of Austriche, and the prince of Pyemont,
and the marquis John of Brande^burge. The Hispanyardes, Dutchmen, and Italyans,
moved confyrmably to the order that was given them: so they went in the vawarde
and in the battle. The Emperor marchyng, approached the first lodgyng that I
have spoken of, and there he rested a little, whylest the batail was coming.
For now the vaward was even at hand, and there he took the duke of Aluoy
and.xx. horsemen with him, and rode unto Ingulstat for to be hold the other
lodgyng nere thereunto.

It is nedeful particularly to know, that the same day the Emperor sent the
duke of Aluoy, the prince of Salmona, and Don Antony de Tolledo, with part of
the light horsemen, and two hundred hackbutters Hispanyardes horsed, for to have
knoweledge of the enemies, (with whom they had a fair and (...) skyrmish,) the
enemies being come forth thereto with great strength. But the skirmishe being
the one part and the other retired: they turned again and came forth,
increasing so their* number in Esquadrons, that the Emperor was certified that
they were coming with all their camp, to battle, so it was necessary to set
al things in order. The Emperor commanded the duke of Aluoy yt he should take heed in all points to the proceeding of the enemies. He turned into ye place
where he had staide the vaward and the batail in ye lodging aforesaid being in
the way chosing a place mete for to fight. He set the footmen in place
convenient, and the artillerye and horsemen where they should stand. And so
they stood loking for the coming of the enemies, which made countenance yt
they would fight. I think under correccion of better judgment, yt if they had
come yt day to fight with us by the way, they might have put all things in
great adventure, although we had taken a place favorable enough for our
advantage. But it seemed to the Emperor that they would not fight that day,
seeing that they had differred the time so long, for it was somewhat late: but
the duke sent him word for to stay, for he thought the enemies made a great
muster to pass forward, but incontinent he sent him word to keep on the way
with his camp, for the enemies began to retire unto theyrs. This varyaunce
was a cause of the late departure. For the Emperor seeing how much more he
should adventure in tarrying, then to come late that night, and how much he
should give unto his enemies to give them one night, and part of the other
day, and space to ame^^^ their lodgings, and that they had erred when that
they had not disturbed our ca^pe by the wai, he came (although it was late)
unto his lodgyng, which was on the other side of Ingulstat, toward the
enemies, having the town upon o^ur backs: and Danubia upon our left hand, and
a marris upon the right hand: and at the fro^t, the plain fields. The duke
of Aluoy caused to be closed up with great diligence, the most part thereof. It
was thought, if the enemies had come the next day, it might have turned us
to great trouble. But they had such a confidence in their great number, and so
stout, that they thought al times and places might have served for to achieue
their enterprise. For the Launtgraue had promised the^ of the league, that he
would drive the Emperor out of Germanye in iii. months. To these words
the lords and the cities gave such credit, yt as to a thing done, some of the^
did give him more then he did demand. And so he carried.iii. or.iiii. score
thousand footmen and more. Then.x. thousand horsemen, and one hundred and
thirty pieces of artilery, but that night they styrred not with any horses
abroad in the fyelde.

The next day the Emperor provided for all things necessary, against such
things as the enemies might take in hand: but that day they made no mouyng nor
stirryng at all.

The other day following, he went to view their strong lodgyng aforesaid.vi.
little Italian miles from our lodging, in a strong place: for upon the
righthande and on the front, they had adepe river and a marrish kept with a
Castle sta^dyng upon the said river, upon their backs a great wood, upon ye
other side a mountain, whereupon they had laid their ordeinaunce. There was
at this view a skirmish but it was of little effect.

The next day after, the enemies set forth their horsemen and fotemen in
arraye, it was thought that they would come to our camp, but it was not but to
take the muster of their folks. When they had taken it, they returned to their
lodging, sith the next day after they raised their camp from thence, and came
with in three miles of ours, in a strong place amongst little hills, having
the water somewhat far of. The Emperor was purposed to cut the^ from that.

The duke of Aluoy consulted with his majesty, and sent Don Aluaro de sand, and
Arze, with one. M hackbutters, giving them instruccions what they should do,
and guides which knew they country. And they passed through a wood, and brake
into the lodging of the enemies, about one or two of the clock in the night,
and killed the watch and many other, before the camp could be set in order.
They gave the^ a great alaru^ and lost but.2. or.3. soldiers, one of our
soldiers had gotten a horsemans standerd. I think they were killed with their
own men, for the night was very dark. After this, Octauia^ with John Baptista
Sabello, captain of the horsemen, and Alexander Uitello, captain of the
fotebe^d of ye Italia^s, appointed with their men to give them a skirmish, and
so they set forth the next day, but the enemies apointing the same they had
taken a place in the wood that was chosen by duke Octauian and his other
captains for the same purpose. But the enemies began to set upon our men in
a barn, nere unto the wood, and there was that day a skyrmishe, but it came
not to pass as it was purposed. The enemies received loss by the reason of
the hackbutters that came with Alexander. There was on both parts slain and
taken.

These two Camps being but three mile a sunder, and being betwixt the^ but a
little river, which in many parts might be passed, and the passages more nere
unto their Camp then to ours: so that the skyrmishes could not be made but
the one part must pass by leisure, al things came unto this term. It was
devised how they might be grieved, for tarryi^g or not tarryi^g there: it must
needs be done, having a respect by what pollicye it might be done. But early
ye next day, they raised their camp in order with all their artiliery, the
which they might easily carrye, the fields being so open and plain. And so in
the morning they were passed the river before said goi^g over against our camp.
The Emperor commanded althinges to be in order, ye day began to wexe clear, ye
mist did break, so yt we might the more clearly see them, and as I thought,
they were in form of a new moan. Upon ye right hand, there was a marrish which
lay upon our left hand to Danubia, and upon that side rode a great esquadro^ of
horsemen and x. pieces of ordinance, and upon their left hand, did ride one other
with.xx. pieces of ordinance, and so al their horsemen were divided and scattred
in the fields, not in ra^ckes but in parts, because they would shote of, and
therefore they set forth their artillery and horsemen. Their fo^eme^ marched
after in ra^ckes. On this sort went the Lantgraue to fulfill ye promise yt he had
made to the cities of the league. Our camp was set in an order to fight
according to their quarters as they were lodged. The Hispaniardes stood in ye
front of the enemies, they had ye marish upon ye left hand. The Almains of ye
regiment of George did stand on ye right hand with a winge of hackbutters
Hispaniardes, and by and by stood turning toward the right hand ye most part of
ye foteme^ of Italy, for part of the^ were in ye fort yt was made in ye
marrishe. Nere after the^ ever following upon the right hand, stood ye Almains
of ye regimente of Madrucho, from the^ to ye town it lay open, and so part of
that space was shut with ye timber of our bridges. And ye rest was set with our
horsemen in.iiii. esquadro^s: for because if ye enemies horsemen should come
upon yt side, our horsemen being set in yt hold, we might fight with them. And
likewise it was a convenient place for the charge. So by the part that the
trenches stood most low: stood ye horses, and for this purpose there were left
some spaces betwixt our Esquadrones of fotemen, the which because for to be
better understand, it is thus set forth in portrature.

At this time the enemies began for to approach, shoting of their artillery,
and with the order that they had taken to girde in our camp, from ye marrish yt
was upon the left hand, as it were the half of the plain field lying upon our
right hand, evermore shoting so nere, that many pieces of theirs, and
especially those that lay upon the right hand, did shoot within.vi. C. paces
of our Esquadro^s. Our artillery was shot of, but theirs had help by the
disposicio^ of the ground more then we had. His majesty had been round about
the camp, and did see what order the duke of Aluoy had set. And horsed and
armed as he was: he turned again and did stand before our Esquadrons, and
sometimes he went amongst the Almaynes. On ye one side and the other there was
great shoot of artillery, which was little regarded, seeing his majesty
amongst them. There it might clearly be seen in such things, how much is
worth the presence of a prince that has a good oppinion amongst his
soldiers. The enemies had approached so nere, where they thought they might
beat us at their pleasure. They made a stand with their horsemen and
footmen, and began to tempest on al parts with all their artillerye, and to
beat us so nigh, and with so great furye, that verelye it appeared to be a
storm of pellettes, for in the trenches and esquadrons there was nothing seen
but Gunsto^s and pellettes. The duke of Aluoy stood with the Hispaniardes at
the point of the camp, where the battery of the enemies was nerest at hand. A
piece whereof took away a soldier standing next unto him, as he was prouydyng
for every thing necessary. They made countenance openly two times to set
upon us. The duke took an order with the hackbutters to be advised not to
stir, until the enemies should be two pickes of length from our trenches,
for in this forte none of the shote of our hackbutters which were many and good,
should be lost. And if they should shote afar of, ye most part should be i^
vain Also he commanded, yt the first salutacio^ which is ever ye best, should
be at hand. The enemies did ever beat so yt it seemed yt they began again: they
set forth and auau^ced their esquadro^s, our artillery was shot: but as I
have said, ye disposicio^ of ye ground did help so much, yt there was no great
hurt done amongst the^. So has it plesed god to preserve us, so many as
has been sent from them, insomuche that nere to the Emperor there has fallen
many Gunstons and pellettes. Insomuche that many left lookyng to their own
peril for ye Emperor. Especially one pellet was so straight and so nere, yt
the peril was manifest, but it pleased god yt it took ye earth before his
fete. An other piece killed one of his guard, all other brake a standerd,
other.2. killed.2. horses. This was the hurt that was done about his
majesty.vi. pieces of ours did break that day, one of the^ killed.vi.
soldiers Hispaniardes, and hurt two.

The enemies preased upon us so much, that they thought to dislodge us with
their terrible shot of artillery, in geuyng shotes with their fury infernal.
And for all this fury yt never ceased, there was not one ray broken, nor any
soldier that stirred his head to look if there were any more safe then he. This
battery continued.viii. hours, when it seemed that the enemies wexed weary, and
to take an other way and not to come to battle with us, seeing that we were
more stout then they had thought we had been. His majesty parceiuing this,
and seeing now yt they began to fagge: he commanded the horsemen to retier into
their camp, and to be al ready if necessity should require to return to the
trenches on foot. Here it may be asked, to what purpose horsemen should be
entre^ched To answer this: ye trenches were made ye night before, and so low
that ye horsemen were set in place where they lacked. And where ye me^ of arms of
our enemies might enter, there stood ours, for so it was ordained, yt if they
came to fight, there we were ready to defend. All the time of this batery, the
duke of Aluoy had set forth certain hackbutters Hispaniardes: which skirmished
with ye enemies yt kept their artillery, which did lie nere unto a great house
prepared for to defend the^.vi. C. paces from our tre^ches, so that at one self
time they did beat with their ordinance, and our soldiers skirmished with
the^ that kept their artillery. Now had they continued.ix. hours and began to
retier nere unto the house, and the little river aforesaid, where above nere
unto a mylle, they had set their tents and pauillions. Now being late, they
withdrew themselves where they had pitched their camp, so that the point
toward the marrish was viii. C. paces from our camp, and the other point upon
the left hand.ii. M. and.v. C. paces.

This night the Launtgraue being at supper took the cup (after the manner of
Almayn:) and drank to Exertel, saying these words: Exertel, I drink to al
those that we have killed this day with our artillery. Exertel answered, my
lord, I do not know how many be ded this day, but I know yt those yt be alive
have not lost one foot of ground. It was said yt Ex^rtel was of opinion yt day
for to give us battle at our tre^ches, but the Lau^tgraue would not and as I
think he had co^sidred ye better, for in such things be many adventures,
chances. And for to judge according to reason, the me^ yt ye Emperor had
there, would not have been lightly dislodged, and that ye Lau^tgraue did know
verily by experience: seeing yt we had been so furiously beaten, and that he
could perceive no kind of weakness in our camp. For our soldiers stood not
only at defense, but they also stepped forth and skirmished at ye mouth of
their artilery. So it is said that the duke of Saxo^ cou^celled to give us
battle the other day at our coming. But in the end they took an other
order, and that night it was prepared yt all the carts in the field should
bring faggotes to raise the repares of our trenches, and every souldyer did
labor in their quarters, yt in ye morning the camp was fortifyed, so yt we
might be behynd them surely defended. And moreover with this, the duke of Aluoy
e^larged our trenches with taking in part of the field, and set therein sure
watch and ward.

The next day ye enemies let rest their artillery, and sent forth certain
hackbutters scattered to provoke us to skirmish, so we sent forth ix. C.
hackbutters, Spanyardes, they skirmished with their enemies in ye plai^field.
The skirmish was so, that our enemies were constrained to set forth a M.
horsemen in favor of their hackbutters, and these came in.iii. esquadrons. The
first might be. C. horses which went lose dyspersed, the other two came in
order one after another. Our hakbutters were.iij. or.iiij. C. scattered abroad,
And in the rereward came. 5.c. The hundred horses of our enemies coming lose,
set upon our first hackebutters: puttyng their trust in the plain field, in
the which, for the most part, horsemen have advantage against hackbutters. But
ours received them in such sort, that they made them to turn fliyng, so that
of necessity, the second esquadro^ came to succor with a sta^dred of Guels,
gyuing the charge upon our hackebutters. But they gave them such a rush, that
they did break in the midst and turned with the first. And so our
hackbutters ever chargyng, came the third esquadron bearyng a standred asure,
but they were so received with our hackbutters, that they brake and turned
their backs who^ward into their trenches. Many tarried behind, horse and
horsemen fallen in the field. A thing to be lauded, It was praised of his
majesty, for verily it was not egal, horsemen against hackbutters, so the
skirmish made an end of all that day.

That night the Duke of Aluoy caused the laborers of Boeme to the number of two
thousand, which be called the best laborers that can be found in the world,
to make a new trenche, the which divided, drawyng toward the house
aforesaid within four hundred paces, so that the cabbyns of the one part and
the other might reach. This trenche had help by a certain disposition of the
ground, so that the laborers might be covered out of danger. They had also
fortifyed and trenched the house aforesaid. With our trenche was charged Don
Aluaro de Sand, with his hackbutters Hyspaniardes, a work unto the enemies
very noyfull seeing we came so nere, they were like to be dyspatched with the
contynuall shoot that we sent from thence.

At this time the Duke of Aluoy consulted with his Majesty taking an order for
to send the Marquis of Marnano and Maderucho with his regyment, and Alonso
Biuas with his terce, for to kyl and degule.iij. M. Suycheners which were
lodged in the Suburbs of Newburge, for to keep the town and certain
artilerye left there by the Duke of Saxon and Lantgraue, but they were sent for
that day, and so seized the enterpryce. Another day the enemies in the same
self order as before, came into the field and set forth their artylery, and
furiously began to beat our camp, how be it not so nere as the first day:
for the new trench beside the house caused them to have a more respect then
they had before. Their battery was in more parts, but they did not so much
hurt. The Emperor heard Mass that day in the trenches, and brake his fast
amongst the soldiors of Lumberdy and Naples, in whose quarter he was. The
enemies did shoot continually, but not much to our damage, being within our
rampyers where his majesty was. There died one because his haulberde was
stricken out of his hand with a pellet, which haulberd killed one that stood
by. This day, his hal, and bedchamber was shot through of his te^t where he lay.
Thus the enemies continued their batery until it was. 4. of the clock. The^
the duke sent forth Alon so Biuas with.v. C. hackbutters of his terce, to
scyrmyshe with the^ which the enemies had set forth. He scirmished so well, that
he gat the first of their.ij. trenches, and after he turned upon them that were
in the house, he scyrmyshed with them until it was late, and then he returned
to our Camp in good order.

This night there was given to the enemies sodaynelye a larum as they had
many sithe their coming, so that they were kept wake, and dysquyeted that
day with scyrmyshes: and in the night lying in their harnes (as we had
knoweledge by the prisoners,) so that their impituous furour began for to
swage. For now we had gathered them so nere together, that their horsmenue
that were wont to ride within two hundred paces of our ca^pe to spy, came not
nere by a thousand and five hundred paces, for our hakbutters pursued them so
nere, and our trenches and repayres being so strong, that they were now forced
to have respect, and to keep them within their Camp. And moreover our new
trenche went forewarde, for his Majesty would dyslodge them in any wise.
Here it might be seen that he that came to dyslodge, was him self
dislodged. Now the trenche was driven to the house the which we have now
gotten, whereby we might easylye beat al their Camp: that there was no remedy
but away from thence. The Count Palatine sent at this time three hundred
horses, which served amongst the enemies until within a short time before
that they were broken. He excused him self, and said, that he sent them to
the duke of Vertemburge as he was bound by a promise and a league made in time
past, and not against the Emperor: and that he caused the^ to go parforce.
Let it be as it was, for the greater number that were against him, so much
more was the victory that God gave him. Many scirmishes were made in these
days, and many things done by partyculer soldiers.

One day early in the morning, they began again with their artilerye to
tempest and beat our ca^pe, but more at large the^ they had done before. This
continued until it was late: then in their retier they gave a notable peale. It
is to be known, that in these days they had sent us pelletes innumerable, of
the which there were many lost and fallen in our camp, but those that were
found about the tent of the Master of the ordenaunce, were one M. and.vi. C.
This night they had such a larum, that they were all night in array. This was
so ordinary that larums were looked for, the going out of our tre^che was the
entering into theirs. Now had they lost many horses and soldiors dead and
slain. And moreover then this, our horsemen took their victuales in all parts,
so that they lived in great travail and miserye, and we never suffered them to
rest, but some times in the night, and ever in the day, they kept their
battle ray. The^ they determined for to dislodge seeing there was no other
remedy. The next night they passed priuelye over a little river with their
great artilery and caryage, and with so great diligence, that in the morning
there could no tents nor pauilions be seen, but only their horsemen which
began to pass, for they had sent their footmen be fore, and divided their
horsemen in xiij. or.xiiij. parts, with certain field pieces which went in
the rerereward. In this order they made toward Newburge. The Emperor sent out
lighthorsme^ to se what they would do: and the^ with the duke of Aluoy and
other knights, he rode to mark their fashions, which to my sight was this.
They sent their great artilery and fotemen before, and their horsemen
incontinent after. It was a marvelous beutiful sight to see all the fyeldes
covered with esquadrons of horsemen and footeme^ in ray, and so in two
lodginges they came to Newburge.

Now the Emperor had news that the Earl of Bure had passed the Ryne in
despite of their enemies, whose Captain was the Earl of Aldamberge sent by
the Duke and the La^tgraue for the defense thereof. After this passage the Earl
of Bure made toward Fra^k fort, his ca^pe was of power to with stand the
defe^ders of ye Rine, but not to resist, they being joined with the^ of the
leage. Therefore his majesty sent to inform him how that he had dislodged the
duke of Saxo^ and La^tgraue, and that they had taken the way toward Newburge
and Tonauert, which wai the Earl ente^ded to come. It was thought best to give
him warni^g thereof, he being so nere unto Fra^kfort, douti^g that the enemies
would have taken the same way.

The Earl of Bure brought three. M. horsmenne at his charge and.iiij. M. which
were come to him belongyng to the Marquis Albert of Brandenburge, and to the
Master of Pruse, and to the duke of Austriche. The which not being of power to
pass the Ryne, they tarryed for the coming of the earl of Bure, which
brought.xxiiij. baners, good Soldiers of the Netherlande, and iiij. baners of
Hispaniardes which had served the king of England against the Frenchemen, and
ij. of Italians from the same wars, with ii. C. hackbutters, horsemen,
and.xij. pieces of artilery. The enemies at the defense of the Rine, were. xxxvi
baners, one. M. and ii. C. horsmenne. The earl of Bure set over v. M. soldiers
one night.iii. leages above the enemies, and did take a town standing upon the
same passage, where all the rest of the army might pass without any
disturbance. And after at Frankforte was foughten a great scirmyshe, where many
of the enemies were slain and driven into the town. These news came to the
Emperor, but not without great difficulty, so many towns of the enemies
being between.

The Duke and the Lantgraue being.ij. days in Newburge, in which time diverse
news came to the Emperor, some said they passed Danubia to enter into Bauer.
And other said that they would take the way to Tonauert. His majesty determined
to tarry for to see their fetch. And at the end of two days they moved they^
camp, and in.ij. lodginges they came to Tonauert, leaui^g in Newburg^. 3.
baners for to keep ye town. Here was one other great error, for there they had
one great, and a strong lodgi^g, with wood water, and al manner of virtuals,
with the bridge at Newburge upon the river of Danubia, a great countrei of
villages and forages for horses, and al at liberty through Bauer up to
Minique, they were sure of Lico the river of Angust with the town of Rain, so
that if we should have gone thither, we should have had Neweburge upon our
backs: nether could he have gone to Anguste, but they would have been there
before him: nor to Vlme, for they stand in the passage, but they looked not
upon all these qualityes, or paraduenture they had a respect to other things.
They went to Tonauert, and as it is thought by many to their great loss.

The Duke of Saxon and Launtgraue, being at Tonauerte two or three days the
Lantgraue went to a town of the Duke of Bauers, two leagues from Tonauert,
called Limbygane, which was to him yielded. He set there Commissioners for the
provision of vyctuals, he turned to Tonauert where they had strongly pytched
their camp.

In all this time wrote the Lantgraue unto the cities of the league, giving the^
accou^pte of all things that was done, putting them in comfort of more things
the^ was done, in bosting of their skirmishes, with killinge and taking many
of the pryncypalles (and this he feigned:) but in the^ end of his letters it was
ever more for money, which I think unto them was not much agreeable, for now the
time drew nere, that he had promised to drive the Emperor out of Germanye, or
for to take him. But they parceiued his busynes, order and facultye, not to be
as he had promised them, nor as they had thought.

At this time the Emperor had knowledge that the La^tgraue had taken the way
to Bendengan, against the Earl of Bure, for so it was said in the Camp of the
enemies that he would do. He sent gides of the same Country for to conduct the
Earl to his majesty by an other way, and it was determined, that if this might
not be, for to follow the enemies, and for to enclose them for the one or the
other was the reason of the war, and not to suffer the Ca^pe of the enemies
to go against the earl of Bure.

Now his majesty turned toward the principal Cities which were left
provided by the Duke of Saxone and the Lantgraue, for it should have been a
thing in vain to besiege them, and a great parell to hazard the principal
part of our army against the number in the ca^pe of the duke of Saxon and
La^tgraue, being now joined with the.xxxvj. baners which had been in the
defense of Ryne, and as it was thought the enemies erred yet in this, that th^^
being at Tonauert all this time and had passed Daunbia with.x. or xij. M.
fotemen and certain pieces of artilery. They made a forte upon the river of
Lico nere unto Rain, they lodged there as me^ that would make an end of the
war, in the place that they had taken. For with the passage of Lyco, they
were sure of August, and with Tonauert upon Danubia they were sure of Vlme: but
they content therewyth, continued a great space in spendyng of time in their
lodging. At this time the Earl of Bure had passed Fra^kforte, he came by
Rotemberge and nere Noremberge, out of the way and danger of his enemies. His
majesty abode in Ingulstat for the to^ming of the Earl of Bure, and after his
coming, he rode into the fields to his ca^pe, which was fair and well
furnyshed with horsemen and footmen.

After that he had been there two days, he determined to follow the enemies,
and first to Newburge, for he would not leave so strong a town, so well
provided at his back especially standing upon Danubia: a principal river and
so necessary to serve a Camp. Wherefore he would go him self to vewe it,
taking with him the light horsemen, and a number of hackbutters Hispanyardes. So
early in the morning he set forth and went to Newburge, where he light on
foot to take the vewe thereof. They sent pellettes but to a little effect.

The next day in the morning, he raised his camp, and caused brydges to be
laid over Danubia, so that in short time he passed over and lodged. j mile from
Ingulstat, in the wai to Newburge, and from this day forewarde, our Camp went
in an other order the^ we had gone: for we had gone but in two parts, vaward
and battle: because if we should have made a rereward, every part of the.iij.
had been to weak for our enemies, they being superior in number. Therefore our
vawarde and battle, went in every one of them.ij. esquadrons of fotemen,
and.ij. of horsemen, for to be the more strong whatsoever might chance. But
after the coming of the Earl of Bure, we made arerewarde. In this sort his
majesty took the way toward Newbrocke, where at the first comi^g, the
Burgemasters did yield up the town. And the captains therein, set by the Duke
of Saxone and La^tgraue, it was yielded to his majesty to do with the one and
the other according to his pleasure. It was much to be thought that so strong
a hold and so well provided, having the passage and rescue so nere, did so
lightely surrender.

At this time the enemies have forsaken Rain, only sustainyng the forte upon
the river of Lico. Before this time there has been diverse opynyons that his
majesty should not set forth toward Newbrocke being so strongly defended, but
he was determined therein. He left two baners of Dutchmen, and ser the men of
war in an I Will nere unto the Castle for that night.

The next day his Majesty with the order that he had taken, lodged in the
orchardes and suburbs of Newbrocke, and there was taken the armoure and weapon
from the soldiers, where he might as well have taken their lives being
Rebels to their Prince, he took their oaths and let them go. He did the same
to the Captains saying: he did know that they were begyled. They answered,
not only begyled, but also enforced.

His majesty being three days in Newbrocke, he made a general muster, in the
which he found. ir. M horsemen, and.xxix. M. footeme^. How be it, they had been
a greater number, but they were now mynyshed by hurt, slaughter and infirmiti.
After he had taken the fidelity of the town, he set a garyson there, and
after he would seek the enemies, for his inte^cion was to find the^ in place
where he might give the^ battle. He determined to pas Danubia by ye bridge of
ye same town, for to make toward Tonauert, for it was said that they had
ca^ped, and that there they would make an end of ye war, in.ij. days, his
maiesti aproched within a leage of their ca^pe, where he came to a village
called Marquese^, the distance was not much, but ye difficulti was more,
because of a thick wood standing between the.ij. ca^pes, having no other
passage but.ij. or.iij. cartwaies. This wood began at our ca^pe and extended
unto theirs, his majesty commanded to vewe the ward, to see by what
possibility an army might pass, and whether by the disposition of the place
the ca^pe might lie so nere the enemies to make us lords of the wood. He sent
the duke of Aluoi with a number of hakbutters which were divided in ye wood, as
it was thought Then he with.xxiiij. horses passed through the wood, so nere
unto their trenches, that he was within the shoot of a saker. The Duke took
with him three or four and went on foot, where he did see the scituacio^ of
our enemies, they were so busye in labor, that they had no other regard.
There the Duke perceived that the wood stretched so nere their camp, that
there was but a little plain of.iiij. or.v. paces, and at the utter part
thereof, one step going down, and a like going up. And upon the top of the
bank they made their trenches so, that upon the left hand it joined with the
wood. This vallei served as a ditche. Upon the right haud they were fortified
with Danubia, so that there was no place to lodge our camp.

With this relation he turned to the Emperor, who seeing that it was not
possible to aproche our enemies for the causes above said: his majesty imagined
by what means he might remove them out of their strong lodging, for being
there and the wood between, it could never be brought to pass, but this
war should be ever at large. Then he concluded that we should go with our
camp on the right hand toward a town called Bendengen, leaving our enemies
upon the right hand.

IT is to be understand that the Emperou has travailed much in Germany,
whereby he does not alonlye know a great part thereof, but moreover he has a
discrescion and a universal knoweledge of all the whole country, so that when
need shall require, verelye he does deserne and comprehend the scituacion of the
cities and towns, and how they stand with their dystances the one from
another, fo that it apeareth that he has been there parsonaly, rather the^ by
sight of painting: so that it was his opinion, that his camp being at
Bende^ge^, we might be lodged at Norling, and there being, we should have a
good country for victuals, and at the backs of our enemies, and a place whereby
might be taken from them, all that came from thence. All the time the Emperor
was in this determinacio^, there were continually scirmishes in the wood, by
forragers, but no great slaughter on the one part nor on the other. And whe^the
dai appointed was come, the Emperor comanded for to dislodge in the order
acustomed and being a great mist we ca^e to Monehu^, a town in the liberties of
Newbrok. The day following his majesty dislodged and ca^e in a litter because of
his Gout. At his coming to Bendenge^ the Duke of Aluoy sent him the
Burghmasters, which did yield the^ and their town into his hands. Now his
majesty was certified that the horsemen of our enemies appeared after our
rereward, wherefore he commanded it to be reforced with hakbutters, for
according to the disposition of the way, they were most necessary, and
therefore to be set in place where they might be profitable if the enemies
should take the way to make any other provision. This day we lodged between
Bende^gen and Norling ever kepi^g this order. The vawarde stood ever in array
to the coming of the battle, the which in coming made their esquadrons. The
vawarde and the battle lodged, they abode the coming of the rerewarde, this
was the order in all his wars.

The camp of the Emperor being lodged, did come knowledge that Norlyng had
received.ij. baners from the duke of Saxon and Lantgraue, for the which doing
they did much repent as they confessed after. In all this time the moui^g of
the enemies was not known, but that they had set two baners in Norling that
night. After the ca^pe was lodged were sent forth light horses for to search
the ways toward the enemies, by whom we were certified that one part of the
footmen were discovered, and.ij. esquadrons of horsemen with their carriage,
but no knowledge what way they would take. This referred to the Emperor he
commanded the camp to be in order before the day.

At this time came an other warnyng that they marched straight toward our
camp, this was a little before the day: so the camp stood al in a readiness,
and when it was day, the mist was so dark, that it differd but a little from
the night, his majesty was then much payned with the Gout, nevertheless he
commanded horsemen and footeme^ to be ready in esquadrons and not to look for
the breakyng up of the myste, so that if the enemies came to fight, they should
not find us out of order, or if they should paraduenture take an other way,
and the place might give us occasion to present the^ battle.

At this time the mist continued so dark, that verelye we could not see the
enemies, nor our camp with our esquadrons, standing so nere together could
not deserne one another. The enemies by the help of the mist (which for a
truth may be called help) they followed the way to Norling. They passed. ij
passages before they could be discovered with our horsmenne, so that by. ^ij.
of the clock in the day, they had passed these two streygtes, and dangerous
river, and gotten the mountain going toward Norli^g. They had a great time for
they went all the night, and after in the day in the mist so close, that it
served them as well as the night. They marched so dyligently and with such
speed, that it would never have been thought that the Almaynes, which seem
to beslouthful and heavy, would have made such speed, but we have seen the
experience in this war, that they can warlyke raise their ca^pe in good
order, and their carriage together with their artileri in place convenient at al
times when need shall require. And seeing that I have said so much, I will say
more of that we have experience of this nation. This it is, they can raise
their ca^pe (as I have said) and chonse sure and strong lodging, haing a
respect to al commodities that may be for a ca^pe. yet there is an other thing
that I note much in them, that in their skirmyshing, they come out stronglye
and retier warrely, beginning with their light horses which they call black,
taking the name of their black harnes which they bear with sieues of mayle,
short dagges of. ij palms of length, and iauelyns, with which they are very
handsome. And as for their footmen, they keep good order and ca^ take great
advantage with artilerie. They can break victuals from their enemies, set
emboyses, and other like feats of war to good purpose. This was the
dylygence of our enemies by the help of the night, and after of the mist. Now
his majesty had seen our camp in order, and when it was clear day, the duke
of Aluoy came and certyfied him, that he thought they would give battle, for
he had seen them in order, and ready for that purpose. To the which his majesty
answered. In the name of god. For if the enemies would fight, so would he.
These were his words in su^me sitting on horseback, for because of ye gout,
he might not stand on foot. He did take his curates and braselets and moved
the camp in this order.

The duke did lead the vaward, and with him ye Earl of Bure, with all his
horsemen and foremen. In this vaward went all the foteme^ of Spain, and shortly
after went his majesty, the horsemen of his house and court, and the bendes
of Flaunders, which went with their standerdes. There went the prince of
Pyemont, to whom his majesty had given charge in those wars, with ye
esquadron of his house, and the court. There went also Maximilian the prince of
Hu^garye, with all his horsemen. The marquis Iho^ of Brandemburge with his. The
foteme^ of the battle were the regiment of Madrucho and the Italyans: the
rerewarde was conducted by the great master of Prence, and the marquis Albert,
the regimente of George of Ranspruge. The vaward did lead sixtene or seuentene
thousand foteme^ in three esquadro^s, and three thousand horses. The rereward
might be.viii. thousand fotemen, and ii. M. horsemen in one esquadron. The
horsemen of these three parts were divided co^firmably for ye necessity,
setting ye black harnes in place conueniente, and the men of arms with their
lances in their places. The rereward and the battle went, (as it were) egal:
for why, his majesty would honor the captains which were willing in such a day
to mete ye enmies in fro^t, and not to be left behi^d

It is to be understand, yt before the breaking up of the myste, the Prince of
Salmona had begone a skirmish with the enemies at the coming of the
Emperor. It was so hot, that his majesty sent the Earl of Bure with his
horsemenne, to be nere unto the river, whatsoever might chance. Al things
being in these terms, now ye battle of his matesty, had made egal with ye
vawarde coming to ye shore. And there he took ye duke of Aluoy, and other
captains, and went upon a mou^tai^ where he might se what ye enemies did. In
some things there it did appear yt they would accept ye battle, and come down
into the plain, lying between yt hills and the river. To ye which they were
much procured on our part, with a new skirmish of back butters, yt were sent
over the water. But they kept the mountains going toward Norling, and now
their vaward had taken their lodging. His majesty made the camp to stay, but
now the Earl of Bure had proved the passages, with certain horsemen, but it
was streyte, and trauelous to be done late and far of the day. But this day
it had bee^ foughte^ without any dout, if the miste had not covered the enemies
so long time until they had passed the streightes and passages aforesaid,
feding us with skirmishes to their advantage, for our horses could not pass
the river in any order, and our fotemen wadi^g through the water, should have
foughte^ with great travail, but they took an other counsel: for they did
take a lodging easy to be kept, with less power then they had, but now as I
have said: it was late, and time to turn unto our camp, and the enemies in
the mountains, did the same. This night they lost many soldiers and carts
which our horsemen did take.

The other day his majesty thought best to raise his camp, and to go nere
unto the enemies, and so in the self and same order as the day before, he went
over against them and took a place for his lodgi^g one mile and an half from
their camp, where the same day was foughten a skyrmish of horsemen. In the
which the marquis John of Brandenburge with.xxx. of his horsemen did fight
against one of ye dukes of Bru^zwique which came with ye camp of ye enemies,
he was hurt and after died of his wou^des at Norling, and other notable me^ of
theirs which were hurt and slain yt day, and some of ours likewise.

His majesty being there lodged certain days, seki^g by all means to have the^
in chase, but they were so settled to their purpose for vitailes, that he did
know it was necessary for to move the reason of the war, and not to lie
ca^ping and lesing of time without any profit against the enemies which
were so stronglye lodged, that for to remove them, it behooved rather to use
pollicye then force: and there about he was determined to work. And thought
which way he might take away from the^ Danubia, the which was so necessary
for both ye camps, yt to my judgment, a great part of the victory did
consiste in the geatting thereof, for the towns standing thereupon, be of great
importance to be lords of the bridges, for to go into Beauer and Sueuer. And
at this time, the enemies had al those betwixt Vlme and Tonauert, and so they
were lords of great plentye of vytayles For they had the passage of Angust at
their pleasure, then he seeing, that the geattyng of them should be to their
great detryment and disaduauntage, and that moreover he might have places
necessary both against Angust and Vlme, two principal heads of the league.
He considred what was best to be done, and so he devised in this sort. He
commanded a muster daily to be made against our enemies. The^ he sent one
night duke Octauian, with the horsemen and fotemen of Italy. And Examburge with
his Almayns and.xii. pieces of ordinance: with all diligence to Tonauert, from
our camp.iii. leagues, giving them instruccions what was to be done Whereby
with great diligence they came unto the town early in the morning, where they
began to beat, without ra^pire or trenche. And so with open staling they
entered. There went out fleyng over the bridge two baners of foteme^, which were
set there by the duke and Launtgraue.

Now I have thought good for to declare one thing, which the readers may
desire to know. How many soldiers be a banner.ii. or. iii because I have
spoken ofttymes of banners, and not of the number. A banner of Dutchemen is
commonly of.iii. C. men or above. This town gotten, they left their two
banners, the rest returned to the camp. The enemies had no knowledge of this
until the next day in the morning, for although they lay nere unto our camp,
it was done with such dilygence, that they had no understanding thereof. This
was of great importunity, by reason of the scituacio^ of the place. In one day
his majesty raised his camp, and removed to Tonauert, and there lodged and
the town at his back, upon the left hand Danubia. That day the enemies
moved not, for to give any disturbance in our way, whereof I have maruayle,
being so great a noumber of horsemen, and knowing the country, and the passages
so much out of order, for in passing we have been oftentimes in stay and
loosyng of time: and forced to be subject to many inconveniences. How be
it, his majesty had provided against all sinister chances. He set the
hackebutters Hyspanyardes and Italyans, in a place apt for their purpose. The
rerewarde was fortified, according to the disposicion of the way, which gave
no place, but to go in range. At length he came to Tonauert, and from thence
to Tillingam, above upon Danubia, which is a town of ye Cardinals of Angust.
There is a good bribge and a plain way, having Danubia upon our left hand,
and upon our right hand, a great thick wood, standing betwixt us and our
enemies, ever following, until we came to the river of Prence, which is three
miles above T^llinga^, and enters into Danubia: and so we went, leaving the
wood upon our right hand. In the which there be two ways from Norling to
Tillingam. His majesty taking that ways, there came to him to be surrendered,
the town of Ho^hscot, with a strong Castle standing upon Danubia. Likewise
was surrendered the town of Tillingam, which was taken from the Cardinal of
Auguste, wherein was a banner of guard, but they fled when they heard of his
coming. He lodged that day between Tillingam and Londgingue^. There is a bridge
upon Danubia, and a strong hold reasonablye fortyfyed. There were three
banners, and that which went out of Tillinga^. They were syted by the duke of
Aluoy, for to yield. They answered stoutelye that they would not, for they
trusted to be rescued the next day, by the duke and the Launtgraue. But
seeing the batterye provided, they took an other counsel, and in the night
they went from thence, and took the way to Anguste. The Burgemaisters
submitted themselves with one excuse that they had been constrained by men of
war, and not willingly, to do any thing against his majesty.

At this time the Emperor had knowledge that the duke and the Launtgraue were
coming straight toward Lodgingen: to this he gave credit, in so much that the
men of war which had been there, looked for rescue. He caused the camp to
be in order, and a certain passage to be taken, where the enemies must of
necessity fight or turn back again. If they would fight, his majesty
had the place for advantage. And if they would turn back, they should
loose their labor. Then for doubt of the one or the other, they set their
enterprise aside. But al things being at this point, the town of Langinguen
came to surrender to his majesty, it was known of them, that not only they
looked for succoure from the duke of Saxon and the Launtgraue, but moreover
that Exertell had been there that night, and that he had fetched away
the four banners to Auguste. Shortelye after Longinguen, came into a town
called Gunel^inguen, standing upon the river Prence. The Emperor commanded John
Babtista Sabello, with the Popes horsemenne, and Aldadano Aguilera, to pursue
Exertell, and these four banners with their two companions, and Nicholas Seco
with his Italians, which by great diligence did overtake Exertell, where they
had a great skirmishe: wherein was taken many soldiers with three pieces of
ordinance, which they carried from Longinguen to Anguste. With this, John
Babtista Sabello turned to the Emperor, ye which Iho^ the same day left in
Longinguen two ba^ners, the Emperor lodged with all his camp. When he had
passed the river of Prence, in a village standing thereupon called Sulten, three
leagues from Vlme: for his majesty would go to Vlme, intending to take the
towns, standing upon Danubia, for he being there before the enemies, if they
would come to rescue, the battle might be to his advantage. The which he
was sure they would procure to do, except they would lose it: So he concluded
the next day to part from thence. But when the Camp was risyng, certain light
horsemenne which his majesty had sent the day before, certyfyed that the
enemies were in gate. And then it was necessary to know: whereupon they
would determyne, before that his majesty should dyslodge his camp. He sent
forth other to see what way they would take. They had gone that day a
long journey. Our horsemen had not discovered them, for being strangers in the
country, it was long before that they could find the right wai. Some
Almains brought news, but they agreed not all in one, until the enemies were
so nere that our scoutes hard their dru^mes, and one part of their men
appeared.

At this time the enemies were come so nere, that the duke of Aluoy being
abroad, he hard their dru^mes and did see some of their folks. He certified
his majesty, which went upon a mountain, where he might see the vawarde of
the enemies, with great strength of horsemen, and the footmen nere unto a
wood side, with certain held pieces, wherewith the Launtgraue professes himself
to be a great doer I do not know to whom a man should give the thanks, to
ye Lau^t grave or to his captains. But this I can say, yt it has been
diligently bestowed, as I have see^. After that the Emperor had seen the
trade of the enemies, he perceived that they would take the way toward
Guingane, standing a league from our camp. He returned to his camp, and ye
enmies to their lodging. There was at this time, a skirmish, but of little
effect. It has been thought by some that day, that it had been good to have
given them battle, but al things counted and debated, the truth is, that we
had no space nor time to have set forth our men in esquadro^s, because of
the wodes, and the spedye taking of the yr lodginges. And espectallye the river
of Prence being between both ca^pes: and if there were a fault, the fault was
this. That our enemies were found after yt the deed should have be done. And
this was through diverse relacions of the skoutes: for when the truth was
known, the time was past.

I have considred one thing in this wars, which I have diverse times seen,
that for the most part, we have lacked good guides, although they have been
naturallye borne in the country, yet of a truth we have gone groping as men
do in the dark, by conjecture, and all for lack of good guides and skoutes,
I cannot say what is the cause except it he as Caesar said by Considio, a
valiant soldier and of great experience. Ceasar sent him for to have
knowledge of his enemies. Considio roode forth and did se men, thinkyng that
he had seen the enemies He returned to Ceasar, and said that he had seen his
enemies. And that the mountain that he had appointed Labiano to take, was
taken, and occupied with the French men, and that he had seen their
banners and arms. This error of Considio, was the cause that Ceasar was all
that day in a stay, and did nothing until the enemies had time to mende
their lodgings. So Ceasar says, that Considio being afraid, he thought he
had seen that thing that he had not seen. Now this is to our purpose, for
our discouerers, either they have not seen their enemies, or when they have
see^ them, they have had little regard, to say the truth.

The Emperor being in his lodgyng, the enemies mustarde certain esquadrons of
horsemen over against him, having a little skirmishe as I have said, they
returned unto theyrs, the which although it was divided by slackes and
runnyng brooks, yet they had a strong lodging for their purpose.

This night, his majesty spoke of going to Vlme, but after many oppinions.
Finally, the next day he did take resolucion for the moving of his camp: for
why, he was certified that the enemies had sent unto Vlme, three thousand
suichiners, and xv. C. soldiers of the same country men, sufficient to
defend that city. The which so being, it was no reason to go theragaynste.
Leauyng one army at our backs of four score and.x. thousand men, for it
is clear, yi we had left our lodgyng, they would have been shortelye
therein, where they might easily have taken away our vyctualles, for they
could not come any other way. They should have been Lords of all the
towns upon Danubia. Therefore the going to Ulme was revoked, by the reason of
these particulers before said. For the manor of the war should have turned
from lodging to lodgyng, and every day skyrmishi^g, where unto ye enmies came
continuallye. The duke of Aluoy appointed to make them a skyrmishe, more then
ordinarye. So the next day in the morning, he made an Imboyshe of three
thousand hackebutters, in a wood toward the enemies standing upon Prence. He
sent the prince of Salmona with certain of his horsemenne, to give them a
bayghte nere unto their camp, and there he set upon the Straglers, there
came out in gross after their custom, some loose, some in Esquadrons, and
the prince withdrewe himself toward the place appointed. There was a great
skyrmysh with horsemenne and hackebutters, there were many overthrown, and
lay alonge in the fields, with the bendes of their color. In this skyrmishe
they did much help themselves with their artyllery, but our hackebutters
had the upper hand, by the help of our light horsemenne. How be it,
they charged stoutelye in gross, but there were of the principal horses of all
the nations that served his majesty. But the order yt the duke had taken the
night before, did not fully take effect, because of some negligence. His
majesty commanded the skirmishe to retire, to the which the enemies were so
willing, that the retrayte was all at once.

His majesty parceyued his enemies to be so lightly provoked: he intended to
give them a notable onsette. So he appointed on a day the light horsemenne to
assail their trenches, so that by skyrmishes, they might be brought abroad. He
divided the Dutchemenne couertelye in ten parts of the wood, and likewise
the Hyspanyardes, and Italyans hackebutters, and all the rest to be in a
readiness, if need should require, and moreover certain pieces of artyllerye
to be laid secretelye. He also commanded that the Prince of Salmona with his
light horsemenne, to do according to the order that was taken. Which was to
allure the enemies out of their camp. as he had done the day before. There
came forth of their camp two great Esquadrons of horsemenne, which would
not for any thing that could be done, depart from their artyller. Aynd this
I think was for one of these two causes, either they had knowledge what order
we had taken: or because they had been so skirmished with ye other skirmish
past, that they durst no more come in the place where theihadde so much lost.

The Emperor seeing there could no other thing be done, because their camp
was so strong, he procured to provide for the night, a Camesado, in the which
he appointed the footmen Hispaniardes and Madrucho with his charge. The great
master of Prence, and ye marquis Albert with his horsemen. With this Camisado
the next night the duke of Aluoy made toward their camp. The Emperor was
abroad secretelye in a place, for to have knowlage from the duke what was to
be done. But when the duke was within half a mile of the camp, he perceived
their watch to be reforced. He commanded them to stay until he had
farther knowledge, for then shortelye he did parceiue that they had warnyng,
for their linkes might be seen from one ward to an other. Then the place
considered, and how it was fortifyed and provided, it was not thought good
for to hazard upon such a chance. For after, we had knowledge that they
had warnyng four hours before our coming, by an espy out of our camp.
So the duke returned to his lodgyng before it was day, and the Emperor at
the same time. Now it seemed that this war was new to begin again, for
the enemies were so setteled, they could not be removed.

Then the Emperor began to search an other entrye, but in the mean time we
had continual skyrmishes with taking their vytaylles, and killing their
forragers with larums in the night, which is a thing noyful unto all nations.

At this time his majesty took an order, that the Prince of Salmona with his
light horses, and the Lord of Brabansone, knight of the order of the golden
Flece, Flemmyng, with the Earl of Bures horsemenne, should go in a skoute, as
the enemies did. They met with two great bendes of horsemenne, not far from
their camp, where was overthrown, slain and taken, a great part of them, a
standerd, and the standerd bearer was taken. There was a chance, which I have
thought good to be written. It is so, that the same horsemanne that did take
the standerde, was belongyng to mounsure de Bure, which the same day in
twelve months, had killed a standerd bearer, and taken a standerde from one
which was brother to this same standerd bearer. This done, the Prince
returned to the Emperor, after that he had slain and taken many of the
enemies, bryngyng a great noumber of horses and carts, which turned them to
great hynderaunce, loss, and detriment.

At this time the Emperor determined to change his lodging for diverse
causes: one was because of the great infyrmitye and sickness amongst our
souldyers, and also it was so full of mudde and mire, that our artillerye was
welnere immouable, so that we could not help our selves therewith: wherefore it
was thought most conueniente to return to Longinguen, as to a place most
mete for all things necessary. In this lodgig died ye Coronel George o^
Rausburge, which in all the Emperors wars had done good service. At this same
time ye Cardinal Fernese, nenew to ye Pope, returned to Rome.

The Emperor departed from this lodging of Sultan, with the order accustoined,
and came to Lau gingam. This day the enemies made no show, but with one
esquadron of.iiii. C. horses. There have been diverse oppinions, that if the
duke and ye Lau^tgraue had would they might have given battle to their
aduauauntage, for they had enforced their camp with.xv. M. men of Uiertemburge
which they call choorles, but such choorles as they be, they have of late
given an overthrow to.xxv. M. Suichiners Now they be in strength and we
lacking, for the Almayns of the ouerland and of the netherlande be fallen in
sickness, and of the Hispaniardes a great number. There could not be
found.iiii. M. Italyans, for the rest were dead and gone unto their country,
but as I have said, the enemies made no demonstracio^ for to take any
advantage of any commodity that they might have for to fight. After ye
Emperor departed from Sultan, and was lodged at Laugingam, he had news from ye
kings brother, that he had the victory in Saxony, and that he and ye duke
Morris had taken the most part of the estate thereof, the which for to be
more spedelye signyfyed unto our enmyes, or for because thet did know that we
had knowledge, there was sent a great salutacion of artillery.

All the time that the Emperor was lodged in Longynguen, he rode daily
about the camp, (as it is his ordinarye custom in all his wars,) and into
the fields, for to behold where the enemies might occupye any place
against him, or he against them. They had been two or three times spying
about a castle in the keeping of the Hispanyardes, a mile from our Camp,
(but ever at such times when they could not be overtaken.) When the
Emperor had diligentely considered all things, he sought for to have an
other lodgyng, so that his doings hence forth might take better effect. He
found one for his purpose, and after he turned to his camp, which was so full
of mudde and mire, that our men of war were sore travailed and weryed.
Wherefore there were diverse opinions, but al agreed that his majesty should
dislodge and to avoid his me^ by garysons, and so for to make the war, but
he was of a contrary opinion, and that was to follow the wars, and this was
the best as it has proved since by experience.

Now being in our lodging so foul and myrye, that our carts nor yet wagones
could come in with victuals, he determined to remove to ye other, which he had
before seen, leading the camp in two parts, the footeme^ and artilery in the
one part, and in the other part the horsemen toward the enemies. This day I
think that the enemies might have geuin us battle, for they had the plain
fields to come aga ynste our horsemen, our footmen and artylery far of. I
do not know the cause, except they did not know our passage, in the which
the Emperor was forced to divide by parts, as I have said. The way was of
such sort that this must needs be done.

The Emperor being lodged (as it is said) it was a great pleasure to all the
army, in so much that it was called in praise, the Emperors lodging, for it
was diffarent and did excede that which we had le^t: for there was much wood
and water, a strong place and for the resort of victueles, commodious: A
mountain upon the front against our enemies, much like unto the work of
hands, whereupon we laid our artilerye, from whence we might shoot into the
fyeldes. Upon the right hand we had a Marrys, and upon the left hand a
great woodde, the which did extend upon our backs: We were so nere
unto the enemies, that our ward and theyrs skirmyshed ordinaryly. The
Emperor commanded to cut their vyctualles, the which was done by such
dylygence by the lygh^ horses and hackbutters, that all the way going to
Norlyng, Tynckespoole and Vlme, did lie full of deadde men, broken carts,
and vyctualles scattered. And of our part there were given so many skirmishes
in the day, and larums in the night, that they could neither eat nor sleep in
rest.

Now our camp being lodged in this place, called the Emperors lodgig, our
advantage began for to appear, and our enemies to be more slow in skirmishes,
for they came not out with such vigor, nor so lustely as they had done, but
our men assailed their trenches, out of the which they came but seldom times.
They showed only with their artilery what wyls they had to skirmysh, for now
with their go^nes they begin to make a forte, and many times prisoners were
taken nere unto their camp, and they were not only oppressed in this, but they
began to be in great penury for lack of bread insomuche that diverse prisoners
confessed that they had been.v. days without it. And moreover that they were
in great fear, seeing that they had thought that the Emperor had been gone
afar of, and yet he was returned more nere at hand then he was before, and
with his camp he determined to put them to flyghte, the which they might well
perceive, seeing the place yt he had taken. And because he would the more
oppress them, he caused a mount over them for to be taken, so that they might
easily be beaten in all parts. At this time the city of Norling entreated to
yield, the which had: there did need no other advantage for to dislodge the
enemies, for one Garrison being therein, their victuals might be taken, whereby
they might be in famyne more hard and sharper then any artilerye.

At this time the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue were at a consent for to write
a letter to the Marquis John of Bra^denburge brother to the Electour, the
which should be written in the name of a knight, servant to the Electour.
The substance whereof was, that the knight should pray the Marquis John,
that he would speak with the Emperor, and say unto him: seeing that he was
a Prince inclined unto all reason, he thought it should be good yt by some
means peace might be ^ounde, laying before him the wealth of Germany. And to
this they offered certain capitulacions touching relygyon, which were to the
great advantage of the Catholics, but not so great as his majesty by the
help of God did entende. This letter was written by this knight, called Adam
Trope, chaunceler to the Electour of Bra^denburge, it was brought by a
trumpette to the Marquis John, whereof he made relation to the Emperor, and by
his consent it was answered* that if the Duke and the Launt grave would put
their parsones and estates into his hands, he would be content to speak of
peace, or else not. They hearing th^s answer, wrote again, saying: that the
affairs touching parsons of estate, required delyberacion, wherefore they
thought it good that he and the Earl of Bure, with ye duke, and the Lantgraue,
might common together in so^e place appointed. The Marcas wrote unto them again
by the Emperors consent, the very same words as he had before written.

Now they of Norling either by dissimulation, or for because they were not of
power to put out of their City the banners there left by the Duke and the
La^tgraue, they treated so long, yt the Emperor thought best to take the upper
hand, and for to dislodge the enemies parforce for being there it could not be
done, but he was determined in any wise it should be done. So the next day we
raised our camp. He commanded their camp to be beaten, for sithe that
Norling did so tracte the time, he would take an other order. This was in the
latter end of Noue^ber, in which time was taken the Lantgraues brother in law,
by his other wife which he had taken, for so they keep the laws which they
find in their gospels.

At this time the Emperor had news that the enemies were up and going, but
this was about the midst of the day, for the Spy (although he was natural
of ye country) had lost his way, therefore we had no knowledge, until they
had hurnt their lodginges, and sent their carriage and great ordinance before.
And at midnight their footeme^ began to march, leaving in the rereward their
horsinen and small artylery, which were wont to go before. The Emperor hearing
of this, he sent certain light horsemen for to be clearelye certified of their
parting. The certificacion was, that their camp was altogether forsaken. The
Emperor rode forth with the horsemen of Monsure de Bure, and commanded the
Dutche men to come after, and the footmen to be in order and ready at the
sending for them. He commanded six hundred Hispaniardes hackbutters to be set
forth as spedely as might be and then with the horsemen that he had taken, he
rode to the camp of the enemies, there they had left many sick me^, for of a
truth that made great haste. Then he commanded the horsemen to follow, and to
keep them in skirmysh. The Duke of Aluoy desired the horsmenne of the Earl of
Bure for to follow after. But now the horsmenne which were sent to keep them
in skyrmysh, turned again, with the straglers which they had taken of their
rerewarde, but their camp did keep on the way, geattyng of ground toward a
hill, where they had one thousand hackbutters, their horsmenne passed over
on the other part all except two standerdes, which tarried thereuppon with the
hackbutters. But when they did see his Majesty coming with his horsmenne,
both their Hackebutters and the horsemenne did forsake the hill, going down
toward their Army. The Duke of Aluoye did make all the haste possible for
to take the hill that they had forsaken, from whence it might well be seen
where they had taken an other hill a mile from thence. The ^^nce between
these two hyls, was all plain and dyscouered. They did lay upon that hyl.vj.
pieces of artilery, with the which they did beat all the plain fields. Now
they being gone down into ye valley, and the Duke of Alnoy upon the hyl
aforesaid, their footmen might be seen marching along, leauyng a great wood
upon their right hand. Their horsemen were divided in the plain, in.viij. or.ix.
parts. Our light horsemen did begin for to skyrmish in the valley, then one
banner of black harnes was sent down by the Duke for to engrose his skyrmyshe.
This was at the coming of the Emperor with other horses, but the enemies with
a hye trot, had gotten ground on the other side of the hyl, under their
artilerye. Then they began to shoot of at our men in the valley, their
hackbutters at the corner of the wood, made away for to be with the footmen,
which kept the ordenaunce upon the mountain aforesaid.

Now the Emperor with a few horsmenne came to the hill, which we had taken,
for the other came after as men of arms might come. He abode there for to take
advise what might be done to keep the^ there, but now the day was far past,
and the enemies being upon the hyl aforesaid, began to kindle their fyers in
many places. And his majesty seeing that it was not possible, for to over take
the^ that day for lack of warning, as it is aforsayde: he determined to take
the other hill, and to leave the Duke of Aluoy with his horsemen there. And when
it was late, he returned to the other lodgi^g for to set forth the footemenne
that night, because the enemies should have no time for to dislodge. For ye
Emperors determinacio^ was for to have the^ in chase, so that he might find
one place to give the^ a brake, and utterly to break their camp, or else to
drive them from lodgyng to lodging, as he ever had done.

Four times in these wars the Emperor has dyslodged the^, and as it seems
to be, ij. times by art and two by force. First at Ingulstat (as they
confessed them selves) they were constrained by force for to retier. The second
time at Tonauert, by art in the geatti^g of the country at their backs, in
taking of their victuals and setting upon Norling, a city of great reputacion,
and in keeping of the same, and from Norling he put the^ an other time by art:
for his majesty did take from them Tonauert, and gat all the cities and towns
upon Danubia unto Vlme. He did take away from the^ the forward and ways to
such cities where they might have any succor or aid, being the principals of
all the power by the loss whereof all their enterprise did stand at an
adventure. The fourth time was this: At Gangone where now they have been
dislodged parforce, and reason of the war, as it may be euidentlye known by
this that I have written. I will not leave one thing unwritten, although it be
but a Soldiers term, it may come to the purpose to this that I have said.
The Almaynes have a saying, that when the Lantgraue doothe manase any manne,
he threatens him saying: I will make thee to go a loofe This is the name of a
town where he gave one overthrow to one army, whereof the makes his great
boast. The soldiers reken upon this, saying: the La^t grave has threatened
until now, that he would make us go aloof, but for to pay him withal, we
have sent him now from Gangone. This in their tongue has a propertye of grace
in words amongst soldiers as Poyses myllitar which has strength and virtue.

Now to turn to the purpose, the Emperor returned to his lodging, and
because he would get time for the next day, he caused the footmen and
artilery to be spedely in order, and then after a little collacion he parted
from thence in a dark snow. At two of ye clock after midnight he came to the
lodging where he had left the Duke with the horsemen and hackbutters
Hispantards (as I have said) The footeme^ came diligently after, we did see
their fyers that they had made, and they might see ours: but leaving their
fyers burni^g, they went on their ways so that when it was morning they had
passed the river of Preuse, taking there a lodging nere unto a castle belonging
to the Duke of Viertemburge.

This night, Jews Onixi^^, captain of Lumbardy, went for to see the doings
of the enemies, who made relacion that he had seen them, and that they were on
foot and ready to depart: this was referred to the Emperor when it was light
day, but the snow which was fallen in the night, and then snowyng was two
foot deep, wherefore our Soldiers were so weary and so dispersed, sekyng where
for to warm them, that it would have grudged a man for to have seen them, and
the horses troubled with the evil night being without meat, sadeled and
brydeled all day before, it was a double travail, but neither the time, nor
the inconvenience, nor yet the strong lodging of the enemies, might suffice,
but that the Emperor would follow, except he should have other disturba^ce, as
not have vyctualles, or not to have lodgyng nere unto his enemies, or for lack
of forradge for our horses, the which without great travail then could not
be had. All those parts being gotten and destroyed with the host of our
enemies, so that through their long being there, and by the rodes that we had
made, it was impossible for horses to endure. For we were brought into the
same necessitye, whereunto we had brought our enemies, for they had the
fruitful Country of Viertemburge upon their backs, which way they made
their muster. Wherefore the Emperor being enforced of necessitye by famine
most terrible of all other in wars, and moreover with the hard and sharp
weather, the enemies having the forewarde, so that it was thought inconuenyent
to continue the camp, but his Majesty was determynes for to follow them, and
seeing upon the other part, that the wether was so terrible as it begone to be,
he would not they should lack meat, drink or lodging. So that night we came
late to the lodging with all the ca^pe, which was necessary to all men, for we
were sore travailed, but we refreshed our selves with victuals, and some rest,
so that we might the better labor and follow our busynes afterward.

This dislodging of ye Duke and Launtgraue at Gangon, was the substancial
point of the war: for from that time forth they were utterly broken and
dispersed, as hereafter follows. But before that I write, I think best to
touch one thing that in all this war they have not offered us occasions, I do
not say that we might fight with any advantage, nor yet egallye that we might
so do, sith this being of a truth as it is, offering has not been even in
deed, but set aparte: for battles be venterous, and as we may geat, so may
we leese, as it is daily seen: If we had lost, it is clearly seen what we had
lost, if we had won, it was impossible to be without great loss of blood in
our army, and a great part thereof to be broken, and the cities in Germanye
being whole. So although we had had the victory, we should have been
constrained with a broken army to have resisted a new power, and th^^ appears
clearly, sith now the enemies be broken, and the camp of his matestye
standing whole, now the cities of Germanye may have a respect to that they have
taken in hand, so that to my judgment it had been a greater honor to the
Emperor to deface his enemies, his army being whole then with any loss
thereof. It is a common proverb, bloody victory attribuite to the soldiers,
vyctory without blood, honor to the Captain.

Now to turn to the order of my writing, I say that the Emperor lodged two
days in this lodgyng called the Emperors lodgyng, there he had knowledge
that the enemies were gone from Laugingam, and divided in two parts, the one
was of the folks of the cities which did take the way to August and to Vlme,
the other were ye horsemen of the duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue: and as it
apeared they did take the way toward Fra^nckonia, and without dout, if they
might have been lords of that province, wars should have been new to begin,
for they might have rau^somed many rich towns, and bishoprics, they might
have leaued a great some of money, with great abundance of victuals and good
lodging, which be. ^ things sufficient to succor a ca^pe going broken and
traueled. The Emperor being advertised what ye enemies intended to do, as he
had before suspect, he raised his camp, and marched toward Norli^g in a
troublous weather of frost and snow, and in.ij. lodginges he came within a mile
of the town* to a village called Bo^inga^, for this was the right way to
Rote^burge, where he ente^ded to be before the coming of the enemies, and there
for to fight with them by the way: it was easy to be taken the forehand, for
they roued far about, and out of the way, but his Majesty came strayghte
unto Bosingane. The Burgemasters came forth against him, to yield up their
town, and a Castle standing above it, belongyng to the Earls of Ottingame, and
the men of war therein yielded to his majesty, how be it they had made a
little brabling before.

The next dai they of Norling came to give up their town, for the camp was so
nere, that there was no other thing to treat upon. He put therein.iiij. baners,
for the. ij baners which were left there by the Duke and the Lantgraue, were
gone that night to a castle, a mile from Norling, where they found other.ij.
baners belonging likewise to the Earls of Ottingam. These.iiij. baners ^et out
soldiers to skirmishe with* our me^ that lay a little from the castle they made
a cou^tena^ce for to come down but the Emperor sent the Earl of Bure with his
men and ordenance, and the^ they yielded. The Earl brought the.iiij. standers
to the Emperor, let the soldiers go free, they would have served the
Emperor, but he commanded them to follow the duke of Saron and the Lantgraue.
Now Norling being surrendered, and me^ of war therein, he made governor of
the country of Ottingame, a brother of the said Earls, which is catholic,
he left the Cardinal of Angust in Norling for certain provision that should
be made there. He went from Bosingame to Tinkespoole, a town imperyall and of
the league, they muster to hold fast, but the Duke of Aluoy was sent by the
Emperors commandment with artilerie, and certain Hispaniardes and Almaynes.
He gave monicio^ to the^ of the town, and if the artilery were laid against
them, they should be given in spoil to the men of war, then they gave up
the town. The Duke brought the Burge masters before his majesty then being
nere unto the town, and there being one day, he left two banners of Guard. He
removed thence, and in.ij. days he came to Rotenburge with great labor and
travail, the weather being so foul and roughe. They of Rotenburge came out
against his majesty the day before his coming thither, offering their town
to him saying: that they neither sent men nor money against him, and that is
truth.

The Emperor had knoweledge that his enemies were not far from thence, and
they intended to have the Lordship of Franckonia, and therefore he made great
speed to Rotenburge, where the ways might be best foreset, where the enemies
intended to pass: for now it is necessary to understand that when his
majesty was at Bosingane, the weather was so rygorous with froste and snow,
that it seemed to be intolerable. Wherefore the most part of his camp, and of
his Captains (as al of a vow) adnysed his Majesty to lodge his camp in
Norlyng, and other towns which he had gotten upon Danubia, and about Vlme
and August: and to this they laid sufficient reasons. His majesty was of an
other opynion, differing from his Captains and to choose a way more importa^t,
which was to defend Franckonia, and to lie before the enemies, that they should
not lodge at August nor Vhne, for why this was an enterprice, that if it might
be obtained, althinges might be done with more facility afterward. But if they
should be suffered to come together, and to recover strength in Franckonia, it
should have been hard to have come to any end, because the cities were yet in
hope, seeing that their camp was not yet altogether broken, therefore
notwithstanding al these difficulties offered, at this present he determined to
cut the^ their way, or to co^strain the^ to take an other, where by they might
be driven in sunder, and dispersed. And this was a good forecast, as it has
sense apeared by experience. For the enemies having knowledge that the Emperor
was in Rotemburge, they left the way to Franckonia for to take an other on the
left hand, and with a great rode, they made through the mountains, where of
necessity they left part of their great ordinance, deuyding it by carriage
into the Castelles of the Dukes of Viertemburge, being there by, so that when
his Majesty came to Rotemburge, they were. 24. mile from thence, being but. i^.
the day before. They go now so broken that these two heads, their guydes
parted them selves, the Lantgraue went with.iij. C. horses toward his house:
and passing by Frankeforte, the governors of the town came to speak with
him, as to a neighbor and captain general of the league, and asked him
counsel what he thought was best to be done, in time of so great necessity.
He answered them saying: this that I think best is, that every Fox keep
his own tail.

Likewise the Duke of Saron did take an other way, gathering up the relics of
the fyelde that he could catch. With a great code he went toward his
country, compounding with Albies by the way, taking of them money to pay his
Soldiers, for therefore they followed him.

The Emperor being at Rotenburge, and seeing the enemies so altered, and
that the time and place served not to overtake them, he determined for to give
lyrence to the Earl of Bure, for to return into Flaunders with the camp
that he had brought, and that he should go to Frankeforte, and procure by
force or otherwise for to get the town, which is great and rich. Then the
Emperor parted with the rest of his army, where the busynes had been in
times paste, but the great reputacion of the vyctorye, now made the war in
Germanye for the Emperor. At this time diverse cytyes sent to Rotenburge their
Ambassadors for to yield, and other began for to entreat to do the same. His
majesty removed from thence, when all the cities and towns imperial unto the
Ryne, and some of Suauer came for to yield them.

The Emperor parted from Rotemburge: and in.ij. lodginges he came to Hale in
Sueuer, one of the cities given up, and of the most richesse of the province,
and one of the league: and there, for the indisposition of the gout, he tarried
longer then he had thought to have done.

At this time the Cou^tey Palatine began to treat as a man repented, because
he had showed himself against his majesty. These treatise and rogacions, were
so set forth, that his majesty amitted him to his clemency: for at the end
this is the virtue of Ceasar: so they said at the beginning, that it might
please him for to remember al things but their offenses. The Count Palatyne
ca^e to Hale to his court, a day was appointed to come to ye palace, he was
brought into a chamber where his majesty was set in a chair, for the
indisposicion of his fete. The Earl came in with great reverence, and began
for to knowledge his fault, and that he had offended, wherefore he did much
repent. His majesty answered, saying. And verelye I have lamented in extreme,
that in your last days, and being of my blood, and brought up in my house,
that you have showed your self so against me in favor of my enemies, in the
aid of their camp. But I having a respect that we have been brought up
together so long time, and to your repentance, trusting that hence forward
that you will serve me as you ought for to do, and other ways then you have
done, then I am pleased to pardon you, and to forgeat all that you have done
against me, and so trustyng that with new deservings ye will deserve the love
and amity wherewith I receive you. The Earl said he took great repentance
in knoweledgyng his offenses sufficientely. As I thought and other that stood
by, the tears fell from his eyes, in the meekness that he showed. It moved
men to p^e^ye for to see a Lord of a house of so much antiquity, and of
the Emperors blood, so honorable and principal, that white head discovered
the tears in his eyes: verelye it gave a great force to his discharge: From
thence forewarde, his majesty treated him with the familiarity past,
although he had then received him with severity necessary.

Now the Lords of Vlme make such speed for to reduce themselves into the
service of his majesty at the same time that the Countye Palentine was in
halle, they came unto the Palace, desyryng to be before his majesty. They
were brought into his chamber where they found him sytting in a chair, and
the Earl standing before him, they kneeled down, showing a countenance of
their minds. The^ their principal said in sum these words.

We of Vlme make knowlage and confess, the offenses that we have done, which
has been all in our defaulte, and of other that has deceived us: but now
seeing there is none so great a sin, but God does pardon them which do repent:
wherefore we trust that your majesty will emit, having a respect to our
repentance, and to receive us into your mercy, and so we beseech you for the
passion of Christ to have pity upon us, and to receive us into your favor,
seeing that we do submit our selves unto your service, to serve you as true and
good subjects, with body and goods as we owe of duty to so good an Emperor.

His majesty answered, that ye coming to knowledge of their error was a
great part to have their pardon, and moreover that it was a great sign (being
repentant for yt which was past,) yt they would serve him truly in time to
come, as good and true vessayles to the Empire: it should be a cause that he
would be the more wyllyng to grant their pardon, and so he admitted them to
his grace, reseruyng unto himself that which was conueniente to be done in
their City, to the wealth and quietness of the Empire. This is in su^me al yt
there was done.

Shortelye after, his majesty, because although the duke of Viertomburge
began for to feel the banners imperial approach, and to flatter a little, it
was not so much, but yet it was more necessary that the Emperor with weapon
in hand should bring him to obedience: for the Emperor having at Vlme so
nere a neighbor of the Duke of Viertemburge, that it was not conueniente to
leave him free in strength, and to depart from him to go about any other
enterprise: for why, his majesty being absente, it might have been an
occasion to have had news. For Auguste being one foot joined with that
estate, there might lyghtlye have been some reuolucion in Vlme: for this has
been ever in a readiness, through the neighborhood that they have had
together with other neighbors, which naturally be troublous, and ever have
desired to turn his affairs when they have been most quiet. I say this by
the French men the which Viertemburge being out of obedience of his majesty
they have had ever an open port to range about in Germanye. The Emperor for
this respect, or for other, which he ought for to know better then they that
know no other thing but that which touches their hands: he took upon him the
e^terprise of this estate, and sent ye Duke of Aluoy before with the
Hispanyardes, and the regimente of Madrucho, and the Coronell Examburge, and
the Italians that were left, the which were so few, that I make no number,
and to my judgment, the cause was this: that the continual travail in our
camp, made that there lacked many soldiers of al these nations: and moreover
then this, the slow paymente of wages, which since the coming from the river
of Prence, had ever e^creased in our ca^pe, and yt Lau^tgraue having enforced
his, as it is said, yet gave us no battle, as he had so ofto promised to
them of the league.

Now the duke of Aluoy is gone with the part of the army, which I have
spoken of, with the Dutchehorsemen, and the three hundred me^ late come out of
the realm of Naples. His majesty came after with the rest of their
horsmenne, and the regimente of the Almaynes, which of late had been in the
conduite of George of Ransburge, and now at the leadyng of the Earl of
Massoulte. They went straight to Alprime, a town imperial and of the league,
standing upon the entrye of the three ways that go to Viertemburge, the way
to that town is most open and plain for to carrye Camp and ordenaunce. The
Emperor being at Alprime, the duke of Viertemburge began for to make ready
his business, for by the way diverse towns were come unto the duke of Aluoy,
for to yield. And going forewarde, they came in to obedience all, except some
strong holds, which by the disposicion of their Scituacion, were inprenable.
But the Duke of Viertemburge, taking a more wholesome counsel, was refourmable
to all things that the Emperor did demand, and gave him three of his
strong holds, which should please his majesty to take, and these were
Ahsbridge, a great Castle full of ordinance and vittayles, Ruramberge, which
had provision for many years. The third is called Porendorse, which was
provided for two thousand men for many years, of ordinance and
vittaylles, conformable to the same. In these Fortresses were found much
artillerye of the Duke of Saxons and Launtgraue, the which they had left
there, because they might make the more haste: and in especially in this town,
being Lady and the keye of the entry into that estate, the^ he gave unto his
majesty, two hundred thousand Duckettes, promisyng to be at his commandment,
nothing except.

The Emperor having in short tune thus subdued the Duke of Vierte^burge,
having these fortes in his power, and the country assured, he had knoweledge
from the Earl of Bure, that Frankeforde was given his majesty, and that he
was therein with twelve ba^ners. Two days after, came the Burgemaisters of the
same city, which he received according, and with like conditions as the
other, reseruyng it to the convenient wealth of Germanye. The next day after,
came seven cities together, al of the league, amongst the which were
Menengam, and Quintain, so that before his partyng from Alprone, all the Cities
of Sueuer, except Auguste, were come to his obedyence: for as I have said,
the victory of the Emperor did fight for him in Germany.

His majesty parted from Alprone, and did take ye way to Vlme passing through
the Duchy of Viertemburge, and in* vi. days he came thither, but they of the
city had sent unto their Borders and confines with a great company of
ambassadors to receive him: and there knelyng in the field, they made him an
oracion in spanishe, because they thought it (as they say) most reuerente to
be spoken in the tongue which most naturally was his, and more tractable then
theirs, they offered him their city with their bodies and goods, as men
determined for to serve their prince. He answered them in Spanishe graciously,
as they say, showing them selves well content, and joyous to bear good will,
to the which now they be come generally in all Germany. In so much yt ye me^ of
war call him commonly* Vnser fater, that is to say, Our father. These
words were spoken one day by a prisoner of the enemies, brought in by the
Dutchemen before his majesty. He asked him it he knew him: he said yea, I know
you, ye be our father. Unto who^ his majesty said: ye be villayns, ye be not
my sons, these good men that stand about me be my sons, and I am their
father. This was a great rebuke to ye prisoner, and a joy to the Dutchme^ yt
stood about him. Moreover then this, with all other he is loved and desired,
for they that have been against him in the war, most part offer to prove,
that they have been begyled, and not to be of knowledge to go against him,
insomuche that there is amongst them a principal Earl, which has stricken
himself seeing his own defaulte, and no marvel of this, for the force of
virtue is so much, that it moves them that be evil to quarrel well: and so
now all men esteem much more to be in his favor, then for to save their
goods, which without him may be lost. I write as I have seen and know.

His majesty being in a town belongyng to Vlme, came to him ambassadors from
Auguste, for there had been given the earnest of our Camp: yet although they
sent for to yield them to his majesty, it was in co^dicions such as he would
not except. For their supplicacion was for to have pardon for Sebastian
Exertell: and if that it pleased him not, yet at the least, his Castles and
towns might remain unto his children. But his majesty would not grant
unto this. They declared unto him that Exertell was in Auguste, and that he
had two thousand men and a great part of the city, with such strength,
that they were not able for to deliver it. His majesty answered, that they
should not need to trouble themself with that, for he would be there
shortelye and dyspatche that matter. When they were returned to their city,
with this resolucyon from his majesty, the people were so afraid, that they
gathered together concludyng for to yield: and they of the Senate being in the
halle of the city. Exertell came in and said unto them. Lords, I can tell
whereupon you treat, it is to be at a composicion with the Emperor, but
because you shall not let for me, I am determined to go myself, for
parauenture in so doing, and other things that I think for to do, may be a
mean for to obtain my pardon. These words spoken, he went to his house as
secretelye as he could. It is said that he took the way to Suisa. They of
Auguste came to Vlme at the days and hour appointed, they were brought before
his majesty sitting in a chair with all the ceremonies imperial accustomed.
They kneling upon their knees, one of them spoke in this manner, first seeing
the ordinarye tytles, used unto Emperors.

We of August having a respect to our offenses, and like so to the correccion
that we have deserved, but knowing by experyence your clemency to be so much,
that al they who h^^e offended you, and after being repented of their errors,
asking you mercy, have found it in you. Now sith we have repented with all our
hearts, we be so bold to call for the succor of your clemencye, beseching
you, that this which has not failed you in other, that it be not lackyng unto
us. And seeing that we submit our self unto your will: we be seche you, that
the disfavor which we have deserved, may turn unto favor, as from so
pitiefull a prince it is looked for. His majesty answered confirmably as to
the^ of Vlme, few words more or less, and commanded them to rise: they came
and touched his hands as the other cities did.

After ye yelding up of August, Vlme and Frankfort, there lacked but Argentine,
of all the four principal heads of the Empire: but she seeing that August,
Vlme and Frankfort, had obtained to be admitted of his majesty, they sent to
Vlme for to have safeconduit for their Burgemaysters, ye which came for to give
up their city, and to be obediente unto his majesty. For now they have known
that the pitiful victory of the Emperor, may do more then the inducinges and
promises of some other for their own particular respects, having treated with
the^ of other things

The co^dicions with ye which generally that he has received the county
Palatine, the duke of Viertemburge, and other knights, and all the cities
beside those which particularly I do not know, being league perpetual with
them of Austriche.

1. They shall set at nothing al other leagues yt they have made heretofore with
any other. 2. They shall declare themself to be enemies to John Duke of
Saxonye, and to Philip of Hesson Launtgraue. 3. They shall chastise all those
soldiers yt have gone or shall go out of their country to serve any other
against the Emperor. 4. They shall receive men of war in those places,
where it shall please his majesty, as Examburge with his coronel in August, ye
Earl Tho^ of Nassoult, with his in Vlme and the.xii. Ba^ners de monsure de
Bure in Franckforte, with other co^dicions which be reserved unto a time
convenient.
This war has tracted with this most furious nation.vi. months: in all this
time his majesty has lacked no care, peril, travail nor watching, that for
to atchieue such an enterprice, has been needful: in the which I dare say
(although it has been done with felicity,) the Emperors fortune was never
greater the^ his industry. For who that will consider from that day that he
set his camp, and has seen the enemies, shall see that he has gone ever
geatting of ground, and in putting them back, and also dislodged them at
Ingulstat forcibly: since from Tonauert and from Norlyng, with great industry.
And after the last of all from Guingue^, by force and reason of the war,
where they were so broken, that they lost all their force, but only those
which duke John might gather together, for to go against duke Morris. And
the Launtgraue retired into his country, his majesty reserved for a time
convenient what was to be done with these two in the mean time. For these
things, and other like, he would take his rest for a certain time in Vlme,
for to purge himself there with the Pale of the Indes, that for his Gout is
wont to be profitable.

The duke of Viertemburge came to kiss the hands of his majesty, offering
him essensuallye, himself with all his power: he tarryed four miles from
Vlme, for there he was taken with the Gout, with the which he is much vexed.

Who that considers well the progress of this same journey, shall see how
many importunate effects were these four times that the enemies have been
dis^odged, and how much more it has been for his majesty to follow them
against the time, and against all other lettes, that have been laid before
him. For as this appears unto me, in this only does consiste the
accomplishment of the victory: for there has been no lack in time of envious
parsons, to procure and to disturb the progress hereof. But God that has
parmitted and will parmitte his greatenesse to go forewarde, for his majesty
with the same industry and felicity that he has gotten this Empire, with ye
self same likewise, he shall conserve it. For why, with these arts that ye
Empire is gotten, with those it is a thing easy to be sustained.

(...) had sent, that he had no time for to take any rest in Vlme, but must
begynnne for to take an order for a new enterprise, which was as necessary
to have his parson, as that which was past. For duke John with the men that
he had gathered, had recovered his estate, al except only Subisa, nor he
had left duke Morris but Trissen and Lipsia, which he kept with strong hand,
so yt it might be said yt he did hold Saxony and Boeme in such sort, yt they
confessed him to be their friend without any remembrance of their king. But for
the duke all yt might be done, they were so shameless that with one honest
dissimulacion they did take and keep by force the Castle of Prage.

When the Emperor had set all things in a readiness at Vlme, he did take
upon him this new travail of his parson, and sent.viii. baners of foteme^,
and.viii. C. horses, with the marquis Albert of Brandemburge, which had also
with him one. M horses. And other.viii. banners also. He sent Pence which be
the sinowes of the war, if these should join with ye king and duke Morris,
they might be superior to the duke John, al things framing as it was
prepared, for the more as herafter follows: for it was otherways provided for
ye king then he had thought. The Emperor sent down Aluaro de Sa^de, master of
ye camp with his terce Hispaniardes, ye marquis of Marna^ with 8. banners of
dutchme^, but they were commanded to tarry, for ye affairs of Saxonye be come
unto this, that of necessitye he must go parsonally in this war: and he
determined not to pardon any of his labor or travail therein, seeing how it
did stand, not only to the king and duke Morris, but also to all Germanye:
for that fire left burning, it might kindle so, that the victory paste might
have been consumed and brought into the terms that it was before. This
considered, the Emperor departed from Vlme, when he had provided for the
footemenne of Spain, to part from their lodgyng with the ordinance that he
had in Vlme.

The duke of Viertemburge because of his infyrmitie, might not come when he
was appointed: but now being amended, he came the same day that the Emperor
parted from Vlme, to do his obedience as a Prince vanquished ought for to
do unto his vanquisher and Lord. Heabode in the halle until his majesty
had dyned, sittyng in a Chair, wherein he was brought with four men (for
it could be no other ways.) The Emperor passed by, but he saw him not, but
the duke did behold him still. The Emperor did set him down with the
Ceremonies accustomed. The Marshall of the Empire stood by with a naked
sweorde, the Chauncelour of the duke and all his counsel knelyng upon their
knees. Then after the ordinarye tytles declared to the Emperor, in the name
of his master he said these words,

I with all humility according unto my duty, present myself before your
majesty, and openly confess that I have grievously offended in these wars
past, and that I have deserved all the indignacion that ye have had against
me: wherefore I am sorrowful, and repent as it is reason, and come humbly to
beseech your majesty for the mercy of god, and for the natural inclinacion of
your majesty, to pardon and to receive me into your grace: for only you and
no other I acknowlage for to be my natural and supreme lord unto whom I promise
in all parts to serve with all mine, as an obedient prince, vessel and subject,
with obedient subieccion and thanks according unto my duty for to deserve
the most greatest grace which I now receive. And moreover I offer to
accomplish and faithfully to fulfill all the Chapters which his majesty has
given me.

The Chancellor of ye Emperor at his commandment answered the majesty of
Caesar. Most pietiful Lord, understanding this, that the duke Vldrike of
Vtertemburge has humbly proponed, and seeing his repentance, and that he
openly confesses his grievous offenses against his majesty, and how woorthilye
he has deserved his indignacion having a respect that he has bewailed, and
that for, and in the name of the mercy of God he asks his pardon, his
majesty Ceasaria for the honor of God, and by his natural cleme^cy, and
because ye poor people which have not offended shall not suffer, he is
content to forgeat all the indignacion that he has had against the duke of
Viertemburge, upon condition that he observe and keep al things which he has
offered, and is bound to parfourme. The duke of Vierte^burge gave great thanks
to his majesty, promising for to be evermore his most faithful, the duke
sitti^g barehead in a chair, for his Ambassadors were sent before to beseech
his majesty that he might come as his infirmity permitted, for on foot nor
upon his knees (although it was to ask pardon) it might not be. This was to
them of Vlme a great admiracion, seeing their mighty neighbor so call for
pardon. This passed, his majesty did take his journey toward Ga^gon, where the
enemies had lodged: he did see their number and parceyued how they had
forti^ied the place where he had thought for to have given the Camisado, where
they might have had a great advantage. He went tro^ thence to Norling, where he
was taken with the gout, so that it was thought that he should not be able
for to ride of long time, but there was such diligence with all things that
might be found for his health, that he began to amend and was able to walk.

At this time John Frederike duke of Saxon had increased his camp, and began
to be a lord over all, for he had taken the Marquis Albert in this sort. The
Marquis was in a place called Rockeles, for they which kept the wars against
the duke John, were set in front against him. Duke Morres was in Frayberge,
the king of Romans in Tresson, ye Marquis Albet with x. baners and.viij. C.
horsemen in the place aforesaid. Moreover they had furnished Suybisa and
Lipsia, the which had been a little before assailed: but it was so well defended
by the soldiers, that his assaults were al in vain. This town of Rokelez was
belonging to a Lady, widow and sister to the La^tgraue, ye which did
entertain the Marquis Albert with daunces and bankettes after the custom of
Almayne, showing so great amity, that he became more neglygent then a good
Capytayne ought for to be in the wars. And on the other part she aduysed
the duke of Saron being in guard.iij. leagues from thence, with.j. bend of
horsemen, and six baners of foot men, which on the other day dylygentlye and
earlye in the morning came upon the Marquis Alberte, which would in any wise
fight in the plain fields, and there he was taken fyghtyng more like a
valiant knight then a politic Captain.

There have been diverse opinions, for some do say that the place might not
be defended. Other say, that if he had tarried there, the duke Morres being
nere thereby with his horsemen might have rescued him. Other say, i^ he had
kept the four banuers which he lodged in the Bourawghe, he had not had
the overthrow: but for all these opinions it came to this, that he lost.v. C.
horses killed and taken, and many of the rest went to the Duke of Saxon, which
had gotten all the baners of the footeme^: other were taken and sworn, not for
to serve against him as is the custom of Almayne. The Marquis was brought to
Got, a strong hold of the Dukes.

Now after this victory, it was thought that he would have gone against the
Duke Morres, he being so nere at hand: but leauyng them in Frabrige, he began
to have a respect concerning the affairs in Boemia: he sent Thumsern with vj.
C. horsemen and.xij. baners, they being at this time lords and Governors of
the vale Laquimistal, through the good will and dissimulacion of the Be^mose,
for this dissimulacion was the foundation of al his cast and compass. This
referred unto the Emperor, he seeing that the king and duke Morres sustained
these wars in the keeping of the principal holds, and that they set not
forth of them for to attempt their fortune: He set forth in haste from
Norling, where a little before had been the Burgemaisters of Argentine, a rich
and mighty city, as it is said, and there they submytted them selves to be
under the obedyence of his majesty, with such co^dicions as it has pleased his
majesty to accept them, which was never granted to any emperor in time past.

1. First that they should forsake all the leagues which they had made taking a
oath not for to enter into any, where the house of Austriche was not the
first. 2. And to chastise al those soldyers of their city that has been
against his majesty. 3. Laying a grievous pain up on al them that shall go
against him hereafter. 4. And to cast out of their city al rebels and
offenders against his majesty. Amongst the which there was one captain
general, whose name was William, the Earl of Fuste^berge, who excused him
self with all dylygence and iustificacions that might be. 5. They delivered
unto his majesty al their artilery and municion at his pleasure, as other
cities had done, with other particulers which I do omytte to write, because I
will follow the breuitye that I have begone, sithe it may be set forth more at
large: in somuche that the Emperor has opened to them so large a field that
they may well extend their subtle style how great so ever they be. I ensure you
they shall remain inferiors in the matter.
Now the Emperor parted from Norling, he did take the way to Newre^berge
with.ii. regimentes of Almaines, of the old Soldiers of the Marquis of
Marenan, and of Illeprande, the which a little before the departing of the
Emperor from Vlme, he died of a burning Agewe. The Emperor lost in him a
good servant, and a soldyer of great experyence, and of great reputacion in
Almayne, beside these two Regymentes. He commanded an other which was made
and set forth by a knight of Sucuer, called Hanse Walter, he had also the
leading of the footeme^ of Spain, and the men of Arms of Naples, with.vj. C.
light horses, and a. M. Dutche horsemen belonging to ye Taichemaster, and to
the Marquis John, and to the Duke of Austriche.

The Emperor had sent before, the Duke of Aluoy, which had lodged his camp
about Newre^berge, except certain baners which tarried to wait upon his
majesty. The Duke being at Newre^berge prepared al things necessary for the
Emperors coming, leaving there.viij. baners as it required for the Emperors
authority. And it was necessary: for although the nobles of the country he
much imperial, yet the multitude of the people, which be a great number, and
many times furious, and worthy to be brideled as the^ they were: The Emperor
was received into their city with great demonstracion of pleasure, he was
lodged in the castle for the space of v. or.vj. days for the assembling of
his camp, and for to recover his health, for yet his indisposicions were not
all quieted.

Who well consydereth this war, it seems to be all one, this present being
a brau^che of the other which is past, in some case there is reason, but to my
judgment it is not one war: for the first the Emperor has finished in the
defactio^ of the mighty power in the camp of the league. The cities thereof
rendered, and some of their greatest princes: so yt as concerning this war of
ye league, it seems to be ended. The other of Saxoni (although the duke was
therein) it is not to be accounted for a member, but the head and principal of
the other, so parilous, yt it was necessary for to have the counsel
accompanied with the determinacion and the hardines of the Emperor.

I will not make any boast of his doings, for they be so great of them selves,
that it should be evil done of me if I should make payment (because he has
brought me up in his house) with any lesynges, although I acquit it with
these trauayles, being so worthy, that they bring with the^ admirations: so
that al men may meruel, neither will I dispraise the the enemies, although the
Emperor who has overcome them, seems to be greater: but to say the truth,
sithe I am a wytnes, for there was nothing done but I have been nere unto him
from Newremberge, which was the way the Emperor did take for to mete with the
king and duke Moreys at ye town of Egner, where by opportunity of the place,
it was appointed for to make the A mass of the wars, and that the king
should be there with his horsemen and certain banners of footmen, and bring
with him duke Morres with his number, for so it was determined, and the time
appointed to be done. The king parted from Tressen, a town belongyng to Duke
Morres, and to the Duke of Fra^brige, and leaving the strength of the enemies
upon the right hand: They entered into Boeme, for to come over the mountains,
wherewith it is al environed, and to join with the Emperor in Egner, but the
Boemose made a muster then of their inte^cions, declaring that the great trust
was not in vain that the Duke of Saxon had in the^, the why* he extended so
that it was the cause of many opinions, which I do not write, because I
do not know so much of a truth as it requires to be written.

Now the Emperor being iij. iourneys from Newremberge, there came a Gentleman
from the king of Romans with knoweledge, that sith that the king and duke
Morres were entered into Boeme with their horsemen and footmen: A knight of the
country had gathered a great number to cut down the woods in diverse parts to
stop the passages and the ways, by the which the king was purposed to come
to Egner: wherefore he must go about through the mountains and the castles
belonging to the knights there being with him. Wherefore he required a number
of hackbutters Hyspanyardes for to pass more strongly, and for to have the
Lordshyp of the wood. The Emperor provided for all things convenient, albeit
that after it was no need to have the Hyspaniardes in this passage, for the
knights of the country which were come to serve, did so much, that they
were al broken and disparsed. This knight of Boeme came not with the men which
he had assembled, his name is Gasper Flucke, a principal man in that country,
from who^ in time past the king had taken lands and goods (and notwithout
deserving) and sense liberally he gave them to him again: but it seems that
he has remembered more the taking then the giving thanks for the gift, for it
is ever the first point of ingratitude, to forgeat benefytes received.

It is said that these knights which met together for to defend this
passage, had made a bancket, and after cast lottes who should be their
Captain General. They did take such an order, that it fell to Gasper
Flucke, and not for that he was more apt then the other for this charge, but
because he was most in power for to furnyshe with men and money; or else it
might be that they did it, because that if their enterprise should not have
good success, every manne would rather see the paryll upon the head of an
other, then upon his own. But let it be as it was, for the most part of that
kingdom made a ruynous demonstracion against their prince.

Now is the king of Romans passed by the Castles aforsayde, the Emperor was
coming three leagues from Egner, the which is a city of the kingdom of
Boeme, standing upon the borders of Saxoni, but it is out of the mountains:
for Boemeis compassed about with great and thick woods, but toward the part
of Morabia, it is more plain: for on all other parts, it seems that nature
has fortyfyed it: for the thickenes of the woods and the marrises which be in
them, makes the passages in the enteryng marvelous di^^i^il: how be it the
land which lies compassed about with these woods, is plain and fertyll, full
of castles and cities. The people thereof be naturally valiant and of good
disposicion. Their horsemen in arms be like to the Almaines, the footmen
dyffer, for they keep not like order to the Almaines, nor they use not like
weapon, for one bears a halberd, an other a Jauelin, other staves of one
faddame and a half of length, with great pykes of iron, other bear short
handgo^nes with broad hatchettes, with ye which they cast.xx. paces very
ha^dsomli. These Boemose have been in time paste soldiers of great estimacio^:
but now not so much in reputacio^. The most part of Saxoni bordereth upon Boeme
from Egner, keeping the mountains of Boeme upon the right hand, until it pass
the Albes, which is a river of Boeme, and enters into Saxony, nere unto ye
city Laitemers. This I have thought good to be written, for the better
understanding of other things past.

The Emperor now being at Egner, thither came the king his brother, duke
Morres, and the Marquis John of Brandenburge son to the Electour, for now his
father had taken an order with the king for to serve the Emperor, and so sent
his son for to serve in this war. The number of the horsemen with ye king
might be.viij. c* Duke Morres brought one. M. the Marquis John.iiij. c. as well
appointed. More over the king brought.ix. C. hungarians, which to my judgment
be the best light horsemen in the world: and so they showed the^ selves to be in
the wars of Saxoni, the.xlvi. and now this the.xlvij. Their weapons be long
spears, stiff and great, where with they give great incounters. They bear
Targettes or Tabbelines, which beneathe be large unto the midst, and from the
midst upward they be made sharpeni^g, with a point above their heads. Some
wear shirtes of Maile, but in their Targets they put and paint poyses and
devises after their fashions, which do besome the^ very well. They bear long
stiff arming swords, and hand ha^mers called Martlets with long ^^eles, with
ye which they help them selves ha^dsomely. They show themselves great friends
to ye Hispaniardes, for as they say the one and the other came of the
Scithians. These were the horsemen which came with ye king, footeme^ he brought
none, for he had left.iiij. baners in Tressen, and the rest in the entryng into
Boeme went home to their houses. He had but one baner which tarryed with him,
and this he sent to Egner. Duke Morres put al his footmen in Lips^a and
Subisa. The Duke of Saxon being thereby with.viij. M. Outcheme^ good soldiers,
and a great number of foreme^ which he had made in the country, and. 3 M.
horsemen armed and well chosen for ye other.xij. baners, and the rest of his
horsemen were with Thumserne as it is said, and divided in diverse parts.

The Emperor came to Egner, a city christened, which is no little marvel,
standing so nere Boeme and Saxo^, for why in the one there be but few
christened men, and in the other there be none. The next day after the coming
of the Emperor, the king came to this city, where they abode the passion
week and Easter holy days, and after he removed when he had sent ye Duke of
Aluoy before with the footeme^ and part of the horsemen, the which sent iiij.
baners of footmen, iij. bands of light horsemen with Don Antony de Tollido, to
a town where there was.ij. baners of the duke of Saxons: but after they had
skirmyshed a little, they yielded up their baners and armor.

All the country of Saxony borderyng upon Egner, is full of mountains, woods
and marshes: but after we came to a town called Plao.vij. leagues from
Egner, there the country begins to be more open and plain, there be fair
fields and meddowes, with many castles and towns. This province was so set in
arms, and furnyshed with the dukes soldiers, that there was no place free
without his baners, ever co^quering and geatting of ground. At this time the
Emperor with all diligence made ready toward the enemies, for his desire was
to find them in the field with all their power, because they should not take
these iiij. strong holds, which be Vierte^berge, Got, Sonobalde, and Eldram,
the which he had taken a little before from the Earl of Manfelte, for eueriche
one of these was of strength, and sufficient for to prolong the wars many
years: wherefore the Emperor with all diligence, did take the wai to Messene, a
town of the duke Morres, taken by the duke of Saron, and therein did lie with
his camp, for that was a place apt for whatsoever he would apoint to be
done, for there were bridges upon the river of Albys, and nere unto Boeme,
from whence he looked for to have great aid of horsemen and footemenne, and
likewise for to go to Viertemberge, if need should require. So being in this
place, and the Emperor following ye way, diverse towns there about came in for
to yield, and also the companyes which the duke of Saron had lodged abroad in
these parts were in chase, for in one day ye prince of Salmona put to flight
three baners, an other day likewise was done by a captain of the hackebutters
Hyspaniardes called Aldana, and certain Hungarianes with him. At an other
time, one captain called George E^peche, with.vij. banners of Dutchemenne, and
certain horsemen did give an overthrow to.viij. baners which the duke had
left in a place called Exemburge, they were al brought to the Emperor, so
that our camp was ever doing things worthy to be wrytien more at large.

In this time the Emperor aproched Messene with his camp, and being at his
lodgyng, there came news that Thumserne was but one league and a half from
thence, wherewith Duke Morres and the king of Romans were much altered, so
that they believed it as if they had seen the enemies with their eyes. Moreover
they thought it good to provide more then it was needful: for our folks
being come wearye and in great heat, and the news being uncertain, it was
but to give a greater travail to our camp. But the Emperor, which could
provide for all things necessary, sent.ij. C. Hungarians for to discover the
fields, and so did let rest the camp, which to my judgment was better then
to have trauayled men with an enterprice so much uncertain. The Scoutes came
to the place where ye enemies should have been, they could not find them, nor
yet have any news that horse or soldier had been seen there that day, but
one which had been taken with a Spaniard in the morning, of who^ it was known
that the duke of Saxon was in Messene upon the other side of the river of
Albeis where he fortified his lodgyng. The Emperor abode there two days for
to refreshe his footmen, for they had gone.x. days with great labor and
travail. Then he determined to march toward Messene, and there to make
brydges of barckes, for the duke had burnt those of the town, but he would
procure to fight on ye other side of the river, but he had news that ye duke
was up and gone from thence, and that he had taken the way toward Viertemberge.

I have many times seen the Emperors setting forth take good efferte: but I
did never se any come so to pass as this, for from the time that he removed
from his lodgyng until he had made an end of ye journey, there was nothing left
undone yt he had appointed, nor yet succeeded otherways the^ he had determined.
He now considering that ye going to Messene with his camp which did stand up
above upon the river, he should lose so much tune yt the duke of Saxon which
was on the other side of the river might be at Vier^e^burge, which stood below
and benethe upon the river, and therefore he sought for to have a forde, to be
in his way and before his enemy. He was enfourmed by one of the country, th^^
iii. leages from thence beneth upon the river, there were.ii. fordes, but they
were like to be kept and defended with the enemies upon the other part.

At this time there came certain hackbutters horsine^ Hispaniardes with
captain Aldana, which had been sent abrod to discover the enemies, and of this
captain it was known that the night past they had lodged in Milburge, on the
other side of the river.iii. leagues from our camp: and there as they said
was a ford, but their horses had passed swiming. The emperor perceiving that
it was not time for to delay the journey, he sent for the duke of Aluoy and
commanded to provide for every thing ^o^ueme^t, for he was determined for to
pass the river by ford or bridge, and to fight with ye enemies, and upon this
determinacio^. provided for all things con^i^mable thereunto, the which to
manisemed to be a thig impossible. The enemies being on ye other part of the
river, the way long and many things lacking, it seemed to be a greatlet. But
the Emperor would in any wise that his determinacion should take effect, and
commanded the artilerye, and the barks of the bridge to be speedelye set
forth that day, and the footeme^ Hispaniardes at midnight, and shortelye after
the regime^tes of Almaines, and all the horsemen in the order accustomed: but
in the morning there fell a very thick mist, so that there was never a part of
the army did see how other did go, and of this the Emperor complained and
said: these mystes do ever follow us when we be nere unto our enemies: but when
we came nere un to the river, the mist began to break up, so that we might see
the Albeys, and our enemies lodged upon the other side. This is the Albies so
many times named by the Romans and so seldom seen of them.

The duke of Saxon lodged on the other part of ye river in this town of
Milbroke, with.vi. M. footeme^, old soldiers, and about.iii. M. horsemen: for
the rest were with Thumserne, and the other were dispersed and taken by the
way. He had with him.xxi. pieces of artilery and he was well assured and did
know, that if we would go and pass by Messene, he might tarry or go where he
would: and where as he was, it was hard for to pass, for ye breadth and the
depenes of the river being in his keeping upon the other side, with a town and
a castle (although they were not strong,) yet they were sufficient to keep the
passage. Now the lodging of our camp being settled and divided by quarters at
the emperors coming about.viij. of the clock in the morning, he commanded
the horsemen to be in order, and not to lodge. The place of our ca^pe was nere
unto ye river, but betwixt us and our enemies was a meadow ground and a wood
standing upon the river. Now at this time aforesaid, the Emperor and the king
of Romans, rode before to meet with the duke of Aluoy, which had been to
have knowledge of the enemies, and considering the river to be dese^ded, it
could not be thought by any means how for to pass. The Emperor the king, and
the duke co^sulting together to make search by the advise of some in the
country there about, to find a forde, for such a thing was not to be taken in
hand temeraryouslye, without knowing where or how. Now the Emperor, the king
and Duke Morres, after a little recreation taken in a house thereby, at their
coming forth, going toward the enemies, came the duke of Aluoy, and said
that he had knoweleddge by a man of the countreye, that could bring him to a
forde, the name of the place where the Emperor came forth, is called
Exsemeser, which is as much to say, wade, it was not far from the forde.
They on the other part had set forth and divided their artilerye and
hackbutters upon the shore, standing at the defense of the passage, and at the
bridge yt was brought and made of barks the which they had made of three
pieces to bring down with them more at ease. The disposicio^ of the passage was
in this sort.

Their riuage in the keeping of the enemies was much superior and above ours,
with a diche wherewith their hackebutters might be covered, our part was so
plain and discovered, ye every flood did flow over. They had the town and
castle aforesaid, but we had no cover but the plain fields, except a few
little trees standing by the water, and where the forth was thought for to be,
it was.iij. C. paces broad. And al though the stream seemed for to be slow,
it had a vehement course: so that through al these things that I have spoken
of, there was so great difficulty, that the help and determinacion of the
Emperor was needful with art and force. An order was taken that certain
pieces of artillery should be laid emo^gst the trees, standing nexe unto ye
water, and.viii. C. hackebutters Hispaniardes, so that these together with the
artilery, might beat the enmies from the river, so that our hackbutters might
be lords upon our side and come to ye water. For although it was discovered,
hard and perylous for to be done, yet of necessitye it must be done.

At this time the enemies had laid hackbutters in their barks, which were
coming down by the stream, so that it was needful for our hackbutters to
go to the open bank, the which there did so vehemently that many of them
entered into the river up to the breast, and charged so hard upon them in the
river and in the barks, and killed so many, that they did forsake the^, except
a ^ew that stood at defense. At this time the Emperor was present, and this was
the skirmishe on the one part and the other: all their artilery, and
hackebutters were dyscharged upon us, but our hackbutters although the place
was notegall: they preased so nere, that the advantage might be perceived on
our part, for the enemies began to slake and to shoot slowly. Then the
Emperor commanded to be sent one thousand hackebutters Hyspamardes, with
the Archemaister de Campo of Lumberdye, for to a Taulte the enemies yet more
lively, and so the skirmishe went so hotely on the one part and the other, so
that it might be called a salutacion of hackbutters. The duke of Aluoy
certifyed his majesty, that the forde was found, and yt we might pass. The
Emperor was fully determined for to pass yt day, and not to give any time
to the Duke of Saxon, for to occupye these strong holds before named. They
being sufficient for to delate the wars many years. The Emperor came to
the forde when they were hearing a sermon, after the custom of ye Lutherians:
but when they hard how it was, I think they tarryed not long to here their
preacher, but to provide, which profited little against him that came against
them.

The Emperor withal speed commanded the horsemenne to pass, the river and the
bridge to be laid and the footemenne Hispaniardes with three regimentes of
Almayns. After that the river had been dilygently sought with guydes and other
of practice in the country, emongst whom there was a young manne from whom
the enemies had taken two horses the day before and he for to be reue^ged of
his loss, offered himself to show the forde, saying: I will be revenged upon
these traitors yt have robbed me, I pray god they may be hanged, he was like to
be worthy to have good fortune: for he passed not upon his loss, but for to be
reue^ged, as he shortly after was. The enemies set fire on some of their
Barges, other were forsaken, in some other, the soldiers did lie along to be
out of peril. At this time the bridge was come to the shore: but the river
being so broad, our barges might not suffice, therefore their bridge was
needful to be gotten, and like as against strength and virtue there is nothing
diffic^le, so all these difficulties of the Albeis have not been impossible.

Now the enemies go from the river, for they may no longer suffer to be
there, but a few which stood at the defense. The Emperor seeing that their
bridges must needs be had, he commanded the hackebutters to be diligent.
Then sodaynlye x. Hispaniardes stripped the^, and with their sweordes
ouerwharte in their mouths, they did swim to the barks of the enmies, and
after they had killed the kepers, they brought them to our shore. There were
also three Hispaniardes horsemen which did take the river, but one of them was
drowned. But when the bridge was gotten, and our hackebutters standing upon the
bank, their hearts began to fail them. All the horsemenne came to the water
side, but the Emperor commanded.ix. banners of Almaynes to keep the fyelde,
of every regimente three, and, xv. hundred horsemen, two hundred and fifty of
the marquis Albertes horsemen, which were come from the overthrow of their
lord, to the king. He commanded the horsemen Hungarians, the which with the
Emperors horsemen now began to pass before the enemies went out of the town
aforesaid. They had made a little skirmish, but our hackebutters entered into
the water, and defended so lyuelye with shootyng of ^o thick, that our
horsemenne were as safe upon the other side as upon our part. But when the
enemies began to break, there was no more hope to keep them forth: then
they made toward a town called Troga, and if they might not take this
advantage, ^hen for to go to Viertemberge, or else to fight by the way, i^
they might not have time to do one of these two things.

The Emperor did take an order, and commanded the Duke of Aluoy, that the
Hungarians and the Prince of Salmona with his light horses, should take
every each one a hackebutter behind him, and to pass over with the men of
arms of Naples, taking with him duke Morris, for these were the horsemen of
the vawarde. Then the Emperor and the king of Romans with their Esquadrons
came to the river. The Emperor rode upon a dark dun Spanishe horse, presented
by monsure de Ry, knight of the order, and his first chamberlayne, he rode in
white armor gilt, having no other apparel, but a broad bend of Taffata
Crimsen, and a dutche murrione, a Demilance like a iauelyng in his hand. He
rode as they write of Julius Ceasar when he passed the Ribicon, speaking these
notable words, and without any doubt it was a proper comparison to us being
there, to have the representacio^ of the sight of Ceasar, passing a river
armed, and with an oste armed, and on the other part not for to treat but of
victory, for the passage of the river was only with this hope and
determinacion, so that with the one and the other, the Emperor did take the
water, following the milner who was our guide. He did take ye way more upon the
right hand above in the stream, then the horsemen which were past before:
the ground was hard, but the deep was above the knees of the most of the
horsemenne, and in some places they did swyme a little stretche. In this sort we
passed the river, the forde extendyng three hundred paces.

The Emperor commanded for to be given to the guide, two horses and one
hundred crowns, now the bridge was made with our barks, and those which we
had gotten of our enemies, and the Hispaniardes began to pass, and after the
Almains according to the order that the Emperor had taken, and now the
Hungarians set down the hackebutters which they had set over the river,
and rode before to skirmish, and to intertain ye enemies which made great have
without leaving of any soldier in Milbrucke, as it was thought at ye first he
would have done: and this was one of the respects, for the passage of ye
hackbutters with the light horsemen. But with their ca^pe, they did geat ever
ye advantage of the ground, parting their fotemen in two esquadrons, ye one
greater then the other, and. ir. sta^derds of horsemen divided in such sort,
that when our light horsemen should overtake them, they might turn and give
them the charge, so that their foteme^ in the mean time might march forewarde.

The Emperor with a high trot as men of arms might suffer, followed the way
after his enemies, in the which way he found a crucifix standing, as ^^ is
commonly used, it was shot with a hackbut i^ ye midst of the breast, This was
of the Emperor so abhorde, that he could not dissemble his Ire, seeing so
vile a de de, he looked up toward the heaven, and said: O Lord if it be thy
will thou art of power to be revenged. These words spoken he rode out through
the plain and open ^ield. But the dust that came from the vawarde was very
great, and the air did drive it in our eyes. The Emperor rode upon the right
hand and this was for two causes. One was for to have sight at liberty, the
other to provide for such perils as we have seen in our time follow when
Esquadrons go not in order, as it is seen by experience, ye vawarde broken the
battle lost, when it is not set in order as it ought to be

Therefore the Emperor provided against such inconuenyences, setting the king
apart with his Esquadrons, so that if our vaward should have been in peril,
he was at hand for to succor, setting upon our enemies, who went so strongly
yt it was necessary so for to provide.

Now the duke of Aluoy with his men in the vawarde, skirmished so nere, that
they made a stond and began to shote of al their artilerye, wherewith the
Almayns be very great doers. The Emperor hasted to be egall with the vawarde,
our footmen had but.vi. pieces of artillery, being far behynd out of our
sight: it was no marvel, for ye bridges could not be soshortly made This was
then three dutche leagues from the Albes, and the Emperor made great speed with
the horsemen because he would undertake to defeat his enemies: for if we
should have tarried for the rest of our fotemenne, they should have had time
and place, to achieved their enterprise. Therefore here it may be clearelye
seen, what may be done in great things, when counsayles be determined.

The horsemen in our vaward were these iiii. C. light horses with ye prince of
Salmona, and with do^ Antony de Toledo.iiii. C and. L. Hu^garians. He had
sent.iii. C. out of our camp this morning to view Troga, a. C. horsemen
hackbutters Hispamardes, and.vi. C. speres with Duke Morts, and two. C.
hackbutters horsemen, two. C. and.xx. men of arms, out of Naples, with the duke
of Castor, here you may see our battle, which went in two Esquadrons. The
Emperor might be.iiii. C. speres, and.iii. C. hackbutters dutchmenne horsed,
the king was.vi. C. speres, and iii. C. hackbutters horsmenne. These were al
our horsemen, and I ensure you I make the number no less then it was, our
Esquadrons ordered indifferently, from the Dutchemenne, for they made the front
of the Esquadrons of their horsemenne sharp. The Emperor made his of seuentene
in a rank, and so the front was broad, and they showed a great noumber, and
represented a fair sight. And to my judgment: this is the best order and the
most sure, when the dysposicion of the ground may suffer it, for why the
front of one Esquadron of horsemenne being large, there is not so much rowme
to be coumpassed by the Flancke, which may be done when the Esquadron is
poynted and streyghte, and seuentene in rank, and seuentene in fylar suffice
for ye shocke. This has been seen by experience at the battle that the men
of arms of Flaunders did geat of the men of arms of Cleues, at ye town of
Sitrade in the year a. M. D.xliii.

The enemies went in order as I have said being.vi. M. fotemenne in two
Esquadrons, and.ix. standerdes of horsemen, of two. M. and.vi. C. horses, and a
Gueten accoumpanied with.viii. or.ix. C. horses. This was the duke of Saxon,
which went prouidyng amongst his Esquadrons, which at the first had
discovered but our vawarde, for the dust did keep the sight from the battle,
wherefore he thought that he might well resyst those horse men: But a marshal
of his camp called Wolf Kraytes, who perceived us better, called him a part
and showed him the battle discovered where the Emperor and the king came
together. In this Esquadron with his majesty went the prince of Piemont, and
the kings two sons who led his Esquadron.

When the duke of Saro^ had seen al our horsemen, and that he had clearly
perceived in our order and going al our determinacion, he turned again emo^gst
the Esquadrons, determini^g with all speed possible to take a wood which did
stand in his way, thinking to be there, with his foteme^ so strongly, yt in ye
night he might go to Viertemberge, for ye was his purpose, for at Troga he
thought he could not be surely, for as he has said sense, he had heard
shotyng of gu^nes i^ ye morni^g, which eue^ i^ deed did shote at ye skoutes
which were sent by ye Emperor, but he had thought we had been but the one half
sent to follow him with the Duke of Aluoy, and that the other had been gone
with the Emperor to Troga. Therefore he would not take the way to Troga, for
there was none of his counsel that would advise him thereto, so that at the
end he concluded to take the wood, in the way toward Viertemberge: and if
that he must needs fight, yet yt it might be to his advantage: and for to
follow one of these two effects, he thought for to geat the wood, which is
full of marrishes, and streyghte ways he sent his hackbutters and light
horsemen to give the charge upon our light horsemen, so that his footemenne
might take the place in the wood that he had appointed.

Now at this time as it is said: the Emperor had made mete with the vawarde: he
spoke chearefullye to duke Morris, and to the men of arms of Naples, the
words beseming a captain in such a day as this, and to the soldiers giving
the^ the name that was Saint George imperial, Saint James Spayn, so going
toward ye enemies a pace that was convenient. These esquadrons going thus
egally, the battle fell into a marrish upon the right hand, wherein did fall
many horses, wherefore it was needful for to draw in the battle, so that the
vawarde might pass without intermedling one esquadron with an other, and to
be both out of order: and for this cause it came to pass, yt goi^g by it
passed ye vaward before the time yt the enemies would give ye charge as I have
said, the which they gave upon our light horsemenne in good order.

At this time the duke of Aluoy perceiving good occasion, sent unto the
Emperor yt he would give ye charge, and so he did at a wynge with his men of
arms of Naples: the duke Morris with his hackebutters upon the other part,
incontinent their men of arms and our battle which now went turnyng to
geat the right hand did mete: they moved against the enemies with such
vehemence, that suddenly they began to turn: our horsemen brake in with such
violence, that they had no place but for to fly, and began to forsake their
foteme^, ye which at the first made a little resista^ce, thinking for to take
the wood: but now al our horsemen were so far forward amongst their horsemen
and fotemen that in one momente they were all broken and scattered in sunder.
The Hungarians with the light horses did take a side, and with a merueilous
quick speed they began to execute the victory, unto the which these
Hungarians have a meruaylous great industrye. They set upon crying Spain,
Spain. For of a truth the name of the Empire, of an old hate, is not to them
agreeable.

In this sort they did take the wood, in ye which there was so many weapons,
and so much harnes scattred, yt it was a great trouble to the^ that executed
the victory. The dead and hurt were many, some at the encounter, other with
great cuttes, some with hackbuttes, and of diverse sorts, there were so many
prisoners that many of our men had.x. or.xii. runnyng about them, many did
lie dead, other did lie wallowyng in their blood. There ye might have seen how
they offered their fortune to their takers. Some were slain, some were taken,
every manne as he would: the dead men did lie in many places on heaps,
and other in parts as they were taken flying or fightyng. The Emperor followed
the chase one mile: all the light horsemenne and part of the Dutchemenne, and
men of arms of the kings followed three leagues.

Now we being in the midst of the wood, the Emperor being there, stayde: and
commanded the men of arms to requoyle, for all went so dispersed and out
of order, that the winners and loosers were ruffled together: wherefore he would
make sure the victory, if any inconvenience should succeed to them that went
before: for it is a thing to be noted, that a captayn do think so, that he
do not say afterward if I had thought, (as many have said,) but this is a
foul word of a captain.

The Emperor and the king came together, which verily showed the courage of a
king. The Duke of Aluoy came from the chase, in white armoure gylte, and a
bend of read upon a baye horse, without any other garnishyng, but of the
blood of the wound that he brought. The Emperor received him joyfully, and
not without cause: and there being, it was said unto the Emperor, that the
duke of Saxon was taken, and his prisoner, pretending to be the principals two
men of arms Hispaniardes of them of Naples, and three or four light horsemen
Hispaniardes and Italyans, one Hungarian, and a captain Hispaniarde. The
Emperor commanded to bring hi^, and so he was brought before him. He came
upon a griseld horse, in a great shirt of mayle, and thereupon a pair of black
curates being bloudye of a wound that he had in his left side. The duke of
Aluoy came upon his right hand, and presented him unto his majesty. The duke
of Saxon would alyghte one foot, taking of his glove for to have touched the
Emperor by the hand, after the manner of Almayne, but the Emperor would
neither the one nor the other. And for to say the truth, he was sore trauayled
through the heat and with the wound, that he came so weary and heavy, that
he thought that the Emperor had had a more respect to this then he had
deserved. Then he being bareheaded, said unto the Emperor according to the
custom of Almayn. Most mighty and most gracious Emperor, I am your
prisoner. To this the Emperor answered: Now ye call me Emperor: this is an
o her name then ye have given me in times past. And this he said: for when the
duke of Saxon and Launtgraue did lead the camp of the league, they did write
him in their letters, but Charles of Gaunt: therefore our Almayns when they
hear of this, they say: let Charles of Gaunte alone, for he will show
himself to be an Emperor. Therefore the Emperor answered him so. And
after he said that his deserving had brought him to this. To these words the
Duke of Saxon made no answer but hurcled up his shoulders, and hanged down his
head, with a countenance like woorthye to be blamed. As a barbarous,
braggyng, proud manne as he has been. Yet the Duke spoke again, beseching
him that he might be entreated as his prisoner. To whom the Emperor
answered, that he should be entreated as he had deserved. And commanded the
Duke of Aluoy, to lead him strongelye to the lodgyng upon the river, which
was gotten the same day at the taking of the forde. The joy of this victory
was general: for the wealth that is come thereby, is every day known more
and more. The Duke Morres that day going in chase, one of the enemies had
charged a hackebutte behind him, ready to fire, but he was cu^te in pieces,
and his horse with them which were there about the Duke.

There was slain of the footemenne of the enemies, two thousand, and many
hurt, and being left there, diverse went away, and saved themselves in the
night following. The next day were taken.viii. C. footemenne, and of horsemen
were slain v. C. and a great noumber taken: but amongst our Almayns the nation
being al one, there were many co^uaid: but those which came to knowledge were
so many, that the Hungarians light horsmenne, and other men of arms had
taken, there came not to Viertemburge of fotemen and horsemen four hundred.
There were taken.xv. pieces of artilerye, two long Coluerins, and.iiii. demye
Coluerins.iiii. demye Cannons.v. Fawcenettes, and great ple^tie of municion.
The next day was taken other.vi. pieces, there was taken all their carriage,
where our horsemen did find great abounda^ce of good stuff and money. Also
there were taken.xvii. banners of foteme^ and.ix. standerdes of horsemen, and
the Geaton of the Duke of Saxon was taken, the Duke Hernest of Branzwique was
taken* He in the war paste which had the setting forth and leadyng of all the skirmishes, the eldest son of the duke of Saxon was hurt in the hand,
and he killed him that hurt him, and after he fled to Viertemberge, many of
the principalles were taken that day: of ours there dyed. ^l. horsemenne, and
other which died afterward of their wounds. This battle was the four and
twenty day of April. M. O xlvii. upon Saint Marks even, twelve days,
after that the Emperor parted from Egner, it began upon the river of
Albeis, about.xi. of the clock, and was ended at seven of the clock at after
noone, from the geattyng of the forde, he was followed as it is said, ever
fyghtyng until he was taken. His footemenne and horsemenne broken with such
courage, and good industrye, that it may be said by him: ille sapit solus
voli^ant alu velut vmbrae.

This great victory the Emperor did attrybute unto God, as a thing given by
his hand, and therefore he said these three words of Ceasar, changing the
third, as a most Christen prince ought for to do, knoweledging the
goodness of God. Veni vidi and vici.

The moderacion of the Emperor appeared unto all men in the vsyng of the
duke of Saxon, one other Conqueror might have been that if he had so
offended, could not have tempered his Ire, as the Emperor did, which is a
greatter difficulty sometime, then to vanquishe the enemy. Now being late,
the Emperor returned unto his lodgyng, at a leven of the clock in the night.
The next day artillery, municions, harnes, and weapons with ye six pieces,
were brought together, and the light horsemenne Hungarians, brought in yet a
great noumber of prisoners: for three leagues before the chase, they had
followed the victory. The Duke of Saxon was delivered by the Duke of Aluoy to
Alonso Biuas, master of the camp of the Hispaniardes, of the kingdom of
Naples, and also with him duke Harnest of Bra^zwique, which was taken by a
Duchemanne borne under the king of Romans, and servant to duke Morres.

In this place the Emperor abode ii. days. At this time Troga did surrender,
and the Emperor with all his army intended to go against Uierte^berge, the
head of the estate of the Duke of Saxon, and principal town of those of the
eleccion: and so he kept it most importunate, and fortifyed it continually
for the space of. xxv years past, with a great number of artilerye. The way
lies by Troga, where stands a Castle, one of the most fairest that is in
Almayn. In the which place duke Iho^ did take most ordinarilye his solace and
pastyme, and there it was known by the prisoners, that they looked for
Thumserne with his me^, yt he had brought out of Boeme with.xx. banners which
they of that kingdom had sent him, and a number of horsemen with them: but the
quick speed of ye Emperor has cut away al their leages, succor and aides
from him.

The Emperor passed ye river of A^bes benethe, half one league from
Uiertemburge, by a bridge made of his barks, and of those which he had taken
from the enemies. I think it is a thing worthy to be had in remembrance, this
that has been seen and known of this river. At that time that ye Emperor
pa^ed by forth, although it was deep, yet the day after, it could not be
passed in any p^a^e without swimming. Here it seems that God makes things
light to them which go in his service. Other two things I will write, because I
have seen the^. One is, yt in the passage of the footmen of Spain, an Eagle
came soryng over them a great space. In the mean time a Wolf came running
out of the wood, and was killed with the soldiers in the myddest of the plain
fyeldes, this was a thing permitted of God or by chance, so that it was a
great marvel to the^ that did behold it.

This day it was a great heat, the Sun apeared in color of blood, and
unto us that did behold it, verelye it was not so low, and as it was thought,
it should have been at yt hour. It was a notable syghte and in the opinion of
all men to be true, so that I dare not say the contrary, it was noted that
same day in Newremberge and in France, as the king does say, and in
Pymount, it was seen in the same color. These things were so mu he noted and
spoken, that I have thought good to write. The Emperor passed the river of
Albes, and lodged between the woods in the sight of Viertemburge, which
stands in this manner.

This town of Vierte^berge is great and strong, it stands quadra^t 4.c.
paces from the Albes. It is set in a raire plain yt it may be seen in all
parts, environed and watered with a deep and broad diche, it has a ra^pire of
60. foot thick, full of grass and herbs. It has a va^demute yt it is
impossible to be beaten with artilerye. There be.v. bulwarks, and a strong
castle standing above, which dyscouereth all the country. Upon that part the
Emperor was determined to make the batterye: he sent for the.xv. M. laborers
which Duke Morres had promised, and the artilerye to be brought from
Tressene, where was a great number and enough to beat Viertemberge, and to
defend their town with ye rest. But al stood upon this, that although we had
the artilery, these laborers were so entreated by the way, that of xv. M.
there came but. 4. C. and with great difficulty, as Duke Morres did say. At
this time the Emperor began for to hear the prayers and supplicacions of the
Marquis of Bra^de^burge Electoure, which was come for to intercede and
entreat for the Duke John of Saron. His majesty had considered diverse
things, amongst the which he has considered the duke of Cleues to be Son
in law to the king of Romans, and Neuew to the duke of Saxon, who with great
instaunce procured to save the life of Duke John, with part of his estate,
whatsoever it might be, having pite upon so great a prince come unto so
miserable fortune, and not to conclude upon the first determinacion, which was
to take his life, and so it was be go^ne to treat, that the duke might be
chastised: and yet the Emperor to use clemencye, as it beseemed so great a
prince, so much lauded in virtue as the first Ceasar, who says that he did
geat more by clemencye then by arms. There has been diverse uers opinions
touching the life of duke John, one sort considered him only to be chastised,
other considered the manor of the correction, with other qualicies so
importunate, that they reputed the victory of the Emperor to live for ever,
and that it should not need to bring them unto utter desperacion, which put
their trust in the Emperors mercy. At the which men looked for to take
example in that he would do to the duke of Saron, and so treating upon the
one and the other, the Emperor concluded to be confirmable to his natural
conditions that was giuig the life to duke John with the conditions which were
sufficient, so yt they might be a recompense for the death of him, which of
many he was judged to be worthy.

There were in Vierte^berge the wife of the duke and his brother, and his
youngest sons. In Got was his eldest son, which was escaped wounded from
the battle. Al these looked for the success: touching the duke, to who^ now
the Emperor had pardoned life, by the intercestio^ of the^ which did entreat.

1. First was taken from him, the election, and all the Towns which have gone
with the same, of the which Vtertemberge and Troga be pryncipalles, and many
other. 2. To enter upon all the artylerye and municions vohyche is a great
number: for only from Viertemburge were fetched out an hundred and twentye
pieces, the small ordinance except. 3. His majesty did apointe in Curing
certain castles and towns to his use. 4. Got which is a forte inexpugnable,
he commanded it to be cast down and rased by the ground. 5. There was found
one hundredth pieces of artilery, an.c. the usa^d pellettes, and other municio^s
according to the same. 6. He to remain prisoner in the Emperors court or in
any other place where he will command at al times durig his majesty's
pleasure. 7. And to be brought in, the baners, standers and arulerie that he
had taken from the Marquis Albert, bosent for to the court. In things
touching relygyon at the first he stood fast, but after he answered so fair,
that it seemed to his majesty, that he should not need to speak any more of
that. His brother lost a town which his majesty did give to the Marquis
Albert. 8. The Duke surrendered all the Castles and towns that he had usurped of
the Earls of Mansfell, and from the charches and Monasteryes of Saxonye, and
to be at the disposicio^ of the Emperor, the which seeing that the principal
part was touching religion, he began to take a good way and to be content with
these condicto^s, and because he would not that so au^cie^t a h^use which had
done so great service to his in times past should be utterly extincte and
undone: he would rather follow equity and mekenes, then their and just
indignacio^ to the which he has been deserui^glie encited by the wars in the
year past when he did break the camp of the league.
Al things co^pounded in this sort, duke John alive and chastised with so
great correction, that from one of the mightiest princes in Germani, he is
become a private knight and his sons shall divide amongst them that which he
only possesses, so that this house which has been of so great power, shall
be come so little as his pride has deserved, but for all this it is not
parceyued that this duke has spoken one lowlye word, or showed any
countenance confirmable to his fortune, but ever a constancy worthy to be
kept in our true religion. Uiertemberge yielded with three thousand men of
war. The Emperor sent to be there in garrison four baners. Two days after
this, the Duchess came forth to do reverence and see his majesty: she came
to h^stent accompanied with the brother of Duke John, and his wife sister to
the Duke Henrike of Bru^zwique, and a son of duke John's, an other was sick
in Uierte^berge, and the third at Got. There came also in their company the
Sons of the king of Romans, the Marquis of Brandemburge, and other Lords
of Alnmyne. She came before the Emperor with all humilitye that might be. It
was not need to (...) her her husband being in so great trybulacion seeing her
self depo^e^, and in a miserable estate. Her fortune showed her what she
should now do, she kneled down before the Emperor, but he did take her
up, and received her as curteouslye as i^ she had lost nothing of this that she
had in her first fortune: it was a thing that moved every man to pity. There
she besought the Emperor touching the duke her husband, whereunto she was
graciouslye answered, she went after where he was amongst the Hispaniardes in
their ward, and there she did viset him having lise^ce of the Emperor, and
then returned to the castle of Uiertemberge. The next day the Emperor entered
into Uiertemberge, for to see the castle where the Duches lai, which seemed to
be a visitacion like unto Alerander when he visited the mother and wife of
Darius: for so much more is the victory when a prince does use it moderatlye.

At this time came from the confines and costs of Tarterye, and Muscouia nere
unto ye river of Neper.iij. captains, offering to ye Emperor their service,
with.iiij. M. horses: he answered the^ with great thanks, and that the wars
were now in term that it should not need and so they departed. Likewise there
came Ambassadors from the king of Tunezey, for to treat with the Emperor
concerning certain affairs for their Lord, and they offered him as many
Aloraues which are the chief horsemen, so that it may be said that out of
Cythia, and from Libia, men be atracted bithe greatness of the Emperor to write
of him.

Now the Emperor had sent a knight of his house called Lazaro Esbende, for
to take Got with two baners, and that he should set at liberty the Marquis
Albert, and that he should tarrye there, and see it divided and cast down to
the ground, other places came in to surrender at their terms: for such an
order was taken, that in Saxonye there was nothing left to be done. But Boeme,
which is their neighbor, was at an evil point with their king, but they of
the kyngdo^e sent Ambassadors to the Emperor, with the fairest words and
greatest offer yt might be, but his majesty did keep the^ there for to be
dispatched when he saw his time.

In these days duke Henrique of Brunzwique the young man was against Breame
with two thousand horsemenne, and four thousand footemenne, in the which
enterprise he had aid of the Emperor, because he was an enemy to the
Dukes of Lu^burque Lutherans, and of the league, as it is written more
particularlye by them which have in charge to write more at large. He was put
to flight by an Earl of Mans^elte, a Rebel and Lutheran, and Thumserne
Captain for the Duke in Saxony, the which with the men that he had in Boeme,
with a great rode that he made about, he joined with this Earl of
Mansfyelde. They two being together, had toure thousand horsemenne,
and.xiiij. or.xv. M. footmen. Duke Henryque of Brunzwique complained unto the
Emperor upon an other captain that having a commission from his majesty had
made war against those cities, which came not to him in time: it followed
that the Emperor caused the captains to be taken.

This story is to be written by them which write more particularlye of the
Emperor: but to speak of the power of Duke John, as he has said sith, if
the Emperor had tarryed two days longer, he had received him. with.xxx. M.
footmen, and.vij. M. horsemen, a strength sufficient to fight with.iiii. M.
horsemen and.xvi. M. footemenne, if he which was their leder had not been worth
so much as to fulfill the number of the^ that lacked for to be egale with our
enemies. And it is clear, that he had this strength, beside those which were
with him when he was taken, and the baners which we put to flight before ye
battle. There remained whole.iiij. M. horsemen and xiiij. or.xv. M. footmen,
beside the account of those which he looked for out of Boeme, and so he was
determined, that if he might not fight to his advantage, to deuyde his men by
garrisons, some in Madeburge, and one of his sons in Got, an other in
Vierte^b^rge, a captain in Eldra^, an other in Sonab^^t, and of this sort to
compass the Emperor about: with taking away of his victuals, but al these
policies came to nothing. For when the duke of Saxon was overthrown, they
began to scatter, and not only these, but all so the Lantgraue: how and by
which way he might make his peace, so that they let fall all the trust that
they had in their neighbors and other strangers, of whom they had received
money and gifts, for the which they have had as much thank and gains that
have tarryed at home, as they which have been abrod and have not followed the
Emperor. Here it may be seen of what weight the parson of duke John of
Saxony with his power, has been in Germanye. For after his defaccion and
taking, he has had little power which has thought him self to be a Governor
ouerall. For after this victory, the Lantgraue is come to make intercession
unto Duke Morres for to have his pardone, and at the first, he offered to
fulfill many conditions, but at the last he handeled the matter otherwise.

The Soliciters in this, be duke Morres and the Electour of Brandemburge, unto
whom the Emperor had a great respect, and at their contemplacion, he was
content to hear what they would propone for ye Lantgraue, but neuerthe less
he would have the thing done which he thought convenient. And so he answered
them what was his pleasure should be done. The La^tgraue replied, addyng yet
more thereunto, but he left our ever one thing which must needs be done.
The Emperor answered resolutelye that he would not treat with the
Launtgraue, but it should be at his pleasure. This answer was given to the
Launtgraue being.viij. leagues from our camp, from whence he then departed in
great desperacion, so that there was no hope for remedy, but only that which
he feared most. And he said, for nothing in the world he would submit him
self to the Emperors mercy, and to be at his will. And with this
determinacion, he wrote to duke Morres certain chapiters with his own hand,
how he would agree and enter, which were the very same that the Emperor
demanded. This conclusion the Emperor would have concluded in Hale, in
Saxon, standing in the way toward the country of the Lantgraue, the which way
the Emperor ente^ded to lead his camp. The same day that his majesty came to
Hale, the there came the Marquis Albert of Brandemburge, to whom as it is said:
he had given lybertye with his banners* standerdes, and artilerye which he had
lost, because he should lack nothing that belonged to liberty. He rested a
great time there: for one of the things that pleased him most in his war, was
that he had recovered this prince which came unto ye Emperor and said: Lord I
thank God and you. He said no more, and I think this to be be sufficient.

Two days before the Emperor parted from Vierte^berge. The king of Romans
had taken ye way toward Prage, with, iij. M. horsemen and vj. M. footmen, with
those which were sent from the Marquis of Ma^enan. The Emperor removed from
Vierte^burge to go against ye Lantgraue, as against ye root of al myschief in
Germany, which was necessari to be plucked up: for letting this great
desperacion, so that there was no hope for remedy, but only that which he
feared most. And he said, for nothing in the world he would submit him self
to the Emperors mercy, and to be at his will. And with this determinacion, he
wrote to duke Morres certain chapiters with his own hand, how he would agree
and enter, which were the very same that the Emperor demanded. This
conclusion the Emperor would have concluded in Hale, in Saxon, standing in
the way toward the country of the Lantgraue, the which way the Emperor
ente^ded to lead his camp. The same day that his majesty came to Hale,
thither came the Marquis Albert of Brandemburge, to whom as it is said: he had
given iyberrye with his banners. standerdes, and artilerye which he had lost,
because he should lack nothing that belonged to liberty. No rested a great
time there: for one of the things that pleased him most in his war, was that
he had recovered this prince which came unto ye Emperor and said: Lord I
thank God and you. He said no more, and I think this to be be sufficient.

Two days before the Emperor parted from Vierte^berge. The king of Romans
had taken ye way toward Prage, with, iii. M. horsemen and vj. M. footmen, with
those which were sent from the Marquis of Ma^enan. The Emperor removed from
Vierte^burge to go against ye Lantgraue, as against ye root of al myschief in
Germany, which was necessari to be plucked up: for letting this grow, and to
go parsonallye into Boeme, although that kingdom might be subdued: yet
nevertheless the Launtgraue might stand in case to begin the wars again,
but ye La^tgraue subdued: Boeme should be more light to be taken in hand: For
why that kingdom and al theirs of the rebels in Germanye, looked for the
sustentacion of ye Lantgraue as in a head in whom they did depend next unto
Duke John, and therefore the Emperor would that the king should part in have,
because the heat of his great victory might increase his strength, so yt this
kyngdo^e which feared so much ye Emperor might be brought more ^ightli to
obedience, by force or other ways.

The day before the partyng of the king, the Hu^garians came to kiss the
hands of the Emperor with supplicacio^, that it might please him to have in
remembrance the succor of Hungary, they made an Oracion according to the time
of their fortune. The Emperor put them in comfort, and wryt unto ye estates of
their kingdom, that they were worthy to have his parson, and commanded to be
given to every captain a chain of gold, to the value of. 3.c. crounes, and a
pay to be made to their me^, the vohych they did take with thanks, and
considered it to be a gift of favor. His majesty gave to duke Morres ye robes
of ye eleccion, with ye tounes belongi^g to ye same, and because amongst
great things he would not forgeat the little, he commanded to be given to the
soldiers ye which did swim to get the barges, garments of crymyson after their
fashyon, and to eueryche one.xxx. crounes, with the advantage of their banners.

The Emperor being come unto Hale in Saxonye, which is a great town standing
in the dyoces of Madeburge, although duke John had taken it for his own. His
majesty lodged in the house of the bishop, and there determined to put in
effect, that the which by the intercession of the electors, it had pleased the
Emperor to consent. The conditions general which to my remembrance be these.

First that the Lantgraue submit him self into the hands of the Emperor with all his possessions, and to swear fidelity to his majesty, to give the.iiij.
principal towns that he has, and for to be cast down at his commandment.

He does give to the Emperor.v. C. and. ^. M. Florauns of gold with all his
artilery, which be. ij C. pieces catted, and to deliver Duke Henrique of
Brunzwique, which he had kept prisoner sense the year M. D.xlv. and to
restore to ye said duke, al things that he has usurped, and to be in the
determinacion of the chamber imperial.

This is the point which is to him so much voorthe, that not for to come
there^^^, he has sustained his opinious so long, until that he has sworn
fide live to the Emperor: and the nobles also be sworn, that when the
Lantgraue goes out of the way, they shall take him and bring him to the
Emperor, who now pardons him his life, and takes away the Vande imperial,
which was proclaimed against him, and like wise remitteth him from perpetual
prison. Before the coming of the Launtgraue to Hale, there was a great
question and bebate between the Hispaniardes and the Dutchmen: it was so far
forth, that the Emperor put him self amongst them. It was a necessary
remedy, for none but only he might suffice, how be it that it was not without
peril which might have chanced, being between ij. parties so furious, which
now be ganne to be blind.

At this time the Emperor did give license to ye Ambassadors of Boeme, saying
unto the^ in sum, yt he would make intercession to ye king, and yt if the
realm was grieved in any thing, it should be disgrauated. But this was to be
understood coming first into the obedience of their king in doing their
duty, and if not, his maiesti could do no less, but to take the affairs of
his brother as his own proper. This was in some his answer, how be it in his
letters they were answered more at large.

Now the day is come that the La^tgraue comes to Hale with one hundredth
horses: he did light at the lodging of Duke Morres his son in law, now
Electour. The next day at the hour appointed, he came to the palace
accompanied with these two Electours. The Emperor was in the haule with the
ceremonies accustomed in these things. There were many lords and knights of
Almme which came to se that which they thought never to have seen in the
La^tgraue: but when he came before the Emperor, he did take of his bonnet,
and kneled down upon his knees, and his chauncelour likewise: the which by
the name of his lord said these words. Right high, most mighty and victorious
prince, Emperor and gracious Lord, Phillip the Launtgraue of Hessene has
greuouslye offended your Majesty being in these wars, and giving a cause of
just indignacion for the enducing of other parsons to fall in the same fault,
wherefore your majesty may use al rigor in ye correccio^ of his deserving. He
confesses meekely that he is sorrowful with all his heart, and following the
offers that he has offered for to come before your majesty, he yeldeth
himself unto your majesty in all points freely at your will. Humbly beseching
for the love. and merci of God, yt your majesty will be content to use of your
goodness and clemenci to pardon and forgeat these said offenses, and to take
away the banishment imperial, which your majesty has so justly declared
against him parmitting ye he may possess his lands, and govern his vassailes,
which make supplicacion that it may please you to pardon and to receive them in
to your grace, knowledging evermore to make recognisance unto your majesty, and
to take you only rightfullye ordained of God to be our sovereign Lord and
Emperor, to obey and to do service to your majesty, and to the whole Empire, al
yt a prince and vassalle is bound to do, and so ever to continue, and never to
do, or treat any thing to the contrary, for to be al his life a meke and
obedient servant in knowing of the great benefit of this pardon obtained at
your majesty, for the which he desires and shall desire al his life to serve
with thanks, as he is bound in such sort, that your majesty may know in
effect, that the Lantgraue and his shall keep and observe as they be bound by
the articles, by the which your Majesty's pleasure has been for to grant.
These were the words of the Lantgraue in effect.

The Emperor commanded one of his Counsel Almane who said these words.
His Majesty (pyteful Lord) does understand what the Lantgraue has said: that
although he has confessed and has greuouslye offended, so that he has
deserved al punishment, though it were the greatest that might be given,
which is to all the world well known. Notwithstanding, his majesty having a
respect that he has submitted him self at his feet, and by his clemency
accustomed, and likewise at the intercession of the princes which have
entreated, he is content to take away the banishment iustlye declared against
him, and not to punyshe him with pain capital as he has deserved for the
rebellyon committed against his Majesty, nor with perpetual priesonne,
neither yet with the confyscacion of his goods: but hencefoorthe to be
content with the Artycles in the Chapters, which his Majesty has granted.
He receives him into his grace and mercy with the subjects and servants of
his house, so that he acco^plishe all that is contained in his chapters, so that
he does not go directlye nor indirectly in any thing against them. And that his
majesty does believe and trust that the Lantgraue and his subjects will deserve
the great mercy and pitye that he has used toward them. These be the words
of ye answer to ye La^tgraue.

Al this time the Lantgraue kneeled upon his knees: but when he did stand up,
his majesty touched not his hand, nor yet made unto him any sight of curtesy.
It was a thing notable to see him kneling a prisoner, and the duke Henrique of
Brunzwique which had been his prisoner, at lybertye, standing by one foot.
Here might be seen the chaungeable success of man. This finished, the duke of
Aluoy came unto him, and said: you must depart, desiring the two electors to
supper with him. So the Lantgraue was led out of ye palace unto ye castle where
ye duke did lie, and after supper he appoi^ted hi^ a lodging in ye castle, and
commanded Don Iho^ de Gneue^a, captain of ye terce of Lumbardy to be his keeper.

At the first the Launtgraue did take his imprisonmente vnpacientlye: for of a
truth, he thought ^his priso^me^t not being perpetual but temporal, that it
should have been so light, and dissembled that he might have gone a huntyng in
the forest of Hesson: but it seems that God has permitted that where he
thought for to excede all other in Almayne in business and quarrels, that in
the self same, he is come for to write against himself, with his own hand,
entreating of no other thing, but to be a prisoner perpetual or temporal, at
the discrecion of him, into whose hands he has submitted himself, and since is
come to knowledge that his mouth has spoken against him. He began to quiet
himself, and to take his fortune with more patience: so he that praised
himself so much in business it is come to pass, that he is lost in trouble
and business. The Duke of Saxon which has praised himself to be a man of
war, and of strength, it is come to pass that he has lost himself in the
war.

These twho heads of the Lutherans which have so much dysquieted al
christendom, now god has given them into the hands of the Emperor, with so
honorable means, to him and his fame so long as the world shall endure. And
sith for to speak of these two princes, I think it shall not be far from
the purpose, to say what every manne may judge in them. The Duke of Saxon is a man of a great courage, eloquente, and discrete. And in his manours he has
a grace in all thing that he says or does. He is liberal, and for these
good qualities, he is much beloved in Germanye and well frended. He is more
quyete then the Launtgraue, by whose counsel, as they say, they began the
war this year past. The Lantgraue differs much in conditions from this:
for why he is unquiet in extreme, a great friend and main tayner of quarelles
and strife. He is not of such effabilitie, nor so light of speech in his
practice and conversation, but rather a light wit, and as to his civility he
is not of that opinion amongst folks, nor like to the Duke of Saxon: but
because he has gone more diligently about this business paste, and being
captain general of the league, he has given more occasion to speak of him
then of the other, although the duke has been more of authority.

In the city of hale came unto his majesty a great greting and congratulacion
of this victory, from the Pope. And in his brief that he wrote unto him, he
set him forth with the renown of Marimo, with mighty names as well deserved
as given. These things done, his majesty parted from hale when he had
provided for the rasyng of Got, the artillerye was brought to Francfort, and
moreover from all the fortes of the Lau^tgraue, except one that his majesty
left him. The artilerie and municions were brought from all parts to
Franckeforte, for thither was brought all the artillerye and municions, which
was gotten in these wars, except the hundredth pieces of Uiertemberge of the
which were sent fifty to millayne, and fifty to Naples. The two hundred that
were taken from the Launtgraue, and one C. from Got. And the hundredth that
were taken of the cities at the breaking up of the camp of the league, they
were brought thither for to carry into Flanders. Of these iiii. C. the Emperor
sent into spayn one. C. with one other hundredth, and xl. which he did keep for
to be sent thither. In Flaunders remain an C. and lx. for why it is mete yt in
all parts of his estates where ye fame of this victory is knownen, that the
the signs and tokens thereof be seen.

Al these things done, ye Emperrour removed to Newremberge following the cost
of Boeme. because yet he would give more hea^ to the affairs of that kingdom,
from whence his majesty had news* that it was subdued: so much is worth
the reputacion of a Prince in any enterprise, how di^^icile and hard so ever
they be. Now the Emperor did take the way through Turing a country
fruitful and full of strayte passages, the which they of the country had
so much fortyfyed, that it seemed that they put a trust much differyng from
that ye followed: for they had such a confidence in the strength of their
Lord, that they looked not for the Emperor ^^ be there victorious, for (...)
were (...) that i^ had (...), (...) been i^possible (...) war of ye Lau^tgraue
against the Duke of Brunzwique, and of them of Breame, with the young manne
Duke Henrique of Brunzwique. and with Grou^gue, and Vierspergue and other
particularities, for I will not enlarge my Come^tarie, nor take away from them
which have in charge to write these and other: this that I put here, may be
a help to their remembrance, and also because I will not lose for my part
these worthy deeds, above al other as these be of the Emperor.

In this way of Turyng came to submit himself unto the Emperor, the
eldest son of the Duke of Saxon, which had been in Got, and ratified all
that his father had granted, and when he came to Bamberge, he received there
a legate from the Pope. And from thence to Nuremberge where he abode certain
days, lokyng for to take resolucion of the city, where he was disposed to
keep the diet, for in Vlme it was thought not to be commodious, as it behooved
for all the princes and cities of Germanye to come together, especially for
health.

At this time the Citizens of ye mighty cities of Lubique, came before the
Emperor, declaryng that they had never offended: and truth it is, for they
never did thing against his majesty. Breame taking the king of Denmark for
their intercessour, labored for their pardon. The duke of Pomerana and
Lunemburge, labored with excuses, prayers, and iustificacions Their affairs,
Brunzwique, Hilson, and Breme, came to Auguste to be at the Emperors mercy,
for why, they did see their correccion at hand, for it should not have been
need, to have his person, nor yet any of his army to chastise them, but to
have sent to the lords their neighbors to make them war, the which they
desired as a thing much for their profit. Hamburge came to surrender to the
Emperor being in Nuremberge. And so the head Cities Maritane, standing upon
the Sea, came to surrender, m^^yng great paymentes, submyttyng themself to the
obedyence Imperial, which they have not known until now and other things
to be done as it should please the Emperor to command.

Now the Emperor has brought to pass all these things in Germanye,
which have been so high in the top of pride, and with so great power, that
it seemed to the heads of them, that their pride was no presumpcion, but all
reason, and without any doubt their power was so great, that it seemed to
all men, that there was not strength in the rest of christendom for to
resyst. But he that may do all things, has suffered the Emperor to have
the victory, for the which his name shall remain more clear then any of
the other Emperors of Rome, consyderyng the great deeds and the causes
wherefore, so that al princes be bound, which stand in the determinacion of
the church, as the countye Palatyne, the Duke Morres, the Duke of
Viertemberge, the marquis of Brandemburge Elector, and all they of their names.
And they of Almayne, which seemed to be most impossible, as the self
Launtgraue, with other princes, and ioyntlye all the cities of the Empire, from
Auguste, where his majesty kept the diet. He sent with the Cardinal of
Trente large relacion to his holiness.

The greatness of these wars, deserve a relacion more at large, then this of
mine, but I with this brief remembrance, may help them which write more
particularlye: but surely this I say, yt when Ceasar had conquered France in
x. years, he filled the world with his Comentaries. And Rome made supplicacions
to the gods, when they had passed the Ryne, and had been x. days in Almayne,
he thought yt it suffised to have ye authority and the dignity of the people
which governed the world. The Emperor in one year, has subdued this brave
province, witness the Romans of our time. Charles the great in. xxx years
subdued Saxony. The Emperor in less then four months was lord of all the
whole province. The greatness of this war is woorthye a greatter style then
mine is: for I cannot write but ye naked truth, without any affeccion, but
yet the remembrance may be perpetual according to the deserving of the
greatness of the enterprise, the which, and of the year passed, has been
governed by the Emperor so straight, that if it had been guyded otherwise, it
had not come unto the end that we have seen it: for at al times when it has
been nedeful to be governed by art, the order has been observed to that
effect necessary. And also when it has been convenient to work by force,
the determinacion has been so executed with such courage and strength, as
has been nedeful. Wherefore his fame is worthy to be so much superior to the
other Capitayns in time past, so much as in the virtue and goodness, he is to
them all.

A letter sent from the king of Romans unto the Emperor his Majesty, upon ye
success of Boeme.
THis that we have here new, since the third day of July is that the tewesday
last, they of ye city of Prage, being as it may be thought, in pride and
malicious intenion, and we having deferred ye term of the Sitacion, at their
supplicacion until the Friday, they began about the midst of the day to
shoot of their hackebuttes at our men, being on this part of the river, so
that they were forced to do the same. We took an order for to defend their
breakyng out upon us: for as yet the marquis of Marenano was not come with his
men. But we had knoweledge at that time that he was within four leagues.
We sent a Gentlemanne in post to haste his coming, they of the city
perseuering in their purpose, and not content with ye shot of their
hackbutters, they shot of their artillery, with the which they killed five or
six parsons, and began to fortify themselfes to make their rampires, and
set forth their ordinance upon the port of the bridge. And in the morning
following they did the same, and we had knowledge when it was late, that the
borderers on the other part of the river were coming for to enter into the
city that night. We sent one number of horsemen armed and Hu^garians, and
Charles ^aradin with them to pass the river by ford, and first to admonish
them to keep their houses in peace, and if they would not so do, for to kill
and make slaughter. When it was day, they of the city seeing our horsemen on
the other part, set forth to the noumber of one thousand, with handegunnes
and other weapons against our men, but they were broken, put to flight, and
slain in ye chase to the^r gates ii. C. and. L. and taken one C. and.xx. of the
city, whence they shot many muscattes and artilery but none of ours were
killed. With this hand that we had of them, and with the coming of the
marquis of Marenano with his footmen, about the midst of the day, their
hearts failed and began to flatter, promisyng that they would turn and
take away their artillery from the places where they had laid it, and to send
forth vittailes of their city for our folks, which before they had
prohibited, kepi^g their gates so that there might be no passage.

The supplicacion for the prolongacion of the term the which we had
granted them, was with craft, subtiltye, and malice, so that they might
provide themselves and prevail by strength, as it has appeared, for
incontinent they wrote twelve letters into diverse parts for aid, and of those
they had sent only three, whereof one copy was brought unto us: but of a
truth they have repented them, and forsaken the letters that they have sent,
and keep the rest.

The Fridaye paste which was the day of the accomplishme^t of the term, that
they had given them to make answer to our Sitacion, they came to the castle
of the old and new city, about five hundred parsons: and being set in the
great Halle, their Bishops, Barons, and Gentlemen, which we caused to come
thither, we commanded the^ for to speak and give answer to ye Sitacio^ in ye
which was declared ye articles of ye deeds, which were done against us. The^
they for themselfes, and in the name of their Citizens answered that they did
know to have erred, and grievously offended, and kneling they made supplicacio^
to be received and to have their pardon. Unto the which we commanded them to
be answered, yt they did know right well what they had done to our displeasure
before, and now of late since our coming as it is manifest. Then we commanded
it for to be read there, more at large then it had bee^ sent in ye Citacio^.
And when ye reding was accomplished al kneling, and for the most part weping,
besoughte that it might please us to grant the^ their pardon, taking for
orators and advocates, my son Hernando, the duke of August and of Texe^
being there present, to the which as it is here the custom, we did grant,
commanding them to answer, if they had any thing to say, or to allege in
their discharge, for we would bewel content to determine by the way of
Justice, so that it might be seen whereby they did hold: and they answered,
they have nothing to allege, but by supplicacion: hearing this, we commanded
to be said, that although their errors and excesses were so great, that they
have deserved great correccion and punishment, having a respect to the peticion
of my son, the dukes, and other parsons which have made intercession for
them, we would receive them and give them certain articles, which we would
have to be accomplished: and in the mean time to remain and to be kept in a
great stewe, standing in the said haule, where we commanded the^ to be until
we had been at counsel and dined. Then we sent them the articles which we
would have accomplished, which be these.

First that they shall cansell and break all the seals of the league yt they
had made at the first dyct and parliament that we did hold of the kingdom,
with the which we were content: for why then we thought it should have been
for the best.

The second, that they give in to our hands all the privileges that they
have, and to denull and take away at our pleasure, and to reform as we shall
think convenient, for of a truth there be some necessary to be had.

The third, that they shall give all the privileges of the offices and
conferaries, of the which they have many, and cause of much disorder.

The fowrth, that they give us all the rentes, castles, vassalles, and
customs, so that hence forewarde, they may be ours.

The fifth, that they shall deliver us all the letters and wrytinges of
leagues, confederations, and intellige^ces, that they had made with John duke
Frederike of Saxony, and those of this kingdom, and al other of what degree,
estate or co^dicio^ so ever they be, subjects or not our subjects, among ye
which, we trust to find some thing for our purpose.

The sixth, yt the custom of their service yt they have granted for.iii. years,
shall be perpetual and for ever ours.

The seventh to deliver us all the artilerye and municions yt they have,
without any reteining in their custody, and yt al their harnes and weapon yt
they have and hold, (the sweord except,) to be brought into ye haule of the
city, and to be done therewith according to our will and pleasure*

This accomplished, we were content to pardon al ye people, except certain
parsones which have grievously offended, ye which we will shall be reserved for
to be punished. For why this cannot be left undone, with out offense of
Justice, and prejudice of the common wealth.

These said articles by the^ seen, although they seemed hard, nevertheless they
did consent, howbeit they thought it mete and needful to be propouned unto
the people, and for this we commanded to be set at liberty, forty or
fifty parsons, for ye excecucion Thereof. The which propouned, accepted, and
consented of all ye people, yesterday saturday they broughtin, and delivered al
their privileges, except certain partyculers, which be many, and can not be
so spedily brought together. They brought also yesterdaye, a great part of
their artilery, and this day they shall bring in the rest, and the harnes and
weapon into the haule of their city according unto our commandment, and so
to accomplish these articles, as shortelye as can be possible, in the which
there is no doubt, si^he these two most hard and difficile of the privilege
and artillerye be now welnere accomplished and fulfilled. Those which be
prisoners, made unto us yesterdaye supplicacion to be desyuered, but they be
answered to have patience two or three days until all thing be finyshed.
For all this we have delivered from thence, certain which we know not to be
culpable, and the other remain still in prisone. This is it that is done
until now, of the which you shall make account unto his majesty, so that he
may know in what estate we be here, and common also with my son.

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete within Temple bar, at the sign of the
hand and star, by Richard Tottel.
Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


