THE AVDI FILIA, OR A RICH CABINET FVLL OF SPIRITVALL IEVVELLS.

Composed by the Reverend Father, DOCTOVR AVILA, Translated out of Spanish into
English.

Omnis terra adoret te, and psallat tibi.

Psalm. 65. Let all the earth adore thee, and sing to thee, O Lord.

Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XX.

THE DEDICATORY. TO ALL ENGLISH CATHOLICS.
HAVING received the honor, and happiness to be a member of your Holy
Communion; and on the other side, having done you nothing but dishonor, by
leading an unprofitable life at least, and most unworthy of the high vocation
of being a Catholic; I have had too much reason to cast my thoughts upon
thinking, how I might make you some little part of amends. Nothing came to my
mind (which might also be within the measure of my power) but the presenting
you with this Book; which, together with my self, I cast at the feet of
you all, with an humble and most reverend affection. Our Lord does know, how
much need I have of all your prayers, and the high account, which I make of
them; whereby you may guess, how much in earnest I desire the same.

And because there is amongst you a Religious Person, a true servant and spouse
of Christ our Lord, by whose means, through the goodness of God, I am grown
to an increase of some good desires to do him Service; and who made much
impression upon my mind, toward the making me translate this very Book; I do
also dedicate it, to the same person, in a particular manner, as a token of
Eternal Gratitude. And I beg of that Soul, that when, by way of Exchange,
for the great Treasures, vvhervvith God has trusted her, she shallbe remitting
her devout Petitions to that divine Majesty; the necessityes of mine, may not
be laid aside.

Our Lord Jesus grant, by the precious merits of his bitter Passion (which I
beseech him to apply to us all, by the intercession of his Immaculately
conceived Mother, the Queen of Heaven) that we, who by his grace, are in
these difficult times, made members of his Militant Church (which to us indeed
is so truly Militant) may one day, by his goodness, arrive to be also members
of the Triumphant. Where clearly, and, at once, we shall be sure to see, and
vvonder, at the inestimable riches of Mercy, vvhervvith our Lord did choose us
fevv, out of so many millions of souls, to profess his Truth and Faith, with
so much prejudice to our selves, in all those things, which the Foolish and
Childish World is wont to hold so dear. Only we must take care, that we
continue in it, to, and in the end; and in the mean time, also to accompany
our Faith, by such good works as may become this high Profession; for else we
shall but double our damnation. Our Lord deliver us from falling into that
Abyss of misery; and enable us by his holy Grace, so to serve and suffer for
him here, that Eternally we may adore him in Heaven.

The affectionate humble servant of you all, L. T.

THE PREFACE TO The discreet, and pious Reader.
THE The great fam that this Book enjoys throughout the world.
extraordinary fame, of this Excellent book gave me a curiosity to be
acquainted with it; and charity, I hope, is that, which makes me thus deliver
it over, to be acquainted with you. The Title thereof will have told you the
Authors Name; and when you shall have perused it, you will acknowledge, I
believe, that spirit to have been eminent, which the only Giver of all good
things, bestowed upon him. The The Nation of the Author, and the time wherein
he lived, and when he dyed.
Country of his birth, was Spain; and the time of his life, was this last age
of ours; for he dyed, in the year of our Lord Jesus 1569. some thirteen years
after B. P. Ignatius dyed in the year 15^6. Doctor Auila, in the year 1569.
and B. Mother Teresa, in the year 1^8^.
Blessed Father Ignatius; and about as many, before Blessed Mother Teresa.

With The communication, which he had with the holiest persons of his time.
both these Saints, being mirrours of their times, and the lasting miracles of
these ends of the world, he had particular communication. For the later of
them, he advised, and directed in the way of spirit, concerning some
difficultyes, which occurred to her; and she was both comforted, and instructed
greatly by him. And as for the former, he bore such affection; and even
admiration to his holy Institute, that his own being already, at that time, so
far in years, was He carried great devotion to the Society of Jesus.
the only cause, that clipped the wings of his desire, which would feign have
been carrying him on; to fly apace after such a guide. But what, he could, he
did; by addressing diverse of his disciples, to become members of that Society,
wherein they happily both lived and dyed; as appears both by the history of
his life, and yet further, by some of his own printed letters; and in a Church
of the Society of Jesus he would needs be buried, namely at Montillia, in
Andaluzia.

The Fray Lewis de Granada, wrote his life.
life of Doctor Auila, is written by Fray Lewis de Granada, a Religious man,
of the glorious Saint Dominickes Order; and one renowned in the world, both for
the memory of his great virtues, and the presence of his holy books. It is no
meaning of mine, to give you here, the full relation of this life; but I only
show, even by the circumstance of the eminent man who wrote the same, what
account our Author deserves at our hands; which must needs rebound upon this
Book, so far, as to increase your estimation thereof. For this reason also,
you shall understand, that when he was yet in health, and subject to the
greatest importunity of business, he He was a man of very great Prayer.
mentally prayed four hours every day; and he slept but four, every night.
When afterward he grew into sickness (which he was subject to, and that in
great extremity, for those seauenteene years, which did immediately precede
his death) it is probable, that he must sleep much less; and (...) is
faithfully recorded in the life it self, that ^e prayed much more; for all was
pray^r with him, from the morning, till two of the clock afternoon; and
again, from six, till bed-tyme, which with him, was not till about an eleven.

So as this With how great light of understanding, and hea^e of Charity, this
Bo^k was written.
Book, and the rest of his excellent works in this kind, were not so much the
issue of a studious and speculatiue brain, as of a b^eeding and boiling heart.
Boiling, through the love of God; and bleeding, for the sins of the world.
Which two objects, being so perpetually before the eyes of his mind; and he, so
hourly, treating with the purity of God, by way of amorous contemplation; and
with men (whose consciences were laden with sin) by way of conversation,
and compassion; it is the less wonder, if his words were like so many burning
coals, which might serve, to sear those souls which are full of festred
soars; and to set such others as are sound, on fire, with the love of
Almighty God.

And in the same spirit, he has also written a large Book of Sermons upon the
B. Sacrament, and upon some festiuityes of our B. Lady; as also a Book of
Epistles to several persons, upon several occasions; which I would to God
some Reader, who has knowledge of that language would take the pains or rather
pleasure to translate. For I am much deceived if there be any virtue to be
obtained, or any vice to be avoided, or any necessity to be removed, or any
affliction to be assuaged, wherein a man may not find some excellent address
for his purpose, in the reading of those works aforesaid, which he was inspired
to write by the love, and for the love of God.

This love of God being in him so hot, did make him profoundly love, that
which God loved so much; and the ardent desire which he had to How hethirsted
after the salvation of souls.
gain such (which were the souls of men, for whom Christ dyed) to God; made
him employ the credit which he found with some great Prelates, and other great
persons (as the writer of his life relates) in procuring them to found Life of
D. Ai^la^-part. cap. 2.
some Colleges, for such as might instruct youth in learning, and virtue; and
others, which might be as Seminaryes, for the education, and intertaynment of
worthy, and exemplar Priests. And speaking often of this subject, he was
wont to say, I Out of the fear, which then he had, that it would not be
satisfied, before his death.
perceive, I shall dye, with this desire. But after, when the Institute of the
Fathers of the Socty. of Jesus came to his knowledge; he did greatly rejoice, in
his very soul: perceauing, how for that, which he was not able to compass,
but only for some short time, and with no small difficulty, our Lord had
provided a The high veneration wherein (...) had B. F. Ig^atius, whom he
compared to a mighty strong man, and himself to a child, who was not able to
move that great Stone, which the other was able to take up, and weild at his
pleasure; and to lay it in the proper place. By this Stone, he u^dersta^ds the
work of wining souls. Vide hist. Soc. Jesus l. 14. fol. 464.
man, who should go through with it in a perfect manner, and with a perpetuity
of continuance and strength; and these are the very words of Supra part. 3.
c. 2.
the Life.

This Book is framed, and the considerations which the Author has fallen
upon, are drawn from his contemplation of that The ground or Argument of the
Book.
verse of the psalm, which is prefixed by way of argument, before the first
chapter. The An address to the particular discourses that he makes in this
work.
particulers, whereof he treates, are many; and the heads of them, shall go, in
a page apart, between this Preface, and the Book. But the maine drift of the
Author, is to make us know, The chief drift of the Author.
both God, and our selves; and that; not by the lying glass of fancy, but by
the clear, and sweet beam of Truth. Our selves; that we may see our misery;
and fly, at full speed, from the cause thereof, which is our pride, and other
sins. And God, that we may tremble, under that infinite Majesty; and believe,
that infallible Verity; and hope, for a part of that inexhausted Mercy; and
even, as it were, furiously love, that incomprehensible Abyss, of Charity, and
Beauty.

This charity of God, the Author does gladly make appear, upon all occasions,
and by great variety of most just motives; but especially, does his soul even
regorge again, when he enters into speech of the He excels himself,
whenever he grows to speak of the Incarnation, Life, and Passion of Christ
Jesus our Lord.
Incarnation, and Life, and Passion of our Lord Jesus. Which he pondereth so
co^templatiuely, and yet so sensibly; so profoundly, and yet so plainly; so
strictly, and yet so tenderly; as is able to make, even brass to blush, and
iron to burn, and lead to melt, for the grief, and shame, of the much, that
we have sinned; and for love of him, in respect of the infinite, that he has
suffered for us. That so, in fine, we may hereafter make the consideration of
the sacred Passion of our Lord, a great part of our busine, in this life; since
it is by it, that we must be happy in the next, unless we have a mind to remain
in torment for all eternity. And that we may, at length, both with our heart,
and tongue, make this prayer to the divine Majesty, to which our Author exhorts
A holy prayer, which he makes in this Treatise following.
us in his discourse upon the Passion, That the mercy of God, may not permit us
to be so miserable, as not to be content so much, as to think, or meditate,
upon those vast affronts, and torments which the Son of God (being the King of
glory, and God himself) was content, not only to consider, but to suffer. Yea
and so to suffer, as that the infinite desire of love, wherewith he suffered
them, may even put the things themselves, as it were, to silence; how loud
soever, they otherwise, deserve to be crying out, in the ears of our heart. And
this he did, without all interest of his own, and only for our eternal good
(as the Author does excelle^tly declare) that so, instead of enemies, and
rebels, and most wicked slaves, which naturally by our descent from Adam, we
were, in the fight of God, we might be translated, into the condition, of being
made his servants, his friends, and his adopted sons, upon the price of his
own precious life. This is the nail that he beats most upon; and I beseech
our Lord, that our hearts may be even riuetted to his divine heart, thereby.

In the mean time, you the Reader, must not spend your hope, upon the meeting
here with Concerning the style.
any curious, or elaborate style. For though even in this kind, the Author be
far enough from fault; yet, composition, was the thing, which he might well
disdain to affect; as knowing, that the inualuable stone which he was
exposing, did deserve to be most highly esteemed, though it were not
artificially either cut, or set. Nor Concerning the quality of the Authors
conceptions.
yet, are you here, so much as to think of encountering certain flourishing, and
fading co^ceits; though I am much deceived, if the most fastidious mind, will
not here find matter, whereupon to feed with great delight. But the Authors
aim, was at a fairer mark. It is not the clapping of hands which he begs; he
He shootes at the souls of men, and not, at the only tickling of their ears,
or the applause of their hands.
shoots at no less, then the souls of me^; and them he conuinceth, by so
pregnant reasons, and obliges by so plain demonstrations, as to make them
glad (or, or least, he gives them cause, why they should be so) to cast away
that loose liberty, which made them slaves, to their own passions; and to step,
or rather to leap, into the chains of the love of God, which will put them,
into a kind of soueraignity, not only over all other things created, but even
over their very selves.

And The extraordinary great care, wherewith he conducteth his Reader,
throughout the whole discourse.
in this he equalleth in my poor opinion, if he do not rather excel, any other
whom I have read, That he most carefully does conduct the soul, which he
instructs in the way of spirit; accompanying his discourse with abundance of
caution; so to save his Reader from sliding into any extreme; and being no
less sollicitous, to guide him straight, then a tender mother, or nurse would
be, to lead her only child, by the sleeves or arms, for fear least otherwise
he might take a fall. I The occasion whereupon he wrote this book.
will further premise to you, upon what occasion he wrote this Book; and to
whom he did particulerly direct the same; and then, by way of prevention, I
will both make, and answer an objection to the end, that your self may be
kept from error afterward.

There was a Lady, called The person for whom he wrote it.
Donna Sancba the daughter of the Lord of Guadalcacar; who for her beauty, and
other better parts, was designed to serve the Queen of Spain, in quality of a
Lady of Honor. Already, she was even upon the point of parting, from her
parents; who had put her into an equipage, which was to have become a Court.
But, before her journey, she meant to arm her self with the holy Sacraments
of the Church; and, in the strength of that desire, she went and cast her
self, at the feet of Doctor Auila, in the way of Confession. She would after
say, that he reproved her a little sharply, for bringing a heart, which
pretended to be penitent for sin, in a body set out, and ardorned too
curiously, and too costly for such a business. What else passed between them, in
that private conference, and Confession of hers, God, and they do only know;
but the sequel thereof, was notorious to the world. For she, instantly, did
vnturne Courtier; she grew quickly to cast away her vain, and sumptuous
attires; and she betook her self (though only in her Fathers house) to a
course of admirable penance, and recollection, which she accompanied with a
Vow of perpetual chastity; wherein she dyed, most holily, and most happily,
some ten years after. This Lady then as being the Child, and Creature (as it
were) in spirit of Doctor Auila, was dear to him, after an extraordinary
manner. And so, for her, both consolation, and instruction, he made this Book,
of Audi Filia; and she esteemed it as she ought; for she never would know, or
call it by other name, then of her Treasure. But when she was gone to God, he
took the Book again to himself; and enlarged it, and enriched it to that
proportion, which, at this day, we see it bears.

Now, in regard that he chiefly speaks therein, to her, as to a person, who
had given her self to God, by a vow of chastity; you An objection which it
imports much, to be well answered.
may seek perhaps to make your self believe, that the doctrine therein
contained, belongs only to such as she. But the answer is obuious, and
assured. That howsoever it may import such as she was known to be, in a more
eminent manner, then other Christians; in regard that she had consecrated her
self, to our Lord Jesus, as to the spouse of her soul, by a particular vow;
yet, for as much as co^cernes the obligation which we The general obligation,
to which all good Christians are subject.
all have, to abstain from sin; to employ ourselves in prayer, and good
works; to despise the vanity of the world; to resist the motions of sense, and
to arm our selves against the temptations of the Devil (to which the promise,
even of our very Baptism, binds us;) to love God above all things; to
imitate the life; and to practice the doctrine of our Lord Jesus; and finally,
to be, and to continue true children of his holy Catholic Church; this
doctrine, I say, does so much, and so mightily belong to us all; as that none
of us shall ever get to heaven, but either by an exact obedience to it, or a
cordial grief, for having swarued from it. And so Of the variety of address,
in the way of spirit, which is to be found in this book for persons of al
quality es.
if you may be entreated to observe, what variety of address for spirit, the
Author gives in the several parts of the work; you cannot choose but
discern, that it is not only meant for Virgins, but for all others also, if
they be Christians; yea, and if they be not so much as that, they yet will here
find reason, to beg of God that they may grow so happy.

Let How much it imports that this book be read, with great attention and
devotion.
us also, all, beg hard for that, whereof we have most need. That when
hereafter, at the day of Judgment, we shall meet Doctor Auila, in the valley
of Iosaphat; there may be no cause to be reproached by our Judge, of so deep
ingratitude, as not to have been the better, for the great benefit, which the
godnes of God has vouchsafed to mankind, by means of this, his dear, and most
devout servant. But In this valley, and there abouts, is the universal
Judgment to be made, Joel. 3.
that the seed which has fructified so abundantly, in Spayn, in Italy, in
France, and in I know not how many other countries, by the translation of this
book, into so many several languages, may also in England, be of comfort to
that good Matt. ^^.
husbandman of the gospel; and not be choked by thorns, nor supplanted by
stones, nor devoured by the ravenous birds of the air; who are ever watching,
how to enrich themselves by our poverty. For so truly miserable, are those
damned spirits, as to think themselves more happy in nothing, then if they
might draw us into a society with them in torment: though indeed, even our very
torment, would be sure to serve, but for an increase of theirs. Our Lord Jesus
deliver us from that place of eternal malediction; both for that, which we
know thereof by Faith already; and much more, for that, which we do not know;
and which I hope we shall never know, by experience.

A RICH CABBINET, FVLL OF SPIRITVALL JEWELS.
CHAP. I.
WHEREIN IS TREATED, How necessary it is for us, to give ear to God; and of
the admirable Language, which our first Parents spoke, in the state of
Innocence: Which being lost by Sin, many ill ones, did succeed in place
thereof.
He^^^en, O Daughter, and behold; Psalm. 4 4.
and incline thine ear* and forget thy people, and the house of thy Father;
and the King shall with delight desire thy beauty.
THESE words, O thou devout Spouse This Book was written chiesly for the Lady,
Don^a Sancha, daughter to the Lord of Guadalcacar who lived not in a Monastery,
but in her Fathers house* though she consecrated her self to God, by a vow of
virginity.
of Jesus Christ, does the Prophet David speak, or rather God, by him, to the
Christian Church; aduising her of that which she ought to do; that so the great
King may be drawn to love her; by means whereof, she may be endewed with all
happiness. And because thy soul, is, by the great mercy of God, a member of
this Church, I have thought fit to declare these words to thee. Imploring first
the aid of the Holy Ghost; to the end, that it may direct my pen, and prepare
thy heart, that so neither I may speak unfitly, nor thou hear unfruitfully;
but that, both the one and the other, may redound to the eternal honor of
God, and the performing of his holy will.

The first thing that we are wished to, in these words, is that we hearken;
and not without cause. Because as the first beginning of our spiritual life is
faith, and this, as Romans 10.
S. Paul affirms, does enter into the soul by means of hearing; it is, but
reason, that first we be admonished of that, which we are first to put in
practice. For it will profit us very little, that the voice of divine truth do
sound exteriourly in our hearing, We must hear first, and practice after.
if withal, we have not ears, which may hearken to the sa^^, within. It will
not serve our turn, that when we were baptized, the Priest did According to
the ancient custom of the holy Catholic Church.
put his finger into our ears, requiring them to be open; if afterward we
shall shut them up, against the word of God; fullfilling so in our selves, that
which the Prophet David says of the Idols, Psalm. 11^.
Eyes they have, and they see not; ears they have, and they dee not hear.

But because some speak so ill, that to hear them, is no better then to hear
the Sirens, who kill their auditors; it will be fit for us, to see, both whom we
are, and whom we are not to hear. For this purpose, it is to be noted, that
Adaw, and Eve, when they were created, spoke one only Language; and that
continued, in the world, till the The confusion of tongues, grew in punishment
of the pride of man.
pride of men (who had a mind to build up the Tower of confusion) was punished.
Whereupon, instead of one Language, whereby all men understood one another,
there grew to be a multitude of Languages, which they could not, mutually
understand. By this we also come to know, that our first Parents, before they
rebelled from their creator (transgressinge his Commandment with
presumptuous pride) did speak also in their souls, but one spiritual
Language; making a A sweet and happy Language
perfect kind of concord; which one mainteyned with another, and each one with
himself, and so also with God; living in the quiet estate of Innocence, the
sensitive part, obeying the rational, and the rational, obeying God; and so
they were in peace, with him; in peace within themselves; and in peace, with
one another.

But now, when they rebelled, with so bold disobedience, against the Lord of
heaven, both they were punished, and we in them. In The case is altered.
such sort, that instead of one good Language, (by means whereof they
understood one another so well) there have succeeded innumerable other ill ones;
all full of such confusion, and darkness, that neither do men agree with
others, nor the same man with himself; and least of all, with God. And
although these Languages do keep no order in themselves (since indeed they are
but moore disorder) yet to the end that we may speak of them, we will reduce
them to a kind of method, and to the number of three; which are the Language of
the World; of the Flesh; and of the Devil; whose office, as S. Bernard says,
is, Of the first; to speak vain things: Of the second; delightful things:
And of the third; afflictiue, and bitter things.

CHAP. II.
That we must not hearken to the Language of the World, and Vayne-glory; And
how absolute dominion it exercises over the hearts of such as follow it, and
of the punishment that they shall incur.
WE must not hearke^, to the language of the World, for it is al but lies;
and they, most prejudicial to such as credit them. For they make us forsake
that truth which is indeed; and to embrace a lie, which has no being; but only
in appearance and custom. Hereby man, being deceived, presumes to cast
Almighty God, and his holy will behind his back; and he disposes of his life
according to that blind guide, of pleasing the world; and so he grows to have
a heart all desirous of honor, and to be esteemed amongst men. He proves like
those ancient proud Romans, of whom S. Augustine says, That A strange and yet
true state of mind.
for the love of worldly honor, they desired to live; and yet for love of is,
they did not fear to dye. So much do they prize it, as not by any means to
endure the least word, that may be in prejudice thereof; nor any thing which
may taste, or eue^ savor, of neglect, though never so far of. Nay heerin there
are such nyceties and puntillios; that it is hard for a man to escape stumbling
upon some of them, and so the offending of this sensitive worldly man: yea A
miserable servitude which pride has put us in.
and often, you shall fall out to offend him, much against your will. These men,
who are so facile to find themselves despised, are no less untoward, and
intractable in passing over, and pardoning the same. And if one should yet, of
himself, be disposed to do so; what troops of Indeed they are truly said to
be false friends, who persuade a man, to the perdition of his soul.
false friends and kindred will rise up against him; and allege such laws
and customs, granted by privilege of the world; as whereby this proposition
may be concluded, That it is better to loose a man's fortune; his health; his
house; his wife; and his children; yea all this seems little to them, since
they do as good as say, that he must even loose the life both of body, and
soul; and all the care that he has both of earth and heaven; yea and that,
even God himself, and his law, are to be contemned, and trodden under foot,
that so this most vain honor, may not be lost; but that it may be esteemed
above all things, yea even above God himself.

O thou vain honor, which were condemned by Christ, upon the Cross, upon the
price of his so extreme dishonor; and who is he, that gave thee place in the
Temple of God, which is the heart of a Christian? and this, with so great
advantage, as that (after the manner of Antichrist) thou will more be prized,
then the most high God? Who made thee a competitour with God? yea Pride makes a
man esteem himself, more then God.
and that thou should even outstrip him, in the hearts of some; by being more
esteemed then he? So renewing, that vast affront, which was done him, when they
preferred Matthew. 27.
Barabbas before him? We must perforce confess, that thy tyranny is great over
such hearts, as make themselves thy subjects; and with great expedition and
facility, do they perform thee service, whatsoever it cost them.

Aaron Exodus 32.
made him self believe, (by demanding the golden eare-rings of their wives and
children, who asked an Idol at his hands); that rather, then to see such as
they loved, to be disadorned, they would desist from their wicked desire of a
false God. But so it fell not out; for those things were no sooner asked, then
given. Nor did they then, nor do men now, take care of what is needful, for
house or Children, so that they may have an Idol of honor, to which they may
offer sacrifice. Oftentimes it happens, that even some of them who serve thee,
do yet understand well enough, how vain and shaddowy a toy thou art; and what
a woeful thing it is to follovv thee; and being able, if they would, to deliver
themselves from thy heavy yoke, by breaking from thee all at once; yet A
miserable case.
is their infirmity, and misery so great, that they rather choose to burst, and
to proceed against the honor of God, then to do God honor, and be at rest,
by flying from thee.

God did cast this out, for a curse against the^ who served false Gods, That
Sin makes men slaves.
they should serve them, day and night; and this is punctually fulfilled by
such as do adore this Honor. S. John, speaking of some principal people of
Jerusalem which believed in Christ, but durst not declare themselves for his
(in respect of men) does say of them, with great reproach; Joan. 12.
That they loved the honor of men, more the^ that of God. Which with much
reason may be verifyed upon these lovers of honor; since we see that they
despise God, rather then they will be despised by men; and that they are ashamed
to perform his law, rather then to be ashamed, in the sight of men. But let
them be doing as long as they list; let them honor this Honor, even to the
outside of all their power; yet firm, and fixed does that sentence stand,
which was pronounced against them, by the sovereign Judge Christ Jesus, when
he said, He that shall be ashamed of me, and of my words; of him will the Son
of the Virgin be ashamed, when he shall come in his majesty, and the majesty of
his Father, with his Angels. And then shall al those Angels, and all the
saints, singe out, Just Psalm. 118.
art thou O Lord, and thy judgments are just. For if this vild worm, were
ashamed to follow the King of Majesty; be thou O Lord ashamed (thou who art
Honor and Altitude it self) that a thing so base, and so wicked, should
remain in company of thee, and thine.

O, Read and tremble.
with what a powder, shall the honor of this Babylon, be then shot down, into
the profou^dest pit of Hell, to be tormented, in company of the proud Lucifer,
since these men would needs be his companions, in the sin of pride. Let no
man offer to make a jest of this; or esteem that the love of worldly honor,
is a sin of small importance; since our Lord, who searches the heart, said
thus, to the Pharisees, Ioa^. 5.
How can you believe in me, since you seek to be honored by one another; and
seek not that honor, which proceeds from God alone. And now for as much as
this vicious affection, is so powerful, as that it sufficed to make men
forbear the believing in Jesus Christ; what mischeife is that which it will
not be able to effect? and who will not bless himself from the same? S.
Augustine therefore said, that no man knows what force he has more or less,
to conquer the love of Vayne-glory, but he only, who makes war against it.

CHAP. III.
Of what remedies we are to serve our selves, toward the contempt of the
Vayne-glory, of the world; And of the great force, which Christ our Lord does
give, for the ouercomming thereof.
WE ought to esteem it, as a great remedy against this mischief, that it is
condemned by the very light of Nature. For as much as even that, does teach us,
That man is to do works, worthy of Honor, but not for Honors sake; That he
should deserve it, but not value it; and that a True nobility.
noble courage, ought to despise, both the being esteemed, and disesteemed; and
that nothing should be held in high account, but virtue. But Note.
if notwithstanding all this, a Christian have not the heart, to contemn this
vanity, let him raise his eyes up to his Lord, being placed upon a Cross; and
there he shall see him, so surcharged with dishonor, that if it be well
considered, it may enter into competition with the grieuousnes of those* very
torments, which he there endured. Nor did our Lord, without cause, make choice
of a death, which might be accompanied with extreme dishonor; but for that he
knew, what a powerful tyrant this love of honor was, and was likely to be in
the heart of many, who would make no difficulty to expose themselves to death;
but yet would fly from the manner of the death, if it were dishonorable. Now
to give us to understand, that neither the one, nor the other, ought to fright
us; he Our Lord chose reproach, to confound and reform our pride.
chose the death of the Cross; whereupon, extreme torments, with excessive
dishonor, did join, hand in hand. Behold then (if thou have eyes wherewith
to do it) how Christ is esteemed, for the meanest of men; and abased, by deep
dishonours; some of which, were brought upon him, by that very death of the
Cross (since that was the most infamous of all deaths) and others also,
whereby they outraged our Lord in particular manner; for as much as there was
no kind of people, which did not employ it self, upon despising, iniuring, and
blaspheming him, with certain fashions of dishonor, which never were found
out before:

Thus shall thou perceive, how entirely that was fullfilled, which he (whilst
he was preaching) said, Joan. ^.
I do not seek mine own honor; and do thou, after the same manner. And Note
if thou will raise up the ears of thy soul, to hear that lamentable Edict
with attention, which was made against innocence it self, proclayming Jesus
Christ our Lord (throughout those streets of Jerusalem) for a malefactor;
thou Sure I am that we ought to be so.
wilt be confounded, when thou see that thou art honored; or when thou shall
desire so to be. And thou will say with a deep and cordial sigh, O Lord. art
thou proclaimed for wicked* and I praised for good? What is there that can give
us greater grief? And not only will thou loose the hungar of wordly honor,
but thou will covet greedily to be despised, in conformity of our Lord, whom
to follow (as the Scripture Eccles. ^^.
says) is great honor. And then will thou say, with S Paul, God forbid that
Galat. ^.
I should receive honor, but in the Cross of Jesus Christ, our Lord; yea, and
thou will desire to fulfill that, which the same Apostle says else Heb. 13.
where, Let us go out, and seek Christ in the camp, and let us imitate him in
his dishonor.

Now if this passion of vain glory, be a powerful kind of thing; much more
powerful, is the remedy of the example, and grace of Christ. Which The blood
of our Lord, works wonders upon the proud heart of man.
does in such sort overcome, and root it out of the heart, as to make it find,
that it is a thing to be abhorred, for a Christian to see the Lord of Majesty
abase himself to such contempt* whilst he, vile worm, swells up with the
love of honor. Therefore is it, that our Lord inuiteth, and encourages us, by
his example saying, Have confidence, for I have overcome the world. As if he
had said, Before I came hither, a hard point* it was to wrestle with the
deceitpfull world; casting away that which flourishes therein, and embracing
that, which it contemnes; but, after that it employed all the forces it had
against me; inuenting new kinds of torments, and dishonor, all which I endured
without once turning my face aside; it is now, not only grown weak, for
having encountered with one who was able to suffer more then that; but it is
even overcome outright to your benefit; since by my example which I gave you,
and by the strength which I have gained for you, you may at case subdue, and
trample it, under your feet.

Let the Christian man consider, that since the world, dishonored the Blessed
Son of God, who is Eternal Truth, and our Sovereign Good; there is no cause
why any man should esteem, or believe it in any thing Nay, seeing A
demonstration, why we ought to believe the world, no more.
that it was deceived, in not discerning such a light of extreme clarity; and
in not honoring him, who is most true, and perfect honor; let the Christian
man reject that* which the world allows; and let him prize and love that,
which the world does despise, and hate. Flying with much care from being
esteemed, by that The World.
which did despise his Lord, and holding it for a great sign of being beloved
by Christ, to be despised by the world with him, and for his sake.

Out of which this resultes; That as they who are of this world, have no ears
wherewith to hearken to the truth, and doctrine of God (nay rather they despise
the same) so The servant of our Lord ought at least to be as careful to please
him, as the servants of the world are, to please it.
he who takes the part of Christ, is to have none, wherewith to hearken to, or
to believe the lies of the world. For in fine, whether it flatter or persecute;
whether it promise or threaten; whether it speak frightfully or fair; it does
every where deceive; and has a mind to do so; and with such eyes, we are to
look upon it. And Note this, for a most certain truth.
it is certain, that for so many lies, and false promises, wherein we have
taken it tripping; if any man should have told us but the one half, we would
trust him now in nothing; yea hardly should we credit him although he might
chance in other things to say true. That If the world do either promise, or
threaten, it lies.
which the world can do, is indeed neither good nor bad, since it cannot either
give, or take away, the grace of God. Nay even in that, over which it seems
to have power, it is yet not able to do any thing; since it cannot reach to the
least hair of our head, without the will of our Lord. And if it tell us any
other tale of it self, we must not believe it. And who then will not dare to
encounter an enemy, who has no power at all?

CHAP. IV.
In what degree, and to what end, it is lawful for a man to desire Honor in
the world; and of the extreme danger which there is, in holding places of
Authority, and Command.
THAT thou may the better understand what has been said; thou art to know,
that it is one thing to love honor, and humane estimation for it self, as
resting therein; and this is evil, as has been showed. But another thing it is,
when these things are beloved for some good end; and this is not evil. It is a
clear case, that a person who has command, and holds place, may for doing
good to others, desire, that honor and estimation, which is fit, for the
discharge of his employment, thereby the more to do good. Men of authority may
desire to be well reputed, so that it be to a good end.
For if men have him, who commands, in mean account, they will not much
esteem of his commandment though it be just. And not only this kind of
persons, but all Christians ought to practice, that which is writre^, Take
Eccles. 41.
care, of thy good name. Not as if he were to rest in that; but because a
Christian, ought to be such a kind of man, as that whosoever should understand
or behold his life, Note.
might give the glory to God; as we use to do, when we see a rose, or a tree,
full of shade, and fruit. This is that, which the holy Gospel requires, That
our light may so shine before men, that they seeing our good works, may give
glory to the celestial Father, from whom all good things proceed.

This aim at the honor of God, and the profit of men, did move 1. Cor. 4.
S. Paul, to recount those great, and secret favors, which our Lord had done
him, without holding himself for a transgressour of that other Prou. ^7.
Scripture, which says, Let the mouth of another praise thee, and not thine
own. For He might safely do so; but other men must take heed.
he recounted his own prayies, so much without the sticking of any part thereof
unto himself, as if he had not spoken thereof at al. Thereby fulfilling, that
which he had already said to the Corinthians, ^. Cor. 7.
That they who had wines, were to have them, as if they had them not; and they
who wept, were to be as if they did not weep, and the like. Whereby he had a
mind to say, That he uses temporal things as he ought, whether they be
prosperous, or adverse, whether they be of consolation or affliction, who
suffers not his heart to stick unto them; but it passes by, as by a thing,
which is transitory, and vain. And certainly S. Paul, (when he related those
things of himself) did speak of them with a heart, which was not only a
despiser of honor, but a lover of contempt and dishonor, for Jesus Christ his
sake, whose cross he held, for the highest honor.

Such hearts as these, may well be trusted with taking honor* and may relate
such things as will purchase it; for they will never do so, but when it shall be
necessary, for some good end. But, as it is a point of much virtue, for a man
to possess a thing, as if he had it not; and so, as that the honor which is
imparted to us by others, should not cleave unto our hearts; so The more need
we have, to use all diligence.
is it also a matter of much difficulty, and to which very few arrive. For, as
S Chrysostom says, To be in the midst of honor, and that the heart of him
that is so honored, should Both these cases are full of danger.
not be affected by it; is, as if a man were to converse amongst fair women,
without ever behoulding them, with unchaste eyes. And experience has taught us,
that honorable and high place, has seldom made men better of worse; and has
very often, made men bad of good. For to bear the weight of honor, and to
resist the occasions which grow in company thereof, a man had need of much
strength. Because, as S Hi^rome says, The highest mountains, are assaulted by
the greatest winds. This is certain, that greater virtue is requisite, for
commanding, then for obeying. And not without cause, and great cause, did our
sovereign Master, and Lord (who knows al things) fly away This point
deserves great ponderation.
from being made a King. Now since it was not possible for him to run hazard in
any estate, how high so ever; it is plain that this doctrine was delivered for
the help of our weakness; and that we ought to fly from that which is
dangerous, since he fled who was out of danger. And if it be a very great
boldness, and against the example of Christ, to receive a place of honor,
when it is offered; what then shall it be to desire it? and what again to
procure it? For, as for the mischeife which it bringes, to purchase such a
thing with money, there lives not the man that can declare it.

We should find it very strange, that a man, who might walk securely upon
firm land would rather choose, the dangers of going by sea; We should think
that he were mad.
and that, not in fair weather, but in a perpertuall tempest. For, as S.
Gregory says, What other thing is the power of honor, but a tempest of the
soul. And besides, these troubles, and the dangers which are ever found in
eminent place, are followed by that terrible menace, sounded forth by God,
though it be hearkened to, and understood by few; A Sap. 6.
most severe judgment, shall pass upon such as command. What kind of thing
shall this be, when Let men of power and command, consider this.
even the ordinary judgment of God, is such; as that the men, who are most
refined in virtue, do tremble thereat, and say; Psalm. 141.
Enter not O Lord into judgment with thy servant. And yet, there are persons so
blindly bold, as For want of faith and the consideration of the next life.
that they choose to enter into his judgment; and that, not such a one as may
be accounted ordinary; but into the most strait, and hard, that God affoardes.
And considering, that Saul 1. Reg. 10.
the King, to whom that kingdom was offered by the order of God, (without his
prizing it, or making much account thereof, (yea and he declined it, by hiding
himself, but was poynted out, and showed by the hand of God) yet nevertheless
that height of dignity, with the circumstances thereof, treated him so ill; that
although God made choice of him, and himself desired to be excused, he yet
passed through so wicked a life, and arrived to so wretched a death, that it
ought to cast apprehension and fear, upon such as enter into place of honor,
though they be called in, by the right door; and far, far, more, upon such
others, as go not in, by so good a way.

Verily, A strange blindness, or rather madness.
it is to be wondered at, that there are persons to be found, so strait-harted
in the service of our Lord, that if they be advised to do any thing therein,
though it be clearly good, yet do they go considering, and reconsidering
whether or no the doing of it, do oblige under the pain of mortal sin, that so
indeed, they may forbear to do it. For they say, that they are but weak, and
they will not ingulfe themselves into matters of great perfection, but tread in
the plain, and beaten way. And yet these very men, who are so void of courage,
in the search of true virtue, (which by the grace of our Lord, it would be no
hard matter for them to obtain) are, on the other side, so audacious, as to
put themselves into dignity, honor, and places of Command. For the innocent
use whereof, (without the hurt of him that has them) there is need of perfect,
and tried virtue; which they make themselves believe that they have; and that,
forsooth, they will give a good account of the forward rank they hold, without
hazarding any thing of conscience, wherein yet others, have run so much
hazard. So How mightily does the love of honor, intoxicate the brain.
deeply does the desire of honor, and command, and other humane interests,
blind men; as to make them, who dare not set upon an enterprise which is
secure, and easy, attempt other things, which are accompanied with difficulty,
and danger. Yea, and they, who do not confide in God, that he will help them,
in those good works, (which only do concern themselves:) do promise
themselves (with strange boldness) that God will guide them by the hand,
toward those things, which concern the government of others. Whereas indeed,
he may answer them with great reason, That since they would needs plung
themselves into that danger, let them look to their own carriage therein. For
of such as these, it is, that God did say, They reigned, but not by my
direction; They were Princes, and I knew nothing of the matter; which
signifies, that he did not approve, or like it.

And he that shall consider, how God Os^ae. c. 8.
abandoned King Saul; (the same God having placed him in the Kingdom) will find,
that he A sad example, but fit for ambitious men, to look much upon.
has much reason to vndeceiue himself; since there will be no assurance given
him by any, that he is not to prove as frail as Saul; but only by his own
pride, and ambition of command. Of Note.
this I am very sure, that he shall never more honestly enter into it, then Saul
did. S Augustine had reason, when he said, That authority, and dignity, is
necessary for such as are to rule the people; and that when a man is in it, he
must administer it according to reason; but that it is unlawful for him, that
has it not, to desire it. And of himself he said, That he desired and
procured to save his soul, in a low place; that he might not put it, to hazard
in a higher. This is especially to be done, when the place whereof we speak,
does concern the charge of souls; the well discharging whereof, does carry
with it so much difficulty, as that it is called the Art of Arts.

These Certain excellent directions, for practice.
dangers ought to be fled by us, as much, as with a moral possibility we may;
in imitation of the example already touched, which our Lord did show, in flying
from the acceptance of a Kingdom* and he has represented to us, many other
holy and wise persons, who have fled the like, with all the hearts they had. And
such as enter into these places, had need do it, either by revelation of our
Lord; or by obedience to such as have power to command them; or by counsel of
such others, as do well understand the obligation of such an office and the
dangers thereof; and they must be sure, to keep the judgment of God before
their eyes; and to cast all temporal respects behind their backs. If these
conditions may not be found, it will at least be needful, that there be ground
for good conjecture, that God is pleased to lay such a burden upon them; and
that such or such a man, may give credit to those conjectures, before he
imbarke himself into so great a danger. And notwithstanding all this, there
will be matter enough of fear; and continual watch must be kept; and our Lord
must be prayed, that since he kept the entrance free from ill, he may also
defend them in the issue of it; for fear least otherwise, it end in
everlasting condemnation. For we have seen many of them, who lived with much
contentment, in such command, dye full of wishes, that they had never been
employed therein; and laden with great fears of that, whereof before, they
were, in their opinion, secure. And Platerv, and false judgment, is then out of
date.
in all likelihood, the truth of a man's judgment concerning temporal things,
does shine brighter upon him when he is departing from them; and when he is
more approaching to the judgment of God, wherein all Truth remaynes.

CHAP. V.
How much we ought to fly from the pleasure of flesh and ^loud; and what a most
dangerous Enemy this is; and of what helps we are to serve our selves, for the
subduing thereof.
FLESH and Blood, speaks of Delights, and pleasures; sometimes expressly, and
sometimes, under a color of necessity. The war which is made upon us by this
enemy, besides, that it brings us much affliction, is full of danger. Because it
fightes, with pleasure in the hand; which is Note, and take heed.
the strongest weapon of all others. This does evidently appear, since many
have been conquered by pleasure, who were not so, by riches, honors, or eue^
by cruel torments. Nor is it any marvel; For this ware is so secret, and so
in the way of ambush or treason; that a man had need of much consideration for
his defense. Who We may well believe it, upon the infinite experience that has
been taken.
would believe, that death, and death eternal, should come toward us, under a
mask of sweet, and smooth delight; death being the top of bitterness; and
delight, the very thing, that we most aspire to taste. A cup of gold, with a
draught of poison, is this false pleasure; whereby they are made drunk, who
have no eyes, but for the exterior. This is the treason, of 2. Reg. 20.
Ioab, who killed Amasus, by embracing him; and of Matt. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22.
Judas, who by that treacherous kiss of peace, delivered over, his blessed
master, into the hands of death. So is it, when by drinking the pleasure of a
mortal sin, Christ dies in the soul; upon whose death, it also dies for
company; for the life it had, came from him. So says Romans 8.
S. Paul; If you live according to the flesh you shall die. And in another place;
Tim. 5.
The widow that remaynes in pleasure, being yet alive, is dead; alive, by the
life of her body; but dead, by that of her soul.

By how much the more closely we are joined to this It is a traitor, lodging
in our bosom.
flesh and blood, so much the more, we are to fear it; for our Lord has said,
Matt. 10^
That a man's enemies, are they of his own house. And this flesh and blood, is
not only belonging to this house of ours; but, of the two walls whereof the
same house is made, this is one. For this, and other reasons, S. Augustine said,
that the combat of our flesh, and blood was continual; and the conquest full
of difficulty; and whosoever will prove victorious, must go armed, with many,
and strong Of Arms.
pieces. For the precious jewel of chastity, is not imparted to al; but to
such, as by the much sweat of many earnest prayers, and of other holy pe^nance,
do obtain it of our Lord. He was pleased to be wrapped in a fair sheet of
linen; which must pass through many rude handlings, before it will come to be
white. Whereby we may understand, that the man who desires to obtain, and to
conserve the gift of chastity, and so to lodge Christ in himself, (as if it
were in another sepul^her) must be content with a great deal of cost, and
labor, to gain this purity; Chastity is such a jewel, as that it can never
be ouerbought.
which is a thing so rich that whatsoever be spend upon it, he may account
himself to buy it cheap. And, as many more painful works of p^nnance, and
satisfaction, are to be required at his hands, who has much offended our Lord,
then at his, who has not so much offended; so though all of us, who live in
flesh, must be afraid of it, and watch over it, and bridle it, and rule it with
discreet-temperance; yet they, who particulerly are infested by it, will have
need to use particular endeauours, and remedies.

He therefore that shall find himself subject to this necessity, must in the
first place, treat his body with severity; by lessening both food and sleep;
and by giving it a hard bed, hayr-clothes, and other convenient helps of this
kind, whereby it may be afflicted. For, Harke^ to this holy Father, though he
were no Protestant.
S Hierome says, By fasting, the plague of this body of ours, is cured; and S.
Hilarion spoke thus, to his flesh and blood; I will tame thee; and take order
that thou shall not ki^ke; but that, through hunger, and pain, thou may have
more mind of m^ate, then lust. And S. Hierome counsels Eustochium the
Virgin, That although she had bin brought up in daynty fare, yet she should be
very careful to use abstinence in diet; and not to abstain from giving the
body further troubles; assuring her, that without taking of this course, she
would not be able to make good the possession of chastity. If, by occasion of
such penance, the body should grow to weakness, and the health to prejudice;
the same S. Hierome makes answer in another place. That it were better the
stomach should suffer, then the soul; and to command the body, then to be
subject to it; and that the legs were better to tremble for weakness, then
that chastity should reele for lack of strength. It is true indeed, that in
another place, he withal requires, That the fasting be not so excessive, as to
weaken the stomach; and yet again in another place, he reprehendeth some
whom he had known to have run hazard of loosing their wits, through the
excess of fasting and absteyning.

In this, it is impossible to give a general rule, that may square with all.
For It is therefore necessary to have often recourse to his ghostly Father.
some find help by one means, and another not; and some one, may be hurt by it
in his health, and not another. And one thing it is, when the war is so
great, as to place a man in danger of loosing his Chastity (for in that case,
it is fit to put the body to any inconvenience, that the soul may so be able,
to remain with life,) and another thing it is, for a man to struggle with a
moderate tentation; whereby he fears not so much danger; nor for the conquest
thereof, is in necessity of taking so much pains. Now for the using of the
most convenient help in such occasions, it will much depend upon the discreet
conduct of him, that guides the person tempted; who, are, both to pray, with all
humility, to our Lord, that heerin he will impart some light. And since the
vessel 1. Cor. ^.
of Election* S Paul did not trust his flesh and blood, S. Paul was no
Protestant; both because he thought it necessary to chastize, and beat his
body, and for that he made not himself sure of his salvation, as these others
do.
but that he punished and made it subject; least preaching virtue to others,
himself might become vicious, by falling into sin; how shall we conceive,
that we can be chaste, without chastizing our body; since we have both less
virtue, and greater causes of fear, then he? Very Note.
hardly, is humility held fast, in the midst of honors; and temperance in
the midst of abundance; and chastity in the midst of delicacies. And if he
should be worthy of derision, who, procuring to quench the fire wherein his
house were burning, would cast in a supply of more dry wood; much more worthily
shall he be derided; who on the one side desires chastity; and on the other,
stuffes his skin with curious, and choice meats; and gives himself moreover,
to idleness. For these things do not only not quench the fire which already
is kindled, but would suffice to kindle it, even where it were already quenched.

And since the Prophet Ezech. 1^.
Ezechiel, is a witness to us, that the cause why that unfortunate City of
Sodom, grew up to the highest of that abominable sin, was the Abounda^ce and
Idleness, are the mother, and the nurse of lust.
fulness, and abundance of bread, and the idleness, wherein they spent
their time; who will now presume to live in idleness, or in delicacyes; yea,
or even to see them though but a far off? For as much as these things, which,
in them were able to produce that greater sin, with facility will be able to
induce us, to commit the lesser. Let such an one therefore, as is a friend to
Chastity, love Temperance, and the ill treating of his body. For if he would
have the one, without the other, it will not prove with him; but rather he will
be deprived of both. For those things which God did join, man should not
desire to separate, neither shall he be able, though he would.

CHAP. VI.
Of two causes that there are, of sensual tentations; and what means we must
use against them, when they rise, from the Malice of the Devil.
WE are much to mark, that the remedy of which I have spoken in afflicting
the body, is wont to help, when the tentation springs from the body; as it
uses to do in young men, who have good health, and have used to regale
themselves. Then, According to the several root, and motive of the tentation,
so is the remedy to be applied.
I say, it is fit to reform the body, when the root of the infirmity rises
thence. But sometimes, the tentation grows by means of the Devil; and it
may partly be perceived by this; that it fights with us more by thoughts, and
foul imaginations of the mind, then by impure motions of the body. Or if you
find these later also in your body, it is not because the tentation began
there; but having begun by thoughts, it grows, at last to result into the
exterior. Which exterior of the body being sometimes extremely weak, and
little better then dead; evil thoughts are yet, now and then, most lively in
it; as it happened to S. Hierome, according to his own relation. It is also
another sign, that such tentations are of the Devil; when they come upon a
suddayne; and when a man gives least occasion, or has cause to expect them
least. Nor There is no sin at all, if no occasion, nor consent be given, nor
pleasure taken in the suggestio^ of carnal thoughts.
can he, as it may happen, observe due reverence, in the very times of his
Prayer; no nor at the Altar, nor in other holy places; where yet even a very
wicked man, would consider where he were, and abstayn from thinking of such
things. Sometimes Note.
these thoughts are such in quality, and so many in number, as that a man never
knew, nor heard, nor imagined any such things, as do then present themselves.
And by the force, wherewith they come, and by the very things themselves, which
interiourly are told him; a man finds that they spring not from himself; but
that it is somewhat else, which suggested, and represented them, to his mind.

When you have these, or such other signs as these, be well assured that it is
a persecution of the Devil; and that, howsoever you may suffer it in your
flesh and blood, yet is it not from thence, that it proceeds. This war is
more dangerous then the other; through the much evil which he wishes us, by
whom it is made; and for that he is an enemy, that is never weary of fighting,
when we are either waking, or sleeping, at all times, and in all places. The
remedy of this inconvenience, is To put thy self upon some honest business, is
a good diuersion.
to procure some good employment, which may put us into thought, and care;
making us thereby, cast off, those impure imaginations. S. Hierome, for this
purpose (as himself relates) gave his mind to the study of the Hebrew tongue,
with much labor, but not without much fruit; and he says, Let the Devil,
ever find thee well employed. Speaking also in conformity of this, how
profitable the manner of life, which is lead in Monasteryes was, to this
purpose; he instructs it, saying thus. S. Hierome was no Protestant.
See, that every day, thou perform, whatsoever thou have in charge; and be
subject to whom thou would not; and go well weary to thy bed; yea and so,
that even, as thou art walking, thou may be ready to fall down a sleep. Be
thou also enjoined, to rise before thou have slept thy fill; and recite thy
Psalm, when it comes to thy turn; and serve thy brethren; and wash the feet
of strangers; and when thou art wronged, hold thy peace; and as for the So that
in S. Hieromes tym there were Abbots and Monasteries.
Abbot of the Monastery, see thou fear him, as if he were some great Lord; and
see thou love him, as if he were thine own Father; and believe, that all V^les
evidently it should contain some sin. Such is the religious obedience, which
is practiced in the holy Catholicque Church; and such a Papist as you see, was
S. Hierome.
that which he commands thee, is fit for thee to obey him in; and take not
thou upon thee to judge of thy superiors, since thy office is but to obey; and
to comply with that which is commanded; according to that which Moses says,
Hearken, O Israel, and hold thy peace. Being thus employed upon diverse things,
there will be no place, for evil thoughts; and when thou art to pass from the
doing of one to another, have that only in thy mind, which thou art then, about.

This is said by S. Hierome; and according to this, it was then the use of
Monasteryes to exercise their younger men, more in these good imployme^ts, the^
in solitude and large Prayer; through the dangers, which, by flesh, and blood,
and passions, (as yet vnmortifyed) both might, and did grow upon them. Though
yet, this rule is subject to an exception, through the diversity of
dispositions, and the particular gifts of God. Men must not be restrained from
liberty to make much prayer, but upon very particular reasons.
Upon which motives, there may be reason, to allow a large time of prayer to a
young man; and to abridge another, who is more in years. When I said before,
that young men did not employ themselves in large prayer, I understand that to
have been large, wherein, almost all his time was spent; and as if in effect
he had no other office but that. For, not to let him have some good spaces for
it, should be a very great error; by reason of the benefits which he should
loose thereby; and There is nothing which maks our miseries, and burdens so
light, as the frequentatio^ of Prayer.
because even for the well going through, any other employment, it is necessary
that he gain strength and spirit, in his Prayer. For otherwise they who are
exteriourly employed, are wont to be still complaining, and untoward, like
Mark this comparison, for it is a good one.
a cart that is laden, without having the wheels made easy toward turning,
by the tenderness of devotion.

Let beginners be advertised, that the Devil does particulerly procure to
trouble them, with these impure imaginations, in the time of their prayer; that
so they may be induced to leave it; and the Devil himself may so take his
ease, the while. For although the Devil do much weary us by these tentations;
much more do we weary, and even add fire to him, by our devout Prayer is a
scourg to the Devil.
prayers; and therefore he procures, that we either make them not at all, or
not well. But we, on the otherside, ought (even, as it were, for spite against
him) to labor with all possibility; that so we may not give over that holy
exercise; since even by the very persecution it self which he bringes upon us,
we may see how profitable it is. And if the war should press us so hard,
whilst we are praying mentally, as that we might find much danger by impure
imaginations, the least that we must do is to put our selves into vocal
prayer; and to beat our breasts; to punish our bodies; to cast our arms into
the form of a Cross; to raise our hands, and eyes toward heaven, desiring
succor of our Lord; in such sort, as that, howsoever the tym which we deputed
for prayer may be well employed. We must else do somewhat that may divert us;
and especially procure to speak with some good man that may give us heart.
Though He means, that we must not give over our Prayer, for the going to ask
counsel; but we must do that afterward.
this last, should not be done, at that time, til we can no more; that so we
may not discover our weakness, in not being able, to overcome otherwise, then
by flight; and least our enemy, do so make us quit the field, and distrust our
forces. For in fine, our Lord, who is both full of pity, and full of power;
will impose silence upon our adversary, when it shall be fit for us; that he may
not interrupt the private, and friendly conversation, which we were wont to
hold with him.

CHAP. VII.
Of the great peace, which our Lord God gives to them that fight manfully
against this Enemy; and of the much that it imports us, for the ouercomming
of him, to fly from familiarity with women.
ALL these skirmishes are wont to be made, in the war against chastity; when
our Lord permits it, for the trial of his Caualliers, whether indeed they
truly love him, and chastity, for which they fight. And after, that he has
found them faithful, he sends down his omnipotent favor, and commands
our adversary, not to give impediment to our peace, and private speech with
him. Then does a man taste the fruit of his labors, and they are full of
savor to him, and more full of merit.

It is also necessary, and very necessary, for the conservation of chastity,
that familiar conversation of men with women be avoided; how much so ever they
be of virtue, and how near soever in blood. For The examples are infinite: and
therefore we shallbe more faulty, if we take not heed.
the foul, and strange falls, which have been given, and taken in the world, by
occasion of this, ought to be a continual remembrancer to us, of our fraylty;
and a quick warning, at the cost of others, whereby we may vnbeguyle our
selves, in respect of the false security, which our pride, would feign make
promise off; saying, That we should pass on, without receiving of any hurt;
we, I say, who are weak; wherein others, who were so strong, so wise, and
(which more importes) so great Saints, were most miserably wounded.

Who would trust the bond of blood, when he reads of that bestiality, which
Amon 2. Reg. 13.
committed with his sister Thamar? with many other, as foul examples as this,
and more, which have happened in the world, to persons, whom the brutish passion
of flesh, and blood made blind. Note this, and take thine eyes into thy head.
And who would trust to the sanctity, either of himself, or any other, when he
sees David; who was a man made after the heart of God, drawn down, by such
obscurity of mind, into so many and so filthy sins, by only looking upon a
woman? And who will not tremble, to think of his own fraylty, when he
considers the sanctity, and wisdom of King Solomon in his youth; and his
deformed falls from chastity; which did hammer so fast upon his heart, in his
old age, as to induce him, to erect a number 3. Reg. 3.
of Idols, and to adore them, after the example of those women, whom he loved.

Let no man in this, deceive himself; nor confide in his chastity, either past
or present; though he find his mind as strong, and as hard against the contrary
vice, as any rock. For it was a great truth, which the experienced Hierome
delivered to us, That luxuriousness of the flesh, subdueth souls that are
made of iron. And S. Augustine, would not dwell with his own sister, saying,
They that will converse with my sister, are no sisters of mine. By There is no
way to conquer, in this war but by flight.
this way of caution, all the Saints have vvalked, and them we must follow,
unless we have a mind to loose our way.

Be not therefore, thou, O Child of Christ, remiss herein; but hear, and
perform that which S. Bernard says; That virgins, who are truly virgins, are
fearful in all occasions, yea even in such, as are secure from danger. And
they who proceed not thus, shall quickly see themselves as miserably fallen; as
formerly, by means of a false security, they were miserably deceived. And
although, by penance, a pardon of the sin is obtained; yet reaches it not,
to a recovery of the crown of Virginity, which is lost. And a poor thing it
is, says* S Hierome, that a virgin who expected a crown, must be glad of a
pardon, for not having kept it. As it would be, if any King Note.
should have a daughter, whom he loved much, and whom he kept for marriage,
according to her rank, and when the occasion thereof should present it self,
this daughter of his should tell him, that she asked his pardon, for that she
was not fit for marriage, as having vilely lost her Virginity. The remedies of
Penance, are miserable remedies, as says S. Hierome; since there is not any
greater misfortune or misery, then to commit a mortal sin, for the remedy
whereof, it is necessary to resort to Penance. Therefore must thou, with all
vigilance, attend to be loyal to him, that chose thee; and to make that good,
which thou have Because she had vowed virginity.
promised to him; that so thou may not try, by experience, that which is
written, Know thou, and see* what a bitter thing it is* to have left the Lord
thy God, and that his fear did not continue in thee; but do thou enjoy the
fruit, as well as the name, of his chaste Spouse; and the crown, which is
provided, by him, for such.

CHAP. VIII
How the Devil, uses to deceive spiritual men, by means of this enemy of
our Flesh, and Blood; and of the course that we are to hold, in keeping our
selves from error.
Thou This excellent Chapter deserves to be seriously pondred, by all kind, of
spiritual persons.
art to be advertised, that the fall of devout persons, is not understood at
the first, no not so much, as by themselves; and for this, it is the more to be
feared. At the first, it seems to them, that by communication with such
persons, their souls do profit; and confiding therein, they do often resort to
such conuersations; and By how insensible degrees, may the most spiritual
persons come to be sold over to this sin of sense.
thereby is engendered in their hearts, a kind of love which does captive them a
little; and puts them to pain, when they see not one another, and with
seeing, and speaking they are at ease. After this, it grows, that they
express the love they mutually bear; whereby, and by other discourses, which
already are not so spiritual, as the former, they take joy to be talking at
large. And by little and little, that conversation which formerly might profit
their souls, they find to have taken them prisoners; by often thinking of one
another, and by the care, and desire, which they have to meet sometimes; and
mutually to send amourous presents, and sweet recommendations, or letters.
These things with other such like fawninges, are not agreeable to a holy
affection, as S. Hierome says; and by these slippery steps, from one to In the
end they find, that even the very beginninges were naught: which ^e^ at the
first they suspected not.
another, they use to come to such ends, as give them to understand (and that
very much to their cost) that even the beginning and entertayning of that
conversation, which first they took to be a service of God, without finding
any ill motion at all; was no other, then a mere deceit of the fly Devil;
who at the first, gave them security, that afterward he might catch them in
the snare, which he had hidden for that purpose. And after, being fallen, they
learn, that a man and a woman, are but fire and flax; and that the Devils
errand, is but to bring them near one another; and when they are so, he blows
the bellows with a thousand arts, and tricks, to inflame them here, with the
fire of Flesh and Blood; and to carry them afterward into that of hell.

Therefore thou, O Virgin, fly away from the familiarity of every man; and
continue, to the end of thy life, in that good custom, which thou have
begun, to be never alone with any man; except thy Confessor; and that, no
longer then why lest thou art making thy Confession; and yet even let that, be
dispatched with as much breuity as thou can; without enterlacing other
discourses; fearing the account of the speech that thou shall either utter, or
hear, which thou art to give unto the strict judge. So Note this, and for the
reverence of the Sacrament, avoid even the least idle words.
much the more, art thou to avoid this in confession; because that, is
ordained, for the taking away of old sins, and not for the committing of any
new; or to make thy self sick with the very taking of physic. The spouse of
Christ, (especially if she be young) ought not to be easy in the choice of her
Confessor; but What kind of Confessor a woman of honor, and especially a
Virgin, must procure.
careful that he be a man of virtuous, and tried life; of good reputation, and
ripe years; and thus thy conscience shall be safe, in the sight of God, and
thy fame, shall be fair, and spotless, in the eyes of men.

Thou must understand and know, that thou have need of both these things, for
complying with the height, of the state of Virginity. And when thou shall have
found such a Confessor, give thanks to our Lord; and obey him; and love him;
as a gift that he has bestowed upon thee. But yet still be very careful; for
although this love be good, as being spiritual, yet there may be a fault in
it, if it be too much; and it may bring him that has it, into danger; and it
is an easy matter, for spiritual affection, to translate and turn it self
over, into carnal. And if thou use not restraint in this, thou will grow to
have thy heart as much taken up thereby, as married women have with their
husbands, and their children. Now this, thou see, would be a great
irreuerence, in respect of the loyalty which thou owe to our Lord, whom thou
have taken for thy Spouse. Do not therefore place, and keep thy Ghostly Father,
in the most interior part of thy heart; keep him near thy heart, as a friend of
thy Spouse but not in the place of thy Spouse himself. And let the memory which
thou hold of him, serve for the putting of his directions in practice;
without reflecting otherwise upon his person; esteeming him as a gift of God,
bestowed for the helping thee to unite thy self to thy celestial Spouse, but
yet without bringing him into that Union.

Thou Note.
must also be provided, for the loosing him, without loss of thy patience, if
God shall so ordain, in whom alone thou art to lodge thy hopes, and he is to
be thy only resting place. That which we read in S. Hierome, of the love and
familiarity between him and S. Paula, did keep conformity with these rules.
Though yet many things are lawful, and safe, to them who have sanctity, and
mature years, which yet are not so to such others, as want one of these
qualityes, if not both.

In this sort then, art thou to carry thy self, with the Ghostly Father, whom
thou choosest, he being such as I have described. But if thou can not have
him such, it is much better, that thou By this he shows the great care which
a Virgin ought to have, of her good name; though such as live not in villages,
but in towns, can have no difficulty, to find many most worthy Ghostly
Fathers* at whose hands they may receive the Sacraments, as often as they will
do it with devotion.
confess and communicate but twice or thrice in the year, and keep good
account with God, and with thy spiritual books in thy Oratory, then by
confessing often, to bring thy fame into hazard. For if, as S. Augustine says,
Good name amongst our Neighbors be necessary for us al; how much more
necessary then, shall it be for the Virgin of Christ; whose reputation is very
delicate, and tender, as S. Ambrose says. And that so much, as that to have a
confessor who wants any of the former qualityes, does cast a spot upon her
fame; which because it is in so precious, and pure a cloth, it seems to be
very deformed, and in no case to be endured. And to the end that they, who
content themselves with saying, There is no hurt, my conscience is clear; and,
who have the reputation of their honesty, in small account, should not be able
to help themselves with a conceit, that men imposed any of these infamies, upon
the most sacred Virgin Mary; it Note.
pleased her most blessed Son, that she should be espoused; choosing rather
that they should hold him for the son of Joseph, which yet he was not; then
that men should have color to say, and thing sinisterly, of his most sacred
Mother, by seeing her have a son, and not to think, that she had a husband.

Therefore let such as have no care to prevent scandalls, seek out some other
shelter; for that which they may learn of the most sacred Virgin Mary, and of
other holy women, is purity within, and good example without; together with
all reservation, and caution, in conversation. And although none of these
inconveniences did follow upon those superfluous intertaynments, yet Note this,
for the preserving of thy soul, in perfect purity, and peace.
should they deserve to be speedily avoided; because they do with the multitude
of thoughts, which they use to bring, deprive the soul of liberty, whereby it
might freely fly up, by the cogitations thereof, to God; and it takes away that
purity, which the secret corners of our heart (where Christ desires to dwell
alone) were bound to have. And it seems, that it remains not so entire, nor
so shut up against all creatures, as it were fit that the bed of so sovereign
a spouse, should be; and that it does not wholly possess the perfect purity of
chastity, if therein there may be found, but even the air, or memory of a man.
But thou must know, that yet what has been said, is meant, when there is
excess in familiarity; or when there grows any scandal by it. For
otherwise, thou art not to converse with such, as reason leads thee to, with a
scrupulous, or perplexed mind. For from hence, even the very tentation it
self, does often rise; but thou art to carry thy self, with a holy and
prudent simplicity; and neither to be careless, on the one side; nor malicious
on the other.

CHAP. IX.
That one of the principal remedies for the conquering of this Enemy, is the
exercise of devout and fervent Prayer, whereby we may find gust in divine
considerations, which makes us abhor all worldly pleasures.
IN one of the former Read this chapter with extraordinary attention; and be
sure to bless God, for the great, and sweet goodness of his, toward mankind;
and let it help thee to hate all bestiall pleasure.
Chapters it was told thee, what a strong, and well tempered weapon Prayer is,
for the fighting against this vice, yea although the prayer be not of so great
length. Thou shall now understand, that if this prayer be devout, and long
continued; and such, as wherein gust is taken, according to that divine
sweetness, which it imparted to some; such prayer I say, is not only a weapon,
wherewith to fight, but even outright to cut the throat of this bestiall vice.
For the soul, wrestling, hand to hand with God, (by the arms of her devout
affections and thoughts) does obtain of him in particular manner, as another
Jacob, that he bless her, with a multitude of graces, and with a profound
internal sweetness. Hereupon she remains stricken in the thigh, which
signifies sensual appetite; this, growing to be mortified in such forte, as
that from thenceforth, she goes lame on that side; and she remains lively
and strong, in her spiritual affections, being signified by the other thigh,
which was untouched.

For, as the delightful gust of flesh and blood, makes us loose all gust and
strength of spirit; so if once we come to have gust in spirit, the gust of all
flesh and blood, grows highly unsavory. Somtymes See how God uses his true
servants.
the delightful sweetness, which a soul, being visited by God does taste, is
so great, that the body cannot bear it; and the same body remains so weak,
and so defeated, as it might be, at the end of some corporal infirmity, which
had held it long. Though at other times it hap^eth, that by the strength, which
is received by the soul, even the very body also is assisted, and recouers new
forces. Making some experience, in this exile of hers, of that which she is to
find in heaven, when the soul being happy, in God, and full of inexplicable
delights, there shall result into the body, both strength and joy, and other
most precious endowements, which our Lord will then impart.

O sovereign Lord, and how How inexcusable they are, who leave God, for the
love of creatures.
mightily without excuse, have thou made the fault of them, who for the seeking
of delight in creatures, are content to forsake, yea and to offend thee;
vvhilest yet every one of the delights that be in thee, are so massiue, as
that all they, which are in the creatures, being summed up into one, are, in
comparison of thine, no better then pure, and perfect gall. And this is so,
with great reason. For the delight or joy, which is taken from any thing, is
but the fruit of that thing, whatsoever it be; and such as the tree is, the
fruit is also. Therefore, is the joy, which is derived from creatures, but
short, and vain, and filthy, and compounded with sorrow; because the tree,
from whence it is gathered, is subject to the same conditions. But the joy
which is in thee, O Lord, what imperfection, or decay can it be subject to?
Since thou art eternal, quiet most simple, most beautiful, immutable, and a
Good, which is infinitely complete.

The The delights of this world, are all but lies.
taste which a partridge has, is of a partridge; and the gust which a man has
of any creature, savors of the creature; and he that can say, who thou art O
Lord, can say, of what taste thou art. Above all understanding, is thy being;
and so also is that sweet delight of thine, which is kept, and hidden up, for
them that fear thee; and who, to enjoy thee, do, with their hearts, renounce
the gust of creatures. An infinite good thou art; and so are thy delights, also
infinite. And therefore, although the Angels of heaven, and the happy souls of
men living there; are ever to remain, enjoying thee; (and The joys of heaven
are so great^ as that no soul, would be able to subsist in them, if it were
not supernaturally enabled to it, by Almighty God.
that, with a proportion of strength, which thou have given them for that
purpose, which is not small) and although incomparably, many more were added
also to them, that in like manner they might enjoy thee; and that, with much
greater strength then now they have; yet so boundless is that sea of thy
divine sweetness, as that (they all, wauing, and swimming, as being full, and
even inebriated with those delights) there does yet remain, so much more
thereof to be enjoyed; as that if thou, O Lord Omnipotent, with the infinite
powers which thou have, did not possess and enjoy thy self; those delights
would carry with themselves a kind of complaint, in that there would be want of
such, as might enjoy, all that, which is there, to be enjoined.

And thou, O most wise Lord, understanding, (as being our Creator) that our
inclination carries us to a love of rest, and joy; and that a soul is not
able to continue long, without a search of some consolation, either good or
bad; thou God is so dearly good, that even in this life, he puts his faithful
servants, into a kind of paradise.
do inuit us, by those celestial delights, which are in thee; that so we may
not cast our selves away, upon the pursuit of sinful pleasure in thy
creatures. Thy voice it is, O Lord, Come unto Matt. 11.
me, O all you that labor, and are laden, and I will refresh you. And thou
did command, that this should be proclaimed in thy name O all you that are
thirsty, come to the waters. And thou have made us know. That Is^. ^s.
there are delightful joys, in thy right hand, which continue to the end and
that of the same river of thy delight* (not by any limited tax, or measure)
thou give to thy servants to dri^ke, in thy kingdom. Yea sometimes thou
vouchsafest, a taste of some part thereof, to thy friends, even whylest they are
yet on earth; to whom thou say, Come Can^. 5.
eat, and drink, and be inebriated, O you, my dearest friends. All this thou
do, O Lord, through a desire of drawing them to thee, by means of joy,
whom thou know to be so affected to it.

Let no man therefore, lay the least imputation upon thee, O Lord, as if there
were any want of goodness in thee, to be loved, or of true delight to be
enjoyed; and let him never be hunting, after any pleasing, or delightful
conversation out of thee; since the reward which thou will give to thy
servants, is to bid them, Enter into Matt. 20.
the joy of their Lord. For of the same plate, and out of the same cup, whereof
thou eatest, and drinkest* they shall eat, and drink; and of the same which
thou enioyest, they shall enjoy; for thou have already invited them, to eat at
thy table, in the Luc. 21.
kingdom of thy Father.

What can thou have here to say, Hearken to this, for he speaks home to
thee; if it be to thee.
O thou carnal man; thou who art, in so high a measure, deceived, as that thou
ariuest, to prize these filthy pleasures, of flesh and blood (which base, and
wicked persons, and even the very beasts of the field, enjoy) more, then that
sovereign sweetness, which is in God; and which is enjoyed, by the Saints, and
by the Angels, and by God himself, the Creator of them all. It is a
business belonging to beasts, which thou do so prize, and love; and thy
passions, are no better then very beasts. And so often do thou cast, the
most high God, under the feet, of thy most vile beasts; as thou do offend
him, for carnal pleasures Fly therefore, O thou Virgin, from a thing so
infamous as this; and ascend thou up, to the mount of prayer; and beseech our
Lord, that he will give thee some taste of himself, that thy soul, being
strengthened by the sweetness, that distills from him; thou may despise those
durty pleasures, which inhabit flesh and blood. Then will thou have a cordial,
and deep compassion, of them, who go casting themselves away through the
b^senes of the durty valleys, of a bestiall life. And Thou have a heart of
stone, if this do not move thee.
being all amazed, thou will cry out, O you men, and what is it that you loose?
And for what? The most sweet God, for most stinking flesh, and blood? And what
pain do they deserve, for so False weights, are an a^h^min ^io^ to God: and
how false are these, which make vain and empty creatures, to outweigh, the God
of eternal glory.
false weights and measures, but eternal torment; and of that, they shall
infallibly be sure.

CHAP. X.
Of many other means, which we are to use, when this cruel Enemy does assault
us, with his first blows.
THE aduises which thou have already heard, by way of remedy of this infirmity,
are things which ordinarily thou must use; though it be not, in the time of
tentation. Hearken now to that, which thou art to do, when it sets upon thee,
by giving thee the first blow. Then, bless thy Diverse profitable and
practical remedies, against temptations of sense.
forehead, or thy heart, with the sign of the Cross; calling with devotion
upon the holy name of Jesus Christ; and say; Not I; I sell not God so good
cheap. O Lord thou art more worth, and I love thee more then so. If Note.
the tentation do not then give over, descend, with thy thoughts, into hell;
and behold how terribly, that living fire does burn, and makes those
miserable creaturs which were here inflamed with the fire of lust, cry out,
and howl, and blaspheme; why lest, in the mean time, the sentence of God is
executed upon them, which says, Let Apoc. 18.
so much torment and desolation be laid upon them, as they glorified themselves,
in their delights. Be thou astonished, at the grieuousnes of the punishment
(though yet withal, it be most just) that the pleasure of one moment, should
be chastized, with eternal torments. And say, within thyselfe, as S. Gregory
does, Momentary is that which delights, but eternal, is that which
tormenteth.

If this contemplation help thee not; send up thy heart to heaven; and represent
to it, the purity of that Chastity, which remains in that happy City; where
no beast can have any entrance; I mean, no person that is bestiall. And there
continue thou for some time, till thou may find strength of spirit; and so
that here, thou may abhor, that which there is so abhorred through the
love of God. It does also help, to suppose that thy body were in the grave; and
to behold, at leisure, how miserable, and stinking the bodies of men and
woman, are there to be. So also is it good, to go instantly to Christ Jesus,
nailed upon the Cross; and especially, as he is tied to the pillar, and
whipped, and bathed in blood, from head to foot; and then to say, with a
deep, internal groan; Thy virgineall and divine body, O Lord, so tormented,
and so laden with grievous pains, and that I should put mine into pleasure?
this were worthy of all rigorous punishment. Since thou, with scourges so full
o^ cruelty* do pay for the delights, which men take in offense of thy law,
I will not, O Lord, delight my self so much to thy cost. In like manner, will
it avail, to represent thy self instantly, in presence of the most pure
Virgin Mary; considering the purity and integrity both of her body, and mind;
and instantly to abhor the dishonest thought which came to thee, as darkness
is driven away, by the approach of light.

But Pray to God to give thee grace, to practice this.
above all, if thou can, shut the door of thy understanding, and shut it
well; as we use to do, in the most internal recollection of our prayer, (as
hereafter we will declare) thou shall find help at hand, with more facility,
then by all those other remedies. For it happens many tyms, that by opening the
door, to a second good thought, an ill one does use to enter in; but keeping out
both the one and the other, it is a turning from the enemy, and not opening the
door, till he be gone, and so he is put to a scorn. So does it also help, to
spread the arms into the form of a cross, to be^d the knees, and to beat
the breast. But that which most importes, or at least, as much as all the rest
together, is, to The devout receiving of the B. Sacrament, is the most
sovereign remedy against tentations of sense.
receive, with due preparation, the holy body of Christ Jesus our Lord; which
was formed by the holy Ghost, and is very far estranged from all impurity. This
is an admirable remedy against those mischeifes, which would grow upon us, by
occasion of our flesh, conceived in sin. And if we could well ponder the
blessing that we receive by the coming of Christ Jesus into us, we should
esteem our selves to be as so many precious Reliquaries; and we would fly,
from all kind of filthynesse, for the honor of him whom we had received.

What Read this with great feeling.
heart can any one have, to profane his body, when it has been honored so far,
as to close with the most holy body of God humaned? what greater obligation,
could have been cast upon me? what more forcible motive cold have been offered,
to make me live inpurity then to behold with mine eyes, to touch with my hands
to receive with my mouth, to ledge in my breast, the most pure body of Jesus
Christ? He vouchsafing me that unspeakable honor, to the end, that I might
not descend to baseness; and knitting me to himself, and consecrating me, as
a place, into which he vouchsafes to enter. How then, and with what body, shall
I endure to offend our Lord. since he, being the author of purity, has entered
into the same body? I have fedd upon him, and fedd with him at the same table;
and shall I now be a traitor to him? No; I will never be so, for the whole
world. Thus is it fit that we esteem this favor, to the end that we may have
a crown put upon this weak and frail condition of ours. But Tremble, and take
heed.
if we receive him ill, or do not serve our selves well of this benefit, just
the contrary effect does follow; and such an one, shall find himself more
enthralled by dishonesty, then he was before he communicated.

If, with all these considerations, and remedies, this bestiall flesh grow not
quiet; thou art to use it like a beast; laying good sound loads upon it, since
it will not hearken to so just reason. Some find help by pinching themselves
very hard, in memory of the excessive pain, which those nails did cause to
Christ Jesus our Lord; Others, by whipping themselves severely; calling so to
mind, how our Lord was scourged; others with spreading their arms into the
form of a Cross; others with fixing their eyes on heaven; others with beating
their face; and such other things as these, which put the flesh to pain; for
at that time, she understands no other language. This The example of Saints.
is the manner, which, by reading, we find that the Saints did hold; whereof
one did strip himself starck naked, and did all tumble in thorny bushes; and
so by means of his bloody and afflicted body, the war which was made against
his soul, did end. Another did cast himself, in the depth of winter, into a
poole of water, which was extremely cold; wherein he stayed, till the body came
forth half dead, but the soul was freed from all danger. Another, thrust his
fingers into the fire, and with burning them, that other fire, which tormented
his soul, was quenched. And a martyr there was, who being bound hand and
foot, (and then tempted to unlawful pleasure) by cutting of his own tongue,
with his own teeth, became victorious in that combat.

And although some of these things are not to be imitated, because they were
inspired by particular instinct of the holy Ghost, and not by the ordinary law
under which we live, yet hereby we may learn; That in the time of spiritual
war, when there is question or hazard of the soul, we are not to be lazy, or
to expect till our enemies do give us thrustes; but we must leap back from
sin, as from the face of a serpent, as says the Scripture; and every one
must apply that remedy to himself, wherein he finds most profit, according to
the address which shall be given him, by his prudent Ghostly Father.

CHAP. XI.
Of other means, besides the former, whereby some grow to loose their
Chastity; that we may fly from them, if we also will not loose ours; and by
what means we may strengthen our selves.
NO care, or labor (though never so great) which is employed toward the
proseruatio^ of Chastity, will be esteemed too much by any, if he know, how to
put the true price, upon the merit, and reward thereof. Now since our Lord has
made thee understand, the value of this treasure; and has given thee grace
both to choose it, and to make This Ladv had vowed Chastity.
promise thereof again to him; I shall not be put, into so much necessity to
declare the excellency thereof, as to give thee good directions, how thou may
be sure not to loose it; and to tell thee of some errors, besides the former,
through which it is lost by others; that so thou knowing them, may avoid
them, least thou also come to loose it, and thy self with it. Some Of the
diverse ways, whereby chastity grows to be lost.
loose it, in respect, that having fierce and violent inclinations against it,
and they, on the other side, being not earnest in making such a continual and
sharp war against themselves; do, with a miserable resolution, deliver
themselves over, bound hand and foot, to the will of their enemies. Not
considering, that the purpose of a A noble word for a Christian to write in his
heart; ^ither to couq^er sin, or to dye in the battai^s.
Christian, is to be, either to dye, or else to overcome; by means of his
grace, who helps such, as fight for his honor. Others there are, who
although they be not greatly tempted, have yet naturally a certain baseness and
straitnes of heart, which is inclined to vile, and poor things. And for as much
as this pleasur, is one of the most vile, and poor, and most at hand; they
quickly find means to meet with it, and to bestow themselves upon it, as a
thing that is proportionable to the baseness and poorness of their own heart;
which does not raise it self so high, as to embrace a life of such men, as are
ruled even by natural reason. Which alone, taught one, so good a lesson, as to
make him say, That in carnal pleasures, there was nothing worthy of a
magnanimous heart. And another said, That the life which consists in carnal
pleasure, is a life of beasts. For not only, does the light of heaven, but even
that of natural reason, condemn such as employ themselves upon this baseness;
as people who live not in the circle of men, whose life must be agreeable to
reason; but of beasts, whose very life is, sensual appetite. And if justice
might be done, there would be a great deal of cause, to take away the name of
men, from these fellows; in regard, that although they have the shape of men;
they yet lead a life of beasts, and are the true dishonor and reproach of men.
Nor would How strange this is, and yet after a sort, it is daily seen.
it be a thing moderatly strange, or give small wonder, to them that saw it, if
a beast should lead a man, bridled, up and down; and carry him whither it
would, directing him, who ought to govern it. And yet there are so many, ruled
by the bridle of bestiall appetite, both of high and low condition; that I know
not, whether it is through the multitude thereof, that it cannot be so easily
discerned. Or else I rather believe, that it is because there are few, who have
light to see, how miserable, a soul in a body is, when it is killed by carnal
pleasures; and the more, if that body, be fresh, and fair.

O how many souls of these, and others, are burning in this infernal fire; nor
is there any to cast tears of compassion upon them, or to say with their heart,
To Iod. 1.
thee, O Lord will I cry out, because the fire has denoured, the beautiful
things of the desert. For Note.
certainly, if we had amongst us of those Luc 7.
widows of Naim, who would bitterly bewail their dead children, Christ would
use mercy, for the reviving them in soul, as he did the body of that widows
son, who is mentioned, in the Gospel.

It is not his part to sleep, who has the office, in the Church, to pray, and
intercede for the people with the tenderness of a Mother. Least God do chastize
both him and them; saying, Ezech. 22.
I sought, among them, for a man who might place himself, as a wall; and See
the infinite goodness of God, who is angry, if by praying for one another, we
seek not to appease his wrath.
might oppose himself against me, and so I might not destroy the earth: but I
found no such man; and I powered out my wrath upon them, and in the fire of my
Ezech. 22.
anger I consumed them. Take heed therefore that thou love not a narrow, and
poor heart of thine own; to which these base pleasures use to be agreeable and
delightful. Remember that which S. Bernard said, That if thou well consider
the body, and that which proceeds from thence, it is a kind of more loathsome
dunghill, then otherwise, thou have seen. Despise it from thy heart, withal
the ornaments, and ^ace, and delight it has; and make account that even
already, it is in the sepulcher, converted into a handful of dust.

When thou see any man or woman, look not much upon their face, or person;
and if thou do, let it be to loath it; but address thy internal eyes, to the
soul, which is shut up, and hidden in the body; amongst which souls, there is
no difference, of man, or woman. And admire thou that soul, as a thing created
by God; since The inestimable dignity, and excellency of a soul.
the value of that alone, is greater then that of all corporeal things, either
made, or to be made. And thus, dismissing thy self from the baseness of
bodies, bestow thy self upon the search of greater treasures; and undertake
thou, noble enterprises; and no less, then to lodge even God himself both in
thy soul, and in thy body, with a profound purity of heart.

Behold The height, and dignity, of the vocation, of a Christian.
thy self with such eyes, as these, since S. Paul says, C^. or. 3.
Know you not that you are the temple of God; and that the spirit of God
remains in you? And in another place, do you not know that your members, are
the temples of the holy Ghost, who remaynes within you, and whom God has given
to you; And, you are not your own; And since you are bought with a great
price, let God be honored in your bodies. Consider also, that when thou
did receive holy Baptism, thou were made the Temple of God; and thy soul
was consecrated to him, by his grace; and so was thy body also, by the ^uch of
that holy water. And the holy Ghost does ^erue it self, both of the soul and
body; as being the Lord of the whole house; enclining both the one, and the
other, to good works; and for this it is said, That even the parts of our
body, are the Temples of the holy Ghost.

God Be thou amazed, at this infinite vouchsafing, of almighty God.
does vouchsafe us great honor; by being pleased to dwell in us, and to honor
us indeed, with the name of Temples; and great is the obligation which thereby
is put upon us, to cleanse our selves; it being so fit, that the house of God
be clean. And if thou will consider, that thou were purchased, as S. Paul
says, at a great price; that is by the life of God humaned, which for thee was
given, thou may see, how great reason it is, for thee to honor God, and to
bear him in thy body, doing him service; and not therein, to commit any thing,
which may be to his dishonor, and thine own extreme disadvantage. For just,
and true, is that sentence, That 1. Cor. 3.
whosoever shall defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy. For in his
Temple, there must be nothing, but that which tends to his honor, and praise.
Remember that which S. Augustine said, When I had once understood, that God had
redeemed and purchased me, with his precious blood, I resolved, that never
more, I would sell my self; To which I would have thee add, And how much less
will I do it, for the base pleasure of flesh, and blood.

Thou have begun a A vow of perpetual Chastity.
work, worthy of a noble courage, because thou meanest to be incorrupt, in
that corruptible flesh of thine; and to possess that, by way of virtue, which
the Angels possess by way of nature; and to pretend to a particular crown in
heaven, in being companion to those blessed Virgins, Who sing that new song,
and follow the Lamb, wheresoever he goes. Consider the name, which now thou
hold, of being the spouse of Christ; and the joy which thou may expect in
heaven, when there that spouse of thine shall lodge thee in thy bed; for thus
thou will come to so much love of the purity of virginity, that for it, thou will gladly loose thy life, as many holy Virgins have done; who rather then
they would not be Virgins, were content to be Martyrs, with great magnaminity.
Procure thou also to This is true Nobility; and the contrary is mere baseness.
have a noble heart, which is very necessary, for the keeping of thee in that
high estate, where God has placed thee.

CHAP. XII.
That God uses to punish such as are proud, by permitting them to loose the
treasure of Chastity, thereby to humble them; and how necessary it is to be
humble, for the ouercomming of the enemy to this virtue.
THERE have been others, who lost the treasure of their chastity, by reason that
God did punish them in his just judgment, through a giving them over (as S.
Paul says,) to the dishonest affections of their own heart, as into the hands,
of cruel executioners. Chastizing thus, some of their sins, by other sins
of theirs, he not inciting them to sin, See and detest the doctrine of Calvin,
which he utters in his Institutions; for the makes the treason of Judas, to
be as properly, and as truly, the work of God, as the conversion of S. Paul.
(for a very strange thing it were for him, who is sovereign goodness, to
because of sin in any soul) but by retiring his succor, from a man, for
other sins of the same man; which is the work of a just judge; who in that he
is just, is also good. Thus says the scripture; A wicked woman is a deep
well; and a loose woman is a strait well; and he shall fall into it, who has
offended God.

Let Be not high-minded, but fear.
no man therefore presume, upon his not sinning against God in the point of
chastity, if yet he sin in other things. Since God is wont to let men fall
into that which they would not, and into which they were not wont to fall, in
punishment of their falling into other sins, from which they ought to have
kept themselves. And though this be generally true in the case of all sins,
and God is offended with them all, and does punish all; yet more particularly
does he (as S. Augustine says) punish secret Above all things, take heed of
Pride.
Pride by open lust. So is it related of Nabuchodonosor; That for the
punishment of his pride, he lost his Kingdom, and was cast out of the
conversation of men; and the heart of a beast was given him; and he past his
time among the beasts. Not that he lost the nature of a man, but that even to
himself, it seemed that he was not such. This did he continue, till God gave
him understanding and humility, whereby he knew and confessed, That honor and
dominion was of God; and that he bestows it, where he would. Certainly Note.
so it is, that the man who attributes the buylding up of chastity, to the
strength of his own arm, God does drive him from amongst his servants; and
being departed out of that company, which was, as it were, of Angels, he
dwells now amongst beasts; having so bestiall a heart in his body, as if he
had never loved God; nor known what chastity meant; and as if there were no
hell, nor glory, nor reason, nor shame. In How highly true is this?
so much, as themselves are amazed at what they do; and they seem not to have
the judgment, or discourse of men; but to be wholly aba^doned to this brutish
vice, like very beasts; till the mercy of our Lord, do look with pity upon so
great misery; and make him, whose case is such, to know, that for his pride he
fell, and by means of humility, he is to recover and rise. And then does he
confess, that the kingdom of chastity, by which he had dominion over his
body, is a blessing of God, which, by his grace, he gives, and which, for the
sins of man, he takes away.

This sin of Pride is so hard to be discovered, and consequently so much to
be feared; that sometimes a man has it so conveyed into the most secret
corners of his heart, that even himself understands it not. A witness of this,
may be S. Peter, and many others; who whilst they were taking pleasure, and
confiding in themselves, did think that they were putting their trust in God;
who by his infinite wisdom sees their infirmity; and with his mercy,
accompanied by his justice, does cure and heal them; by giving For Pride, and
Ingratitude, many have grown to lose their chastity.
them to understand, (though to their cost) that they were unthankful unto
him, and unduly confident in themselves, since now they see how miserably they
are fallen. Now although this fall, cost them dear, yet does it not carry so
great danger with it, as does the secret sin of Pride, wherein they were.
For, not knowing thereof, they would have sought after no remedy; and so they
would have run upon their own ruin; but coming to find out, that sin by
their fall, and being humbled before the mercy of God, they obtain remedies
from him, against both inconveniences.

For this I say it is, that S. Augustine told us, That A golden sentence of the
great S. Augustine.
God does punish secret pride by open lust; because the second sin is
manifest to him that commits it; and by means thereof, he grows to a
knowledge of the former, which lay hidden. And thou art to know, that some
people are only proud, within themselves; and others are so with contempt of
their neighbors, whom they conceive to be defective in virtue; and especially
in that of chastily. But Note this.
thou, O Lord, how truly will thou behold this fault, with angry eyes? And how
thankelesse were those thanks to thee, which were given thee by that Pharisee,
who said, I am not ill like other men; I am not an adulterer nor a robber, like
that Publican. This, O Lord, thou do not leave without punishment; Thou
do punish it, and that with great severity; by letting him fall that stood
on foot; in punishment of his sin, and thou do raise the other up, who was
fallen; thereby, as it were, to make him a kind of amends, for the wrong which
the other had done him.

It is a sentence of thine, and thou obseruest it very well; Do Luc. 6.
not condemn others and thou shall not be condemned: And, with the Matt. 5.
same measure wherewith you measure to others, with the same it shallbe
measured to you again. And, he that exal teth himself, shallbe humbled. And
thou did command it to be thus published in thy name, to such as despise
their neighbors Woc be to thee who despisest; for thou shall be despised. O
how many have mine eyes seen, punished according to this sentence, who never
had understood how much God abhors this finne, til they saw themselves
fallen, into the very same, for which they condemned those others; yea and into
worse.

Of Take heed of contemning others; least thou grow the subject of the contempt
of others.
three things (said an Ancient of former times) I condemned others; and into
all three, my self did fall. Let him that is chaste, give God thanks for the
favor he does him; and let him live with fear, and trembling; least himself
do fall; and let him help to raise such an one as is fallen already; showing We
may be severe to our selves but we must have compasio upon others.
compassion toward him, and not contempt. Let him consider, that they are both
made of one piece; and that as the other fell, so he (for as much as concerns
himself) does fall. For, as S. Augustine says, There is He is blind, who
believes not this.
no sin committed by one man, which would not be also committed by another
man, if he were not assisted by him that is the maker of man. Let him draw good
out of evil; humbling himself by occasion of the others fault. Let him, I
say, draw good out of evil; and as for the good of his neighbor, let him
rejoice in that. Let him not be as a venomous serpent, which fetches evil out
of all things; pride out of ethers miseryes, and envy out of their felicityes.
Such Note.
souls as these, will not escape the punishment of God. He will suffer them to
fall upon that, into which those others fell; and he will not give them the
felicity for which they did envy others.

CHAP. XIII.
Of two other dangerous means, which are wont to make way for the loss of
Chastity, in such as endeavor not to avoid them.
AMONGST the miserable falls from chastity, wherewith the world is made
acquainted; it is reason that we forget not that, of the King, and Prophet
David. Because that fall, being so miserable, and the person that fell, so
highly qualifyed, it leaves the hearer with great apprehension; that there is
no one, who may not fear his own infirmity. The occasion of this fall, (as
says S. Basil) was a light kind of complacence, which David took in himself,
when once he was visited by the hand of God, with much consolation; and he
presumed to express himself in this manner, I said in my abundance, that I
shall never be moved. But O, how far otherwise did it fall out; and how well
did he afterward understand, that, whereof before he was ignorant, That Eccl. 7.
in the day of prosperity which we have, we must be calling those A safe and
most profitable advice.
miseryes to mind, which we may have; and that we must take in, those divine
consolations, by the weight of Humility, accompanying it with the holy fear of
God; least otherwise he experience that, which David himself delivered, Thou
turnedst thy face from me, and I was troubled.

Another cause of his fall, is given us to be understood, in holy Scripture, by
saying that at such times as the Kings of Israel, were wont to pass into the
wars, against the infidells, King 2, Reg. 1.
David stayed at home. And walking up and down, upon a tarrasse of his palace,
he saw that which was the occasion of his adultery, and of the murder also,
not only of one, but many. All this had been avoided, if he had gone to fight
the battles of God, according to the custom of other Kings; and himself had
done so, other years. If A good lesson to us Catholic to be sympathizing
always with the Holy Church our Mother, both in sorrow, and in spiritual joy,
according to the diversity of times, and occasions.
thou will be wandering up and down, when the servants of God are recollected;
if thou will be idle, when they labor in good works; if thou will be
dissolutely sending thine eyes abroad, whilst theirs are weeping bitterly,
both for themselves and others; and if, when they are rising up by night, to
pray, thou art sleeping and snorting, and leaving of (by occasion of every
fancy) the good exercises which thou were wont to use, (and by the force and
heat whereof, thou were kept on foot) how do thou think to preserve
chastity, being careless, unprovided of defensive weapons, and having so many
enemies, who are so stout, laborious, and completely armed, in fighting against
it.

Do Note.
not deceive thy self, for if thy desire to be chaste, be not accompanied by
deeds, which are fit for the defense of that virtue, thy desire will prove
vain; and that will happen to thee, which did to David: Since thou art not
more privileged, more stout, nor more a Saint, then he. And to conclude this
matter, (of the occasions, through which, this precious treasure of chastity,
is wont to be lost) thou art to understand, that the cause why God permitted,
that the flesh should rebel against reason, in our first parents, (from whom,
we have it by inheritance) was, for that they rebelled against God, by
disobeying his commandment. He chastized them in conformity of their sin,
and thus it was; That Note. Lex Taliotus.
since they would not obey their superior, their inferior should not obey
them; and so the unbridled nesse of this flesh, being a subject and a slave,
rebelling against her superior, which is reason, is a punishment ^ayd upon
reason* for the disobedience, with she committed against her superior, which
is God.

Be therefore very careful, that thou be not disobedient to thy superiors,
least God permit, that thy inferior, which is thy flesh, do rebel against
thee; as he suffered Adad to rebel against King Solomon 3. Reg^ 12.
his Lord; and least he scourge and persecute thee; and, by thy weakness,
draw thee down into mortal sin. And if, with the inward eyes of thy heart,
thou have understood, that, which here with the eyes of thy body thou have
read; thou will see how great reason there is, that thou should look to thy
self, and consider what there is within thy self. And No man can see himself
exactly, but by light from heaven.
because thou art not exactly able, to know thine own soul, thou art to beg
light of our Lord; and so to sift the most secret corners of thy heart, that
there may be no ill thing there; which either thou know, or know not off;
by means whereof, thou might, through some secret judgment of God, run
hazard to loose the treasure of chastity; which yet it does so much import thee
to keep safe, by means of his divine assistance.

CHAP. XIV.
How much we ought to fly from the vain confidence of obteyning victory
against this enemy, by our own only industry, and labor; and that we must
understand it, to be the guist of God; of whom, it is to be humbly asked; by
the intercession of the Saints; and in particular of the Virgin, our Blessed
Lady.
ALL that which has been said, and more which might be said, are means for the
obtaining, and keeping of this precious purity. But it happens oftentimes,
that as, although we bring, both stone and wood, and all other necessary
materials, for the making of a house, yet we do not fall upon the buylding of
it; so also does it come to pass, that using all these remedies, we yet
obtain not the chastity which we so much desire. Nay there are many, who,
after having had lively desires thereof, and taken much pains for the
obtaining of it, do yet see themselves miserably fallen, or violently at least,
tormented in their flesh; and with much sorrow they say, We have labored all
night, and yet we have taken nothing. And it seems to them, that in
themselves, that is fulfilled, which the Wiseman said, The Eccl. 7.
more I sought it, the further off, it fled away.

This Take heed of trusting to thy self.
uses oftentimes to happen, by reason of a secret confidence, which these
proud laborers, have in themselves; imagininge, that chastity, was a fruit
which grew from their only endeavor; and not, that it was a gift, imparted by
the hand of God. And for not knowing of whom it was to be asked, they justly
were deprived of it. For God shows mercy sometime even in suffering us to sal
into ^^nne.
it had been of more prejudice to them, to have kept it; (since withal, they
would be proud, and ungrateful to God) then to be without it, yet withal, to
be full of sorrow, and humility, and so to be forgiven by penance. It is no
small part of wisdom, to know by whom chastity is given; and he is gone a
good piece of the way, toward the obteyning of it; who indeed belieueth, that
it comes not from the strength of man; but that it is the gift of our Lord.
This does he teach us, in his holy Gospel, saying, All are not capable of
this word, but they to whom it is given, by God. And although the remedies
already pointed out, for the obtaining of this happiness, be full of profit;
and We must both work and pray, for neither of them both alone, will serve the
turn.
that we must employ our selves thereupon; yet must that be with this
condition, that we place not our confidence in them; but let us devoutly pray
to God, which David did both practice, and advise, by saying; I did cast up
mine eyes to the mountayns, from whence my succor shall descend* my succor is
of our Lord, who made heaven and earth.

A good witness of this, may the glorious S. Hierome be; who relates of
himself such extreme afflictions, by temptation of the flesh, as reduced him
to so great extremity, that neither great fasting, nor large watching, nor
sleeping upon the ground, nor that his body was even half dead, could deliver
him from the same But then, as a man deprived entirely of all succor, and
finding no remedy in any remedy; he cast himself at the feet of Jesus Christ
our Lord; and made him He alludeth to S. Mary Magdalen.
a bath of his tears; and wiped them with the hair of his devout thoughts.
Yea, and sometimes it happened, that he spent whole days, and whole nights in
crying out after Christ. In God is a liberal rewarder of his servants, if
indeed they be his servants.
the end, he was heard; and God gave him the desire of his heart, with so great
serenity, and spiritual consolation; that it seemed to him, as if he were
assisting, among the quires of Angels. In this sort, does God relieve such as
call upon him with entire affection, and who remain faithful in the war,
till he send them succor.

And The inuocat^o^ of Saints, is very useful, and especially of the
immaculate Mother of God.
not only must we inuoke God to favor us, but the Saints also; who are
signified by the Mountains spoken of here by David; and especially must the
most pure Virgin be called more upon, then any of them. Importuning her with
services and prayers, that she will obtain this blessing for us. And these
services, she will receive, and these prayers will she gladly hear; as a true
lover of that, which we desire by her means. I have, in most particular
manner, seen great favors obtained, through the means of this ^lessed Lady,
by persons troubled with the temptations of sense; with The devotion to the
sacred, and immaculate conception of the Mother of God, is much, and most
worthily recommended by this Holy Author.
having offered some prayers to her, in memory of that purity, wherein she was
conceived without original sin; and of that virginal chastity, wherewith
she did conceive the Son of God. Take therefore this B. Lady, for thy
particular advocate; to the end, that, by her prayers, she may obtain and
conserve purity in thee. And consider, that if among the women of this world,
we find some, who are such friends to honesly; as that, to the uttermost of
their power, they assist and protect any creature, that will forsake the
baseness of the contrary vice, and walk on by the purity of chastity; how
much more, incomparably, is it to be hoped, of this most pure Virgin of
Virgins, that she will cast her eyes, and her ears upon the services, and
prayers, of such as desire to preserve chastity, which she so cordially loves?
Be therefore sure, that thou abound in desire of this blessing. Fail not of
confidence in Christ, nor of earnest prayer, nor other endeauours, as has
been said. For neither in his Saints, will there be wanting any love or care
to pray for us; nor mercy from heaven, for the granting of this gift, which
God only gives. And his pleasure is, that every one who receaueth it, should
know, that of him they have it; and they are to give him glory for the same,
since, in all reason, it is so due to him.

CHAP. XV.
How our Lord disposes not, equally of the gift of Chastity, unto all;
because to some, he gives it only in their souls; and of the great profit
which the temptations against Chastity, do bring, if they be well borne.
IT is to be considered with attention, that God does not equally impart this
gift to all; but with difference, according to the pleasure of his holy will.
For to some he gives, more, and to others less. To some he gives chastity in
the soul only; which is, A deliberate, and firm resolution, not to fall into
the contrary vice, for the whole world, but yet, together with this good
purpose, such an one, may have foul imaginations in his mind, and painful
temptations, in the sensitive part of his soul. Which, although they cannot
draw the reasonable part to consent to sin; yet do they afflict her, and give
her enough to do, in defending her self against their importunityes. This A
good picture, of the present case.
carries some resemblance to that of Moses, and the people. For he being in
the top of the mountain, in the company of God, the base people, were at the
foot thereof, adoring I dolls. But whosoever is in the state aforesaid, must
give great thanks to our Lord, for the favor that he has vouchsafed to his
soul; and he must patiently suffer the little obedience, which is performed to
him, by his sensitive part. For Note.
as, if only Eve had eaten of the forbidden tree, Original sin, had not been
committed, unless Adam also had consented, and eaten thereof; so whilst the
good purpose of not co^senting to any thing that is evil, does reign in the
superior part of the soul, it is not in the power of the sensitive part, (how
much soever it That is, how much soever it solicit us.
eat) to produce a mortal sin, since the That is, Reason.
man consents not to it; but it is displeasing to him, and he reprehe^deth it;
whereby thou see that thou art to be very careful, not to suffer these
imaginations, or motions, to remain in thee, but to drive them away. For he
that sees the danger wherein he is, by keeping that fire of hell within
himself, and by cherishing that serpent in his bosom (especially Note this,
and note it well.
if he have observed, at other times, that from thence, has used to grow a
consent to do that evil work, or to take pleasure in that vicious delight,)
such negligence is adjudged to be a mortal sin; since when he saw the
danger, he loved it, by not driving it away. But as long as there is a purpose
alive, of not consenting to the evil work, or to the evil delight; but to
resist (although weakly) when thou see the danger wherein thou art; thou
art to think, that our Lord did not suffer thee, to fall into mortal sin.
And because herein, it is very hard to give a clear sentence, without
particular information of him that suffers the temptation, it No security of
light, under God, without aduising with a good Ghostly Fath^^^
is fit to acquaint the learned Ghostly Father with it; and to take his
counsel. And if, notwithstanding all this, it offend any man to suffer so
continual war within himself; let him consider, that by the trouble of
temptations, the sins which he has committed are purged; and man, is
animated, toward a better serving of God, when he sees that he has more
need of him. And, (...) humble, by the importunity of the temptations of sense.
as madd as we are, we come to know, by our own weakness, and by seeing our
selves in so gro^^ hazard, and that we are, even upon the very horns of the
bull; as that, if the hand of God, did, never so little, abandone us, we should
fall into that fearful (...) of mortal sin. And till this weakness be,
even from the root thereof, acknowledged, and experimented by thee, the
temptations of sense will not give thee over; which are, as so many tempestuall
showers, and blows, that may cause thee to acknowledge, that this blessing is
not to remain in thee, unless it be granted thee, from above.

If thou were a faithful servant of God, the more thou were combatted, by thy
flesh, the more would thy soul encourage her self, to the conservation of
chastity; and so the temptations, should be as knockes which might help thee to
give thy purity, a deeper root; and thou should see the wonderful things
of God. For The great goodness of God shines fair in our wickedness, and his
strength in our weakness.
as, by occasion of our wickedness, the goodness of God appears the more; so
by the weakness of our flesh, he brings strength into our soul; the spirit
giving the No, to that which the flesh enticed it to; and the love of chastity,
does unite and fortify it self with new spirits, as often as the flesh
solliciteth the mind to put it away. Thus, by means of one troublesome, and
base contrary, God perfects another, which is noble, and precious; and this is
chastity.

Remember that a good war, is more to be desired then a wicked peace; and
that it is better for us, to labor that we may not consent, thereby to please
our Lord; then for the taking of a little bestiall pleasure (which, even as
soon as it is taken, leaves a Sinful pleasure, is a bitter pain disguised.
double sting behind it) to cast him into indignation, against us, whom we
ought, with all our powers, both to love, and please.

Call thou with humility, and with confidence, upon him who will not fail to
succor one, that fightes for his honor. And in the end, he will so ordain,
that thou shall come rich, out of this skirmish; and he will esteem of the
affliction, which thou have been in, as of a kind of martyrdom. For as the
Martyrs, chose rather to dye, then to deny their faith; so thou choosest to
suffer what thou suffer, rather then to violate his holy will. And he will
make thee a companion in glory with them, since thou art so here, in thy
afflictions. In Note.
the mean time, comfort thy self with having in thy heart so good a proof,
that thou love God; since for love of him, thou leauest that which thy flesh
likes.

CHAP. XVI.
How the gift of Chastity, is granted to some, not only in the interior part
of the soul, but in the sensual part also; and this, after two manners.
TO others, our Lord gives this blessing of Chastity, more abundantly. For not
only does he grant a detestation of these delights, to the soul; but even in
the sensitive part, and flesh, they have so much temper, as that they enjoy
great peace; and do scarce know what a painful temptation does mean. Now
this happens after two manners. Some have this peace and purity, even by
natural complexion; but others, by election, and favor of God. They who have
it by natural complexion, are not greatly to applaude themselves, for the
peace that they find; nor to contemn such, as they see are tempted. For The
greater the temptation is, the greater is the virtue, in ouercomming it.
the virtue of chastity, receives not her measure, from the having of this
peace; but from the mainteyning, in the soul, a firm purpose not to offend
our Lord, by the contrary sin. And if one being tempted with sense, make
good, the purpose of Chastity, in his soul, with greater strength then the
other, who is not called into that war; more chaste shall this person be, who
is assaulted; then the other, who is not solicited.

Neither yet, are those well complexioned persons to go out of countenance, by
saying, I do little, or I gain little by being chaste; But they must serve
themselves of their good inclination, and make choice of chastity, by discourse
of spirit, to please our Lord; to which they are invited, by their own
inclination. And, by this means, they shall serve God, with the superior
part of the soul, by a virtuous election; and with their sensitive part, by
their obedience, and good inclination.

Others A more noble kind of chastity.
there are, who not by natural inclination, but by favor of our Lord, are so
chaste, as that they feel in their soul, a most profound, internal
detestation, of that baseness; and in their se^siti^e part, so great
obedience, that it goes not dragging, after the commaundment of reason, but
obeys with gust, and speed; and they both, enjoy an entire peace. At this
excellent condition, did those Philosophers point, who said, That some men
there were, so excellent: and who had their minds, so well purged that not only
they did operate virtuously, without any war of their passions, but that,
even those passions, being so absolutely overcome, they forgot that they had
any; and that, not only their passions did not conquer, but not so much as
assault them.

But Few Philosophers, were ever chasts and never any was truly humble.
that which the Philosophers were talking of, and never had, (for without
grace, there is no true virtue) that, good Christians do possess, to whom God
is pleased to impart this perfect gift. Not purchased by their own force, but
granted by his strong, and celestial holy spirit, which is bestowed through
Christ Jesus our Lord, in resemblance of the same Lord, who kept the
entirenesse of Virginity, in mortal flesh. This heavenly spirit infuseth
perfect chastity into whom he will. And this he works in them, That as the
superior part of the soul, is with perfect obedience, most subject to God,
and from him receaueth powerful strength, and most excellent light, being so
perfectly united with him, and so ruled by his will, that he may say with the
Apostle, He 1. Cor. (...).
that comes close to God, is made one spirit with him; so this efficacy of
God, which infuseth force, and gives, to the sensitive part this disposition;
does procure, that (wholly forsaking bestiality, and that fierceness which
naturally it has) it may be obedient, and yield it self very subject to
reason. And although they are of different natures, the one being spiritual,
and the other sensual; yet does the sensitive draw so near to reason; and
takes the bridle into her mouth so well, that she goes tamed, and in order.
And howsoever it be not that thing, which reason is; yet does it proceed
according to reason; not hindering, but rather helping the spirit; as a
faithful wife, would do her husband.

And Even the reasonable part, of a carnal man's soul, grows to be, as it
were br^^tish; and so, even the sensitive part of a chist person, grows to
be, as it were reasonable.
as the souls of some, are so miserably given over to the flesh, that they
sail not by, any other star, then of their appetite (and though, the nature
thereof be spiritual, yet they abase themselves to the lamentable subjection
of their body (being so transformed as it were into flesh, that they grow
fleshly, and do seem in their will, and in their thoughts, to be but a mere
lump of flesh;) so the sensual part of those others, comes so close to
their reason, that the same does more, look like reason, then even the very
souls. of those others do. This The doctrine of Chast^^y, till the coming of
^^sus Ch^^st our Lord, was a great piece of newe^^ and the Sectaryes of this
age would now sayn put it out of ^ashion.
seems a hard thing to be believed; but in fine it is the work and guise of
God; and conceived especially (through Jesus Christ his only Son) in this time
of the Christian Church. Of which time, it was prophesyed* That the wolf and
the lamb, the Lion and the Bear, should feed together; because the
irrational affections of the sensitive part (which (as cruel beasts) would be
striving to vex and swallow up the soul) should be put in peace, by the gift
of Jesus Christ; and, having given over the war that they were in, should
live in amity. As Job says, The Job. 5.
beasts of the earth shallbe peaceable to thee; and thou shall keep
friendship, with the stones of the earth. And then also, is that fullfilled,
which is written in the Psalm, Thou man of one consent with me, and my guide,
and familiar acquaintance, who did A place of Holy Scripture, well pondered
and applied.
eat with me of that sweet food; and we went into the house of God, with one
consent. Which words, the interior man, does say to the exterior; holding
him in such subjection, that he styles him to be, of one soul: and of such
conformity to his will, that he says, they eat sweet food together, and go
jointly into the house of God. For they are in such a league, that if the
interior man, do feed upon chastity, or prayer, or that he fast, or watch, or
perform any other holy exercise, finding much sweetness in them; just so does
the exterior man also, and they are sauoury to him, like a sweet food.

But Note.
yet, do not thou conceive, that in this exile of ours, one shall arrive to so
great abundance of peace; as not to find sometimes, both in this, and other
particulers, some motions against reason. For excepting Christ our Redeemer,
and his sacred Mother; this prerogative was never granted to any. But thou art
to understand, that although there be of these motions, in persons to whom God
does grant this gift; yet are they not either so many in number, or such in
quality, as to put them to any great pain; but without engaging them to much
war, or taking from them true peace, they are overcome by them, with ease.
And A significant comparison.
if, in a City, we should see a couple of boys together by the ears, and
instantly after to shake hands; we should never say, That, for that short
little bickering, the peace of the City were broken, if it were maintained by
the rest of the people.

And since, even the Philosophers, confessed that there was such a state of
soul as this; without knowing what belonged to the power of the holy Ghost;
Let A fortiori.
it not be hard for a Christian, to confess it, and to desire it, for the
glory We proclaim the Divinity of Christ, by the conquest of our sensualityes.
of the redemption of Christ, and of his power; to which nothing is impossible.
Of whose coming, it was prophesied, That then, there was to be an abundance
of peace. And Isay says, It is as a river. And S. Paul says, That it
exceeds all understanding. And when the flesh shall be thus obedient, and
thus tempered, then shall we be far from hearing the voice of her Of sensuality
natural language; and out of danger also, of falling under that terrible
malediction, which God cast out against our first Father Adam, because he
bearkned to the voice of his wife. It rather belongs to us, to make her serve
us; and to hear our voice; and, (as we would do, to a byrd in cage) so to
teach her to speak our Of reason and religion.
language; and to make her learn it, since she can obey us, with so much
readynesse. By A sweet frai^e, of a long labor.
which long rooted obedience, which she yealdeth to reason, she grows so well
nourtured, that if she ask for any thing, it is not for the use of pleasure,
but for the relief of necessity. And that voice we may well hear as God
commanded Abraham to hear the voice of his wife Sara; who was then so aged,
and her body so weakened, and so mortifyed, that now it had no more the
superfluityes, which others of fewer years were subject to. And such a body as
that, we may trust the more; hearing that which it will say to us; though Note.
yet, we must not give it so much credit, as that the will thereof, may be a
law. But we must examine it with prudence of spirit, least that flesh of ours,
which seemed to be dead, do but only counterfeyte the being so; and least it do
so much the more dangerously draw us down, as we thought it had been more
faithful to us.

CHAP. XVII.
Wherein he begins to discourse of the languages, spoken by the Devil; and
how much we ought to fly them; and that one of them, is to make a man proud,
and so to bring him to great mischeife and error* and of the means, how to
avoid this language of Pride.
THE Languages of the Devil, are as many, as be the kinds of his malice, which
are innumerable. For as Christ, is the fountain of all the graces, which are
communicated to the souls of such, as by obedience grow subject to him; so is
the Devil, the Father of sin, and darkness; who by inciting, and
persuading his rotten sheep, induces them to wickedness, and lies, whereby
they may eternally perish. And because his deceites are so many, that the
spirit of our Lord alone, is able to discover them, we will only speak a few
words, remitting the rest to Christ, who is the true instructour of our souls.

The Devil is called by many names, to declare the mischeifes that are in him.
But amongst them all, let us speak of two; That of Dragon; and that of Lion. A
Dragon he is, as says S. Augustine, because he secretly does lie in ambush,
and lay his snares; A Lion, because he does openly persecute. The snare which
he lays to deceive us by, is first to puff us up with Vanity, and Falsehood;
and afterward to pull us down, by giving us a real, and a miserable fall. He
puffes us up, with thoughts, which incline us to an estimation of our selves,
and so he makes us fall into pride. And for as much as he knows by
experience, that this sin is so The power which pride has to do mischeife.
great, that it sufficed to make himself, of an Angel, a Devil; he labors
all he can, to make us partakers with him therein; to the end that we may also
partake with him, in the torment, that he is subject to. Full well he knows,
how displeasing, Pride is to God; and that it serves the turn to make
unprofitable, whatsoever a man has, how good soever it seem. And he labors
so hard to sow this vile seed in our soul, that Mark the craft of the Devil,
and learn to ^^y him.
he will not stick many times to speak truth; and to give good counsel; and
feelinges of devotion; only to induce us thereby, to pride; making small
account of what he loses, in that, one do some one good work; that so he may
gain him to himself, in gross; and others also, who follow him, by the sin
of pride. For as a King goes accompanied with muoh people, so does pride with
many other sins. The scripture says; The beginning of all wickedness is
pride; and he that has that, shall be full of maledictions; That is to say, both
of sins, and punishments.

We read of a solirary person, to whom the Devil appeared for a long time, in
the figure of an Angel of God; and gave him many revelations; and every night,
made his cell resplendent, as if there had been some great light or lamp. But
at the end of all this, he persuaded with him, to kill his own son; that so
he might be equal in merit, to the Patriarch Abraham* Which the solitary
person (being deceived) prepared to put in execution; but that the son, who
had suspicion thereof, fled away. To another also, he appeared in figure of an
Angel; and for a long time, told him many truths, thereby to gain credit with
him; and afterward he told him a great lie, against faith; which the other,
being deceived, did believe. So A fea^ful example.
also do we yet read of another, whom (after he had lived fifty years, in very
singular abstinence, and with more strait observation of solitude then was
observed, by any of the rest in the wilderness) the devil, in form of an
Angel did persuade, that he should cast himself into a deep well, that so he
might know by experience, That neither that, nor any other thing, could do
hurt, to one that had served God, so long, and so well, as he had done. All
which he believed, and put the same in execution. And being, with much
difficulty taken out of the well, even half dead; and being advised by those
other holy old men of the wilderness, that he should repent himself of so
great a sin (being suggested by an illusion of the Devil,) he would not
believe, or do as they required him. And that which is worse, (although indeed
he died the third day after) so deeply had that deceit conuayed it self into
his heart, as that (notwithstanding he even saw himself dye, by reason of that
fall) he still, nevertheless believed, that it had been a reuclation of an
Angel of God.

O Be not high minded, but fear.
how necessary is it, for such as hau^ even profited in virtue, that they live
with a holy fear of themselves; as men, who although they may make conjecture,
that they are well with God, yet We may have great hope, but no certainty of
being in the state of grace.
can they have no certainty thereof. Nor do they know, whether they be worthy
of lou^ or hate, even at the present time; and much less what they are to be
in the rest of the life which they will lead. And especially they ought to be
very careful; not to believe themselves. Pride deserves to be deceived. And
if as I have related to you the deceites of men in former times, I should also
recounte, such as have happened in these days of ours; neither would they be
written in a small volume, nor could thou read them, without much labor. On
the one side, the case stands thus, according to that which we may judge, That
See the great reason, that we have, both to love God, and to fear him.
God does rain upon the hearts of many, the water of particular mercyes; in
virtue whereof, they bring forth many fruits, which even to the exterior are
good; but the same men, have a kind of interior communication with our Lord,
and that so familiar, that it can hardly be believed. On the other side, we
have also experience, that by the permission of God, the Devil, does in these
times, use particular diligence, for the deceauing (by false motions, and false
speeches, both interior and exterior, and by appearing with false light to
the understanding) of such as are proud, and addicted to their own opinion;
with conceit that it is the will of God. And so also, does he suffer the Devil
to exercise, by diverse ways, such, as serve him, in humility. And therefore in
these times, when it seems, that Satan is broken loose (as S. John says) it
is nec^ssary for them that serve God, to use double diligence; that they may
not easily believe such things as those; and to procure profound humility, and
holy fear, that God may not permit them to be deceived. They must also
endeavor with speed, to give account of what they find, and feel in
themselves, unto their Prelates, and Superiors, who may instruct them in the
truth.

The Prophet says, That under the tongue of wicked persons is the poison of
vipers; and how much more then, will it be, in the language of the Devil. who
is the most wicked thing, of all things, that are wicked. And if, he shall
puff us up, by occasion of the virtues, that we may have, we are to humble our
selves; and to consider the ill which we daily do; and the sins which we have
committed. Which were so many, as that if our Lord, had not been close at
hand; and had not come into that way, wherein we did walk, with so much desire
to forsake him (as he did to S. Paul) we should have been multiplying our
wickedness, to such a proportion, as that, even the torments of hell, would have
been too little for our punishment.

O An excellent admiration of Gods mercy.
thou Abyssus, and even bottomless pit of mercy; and what could move thee, to
cry out to our heart, even from heaven; and to say, Why do thou persecute me,
with thy ill life? By which words, thou did pull down our pride; and did
make us profitably fear, and tremble; that with grief, for having offended
thee, and with desire of pleasing thee, we might say, O Lord what will thou
have me do? And it is thy pleasure, O Lord, that we should expect the remedy of
these our miseryes, from thee; by means of the medicine of thy word, and They
be the Sacraments, which convey the blood of our Lord Jesus, to our souls; and
they are the true Priests of the true Catholic Church, who may minister them.
of thy sacraments, which the Priests of thy Church dispense. And thou
command us to repair to them, for the same, as S. Paul did, to thy servant
Ananias. Thus do we know full well, that our perdition came from our selves; and
our remedy from thee. And we confess, that it was thy infinite goodness, which
made thee call to thy self, such as had turned their backs toward thee; and
to remember them that had forgotten thee; and to be showing favors to them,
that had deserved torments; taking them to thy self for sons, who had been
so wicked slaves; and lodging thine own royal person in them, who formerly had
been so stinking, and even the very sinkes of uncleanness.

These sins which then we committed, were ours; and if yet, we be any thing
less wicked, it is by God, and in God, that we are so. As the Apostle says,
You Philip.
once were darkness, but now you are light, in our Lord. It is therefore
necessary for us, to remember the miserable state, in which by our fault, we
placed our selves; if we will be secure, in that happy state, wherein now, we
are lodged by the mercy of God. Assuring our selves, as of a most certain
truth, That yet, we should do those very things which formerly we did, if the
powerful, and pitiful hand of God, did retire it self from us. And if we
considered the many dangers, to which we are subject through our frailty, we
would not presume to rejoice outright, in the grace which we have at the
present, through the fear of those sins, which we may commit, in the future.
And we should know, how wholesome a counsel that is, of the holy Scripture,
Blessed Psalm. 111.
is the man, who is ever fearful. And again, Work on^ your Philip. 2.
salvation with fear, and trembling. And yet again, Let 1. Cor. 10.
him that stands, take heed, that he do not fall.

A Go on in this excellent contemplation, with great attention
sin that is committed, will cost sighs before it be pardoned; and a sin
that may be committed, must cost fear, that we may be preserved from it; as it
is excellently figured, by the fear, which Jacob, had of Esau, when he came
from Mesopotamia, though God himself had bid him come. A great joy was that,
which the children of Israel conceived; and devout songs they were, which
they sung then to God, when he wrought so great a miracle with them, as to make
them pass through the sea, without once being wetshod. And it seemed to them
(since they had not perished, in so great a danger) that nothing could be able
to pull them down; nor to impeach their ariual in that Land which God had
promised. But the experience fell out to be contrary. For after they had
received that great favor from God; certain tentations, and proofs did
follow; wherein they, were found weak, and impatient to endure the touch and
trial, who had formely been so devout, and cheerful, upon their passage
through the sea. And Note.
because no soul shall wear the crown which is promised by God, but such as
are found to be faithful, in the probations which he is ploased to send; those
others, who were not such, could never reach to the Land of Canaan; but instead
of the life which was promised, they were punished, in the desert, with death.

Who Note the great reason, which thou have to be humble, whosoever thou be.
will therefore now, be so far, from shooting at the mark, as, whether he
behold his life past, or that which yet remains, in spending, to presume to
toss up the head, and to take pride in himself; since in that part which is
past, he did so miserably fall; and in that which is to come, he is subject to
so many fears of doing the like. And An excellent description of a man, who is
truly virtuous; for he who is not thus, is but a counters fait.
if he knew, and did acknowledge this truth, as he ought, That all good things
come from God; he would see, that to receive gu^ftes from God, is no reason for
making him who has the same, to take in, the vain snuff of pride; but rather
to abase himself as a person who is bound to the performance of more
gratitude, and greater service. And when he considers, that together, with
the increase of favors, the account which he is to make for them, does also
increase, as the Gospel says; he finds, that they are as a heavy burden,
which makes him fetch many a deep sigh, and to be fuller, then he was before,
of humility, and care.

And because our leuity is so great; and this secret pride, is so conveyed
into the very bones of us; that no force of man is sufficient to cleanse us
wholly from this sin; we must beg the gift of God; importunately beseeching
him, that he will not suffer us to fall into so great a treason; as that we
should rob him of the honor, which for all things that are good, is due to
him. The pestilencies of the body, are cured by fasting; and of the soul, by
prayer. Therefore he, who finds himself subject to this plague of the soul,
must pray with all possible diligence, and perseverance; and present himself,
in the high presence of God; beseeching him, that he will open his eyes, and
make him truly know, what God is, and what himself is; that neither he may
impute any thing that is evil to God; nor ascribe any thing that is good, to
himself. And so he shall be far from harkening to this false Language of the
proud Devil; who, by means of proper estimation, would feign beguile us. But
hearken thou to the truth of God, which says; The Believe this truth, if thou
have a mind to be happy.
true honor and estimation of a creature, does not consist in it self, but in
receiving favor, and in being esteemed, and loved by the Creator. And because
I shall afterward speak more at large of this matter, when I discourse, Of the
knowledge of a man's self, I will say no more of it for the present.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of another suare all contrary to the former, which is Despair, whereby the
Devil procures to conquer Man; and how we shall carry our selves against him.
ANOTHER invention wholly contrary to the former, is used by the Devil; which
is not by blowing up the heart, but by beating it down, and by dismaying it so
far, as thereby to drive it upon despair. He contriueth this, by bringing to
memory, the sins which a man has committed; and by aggravating them as much
as may be; that so being frighted, he may fall afflicted, as under the weight
of a heavy burden, without hope of help. Thus did he proceed with Judas; from
This is the usual trick of the Devil.
whose sight he took the grieuousnesse of the sin, when he was to commit it;
but afterward he represented to his mind, what a huge crime it was, to have
sold his master; and for so mean a price; and to such a death. And thus he
blinded his eyes by the greatenesse of the sin, and made him fast in the
snare, and from thence he carried him into hell.

So that, as he blinds some by their good works, letting them see the same,
and removing their sins out of sight, (that so he may deceive them through
pride) so, from others, he hides the memory of the mercy of God, and the good
deeds, which, by his grace, they have performed: and he bringes their sins
into their remembrance, and so pulls them down by desperation. But A most
profitable advice.
as the remedy of the former was, That when he would vainly hoyse us up into
the air, we were to fasten our selves to the earth; not considering our
peacockes feathers, but the durty feet of our sins, which we had committed,
or should commit, if it were not for the help of God; so in this other deceit,
our remedy must be, to transfe^re our eyes, from our sins, and to lodge them
upon the mercy of God; and upon the good deeds, wherein, by his grace, we have
employed our selves. For when our sins do strive to make us despair, it
will be very well done, to call the good deeds to mind which we have done, or do
perform; according to the example which we see in Job, and King E^echias. But
Note this, for it is a most comfortable, and withal a most safe doctrine.
this must not be done, for the placing of confidence in our own good works,
in as much as they are ours; (for fear, that least, when we are flying from
one snare, we fall into another) but to the end, that we may hope, in the mercy
of God; that since he did us so much favor, as to make us, by his grace, to do
well, he will reward it in us, yea even to a cup of cold water, which we gave
for his sake. And that, for as much as he has placed us, in the course of
doing him service, he will not leave us, in the half way; since his works
are perfect, as himself is; and it was a greater matter for him, to draw us
formerly out of emnity against him, then to conserve us now, in amity with him.

This Philip. 1.
S Paul does teach us, saying, If when we were enemies, we were made friends
with God, by the death of his Son; much more, now that we are made friends
shall we be saved in his life. It is most certain, that since his death was of
power to raise the dead; his life will be as able, to preserve life, in them
that live. If he loved us when we loved him not, he will not vnloue us, since
now we love him. So that we may presume to say, with Philip. 1.
S. Paul, That he, who began this good work in us, will continue it, even to
the day of Jesus Christ. And if the Devil procure to trouble us, by laying
those sins before us, which we have committed; let us consider, that he is
neither the party offended; nor yet the judge, who is to give any sentence
concerning us. It is God whom we offended, when we sinned; and he it is, that
must judge, both men and Devils. Therefore let not that trouble us, which this
accuser does object against us; but let us be comforted, in that he, who is the
true judge, does pardon, and absolve us, by God absolueth us from our sins by
means of the sacraments which are ministered by his true Priests.
means of Penance, and of his Priests, and Sacraments.

This is that, which Romans ^.
S Paul says; If God be for us, who shallbe against us; he that pardoned not
his own Son, but delivered him up for us. And how then shall it be possible,
that he, having given us his Son, shall not, with him, have given us all
things? Who shallbe able to accuse the elect of God? It is God that
iustifyeth, who shall condemn? All this says S. Paul And this, being
considered, ought to give us great strength of heart; and to hope well for that
which is to come; since we have such tokens, for what is past. Nor let us be
frighted by our sins, since the eternal Father did punish his only Son for
them; that so man might have his pardon (who deserved to be chastized) if he
would dispose himself to sue it out. And since he is pleased to forgive us,
what can the Devil get, by crying out, in demand of Justice. The Justice due
for all the sins of the world, was once done, upon the Cross; and it fell
upon the innocent Lamb, Jesus Christ our Lord; that so every sinful person,
that would, might approach to him; and might enjoy the benefit, of hi,
redemption, when Not by says alone, but accompanied, with P^un^nce, shall we
be saved, if we have sinned.
he should be pardoned, by doing penance.

What kind of Justice would it therefore be to punish the sins of a penitent
man, a second time in hell; they having been sufficiently punished once
before, upon the person of Jesus Christ our Lord? I say punished with hell (for
I speak of a penitent, who is already baptized; and who has now (by means of
the Sacrament of penance) ^eceaned pardon, and grace, which was lost) because,
to such a one, the punishment of hell, which is eternal, is changed into
temporal; which is either satisfied in this life with good works, or in They
who have not satisfied in this life, nor will believe a Purgatory where they
may satisfy in the next, shallbe ^a^e, to do it in Hell.
Purgatory, by suffering those other pains. Yet Note this, and thereby learn
to answer the objection which is made, by Protesta^^s
let no man conceive, that the not taking totally away the pain, proceeds
from any want in the redemption of our Lord; whose virtue is, and works in
the Sacraments, Psalm. 129.
For his redemption is abundant, as David says; but this happens, by the
fault of the penitent, who wanted disposition to receive more. And such grief,
and shame he may have for his sins; that he may rise from the feet of his
Confessor, fully pardoned as well of all the pain, as of all the guilt; no
less then if he had then received holy Bapti^me; For in Baptism all that, is
taken away, in them who are, but even moderatly disposed, to the receiving of
it.

Let all men know, that the Oil which our great Elizaus, Jesus Christ our
Lord, did give us, (when he gave us his passion; and which does work in his
most precious The benefit of the Passion of our Lord Jesus, is conveyed to our
souls by the Sacraments of the Holy Church.
sacraments) is that we may, thereby, be able to pay all our debts; and to live
here, in the life of grace, and afterward in that, of Glory. But it is
necessary, that like the other Widow, we do walk on, maintayning good
dispositions in our selves; according to which every one shallbe sure to
receive the effect of his sacred passion; which in it self, is most
sufficient, yea and superaboundant.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the much which God the Father gave us, in giving us Jesus Christ, our Lord;
and how thankful we ought to be, and to help our selves by this favor; and
to strengthen our selves thereby, for the excluding of all desperation,
wherewith the Dinell is wont to assault us.
MVCH reason has God to complain and his Preachers to reprove men, for being
so forgetful of this benefit, which is so excellent as that, for it, we should
give thanks to God, day and night. For as S. John says, So God loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end that every one who
belieueth in him, and loves him, may not perish, but have eternal life. All
other blessings, are locked up in this; as the less in the greater, and as the
effect in the cause. It is a plain case, that he, who gave the sacrifice
against sin, did give pardon to those sins; for as much as concerned him; and
to whom our Lord gave that, he also gave command over them. And in The great
reason of our comfort.
fine, he that gave us his Son, and such a Son, and so given, and borne for
us; will deny us nothing, that is necessary. And he that has not what is fit,
let him blame himself; for to complain of God, he has no reason. For the
understanding heerof, S. Paul says thus: He that gave us his son, will he
not give us all things together with him? Nay he said more, He has already
given us all things with him; for, in as much as concerns the part of God,
all is already given; pardon, grace, and heaven.

O Lay up these considerations, at thy heart.
you men, why do you loose such happiness; and why are you ungrateful to such
a lover, and for such a benefit? And why are you slothful in the preparation
of your selves to receive it? Worthy it were, of all reprehension; that a man
should go naked up and down, half dead with hungar, and full of miseries,
and if when another, had given him great legacies by his will, whereby he might
pay his debtes, and depart from his wantes, and live at ease, he should yet
remain without enjoying all this happiness, rather then travel two or three
leagues, for the prouinge of that will. Our redemption was made so copiously,
that although Gods forgiving the offenses which men commit against him, be a
blessing which exceedes all humane conceit; yet the payment which is made by
the passion, and death of Christ our Lord, does exceed the debt of man in
value, much more then the highest part of heaven, does the lowest part of the
earth, as S. Augustine says.

It This comparison in full of co^sort to us sinners.
was due to sinful man, that he should be fettered, torn, and killed; and can
you find in your hearts to think, that these debtes are not well paid, by the
scourges, torments, and death, of a man, who was not only a just man, but man,
and God. An inexplicable favor it is, that God does adopt for his sons, the
sons of men; who are but as so many little worms of earth. But to the end
that we might not doubt of this favor, it is seconded (according to Io^n. 1.
S. John) with another, and a greater; For he says, The word of God, is made
flesh. As if he had thus expressed himself; you may not fail, to believe,
that by spiritual adoption, men are borne of God; for in proof of this
wonder, hearken here to a greater; which is, That the son of God (...) made
man, and the son of a woman. So Note.
also is it a wonderful thing, that a miserable little thing called man, made
of earth, should arrive to heaven, en^oying God, and accompanying the Angels
therein, with unspeakable glory. But yet a far greater matter was it, that
God should be placed in the torment, and ignominy of a Cross; and that he
should dye, between a couple of murdering thieves. Whereby the divine
justice, was so entirely satisfied, (both by reason of the much that our Lord
did suffer, and chiefly, because he that suffered it, was God) as that he both
pardoned that which was past, and does further power his benedictions upon us
for the future. But yet so, as that our barrenness must bring forth the fruit
of good life, worthy of heaven; which is figured by the Son, who was granted
to Genesis 18.
Sara, when she was old, and barren. For the calfe which was sodden in the
house of Abraham, (this being Christ Jesus crucified, by the people who The
^ace of the jews.
descended from Abraham) was of so much gust to God; that of wrathful he grew
calm thereby; and curses were exchanged into blessings. Because he received a
certain thing, which contented him more, the^^ all the sins of the whole
world could displease him.

Why then, O man, do thou despair, having, for remedy of thy miseries, and
for payment of thy debtes, God himself, humaned, who is of infinite merit; and
who, by dying, put our sins to death; much better then the Iud. 16.
Philistines were made to dye by the death of Sampson. And How infinitely good,
is God.
although thou have committed as many sins, as the very Devil himself, (who
thus would draw thee into despair) thou must take heart in Christ, who is That
lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. Of whom it was
prophesied, That be would cast, and, as it were, shoot, all our sins, into
the lowest bottom of the sea; and that he was to be anointed the holy of
holies; And that sin should have an end; and then, that Justice should reign
for ever. If then our sins be removed, be drowned, and be dead; what cause
can there be, that such vveake and defeated enemies, should overcome, and cast
thee upon despair?

CHAP. XX.
Of some means, which the Devil uses against the remedy that is spoken of,
whereby to fright us; and how for this, we must not fainte; but animate our
selves the more, considering the infinite mercy of our Lord.
BUT I already hear, O Man, that which thy weakness answeareth to what is
said. What A shrewd objection, but mark the answer, for it satisfyeth.
does it profit thee (say thou), that Christ dyed for thy sins, if the
pardon thereof, be not applied to thee? And though Christ dyed for all men, yet
many of them are in hell; not through any fault of his redemption, which is
abundant, but for want of their disposition to receive it. From hence therefore
grows thy despair. To this I answer; That although it be true which thou
say, yet do thou not serve thy self well thereof. S Bernard tells us,
that toward 2 having the testimony of a good conscience, which may give a man
the joy of a good hope; it suffices not, to be^eeu^ in general, That sins
are pardoned by the death of Christ; but it is also necessary, to have
confidence and good conjectures, that this pardon is applied in particular to
such a man, by means of Contrition, Conse^^ie and S^^^ofaction.
those dispositions, which the Church does teach. For though he believe the
first part, he may yet despair; but that he cannot do, if he believe the
second; for how can he despair, if he live in hopes But Behold the solution.
indeed, thou ought to consider, that it is high reason, that when thou
see even those bowels of the heavenly Father all open, for the giving to
thee his son, as he gave him; and seeing that he was at such cost therein,
and that the divine Lamb is already dead, to the end that thou may feed upon
him, and not dye; thou art to drive from thee, all pusillanimity and sloth;
and procure to serve thy self of this Redemption, with confidence that God will
help thee to it. And since, for thy being pardoned, there is no cause why
Christ should put himself to new pains, or to suffer hereafter more, or
less, or to dye for thee any more; why should thou think it, to be any
desire of his, that since he has been at the charge of such a feast, there
should be want of guests to sit thereat. But it is far from this; nor is it his
will, That the sinner should dye, but that he should be converted, and live.
And to the end that he might do so, himself left his life upon the Cross. And
do not thou believe, that it is needful for thee, toward the enjoying of
this Redemption, to do any impossible thing; yea or even so hard, as that thou
should despair to go through with it, even when thou art considering thy
weakness. Send but one cordial sigh to God, for having offended such a Father,
and have thou a purpose of amendment; and manifest thy sins to a Priest, who
may absolve thee; and the ears, even of thy flesh, and blood shall, for thy It
is a picture in little, of the joys of heaven, which no man knows, but he
that feels th^^^.
greater consolation, hear the sentence which is given, upon the ending of thy
suite. Which shall certify thee in this manner, I absolve thee from all thy
sins, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

And Note.
although it should seem to thee, that thy grief for thy sins were not so
complete as it ought to be; and that therefore, thou art afraid of thy self;
yet art thou not So that yet thou be sorrv, (though imperfectly) for that which
is past; and have a firm purpose to avoid the like in time to come.
to be afflicted thereat; because the desire which our Lord has of thy
salvation is so great, that he supplyeth our wants, by the privilege which he
gave his Sacrament; which makes a man, of attrite, contrite. And Note.
yet again, if it seem to thee that thou art not able to do even so much, I
tell thee once for all, that thou must not presume to do it of thy self; but
call upon thy heavenly Father; and beseech him by his Son Christ Jesus, that
he will help thee, both to grieve for thy life past; and to purpose an
amendment for the time to come; and to confess thy self well, and lastly for
all that, whereof thou have need. And Deus, cutus n^t^^a bonita^^ cutus
Voluntas, potentia. cu^us opus, mis^r^ or d^^ (...) S. Leo.
he is of such a nature, as that there is no cause, why, we should expect any
other thing at his hands, then sweetness and succor since he, who gives the
pardon, is the same, who does first inspire us, with a disposition to demand
it. And if, withal this, thou do not find comfort even after having heard the
sentence of absolution; yet In the service of God, a man must have a patient,
and noble courage.
be not thou dismayed thereat; nor give over that, which thou have begun. For
if in one confession, thou had no comfort, thou shall be sure of it in
others; and that shallbe fullfilled in thee, which was said by that penitent
King Psalm. ^0.
David, Thou shall give joy, and comfort to mine ears; and my bones which are
humbled, shall rejoice.

It is certainly so, that although the words of sacramental absolution, do
not give a man such a certainty of pardon, as that he can believe Not as an
article of Faith.
it by faith, or know it by express evidence; yet do they give such repose and
consolation, as wherewith the powers of our soul may be recreated, which by
sin were humbled, and oppressed. And let no man give over to ask pardon; for
if he persist in his desire, the Father of mercyes will go out to meet his
prodigal son; and will give him pardon, and will cloth him with the
heavenly garment of grace; and he will take pleasure to see him so recovered by
penance, who was lost by sin. Nor Note.
let any man think it to be incredible, that God should live with sinners,
under the laws of so great tenderness, and sweetness, which are penned by his
own goodness, and most faithful love; since he executed laws of so great
rigor, upon his Son, as that (loving him as he loved himself; and being the
person that he was; and paying for the iniquity but of others) he did not yet
acquit him, of any one only sin, for which his justice was to be satisfied.
And for this reason, as A comparison which is both significa^t, and sweet.
a Lion (who how fierce soever he be, if he yet be satisfied and fully fed,
does no harm to inferior creatures, which yet he would swallow up, if he were
hungry) so the justice of God, being satisfied with that which was paid by
Jesus Christ, that di^ine lamb he does them no hurt, whom he finds ^o
approach toward him, that so they may be incorporated to his body; nor does he
hinder his mercy from working in them, according to his custom. And from hence
it grows, that instead of being an angry judge to us, he becomes a Father
full of pa^ty.

CHAP. XXI.
He proceeds in the discourse of Gods mercy, which he shows to them that
cordially ask pardon. This is a consideration, of power to conquer all
Despair.
A Cup What a hideous thing sin is, if it be truly considered.
of dangerous poison does he drink who commits sin. A most deformed and
terrible face it has, in the eyes of such as truly consider of it; and very
able to afright any man, though he be never so stout; if he pause and consider
with a lively feeling, what that is, which he has done thereby; and against
whom he has done it; and the promises of happynes which he has lost, and the
threats of misery that hang over his head. David, beholding these things,
does cry out, though he were full of courage, My heart has failed me.

But this so great misery, is no^ left by God, without remedy, as has been
said. And to the end that he, who needs remedy, may have it; I will declare
somewhat of the greatness of the mercy of God, which he uses toward sinners,
that ask his pardon. The Devil will not fail to play his part, and will
fright thee, as has been said, by representing the greatness of thy sins. But
make thou no answer; only turn thy self to God, and say, For thy names sake
O Lord, pardon my sin, A strange reason, but so good is God, as that it
works upon him.
for it is great. And if God will give thee grace to find out the mystery of
these words; certainly thou will be far from despair, how much soever thou
have sinned. Did Be sure to mark this well.
thou ever see, or hear of any Tribunal of a judge, where a man, being
accused of many, and grievous crimes, (with intention that he might be
condemned and punished, according to his demerit) himself should confess his
fault, and admit of the accusation; and should take, for the means of his
pardon, the confession it self, of that very thing, which the accuser did so
much exaggerate, and whereby he labored so to condemn him? So as, thou art to
make account, that the guilty person speaks thus; O Lord, I grant all, and I
confess that I have sinned much; but thou shall pardon me for the honor of
thy name. And this course takes effect with him, both in respect of God, and
in regard of himself.

Our A consideration of vnspeable comfort for us.
Lord God, has both justice and mercy; and when he beholds our faults with
justice, they provoke him to wrath; and the more sins we have committed, we
urge him to inflict the greater punishment. But again, when he looks upon
our sins with mercy, they move him not to anger, but to compassion; because
No^e.
he does not consider them, as an offense of his, but as a misery of ours. And
as there cannot happen to us, a thing that hurts us so much as sin; so also
is there not to be found, so fit an object for his mercy to work upon, as the
same sin; if it be considered, as I have said. And so much more as we have
sinned, so much more hurt have we done our selves; and so much more do we
provoke to mercy, the heart which has it. and which is disposed to use it; as
is the heart of our merciful Lord, who is the true shewer of mercies.

Know therefore now, that the men who have sinned much, do carry themselves in
one of these two manners. Some, Obstinate, and insolent, despayring sinners.
despayring of remedy like Cain, do turn their backs to God, and deliver
themselves over, (as S Paul says) to all filthynesse, and sin; and their
hearts do harden daily, more, and more, against all goodness. So far, at
that, even when they are in the deep bottom of iniquity, it never troubles
them; but they take pride therein; and so much more is it fit to have
compassion of them, as they have none of themselves. The thing which happens
to these men, is that, whereof the scripture speaks; With the hard heart, it
shall go ill, in the latter end. And woe be to him, who is to feel this ill;
for it were better for him, that he had never been borne.

There The sinner, who is penitent.
are others, who having committed many sins, do, by the help of God, return
to themselves; and wounding their heart with grief, and being full of
confusion, and shame, do humble themselves before the mercy of God; and that,
with so much more humility, and cordial sorrow, as their sins have been
greater and more. And because God does lodge his eyes, upon an humbled and
contrite heart; and when men are humbled, he gives them grace; more grace he
gives, to such as he finds more humbled; and the occasion thereof, was the
having committed so many sins, which they confess, and bewail, but without
despair. And they do thus allege, and beg before the mercy of God, That
since their misery, and ruin is very great, his mercy may be also plentiful,
and very great. Thus said David, Have mercy, O Lord, upon me, according to thy
great mercy. Now because God, as has been said, looks with eyes of mercy upon
the sinner, who is contrite, and humbled. there, does he give a greater pardon,
and a larger grace, then where there were not so many sins, nor so much
humiliation. Fulsilling that, which S. Paul Romans ^^
has said* That where sin abounded, grace did superabound, and thus a man's
greater fall, does result to the greater praise of God; since he gives him
greater pardon, and more grace.

And A most sovereign remedy against despair.
where now is he, who understanding this, will despair, for being subject to
many debtes; since he sees, that the liberality and bounty of our Lord, is
more discovered, and more glorified, in making such a large and general
release: and that God, takes it as a point of honor to his Name, to pardon,
and to pardon much. Nay knowing that it is but justice, that our Lord, and his
Name should be glorified, we will say without despair, yea and not without
great confidence. For thy name O Lord, thou shall pardon my sin, even because
it is great.

But Note.
Now, the glory which God draws from hence, does no way grow from this sin
of ours; for sin, is, of it self, a high contempt, and a great irreuerence
against God, See how artificial the deer goodness of God is, to wicked mankind.
but this proceeds, from his omnipotent divine bounty; which draws good out
of evil; and procures, that his enemies may serve him, by giving matter for
his friends to praise him. Call to mind, that when the people of God remained
in Egypt, men found themselves in great affliction; and they did but expect
their death, by the hands of their enemies, who came close upon them. Yet
Moses said to them; Fear A place of Holy Scripture divinely pondered.
nothing; for these Egyptians shall perish, and you shall never see them more.
And when the sea had drowned them, and cast them up upon the shore, the
children of Israel made a stand, to look upon them. And although they saw
them, yet they saw them dead, and consequently, without fear of seeing them, as
if they had seen them no more. Hereby they took occasion to give glory to him
that slew them; and they said, Let us singe unto our Lord, for he has been
gloriously magnifyed; and he has drowned both horse, and horsemen in the sea.

All this is a figure, of that strait affliction, wherein our sins do put
us; representing themselves unto our souls, as enemies of mighty strength, who
are about to kill, and swallow us up. But the word of God, (being full of all
reason to make us hope) does give us heart, by requiring that we despair not;
and that we turn not back upon the vices of Egypt; but that (proceeding in the
good purpose, whereby we began to walk, in the way of God) we should keep on
foot; being comforted in his assistance; to the end that we may see his
wonders. Which are, that in that sea of his mercy, and in the crimson blood of
Jesus Christ, his Son, our sins are drowned; and so also, is the Devil,
who came mounted upon them, like a Cauallier, that so, neither he, not they may
do us hurt. But A circumsta^ce, excellently applied.
rather we remembering them (although they grieve us (as it is fit they should)
they may yet give us occasion, to render thanks, and glory to our Lord God,
for having been such a father of pity in pardoning us; and of supreme
wisdom in drawing good out of our evil, by giving true death, to sin which
killed us. And that which remains thereof in us alive (which is the memory of
having committed it) does but serve, that his elect may grow the better by it,
and become the exalters of his honor.

CHAP. XXII.
Where he prosecutes the treaty of the Mercy of God, which he uses toward us;
his Majesty ouercomming our enemies, after an admirable manner.
THIS admirable maister-piece of Gods hand which drives treacle out of poison,
against the very poison it self; and draws the destruction of sin, out of
the very sin; does spring, and carry a resemblance to another piece of
prowess which the most High has wrought; not less, but greater, both then
that other, and then all the rest. This was, the work of the Incarnation, and
Passion. Wherein, God was not pleased to fight, with the weapons of the
greatness of his majesty; but, by taking those of our weakness; and apparailing
himself with human flesh; which howsoever it were free from all sin, it did
yet resemble the flesh of sinners; for as much as it was subject to that pain,
and death, which sin had brought into the world. And by this pain, and
death, which (without their being his due) he took upon him, he overcame, and
destroyed, our sin; and they being destroyed, both pain and death (which
entered in by their means) were destroyed also. As A noble consideration, and a
l^uely comparison.
if a man should set the body of a tree on fire, by the branches of the same
tree; and so should burn up, both the tree, and the branches.

How The infinitenes of our obligation to our Lord Jesus.
greatly, O Lord, is thy glory magnified; and with how much reason, are we to
sing, and to praise thee, more then they praised Danid, for going into the
field against Golias; who put the people of God into straites, when there was
none that could overcome, yea, or who had the courage to set upon him. But
thou, O Lord, our King, and our honor; dissembling (as it were) the weapons of
thy Omnipotency, and divine life, which thou have, as thou art God; did fight
with him, by taking that stafle of the Cross into thy hand; and in thy most
holy body, five stones, which were the five wounds, and so thou did ouercom,
and kill him. And although the stones were five, yet one of them, had been
enough, for the victory. For if thou had endured less then what thou did
endure, there would yet have been merit enough, for our Redemption. But Note.
thy pleasure was, O Lord, that our redemption should be copious, and
superaboundant. That so, weak persons might be comforted, and such as were
negligent, inflamed; by seeing the excessive love, wherewith thou did suffer
for us, and kill our sins; being figured in the person of Golias; whom^ David
slew, not with any sword, which he might have carried of his own, but by the
very sword of the Giant; and so the victory became more glorious, and the enemy
was made subject to more dishonor.

Much The infinite wisdom, which did accompany, the i^ finne mercy of God.
honor had our Lord gained, if with his own weapons of life, and divine Omni
potency, he had fought against our sins and death, and had so defeated them.
But much more did he gain, in ouercomming them, without so much as drawing his
sword; Nay, by taking the same sword (that is, the effect of sin, which is
pain and death he did in flesh condemn sin; offering his flesh to be made
subject to pain, and such hard usage, as if it had been the flesh of a
sinner; being indeed, both of a just man, and of God. That so, by this means,
as S. Paul says, The justification of the law, might be fullfilled in us, who
walk not according to the flesh, but the spirit. And since the justification
of the Law, is fullfilled in us, by our walking according to the spirit; it is
plain that these (being such works, as wherewith the Law is fullfilled) are
such as it requires at our hands; and whereby satisfaction is given to it; and
so it grows to be evident, that he spoke falsely, who said, That This is sa^d
by n^^e, but our modern Sectaryes.
all the works, which were done by a just man, were sin.

Christ, They who affirm (as our Secta^^s do) that sin does still remain in
the soul of persons who are penitent and pardoned: deprive the passion of our
Lord, of the better part of the worth thereof.
did perfectly overcome sin, both by deserving pardon for such as were past;
and force for the avoiding of such as might be to come; and so he freed our
souls from the law of sin. Because we are no longer subject to the command
thereof, and he delivered us from the hurt or pain due unto it, since, by
giving us grace to suffer pain, we satisfied for that, to which we might be
liable in Purgatory; and besides it helps us to gain crowns in heaven. He
did further also deliver us, from the law of death. For howsoever we be to
pass that way, we are not yet to remay ne therein; but (as one who lays
himself down to sleep, and is afterward awaked) our Lord will raise us up,
to lead a new life, which never is to dye again. And that life, is to be so
happy, as, that it shall reform this base body of ours; and shall conform it
to the body of his brightenesse; and then we shall be joyful, and entirely
secure; and despising our enemies; and triumphing over them, we shall say, O
death, where is thy victory; O death where is thy sting? which sting, is sin,
in them where death is still in force; whereby it does wound, as the Be is
wont to do, with her sting; for by sin, death entered into the world.

Both the one, and the other enemy, which were wont to govern, and to wound
the world, remain drowned in the blessed blood of Jesus Christ; and slain, by
his precious death. And in See here how copious the Redemption is, which our
Lord has purchased for us.
their place, succeeds that everlasting justice, whereby here, the soul is
justified; and afterward shall succeed, the vision of God face to face in
heaven; and a life, which shall be eternally blessed, both in body, and soul.

What shall we say to this O Virgin, but that, which S. Paul has taught us;
Thanks be given to God who has granted us victory, through Jesus Christ. Him
thou art to adore, and with a grateful and enamoured heart, say to him, Let
all the earth adore thee, and praise thee, and singe a hymn to thy name, And
see thou say this often, every day; and especially, when at the Altar, his most
holy body, is elevated by the hands of the Priest.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the great mischeise, which despair does work in the soul; and how we
must overcome this ene my, with spiritual alacrity, and diligence, and fervor
in the service of God.
THis despair, and loosing of heart, is such a dangerous instrument of our
enemy, that when I remember the great mischeifes which have grown by it to the
consciences of many, I desire to speak a little more concerning the remedy
thereof, if perhaps any good may come thereby. It This is a case, too common.
happens so, that sometimes there are persons, who be laden with a multitude
of great sins, and neither know what despair, nor so much as a little fear
is, nor does it once pass, through their thought. But they go on, as being
assured, by a false hope; offending God, and yet not fearing punishment for the
same. And We see, by lamentable experience, that such as are not Catholics do
pass from one extremity of pres^^^tion, to the other of de peration, without
resting in true hope.
if once the mercy of God shine upon their souls, and they begin to see the
grieuousnes of their sins, (though it be reason, that, (since they ask
pardon of God, with purpose of amendment, and that they receive the benefit
and comfort of the Sacraments) they should, be strengthened thereby, both
against that which is past, and that also which, in the service of God, might
afterward present it self) yet fall they upon the other extreme of fear; as
before they were subject to that, of false security. Not Note.
considering, that they who oftend God, and do not repent, have reason indeed
to fear, and tremble, though all the world smile upon them; (because the wrath
of the omnipote^t, is provoked against them, which wrath there is no power that
can resist) and that they, who humble themselves to God, and receive his holy
Sacraments, and who will procure to do his will, ought to have the heart of
Lions; for as much as they are commanded to confide in God, by that token,
that God is with them. Whom as they hold for an enemy to the wicked, (and for
that themselves have been such, they are in fear) so it is all reason, that
they should hold him for a friend of the good; and that, in regard of the holy
purposes, which he has inspired them with, they may confide, that he is also
their friend, and that so he will be, giving increase, to the good seed which
himself did plant, and perfecting that which he has begun.

This is certainly true; that when once a man comes to say in earnest, that
which David said, I have held up my hands, toward the performance of thy
commanamentes, which I have loved, God puts his eyes, and heart, where that
man puts his hands, that so he may help him; and, (as one, who is good, by
an infinite goodness) he takes him into protection with care, and ranketh
that man on his side, who will fight for his honor; making war upon
himself, to give contentment to God. And The difficulties which use to occur,
to such as begin to serve God.
although it be true, that when a man begins to serve God (through some
particular calling, which may incite him (with the contempt of all things) to
seek that precious pearl of the Ghos^ell, by the perfection of a spiritual
life) there may grow against such a man, such trains and wars of the
Devils, (both immediately from themselves, and also by the means of wicked
men;) and they lock him up in such straytes, that when he rayseth the first
foot from ground, and places it on the lowest of those fifteen steps,
whereby men rise to perfection, he is forced to say, When I was in tribulation,
I called upon our Lord and he heard me; O Lord deliver my soul from wicked
lips, and from the deceitefull tongue; (which wicked lips are they, which
do expressly hinder that which is good; and a deceitful tongue is that which
procures, in a disguised manner, to deceive;) and sometimes so great
impediments are presented, (or at least it seems so) toward the making one
depart from his course begun, that they are like those great Giantes, whereof
the children of Israel said, Compared with them, we are no more then a few
little grasshoppers; and the walls of the City which we are to assault, seem
to threaten heaven with their height; and the earth in that place, seems to
open to swallow up her inhabitants: notwithstanding, I say, all this, thou art
to consider (and let us all consider it, with well opened eyes) how much that
faint-hartednes and despair displeased God, which the Sons of Israel were
subject to, by the means aforesaid. For as much as, the sins which they
committed in the wilderness, (howsoever they were great, and many) and one of
them was, that they adored a Calfe for God (which seems to be the very
outside of wickedness) yet God endured all this at their hands; and did them
favor toward the prosecuting of their enterprise begun. But Note how
predomina^tly, despair is displeasing to Almighty God.
he would not endure their disconfidence, and despair of his mercy, and power;
and he swear to them in his wrath, as David says, that they should not enter
in to his rest; and as he swear it, so he performed it. Does it not seem to
thee, that we have reason to curse this vice, which is opposite to the honor
of the divine goodness? That, being so much greater then our wickedness, as God
is greater then man? And be thou assured, that as the way of perfect virtue, is
a kind of stiff battle made against our enemies, who are full of strength,
both within us, and without us; yet he that shall begin such a war, cannot
bring, in his company, a thing of greater prejudice, then pusillanimity of
heart. For he that has this, will be put to flight, even by shadows.

With much reason did God command in times past; That when his people were in
the wars, his Priests should encourage them (before they began to fight) not
by humane reasons of the multitude of their men, and strength; but by thinking
upon the Firrne hope in God is the only sound receite against hart-breaking.
protection of the Lord of hoastes, who holds victory in his hand; and who is
wont to conquer lofty Giants by little grasse-hoppers, for the glory of his
holy Name. And agreably to this which God commanded, the valorous S. Paul says
to them who were entering into the spiritual war: Comfort Ephesians. 4.
your selves in our Lord, and in the power of his strength; that so being
hartned, you may fight the battles of God, with cherfulness, and courage.
So is it read of Judas Machabaeus, who fought with cheerefulnes, and so he
conquered. And S. Anthony, a man well experienced in theses piritual combats,
was wont to say; That this spiritual cherfulness, was an admirable thing,
and a powerful remedy toward the ouercomming of our enemies. For certain it
is, that the delight which is taken in doing of any work, does increase a man's
forces toward the doing of it. Therefore How necessary it is to have alacrity,
and courage in the service of God.
does S. Paul advise us thus, Rejoice always in our Lord. And we read of S.
Francis, that he reprehended such of his friars, as he saw to go sadly up, and
down, as if they were ill contented: and he would say to them, He that serneth
God, should not be after this fashion, unless it were for having committed a
sin; and if thou have committed any, confess it, and return to thy former
alacrity. And of S. Dominicke it is also read, That there appeared in his face,
a kind of cheerful serenity; which gave testimony of his inward joy. This is
wont to grow, out of the love of our Lord, and from a lively hope of his mercy;
whereby they are able to carry their Cross upon their backs, not only with
patience, but even with pleasure; as they did, whose goods were stolen, and yet
they remained content; and the reason of that was, because they had lodged in
their hearts, a better kind of riches in heaven. Experimenting that which S.
Paul said, Being joyful in hope, and patient in tribulation, for It is hard to
have patience in a longe-liued Cross, without having a great hope in God.
without the former, men can hardly ariue to the later.

But when this vigor, and alacrity fails, it deserves great compassion, to
see how men, that walk in the way of God, are full of unprofitable sadness,
their hearts being discontented, and without gust, in things that belong to God;
and untoward even to themselves, and to their neighbors; and with so little
confidence in the mercy of God, that there wants not much to make it none.
There are, many amongst these persons, who commit no mortal sins, or very
rarely; But they say, that because they serve not God as they ought, and as
they desire, and by reason of the venial sins which they commit, they live
in such a fashion, as we see.

But A worse effect, of an evil cause.
if the effects of superfluous sadness be such as these, they do men more harm,
then the faults themselves, which they committed. And that which they might
prevent and cut off, if they had discretion and courage, they make to increase;
and so they fall out of one evil, into another. Such as they, ought to
procure, and labor, to serve God withal diligence; and if they see they fall,
let This is indeed, good counsel.
them weep, but not distrust; and (knowing that they are weaker then they
thought) let them humble themselves more, and demand more grace, and live with
greater caution; taking help of the time past, for the time to come.

There Excessive sloth, does sointymes also cast men afterward upon despair.
are many, who, on the contrary side, are careless, and slothful, in serving
God; and when they fall into sin, they know not how to help themselves; but
they go down into the pit of disconfidence, and of greater negligence. Whereas,
in very deed, for the avoiding of despair, we must avoid to be lukewarm, and
negligent in the service of God. For No man can have a good hope who endeauours
not to lead a good life.
otherwise, as long as a man has these roots within him, he cannot, though he
would never so faigne, have that vigor and strength of mind, which Note this
point well.
grows from a good, and diligent life. And if such persons would consider,
that they endure more The Devils Martyrs.
trouble by these sad and despairing thoughts, which grow from melancholy;
then they should, in cutting up, by the root, those cuill affections, and
dangerous occasions, which hinder them from serving God with fervor; they
would, (especially since they love to fly from pain) make choice of those
troubles which are annexed to the perfection of virtue, to fly those others,
which follow upon the want thereof.

S. Paul ^. T^^^. 4.
says, That the end of the law is Charity, which proceeds from a pure heart,
and upright conscience, and a faith unfeigned. And he means this upright
conscience to be hope, as S. Augustine says; giving thereby to understand,
that unless there be a good conscience, (having faith and love, and good works
which flow from thence) there There may be in such men a fond, and dangerous
kind of presumption; such as the Sectaryes are acquainted with, but no true
Christian hope, which is pleasing to God.
will be no lively hope, which may give us alacrity; and if there be any want at
all of good conscience* there will be also want of cheerfulness, and
consclation, which are caused by a perfect hope. For although such a fearful
man be not slain perhaps by sin, but do live in state of grace; yet he shall
work but weakly. So as they who tell thee, Believe that God does pardon thee,
and love thee, and then thou shall be pardoned and loved, with such other words
as these, do As Luther and Calvin hauedone their followers.
grievously deceive thee; and they give testimony that they speak by
imagination, and not by experience, or according to the doctrine of faith. And
A most certain, and a most soueraign truth, the not understanding whereof
makes so many cast themselus away by violent death.
such braueries as those, (for as much as they are not of God) cannot hold a
man upon his feet, when tribulation comes, if it be a sound one. Strength of
heart, and the joy of a good conscience, are the fruits of a good life, which
they gather, who live well, although they look not for it. And after the rate
of the one, increases the other. Now from a contrary cause, follows a
contrary effect, as it is written, The Eccl. ^.
wicked heart, gives sorrow and from hence grows disconfidence, and other
miseries, in company thereof.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of two remedies for the getting of Hope, in the way of our Lord and that we
must not turn coward, although the remove of the temptation be differred; and
how there be certain hearts, which know not how to be humbled, but by the
knocks of tribulation; and therefore, that they must so, be cured.
THE conclusion that thou must draw out of all this, is, That since it does so
much import to go on comforted, with a good hope, and with alacrity, in the
service of God, thou must procure two things toward it. The one, is the
consideration of his divine goodness, and love, which he has manifested by
giving us Christ Jesus, for our own. The other, that castng off, all
slacknesse and sloth, thou serve our Lord with diligence; and when thou
fallest into any fault, be not dejected with disconfidence, but procure remedy,
and hope for mercy. And if many times thou fallest, procure thou many times to
rise. For If this be not true, what is?
no discourse of reason will endure, that thou should be weary of asking
pardon, since God is never weary of giving it. And since he commanded us to
pardon our neighbors, not only Matt. ^^.
seven times in the day, but seauenty times seven; (which signifies, that we
must do it, without limitation) much, and much better, will our Lord grant us
pardon, as often as it shall be asked; since his goodness is greater, and is
placed before us for an example, which we are to follow. And if integrity of
life, and the remedy which thou desire, do not come so soon as thou could
wish, let not that make thee conceive that it will never come. Nor Take heed,
that such a thought as this, do not once enter into thy heart.
be thou like them that said, If God send not remedy, within five days, we
will give our selves up to our enemies; For the holy Iud. 7.
Judith reprehended such men as these, with great reason; and she said, who are
you, that will thus tempt our Lord? For such words as these, are not to move
him to mercy, but rather to stir up his wrath, and to kindle his fury. Have
you perhaps appointed a time, wherein our Lord is to show mercy; and have you
set down the day, according to your own mind? Learn to hope in our Lord,
till his mercy come; and be not weary of suffering, since patience imports
you, as much as life.

And Note.
if the straytes be great, which weaken thy hope; even A comfortable
consideration for English Catholics; which ought to fill our souls with
patience, and with an humble, and peaceful expectation of the good will of God.
those very straites, should in reason give thee courage; because they use to
be the very Eve and introduction of the remedy. For the hour, wherein our Lord
delivers, is when the tribulation has lasted long, and at the present
afflicts most. As it appears plainly in the case of his disciples; Luc. 5.
Whom he permitted to suffer, during three parts of the night; and in the last,
he gave them comfort. He also delivered his people, out of the captivity of
Egypt, when the tribulation which they suffered, was grown up to the highest;
and so will he do with thee, when thou think not of it. And if thou conceive,
that thou would faigne lead a holy life, and perfect life, and which all,
might be to the glory of God; thou Examine thy consciece by this light; and see
if the case be not thine.
art to know, that there are some so proud, and lofty, that there is no
humbling of them, but upon the price of temptations, discomfortes, and falling
into sin; and so weak they are withal, that they will not go on in the way
of God with diligence, if they be not ridden upon the spur; and their heart is
so hard, as that they must be hammered upon, with a great deal of misery. Nor
have they any caution or discretion, but upon the experience of many of their
own errors. In fine, they have a mind, which is filled, and puffed up with a
few graces; and they have need of many afflictions, to make them proceed with
humility, in the sight of God, and of their neighbors.

Thou see already, that the cure of these inconveniences, cannot be wrought
but with If gentler pnisicke be not able to cure us, we must be content that God
do play the Surgeon with us.
burning irons; and by Gods permitting men to fall into desolations,
obscuritics of mind, and even, into sins; that so, being much afflicted, they
may humble themselves, and then be freed from their miseries. The Prophet
Micheas says, Thou Mich. 4.
shall go as far as Babylon; and there thou shall be delivered, and God will
redeem thee, from the hand of thine enemies. For by the confusion of this kind
of life, and by these falls in to sin, a man uses to be humbled; and both
to seek remedy of God, and to find it; which, if he had not fallen he might
perhaps have lost by pride, or not have sought with diligence, and gre^fe.

Eternal thanks be given to thee Amen.
O Lord; who out of such prejudicial miseries, art wont to draw these
celestial benefits; and that thou art glorified as well in pardoning sinners,
as thou art, in making, and keeping them just; and who sauest, by the way of a
contrite and humbled heart, him who was not in disposition, to serve thee with a
heart of innocence; and who make a man's sins give him occasion, of being
humble, diligent, and advised; that so (as thy self did say,) He Luc. 7.
to whom more is forgiven, may love more; that so it may be fulfilled, which
the Apostle says, Mercy in justice, makes that justice of thine, appcare more
glorious, as it makes thy goodness seem more in pardoning, and saving such,
as have sinned, and return to thee. In another place he also says, That Roun
8.
all things prove to the good of such, as love God. Yea so do Infinite goodness
of our God.
the very sins themselves, which they have committed, as S. Augustine says.
But Abs^^.
yet this must not be taken, as a ground for thy tepidity or facility in
sinning, to buyld upon; for that must in no case be done. But to the end that
if thou fall into so great misfortune as to offend our Lord, thou do not yet
commit a greater sin, then that can be, by dispayring of his mercy.

CHAP. XXV.
How the Devil procures to draw us to despair, by tempting us, against
faith, and the divine mysteries, and of the remedies that we must use, against
these temptations.
AT other times, the Devil uses to fright us, by drawing thoughts unto our
mind, which are soul, and abominable, against faith, and the mysteries of God.
And he makes him who has them, conceive, that they proceed from the man
himself, and that he consents to them. And hereby he gives him so great
affliction, as to deprive his soul of all alacrity; and he makes it believe,
that it is cast of by God, and condemned by him; and does put him into an
humor of despair, by telling him, that it is impossible for him to belodged
in anyother place but hell, since he holds blasphemies, and such other
incidentes to that place. The Note.
devil is not such a Dunse as not to understand, that a Catholic Christian,
can never come to consent to things, which are so detested by his Christian
heart; but the meaning is to dismay him, that so he may loose the confidence
which he had in God; and, being tormented with such importunities, may grow to
loose his patience; and so carry a heart in his body, which is full of tempest
and disgust; that being a thing, whereby the devils use to make much harvest,
through the disposition, which upon this occasion, men have, to receive what
evil impression the same devils will.

The A main point, of all points.
first thing then, which we are to do (if it be not done already), is to
consider our conscience, with care and great repose of mind; and to cleanse it
by confession, from all that evil which we find therein; and to put it into
such order, neither more nor less, then if we were, that day to die; and from
thence forth, to live with greater care in the service of our Lord, then
before. For it happens sometimes, that our sovereign judge, permits these
fearful things to come upon us against our will, in punishment of other
things which we have willingly fallen into; and for the negligence which we
have used in his service, which our Lord is disposed to cure, by a scourge that
shall smart so much, as that, being bruized thereby, we may for bear to feed
upon forbidden fruit; and that we may put on, a pace, in our way; as an
unreasonable creature would do, when he were followed by the whippe.

Sometimes our Lord sends this torment for other ends, which to his high
wisdom are not unknown. But whether it be sent for these, or the former
reasons, every one is to do (as has been said) by purifying his conscience, and
growing diligent in Gods service; for this remedy can hurt none, and it will do
good to all. And their, confiding in the mercy of God, and desyring succor of
him, if yet he cannot give over to hear this Language (because the devil is
able, whether we will or no, to bring these thoughts, and inward speeches to
our mind) let the man at least, proceed (by way of action) as if he heard them
not; and let him remain in peace, without afflicting himself, upon that
occasion; and without There is nothing to be got, by arguing with the devil.
changing of words, or making answears to the enemy, according to that of
Psalm. 37.
David, As one that is deaf, I did not hear; and as one that is dumb, I did
not open my mouth.

These things are hard to be believed, by such as are ignorant of the devils
craft; but if they give not over to think, or do the good things they were
about; and if they employ not themselves in hearing, and catching at, and
killing those former thoughts (as they would do flies) they presently think,
that they have consented thereunto. But they know not what great difference
there is, Great errors grow in the mind^ of many, for want of well considering
this difference.
between hearing, and consenting. And so much the more, as those thoghts are
highly abominable, so much more confidence may they have in our Lord, that he
will preserve them from consenting, to so extreme wickedness; to which they
carried no inclination, but detestation. The Note.
best remedy is therefore, (through a quiet kind of dissimulation), not to
seem to value them; for there is nothing which does more afflict the devil,
who is so proud, then to contemn him, with such a downright contempt, as not
to make any reckoning either of him, or of that which he brings, for our
trouble. Nor is there any thing so dangerous as to hold argument with one, that
can so easily over reach us; and the best of our case will be, that he will make
us loose our time; and give over the good that we were wont to do. We must
therefore shut the door of our understanding as hard as we can; and unite our
selves to God, and make no answer to our enemy. And for our satisfaction, and
consolation, we must, diverse times every day declare our selves to believe,
that which our holy Mother the Church belieueth; and that we have no will at
all, to consent to any such false, and foul conceits. Let us say unto our
Lord, as it is written, O Lord, I suffer violence, answer thou for me. And we
must hope in his mercy, that he will do so. For the victory in this combat
depends not upon the only labor of our arms, but the principal is, to
inuoke our Lord omnipotent, and to shroud our solues under him. Whereas if we
should use much discourse, and make many answeares to our enemies, how can we
desire of God, that he will answer for us. You, (says Exodus 14.
the Scripture) shall hold your peace, and our Lord shall fight for you. And in
another place, Isay says, Note.
In silence, and hope thy strength shall be. And in failing of either of these
two things, instantly a man grows weak, and troubled; but by this silence,
with a not seeming to hear, together with having a good hope, I have seen
many cured, in shortty me, of this great affliction; and that the Devil has
grown to hold his peace; finding that they neither heard, nor answered him.
And it is after the manner of little country dogs that barcke; if he, that
passes, hold his peace, they do so too; or else, they bark, but so much the
more.

CHAP. XXVI.
How the Devil endeauours, by means of the aforesaid temptations, to remove
us from our devotion and good exercises; and that our remedy is, to increase
therein; laying aside all superfluous desire of feeling spiritual sweetness
in the soul; and to what end these also may be desired.
BUT some Note this Chapter well, for it may profit much.
weak man will say, These wicked thoughts take devotion from me, and the
nearer I am to be devout and diligent in good works, the more they press me:
and to the end that I may not hear them, I grow to have a desire to give over
the good work that I began. But the answer is clear. For this, is that very
thing, which the Devil went about, though he went by a kind of circling way;
by bringing in thoughts of a different nature. Now Note.
thy course must be, rather to increase in thy well doing, then to decay; as if
one would do it, even of purpose to make the Devil retire with lost, when he
thought to have gone on with gain. And if thou want tenderness of devotion,
do not trouble thy self for that; for as much as our services, are not to be
measured, otherwise then by the rate of our love; which Note this well, and
believe it; for it is a certain truth.
consists not in tenderness of devotion, but in a francke offer and
resolution of our will, to do that which God, and his Church commands; and
to endure that, which his pleasure is, that we should suffer, for his
co^tentment.

If some, who may seem to have left their pleasures of the world, for the
service of God, did leave also the inordinate desire of sweet, and sensible
devotions of the soul, they would live with more alacrity then now they have;
and the Devil should not be able to find certain We must take care that the
Devil have no hold, to take us by.
hairs of appetite, to take hold of, and thereby to turn their heads about,
and to deceive and hurt them. Christ Jesus, died naked upon the Cross, and
naked we should offer our selves to him. And we should care for no other
cloths, then the doing of his holy will, as it is declared to us, by the
commaundments of himself, and of his Church; and to receive with an Pray for
this blessing, for it is a great one.
amorous kind of obedience, that which he shall be pleased to send, how hard
soever it be: with equality of mind, we are to take from his hand, either
affliction or consolation; and to give him thanks, both for the one and the
other. S. Paul Ephes^ 5.
says, That in all things we are to give thanks to God, because, as it is
the mark of a good Christian, to love one that does him hurt, for the love of
God (since every one loves him, that does him good) so to be 5. Note,
thankful to God in adversity (not regarding the rough exterior that it
carries, but the hidden favor which God does send us, under that
superscription) is the sign of a man who bears other eyes in his head, then
of flesh and blood; and that he loves God, since, in that which is painful
to him, he does yet conform himself, to Gods will. And A sovereign receipt
against all miseries of man's life, both interior and exterior.
so we must not seek to fasten our selves to the weak boughs of our own
desires, though they may seem good; but to the strong pillar of the divine
will; to the end, that obeying it (as has bin said) we may participate,
according to our possibility, of that peaceful rest, and immutability, which
resideth in that Will; and that we may decline those many changes, which in our
heart we shall be sure to find, if it give access to this kind of Of spiritual
gust.
covetousness.

There is in very deed, little difference, between serving Christ for money,
or else for consolation, and spiritual gust of thy soul, whether for heaven or
for earth; if the last mark that I aim at, be this covetousness. Even
Lucifer, (according to the opinion of many Doctors) did desire true felicity;
but because he desired it not as he ought, and of whom he ought, and that it
might be given him, when it should have pleased God; it served not his turn to
have desired that which was good; but he sinned by not desyring it well; for so
it came to be covetousness, and no good desire. In the same manner therefore
do I declare, that we must not fasten our selves to an earnest and disordered
appetite of spiritual gustes; but offering our selves to the Cross of our
Lord, we must be glad to take what he shall be pleased to give, whether it be
sweet honey, or vinegar and gall.

Nor Note.
have I yet said this, as if these gustes were evil, or unprofitable of
themselves, if men know how to make true use thereof; and if they receive them
not as to dwell in them, but to procure more breath, and heart in the service of
God; especially for beginners, who ordinarily, according to their, age have
need of milk, like children. And How great a blessing it is, to meet with a
guide, who has the gift of spiritual prudence.
he that would nurse them, with the food that is fit for men; and seek, by
that means, to make them perfect, upon a sudden: should commit a great
error; and instead of helping, would do hurt. Every age, has a several
condition, and degree of strength, according to which the food and nourishment
is to be applied. And, (as the well experienced, and holy Bernard says) We
must not fly, but walk forward in the way of perfection; and let no man
think, that it is the same thing to understand it, and to possess it. And
therefore, it our Lord impart these comfortes, let them be received, toward
the carrying of his Cross, with greater force. For as much, as it is his
custom, to comfort his disciples in Mount Thabor, that so they may not be
disquieted in the persecution of the Cross. And ordinarily, before the gall of
tribulation come upon us, he sends the honey of comfort. And I never knew any
man, mislike or vndervalow spiritual Consolations, but such an one, as by
whose soul, they had never passed.

But if our Lord be pleased to guide us, by the way of discomforte, and that we
must needs hear the harsh and Of d^aboh^al tentat^os, and disolations.
paynefull language, whereof we were speaking; yet must we not be dismayed, at
any thing that he sends; but with patience we must drink the Chalice, which
the Father gives, even because he gives it; and we must beg strength of him,
that our weakness, may yielde obedience thereunto. Nor yet on the other side,
must thou conceive that I teach thee, not to have joy when our Lord does visit,
or not to have a sad feeling of his absence, when we find our selves delivered
over to our enemies, to be tempted, or afflicted by them. But that which I
would say, is this, that (according to the force which God shall give us) we
must procure to conform our selves to his holy will, with obedience, and
equality of mind; and in no case to follow our own: which infallibly will be
accompanied with discomfort and disconfidence, and such things as these.

Let We ought to carry, a most cordial, and profound love, to the
accomplishment of the holy and a^^e will of God in all things.
us beseech our Lord, that he will open our eyes; for then we shall more clearly
see then now we do, the very light of the sun. and that all things of the
earth, yea and of heaven it self, are but very poor and unworthy of being
desired, or enjoyed; if from them we sever, the will of our Lord. And that
there is no one thing, how little soever, or how bitter soever it be otherwise,
which if it be joined to the will of our Lord, is not of extreme value. Better
it is, without comparison, to be in affliction, if our Lord require it, then
(abstracting from his will) to be in heaven. And if once we did banish from our
selves, this secret covetousness, with resolution; there would fall of, withal,
many evil fruits, which grow from thence; and we should gather others, in
place thereof, of more worth; namely joy and peace; which use to be derived
from the union of a soul, with the will of God. And so firm they would be
withal, that tribulation it self, would not be able to take them from us. For
as much as, although such persons do find themselves afflicted and forsaken,
yet are they not in despair, no nor greatly troubled; as knowing that, to be
the way of the Cross, to which they have offered themselves, and by which
Christ did walk, as it appeared, when, being upon the Cross, he said to his
Father, O Matt. 17.
my God, Why have thou forsaken me? But shortly after he said, Into thy hands,
O Father, I commend my spirit. Our Lord had also said already: Again Joan. 10.
Will I see you, and your heart shall rejoice, and no man shall take this joy
from you For if a man enjoy this condition, there is no tribulation, which
there, in the most inward part of his soul, does much disquiet him; because
there within, he is close united, to the will of him that sends it.

If thus we would carry our selves, we should deceive the deceauer, which is
the devil. For as much, as, by not being dismayed, nor retyring from our good
course begun (notwithstanding the evil language he speaks) but, on the other
side, (taking that which our Lord does send, with obedience, and giving of
thanks) we depart without any hurt out of this skirmish, although it should
last as long as we live. Yea we come to greater profit then we had before;
since it gave us occasion to gain more crowns in heaven, in reward of that
conformity which we had to the will of our Lord, without respecting our own,
even in that, which was very painful to us.

CHAP. XXVII.
That the conquest of these temptations, does consist more in having patience
to bear them; and in the hope of the favor of our Lord; then inprocuring
forcibly that they may not come.
THE conquest, whereof we have spoken, proceeds more from the stratageme of
having patience, at that which comes upon us; then in the force which we can
use in procuring that it may not come. And for this, did the spouse say in the
Canticles, Catch me those little foxes, which spoil our vineyards, for our
vine has s^orished. The vineyard of Christ is our soul, which was planted by
his hand, and watered by his blood. It does flourish, when, the time of
sterility being past, it begins to lead a new life, and yealdeth fruit to
him that planted it. But because in such beginnings, both these and other
temptations of the crafty Devil, do lie in wait for us; therefore does the
noble spouse admonish us, that (since our soul, which is his vineyard, is in
flower) we should procure to hunt those foxes out. By which word, it is given
us to understand, that it must be done in the Because the flowers come before
the fruits.
morning, as has bin said. By saying that they were foxes, we are as good as
told, that they come disguised, to deceive us; and seeming to byte on the
onesyde, they wound on the other; and in saying that they are little, he
tells us, that they are not so much to be feared, by him that knows them;
for the knowing the^, is to weaken the^, if not to overcome them out right. In
saying that they destroy the vines, he signifies that they do men much
mischief, who know them not. For being frighted, and not confiding to go
through with their business, in the sight of God, they leave their way; and
(following a lamentable persuasion,) they give themselves openly to sin;
conceauing that they enjoy more peace, in the broad way of perdition, then by
the strayte one, of virtue, which leads to life.

The end of such persons, if they return not first, to the right way, many
times is such, as that it carries most certain tokens of eternal perdition,
as the Scripture says; He Eccl. (...).
that passes from justice to sin, God has prepared him, for the instrument
of justice, that is, for hell. They Note.
should consider that as the Gabaonites were besieged, and persecuted by their
enemies, for having made peace with Iosue 10.
Iosue; and that Iosue (being called upon, by them, to give them succor) did
relieve and free them; (making their case his own, because they were
persecuted by their enemies, in regard of the peace they made with him) so
they, who (beginning to serve God) do enroll themselves in his band, grow
instantly to be persecuted by the Devils, which they were not before; and this
does evidently appea^e to be so, because, by forsaking the party of Christ, the
persecution which is made against them would cease; and if they continue to
suffer, they suffer for holding up the party of Christ. Now this, is a most
particular favor, which God does, as S. Paul Phil. 1.
affirms. To you it is given by Christ not only to believe in him, but also
to suffer for him. And if the Angels of heaven, were capable of envying earthly
creatures, The great nobility of suffering for the love of God; and for his
will.
it would be for this, that they suffer for God. And although, by the word of
God, a Crown is promised to that man who suffers lac. 1.
temptations, and is proved by them, which reward it shall be fit for us to
consider, and desire, thereby to get more spirit, that we be neither tepide in
working, nor weak in suffering, (as it is said both of Moses, and of David
also, that they had an eye to the reward) yet the true and perfect lover of our
Crucified Lord, does so much esteem, a being in conformity with him, that he
receives even the very suffering it self, as a great favor and reward; for,
as Saint Augustine says, A happy injury is that, whereof God is the cause. And
since there is not a man, who will not succor another, that suffers by
coming to his service; much more may this be expected from that divine
goodness. And that he will make that man's cause his own, as David thus
desired that he would; Rise up o Lord, and judge thy cause, and remember the
injurious words, with the fool has uttered against thee, all the day long.
That business belongs to God, which is pretended to, by such a one as
serves him; and therefore God comes out to his succor, with great fidelity;
and in this hope, and not in any thing of our own, we are to set upon the
enterprise, of Gods service.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the great remedy which grows against these tentations, by seeking a wise
and well experiented ghostly Father; who must be entirely informed and
credited; and how the ghostly Father ought to proceed with such persons; and of
the fruit which rises from these temptations.
IT uses, in these temptations, to put men to much difficulty, that they are
plainly to declare them to their Ghostly Father; in regard that they are
things so wicked, and so deformed, that they deserne not to be mentioned; and
even the very naming of the^ does strike with horror. And yet on the other
side, if they declare them not very much at large, and do not express every
thought, though never so little, it seems to them that they made no good
confession; and so they never go well satisfied, whether they speak, or be
silent; but with the same affliction that they had before.

Such It is no ^ner^aile if so many make themselves away for despair, who are
not Catholics; for they want this great, and soueraign means of comsort.
persons as these, are to seek a wise and well experienced ghostly Father, to
whom they must lay open the roots of the temptation; in such sort as that he
may be satisfied, and posses^e the business. And the penitent must give
entiere credit to him, for therein consists the remedy of these persons, who
either for the little that they know, or the much passion that they have, are
wholly unfit to judge themselves. Now this ghostly Father, must pray much to our
Lord, for the recovery of his patient; nor must he be made weary, if the
penitent do many times ask him the same questions; nor for other weaknesses,
which such, use to have. Nor must he wonder at them, nor despise him for them;
but he must carry a cordial, and deep compassion toward him; and Gala^^ ^.
correct him, in the spirit of meekness, as S. Paul says; least himself grow
also to be tempted, either in that, or somewhat else; and so he find to his
cost, how great humane weakness is. He must recommend to him, the reformation
of his life, and to resort to the remedies of the Sacraments; and then assure
him, that there is no thought so deformed, and so wicked, as that it can defile
the soul, unless it consent; and let him give him, good hope, that, by the
mercy of our Lord, he shall be delivered in fit time; and that, in the mean
while, he must content himself to suffer that torment, by those executioners,
in discharge of his sins, and in imitation of that, which Christ Jesus
suffered. The penitent, being thus comforted, and carrying his Cross with
patience; and offering himself to the will of our Lord to carry it all his
life, if it be pleasing to God, shall gain more by that vinegar and gall,
which the Devil gave him, then by the honey of devotion which himself desired.

From hence it grows, that our soul being in the flower of her beginnings;
does enter upon yealding the fruit of perfect men; since for merly, we were
sucking the milk of devotion, and now we can eat the bread with the Note the
true difference between beginners and proficie^ts in spirit.
crust. Sustaining our selves by the hard stones of temptation, which he did
cast before us, to try whether or no we were the sons of God, as he proceeded
with our Lord himself. Thus do we fetch honey out of poison; and health out of
being wounded; and we come out of the tentations, well tried, with a million of
other blessings. For which yet, we must not give the devil thanks, whose
intention was not, to make Crowns for us, but Chai^es. But The infinite power,
and wisdom, and goodness of God.
the thanks we are to give, is to God, that supreme and Omnipotent Good; who
would never suffer any evil to happen, if it were not to draw good from
thence, in a superior kind of manner. Nor would he suffer that enemy, who is
both his and ours, to afflict us; if it were not for the great confusion of
that enemy, and for the good of him that is afflicted; as it is written, That
Psalm. 2.
God will scoff at these scoffers, and he that dwells in heaven will deride
them. For although this dragon play his part, and does, in the sea of this
world, make a jest, as it were, of tempting, and vexing the servants of God;
yet it is God, who indeed does make a jest of him; because he draws good,
out of the others mischeife. And whylest the devil thinks, that he does
virtuous men most harm, it is then that he does them most good; whereat he is
so confounded, and ashamed, that through his pride and envy, he could wish that
he had not begun that enterprise, which fell out so much, to the advantage of
him whom he hates. And that mischeife, and snare, which he prepared for
others, has cast it self about his own neck; and he is choked with envy, to
see that the persons whom he tempted, go free a way, with this cheerful song
in their mouths, The Psalm. ^^^.
s^are is broken, and we are free: our help is from our Lord, who made heaven,
and earth.

CHAP. XXIX.
How the Devil procures, by exterior means, to make us give over good
exercises; And how we must strengthen our heart by confidence in our Lord, for
the ouercomming of him; And of other things, which help to free us from this
fear; and of the fruit of this temptation.
SO great is the envy which the Devils have of our happiness, as that they
always endeavor to keep us from enjoying, that, which themselves lost. And
when, in any battle, they go away overcome by us, or (to speak more truly)
by Almighty God; they are still ranging more, and more battles, if so
peradventure they may find some careless person to be defeated. They change
their weapons, and their manner of fighting; in hope that whom now they
overcame not, they may, afterward. And so, when they have discovered, that they
could not entangle us, by craft (for as much as we are guy ded by true
Christian doctrine, which tells us that we must commit our selves to the most
just will of God, and that patiently we must suffer what he sends us, either
from without, or within) they resolve to denounce, an open war; and he makes
himself a fierce Lion, who was before a Dragon, but concealed. He aymeth at
one thing, and thrusts at another; and more boldly does he procure to make
himself be feared; conceauing that he may obtain that by giving frightes,
which he was not able to do by other crafty means. Here shall you see him
not made a fox, but a fierce Lion; who amazeth men with his roaring, as S.
Peter says, Brethren 1. Pet. 5.
be temperate, and vigilant; for your Adversary the devil, walks his round,
seeking whom he may denoure, whom you must resist, being strong in faith. They
must not be intemperate or inconsiderate, who are subject to have such an
enemy; and the sheep who find themselves environed, by such a roaring Lion, are
much to watch and pray to our true pastor Jesus Christ. But what are the
weapons, by which this enemy is overcome, that so he may go confounded, out of
this war, as he did out of the last? These weapons are faith, as S. Peter and
S. Paul have said. For when a foul, through the love of God (which is the life
of faith) despises both the prosperity, and adversity of the world; and does
believe and confide in God, whom she does not see; the devil must not think to
have an entrance there.

And besides, in^egard that this light of faith, teaches men that are in
danger, to confide in the mercy of God; if he that is assaulted, will serve
himself well thereof; he shall get great courage, to fight against the devil,
which is a thing very necessary for this war. For Note.
if the faint-harted man, be not fit to fight even against visible enemies (for
which reason, God commanded that such persons, should retire from the war)
how much less shall they be so, to fight, not against flesh and blood, but
against Devils, who are the Princes of darkness, as Saint Paul says. And
although, in the high presence of God, we are to be prostrate, and in fear,
least he abandone us for our sins; yet in time of war, when we are
assaulted by our enemy, it is wholly fit that we be full of courage, despising
him, and imploring the assistance of our Lord.

In this sort do we read, that our Lord himself prayed to his Father, before
his apprehension, being prostrate and full of anguish; and from thence he went,
so full of courage, as that himself passed out, to meet his enemies. The
prime intention of the Devil in this battle, is to deprive our heart of
courage, to the end that so, we may give over the good course begun. This he
procures, by taking sometimes the figure of a Dragon, or of a Bull* or some
other beast, disturbing our prayer with noise, or hindering the quietness of
our repose (as we read him to have done to Job) and casting a man into a
profound internal fear, which makes him tremble; though he be never so
valiant, and sometimes* he will even sweat with anguish. And other effects
there are like these, which give restimony, how that infernal wolf is not far
off. It is plain, that since all the mystery of his war, works by fear;
the principal weapon that we are to have, is strength of heart; being
encouraged, not through our confidence in our selves, but by a faithful trust
in our Lord. This is the thing which in this war, does make us victorious;
for confidence overcomes fear, as it is written: I Isa. 12.
will do it confidently, and will not fear. And be well assured, that thou
shall never repent thy self* for having placed thy firm trust, which is a
courageous kind of hope, in God; neither shall thou be able to say, He has
deceived me, since it did not succeed as I hoped. For hope, as S. Paul Romans 5.
says, puts not to shame, nor shall he that hops in our Lord be confounded.

Never A virtuous life, is the ground, of giving co^tioua^ce to a good hope.
does if fail a man, if he be not wanting to himself; but then only it
fails, when he loses charity, which is the life of hope, and of all virtue.
And those I he old Hetmi^^.
Ancients of the desert, knowing how neceslary, a heart full of courage was,
toward a not being overcome, in these skirmishes against the Devil (which
amongst them, were very usual) they went by night to pray alone, amongst the
sepulchers of dead men; that so they might purchase a being free from fear;
the dominion of which fear over us, does use to bring us extrem prejudice. If
we will take the counsel of Christ, we shall live very secure from this fear:
for he takes it fio^ us, saying I (...) ^0.
will tell you whom you are to fear; him fear, who, after the body is dead,
has power of casting into hell; fear him. He that fears not God, shall, by
reason of his evil conscience, fear the world, and the Devil; but he that
fears God, fears not the Devil; for to fear him, is in some sort, to be
subject, as to one that can do him hurt. And Note.
because he has not power to reach even to a hair of a man's head, unless God
give him leave, there is no cause why we should fear him, but our Lord, by
whom the leave may be given. For this reason it is, that we always must be
humble, and, with holy fear; in the presence of God; but with the Devil we
must be full of courage* through our hope in God; and full of a holy kind of
pride. And how much more full he is of brauing, so much more fear thou God,
and recommend thy self to him; and so much less, must thou fear the Devil.

So do we read of S. Anthony, that great conqueror of Devils; who seeing
himself environed by them, in the form of cruel beasts, (which seemed, as
if they would have swallowed him:) If you had (says he) any power, any one of
you would be able to overcome a man; but because you are defeated (God having
taken your forces from you) you procure to join many together, and so to
fright us. If our Lord have given you power ^uer me, here I am, come and
swallow me up; but if not, why do you labor thus in vain. And so this Saint
used to say, that against Devils, the sign of the cross, and the faith of
our Lord (which somtims signifies Confidence) is a wall unto us, that cannot
be scaled. And though our forces, being compared with that of the Devil, are
very slender, and weak; yet faith does tell us, if we be not deaf; That God
is the defendour of all such, as hope in him* And since he is so good, as to
promise us his defense and succor; and to plant his heart and eyes upon the
Church, which is figured in the temple of Solomon; and is both true of his
word, and of power to perform his promises, (there being none either in heaven
or earth, that can refist, either him, or any man who is assisted by him) that
Christian should not esteem of God, nor of his sincerity, nor goodness, nor
power as a Christian ought, if he believed not of him, that he for his part,
performs well the promises, of his succor. But these, and the like things
which he does, must be understood with this condition that a man, at that time,
be in the state of grace, or procure to be so, not only by believing the
promises in general, nor yet by believing, that, in particular they are
applied to him; but by penance also, and other means, which are taught by the
Catholic Church. Not, but that we do nevertheless assuredly believe, that
many in the same Church are in the state of grace, to whom without all doubt,
God fulfilleth the promises of being their defendour who hope in him; but yet
for as much, as no man can be infallibly sure, without special revelation,
that himself is in that state of grace, he is to believe by the Catholic
faith, that the divine assistance, is never wanting on the part of God; but
himself may, and must fear, that it will not perhaps, take effect in him,
through his fault, or negligence in doing his duty. So that with some fear of
himself, and by confidence in our Lord, he must procure to encourage, and help
himself, by the word of God, who promises succor to such as fight for him.
And Note.
this fear, or uncertainty, in which God has left us, of not knowing
assuredly that we are in his favor, though it may seem painful, is very
profitable, toward the conseruing of our humility; and the not vndervalewing
of our neighbors; and to spur us up, toward good works. And with so much
the more caution, and consideration must we do it, as we are less certain,
whether we be pleasing to our Lord, or no.

But do not for all this conceive, that thy heart must be dismayed with vain
fear; for as much as this truth which I have told thee, did not keep David
from saying, If Psal^ 15.
whole armies shall rise against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid; and if
war shall come upon me, yet will I hope in God. So also does S. Paul Heb. 13.
admonish, us that we should serve our selves of those words which God said, I
will not forsake thee; and I will not abandon thee; in such sort, as that we
may confidently say, Our Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man can
do. These, and the like words, do not wholly take away, all the fear which a
Christian (for his own part) ought to have; but it takes away all excess
thereof, by the confidence which is to be placed in God. And thus we are to
walk, between hope and fear; and so much more, as the love increases, so
much does the hope also increase, and so much also is fear diminished. And An
excellent rule.
therefore, if thou have a mind to feel, in thy self, that courage of mind,
and the little fear which perfect men do find, cast thou away al tepidity from
thy self; and take the business of virtue to heart, and then, in that very
heart of thine, thou shall read that courage, which now thou read but in
Books. Then shall thou be able to fight boldly, against the Devil, although
he circle the^ round about, to devour thee; for thou shall have a hope to be
defended by Jesus Christ, who is the strong Lion of Judah. He always
overcomes in us, if we do not loose our confidence; and if, like cowards, we
do not deliver up our selves, with our hands bound behind us, to our enemies
without resolving to fight. Our Lord, does not suffer these wars, and
temptations to come to his friends, but for their greater good; as it is
written, Blessed la^. 1.
is the man who suffers temptation; for he being so proved, shall receive the
crown of life, which God promises to such as love him. He was pleased also,
that patience in troubles, and the standing fast on foot, for his honor in
tentations, should be the touchstone, whereby his friends were to be tried. For
Note.
it is no sign of a true friend* if he only accompany another in occasions of
case; but to stand fast by him, in time of tribulation. And as all men would be
glad to have approved friends to stand fast by them, in the time of affliction
and trial (accounting of it, as their own) just so does God desire to have
his; and like a thankful person he says to them, You are the men, who have
remained with me in my temptations. And as an abundant rewarder, he says
further to them, I Lue: ^^.
dispose of my kingdom to you, as my Father disposed of it to me; that you may
eat, and drink at my table, in my kingdom; companions here in pain, and
afterward in the Kingdom of glory.

Thou must encourage thy self to fight manfully, in the wars, which are made
against thee, to divide thee from God; since he is thy helper on earth, and thy
reward in heaven. Remember how S. Anthony, being cruelly vvhipped, and beaten
by the Devils, lifting up his eyes to heaven, saw the roof of his Cell all
open, whereby a beam of so admirable light did enter; as at the presence
thereof, all the Devils fled away; and the pain of his wounds forsook him;
and with profound internal sighs, he said to our Lord, (who then appeared to
him) Where were thou, O my good Jesus, where were thou, when I was so ill
handled by the enemies; why were thou not here, in the beginning of my combat,
that so thou might have prevented, or cured all my soars. Whereunto our Lord
answered, Here I was, from the very beginning but I stood looking on to see
how thou did carry thy self, in thy combat. And because thou have fought
manfully, I will ever help thee: and thou shall be famous throughout the whole
earth. By these words, and by the virtue of our Lord, he rose up so full of
courage, as to find by experience, that he had gotten then more strength, then
he had lost before.

In A most comfortable and true doctrine.
this sort does our Lord treat his friends, and he leaves them oftentimes in
traunces of so great danger, as that they scarce know where to set a foot; nor
do they find one hair of strength, by which they can take hold; nor are they
able to help themselves, by the memory of those favors which in former times,
they had received of God; but they remain, as if they were naked, and in
profound darcknes, being given over to the persecution of their enemies. But
suddenly when they least look for it, our Lord does visit them; and deliver
them; and leave them with more strength, then they had before, and thrusts
those enemies under their feet. And the soul (howsoever it be more weak in
nature, then the Devil) does feel in it self, such a powerful strength,
that it seems to tear him even in pieces, as a thing that is but weak, and
without resistance; and not only grows it not able, to fight against one, but
against many Devils; so great is the courage which it feels to have
comfreshly toward it, from heaven; and wherewith it does not only defend it
self, but it says with David; I will persecute my enemies, and I will take
them. I will not return till they be conquered, and deseated, that they may no
more remain upon their feet, but they shall fall under mine.

What is there of greater profit, then that which S. Augustine beggeth, when he
says, O Lord, make me know thee, with an Yea, and his prayer was heard.
amourous knowledge, and let me also know my self. Now The excellent use and
fruit of temptations and desolations.
what means is there so proper, for the making him know himself, as to see
himself experimentally in such traunces. That he may touch, as a man may say,
with his own hands, his own weakness; and that, so very truly; as to be
wholly vnbeguiled of any estimation, which he might make of himself. And, on
the otherside, he finds by experience, how faithful God is, in fulfilling
the promises, of his succor, in the time of necessity; and how powerful he
is, in delivering his servants from so great weakness, by the sudden gift
of so admirable strength; and how full he is of mercy, in visiting, and pitying
them, who are so extremely afflicted.

By this means, a man does fall flat upon his face, acknowledging his poverty
and misery; and he adoreth his God, by both loving him, and hoping for succor
from him, when he shall find himself in new dangers. S. Paul Romans 5.
affirms that it happened to himself, after this manner: I will not (says he)
have you ignorant, my Brethren, of the tribulation that we suffered in Asia,
whereby we were afflicted above measure; and above our own strength; so We
must not be dejected, in being much afflicted, since S. Paul himself was
discomforted.
far, as that even to live, was a trouble to us; and we did within our selves
believe assuredly, that there was no means for us to escape from death. And
this happens so, to the end that we might not have confidence in our selves,
but in God, who gives life to the dead. He, who has delivered us, out of so
great dangers; and by whom hereafter, we also hope to be delivered.

CHAP. XXX.
Of many reasons which there are, why we must hope that our Lord will deliver
us, out of all tribulation, how greiuous soever it be: and of two
significations, which this word Believe, may be accounted to have.
It is true which S. Gregory says, That the accomplishment of things past,
gives assurance concerning things to come. And since men are wont to trust
others, upon taking pawnes, we seem not to do much for God, if we hope for a
deliverance out of future tribulation, since he has so often done it, in times
past. It A lively comparison, wherein we ought to take much comfort.
is certain that if any man should have made us find his love and favor, in
succouring us ten, or twelve several times, in our troubles; we should believe
he loved us; and that still he would do us favor, if, in other afflictions of
ours we should have need. And why then shall we not have a confident belief,
that God will defend us in all our dangers; since they are not twelve, but many
more times, that we have taken experience of his succor, in our tribulations.
Remember well, how often he has drawn thee, with victory, out of those sharp
skirmishes of thine against thy adversaries; and thou were grateful unto him
for it; and thereupon thou did conceive a reason to believe, and confide,
that he loved thee; since after the tempest, he sent fair weather; and joy
after tears; and since he had been thy true Father, and defendour.

And why then, if now he please to try thy confidence, thy love, and thy
patience, by a present tribulation, (as if he hid himself, because he
answers not to thy cries) do thou let thy self fall, into such weakness,
as that the present trial which comes to thee, makes thee loose the
confidence, which in many former proofs, thou had gained. It is true, that
we feel those things most, which at the present lie upon us; and if thou
markest the straytes wherein thou find thy self, and how our Lord does not
free thee of them, thou will perhaps conceive, that our Lord has laid aside
the care, which formerly he had of thee; and thou will say, as the Apostles
did, in that great sea-tempest, to our Lord, who then was sleeping, Master
Marc, 4.
do thou not care, though we perish; and thus will thou be overtaken, by the
reprehension of that scripture, which says, The fool changes like the moon;
Because it is sometimes after one manner, and sometimes after another. And thou will be like a Vane, upon the top of a house, which is subject to many changes
in one day, because it is governed by every wind. Thou were in possession of
our Lord, as one that was careful of thee, and thy defense in the time of
trouble, because then he breathed upon thee, by the wind of his mercy and
comfort, wherewith he gave thee deliverance; and thou did pay him, with
thanks. And because now, there blows another wind, wherewith our Lord is
pleased to prove, and trouble thee; thou art no longer of that belief, and
confidence, which before thou had. So that thou do believe, but what thou
see; and thou do not value our Lord, but according to that, which at the
instant time, he does toward thee; without helping thy self; of that which
thou have tried at many other times, that so at the present, thou may be
comforted in our Lord.

A strange incredulity was theirs, who having seen the meruayles of God in
Egypt, and the victories, and favors, which he wrought for them, in the
desert; would not take his word, whereby he told them, that they should enter
into the land of promise. For this, says S. Paul, they entered not. And so is
it true (though not according to equality, yet with some resemblance,) that the
disconfidence, and pusillanimity of that man is great, who, (notwithstanding
that God has delivered him many times from dangers past) grows not yet to
confide, that he shall not be abandoned, nor confounded, in the danger either
present, or future; since as we have said, the hope which one puts in our
Lord, (if the man be not infault) will never fail, nor will there be cause that
a man should say, I was deceived.

Now it is to be understood, that sometimes this word Note.
Believe, is taken for that work, which the understanding performs, by
settling it self in the truths of the Catholic faith, with a supreme kind of
certitude, as formerly has been said. And he that belieueth against this
faith, is called, with a full mouth, and is indeed, an Heretic, and an
incredulous person; and such an error believed, has the name of an heresy, or
of incredulity. But the disconfident person, of whom we have spoken hitherto,
is neither incredulous, nor is he subject to incredulity; because he has no
obligation to believe (in quality of an article of faith) that God will deliver
him, out of that present trouble; as yet, they of the The children of Israel.
desert, were obliged to believe, that God would give them victory against
those enemies, who were in the Land of promise, if they would have gone out to
fight against them.

But, at other times, holy men, and even the common use of speech, do call,
Believing, the holding an opinion, which is caused by reason, or conjectures.
This do they call credulity; and if it be vehement, it is called faith. And
this manner of credulity does he possess, who belieueth, by probable
conjectures, that he is pardoned by God, and that he is in state of grace; and
that God will help him, in that whereof he shall have need in the future; and
this which passes in the understanding, does help men to have confidence, and
hope, which are in the will. And therefore sometimes, Incredulity is taken for
Disconfidence, and credulity for confidence. And thus it may be said, that he
who (because God had delivered him out of other dangers, and for other motives
also) had reason to believe though not with certainty) that God will also
deliver him out of this danger) is subject, if he do it not, to incredulity:
not against the Catholic faith; but against that, which rises, out of
coniecturs. But because the The Caluinists were scarce known in this Authors
time; though their case be all one with that of the Lutherans.
Luthera^s take one of these words for the other, we Catholics must speak
distinctly; calling faith, and confidence by their proper names; declaring how
we are to understand, either believing, or being incredulous; since A wise
proposition, and being well applied, will serve to many good purposes.
that, which at some one time may be securely expressed, by such words, at some
other time, must be avoided.

Returning therefore to our purpose, thou must five from disconfidence; and
from being changeable, which the Eccles. 17.
Scripture reprehendeth in the fool, who is, as the Moon. And procure thou,
to partake of that stability, for which the just man is praised thus, As the
Sun, shall he remain. Which signifies, that he shall be ever after the same
manner. Learn Note.
by one time, how thou art to carry thy self in others; and, as the Scripture
says, In Eccles. 11.
the day of thy prosperity* forget not that, of thy adversity; and in the day
of thy adversity, forget not that, of thy prosperity. That so, tempering the
prosperity of one, with the adversity of the other, thou may grow to live in
an A happy state of mind.
equality. And that neither thou may be drawn down in the time of thy
tribulation, by the weight of disconfidence, and sadhes; nor yet grow
giddy-headed, by excess of joy, in the time of spiritual consolations.

So do we read, of that holy Anna, the Mother of of the Prophet 1. Reg. 1.
Samuel, who, after having prayed in the Temple of God, still kept her face,
the same way. The meaning is, that she conserved her heart in equality. Isaias
Isa. 4.
says, That one should have such a habitation, as might give shade, against
the heat of the Sun; and security, or defense, against the storm and the
rain. And it were well, that thou did procure to live in this Happynes is
ever in this house.
house; that so, having strength of heart, and confiding in the mercy of God, it
might give thee assurance, in those places and passages of business, wherein
there uses to be Of trouble.
danger. As it was prophesied, of the time of the new Law, That Ezech. 34.
men should sleep securely, in the thickest woods. And although it seem a
strange thing, to be at rest; and to have security in this place of our exile
(and indeed it must be very little, in comparison of that, which is in heaven)
yet, if we rank it, by those fears, which the wicked of the world are
subject to, it is very great; and deserves greatly to be esteemed. And
particulerly S. Paul Heb. 6.
says, that the virtue of hope is as a firm, and secure anchor of the soul.
Because although we have an enemy of the Devil, who has a mind to fright, and
to discomfort us, by means of these combats; we have yet withal a friend, who
is both more stout, and more wise then he. And if the former do abhor us
much, incomparably more does Christ love us; and if he sleep not, endeavoring
still how to do us mischief; the blessed eyes of God, do watch over us to help
us to save our selves; as sheep, for which he gave his precious blood.

Since Note.
then, we have the arm of the Omnipotent, why shall we fear the Devil;
whose power is mere weakness in comparison of the other. How shall he be able
to fear the Devil, who does cordially believe this truth (if he will serve
himself of faith, as was said before) that the devils can do us no manner of
harm, unless first, they have leave from God Could the devils peradventure,
touch Job, or any thing that was his, or could they drown the swine of the
Genesarits, without first obtaining leave? Or shall he perh^ps, who may not
touch the swyne, touch the children? Do you therefore comfort your selves in
our Lord: as S. Paul requires; and in the power of his virtue take in hand the
weapons of God, that you may standon foot against the cra^ty enterprises of the
devil. And, having spoken of some of the particular weapons, he adds, saying:
In all things, take to you, the shield of faith; whereby you may quench all
those darts that burn like^^re For as this enemy, is of more strength then
we; so we must help our selves, by the shield of faith, which is a
supernatural remedy; defending our selves with some what, that belongs
thereunto; as with some word of God; or by receiving the Sacraments; or
following some instruction of the Church. And beheuing firmly, with the
understanding that al power is of God. We must also be comforted with the head
piece of hope; and so being offered up to God, by the love of him (taking with
a good will, whatsoever he shall send) and by which way soever it come) we shall
make a scorn of our enemy; and we shall adore our Lord, who gave us the
victory, against him; and that, not only by himself, but by means of the
succor of his holy Angels, who fight for us; as was declared to the servant
of the Great 4. Reg. 6.
Elizaeus, who (being in much An example to prove the assistance that we have
by the holy Angell^.
fear of a great army of men, who came to take his master) the Prophet bad
him not fear; for, faith he, there are more for us then against us. And whilst
I lizaus prayed, and said, Open thou O Lord the eyes of this young man, that he
may see, God did open his eyes; and he saw that there was a hill full of
horsemen; and chariots round about Elizaeus; who were the Angels of our Lord,
who came to defend the Prophet. In such sort; that if we will take the part of
God, we shall have a multitude of Angels, on our side; one of which number is
able to do more, for us, then all the powers of hell against us.

Therefore, so great assistance, should make us able, to despise the devil;
and to lay all vain fear aside; and to give us the courage of ^ions, against
him, in the virtue of Christ. Who The sweet and strong power of our Lord Jesus.
was a meek Lamb, in delivering himself to death; and was a Lion in
dis-peopling hell; ouercomming and binding the devils; and with his arm,
defending his beloved flock. And if any man shall think, that I have been to
prolixe in this argument; let him attribute it to the desire I have, that thou
may not be one of the many, whom I have seen; who for fear of the Devil,
have given over the service of God.

I well know, that by this enemy, some other wars are made, even more cruel,
then the aforesaid. And I also know, that in the very extremity of tribulation,
when already there is grown to be no strength in him that suffers, nor wise
knowledge in him that guides the shipp, and when the infernal Lion, and Bear,
means to swallow up the poor sheep, it grows to be comforted; and that
pitious David, Jesus Christ takes the sheep without harm, out of the mouth of
the Lion; cutting in pieces him that was carrying it away. My self am a
witness, of greater tribulations then I could possibly have believed, if I had
not seen them; and of the marvelous, and pitious providence of God, who does
not in affliction abandon them that seek him, although it be with many
frailties, and faults. And Note this for thy comfort.
although I have seen many of them who feared God, to have been grievously
assaulted in these fightes, I never saw one that ended ill. And therefore
whosoever shall find himself in these traunces, (although he seem conveyed
even into the very belly of the whale) let him call, even from thence, upon
Jesus Christ; and let him serve himself of the good advise which his Ghostly
Father shall give him. And let both of them have good hope, in that good
sheephard, who gave his life for his sheep; who kills, and quickneth; who
places men, as it were, in hell, and draws them out alive from thence. For
although at one time, he send troubles, at another time he takes them away;
and that to the great advantage of him, that suffers the tribulation.

CHAP. XXXI.
That the first thing which we are to hear, is divine Truth, by means of
Faith, which is the beginning of all spiritual life; and which teaches us so
high things, as that they exceed all humane discourse.
ALL that hithe^to is said, has been to give thee to understand whom thou art
not to ^eare; and to help thee to these directions which thou have read. It
remains that now I tell thee, whom thou art to hear; that so thou may
fulfill the first word which the prophet speaks, Hearken O Daughter. And know
that he who deserves to be hearkened to, is only Truth. But because there are
many Truths, the hearing or knowing whereof does make little to our purpose, I
tell thee, (since here we are to speak of the Note well, that when the
Author, throughout his whole discourse of Faith, does speak of Christianity,
or Christi^s, he means only such as believe, and profess the holy Catholik^
Apos^olik Roman Faith; as appears elsewhere abundantly; and especially Cap.
4^.
Catholic faith, which by us Christians is embraced) that thou art to hear,
and learn, that which God speaks in his holy Scripture, and in his Catholic
Church. This faith, is the beginning of a spiritual life; and therefore (as I
said before) it is with much reason, that we are first admonished by the
prophet, of that which first it is fit for us to do, since S. Paul Romans 10.
affirms, That faith comes by hearing.

This faith is the first reverence whereby the soul adoreth her creator,
believing most highly of him, as is fit to be believed of God. For although
some things of God* may be arrived to by reason, which S. Paul Ro^^. 1.
does call The manifest of God, yet the Mysteries, which faith belieued^,
cannot be reached, outright, by reason. Therefore we say, that faith belieueth
that which it sees not; and does firmly adore, that which lies hid from
reason. And this is given us to be understood, by the two Seraphims which
covered the face of that great Lord, in the Temple which Isaias Isa. 6.
saw; and so also, when Moses came near to treat with our Lord upon the
mountain, the Ixod. ^4.
Scripture says, That he entered into the obscurity, or cloud, where our Lord
was. A strange thing it may seem, that God should place his dwelling in
darkness, since he is most pure and perfect light, which endures no darkness,
as S. John 1. Io^^. 1.
says. But because he is a light so very bright, and so ouershining, that, as
S. Paul 1. Tim. ^.
does witness, he dwells in light which is ineccessible, he is said to dwell
in The true reason why we cannot arrive to see God.
darknesses because no eye created, either of man, or angel^, can arrive to his
mysteries, by the force of reason. And Note.
for this cause, in regard of such eyes, the light is called darkness. Not
because such light is obscure, but for that it is a light which does infinitely
exceed all understanding. As when we see that a wheel does move with extremity
of speed, we use to say that it stirs not. And we speak in this manner,
because our eyes are not able to hold pace, with so swift a motion; not because
there is indeed any want of motion, but for that it does outstrip the ability
of our sight.

Not only does our Faith reverence God, by believing that, which reason cannot
reach; but besides, it does profess him to be so high, that howsoever God be
clearly seen by his own light in heaven, there is yet no understanding,
either humane or Angelical, which of him, can see all, that is to be seen. No
will, no delight although they al should be joined in one, are able to love
him, or enjoy him, as much as there is reason in him, both of love and joy.
Only God only truly understands God.
God is he, that comprehends himself; and creaturs when they have seen, and
loved, and enjoyed, and praised him, withal the powers of their heart, they do
reverence him also by knowing further, that in comparison of that which he is,
and of that which remains to be said of him, and of that service which is
his due, all that which they know of him, and which they do for him, is very
little. And therefore, falling upon their faces, they adore him with a
profound silence; confessing, that he only is his own perfect praise to which
they are not able to reach. And this silence, is an honor very fit for God;
for it is a confession, that such praise is due to him, as cannot be expressed
by all the creatures. Of this honor, David Psalm. ^4.
says, To thee, O God, is praise due in Sion. In such sort, that although, in
heaven, there be an incessant voice of divine Isa. 6.
praise, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of hoastes; with other admirable
praises, which day and night they yield to him, yet do they also confess in
silence, that our Lord is greater, then they can either express, or
understand. For Psalm. 17.
he mounted above the Cherubim; and he flew upon the wings of the wind; and
there is none, how speedy soever, that must think to overtake him. And all
they, who shall know and see him, must be feign to say, that which the children
of Israel said, when they saw bread coming from heaven Man-hu, which
signifies, what is this? Admiring, as the Queen of Saba did, that infinite
abys^us of light; whereof although they shall see in heaven much more, then
they heard thereof on earth, yet can they not comprehend it all. Such is the God
whom we have; and such does our Faith teach him to be; singing that which
David Psalm. ^0.
says, The heaven of the heaven is for our Lord; because the secret of what he
is, after the aforesaid manner, is for himself alone, since he only
comprehends himself.

CHAP. XXXII.
How agreeable to reason it is, to believe the Mysteries of our Faith, although
they exceed all humane reason.
ALTHOUGH thou have heard, that our Faith belieueth certain things which by
reason alone, cannot be arrived to, yet take heed thou do not think, that to
believe them, is a thing, either against reason, or without reason. For as it
is very For if he could, it would not be faith, but knowledge.
far from him that belieueth, evidently to understand that which he
believes, so is it far from the belief of a Christian, to be light, or to
waver in believing. For we have such reasons to believe, as that we may dare to
appear, and give account of our Faith, before any Tribunal how exact soever;
as 1. Pet ^ 5.
S. Peter does advise, that we Christians, should be prepared to do. This thou
shall easily understand, by the similitude which here I put. If thou should
hear say, that a man borne blind had suddenly recovered his sight; or that a
dead man were restored to life, it is plain that thy reason could not reach to
the means of doing this; because it would exceed the bounds of nature; and
reason does not reach, to supernatural things. But yet so Note this well for
it iustifyeth Catholic and gives Protestants reason to be both more pious,
and more prudent.
many, and so well conditioned witnesses, might auow the having seen it; that
not only it would be no leuity to believe it; but it would be incredulity and
hardness of heart, not to believe it. For though reason cannot reach to know, how
a blind man may come to see, or a dead man return to live; yet at least it
reaches to this, That it is reason to believe, such, and so many witnesses.
And Observe well these gradations, for they are most reasonable, and they are
all in favor of Catholics.
if they should dye in confirmation of that which they affirmed, there would be
more reason to believe it. And if they should work other miracles, as great or
greater then the former, in confirmation thereof; the fault of not believing
it, would then be great, howsoever the thing which they affirmed to have
happened, were very strange and high.

Just so art thou to understand, that there is nothing which reason can less
reach unto, the^ the clear understanding of that which is believed by Faith;
nor is there yet, any thing so agreeable to reason, as to believe it; and it is
an extreme fault not to believe it. It is certain, that for the true miracles
which Moses wrought, the people of Israel believed him, to be the messenger of
God; and that he spoke with God; and received the law at his hands, as given
by God. And so also the M^^ves, who are a bestiall kind of people, believed,
that Mahomet, for a few, (and they false) miracles, which he wrought, was a
messenger of God; and as from such an one, they r^ceaued the bestiall law,
which he gave them.

Well then, do thou consider the true miracles which have been wrought by Jesus
Christ our Lord, and by his Apostles; and by other holy men in confirmation of
our faith, from that time to this; and thou shall find, that as easily thou
may count the sands of the sea, as the multitudes of them; and that
incomparably they do exceed all the others which have been wrought in the world,
both in quality, and quantity. Three only dead persons were raised to life, in
the whole course of the old law; which continued almost two thousand years. And
if thou consider the new law, thou shall find, that S. Andrew alone, did raise
at once, forty dead; that so it might be fulfilled, which our Lord said, He
Joan (...) 14.
that belieueth in me, shall do greater things then I. And that so, his great
power may be seen; since not only, by himself, but in such other of his
servants, as he is pleased to work, he can do what he will, though it be nouer
so wonderful.

I have related to thee, that which one Apostle did at one time; to the end
that hereby thou may understand, the innumerable miracles which have been
wrought, both by that Apostle, and by other, both Apostles, and Saints, of the
Christian Church. And, although in the beginning of the Church, there were so
many, and so great miracles wrought for the confirmation of our faith, that the
proof thereof is superabundant; yet That true miracles are wrought to this
day; and the causes, why it pleases God to work them.
so great is the desire which our Lord has of the salvation of us all; and
that we all may come to the knowledge of his truth; and that they who do
already know it, may be comforted and confirmed therein; that his providence
has care, to renew, or refresh Of miracles, which confirm the faith of Christ.
this kind of proof; and to give testimony to the truth, by new miracles. And
so, is there hardly to be found an age, wherein some Christian or other, is not
canonized for a Saint; which I would to God, that any reasonable Protestant,
would but inform himself well of the exact and rigorous care, which the
Catholic Church does we, when there is question of Canonizing any Saint.
is never done without sufficient proof of a perfect life that he has led,
and of many miracles that he has wrought. Whereof if any man were curious, and
would make search, he should find no difficulty, even in our times, to meet
with miracles, amongst us; and, in the Indies, both Oriental, and Occidentall,
in more abundance.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of, how firm and constant, and authorized witnesses, our faith has had, who
have given their lives for the truth thereof.
IT is possible that some may doubt of the truth of our witnesses, which
speak, and write of the multitude of miracles which have been wroght in the
Christian Church. For as they are people, who detest our faith; so it seems
to them, that if these witnesses should be true, they must not fail to
confess, that we have much more reason to believe our Truth, then they, their
Error. But I ask, that (since they will not give credit to our witnesses; and
therefore they refuse to receive our faith) why give they credit to their own
witnesses, in receiving their false behefe. Whereas A wise and excellent
consideration.
it is certain, and clear, that if they would take the pains to consider it,
our witnesses do far exceed theirs, in all kind of weight of authority. There
have been men, in the Christian Church, whose The high virtue, and piety of many
Catholic Christians
life has evidently been so good, as to prove, that they were free from all
covetousness; from all appetite of honor; and from all that which
flourishes, and is esteemed in the world; being full of all virtue, and Truth;
so far, as to dye, rather then loose it. To what interest can he pretend, by
the testimony that he gives, who does not only not pretend to any thing of
this world, but even that which he has of his own, he casts away? What
interest can move that man to be a false witness, who gives his life under
most greiuous torments, in confirmation of what he says? And though some use
to be drawn by force of torments to confess that which the Judge desires
(although it be against truth) yet if ours would say that which is desired by
the Judge, not only should they not loose their goods, and life, but much more
prosperous should they have remained, by the much which the Judges promised,
and would have performed. But desp^^ing all this, they chose to die, that they
might not abandon their faith, or virtue, which the Judge would so feign have
had them loose. So that they loved no temporal thing, nor feared they any
thing that was temporal, how terrible soever. No exception therefore can be
taken to that which such men say; and if it should seem to any, that these
proofs were sufficient to make us hold them for good men; and that willingly
they would deceive no body, but that themselves were yet deceived; and did so
deceive others, without knowing it; To this I answer, that in the Church
there have been men, shedding their blood for Christ, so evidently full of The
great wisdom of many Catholic Christians who have suffered death in
confirmation of the faith of Christ.
wisdom, that no reason can be given, why we should believe of them that they
were deceived, in a matter of so great weight* and that so far, as to loose
their lives for the same. For the much interest that a man has in any thing,
does make him look and look again, what it is that he ratifyeth; nor does a
man use to lay down his life, in confirmation of a truth, if he be not
sufficiently certifyed thereof. And it is a thing notorious, that so great
wisdom has been found among the Christian people, as therein they exceed all
other generations of men, no less then wise masters, do ignorant scholars.
And that there have been, not one, nor one hundred, but a mighty number of such
persons, is a very great testimony of the truth of our faith; in confirmation
whereof, they gave their lives. And Let the false martyrs of foolish John Fox
be impartially compared with out true ones, and their baseness, and
bestiality, will soon appear.
although we read of some who also dyed in confirmation of their Error, yet
ours do incomparably exceed them, in number, virtue, and in wisdom.

CHAP. XXXIV.
That the perfect life of such as have believed our faith, is a great testimony
of the Truth thereof; and how far Christians have exceeded all other Nations,
in goodness of life.
SINCE we have made mention of the goodness, and virtue, which has been found
in our Christian Martyrs, it is not reason that I forbear to let thee know,
how great a testimony of their Faith, is the perfect life of them that believe
it. Since Another excellent consideration, of the perfection of the life of
many of them who profess the Christian Catholic Faith.
God being good, and the maker of all things that are good, al reason tells
us, that God is a friend to the good; since every one loves another that is
like himself; and every cause, the effect, which is produced by it. Now if he
be a friend, he is to help them in their necessityes, whereof the greatest of
all, is the salvation of their souls. And (c) saved they can never be, without
the knowledge of God; nor can they know him so as to be saved by him, if he do
not discover himself unto them. It therefore remaynes, that since none of
these things can be denied; and if on earth there be any such knowledge of God,
No salvation without faith which i^ entirely, and precisely true.
as by which me^ may be saved, God gives this to Christians; since amongst
them, there have been, and are, people of the most elevated life, and most
perfect manners, that has been seen, in any time, or in any generation.

It seems that the Philosophers were the flower of Nature, and the very beauty
thereof; where it seems that she employed al her strength toward that which
concerned living well, in conformity of reason. But laying aside those deformed
sins, which S. Hierome imputes to the chief of those Philosophers; and to
speak of some who appeared to carry more resemblance of virtue in them, then
others did; so much do they, of the Christian Church, exceed those others, as
that we have weak, and young women amongst us of more virtue then they had,
who were yet, amongst them, esteemed for heroical men. For who amongst them,
will be able to equal the courage, and ^oy, wherewith S. Catherine. S. Agnes,
S. Lucy, S. Agatha, with innumerable others like to them, did offer themselves
to most grievous torments, and to death it self, for the love of Truth, and
Virtue. And if in the virtue of Fortitude which seems to be so much estranged
from the weakness of that sex, these did so far exceed those others, as well
in number, as in the greatness of the torments, and their ^oy in suffering them;
how much greater will the excess be, in Humility Charity, and other Virtues,
which are not so incompatible with their sex? And although we now give but
these, for an example or pasterne of the rest, yet thou see the innumerable
store of men, and women, who in every particular state, have served our Lord,
with a perfect life, in the Christian Church. Some of which having been
sublimed in this world, and abounding in all kind of riches, and humane
prosperity; and then at the present, possessing much, and expecting to inherit
great states, and kingdoms, have despised all this; and to please God the
more, have chosen the life of the Cross, in poverty, and affliction, and in
obedience, both to God and men. And all this, with so great testimony of
virtue, both in the interior and exterior, as struck them to admiration who
conuersed with them.

People there has been in our Church, which as S. Paul says, has shined in
the world, like lamps of heaven; and, being compared to the rest of the world,
they are found to excel them, beyond comparison; which the most obstinate
person cannot deny, if he will but consider the life of a S. Paul, and of the
other Apostles, and Apostolical men, who have been in the Church. And since
there has been so great goodness in this Christian people, as by their works
we find to be evident; what scruple can we have to affirm, that either there
is no knowledge of God on earth, or else that these men had it, as persons who
were more beloved of God, and did serve themselves better of his knowledge, and
employ themselves more, upon pleasing him that gave it. In no sort can it be
said, that the world is without some such knowledge of God, as is necessary for
salvation. For this were to say, that the chief creatures which God made under
heaven, and for whose sake he created all things, should all be lost; for want
of means which God might give them to be saved. But God is infinitely good.
God is no such thing, as that he will thut the gate of salvation against us;
nor can it stand so with the bowels of his mercy, and goodness, as that he can
be without friends, to whom even here, he may do great favors, and much more
in heaven.

This proof of our Faith, being taken from the life of Christians, was much
esteemed, and recommended by the holy Apostles, in the beginning of the
Catholic Church. Amongst whom S. Peter 1. T^^. 3.
says, I et women be subject to their husbands, that so if there be any who
beleecue not the word of God even without that word they may be gained, by the
good conversation of their wives, behold^ng their holy manner of life, in the
fear of God. Where by The hero^call virtue of ^e^s hue^ does prove the truth of
their Religion.
the force of virtuous life does well appear, since it was able to convert
infidells; which, by the preaching of the Apostles, (though that had been used
with great efficacy, and even with working of miracles) could not be gained. S.
Paul says, That being to go from one place to another, he had no need that
they to whom he had preached, should give him letters of favor to countenance
him, with those others to whom he was about to preach. And he says to the 1.
C^^. 1.
Corinthians, You are my letter, which is known and read by all. And this he
says, because the virtuous manner of life that they held, (by means of his
preaching, and labors) were a sufficient letter to declare who S. Paul was;
and how proficable his presence was; and he says, That all men did know and
read this letter, because any nation, how barbarous soever it be, howsoever it
understand not the language of words, yet Good life in others, is a language
which the most ignorant men alive can understand.
does it understand the language of good example, and of the virtue which it
sees to be put in practice; and thence it is, that men grow to esteem much,
the man who has such disciples. It is also for this, that the same Apostle
says in another place, That servants, who are Christians, should serve their
Lords, and masters, with so good a will that they might in all things do
honor, to the doctrine of Christ our Savior. The meaning is, that their life
was to be such, as to testify, that the Christian faith and doctrine, should be
held thereby to be true. And how much this point imports, our Lord (who
knows all things) did teach us well, when (praying to his eternal Father,
and interceding with him, for Christians), he said these words; I ask of thee
that all they may be one thing, as thou O Father, art in me, and I in thee;
that all they may be one, and the same thing in us; that so the world may
believe, that thou have sent me.

Certainly, Note and live accordingly.
this is a great verity, which here the supreme truth has told us; That if we
Christians were perfect keepers of the Law which we have (the principal
commaundment whereof, is that of charity) we should cause such an admiration in
men of the world, that see us (we being equal unto them, under the law of
nature, and much superior to them in virtue), that they would render
themselves to us, as the weak do to the strong, and as the low to the high; and
they would believe that God dwells in us, by seeing us made able to do those
things, to which their power does not arrive; and they would give glory to God,
who is the master of such servants. And then would it be fulfilled, that we
should be the letter of Jesus Christ, from which all might take their lessons;
and that we did set forth and commend his doctrine; and that we were a good
odor to him, since we speak well of him, by occasion of the life we lead.

But Yea and even the wickedest devil in hell, must in his heart acknowledge it
to be true.
thou O Lord do know, that although there have been in thy Church very many,
so always there are some, whose life does shine like a great light; which even
the Infidells, (if they would) might be drawn to look upon, for the discovery
of Truth, and so to save themselves; yet A woeful thing it is to be a wicked
Christian, and their damnation will be worse then that of In^idells.
so do thou also know, O Lord how many there are in thy Church (which
contains Christians both good and bad) who not only are no means to make
infidells know, and honor thee, but rather to alienate themselves from thee:
and to blind their souls more and more; and so, instead of the honor which
they should give thee, upon the hearing the name of a Christian, they do more
pestilently blaspheme thee. It seems to their deceived judgment, that he
cannot be true God, or Lord, who has servants that live so ill. But thou O
Lord, have provided a day for thy self, wherein thou will complain of this
offense, and say, My name is blasphemed, upon your occasion, amongst the
infidells; and to chastize him with severe punishment, who in steed of
gathering together with thee, that which was scattered, (as he ought to have
done) does either scatter that which was gathered, or does hinder it from being
so. And Let men be as wicked as they will, God will still be just and good.
then will thou make the whole world understand well mough, that thou art good,
though thou have servants that be wicked. For the sins which they commit,
displease thee. And thou do forbid them by thy commaundmentes, and thou
do severely punish them.

CHAP. XXXV.
That the very conscience of him* that de^yreth to obtain virtue does testify,
that our Faith is true; and how the desire of leading an evil life does both
procure the loosing of Faith, and hinder the getting it.
BY how much more the witness of any thing in question* is nearer to us* and
well known by us; so much does his credit increase, toward the making us
believe, that be says true. And therefore, since I have ^old thee, of some of
the means which give testimony of the truth of our Faith; Hearken here, to
some others, and those not past, but present. And they again are so near
thee, that they are in thy very heart, if thou will receive them, and take
particular knowledge of them, as thou use to take of those things, which
pass there. This is grounded upon the word, which our Lord spoke. If Joan. 7.
any man will do the will of my Father, he shall know whether my doctrine be
of God, or no. Blessed be thou O Lord, who art so assured of the justice of
this thy cause, (that is, the Truth of thy doctrine) that thou leauest the
sentence, which is to proceed upon it, in the hands of whosoever will, whether
he be friend or enemy; with this only condition, That he who shall make
himself the Judge thereof, will do the will of God; which is, but that he
should be virtuous, and so be saved.

It is Note this well, for it is a wise and most certain truth.
certaynely so, that if a man should cordially desire to be good, both toward
God, and toward himself, and toward his neighbors; and would seek out the
fittest doctrine that he could find for making himself such; if before such an
one, I say, they should lay all the Laws, and doctrines, which are in the
whole world, both true, and false, (to none of which he already, carried any
particular affection, or passion, but did only aim at the finding out of
Truth) this man, laying aside all the rest, would take in hand the Gospel,
and doctrine of Christ, if he According to the true sense thereof, which is only
taught by the holy Catholic Church.
understood it, as a thing which might address him better, to the end of his
just desires, then any other. And as he were practicing the virtue that he
aspired to, he would be making experience of the efficacy of this doctrine; and
how fit it were, for all that is good for the soul; and how well it were framed
for the relief of our necessityes; and, in how short a time, and with how
great clarity, it did help a man to be virtuous. So that such a man coming on,
by the very experience of the power of this doctrine, would confess, as our
Lord has said, That it came from God; and he would also say, that which others
said (when they heard Jesus Christ our Lord preaching to them) never did man,
speak so well. And if even they, who know not Christ by faith; did but hear
that admirable, and charitable word, which our Lord himself did utter with so
loud a voice, If Joan 7
any man be thirsty, let him come to me and drink; and if they would come, and
make trial of that delicious fullnes; and so take experience of this doctrine,
with desire of being virtuous; it is certain, that they would not remain, in
their infidelity, and blindness.

But Behold here the most true cause why Catholic Religion is no more embraced
in England.
for as much as they are friends of the world, and not of true and perfect
virtue, nor do they seek with care, the certainty of Truth, and the knowledge
of God; they continue without hearing, and receiving it. And although they
heard it, yet would it not be received by some; because it would be contrary to
the things which they desire. And for this, our Lord said to the Pharisees,
certain words which I cyted once before, How 1. Joan. 5.
will you be able to believe, since you seek honor one of another, and seek
not the honor, which is of God alone. And not without great weight of reason,
did S. Paul 1. Tim (...).
affirm, That some had lost their faith, by giving themselves to covetousness.
Not that a man does instantly loose faith, by committing of any sin, except
heresy; but for that, a heart which is affected to things of the world, and
disaffected from virtue; when it finds in Christian doctrine, certain Truths,
which are contrary to the wicked desires of the same heart, and which
condemns, under so grievous pains, the things which it self desires to
practice, it grows by little and little, to seek other doctrine, which may
not be of so bad taste in the mouth; nor keep such a barking against the ill
affections and actions thereof. And The case of most Protestants, who are
intel^^g^^.
so the will, being ill inclined, is wont to be a means of putting blindness
upon the Understanding; and preuailes so far at last, as to make a man give
over that Faith, which cries out against wickedness that he may follow and
believe other doctrines, wherein he may be more at ease, and live how he listes.
And as this corrupted will, is a means sometimes to make him loose Faith that
has it; so is it also a means to de^a^ne him, from it, that has it not. For
both these, and those, carry a fastidious kind of mislike, against perfect
virtue; without alleging in very deed any other cause, but only, That it is
unsavory, or too highly good; and so they have also such a mislike, against
the Truth of Faith, as being contrary to that wickedness which they love.

CHAP. XXXVI.
That the admirable change which is made in the heart of sinners, and the great
favors which our Lord does to them, who follow him with perfect virtue, and do
call upon him in their necessityes, is a great testimony to the Truth of our
Faith.
IN how much better case are they, who, with desire to serve God, have chosen
to embrace this perfection of virtue; though al they that serve him do enjoy
otherwise (if they will mark it) many testimonies, which Faith places in
their heart. But especially do they enjoy it, who serve him, with a profiting,
and proceeding virtue; many whereof were yet formerly in miserable case, and
made slaves to sin; and so passionatly affected to it, that their hearts did
seem, even to be transformed into the same. And that with so great
determination to follow wickedness, that they would pass (as we use to say) the
vory pikes, for the committing thereof But The powerful grace which God
imparteth, in the holy Catholic Church.
these miserable captives, who were so weak, in the delivery of the^ selves
from so strong a tyrant, have sometimes, by the hearing of one Sermon, other
times, by making one confession, other times by some one single inspiration of
God; and others by other means, which do abound in the Catholic Church,
have found within themselves, a most powerful and mighty hand; which putting
those in captivity who lead them captive, drew them out of the slavery of
sin, wherein they were; and made a change of their heart, so truly changed;
that many times, in less space, then of a month, yea and of a week, they have
been seen, to have more abhorred wickedness, then formerly they were lovers of
it. Saying with their hearts, I have abhorred Psalm. 118.
sin; I have detested it; and I have loved thy law. And this they do so
truly, as that they resolve not to commit a sin, neither for life, nor death;
nor any thing created, as S Paul Romans 1.
says.

Who is he, that wrought this so strange, and happy change, in so short a time?
Who drew water, out of so hard a rock? Who raised up such a miserable dead
man, bestowing such an excellent life upon him? No other certainly, but the
hand of God, who is so believed in, and so beloved, as the Christian Church
belieueth in him, and loves him, by those means, which the Christian doctrine
imbraceth, and teaches. And if this manner of proceedinge with God, do pass
on, (as in many it does) in such sort, as that (leaving all things) they
employ themselves wholly upon attending to God, who brake their chains; and if
they began to walk, by the solitude of a spiritual life, and by that strayt
way which leads to true life (though many times, they might see themselves,
in so great afflictions, and fierce tempests, that (as David says) it makes
such as sail, loose their courage, and their discourse) yet by calling upon
their Jesus, who is the guide of their way; and at other times, by receiving the
comfort of the Sacraments; and at other times again, by hearing, or reading
the word of God; or by such other means as are in the Church; they have found
themselves so wonderfully assisted, in their tribulation, as that (seeing the
sea of their heart to be grown so still, upon such a sudden) it has made them
say, with the Apostles, Matt. 8.
Who is this, to whom the sea, and the winds obey? Certainly, this is the holy
Son of God.

S. Bernard relates, how by experience he had found many times, that the name
of Jesus, being cordially called upon, was a remedy and cure, of all the
infirmities of the soul; and that which the Saint did say, was approved in
him, by experience. The same has happened to many others, both before and after
him; among whom S. Hierome may be one; who is worthy of all credit. He
relates, (as I have said before) that seeing himself in tribulation of the
flesh, without meeting with remedy, in any thing that he had thought upon, and
without knowing, what more to do, did find it out, by casting himself, at the
feet of Jesus Christ, and by calling upon him with devour prayer. Whereupon
his tempest received such a calm, that he seemed to himself, as S. Hierome,
in Extasis.
if he were even assisting among the quires of Angels. For Note.
the favor which God is wont to do, does not only remove the tribulation that
a man is in, (which may happen sometimes, by the turning of his thoughts some
other way, or by such other natural means as that) but it is a favor which
God does, whereby he planteth such a disposition in the mind, as is directly
contrary to that which was felt before. Now this change and perfect delivery,
and that upon such a sudden; is not in the power of any man to give himself;
as Or else let him never trust me.
he that shall try it, will confess.

From abroad it comes; from God it comes; and from such other Christian
means it comes; and so experience is taken, of that which S. Paul said, That
Christ Jesus crucified, to them that were called by God, was the strength of
God; and the wisdom of God; Because, they calling upon him in the day of
tribulation, he gives them light, and force; that so, ouercomming all
impedimentes, they may proceed in their way, and sing therein, as Psalm. 1^7.
David does, Great is the glory of our Lord. And so they find in themselves,
that which the same Prophet Psalm. 55.
says, In whatsoever day I called upon thee, I have known, that thou art my
^od. For to remedy them so speedily, and so powerfully, is a great testimony,
and motive to prove to them, that God is the true God, and that he has care of
them. And here we speak not of celestial visions, or revelations, which may
rather pass amongst maracles, but only those things which are more ordinary;
and which may be subject to better proof.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the many, and great good things, which God works in the soul that
follows perfect virtue; and that this is a great proof, that our Faith is
true; because that, did teach us means, how to obtain those graces.
NOT only do they, who travel diligently in the way of perfect virtue, enjoy
the benefit of being delivered by Christ, from the dangers which present
themselves; but moreover, do they obtain, and possess such graces in their
soul, as that we may say to them, and that with much truth, Luc. 7.
The Kingdom of God is within you. Which as S. Paul Romans 14.
says, does consist, in having with in ones self, justice, and peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost. And so these persons, are so affectioned, and such lovers of
that which is just, and good, as that, if the laws of virtue which are written
in books, were lost; we should find them written in their hearts. Not because
they have them without In their memory.
book, but for that the resolute love of their hearts, does say the self same
thing, which the Law says exteriourly. Their heart, being already so
transformed into the love of goodness and to work it with so much diligence
and delight; as that to follow that, to which their heart inclines, is to
follow virtue; and to fly from vice; they being made a living Law, and a kind
of measure of humane actions, which even Aristotle himself was aiming at. And
from hence does spring a certain joy, and contentment, so complete, as none
does know, but he that feels it. For as much as Isaias Isa. 4^.
says, That the peace of such persons, is as a river, and as the very gulfes
of the sea. And S. Paul Philip. 4.
says, That this peace of God, does exceed all understanding. And S. Peter
says, That this joy cannot be recounted. A hidden manna it is, which is given
to him that manfully ouercometh himself, and they only know it, who receive it.

And from whom now, does this so perfect virtue proceed; and this rest of mind
which is the earnest-penny, and introduction to eternal felicity. Certainly
it is not by means of the Devil. For Note.
although sometimes, the Devil, (as we have said), have counseled some to do
some particular good, that by means of those counsels, he might gain credit
to himself, whereby the better to deceive them afterward; yet to make a man
perfectly good, and a fulfiller of the law of nature (which cannot be denied to
be good, since God is the author of nature it self) is a work, which neither
the Devil does, not can effect, who cannot give that goodness, which himself
has not.

Nor yet is it the work of man alone; for as much as to have virtue, and much
more to have perfect virtue, whereby God may perfectly be served, is the gift
of the Father of lights, from whom every perfect gift descendes. And See
therefore how unjustly the Catholic doctrine is charged by the Caluinists to
be a doctrine of presumption.
the same man does find by experience; more then once, that he is delivered
from sin, out of which he was not able to depart; and that he is favored
with certain graces, which it was not in his power to compass. Since
therefore this perfect virtue, comes neither from the Devil; nor from the
spirit of man; it remains, that we conclude it to be infused by God, when The
perfection is only to be found in the holy Catholic Church.
he is inuoked, and served, as the Catholic Church does teach. And man finds
by experience, that this virtue comes to him, by the means of Faith, in
confirmation of the truth thereof; for out of a lie, such profit of light or
knowledge could not come, for the procuring of perfect Virtue; and for the
inuoking of God, to favor him in the pursuit thereof.

S. Paul uses this proof, when he speaks thus to the Galathians; I desire
only that you will tell me, The holy Ghost which you received, was it by means
of the works of the Law, or else by means of faith? As if he should have said,
Since I, preaching Faith to you, and not the old law; and you believing it, and
disposing of your selves thereunto, by your will, did receive the holy Ghost;
why do you now return to the old Law, since you find by experience, that
without it, and by means of Faith, and of penance, upon the receiving of
Baptism, you have received the holy Ghost, with the graces and benefits
thereof? And so (to prove the thing which we have in hand) That perfect verene,
which is obtained by the right use of Faith, and by those other means which it
teaches us, does give testimony, that it is true; because, toward the
obtaining of so good a thing, it was a means, and it taught us also, other
means. And so these persons, who are so rich through the graces which come to
them by Christ Jesus, are so adherent to him, and so enriched by him, that they
have no thought of looking for the Messiah whom the Jews expect; nor of
enjoying that paradise, which Mahomet does entice men by. For as they despise
those bestiall delights of the flesh, which Mahomet in his paradise does
promise; and those other transitory benefits of the earth, which the Jews, by
their Messiah do expect; so they willingly take their leave both of the one and
the other; howsoever they be entreated to the contrary. And they remember how
it was prophesied, that in the time of the Messiah, They Ezech. 14. and 16.
Ierem. 31.
should know, that our Lord, was God; by his breaking the chains of the y^^kes
of men; and that God, would give men new hearts; and that he would write his
Law, in the very howells of them, that would receive it. Now because they make
very great conjectures, that they have a part in these blessings, it is a
testimony to them that Christ is come.

By these and other effects, which cannot be related, and which they have
within themselves, they are so full of joy, and peace, and confidence, in Jesus
Christ, as that, if men should tell them of another Christ that were Matt. 14.
in the desert, or in the secret closets of the house; or that he were far
off or near hand; they would never bestow the seeking of him. For since the
true Christ is but one and that they find the conditions of being true, in him,
in whom they do believe; with the same faith whereby they accept the one, they
reject the rest. But Note.
yet I say not this, to the end thou should think, that Christians believe
by the only experime^tal motives which they find within themselves; for they
only believe through faith, which is infused by God, as here after I will show.
But this I have only said, that thou may know the many motives, that we have
to believe, since we are treating of this subject. And one of them, is, The
experiments which perfect men do find in their soul; which since they are
things that pass up and down in their heart, thou art not to look for them
in books, or in the lives of others; but in thy own private conscience, by
striving to attain perfect virtue. That so, as I was saying in the beginning,
thou may have witnesses both near thee, and well known by theo, as
remaining within thee; and that thou may fulfill what the Scripture says,
Drink the water of thine own Cisterne; and thou shall see such meruailes
wrought within thy self; as shall take from thee, all appetite of seeking
any, without thy self.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
That if the power and greatness of the work of Believing, be well pondered, we
shall find great testimony, to prove, that it is much reason, that the
understanding of man do serve God, by embracing of Faith.
HE A worthy, and a wise discourse.
that had light to know, and a steedy hand to weigh, the very work of
believing, would be in no necessity of other witnesses, toward the receiving
thereof; but even therein, would find beauty to make him love it, and reason
to embrace it. For who is he, that will not conceive it to be wholly fit, that a
creature should serve his Creator with all his power; and vvithal his means?
And so also, do all men know, that although we owe him this service, withal
that we have; yet specially since God is a spirit, the prime service that we
are to do him, is with our spirit, through the liknes which it has to God. And
because in our spirit, there is reason, and there is a will; and that it cannot
be denied, but that a man owes God service by his will; for the same cause the
service of the understanding, must not be denied. For there is no reason that
man should serve God with the lesser facultyes that he has within him, and not
serve him with the chief, which are his understanding, and his will.

Nor yet is it reason, that Note well.
since the service that the will does to God, is by obeying him, the
understanding should remain without obedience to God. And as the obedience of
the will, consists, in denying a man's own will, for doing of the will of
God; so the service which the understanding is to do him, is to deny it self,
for the believing of the truth of God. For if the service of the understanding,
did consist in conceauing, or consenting to any thing, which it might be able
to reach, by the only hand of reason; either it would not deserve the name of
service, or at least but service of an inferior rank; since therein, there
were no obedience. Or if there were any obedience, it would be but of the will,
which God might command to impose upon the understanding, that it should
think this, or that.

But, to the end, that the service, and obedience of the understanding, may be
proper only to it self; it is necessary that it consent to somewhat which it
self does not understand; and thereby, it does truly abase, and deny it self;
and obey, and make it self captive, and do reverence, to the supreme God.
Fulfilling that, which S. Paul 1. Cor. 10.
requires, That we must captiuate our Understanding, to the service of Faith;
which, in another place, is styled, The obedience of faith So Note this well.
also, as the goodness of God exacteth at our hands, that we love him; and his
liberality requires that we hope for mercy from him; in the same manner, does
his truth require, to be believed; since there is no less reason for the one
of these, then for the other. And as the obedience which we give to God by our
love, presupposes that we deny the love of our selves; and as the hope we have
in him, is to work by an independance upon our selves; in the same manner, the
obedience which we are to yeald to his truth, is performed, by a departure from
our own seeming; and a belief of what he affirms, with greater constancy,
then if our selves did understand it. For otherwise, what should one be
beholding for to another, in believing that which that other says, not because
he says it, but because himself does so understand it. But, believing beyond
understanding, deserves praise, as carrying difficulty with it; as one would
trust without a pawn; or walk without a staff; or love an enemy, for Gods
sake. If therefore, it be done for God, it will be true virtue, and worthy to
be offered to God; and to receive a reward at his hands. And since the will of
a man is dedicated to God; and sanctified, by the abnegation of it self; the
understanding must not rest, as if it were profane, by believing it self,
without obedience to God. Since in heaven, it is to be made happy, by the
clear vision of his face. For as S. Augustine says, the reward of faith, is
to See; so that no discourse of reason will permit, that the understanding
should forbear to do service here on earth; now the service, which is proper
to it, is by believing.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Wherein answer is given to an objection which some make against our Faith; by
saying, that God teaches things, which are too high.
SOME man may say, being moved either by these, or other reasons; That it is
fit for a man to believe, that which he understands not, because God says
it. But that, since this may be performed by believing diverse other things,
there is no cause why yet we should believe that, which is believed by
Christians. But tell me, O you blind men; what is the fault you find, in that
which we Christians do believe. And if your selves know not how to say what you
think, I will tell you what it is. The Note, and take heed.
articles which of the height of God are to be believed, do seem so high
things to you, that even because they are so very high, you believe them not:
And the low or mean things which we believe of the humility of God, are so
very low; that even for that very reason, you hold them not to be worthy of
God, and so neither do you believe them. For tell me, in that highest mystery
of the most holy Trinity, what other thing does offend you; but that it is so
incomprehensible; and that the sight of your understanding, being beaten back
again upon your selves (by the A bysse of that infinite light, and the height
of such a mystery) you shut your eyes, and with saying, How can this be? you
forbear to believe it; whereas it were agreeable to all reason, that we should
think most highly of the most high* and that we should ascribe to him the most
high being* and the most excellent being, to which our understanding could
arrive. And when we shall have arrived to things very high, we must y^^ believe,
that in him there are st^l things higher; and which do wholly exceed our
capacity.

This is to honor God, and to hold him for God, and for a great one. For if
our Understanding could reach to all the height of God, God would be little;
and consequently he could not be God. For he could not be, unless he were
infinite; and the infinite is incomprehensible by any thing that is finite. And
since it is better, that there be in God, a supreme Communication, (since
supreme Communication, is due to a supreme goodness) and if this must also be,
it must be, by communicating the very, true, and total essence of it self;
and so there will be in God, supreme fecundity, as it is fit for God; and not
sterility, which is a thing very far from him; as he says, Isa. 1^.
by Isaias; I who give power to others that they may engender, shall I perhaps
remain barren?

And although by making of Angels, and men, and the whole world, he
communicates many favors to it, yet neither is this any such fecundity, nor a
Communication of an infinite Goo^^, because he gives not his essence. But he
only gives them, the being and virtue which they hau^^ nor shall God leave to
be a solitary God, notwithstanding the many creaturs that accompany him, since
between him and them, there is an infinite distance. Just so, as Adam would
not have failed to be solitary, notwithstanding the many beasts, and other
creatures which were in the world, how near soever they had been to him. And,
that man might not remain alone, God gave him a companion; which might hold
resemblance and equality, with him. So God is not solitary; but in the unity of
Essence, there are three persons. Nor is he covetous, or barren, since there is
a communication of an infinite Deity. Neither must thou forbear to believe
that so it is, although thou know not how it comes to be so; since even
because it is so high, it carries a kind of trace, or sent, to be a thing of
God. And because it is better to be so, then not; even for this very reason, it
is a thing which it is fit for God to have; and that so we should believe it,
since of God, we are to think, according to the greatness of God; that is, the
highest that possibly we can imagine.

CHAP. XL.
Wherein answer is made to the^* who object against the receiving of our
Faith, that it teaches mean and low things of God; and how in these mean
things which God teaches, most high glory is contained.
NEITHER yet, is there any reason to stumble at the humility, which the most
high God took upon him; abasing himself to become man, to live in poverty, and
to dye upon a Cross. For these works are not only not to be said unworthy of
God, but they are most worthy, if they be well understood. Indeed, if he had
abased himself because he could not choose; or if, by that abasement, he had
lost the height which he had before; or if he had been moved to it, by any
interest of such an abasement. But neither did he leave to be what he was, by
taking that which he was not; nor came he from heaven to earth, by any
constraint; nor was he induced by regard of profit; since God cannot increase
in being rich: But Note this well discourse, and learn to love God greatly, by
it.
he was moved to it, by his own only goodness; and by the love, which he bare
to men; and the desire which he had, to recover them by such means, as might
be, of most glory to himself, and of most advantage to us.

And such was the means he took, by making himself man, and dying upon a
Cross For there is not a greater sign of love, then that a man should die for
his friends. Which love so excellent, did not spring from any desert of theirs,
but from his own excellent goodness. So that his lowness, and his death, do
not argue, in him, any want of power or goodness: For as much as he being
omnipotent, and wholly wise, might have given us remedy by many means besides
this; but it argues in him, an immense excess of love, and goodness; and this
so much the more, as God who loves, and suffers this, is the greater; and as
that which he suffered was more grievous, and painful; and they for whom he
suffered, were the more unworthy, and base. And since in loving such persons,
his excellent goodness is manifested; this work is to be called a great
height, since in spiritual things, high, and good, are all one; and when it is
the more good, so much the more great, and high it is.

And since the greatest honor which we can do any man, is to hold him for
good, more then for being valiant, or wise (for as much as no man; who is
sensible of honor, does not so desire it) it is evident, that since these
works, do manifest his goodness and love, more then all the rest; they give him
consequently, more honor; and they give it better, then all the rest. And In
true account, nothing does so exalt Christ our Lord as his abasement.
if in the opinion of ignorant persons, the abasement which God has made of
himselve, take honor from his dignity, and height; it ought in the judgment of
wise men, to extol the honor of his goodness, and consequently of his height
and greatness; and so he loses neither the one, nor the other.

And not only, does his goodness shine in these works, more then others, but so
also does his wisdom and power, and other his most wonderful attributes,
appear therein. For amongst all the works which God has wrought, or is to
work, there is none equal, in being moruailous; nor is there to be found so
great a miracle, as that God, should make himself man; and suffer afterward
for man. And whosoever belieueth not this, does his best, to take from God, the
greatest honor he has; and greater then if he should take the honor that is
due to him, for all the other works which he has made, or is to make in Since
the Creation of the world.
Time. Consider well of this, and thou shall discern how the omnipotency, and
wisdom of Goth, does shine in making two so different extremes, to meet in
one, as are God and man in the unity of one person. And note, that his power is
more declared, in combatting and conquering our sins, and death, by the arms
of our weakness; then if he had overcome them with the weapons of his own
omnipotency, as we said before, whylest we were speaking of despair. And An
excellent discourse.
consider, that when God continued in his greatness, he had but a small people
that served him, and the same went also daily from him, to adore strange Gods;
and even when it did not so, it served him yet with much weakness. But when God
abased himself, so far as to be man, and to die for him; it made such deep
impression, upon the minds of men, as that they, who were high, did abase
themselves; and the weak, became strong; and the wicked good; and finally
there grew so great a change over the world, as well in the destruction of
idolatry, as in the renouation of life and manners; that the accomplishment of
the word, which our Lord spoke, was plainly seen, lo. m. 1^.
When I shallbe exalted from the earth, and placed on the Cross, I will draw
all things to my self. And so it appears, that he obtained that victory over
the hearts of men, by baseness, weakness, torments, and death; which he
obtained not, whylest he remained in the height of his Majesty. And thus was
that fullfilled, which S. Paul t. Cor. 1.
says, The weakness of God, is more the^ the strength of men. And so it also
appears, that God does not only gain the honor of goodness, but of
wisdom and power also, by taking upon him our baseness, and by working that
thereby, which he wrought not by his greatness.

For this it is, that S. Paul Romans 1.
says, That he is not ashamed to preach the Gospel, since it is the virtue
of God, for the saving of men. For although this humanity, hunger, dishonor,
torment, and death, be truly affirmed of God, yet there is no cause for a
Christian to be ashamed thereof; since by means of these things, God obtained
the conquest, over other things, that were so mighty, as are sin and death;
and procured that man might obtain the grace of God, and his Kingdom, which
are the greatest things, that could arrive to man. Hereby God gained more
honor, then by having created heaven, and earth, and all that is therein. And
therefore this work, is, for the eminency, and excellency of it, called the
work of God; as our Lord said, This is my food, to do the will of my Father,
in my finishing his work, which is the redemption of men. Not, but that God
has wrought other works; but because the In^ernation, and redemption which
follow hereupon, is the greatest work of them all; and that which he prizeth
most, as the thing whereby he receives most honor.

For The same excellent discourse continued.
although to have scourged Egypt, for the love of his people; and to have
drawn it out from thence, and to have conducted it through the desert, did
give honor to God, as Isaias says; yet already thou can not choose but see,
which is the more high and heroical act of love, for God to whip his enemies,
for the love of his people; or to suffer himself to be scourged in his own
flesh, for the love both of his domestiques, and of strangers, and both of his
friends, and of his enemies. One thing it is, for God to carry his children
through the desert, like an eagle that would teach his young ones how to fly;
taking them up upon his shoulders, when they are weary, that so they might
vnweary themselves, whylest yet God grows not weary thereby; and another
thing it is, to ouerloade his own shoulders with a heavy Cross, (which did
even flea them of their skin) together with all the sins of the whole world,
which like the beam of a wyne-presse, did strain him so far, as to deprive
him of life upon the same Cross; and this, to the end that men might be out of
pain.

Who is he that will not discern, that this was a most excellent heroical act
of love, the like whereof was never seen; which gave more honor to God, then
all that was past. That other, was, to him, but a common thing; and there was
no need of so great love, for the doing of it. But this later, was a business
that would have been embraced by few; and hardly will there be found a man upon
earth, who would suffer himself to be publicly whipped, or put to death, for
any good man, or any friend. And yet, if such a man could be found, there would
still be no comparison to be made, between that, and the much that our Lord
did love, and suffer for us. For he has no equal. Nor is it to be greatly
merua^led at, if a Lion carry himself like a Lion; but that a Lion, should be
content to suffer like a Lamb; and that the only cause thereof, should be his
love; this is a business of a strange extent, and worthy of eternal honor.

And since in former times, they said, Let Exodus 15.
us sing unto our Lord, for he has been magnified, in a glorious manner; Let us
also say, with a most profound gratitude, Let us sing unto our Lord who has
been magnifyed, in a most humble manner. For as much, as formerly, God did
neither abase himself, nor take pains in the ease which he gave us; nor,
although he imparted riches, did he impouerish himself; but here he
impouerished himself, he did sweat; yea he abased himself to death; and death
of the Cross; to raise his servants from sin, and to conduct them to
heaven; and he prevailed in his enterprise; and that which Isaias Isa. 55.
said, was fulfilled, that instead of the little shrubbe, there should grow the
Firretree; and instead of the nettle, there should grow the myrtle. And that
our Lord should be renowned, by an eternal token, which shall never be taken
away. For the honor which God did gain, in placing of of this sign, which is
the Cross, and to die thereon; and to make men good of bad; shall last for
ever, and there shall none be able to overthrow it.

CHAP. XLI.
That not only the glory of our Lord does shine in the humble things, of God,
which our Faith teaches, but also our own great profit, our strength, and
virtue.
NOT He still prosecuteth the same excellent discourse in an excellent manner.
only does the honor of God, shine after an excellent manner, in the works of
his humanity, and humility; but from thence also, does result the great profit,
and glory of man; whom nothing does so much exalte, as that God, has put
himself into Brotherhood with him. Nor is there any thing, which does so much
strengthen his heart, against the swooning afflictions which sin causes in
it; as to see, that God died, for the remedy thereof; and that he gave himself
to man, as his own. Nor is there any thing, which can so move him to love
God, as to see himself beloved by him, even to the death; nor to make a man
despise prosperity, or suffer adversity, nor to humble himself to God, and to
his Neighbor; nor indeed to any good thing, be it great or small, as to see God
abased, and humaned, and that he was pleased, to pass through these things;
giving us commandments to perform; examples to behold; and strength to go
through. And since this way of remedying our humility, and baseness, turns
more to the glory of God, and to the good of men; it is a sign, that this is a
work of God; since in that which God works, he pretends the manifestation
of his own glory, and man's good. And therefore he that either denies this
work, or hinders it, is an enemy of God, and of all mankind. Since thereby he
will deprive God of the greatest honor, which, by his works, can come to him;
and man of the greatest glory and benefit, that can be imagined. And since he
declares himself, as an enemy both to God and man, it is but reason, that he
be punished, and that with eternal death in hell. And the answer that he will
be able to give, when God shall ask him this question. Why Read this with
great attention.
did thou not believe those high things of me? must be this, Because, O Lord,
they seemed so high to me, that I did not think thou had been so high. And
being asked, why he did not believe those mysteryes of his humanity and
humility, since they were the testimonies of his goodness and of his love, he
must answer, That he did not think the love, and goodness of our Lord, to have
been so great, that he could find in his heart, to do, and suffer so much for
the love of men. So that he stumbleth both upon the high and upon the low. And
the root of all, is, because he thinks basely of God. And that he took his
height, and his goodness to be a limited kind of thing. Which root, and that
which proceeds thereof, shall justly burn in the fire of hell, as being
injurious to the most high God, whom it does diminish, and confine, with* in a
certain narrow compass.

How much better answer shall he make, who says, I believed, O Lord of thy
highness, and of thy goodness, all that possibly I could; because I held thee O
Lord, to be infinite in all things. And let it not please thee, that thy
works should seem ill to me, because they contain an excess of goodness and
love toward me: as it does to the infidelity of some, who find no other fault
in thee, but that thou art so very good, and so amorous to mankind. It being
indeed, but reason, that for this goodness, we should come to thee, and should
take thee for our God, since every one, O Lord, had rather, that thou should
be a ^ouing Father, and a pardoner, then a severe judge, who would make men
tremble, by chastizing them in rigorous manner. And if the fashion of Gods
treating with mankind, and of redressing our miseries, were put into the hand
even of a man, he could choose no other then that which God chose, as most
honorable to himself, most useful to us, and full of all happy sweetness.

CHAP. XLII.
Wherein it is proved, that the Truth of our Faith is infallible as well in
respect of them that have preached it as of them who have received it; and of
the manner how it was received.
LET us add to that which has been said, how This consideration alone may
suffice to prove the undoubted divinity of Christ our Lord.
this Faith, and belief was received in the world; not by force of arms; nor
by favor of men nor by humane wisdom; but that the Truth of God, fought
single, by means of a few Fisher men, without knowledge, or countenance,
against Emperors, and against Priests, and against the whole wisdom of
mankind. And it proved to be victorious; by making them quit their old, and
false, belief: and by inducing them to entertayne a Truth, which was so
superior to reason, and that to be so cordially embraced. For to give so firm
credit to things so high, is a great wonder of God; as also it is, that the
same men, who first did murder those that believed, should suffer themselves
afterward to be murdered, for the Truth of the same things; and that, with
greater strength and love, then formerly they disbelieued them; and then they
persecuted others. And withal, there was a law preached to them, and most pure
commandments given them, so much against the hair of the inclination of their
hearts; as that they could not think of things, which carried greater
contradiction to one another, then the law of the Ghospel, and the disposition
which man has to sin; as S. Paul says; The law is spiritual, but I am
carnal, sold under sin. And notwithstanding all this the same law was
received, and by the same virtue of Christ Jesus, their hearts, and their
works, were so renewed toward the accomplishing thereof, as that it did
evidently appear, that he who formerly had created men in their natural
being, was the same who by his virtue, did renew them.

And A wise and worthy contemplation.
if this should have been preached amongst the bestiall people of Arabia,
where Mahomet did preach his lies; or amongst men like to them, who were as
easy to be deceived, as they use to be who seek, and who carry lies, some
suspicion might be had of such belief. But what shall we say; This Truth was
preached in I^wry, where the knowledge of God, and his scriptures were: in
Greece, where was the top of humane wisdom; and in Rome, where was the
Empire, and gouernoment of the world. And in all these places, though it were
persecuted, yet in the end it was believed; and the triumphant title of the
Cross was verifyed, being written in H^bre^^, Greek, and Latin; whereby it
was given to be understood, that in those tongues, which were the principal of
the world, Christ was to be confessed, for King.

If therefore such as they, believed, upon sufficient motives, it is reason
that we follow them; and if there were any want of humane motives, it is plain
that they were led to it by light from God, for as much as, being people so
advised, and so affected, to their own ancient belief; and so strong in power
of arms, such a deep plant of Faith could not have been so low rooted, in a
people so contrary to this Truth; if the powerful hand of God had not
cooperated therewith.

S. Augustine observing this, says, That he, who seeing that the world
belieueth, will not yet believe or demaundes new miracles, for that purpose; he
himself is a prodigious, and fearful miracle; since he refuses to follow,
where so many, so noble, and so wise men, have gone before; and which they have
imbra^ed with so great constancy. Most just cause have we to do this, who by
the grace of God are Christians. For as much as since the world was a world, it
never had, appearing in it, a man of such doctrine, and of so heroical virtue,
and of so wonderful, and miraculous works, as Christ Jesus, our Lord; who
preached himself to be true God; and Plain proofs of the Divinity of Christ
our Lord, and the nobility and sanctity of the Catholic faith.
did prove it, by divine scripture; and by a multitude of miracles; and by the
testimony of S John Baptist, who was a witness auowed by all. And the same
has also been preached since, and proved by a multitude of miracles, in the
Christian Church. And there has never appeared any Faith, which does so honor
God as this of his; nor any law which does so teach men how to serve him, as
does the ghospel; which if a man could well understand, no other motive would
be needful, for the making of a man believe. Neither have there been seen in
the world, men of so great sanctity, as they of the Christian common weath; nor
have there been ever preached, so great and so high rewards, for them that
follow virtue; nor so horrible threats against men of vice; in testimony, that
our God is a great friend to goodness, and an enemy of wickedness. Nor have
there been wrought in the whole world, so many, and so great miracles, in
confirmation of any opinion, as in confirmation of this Faith Which if it were
not true, it would be v^ry injurious to the honor of the true God; since it
ascribed an equality, and unity of essence, with God himself, to a man. Nor
would he have suffered it to continue such a number of years; nor would he so
severely have punished the people of the Jews, for having crucified such a
man; nor would he have wrought so many, and so great miracles in confirmation
of this belief. So that we may with reason say to God, as Richardus does; If
we be deceived, in that which we believe, God has deceived us. For as much as
this Truth has* of it self, so much clear evidence; and such effects have
followed, and such miracles have been wrought, in confirmation thereof; that
other then God, could not work them. But as god is far from being a deceauer,
so in this, are we far from being deceived. Glory be to God for ever.

CHAP. XLIII.
That such is the greatness of our Faith, that none of the aforesaid motives,
nor any other, that can be delivered, are sufficient to make a man believe with
this divine Faith; unless our Lord do incline a man to believe by particular
favor.
HITHERTO, thou have heard some of the reasons, which may incline a man to
find, that the Catholic Faith is true, and to satisfy any man, that should
charge us, as if we were light in believing, since we have more ^otiues, then
any Nation of the world. But with all this, assure thy self, that so great is
the height of the Christian Faith, that although a man should have, both these
and other motives, which might be thought of; and although amongst the rest, he
should have also this other, to see miracles wroght in confirmation of the
Faith, with his own eyes of flesh; yet Faith, is the gift of God alone.
such a man shall not be able, by his own strength, to believe, as a Christian
must, and as God commands him to believe For, the teaching hereof, depends
upon an interior Master; infusing Faith into the understanding: whereby a man
is taught, and fortified toward this belief, as Christ says, That it is
written in the Isa. 54.
Prophets, That Joan. 6.
all shall be taught by God. And the same Lord, which S Peter had confessed for
the true son of God, and for the Messiah promised in the law, gave him to
understand, that he was not to thank himself, but to acknowledge that Faith
and confession, as the gift of God; and he said, Plessed Mat. 16.
art thou, Simon the son of Jonas; for flesh and blood has not revealed
these things to thee, but my Father which is in heaven And in another place,
he says, All Joan. 6.
they who hear, and learn of my Father, come to me.

A sovereign School is this, where God the Father, is he that teaches; and
the doctrine which is taught, is the Faith of Jesus Christ his son; and in
that, we are to walk, by the paces of Faith, and Love. This Faith must not
wholly rest, upon whatsoever motives or reasons that may be brought; for
whosoever belieueth only upon them, does not believe in such sort, as that his
understanding is so persuaded, as to admit no place for doubt, or scruple. But
the faith which God infuseth, does rest upon the divine Truth; and makes one
believe more firmly, then if he saw it with his very eyes, and touched it with
his very hands, and with greater certainty, then, That four are more, then
three, or the like, which the understanding, sees things with so great
clarity, as to have no difficulty therein, nor ability to doubt thereof, though
it would. Then does a man say, to all the motives which induced him to believe,
as they of Samaria, said to that Samaritan woman.

No longer now do we believe, for that which thou saydst; for our selves have
seen, and known that this is the Savior of the world. But Note.
although they say we have known; yet do not thou understand, that they who
believe, have that kind of clarity of evidence, which the Philosophers call
Science. For (as before has been expressed) neither can the understanding
arrive, by the reason thereof, to have clarity in things of Faith; nor can
faith have evidence; for so it should not be faith; nor would there be any
merit in it. It is true, that faith, is said to be a kind of sight; and that it
is in the understanding; but because it is not, with this clarity of evidence,
S. Paul says, That we now see as by a glass, but hereafter, we shall see, in
heaven, face to face. But the Samaritans say, that they know Christ to be the
Savior of the world, to give us to understand, That they believe it with so
great firmenes, as that which they do most clearly know; yea and much more then
so. For (according to what we have said) he that imbraceth the faith, being
infused by God, belieueth it because it is affirmed by the Truth of God. And
The reason of the infallibility of Faith, and the great extent thereof.
now because this Truth, is infinite, and more certain then all other Truths
(since by the participation thereof, all other things receive their strength
of truth) such a belieuer is so assured, that he cannot be deceived in what he
belieueth, as he is sure that God cannot fail to be true; which certainty, is
the greatest of all others whatsoever. And this makes a man remain so full of
satisfaction, in this kind, that there passes not so much as a thought in his
mind, against this faith; or if any pass, it passes on so quickly, as that
it puts him to little pain. And if he be combatted by scruples, or vain
thoughts, yet is he full of repose, and quietness in the interior part of his
understanding; for his belief is built upon fine and firm stone, which is
Truth it self, which he belieueth for the very Truth, and not upon other
motives. Therefore can neither winds, nor waters, nor rivers, drive it down.
And if thou marvel, that in the understanding of a man, who is so various,
and changeable in his opinions, and who with so little firmness does settle
himself upon the ground of reason, there is yet in him so great a certainty,
and such a settled and firm constancy, that neither by means of argument, or
torment, or example of others that loose their faith; nor for any thing, either
high, or low, he can be made to stir from his belief, I say that even this
may make thee know, That this business, and this building, is no effect of our
force, which cannot reach so far.

A gift of God it is, as S. Paul says, which can neither be inherited, nor
merited, not purchased by humane strength; that no man may glory to have it of
himself; but let them be faithful, in knowing that it is the favor of God;
and given us for his Son, Christ Jesus sake; as S. Peter says, You were made
faithful by him Do not therefore marvel, that upon the miserable sand of man's
understanding, so firm a building is erected; For our Lord affirms thus, It
is the work of God, that you believe in him, whom he has sent. So that as
God conducteth man to a supernatural end, which is to see him clearly in
heaven; so was he not content, that man should believe in him, as merely a
man, by the force of motives, miracles, and other reasons. But raising him up,
above himself, and giving him supernatural force wherewith to believe, not
with doubt, and scruple, as a mere man would do; but with certainty, and
security, as becomes the Mysteryes of God. And hereby we understand, That no
man can call upon Christ Jesus, but in the Holy Ghost. For although it be not
necessary, that for believing, a man must be in state of grace, (as hereafter
I will show) yet can it not be done without the inspiration of the Holy Ghost;
For there, S. Paul the Apostle, is speaking of such works of graces as these,
which the Deuines express, to be given gratis.

This is that Faith, which inclines the understanding to believe supreme
Truth, in that which the Do not wilfully mistake the Author; for whenever
he names the Christian faith he means the Catholic Roman, as he shows
plainly, and plentifully by this book.
Catholic faith affirms; as the will is inclined by love to love supreme
goodness. And as the Mariners needle, is carried force of the North, to turn
straight toward the north; so does God move the understanding by that Faith,
which he infuseth, to go toward him, by giving a kind of credit, which is A
true description of true Faith, which shows how noble and sublime a thing it
is.
firm, quiet, and full of satisfaction. And when this Faith is perfect; it
carries in her company, a certain light, whereby, although it sees not what
it belieueth, yet sees it, how fit it is, to believe the mysteryes of God; And
not only does it feel no pain in believing; but much delight; as perfect
virtue uses to do, which operateth with facility, constancy, and pleasure.

This is that Faith, which for much reason is to be prized and honored; since
by it we honor God, as S. Paul says, that Abraham did; giving to God the
honor of being so mighty, as that he can do whatsoever he says. This is that
^ayth, which God has erected in our soul, as it were a Tower; to the end that
mo^^^ng up by it, we may see (though it be, but as in a glass) that which is
in heaven, and in hell, and that which happened in the beginning of the world,
and that which is to happen in the end. And though a thing may be never so
hidden, yet can it not lie hidden from the eyes of faith; as is plame in the
case of the good thief; who seeing so much contempt, and exterior baseness,
upon the person of Christ crucified; did enter yet, by his faith, into that
which was most retired; and he knew him for the Lord of heaven; and confessed
him for such, with great hum^^^t^, and constancy.

By Note this; and reverence the church of Christ, which has power to declare
which are the S^^^ture^ which are to be be^^u^d by (...).
this Faith, we believe that to be the scripture, and word of God, which the
Church declares to us to be such. And though it be spoken by the mouth of men,
we ^et do embrace it for the word of God. And therefore we do no les^^ believe,
that Evangelist, or Prophet who wrote that which he did not see, then him that
wrote what he saw. For our Faith, does not cast her eye, upon humane testimony,
which rests upon means that are humane; but upon this, That God inspireth
such an Evangelist, or Prophet, to write the Truth; and that God assisted him,
that so he might not be deceived, in what he wrote.

Certain it is, that although S. Peter, with his own ears, did hear that
voice of the Father, which he sounded forth in Mount Thabor; This is my
wellbeloued son; and who with his own eyes saw Christ Jesus, shine as
brightly as the sun; yet if we should consider him, but as a man, giving
testimony of what he saw, and heard; more firmness, and certainty, has the
Scripture or speech of the Prophets, who gave testimony of Christ Jesus to be
the son of God; although they neither saw, nor heard him ever with their
corporal eyes and ears; then that, which S. Peter said, by what he had both
heard, and seen.

But Note this wel^.
since the letter of S. Peter, wherein this is written, is declared by the
Church, to be divine Scripture, and so by consequence, that whatsoever he says
therein, is the word of God: it is certain that God assisted him in saying it;
and assisted him so as that he might not be deceived, in what he either heard,
or saw, upon Mount Tha^or; nor in that which he wrote, when he recounted what
had passed there. And thus the word of the Prophets is not more firm or
certain, because he, or they did utter them; but because they spoke, by the
instinct of the same holy Ghost, who is Truth it self.

This habitual faith, God infuseth into the souls of children when they are
baptized; and into persons of discretion who want it, he infuseth, both
habitual faith, and actual; when they dispose themselves to rece^^e it. For
he desires that all should be saved, and come to the knowledge of this Truth;
since without it, God cannot be pleased, nor man be saved. He fails not to
give it to every one, if there be no fault in him.

CHAP. XLIV.
That we must give our Lord great thanks, for the gift of Faith; and that we
must use it, to the end for which it was given; in such sort, as that we
attribute not that to it which it has not; and what both the one, and the
other is.
IT is much reason, O thou Child of Christ, that all we who are Christians, be
most cordially thankful to our Lord, who, out of his grace, bestowed this
benefit of Faith upon us, whereby we might be grateful to him. Nor must we
suffer a day to pass, without confessing this Faith; at the least in the
morning, and evening; and without giving him particular thanks for this
benefit. We must procure to conserve it in great sincerity, and purity, as a
thing which imports us much; considering to what end it was given us; both
that we might not fail to use it for that which it is, and that we attribute
not that to it, which it has not.

It is given us, to the end that we may believe, that which God commands us
to believe; and that it may be a light of knowledge, which may help to move
our will, toward the loving of God, and the keeping of his commandments,
whereby a man may be saved. But if any one will attribute to this Faith, that
by it A greiuous error it is to hold that says alone will save our souls.
alone, we ariue to have justice, and pardon of our sins; he shall fall into
a Note this discourse very well, for it does much import.
grievous er^our; as they have done who did affirm it, because, as already
has been said by the authority of S. Paul, No man can say, that Jesus is our
Lord, but by inspiration of the holy ghost. Whereby it is to be understood,
that the same inspiration is re^uisite to believe all the other mysteries of
our Faith. And we know that our Lord said to some of them who heard him, why do
you call me Lord, Lord; and do not the things that I command you. Now since
they could so much as call Jesus, Lord but by faith inspired, as S. Paul says;
and yet, not doing that, which our Lord commanded, they were not in state of
grace; it follows clearly, that a man may have Faith without grace, which S.
Paul affirms also in another place, where he faith, That if a man should have
the gift of speaking tongues, and should comprehend, and possess all
knowledge, and prophecy, and have all faith, so far as that he could remove
mountains from one place to another, and yet should be without charity, all
this were nothing. And since it is certain, that the gift of tongues, (with
the rest, which is there recounted) is compatible with mortal sin, it
stands not with reason that men should make it impossible, for faith to be
without charity; though it be true, that charity cannot be without faith. They
are the words of the divine scripture, That justice is given by faith; but that
it should be given by faith alone, is an invention of men; and a very ignorant,
and perverse error. Whereof our Lord did warn us, when he said to S. Mary
Magdalen. That many sins were forgiven her, because she loved much. Which
words are as clear, to show that love is requisite, as there are any in the
whole scripture, to show the necessity of faith. And that not only there must be
love in the justification of a sinner; but because love is a disposition
toward the obteining of pardon, as faith is, they both must go hand in hand;
and of both did our Lord make mention, in the conversion of S. Mary Magdalen.
For, at the end of the discourse, he said; Thy faith has saved thee, go in
peace. Nor in that which our Lord said before, That many sins were forgiven
her, because she loved much, would he say that it was, because she believed
much, (giving the effect, the name of the cause) since it is evident, that our
Lord having asked, which of these two debtors did love him most who released
the debt, it was answered, He to whom the more was released (and not he to
whom the less) he was to have concluded his discourse, with speaking of love,
and not of Faith. And if liberty may be taken, for a man to say, that he called
Faith, Love; (tearming the effect, by the name of his cause) let us also take
liberty to say, that in those places of the Scripture, where it is affirmed,
That man is justified by Faith, Love is to be understood, by the name of Faith,
by considering in the cause, the effect.

In plain manner did our Lord speak here (unless a man be disposed to hood
wincke himself, in so fair a light) and he called faith and love, by their
own names, and both of them are requisite to justification, as we have said
already. And our Lord did settle the same conjunction, when he said afterward
to his disciples, The Joan. 16.
Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and have believed that
I issued from him. And fince Faith and love, are both requisite to a man,
without doubt he will have grief for his sins, as having grievously offended
God, whom he loves above all things; as it is plain, by the example of S.
Mary Magdalen, and of other sinners who were comuerted to God.

Now If this be well considered, it will overthrow the fancyes, which the
Caluinish have, concerning Faith.
because both these things are requisite (and others also which flow from
them) toward the obtaining of Justice; therefore does the holy Scripture,
sometimes name Faith, and sometimes Love, and sometimes sorrow and grief; of
Repentance; and sometimes The humble prayer of the penitent, who says, Lord
have mercy upon me a sinner; and sometimes the knowledge of the sin it self.
I have sinned, O Lord, said David; and instantly he heard the word of pardon,
in the name of God. But yet he, who should be induced by this, to say that
sin is pardoned, by a man's only knowledge of the sin; should fall into no
small error; since Cain, and Judas, and Saul, and many others did know their
sin, and yet came not to obtain pardon of it. And so far, without all
ground, is it for them to say, That by only Faith it is obtained, in respect
that the Scripture does in some places make mention of Faith alone; as it is
that, for the same reason, we might also exclude faith out of this business*
as being unnecessary, because, in other places, the Scripture says, That
sins are forgiven by penance, and other means, without making any mention
at all of Faith.

But The doctrine of the Catholic Church, concerning this point.
the truth of Catholic doctrine is this, That both the one, and the others,
are requisite; as dispositions, toward the obtaining of pardon and grace And
if any man shall reflect upon this, That Faith is named many times, by way of
attributing justice to it, and that by faith we are made the sons of God; and
partakers of the merits of Jesus Christ, and such like effects, as do accompany
grace, and charity; it is not because faith alone is sufficient for it; but
because, when the Scripture attributes these effects to Faith, it is to be
understood of that Faith, which is formed by charity, and which is the life
thereof. Neither yet must these effects be attributed to Faith, as if
necessarily, upon our having faith, we must have love; because true faith may
remain, as has been said, even when grace and love are lost; which love, as
S. Paul says, is greater then either faith or hope. And when our Lord spoke of
faith and love, as well in that passage of S. Mary Magdalen, as in that other,
which we mentioned, with his disciples, he named love, before faith; giving the
precedent place of perfection, to that which was the act of the will; which
yet, after a sort, is subsequent, if it be compared with an act of the
understanding, to which faith belongs.

It is also to be understood, that although the Sacraments of Baptism, and
Penance, are necessarily to be received (or at least, a purpose of receiving
them must be intertayned) for the obtaining of that Grace which is lost (the
former by Infidells, and the latter, by belieuers, who, after Baptism, have
committed mortal sin) yet is there not, in holy Scripture, so frequent
speech of them as of faith, for the reason, which shortly I shall relate. But
yet, neither is the mention of them forborne, least any one should think, that
they were not necessary, toward the obtaining of Justice. S. Paul Tim. 3.
faith, That God saved us, by the Baptism of regeneration, and renouation of
the holy Ghost; and that Christ did cleanse his Church, by the Baptism of
water, in the word of life. And it, because the Scripture says, That we are
justified by faith, we were to cast away the Sacraments; as justly were we to
cast away says, since it says, That salvation, and cleanesse, is given by
holy Baptism. But our Lord does couple these things together, by saying, He,
Marc. v^^uno.
that shall believe, and be baptized, he shall be saved. The same Lord of ours,
said also to his Apostles, when he instituted the Sacrament of Penance, Whose
Joan. 10.
sins you shall pardon, they are pardoned etc. and consequently grace and
justice* is given by this Sacrament, since there can be no pardon of sin,
unless grace be given withal; which is signified, and contained, in all the
seven Sacraments of the Church. And it is given to him that receaueth them
wel^ even with more abundance, then To which disposition out of the Sacrament,
there would not be allowed so great a grace, though yet still, the recea^^^
must have good disposition, if he mean to acquire new gra^e and not to co^^^t
a new ^acri ledge.
there is disposition in the receauer; in regard that they are privileged
works, which by the very being received, do confer grace. Therefore ought
they to be received, and renewed, in extraordinary manner, as the Catholic
Church does believe, and teach us.

Now, This is worthy o^ great consideration.
if Faith were, in the beginning of the Church, so frequently mentioned, and
preached; it was fi^ to be so, because the faith was then newly planted; and
the endeavor was, to make infidells receive it; and to enter by it, as by the
first gate, which shows the way to salvation; that when once they were come
in, they might be informed more particulerly, both of what they were further to
believe, and what they were to do.

So also was it necessary in those times to express, after a particular
manner, the mystery, and high value of the passion, and death of our redeemer
Jesus Christ, who with extreme dishonor, had then been crucified; and how the
faith of this mystery, makes men believe and confess, That upon that wood,
which to outward appearance was so dishonorable, that divine life was hanged;
and that there, in the midst of the earth, God wrought, by means of his
death, the recovery, and salvation of the world. This faith being such, does
honor the dishonor of the Cross; and is the exaltation of that baseness,
which was exercised thereon, in a strange, and extreme manner. For which
reason, it was fit to make often mention of the name of faith; and that with
great respect; since it resulted to the honor of Jesus Christ our Lord, of
whose person, and merits she The Church.
gives testimony, by preaching the height thereof.

So as, if the Scripture say. That men are iustifyedly faith; it is not meant,
as if that alone were sufficient; but because it is the beginning, and
foundation, and rote of all that is good; as the Council of Trent defines;
and O how true is this.
they who attribute justification to faith alone, do but seek for comfort in
their tepidities; or in the impiety of their lives; desiring to secure
themselves by the way of believing, that their Circle may be the wider in the
way of living. And the peace, and confidence of a good conscience, which is
caused by perfect charity, these men will needs obtain, without the taking of
such pains, as the perfection of virtue does require. Yea, and they content
not themselves herewith; but, although, according to the very truth, no man can
be entirely certain in this life, whether he be worthy of love, or hate,
(though yet according to the grace and ver^ue which he has, more or less, he
may have more, or fewer reasons of confidence) yet these men, who give that
certainty to such as believe, (according to their own imagination) that they
are pardoned by God, which a Christian man is to have, in believing an article
of faith, are people deceived by the devil; and these things are believed, by
such as have neither any firm ground of faith; nor any sanctity of life; but
are haters of all obedience; and who, being blindfold, go groping after the
mysteries of God; and indeed if they were not blinded, the devil could not so
easily deceive them.

CHAP. XLV.
Why our Lord did resolve to save us, by the means of Faith, and not of humane
Reason; and of the great subjection which we must yield to those things which
our Faith does teach; and of the particular devotion which we owe, in especial
manner, to that which our Lord Jesus taught us by his own sacred mouth.
THE method of the words of this Treatise, did require, that after the first
word thereof, I should declare the second to thee; but the order of the
sentences, whereof the first, and the third, say the same thing; requires,
that (forbearing at the present to touch the second), I now declare the third,
which says thus: Incline thine care. By this thou art to note, that so great
is the height of the mysteries of God; and so low, and poor is thy reason; and
so easily subject to deceit; that for the security of our salvation, God
resolved to save us, by our faith, and not by our knowledge. And this, not
without most just cause; because since the world (as Saint Paul says) did not
know God by means of wisdom, but sell impertinently upon many crrours,
as^^^bing the glory of God to the Sun, and Moon, and other creatures. And
because others who (by the trace of those creatures) came to know God) took
such a deal of pride, in their way of tracing the knowledge of a thing so
high, this light was taken away, for their pride, which our Lord had given them
through his goodness; and so they fell into the darkness of idolatry, and
into a multitude of other sins, such as they had fallen into, who never had
known God. For which reason, as, after the fall of the wicked Angels (God
taking (as a man may say) a kind of warning by that) he would not suffer any
creature to remain in heaven, that could be able to sin; perceiving how ill
the creatures served themselves of reason; and because the world (as S. Paul
says) did not know God by wisdom, he would not leave the knowledge of him,
and the salvation of themselves, in the hands of their wisdom.

Therefore, as soon as the holy Ghost had given us counsel, by the two words
already mentioned, of Hear and See, he does instantly advise us by a third,
which says, Incline thine ear. Whereby he gives us to understand, that we
must submit our reason most profoundly; and not be too confident therein, if we
mean that our hearing, and our seeing, which were given us for our good, may
not be the occasion of our eternal perdition. Certain it is, that many have
heard the word of God, and have had an excellent sight and notice, of high, and
subtle things; but yet because they rested upon the curiosity of their sight,
more then they did ^^cline the ear of their reason, with obedience; their
sight grew to be stark blindness; and they went stumbling in the light of
Noonday, as if it had been in utter darkness.

If therefore thou will not loose the way to heaven, Incline thine ear, that
is, thy reason, for fear least otherwise thou be deceived thereby. Incline it,
with a most profound reverence, to that which is said by the word of God,
throughout the whole Scripture. And if thou understand it not, thou art not,
for that, to think that the Holy Ghost which spoke, did err; but submit thy
understanding, and believe, as S. Augustine says, that he did that, which by
reason of the height of that word, thou art not able to understand. And
although thou art to incline thine ear, by giving equal credit of Faith, to
all the Scripture of God, because all of it is the word of the same supreme
Truth; yet art thou to carry particular respect, and care, to receive profit by
those blessed words, which A pious and very profitable advice.
the true God incarnate spoke here on earth. Open thou, with devout attention,
both the ears of thy body, and of thy soul, to every word of this Lord, who
was given to us for an especial master, by the voice of the eternal Father,
who said, This is my well beloved Son, in whom I am pleased, hear him. Be
studious. in reading, and hearing these words; and then thou will not fail to
find, in them a singular remedy, and powerful efficacy, for those things
which concern thy soul, which thou have not found in every other of those
words, which God has spoken, from the beginning of the world. And this is so,
with great reason, since that which he said in other places, was spoken by the
mouth of his servants; but that which he said, in the humanity which he took,
he spoke in person; opening his own sacred mouth to speak; he who formerly
had opened, and afterward did open the mouth of others, who spoke both in the
old, and new Testament. And take heed that thou be not unthankful; for so
great a blessing, as it is, That God should be our Master; giving us the milk
of his word to sustain us; he who had given us first a being, that we might
have somewhat to be sustained.

So great a favor is this, that if we had scales wherewith to weigh it; and if
it were told us, that at the furthest corner of the world, some words of God
were left for the instruction of our soul, we were to make light of all
labor; and danger, to hear some few of those words delivered, by that
supreme wisdom, for the making of us his disciples. Serve thy self therefore
well of this favor, since God has given it thee, so near at hand; and desire
of him, who takes care to conduct thy soul in the way of spirit; that in holy
Scripture, and in the doctrine of the Church, and amongst the writings of the
Saints he will seek out such words, as may carry proportion to the
necessityes of thy soul; whether it be to defend thee against tentations, as
our Lord did fast in the desert for our example; or whether it be to spur
thee up in the search of those virtues, which thou want; or whether in fine
it be to know how to carry thy self as thou ought, with God, with thy self,
and with thy Neighbors, whether they be thy betters, thy inferiors, or thy
equals; and how thou art to conduct thy soul in prosperity, and how in
tribulation. And finally, how thou art to behave thy self, in all that,
whereof thou may have need, in the way of God. In such sort as that thou
may say, In Psalm. 118.
my heart, I have hidden thy words, that I may not sin against thee. Thy word
is a torch to my feet, and a light to my pathwayes. And be sure thou fall not,
into curiosity of desiring to know more then thou have need of, either for thy
self, or for such as are under thy charge. For whatsoever is more then this,
thou must leave to them whose office it is, to teach the people of God; as S.
Paul Romans 11.
admonishes, That our knowledge may be with sobriety.

CHAP. XLVI.
That the holy Scripture must not be declared by what sense one will; but by
that of the Church of Rome; and where that declares not, we must follow the
uniform exposition of the Saints; And of the great submission, and subjection,
which we must performs to this holy Church.
THOU art to know, that the exposition of holy Scripture, must not be made
according to the wits, or fancies of particular men; for so (although it be
most certainly true in it, self) as being the word of God) yet (for as much
as concerns us) it would be very uncertain; since commonly there are as many
opinions, as there be heads of men. Now, for as much as it does greatly import
us, to have suprem certitude of the Word which we are to believe, and follow
(since we are to lay down, for the confession and obedience thereof,
whatsoever we have (and even our very life,) our business were not well
provided for, if (notwithstanding the several opinions, which men of themselves
are subject to) the certainty of this Word, might not be lodged in the heart of
a Christian.

To The only Catholic Church of Christ, in the undoubtedly true Interpretour
of Gods holy Scripture.
the only Catholic Church, this privilege is given, that it may understand,
and interpret the Divine Scripture; because the same holy Ghost, which
delivered the Scripture, does dwell in her. And where the Church does not
determine, we must have recourse to the uniform interpretation of the Saints,
if we will be free from error. For otherwise how shall that which was spoken
by a divine spirit, be understood by a spirit, and wit which is humane; since
every scripture, is to be read, and declared, by the same spirit that wrate it.
Thou art also to know, that the declaration, of, what Scripture, is the Word of
God (that so it may be believed by all men) does not belong to any other, but
only to that same Christian Church, which by divine ordination has the Bishop
of Rome for her head. And esteem, thou for certain, as S Hicrome Let
Protestants note this and tremble.
says, That whosoever shall eat the lamb of God, out of this Church and house
of God, is a profane person, and no Christian. And whosoever shall be found out
of the same, will infallibly perish, as they who entered not into the Arcke of
Noe, were drowned in the flood.

This is that Church, which the Gospel commands us to hearken to; and
whosoever shall not hearken to her, is to be held, for a wicked person, and for
an unbeliever. And this is that Church, of which S. Paul says, that she is
the pillar, and strength of truth. And to believe that this is so, that very
Faith infused by God, (whereof we spoke before), does incline, and illuminate
us, as to one of the other articles; and with a like certainty to that which
belongs to others, and as hitherto it has been so believed of this Church.
And although, in these times of ours, there be departed from her, a certain
race of people, full of Heresy is both the Mother, and the companion, and the
daughter of Pride.
pride, and who, for that very pride, were fit to be deceived by the devil;
yet the Church does not for this, give over to be what she was; nor must we
leave to believe, that which formerly we believed. And therefore against this
Church, let no revelation, move thee, nor inward feeling of spirit, nor any
other thing, either greater, or less, although it might seem, to be an Angel
from heaven, which should go against it; I say although it should seem, for to
be so indeed, it is not possible.

Much less art thou to be moved, by the doctrine of heretics, whether they be
past, or present, or to come; who being forsaken by the hand of God, through
his just judgment, do follow a false light, instead of a true; and destroying
themselves, they are the cause of perdition to as many as follow them. Observe
what end they have had, who in former times have departed from the belief of
this Church; and how they have resembled the blustering of a wind, which quickly
passed, and soon after was forgotten. And consider, how this Church has
remained victorious. And although, even since the infancy thereof, it have been
assaulted; yet never has it been conquered, because it was grounded upon a
firm rock; against which, neither the rain, nor the wind, nor the rivers,
nor the very gates of hell, can prevail. Shut therefore thine ears, against
all doctrine which is contrary to this Church; and follow that belief, which
has been received, and kept, for such a multitude of years; since it is
certain, that an infinite number of men, have been, not only saved therein, but
have here, been Saints.

For my part, I cannot reflect upon a greater folly, then for a man to leave a
way, by which so many persons, so wise, and so holy went to heaven; to follow
certain other folks, who are incomparably inferior to the former, in every
thing, that is good. In pride indeed, and impudence, they are superior; for
they will needs be better believed, (without any other proof, but of their
own opinion) then a multitude of our forefathers, who were endued with divine
wisdom; and who lead a most excellent life; and who wrought a multitude of
great miracles. Whereas their chief, whom these deceived creatures follow, was
a certain A strange fellow to make the reformer of Gods Church.
Luther, a man so weak in the point of his flesh, that he was not able to live
without a woman; nor, she being dead, could he live then in chastity, but
According to Luthers doctrine, he must either do that or worse: for he says,
it was not possible for a man to live* witho^^^ woman.
was feign (as the report goes) to take a second; though many others, have
contented themselves with one, and others again without any at al, that so
they might, with greater liberty and purity, attend to the contemplation of
God. How then shall we call that, a good spirit, which lived in that wicked
man, since it had not force to give him a chastity, even of the most vulgar
streine; whereas yet he had made a promise of it, after the highest manner; and
which many men did so possess, whom it had been fit for him to follow as his
betters. And since our Lord has said, that by the fruits, we should know the
tree; it must have been a spirit of earth, and of infirmity of flesh, and of the
devil, which dwelt in that man; since he yealded such fruits as these, and
worse then these. Stay a while, and thou shall see the end of these wicked
persons; and how God will vomit them out, to their extreme reproach; declaring
the error of them by some manifest punishment, as he has done with their
predecessors.

CHAP. XLVII.
What a terrible chastisement it is, when God permits men to loose their
Faith; and that it is justly taken away from them, that work not, in
conformity of what it teaches.
HE that could have light to judge, that the true blessings, or miseries of a
man, are the spiritual; would quickly discern the severe chastisement of God
upon that kind of Heretics.
people; yea so great chastisement, as that only hell is worse then it. Who
I^rem. 20. Psalm. 39.
will not fear thee, O thou King of the Nations; or who has known the power
of thy wrath; or who shall be able to recount it, through the great fear, which
is to be had thereof? The greatest chastisements of God, which are most to be
feared, are not the loss of goods, or of reputation, or of life; but, for God
to suffer the will of man to be hardened in sin; or to permit his understanding
to be blinded in error; and especially in matters of Faith, these be the
wounds, which are inflicted by that celestial indignation; and they are not the
corrections of a father, but of a just and rigorous judge. Of these it is, with
much reason, understood, which God says in I^rem. 30.
Ier^^y; With the wound of an enemy, with rig^rous chastisemen^* I have wounded
thee. Though indeed he uses not this rigor of a judge, till first he have
employed the mercy of a Father. And if thou mark it well, the blindness of the
Understanding, has this particular mischief belonging to it, more then has
the hardness of the will; that Let Heretics consider the sad case they are in.
this latter, though it be a great one, is capable of more hope to meet with
remedies. For as long as a man's Faith remains (though it be dead) yet still he
knows, that there is help in the Church toward the cure of his sin; which
is a great step toward his recovering, and rising. But he that loses his
Faith, how shall he seek it, or where shall he find it; since it is not to be
found out of the Church, (because it is no where else) and that which is in the
Church, he will not seek, because he belieueth it not, and so he remains in
ruin. This is a word which God speaks in Israel, and whosoever shall hear
it, his very cares shall tingle again, with mere sear. But so great a
punishment, is not inflicted without great cause; which S. Paul Romans ^^
declares thus: The wrath of God discovers it self, from the heavens
downward, upon all the wickedness of those men, who A place of Scripture
excellently pondered.
detayned the wrath of God in injustice. And the intent of the Apostle in that
place, is this, That there were men, who although they knew God, did not serve
him as God; but rather did puff themselves up with a blind kind of pride; and
having Truth in their understanding, they wrought iniquity with their will. So
that the truth of God, was detayned, or imprisoned in them; since they did not
perform that, which it advised, but that, which their own perverse will
suggested. And because the Truth of God, is a most excellent thing; and he
bestows it as a great favor, to the end that a man practicing it with
affection, may honor it and obtain virtue by it, and so be saved; and if he
consider not ^eerof, and do entertain it, in such a fashion, as that he
neither practices those things which it teaches, nor does lodge it in so
fair a place as it deserves; he does thereby great dishonor to God that gave
it; and to the Truth it self, which was given by him. And if it had a tongue
wherewith to speak, it would, with a loud voyee, demand justice against such
a man. For as much as it, being so precious a Jewel, and which is able, so
much to enrich men, it is detayned, without hearing what it says; and without
doing what it requires; and it is quartered out, in the stinking company of
sin, where with the will of such a man aboundes. And so, in such sort, as it
is able, it does, like the blood of Abell cry out demanding vengeance. Because
although such an one, depriueth not Truth of life; because true faith is
compatible with a life that is wicked; yet does he deprive it of that efficacy,
which it would have in working; if instead of hindering, he did assist it,
toward the performance of those things which it teaches.

These cries are heard by God; for it is he that says, The servant who knows
the will of his master, and does it not, shallbe beaten with many stripes.
Amongst which, the very greatest which he gives, in this world, is to permit
(as we have ^ayd before) that in punishment of his sins, he fall into error
of belief. And so were those others punished, by being suffered to fall into
such blind Idolatry, as that they came to worship, for God even birds, and
serpents, and other beasts. And because they robbed God of that honor, which
was due to him as God, and gave it to such as it belonged not to; God redoubled
upon them the punishment of this sin of Idolatry, by suffering them to fall
into such other filthy sins, as breed horror to think of them, and shame to
name them. And although such as are afflicted with this punishment of
infidelity, without doubt, will fall into other sins; yet is that fall of
theirs into those later sins as free, as that, whereby they fell into the
former, through their own will. Which yet how many soever they be, either of
one kind, or of the other, the mercy of God is not shut up against them, if
they dispose themselves to retire, into the bowels of his pity.

The power of God is manifested in the first of these; his wisdom in the
second; and his goodness and mercy, in the third. Now, by the The just judgments
of God both against Jews and Gentilles.
same reason, whereby the sovereign Judge did punish the proud Gentills, he
did also punish the ungrateful Jews; and that upon great cause. Because he
gave more knowledge to them, then to the Gentills; whereof they served themselves
so il; as that with infidelity they denied the very true life it self, which
is Christ Jesus; and they crucified him, by the hands of the Gentills. And
because they had a mind to extinguish that sovereign light, without which
there is no light, nor Truth, they remained in obscure darkness, and they will
remain in eternal perdition, unless they be converted to the service of our
Lord, whom they denied.

But now let us see, what the motive was, which drew them on to so great a
misery, as to vnbelieue that light; which stood there, before their eyes. S.
John Joan. 3.
makes the answer thus, Men loved darkness, more then light, because their
works were evil; and every one that works evil, abhors the light. So
that, because our Lord, and his doctrine, did address them to all virtue and
truth, and they loved falsehood and lies; they could not endure to hear or see
him; nor did they wish that there had by many light of doctrine in the world,
which might be able to discover that counterfeit sanctity which they professed.
Or that there should be any example of perfect life, in comparison whereof,
their own, might be condemned for wicked. And from this root, of a will which
was so depraved, did grow that bitter fruit of denying, and murdering that
heavenly Physician, who came to cure them. And they found themselves to be
such, as the Prophet Psalm. ^8. verse. 24.
David had painted out long before, when he said thus of them, Let their eyes
be obscured, that they may not see, and let their back go ever bending
downward; for their eyes have remained without the light of faith; and their
will has been all employed upon things of the earth.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Wherein the former discourse is more particulerly prosecuted; and it is
declared what dispositions are requisite, for the beginning to read, and
understand the divine Scriptures, and the holy Doctors.
BUT now if God did take into so zealous care, the honor of that knowledge,
which he gave the Gentills, and that which he also gave the Jews; how much
will he have zeal of that which he gives Christians; since incomparably,
this, is more then that, which either of the other did enjoy. And God
inflicteth grievous punishments upon such as live not according to the true
faith which they have received.
since men do serve themselves very ill of the knowledge of this so excellent
Faith, it is not to be meruayled at, if sometimes God strike such persons, by
suffering them with a great chastisement to fall upon heresies, as he suffered
those of former times. Can it be said perhaps, that we see not that
accomplished, with our own eyes, which S. Paul did prophesy, of the latter
times, saying, That God would send the operation of error to certain men,
that they might believe a lie; and this lie, is against Faith. For no man can
be ignorant of the miserable, and great efficacy, wherewith so much people,
has cordially embraced the Lutheran heresy; so that we see plainly, how God
Do not wilfully mistake the Scripture or this author, but mark well, that
which instantly follows
has sent this efficacy of error, for the believing of a lie, as S. Paul
says.

Not that God does send these things, by inciting men to believe a lie, or to
work any wickedness; For he is not the tempter of the wicked, as S. James the
Apostle Iac. 1.
says: But he is said, to send the operation of error, when by his just
judgment, he Note.
suffers the understanding of men to be deceived by false discourses, or by
false miracles; which either some man, or the perverse Devil, may work; and
withal they find in themselves, such force toward the believing of that lie,
as to think themselves moved to the belief of it, as if it were some great
and wholesome Truth.

A Heresy is one of the most terrible judgments which God inflicts, for the
punishment for other sins.
great and extreme judgment of God is this; and, since he is just, that sin
must needs be great, whereof the punishment is such; and what this sin is, S.
Paul These. 2.
himself declares to us, by saying, Because they received not the love of
Truth, to be saved thereby. For if thou consider, how powerful the Truth is,
of that which we believe, for the helping us to serve God, and to be saved;
soon will thou acknowledge it to be a great fault, not to love this Truth, and
not to follow that which it teaches; and much more, to work wickedly against
it. How A good and just consideration.
far should he be from offending God, who belieueth, that for such as offend
him there is prepared an everlasting fire, with other innumerable torments,
wherewith such an one is to be punished, as long as God shall be God, without all
hope of the least remedy? How will he presume to sin, who belieueth, that
when sin enters into the soul, by one door, God goes out by another? And
what kind of creature, a man is, without thee, O Lord, he well knew who prayed,
O Psalm. 4^.
Lord, depart not thou from me. For when God is gone, we remain in the first
death of sin, which is but an introduction, to the second death, of infernal
pain.

With great reason did Job Job. 6.
say, Who can find in his heart, to taste that, which being tasted, brings
death? Without doubt, it is but reason, that since we would not taste of any
food, which a Physician whom we believed, should tell us, did carry death
therein; we should less taste of sin, since God has said, That Ezech. 18.
the soul which finneth shall dye. For the Faith or belief which thou have in
the word of God, does not work that effect in thee, which the word of that
Physician does work; and yet this later both can deceive, and uses sometimes
to do it, which God never does. And since God has said, That he is the
eternal reward of such a servant, why does not this make us all, go toward
his service, with great diligence, and courage; although we were to pass
through many labors; and that it should cost us even our lives? Why do we not
love our Lord whom we believe to be supreme goodness; and whom we know, to
have loved us first, yea and that so far as to dye for us? And so Note.
we should discourse in all other things, which this holy Faith does so
powerfully teach us, and inuit us to, (for as much as concerns it) and our
selves, are in great fault for leaving to follow it, yea and for doing the very
contrary things to it. Can there be a more prodigious thing in the world, then
that a Christian, should believe the things which he belieueth, and that yet he
should do so wicked things, as many of them do? In punishment therefore of
this, that they did not love the Truth, whereby they might have been saved,
(putting in practice, that which they were taught thereby) it is a most just
judgment of God, Who Psalm. 65.
is terrible in his counsels over the sons of men, That this Faith be taken
from them, and they be permitted to believe error.

And if thou do consider, how God does suffer the snare to be prepared, whereby
Jews and heretics, are chastised as we have said, it will appear to thee,
that it is a thing rather to be trembled at, then to be talked of. Ask any of
these that are so peremptory, in following the obstinacy of their error, upon
what it is, that they ground themselves. The Almost all heretics do offer to
shroud themselves under holy scripture.
one sort will say, that it is the Scripture of the old Testament; and the
other of the New* and thou shall plainly see the prophesy of David
accomplished, when he says, The A passadge of holy Scripture excellently
podered.
Table of these people shallbe turned into a snare, and into a punishment, and
into a stumbling block. Did thou ever see a thing, of so contrary
appearance, as that the Table of Life, should be turned into a snare of death;
the Table of comfort and pardon, into a punishment; that Table where there is
light which guides men into a way that leads to life, to convert it self
into a means, of making one loose the way, and fall upon death.

Great, without A holy conte^plation of the Author, and of much terror to
such as are in heresy.
all doubt, is the fault which deserves such punishment; that a man should be
blinded in the light, and that his life should be converted into death. But
thou art just O Lord, and thy judgments are just; and there is no wickedness in
thee; but that wickedness, is in them, who serve not themselves well of thy
goodness; and therefore, it is fit, that they should but stumble upon the same
goodness of thine; and that the dishonor should be punished, which they do,
both to it, and thee. A great blessing, O Lord, an extraordinary blessing is
thy Faith; being reuered, obeyed, and put in excution, as al reason does
require. And a great blessing did thou bestow, in giving us thy holy
Scripture, which is so profitable and so necessary for us, in the way of thy
service. But Note:
because the wind which blows upon this sea, is a wind that co^moth from
heaven; and there have been some who would needs sail by the earthly winds of
their own brains, and studyes, they have been drowned, and thou have
suffered it. Because, as in the Parables which thou, O Lord, did preach on
earth, those men were secretly taught thereby, who had a good disposition
thereunto; whereas others, were blinded even thereby, through thy just
judgment; so do thou also govern the profound sea of thy divine Scripture,
which is deputed for the showing of mercy, to the lambs of thy fold, who may
swim therein, to the profit both of themselves, and others; and so also is it
designed for the showing of justice, in suffering proud Elephants both to
drown themselves and others also. A fearful, and very fearful thing it
ought to be esteemed, to enter into the divine Scripture; and no man ought to
run upon it without much preparation, as to a thing wherein there may be much
danger to him. Let him that An-vndersta^ding exercised in humility, and a
lifeled in piety, are good dispositio^s for the reading of holy Scripture with
profit.
enters into it, carry with him the sense of the Catholic Roman Church; and
he shall avoid the danger of heresy. Let him for his further profit by it,
carry purity of life, as S. Athanasius does advise, by these words, Goodness of
life, and purity of the soul, and Christian piety, is necessary for the
search, and true science of the Scriptures. And he says afterward, that
without purity of mind, and a life which follows in the steps of sanctity, it
is not possible to understand the speech of Saints. For as if a man would
behold the light of the Sun, he makes clear his eyes, and by so doing his
sight grows clear, and by that means to be of some resemblance with the
very Sun which he desires to behold; that so his eye being made light, he
may the better look upon the Suns light: and as also, if a man desire to see
any City, or Country, he must come, within a certain distance, for that
purpose; so he that would procure the understanding of holy books, must first
endeavor to cleanse, and purify his soul, and by a resembla^ce of life and
manners, to draw near to the Saints, who wrote the^; that so approaching to
them, by his intentions, and actions, he may understand those things, which God
revealed to them, and being made, as it were, one of them, he may escape from
the danger, that sinners are subject to, and from the fire which against the
day of judgment, will be provided for them.

It is necessary to ponder this greatly, which S. Athanasius delivered; that so
we may receive profit by the divine Scripture. For though without this purity
of life, a man may easily know by Scripture, what God in general requires of
him; yet in particular to know the counsel, and will of God, cannot be
learned (as the Wiseman says) by humane study; but he affirms thus, in the
manner of a question, Who, O Lord, shall know thy meaning, unless thou give him
wisdom and unless thou^end thy holy spirit from on high? This Wisdom True
celestial wisdom.
is that, which teaches the way how to please God in particular manner, and
this resideth not in wicked men. But when this industry continues, with
experience of holy labors, humble prayers, and the fruit of good works, it
makes a man truly wise; that so by reading of Scripture, and long experience,
he may teach others after the manner of an eye witness; and may light upon
the vein of another man's heart; instructing it, by that which passes in his
own. And without this, though he may chance to hit right for once, he will
mistake many times; and will fall out to be one of them of whom S. Paul says,
That 1. Tim. 1.
taking upon them to teach the law, they understood not that, whereof they
speak. A man who puts himself upon the studdy of holy Scripture, must help
himself also, by the interpretation and exposition of the Saints; as also of
the Schoole-Deuines. For as for the profit which may be drawn from the study
of holy Scripture without accompanying it, by these endeauours, Germany has
taken experience, of it to her cost.

CHAP. XLIX.
That we must not grow in pride, for not having lost our Faith, as others have
done, but rather we must be humble, with fear; and the reasons which we have
for being so.
DO not thou, by hearing of the fall of others, grow to such pride of heart, as
to say, I am not like one of them, who so wickedly have lost their faith. Call
thou to mind those men, who related to our Lord, how Pilate had caused certain
Galileans to be killed, as they were in the midst of offering their
sacrifices. And they that related this, carried in their heart, a kind of vain
contentment, wherewith they held themselves for better then those others, who
had deserved, that Pilate should cause them to be murdered. But now when this
sovereign Judge, did know their pride, without the manifestation of it on
their parts; and being desirous to vndeccaue them, he said after this manner.
Think you, that those Galileans were the greatest sinners of all the men in
that Province, because that punishment came upon them? Or do you think, that
those eighteen men, upon whom the tower of Siloe did fall, and slew them,
were the greatest sinners, of all them that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you,
No. But if you do not penance, you shall also perish. The same did S. Paul
intend, when he said, For their incredulity, were the Jews cut off, which had
been the branches of the Olive tree of belieuers; and thou who by faith art on
foot; do not thou grow proud, but fear; for else, thou shall also be cut off.

The The punishment which God inflicteth upon others, must make us humble, and
not insolent.
punishments which God has inflicted upon others, ought to make us chaste, and
humble, and not proud. For whither soever we cast our eyes, in these vnhapy
times of ours, they will find reason to weep: and to say with Jeremy, If Ierem.
14.
I go out into the field, I see that men are slain by the sword; if I enter
into the city, I find them defeated, and dead of hunger. The former are they,
who went out of the City; which is, the Church. A kind of people this is,
without a head; for the sword of incredulity, has taken off from them, the
head which God gave to Christians, which is the The Bishop of Rome, as
successor to S. Peter is the visible head, which God has given to the Church,
under Christour Lord.
Bishop of Rome. And the later, are those many, who in this city of the
Church, have their Faith untouched; but they are miserably dead of hunger,
because they took not the food, of obedience, to the co^mandme^ts of God, and
of his church.

These things deserve, that we should feel them much, if we have any feeling
of Christ; and that we should bewail them in his high presence, and say to
him, How long O Lord, will thou forbear to have mercy on them, for whom thou
did shed thy blood, and loose thy life, upon the Cross, in the midst of so
many torments. And since the business is thine, let the remedy also come from
thy hand, being impossible that it should come from any other. Be thou
careful, O daughter, to feel, and to pray for this; for Note.
if thou love Christ, thou art to lodge in thy heart a tender and profound
compassion, of the souls, for which Christ Jesus dyed. And so art thou also
carefully to consider, how thou live; and how thou do profit by the Faith
which thou have, least otherwise, God do also punish thee, by suffering thee
to fall into some error; and so to loose it; since thine ears have heard the
news, of so many that have lost it, by the heresies of that perverse Luther.
And others there are, who have denied Christ amongst the Moors; to follow the
bestiall law of Mahomet; whereby thou shall see accomplished that which Saint
Paul says, That some had lost their Faith for having cast away a good
conscience in their life. And whether it be, (as we said before) when we spoke
of the motives which induce a man to believe) because even their evil
conscience, by little and little, draws their understanding unto blindness,
to the end that it may seek some doctrine which does not contradict their
wickedness; or else, because the supreme judge, in punishment of other sins,
permits them to fall upon heresy; or whether it be, both for the one, and
the other reason; it is a thing to make one fear, and to be full of care, to
avoid it. And howsoever this happen not to all wicked Christians, since
although they be in mortal sin, they do not, for that, loose their Faith,
(as I have said before) yet in a matter that is of so high importance, the very
having happened to one alone, gives us all reason to fear, and care, that we
may avoid the like occasion.

Without doubt, the hearts of all those eleven Apostles, were far from any
disposition of delivering Christ Jesus our Lord to death; yet because he said,
that one of the twelve would do it, they were all afraid, and they said, Is it
I O Lord? through a fear, least by their frailty, they might fall into actions,
from which they were free at that time. Against all such inconveniences, the
word which we have here in hand, is full of use, Incline thine ear, obeying
God, and his Church by Faith. And have not thou a busy, and sifting
understanding, least it be oppressed by Majesty, as such, are threatened in holy
Scripture that they shall be. And Mark well this comparison, for it reaches
home,
they, who will be descanting upon the ineffable mysteries of God, by the
poorness of their own understanding and reason, shall find it happen to
them, as it does to such, as fasten the point of their sight upon the sun;
which so, they do not only not come to see, but rather they loose their very
sight it self; and it is beaten back again, through the great excess of the
light which they see, to the eyes themselves, with which they would see it. So
those men, seeking satisfaction by the way of curious understanding, and
sifting; do find themselves full of unquietness and doubt. For the wisdom of
God, is not communicated, but to such as are little and humble: and do approach
to him with simplicity; inclining their ear to him, and to his Church; and
such as these, receive extraordinary favors by his goodness, wherewith the
soul rests satisfied, and beautifyed, by Faith and good works; like the
fair Rebecca, to whom were given in the name of Isaac certain pendents for
her ears, and bracelets for her hands. And to the end, that this humble
subjection might be so much the more recommended to our understanding; the holy
ghost was not content with exhorting us to it, in the first word only, by
saying, Hearken O Daughter; but be advises to it yet, with another, by saying,
Incline thyme ear. To the end that men may know, that since God does speak no
idle words, and that yet he delivered this doctrine to us in several words;
his pleasure was to recommend, in particular manner, this simple, and humble
manner of believing, as the beginning of our salvation; and if to this we will
add love, it will then be entire, and perfect.

CHAP. L.
How some use to be much deceived, by giving credit to false Revelations; and
it is particulerly declared, wherein true liberty of Spirit does consist.
IT is not reason, that I pass from hence, with out acquainting thee with a
great danger which happens to them that travail in the way of God; and
whereby many have been ouerthrown. The chief remedy whereof, consists in that
advise, which the holy Ghost gives us, by means of this word. Inclyne thine
ear. This danger grows, when revelations, or visions, or other spiritual
gustes, do offer themselves to some devout persons; which, by the permission of
God, do ariue many times, through the work of the Devil; and that, for the
obtaining of two effects. One is, that by the means of these deceites, he may
take credit from the true revelations of God; as he has also procured, to show
false miracles, thereby to discredit such as are true. Another is, to deceive
that person, under the show of Good, now that, by other means, he cannot do
it. Many of whom, we have read of, in former times, and many we have seen in
these days of ours; who may serve for a warning to any such person, as is
desirous of his salvation; and to put him in fear of being easy, in giving
credit to such things as these; since some of those very persons, who gave them
such credit at the first, did afterward (when they were free, from being so
deceived) advise others to take heed, how they fell into those inconveniences.
Gerson recounteth, that, in his time, many of these abuses did happen; and he
said, that be knew of many; and that some did hold for certain, that it was
revealed to them, that they should be Popes. And some one of them, did leave
the same in writing; and by conjectures, and other such kinds of proof, he
affirmed it to be true. And another, believing, upon the same motive, that he
was to be Pope, this thought did after, settle it self in his heart, That he
Let not a Caluinist make himself merry at this, but let him tremble to find how
like he is to the Devil, in saying that the Pope is Antichrist.
should be Antichrist, or at least the forerunner of him. And upon this, he was
grievously tempted to kill himself, that so he might not bring such a deal of
misery upon Christian people; till at last, by the mercy of God, he was drawn
out of these deceitful errors, and left them in writing behind him, for the
caution and instruction of others.

There have not been wanting some, in these days of ours, who held for
certain, that they were to reform the Church of Christ, and to bring it to
the first perfection, or even greater then it had at first. But their being
dead without doing it, is a sufficient proof that they were deceived; and that
it would have been better for them, to have attended to the reformation of
themselves (which, by the grace of God, would not have been hard) then, so
forgetting their own consciences, to cast their vain eyes upon that The
Author means, only Reformation of manners* for he shows in a hundred
places, that the Faith of the Church both is, and for ever must be true.
thing, which God, had no mind to do, by their means. Others, have resolved
upon seeking new ways, which seemed to them very compendious, for their own
ariuing quickly to God. And it seemed to them, that giving themselves to him,
in a perfect kind of a manner, and abandoning themselves into his hands, they
were so taken and possessed by God, and so wholly governed by the holy Ghost, that
whatsoever came to their heart, must (forsooth) be no other thing, but the
instinct and light of God himself. And Much of this discourse is meant, by a
cer^ayne fantastical heretical people, which was beginning to sly de into
Spai^e about his time, and they were called Il^umimati*
so far did this deceit ariue, that if this kind of interior motion came
not to them, they would not stir a foot, toward the doing of any thing how
good soever; and (on the other side) if they had a mind to do any thing; that
they would be sure to do, though it were against the will of God. Believing that
the humor which they found in their heart was Gods particular instinct, and the
liberty of the holy Ghost; which did enfranchise them from all obligation, to
the ordinary Commandments of God; to whom, they said they carried, such an
entiere, and true love, as that, even by breaking of his commandments, they
lost it not. They considered not, that the Son of God, did preach, by his
own sacred mouth, a doctrine very contrary to this, when he said, If any man
love me, he will keep my word; and he that holds and observes my
Commandments, he is the man that loves me. And again, If any man love me, he
will keep my word; and he that loves me not, will not keep it. Giving clearly
to understand hereby, that whosoever keeps not his word, does bear no love,
nor hold friendship with him. For as S. Augustine says, No man can love that
King, whose Commandments he hates.

Now as for that which the Apostle says, That Note how the objection which is
made by heretics, under the color of this place of Scripture, is soundly
answered, and at large.
to the just man there is imposed no law; and that where the spirit of our Lord
is, there is liberty: This is not so to be understood, as if the Holy Ghost did
free any man, how just soever he may be, from keeping the commandments of God,
or of his Church, or of his Prelates; but rather, how much the more this spirit
does communicate it self, so much the more love does it infuse; and by the
increase of love, the care and desire does also increase, of keeping more and
more, the word of God, and of his Church. And as this spirit is most
efficacious, and makes a man become a true, and fervent lover of that which is
good; so it further puts, such a disposition into the soul, when it
imparteth it self abundantly, as that the keeping of the Commandments is not
hard, but very easy; and so full of gust as that David said, How sweet are thy
words to my threate, yea more then honey to my mouth. Because when this spirit,
does place, in the will of man* a most perfect conformity with the will of God,
making it to be one spirit with him, and does say, as S. Paul does, That he
has the same mind to will, and not to will; it must necessarily follow, that
to such a man the observation of the will of God, is to be full of gust; since
it is of gust to every body, to do that which they love.

And this is so full of Truth, as that if the very law of God could be lost, it
would be found written, by the holy Ghost, as it were, in the bowels of these
persons; according to that which David Psalm. 39.
says, That the law of God, is in the heart of the man, that is just; that is,
in his will, which is according to God. And God himself said as much, I Ierem.
31.
will put my law into the bowels of the^. From hence it is, that although
there were no hell to threaten, and no heaven to allure, and no commaundment to
oblige, yet would this just man, do that which he does, for the pure love of
God. For, because the holy Ghost works in a man toward God, that which
nature works in the heart of a son toward his Father, (since by his gift,
and by his grace, we receive the adoption of being the sons of God) from
hence, I say, it grows, that such a man, like a tender hearted Son, does
reuere, and serve God, through the filial love which he carries toward him.
Upon this does also follow, a perfect detestation of al sin; and a perfect
hope which dispatcheth all fear, and sorrow away, with speed, (as it may be
done in this exile of ours) and it enableth him to suffer pain, and trouble,
not only with patience, b^^ even with joy. And by reason of the liberty which
he has, both in respect of sins, and afflictions, abhorring the former, and
loving the latter, he may be called free; and that, upon such a just man, there
is no law imposed.

Even so, as if there were a mother who did much love her son; and would
feign do much for him; that law would be of no trouble to her, which should
command her to do those things toward him, which her own maternall heart did
induce her to. And so this mother, should not be placed under a law, or under
the trouble that she was put to; but should rather be superior to them; since
she performed that with alacrity, which the law commanded with authority. In
this sort do they of whom we have spoken, by fulfilling the law of Gods love;
yea and there are many, who do things, to which they are tied by no obligation;
their heart flaming up into a hoater fire of love, then the law does any way
oblige them to.

In this manner therefore, that of S. Paul, is Gal. 5.
to be understood, If you be conducted by the Spirit, you are no more under the
law. Because This liberty of Spirit is very different from the Protestant
liberty of the ghosp^ll.
by abhorring sin, and carrying a tender love to that which the law
commaundes; and being joyful in tribulation, (which are all, effects of being
guided by the Spirit) the law (as has been said) is no burden to such. But in
breaking any of the commaundments of God, or of his Church, this Spirit does
instantly fly away; as it is written, That it departs from the thoughts of
them, who are without understanding, and that it shall be driven out of a soul,
when sin comes into it. And as then, men are not carried by this holy
Spirit; so is it impossible, but that they should be under that weight, which
the law imposes, upon such as love it not; and who are weak in suffering
affliction, and subject to return to sin.

Let Here Protestants are plainly spoken to.
no man therefore affirm, that when he breaks the commaundment of God, or of
his Church* he has Justice, or liberty of spirit, or love of God in his soul;
since our Lord pronounces him to be a slave, and no free man, who commits
sin. And as, there is no participation between light, and darkness; so neither
is their any, between God and him that works wickedness. For, as it is
written, The wicked man, and his wickedness, are detestable in the sight of God.

I have given thee notice of this so blind error, in the nature of an example,
by means whereof thou may consider of many others, as absurd and foolish as
this is; into which, both in other times, and these also, such persons have
fallen, as grew lightly to beli^ue, that the notions, or instinctes of their
own hearts, did come from God.

CHAP. LI.
Of the way wherein we are to carry our selves, that we may not err by such
illusions; and how dangerous the desire is of Revelations, and such things as
those.
THROVGH the desire I have, that thy soul may not be one of these, I recommend
to thee much, that thou profit, as the prouer be says, by another harm: and
that thou be very careful, that in thy self, there be no consent, either
great or small, to any desire of these singular, or supernatural things; for
it is a sign either of pride, or at least of curiosity, which is full of
danger. There was a time, when Mark this Exemple.
S. Augustine, was assaulted by this temptation; his words are these. By how
many subtilties of temptation, has the enemy procured, with me, O Lord, that I
should beg some miracle at thy hands; but I beseech thee, for the love of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and of our City, the heavenly Jerusalem, which is pure and
chaste, that as now all consent to this temptation, is far from me; so it may
ever be far, and further off S. Bonauenture says, that many had fallen into
great follies, and errors, in punishment of their having desired such things
as these; and he says further that they are not so much to be desired, as
feared.

If any such extraordinary things happen to thee, without any desire of thine;
be thou afraid, and do not give them credit; but instantly have recourse to our
Lord; beseeching A holy, wise, and safe advice.
him that he will be pleased not to carry thee by this way; but that he will
suffer thee, to work thy salvation in his holy fear, and in the usual and
plain way, of such as serve him. Thou art especially to do this, when any such
Revelation or instinct, shall inuit thee to admonish, or reprehend a third
person, of any thing that is secret; and much more if he be a Priest, or
Prelate, or the like, to whom particular reverence is due. In such case as
this thou art to cast away these things withal the heart thou have; and to
depart from them, with saying, that which Moses said, Send him O Lord, I
beseech thee, whom thou art to send. And Jeremy said, I am but a child O Lord,
I cannot speak, and both these, did hold themselves for insufficient; and fled
from being sent to reprove others.

Do not fear, least by this humble resistance, God should be made angry, or to
absent himself, if the business be his; but There is no danger of loosing any
thing with God by doing acts of humility.
rather he will draw nearer to thee; and he will assure and settle the thing in
question. For he that gives grace, to the humble, will not take it away, for
an act of humility; and if it be not of God, the Devil will fly away; as being
struck with the stone of humility, which gives a blow that breaks his head,
like that of Golias. And so it happened, to a Father that remained in the
Desert; who upon the appearing of the figure of a Crucifixe, he would neither
adore it, nor believe it. But See the sweet and safe simplicity, and humility
of th^se holy Ermites.
shutting his eyes, said, I will not see Jesus Christ in this world; it shall
serve my turn to see him in heaven. Upon which answer, the Devil fled away,
who was desirous to deceive him under that form. Another Father, answered (to
one that told him that he was an Angel, sent to him, on the behalf of God) I
have no need, nor am I worthy to receive messages, by the mouth of Angels, and
therefore consider well to whom it is that thou were sent; for it is not
possible they should send thee to me; Nor will I so much as hear thee. And so
with this humble answer, the proud Devil fled away.

By this way of humility; and by a most cordial driving away such things as
these, many persons have been free, through the mercy of God, from great
snares, which by this means the Devil had prepared for them. Experimenting so
in themselves, that which David Psalm. 12.
says, Our Lord keeps the little ones: I humbled my self, and be delivered
me. And on the other side, a false instinct, or Revelation of the Devil,
finding any vain contentment in the heart of him that does receive it, takes
root and force from thence, to deceive men, out right; God permitting it, with
just judgment. For as S. Augustine says, Pride deserves to be deceived.

Thou must therefore be free from this vain inclination; and from thinking that
thou art capable of these Revelations; that so thy heart may not vary the
compass, in the least point, from that humility wherein thou were before,
under the holy fear of God. And so carry thy self in them as if they had not
come to thee. And if notwithstanding this answer of thine the matter do still
go on; give thou instantly account to them, that may tell thee what is fit;
although it will be better done, to give notice of it instantly, after first it
happened; and to help him (by means of prayer, and fastes, and other good
works) who is to give thee counsel, that God may declare the truth to him, in
a matter that is of so much difficulty. For A great strayte.
if we hold the good spirit of God, for the wicked spirit of the Devil, it is
a great blasphemy; and we shall so, be like to those miserable Pharisees, the
contradictours of the truth of God; who attributed to an evil spirit, the
works, which Christ Jesus our Lord, did, by the Holy Ghost. And on the other
side, if with facility of belief, we accept of the instinct of an evil spirit,
as if it were of the Holy Ghost, what greater misery can there be, then to
seek darkness and error instead of truth; and, which is worse, the Devil,
for God. On both sides, there is great danger; either in holding God for the
Devil, or the Devil for God. And how great necessity there is, to be able to
distinguish and to judge of these things, as indeed they are, I think there
is none, who does not see. But as evident as this necessity is, so difficult
and hidden a thing it is, to get assurance and light, wherewith to clear this
doubt. And therefore, as it belongs not to all men to prophesy, or to work
miracles, or to impart such other graces, but to them to whom the Holy Ghost
is pleased to impart them; so also, is it not given to the spirit of man, how
wise soever it be, to judge with certainty, and truth, of the difference of
spirits, unless it were in a matter which were evidently For in that ease it is
cleerlynaught.
against the Scripture, and the Church of God. That light therefore of the Holy
Ghost, which is called Discretion of spirits, is wholly necessary in this case;
by the inward, and sweet light whereof, the man who has this gift, does rightly
judge, which is the spirit of Truth, and which of Error. And if the matter be
of importance, it must be related to the Prelate, and his resolution is to be
followed.

CHAP. LII.
Wherein some signs are given, of good, and bad, or false Revelations, or
Illusions.
BESIDES that which I have said, thou art to consider, what fruit or
edification these things do leave in thy soul. And This balance is to be
held by a steedy hand.
yet I say not this, as if by these, or other signs, thou art to become the
judge of that which passes in thy self; but to the end, that when thou give
him account, of whom thou art to take counsel, he may so much the more
certainly know, and teach thee truth, as thou shall give him more particular
information. Consider therefore, if these things help thee, toward the
relief of any spiritual necessity which thou have; or for any thing
concerning thy soul, of notable edification. For if a good man will not speak
idle words, much less will God do it; who says, I am the Lord, who teach
thee things which are profitable to be known, and who govern thee in the way,
where thou art to go. But when thou see that there is nothing of moment, but
intricate and unnecessary things; esteem it as a fruit which the Devil
sets before such a one, as he seeks to deceive; and to make him loose his
time, and the time of others, to whom he relates it; and when the Devil can
get no more, he contenteth himself with this gain.

Amongst those things which thou art to consider, whether they work them in
thy soul or no, let the chief be this, Whether it leave thee more humble,
then thou were before. For humility, as a Doctor says, gives such weight to
the coin of spirit, as that it does sufficiently distinguish the metal which
is massy, from that which is light. And S. Gregory says, The In what case then
be all Heretik^.
most evident distinctiue sign of a man elect, is his humility; and of the
reprobate, his pride. Consider then I say, what trace is left in thy soul, by
this vision, or consolation, or spiritual gust; and if thou perceive thy self
to remain more humble, and in more confusion through thine own faults; and
with greater reverence, and trembling under the infinite greatness of God; and
have no light inclination to communicate that to other persons, which has
happened to thee; nor do busy thy self much in considering or making
account thereof; but do procure to forget it, as a thing which may make thee
esteem thy self; and if (at any time, when it comes to thy memory) thou
humble thy self, and dost^wonder at the great mercy of God (in showing so
great favor to so base creatures) and if thou find thy heart as quiet, and
more settled then it was before, in the knowledge of it self; it has some
show to be of God; because Note this reason.
it is agreeable to the instruction, and doctrine of Christ; which is, That a
man should abase himself, and become despicable in his own eyes; and that for
the blessings which he receaueth from God, he must know himself to be more
obliged, and confounded; giving the whole glory of it to God, from whose hand
all good things proceed. And with this, S. Gregory agrees, saying, The soul
which is full of divine understanding, has these, for most evident fignes;
namely Humility and Truth; both which, if they perfectly join in any soul, it
is a thing notorious, that they give testimony of the presence of the Holy
Ghost. But when it is an abuse of the Devil, it falls out very contrary to
this. For Humility or Pride are the distinctiue signs, whereby to know, the
truth or falsh god of spiritual gustes etc.
either in the beginning, or at the end of the revelation, of consolation, the
soul does find it self vain, and desirous to speak of what it feels; and
with some estimation of it self; conceauing that God is to do great matters in
it, or by it; and it has no desire to think upon the defects of it self, or
to be reproved by others; but all that persons business is, to be talking, and
rolling up and down in his mind, that which he has felt, and he would be
gladd that others also, should be talking of it.

When thou shall see these signs or the like, which show a kind of leuity of
heart, it may be affirmed, without any doubt, that the evil spirit walks that
way. And how good soever the thing appear, and though it bring tears, or
comfort, or knowledge of matters belonging to God; yea although thou be hoysed
up to the third heaven, yet if thy soul withal, do not remain with profound
humility, put thou no confidence in any such thing, which may happen to thee;
nor do thou accept thereof. For, how much the more high it is, so much is it
the more dangerous, and so much the greater fall will it give thee. Ask grace
of God, that thou may know, and humble thy self; and that being the ground,
let him give thee what is most pleasing to him; but if that be wanting, all the
rest (how precious soever it appear) is not gold but copper; nor is it the
meal or flower of nourishment, but the ashes of pride.

Pride has this mischeife belonging to it, that it despoyleth the soul of the
true grace of God; and if it leave any thing that may seem good, it is but
counterfaite; and so it is not acceptable to God, but the occasion of greater
ruin to him that has it. We read of our Redeemer, that when he appeared to
his disciples, upon the day of the Ascension; he first reprehended their
incredulity, and hardness of heart; and after that, he commanded them to go
and preach; giving the^ power to work many and great miracles. Making us
understand thereby, that God does first abase such as afterward he means to
raise.
whom he rayseth to great matters, he first abaseth in themselves, giving them
knowledge of their own weakness; to the end that although afterward, they
grow to fly above the heavens, they may still be fastened to their own baseness,
without attributing any other thing to themselves, but their own unworthiness.
Let therefore the sum of all be this, that thou do well observe the effects
which are caused in thee by such things as these; not thereby to make thy self
the judge thereof; but for his information, whose counsel thou art to ask,
and follow.

CHAP. LIII.
Of the secret pride, whereby many use to be much deceived in the way of
Virtue; and of the danger that such are in, to be snared by the illusions of
the Devil.
BUT thou art further to note, that many, do find in themselves, their own
meanness; and that of themselves they are nothing; and they seem to attribute
the glory to God, for all the blessings that they receive; and they have many
other signs of humility; but notwithstanding all this, they are full of pride;
and that, so much the more dangerously, as they conceive themselves to be most
free from it. The reason of this is, because although they do live, as in the
sight of Truth, by not attributing those blessings to themselves; yet do they
live in error, by conceauing them to be more and greater, then indeed they
are; and they take themselves to have so much light from God, as that they are
able, not only to rule themselves in that way, but others also; and no man is
of sufficiency, in their opinion, to govern them. They are greatly friends to
their own fancy; yea and sometimes, they make not much reckoning, of that which
former Saints have said, or that which the servants of God, living in their
own time, conceive.

They This is still meant of those heretical Illuminati.
boast themselves to have the spirit of Christ, and to be governed by it; and
to have no need of human counsel, since God with so great certainty, and the
unction of his spirit, does give them comfort in their prayers. They think (as
S. Bernard says) of other men's houses, but that the sun, does only shine in
their own: and they defye, and despise all wisemen, as Golias did the people of
God. Only he is good in their opinion, who conformeth himself to them; and to
them nothing is more troublesome, then to meet with a man that contradicts
them. They will be the masters of all men, and believed by all men, and they
will believe none. The wary discretion of men who are well experienced, they
call tepidity, and fear; but as for unbridled feruours, and noueltyes, full of
singularity; and which are the occasions of tumult, these men call the liberty
of spirit, and the strength of God; and they have, almost ever, in their
mouths, This my spirit tells me; God satisfyeth me in this; and the like. At
other times, they allege the Scripture of God, but they will by no means
understand it, as the Church, and the Saints have understood it; but only as
they list themselves. Believing that they have not less light, then the former
Saints: nay that God has taken them for instruments of greater matters, then
those others; and so they make Idols of themselves; and place themselves upon
the heads of all men, with intolerable presumption. So miserable is the
error of these men, that being extremly proud they hold themselves for
perfectly humble; and believing that God only dwells in them, he is indeed
far from them; and that which they take to be light is profound darkness.

Of these, or such as these, Gerson says, There are some to whom it is a
thing very agreeable, to be governed by their own conceit, and they walk
under the conduct of their own inventions; or rather they are cast headlong,
upon their own opinion, which is a most dangerous guide. They Even in doing of
penance, discretion is to be followed; and whenever excess therein is used,
and not accompanied with docility, and other interior virtue, it is not only
su^pi^^ou^, but dangerous.
macerate themselves with too extreme fasting; they watch too much: they
trouble and empty their brain, with excess of tears, and in the midst of
all this, they follow no man's admonition or counsel. They care not to ask the
opinion of them that are wise in the law of God; nay they care not to hear
them; and when either they do hear, or ask their counsel, they despise their
sayings. And the cause of this is, that they conceive themselves to be some
great men; and that they know better then all the world, what is fit for them
to do. Of these I pronounce, that speedily they shall fall into the illusion of
the Devil; speedily shall they fall upon the stone of offense, because they
are conducted by a blind kind of rashness, and an excessive kind of lightness.
And therefore, what soever they shall tell thee of any extraordinary
Revelations, know thou that it is to be suspected. All this says Cerson.

CHAP. LIIII.
Of some propertyes which they have, whom we said to be deceived in the last
Chapter; and how necessary it is, to take the opinion of others; and of the
mischief that men are brought to, by following their own.
THOU art to understand, that some of them of He continues to describe those
aforesaid heretics.
whom I spoke in the last chapter, are people without learning; yea they are
cordial enemies to men that are learned. And if perhaps they have a little
Latin, to read and to carry a new Testament about them, they do believe
themselves so much (conceauing the while, that they believe God) and they rest
so much, upon certain light motives; and do answer themselves thereby, in
such blind errors, that how manifest soever, in themselves they be, these men
know not how to shake them off; and they are so presumptuous, and so impossibly
to be persuaded, that, as the Scripture says, A man were better, encounter
with a bear from whom they had taken her whelps, then with a fool that
presumes in his fault. And yet they have much, in their memory, and no less
in their tongue, that saying of S. Paul, Knowledge does blow up, but Charity
does build up. And by this they think they have a pattent to contemn wise
men, as men that are pussed up; and they value themselves at a high rate, as a
kind of people that is full of charity.

The Let heretike^ examine themselves by this rule, and they will see their
own extreme pride.
while they mark not, that themselves are the men that are puffed up with the
pride of sanctity (which is more dangerous, then the pride of science) as a
thing which rises from that which is better, and for the same very reason it
is worse, though indeed neither science, nor good works, do of themselves
produce this moath; but it is the wickedness of the wicked, which takes
occasion to swell, by that which is good. Since the case stands so, they
ought not instantly to contemn such as are wise; because wisdom, of it
self, is no impediment, but that withal a man may be humble and holy. Yea to
many it has been, and still is, a great occasion of their being so; and for
others to esteem that they are not so, proceeds from an erroneous judgment,
and an excessive pride in themselves. But suppose they were not, yet were those
others to remember, that it is written, Upon Matt. 1^
the chair of Moses, sit the Scribes, and Pharisees; do therefore that which
they direct you to, but do not that which they do. Whereas these fellows do
just the contrary; for they receive not the good instruction which wise men
give; and they practice the evil, which they say the others do commit, in
being proud. And they despise them, without esteeming that course and order
which is both natural, and divine; and that is, that they who are less,
should be governed by them who are more wise.

Nor is this doctrine against that which is delivered by Joan. 2.
S. John, That the Of the holy Ghost.
Unction teaches all things. For that which he intended, is but this, That
The true meaning of this place of Scripture.
the grace and light of God, does sometimes teach a man interiourly by it
self; and at other times, it directs him to ask the opinion of others; and
of whom he is to ask; and so it teaches all, though not, all alone. To this
purpose, S. Augustine says, Let us fly from such te^tations which incline men
to the greatest pride, and are the most dangerous of all others. Or rather, let
us consider, how the Apostle Act. 9.
S. Paul (although he had been prostrated, and instructed by a voice from
heaven) yet, nevertheless, was sent to a man, of whom he was to receive the
Sacraments; and by whom, he was to be incorporated into the Church. And Act. 10.
Cornelius the Centurion, was sent to S. Peter; not only to receive the
Sacraments, but to understand from him, what he was to believe; and in whom he
was to hope, and whom to love. For if God did not speak to men, by the mouth
of men, the condition of men would be miserable. And how should it else be true
which is written, The 1. Cor. 3.
Temple of God is holy, which Temple you are, if God gave not answeares out of
this Temple, which is men; but should resolve that whatsoever men were to
learn, should be derived from heaven, by the means of Angels. And so also
charity would have no intercourse by the communication of some hearts with
others, if men were not taught by the means of other men. S. Philip was sent
to the Eunuch; and Moses took counsel of I^thro, his Father-in-law. All
this does S. Augustine say.

S John Climacus Note the authorityes.
does also affirm, that a man who belieueth himself, saves the Devil a
labor, in tempting him; for he is Devil enough to himself. In like manner S
Hierome says, I will not follow mine own opinion, for that is wont to give me
evil counsel. And S Vincentius does much advise, that a man, who desires to
be spiritual, may have some master to govern him: and if he will not have
one when he may, God will never communicate grace to that soul, for the pride
thereof. S. Bernard and S Bonauenture do, at every turning of a hand, advise
the same. Yea the Scripture of God, is full of it. Sometimes it says, Woe Isa.
5.
be to you, who are wise in your own eyes; and in your own sight are prudent.
And else where, If thou see a man who esteems himself wise, believe that the
fool shall go away better cheap then he. S Paul admonishes us, not to be
wise in our own opinion. And the Wiseman Eccl. 6.
says. Whatsoever thou say, to a fool unless it be of things that his heart
belieues, he will not receive the words of prudence. And in another place, If
thou incline thine ear, thou shall receive instruction, and if thou love to
hear, thou shall be wise.

Therefore, to avoid prolixity, I say that the holy Scripture, and the
admonition of Saints, and their lives, and the experimental knowledge that we
have; do all, with one voice, recommend to us, that we do not lean, or rest
upon our own prudence, but incline our ear, to the counsel of others. For
otherwise what thing would there be in the world more disorderly, then the
Church of God; and the same would happen to any other Congregation of men, if
every one might follow his own opinion, conceauing that he is in the right.
And how can it be, that the spirit of Christ, which is the spirit of humility,
of peace, and of union, should move any one to be contrary to the rest of
those men, in whom God himself does dwell? And how can it grow from this
spirit of God, that a man should have him self in so high esteem, as that
there may not be found, in the whole congregation of men, another, who can
teach him, or who can judge, whether his Spirit be good, or bad. For as, S.
Augustine says, He would not fail to take and follow the counsel of others,
if it were not, that through pride, he thinks himself better then the other,
in giving counsel. And though his pride is so great, as to think that he is
better then others, yet he might think, that as one may belesse good then
another, and yet may have the gift of prophesy; and power to cure sick
persons, and may have such gifts as these, (which another perhaps, may not
have, (though he be better then the former) so it may also be, that he who is
inferior in other gifts, may be yet more eminent, in the gift of affoarding
counsel; or in the discretion of spirits, which another man, who is more
eminent may chance to want.

And since God is so great a friend of humility, and peace, let no man fear,
that if the thing which he has, be of God, it will go from him, or that he
shall loose it, only because he submits himself, for the love of the same
God, to the opinion of another; but rather it will be more and more confirmed;
and if it proceed from other means, it will fly away.

Consider also, that if this wisdom be infused by God, one of the conditions
thereof, (according to Jacob. 3.
S. James) is A wise and true consideration.
to have a power of persuasion; and consider yet again, that S. Augustine
calls these thoughts most proud, and most dangerous For The Pride of the
understanding, is much more dangerous, them the Pride of will, and why it is so.
although the pride and disobedience of the Will, be dangerous, which
consists in being unwilling to obey another will; yet much more dangerous is
the pride of the understanding, which consists in not being subject to
another, upon the belief which he gives to himself. For a man that is only
proud in will, sometimes may be content to obey, because he holds another
man's opinion to be better; but he that is resolved to hold his own for best,
who shall cure that man? And how shall he be able to obey in a thing, which he
holds to belesse good? And if the eye, which is the understanding (wherewith
it should be able to see, and cure this pride) be blind, it self (with being
full of the same pride) who shall be able to cure it? And if the light grow to
be darkness, and if the very rule of straightness become crooked, what kind of
thing, will the rest be?

So great are the mischiefs which grow from pride, that it troubles al them,
with whom it has to do; for if men will defend their own opinion in obstinate
manner, and be inseparable from it, who shall be able to live in peace? And to
the end, that thou may fly, and cutse this vice, know that it arriueth so
farce, as to make of them that were good Christians, perverse Heretics. Nor
have they been, nor are they such, for any other reason now, but because by
giving more belief to their own judgment, then to that of the Church, and of
their Prelates, they conceive themselves to hit the bird in the eye; and that
whatsoever passes in their heart, is the work of God; and that to believe the
opinion of others, rather the^ that which they find in their own heart, were to
forsake God, for man. But experience and truth demonstrates to us, that the
thing which they thought to be the spirit of Truth, was the spirit of Error,
which not being able to overcome them otherwise, did assault them (after having
transformed it self, into an Angel of light) under the appearance of Good;
and so deprived them of the life of their souls, for not being content to
submit themselves to the advice of others.

CHAP. LV.
That we must fly fast from our own opinion; and choose some person to whom
for the love of God, we must be subject, and be ruled by him, and what kind of
man he must be, and how we must carry our selves with him.
BEING therefore afraid, and taking a warning by occasion of these fellows, I
admonish thee, that as thou art to be an enemy to thyn own will, so thou art,
much more to be so, of thine own opinion; and of resolving to carry things,
by thine own judgment; since thou see the evil conclusion, which is made by
self conceit. Be an enemy thereof, both within doors, and without; and
follow it not, even in trifles. For Note this well.
thou shall hardly find a thing which so much will disquiet the peaceful rest,
that Christ desires to find in thy soul, (that so he may communicate himself
thereunto) as to be obstinate, and resolute, to carry the matter after thine
own mind. And better for thee it were, not to have that which thou desire,
then to loose that, whereof thou have so much need, for the enjoying of God,
with intiere peace. This I say is to be practiced by thee, if the ordering of
the house do not belong to thy care; for in case it do, thou must not forbear
to do that which seems best to thee, though yet withal, thou art to inform
thy self well, both by making prayer, and taking counsel, according to the
quality of the thing in question.

Thou Whosoever will master his will in great matters, must be content to
begin in small ones.
know well enough, that they who are in danger of receiving some great
affront, do begin to make trial, upon enduring certain toys; that so they
may be exercised toward the bearing of such as indeed are great ones. And
know thou assuredly, that whosoever is accustomed to believe himself; and does
esteem himself to have a wise understanding, resolving to bear himself out
in small matters; will find it very strange, and hard, to depart in greater from
his own opinion. And on the contrary side, a man who has used to call his
understanding fool, and to give it little credit in trifles, will find
himself facilitated, toward a subjection of himself to the pleasure of God,
and of his Superiors; and not easily to judge ill of his Neighbors. And as I
have said, that in things of small importance, thou shall do well to forsake
thine own, and to follow another man's opinion, without much examination of who
it is, that says, or says it not; so I tell thee, that in the things which
concern thy conscience, thou art much more to follow advice; neither trusting
thy self therewith, nor yet some such other man, as thou may find at random.

It will therefore be fit for thee, to take for thy guide and Ghostly Father,
some person, who is both Both learning, and experience are wholly necessary to
such as are to be the Ghostly Fathers of spiritual persons.
learned, and of experience, in things that belong to God. For without both
these qualityes (speaking ordinarily) he will not be for the purpose. For
learning alone, is not sufficient to provide for the particular necessityes,
and prosperityes, and temptations, which happen to the souls of such as walk
in a spiritual life; and in these cases, as Gerson says, recourse must be had
to men of experience. And it will fall out, many times, to them who have no more
the^ learning, as it fell out to the Apostles; who (being one night, in a
tempest at sea) thought that Christ coming toward them, was but some other
idle apparition; (holding that for a deceit, which yet indeed was a real
favor, and the truth of our Lord.) Some man will strike thee into excessive
fears, condemning every thing for evil. And as their own hearts are very
far from the experience of any spiritual gustes, and illuminations of God,
so do they speak thereof, as of a thing never heard of* and can with difficulty
be induced to believe, that nobler and higher things do pass in the hearts of
others, then they find in their own.

With others also thou shall meet, who are practiced in matters of devotion,
and who are easily carried toward any gust of spirit, and who make much
account thereof. And if any such thing be told them, they hearken to it, with
great admiration; esteeming him for more holy, who has more of them; and he is
light in giving credit to them, as if in them, all were safe. But because
indeed it is not so, many of these persons fall into error; and they suffer
also them to fall, whom they have in charge, for want of giving them sufficient
advice, against the craft of the Devil; and in this respect they are as unfit
to govern souls, as the former. But Note this and learn thereby, wherein
true sanctity does consist.
know thou, that there are some of so good judgment, as to understand, that
true sanctity consists not in such things as these; but in the accomplishing
of the will of our Lord; and they have experience in spiritual things, and
they also can tell how to doubt, and to ask of others who may inform them.
Thou Great experience with great humility, goes far in making a manable to
guide another in matters of spirit, though there be not so great learning.
may trust these last, although they have no eminency in learning; because
that which they have, is enough, since they have no other employment, but to
look to themselves. And since it does so much import thee, to light upon a
good guide, thou must with great instance, beseech our Lord, that he will
direct thee, by his providence, to such a one; and thou being once addressed,
put thy heart into his hand, with great security; and hide nothing from him,
whether it be good or bad. Not the good, to the end that he may address it,
and advise thee; and not the evil, to the end that he may reform it. And do
not any thing of importance without his opinion; placing confidence in God,
(who is a friend to obedience) that he will put, into the heart, and tongue of
that guide of thine, the thing which shall be fit for thy salvation. By this
means thou shall fly from those two evils and extremes; The one, Of them
that say, I have no need of man's counsel, God teaches me, and satisfies me;
The other, Of them, who are so subject to some man, without considering any
other thing, but that he is a man; as that the malediction lays hold on him
which says, Ierem. 17.
Cursed be the man that confides in man.

But The true middle way that is to be walked in.
do thou submit thy self to a man, and thou shall have escaped the former; and
do not confide in the knowledge or force of that man, but in God, who will
speak to thee, and strengthen thee by means of a man; and so thou shall have
declined the later danger. And be thou well assured, that how much soever thou
seek, thou shall never find any other way so straight, or so secure, for the
knowing the will of our Lord, as this of humble obedience, which is so much
ad^^^ed to, by all his Saints; and so much practiced by many of them; as we
find* by the testimony, of the lives of the holy He means chiefesly such as
lived in that desert.
Fathers. Amongst whom, it was held for a great sign of a man's approaching
toward perfection, if he subjected himself much to the old man, that was to
govern him. And amongst the many good things, wherewith Religious Orders do
abound; thou will hardly find any other so good, as that all of them, live
under a Superior, whom they are to obey; not only in exterior actions; but
interiourly also in the opinion and judgment. Who if they have confidence, and
do carry devotion to the virtue of Obedience; they shall lead a life both very
safe, and very sweet.

CHAP. LVI.
Wherein he begins to declare the second word of the verse, and how we are
to consider of the Scriptures; and how we must restrain the sight of our eyes,
that we may the better see with those of our soul, which the freer they are
from the sight of creatures, the better shall they see God.
IF thou have well considered the words, which already I have spoken, thou will
have seen how necessary it is, to Hear; that so thou may please our Lord
God. Now hearken to the second word which is, See. It is not enough to be
attentive to the external word of God; or yet to the internal inspirations,
which are signified by hearing; but it is also necessary to keep the eye
clear, that it may see. For the blind, who do not see the light, are no less
reprehended by Christ, then the deaf, who do not hear the Truth. But do not
think, when he advises thee to see, that he inuiteth thee to see sportes, or
entertainments of the world; for that A most necessary thing it is, to have the
eyes well mortified.
kind of seeing, what is it else, but a kind of blinding, since it blocketh up
the sight of the soul. It is enough for the eyes of the body, if they behold
the earth into which they must return; and if they cast themselves up to
heaven, where the desire of their heart is lodged; according to that of Psalm. 8.
David, I will behold the heaven, that work of thy hands, the moon, and the
stars which thou have framed. And yet if thou have a mind to look upon other
creatures, I have nothing to say against it; upon this condition, that such a
sight may pass from them to God; and that it be, not to forget and loose God
thereby. For of such sightes as that, David Psalm. 118.
said to our Lord, O Lord ^uert mine eyes, that they may not look upon vanity
and quicken me in thy way.

This wise King, knew well, that inordinate looking, is an impediment to speedy
running the Carriere of God; and uses to make the burning heart of man, grow
cool; and therefore it is, that he says, Quicken me in thy way. For it is
plain, to men of experience, that how much more retired these exterior eyes
use to be, so much more clearly do men see with their interior eyes. And this
sight, is both more cheerful, and more profitable. And it is but reason, that
a Christian man should easily believe thing since we read of some Philosophers,
who did put out the eyes of their body, that they might have the eyes of their
understanding, more recollected to contemplatio^. Wherein, we are to discard
their error, in thrusting out their eyes; and yet we may serve our selves of
their good intention, by recollecting them; and we are, withal care, to keep a
guard upon the^, least such miseryes happen to us as by dissolutenes of this
kind, are wont to rise.

From Note how the immortification of the eyes, was the occasion of the first
great sin of Adam, and Eve.
whence do thou think, that the beginning of the perdition of the world
proceeded? I assure thee it came from one disordered sight. Eve beheld the
forbidden tree, and grew into an appetite of eating the fruit, as seeming to
her full of beauty, and gust. She did eat, and she made her husband eat
thereof; and that bitt was death, both for them and all their posterity. There
is no discretion to behold that, which it is not lawful to desire; as is
plain, by David the holy King; whose eyes took pleasure in looking upon a
woman, as she was bathing in her garden; and he grew to have reason, thereby,
to weep days and nights; and to bathe his own bed, and Royal couch with
tears in so great abundance, that his eyes, were as if they had been
moath-eaten with much weeping. And he that says, Mine eyes have powered out,
even floudes of tears, because the wicked have not kept thy law, had done
better to have shed them, because himself did not keep it. Good counsel had
it been for his eyes, not to have taken gust, in that which cost him
afterward so dear. And so it will also, be good for us sinners, since we are
so loose of the fear, as that, where the eyes go before, the heart with speed
goes after. Let Note well this whole discourse.
us therefore put a veil between us, and every creature; not fastening our
sight wholly upon any of them; least being there taken up, we loose the sight of
our Creator; That is, those devout considerations which we had of him. And do
thou believe for certain, that one of the most assured signs of a retired,
and recollected heart, is the mortification of the sight, and of a dissolute
heart, if the sight be dissolute.

There is no pulse which so assuredly declares the disposition of the body, as
the eye expresses the inclination of the soul, either to good, or evil. And
therefore the Spouse does praise the eyes of his fellow Spouse, by saying, That
1. Cant. 5.
her eyes were, as of the Dove; giving us to understand that they were chaste,
as they of the Dove are, which use to be black. Let us therefore see well, how
we see; unless we have a mind to pay that by lamenting, which we have sinned
in by looking. And if this care must be had, in the exterior eyes, how much
more must it be had, in those of the mind; wherein chiefly the seeing well, or
ill consists; and whereby it is best judged, whether a man have eyes, or no.
No man doubts, but that the Pharisees to whom Christ Jesus our Lord, was
speaking, had eyes in their heads, wherewith they saw; but because their soul
had no eyes, he calls them blind, and guides of the blind. For, as S. Antony
said to a blind man called Dydimus, who was full of wise knowledge of holy
Scripture, Thou have no reason to be troubled for the want of corporal eyes,
which cats, and dogs, and other inferior living creatures have, since the
eyes of thy soul are clear, wherewith God is seen.

Of this sight therefore, art thou to understand that, whereof thou art
admonished, in the second word, see. If thou will perform it, thou have eyes,
which are thy understanding; and this was given us, for the sight of God. Do
Consider, and avoid, those objects which are so hurtful to our sight.
not fill it with the dust of the earth, and transitory honor; do not stop it
up with the gross humors of sensual thoughts; but shaking of such poor
things as these, which fill the sight, preserve thy understanding clear, that
so it may be employed, upon him that gave it; and who demaundes it of thee
again, that so he may make thee happy by it. Do This may be good counsel for
all Christians according to our several vocations: though chiefly it be here
meant, for such, as are in state of virginity.
not think it to have been in vain, that Christ has freed thee from worldly
business; and was pleased that thou should not enter into the troubles and
incommodityes of a married life; the cares whereof, use to trouble their sight,
who are subject to them; if our Lord do not impart, a very special grace; in
the strength whereof, they may comply with both obligations. But thee our Lord
has freed, to the end that thou might be wholly his; and that thine eyes
might cast themselves upon him alone, as the chaste Spouse should only look,
upon him, whose Spouse she is.

CHAP. LVII.
That the first thing which a man must see, is himself; of the necessity which
we have of this knowledge, and the inconveniences that grow upon us, through
want thereof.
THOU Here begins a most excellent, and most profitable discourse, of the
knowledge of ones self. It is made at large and deserves to be well considered.
shall therefore hold this order in looking, that first thou look upon thy
self; and then upon God; and afterward upon thy Neighbors. Look upon thy
self, that so thou may know thy self, and have thy self in small account.
For there is not a worse kind of deceit, then to be deceived in one self; and
to esteem himself for other then indeed he is. A piece of dirt thou art, for
as much as concerns thy body; and a sinner thou art, for as much as concerns
thy soul; and if thou esteem thy self to be more then this, thou art blind.
And the spouse will say to thee, If thou do not know thy self, O thou who
art fair amongst women, go out, and look after the footsteps of thy heardes,
and feed thy kiddes, by those cottages, or tents of the sheepheardes. This
place, I will declare to thee, according to the Greek letter and the vulgar
edition, which the Council of Trent directs us to follow, The same place of
holy Scripture may have diverse meanings and all of them true, as S. Augustine
does prove at large lib. 11. Confess. in many places.
although the Hebrew letter do carry another sense: They say therefore,
according to the opinion of S. Gregory, S. Bernard, and Origin after this
manner. There is nothing so much to be trembled at, as to hear it said, by the
mouth of God, Go out, and see. For if the saddest word that a Father can say to
a son, or a husband to a wife (whom he kept in great honor, and abundance)
is to separate her from his estate and protection, by saying, Go thy ways from
me, and from my house; what kind of thing shall it be, for the soul to depart
from God, but to be banished from all happynes, and to fall into all miseryes?
Whither shall we go, said S. Peter to Christ, for thou have the words of
eternal life? Whither shall we go, for thou have the fountain of life, and
thou only have it? Whither shall we go, O thou sweet and cheerful light,
without which, all is darkness? Whither shall we go, O thou bread of life,
without which all is deadly hunger? Whither shall we go, O thou most strong
defense, without whom, even security it self, is but danger? In fine, whither
shall that sheep go, which is all environed with wolves, if the shepherd do
forsake it, and cast it off? (...) It is so, and he that does not think so,
does not think of it, as he ought.
sadd word it is, Go out, and see; and like that, which Christ has to say to
the wicked, at the last day, Go you cursed into the fire, that is prepared for
you.

I say yet once again, that there is not a thing, which ought to make a man
tremble more, or labor more for the avoiding of it, if he be, in the
plentiful and cheerful house of God, and in the hand of his most strong
protection, then to hear these words, Go out, and see. This going out, is no
trifle, but the cause of all mischief. For that man who is made destitute of
divine help, and left to his own strength, what will he do, as says S.
Austine, but that which S. Peter did, when he denied Christ? And that, without
knowing, or repenting himself of the evil which he had done, till the divine
countenance, and favor of Christ, did shine upon him, who by falling into
sin, had forgotten him; giving knowledge to S. Peter of the misery into which
he had cast himself; and giving him grief for the same; and letting him see,
that the cause of his fall, was his having confided in himself. So that the
reason why our merciful Lord grows so rigorous, in turning his children out
of doors, is because they do not know themselves; esteeming that they are
somewhat, and resting so upon their own strength.

To this soul therefore, the Spouse does say, If thou do not know thy self,
get thee out, and see the footsteps of thy herds of Cattle. Which is as much,
as if he had said, that he gave her^^uer, to follow the trace, and works of
sinners, who commit iniquity by troops, like heardes of Cattle, one helping on
the other. And Companions in sin, companion^ in torment.
so also, at the last day, shall they be tied up in bundles, to be jointly
burnt in the fire of hell, who here have jointly given themselves to sin.
And the spouse to such a soul does say, Thy heardes: because sin is of us, and
not of God; and the good that we do, is of God, and not of us; since we do it
by virtue of him. Now this, he is resolved, that we should soundly know to be
so; not so much for that which it imports him, (whose glory in himself, is
not increased, although he be glorified by us) but for that which concerns
us; for whose good it makes (and that greatly) to know, that the honor, of all
the good we have, or do, must be ascribed to him, and not to us. And if, of
that which he placed in us, for his own praise, we will erect an Idol, by
attributing the glory of the incorruptible God to our selves, who are
corruptible men; he will not suffer it to pass unpunished, but will say
Continue thou, with that which is thine, and perish; since thou would not
remain in me, who had a mind to save thee, from perishing.

O with how Read and take heed and tremble.
high Truth, are these words accomplished in proud men; and how soon do they
grow from being spiritual to be carnal; from being recollected to be
dissolute; from being gold, to be dirt. And they who were wont to feed upon the
bread of heaven with gust, do afterward take pleasure to eat the food of
swine. And it grows to be afflictiue to the^, not only to do the works of
God, but even to hear men speak of him. Whence do thou think it did
proceed, that some persons who were chaste in their youth (although they were
assaulted with stinging temptations) when they came into old age, have
miserably fallen into such deformed vileness of this kind, as that they were
amazed, and even did abhor themselves. The cause was this. In their youth
they lived with holy fear, and with humility; and finding themselves so, upon
the brimme of falling, they called upon God, and were defended by him. But The
fruit of pride.
when afterward, upon a long possession of the chastity which they had, they
grew to be high fed, and to confide in themselves, at that very instant were
they forsaken by the hand of God, and did that, which was proper to themselves,
which was to fall. And so is it accomplished, That they feed their kiddes;
which are their light, and dishonest appetites, near the Tents of the
sheepheardes, which are the bodies of the creatures of God; For in them they
dwell, as if it were in a Tente, which is set up in a field, to be removed
upon every short warning, and not, as in a house, or City of rest. And so they
are said with much reason, to feed their senses upon bodies; and things
belonging to the body; because, by their pride, they lost the true sense which
they had; believing otherwise of themselves, then they are, (which is indeed
but to be sinners, and good for nothing of themselves) and robbing God of that
glory, which does so duly, and truly belong to him, for all the good which we
do at all.

Awake therefore, O daughter, and be warned by the hurt of others, and serve thy
self of the threat, least otherwise thou be put to feel the smart. And be
thou like the spouse, to whom this speech was used, who hearing so sad a word
(of, Go thy ways, and see) to fall from his mouth, from whom all good things
proceed, she considered, and she knew herself; and she cast off certain
presumptions, to which formerly she had been subject. Being thus humbled by
this reprehension, the spouse does comfort Cant. 5.
her, by saying, I have resembled thee, O thou my friend, to my troops of
horse amongst Pharaos Chariots, thy cheeks are fair as of a Turtle. By pride
a man grows like the Devil; who as the Gospel says, did not remain in the
Truth, which is God; but did resolve to subsist in himself, and upon himself
to lean, and rest, and so he fell. For a creature cannot subsist in himself,
but in God. And on the other side, a man, by the humble knowledge of himself,
grows like to those good Angels, who did cast themselves upon God, and untied
themselves from themselves. For they saw that they were, but as a kind of
broken reed; and so God vpheld them, and confirmed them. And they cried out
saying. Michael, which signifies, Who like to God? Wherein they contradicted
the wretched Lucifer, and his followers, who would needs make Idols of
themselves, ascribing that to themselves, which did belong to God; which is, To
be the beginning, and the protection, and the entiere repose of all creatures.
Not as if they conceived, that this could be (they who knew themselves to be
creatures) but because they took pleasure in it, as if so it had been. As
proud men use to do; who although with the mouth, or understanding, they cry
out, that they hold, and hope for all their good from God; yet by Note and take
heed.
their will; they exalt themselves, and they vainly rejoice in themselves; as
if of themselves they had that good. Confessing with their understanding, that
the glory is due to God, but robbing him of it, by the will.

But those good Angels, cry out, both with the will and understanding, Who
like to God? For with their hearts they did humble, and disesteeme themselves;
as they knew by their understanding, that they were to do. And for this, they
were exalted, to the participation of God, without so much as a possibility of
ever loosing it. Now, to these troops of horse. which is the Angelical army
that destroyed Pharao, and his chariots in the red sea, Christ compares his
Spouse, when she is content to know, and measure her self; and he praises her
cheeks, wherein she uses to show bashfullnesse. For the spouse was ashamed of
that reprehension, as having demanded higher things, then were convenient for
her meandness. And her cheeks, of bold, grew bashful, and chaste, as of the
turtle; which is an honest and a modest bird. And for this it was, that the
devout S. Bernard S. Bern^^, was therefore no Protestant.
said, That he had found by experience, that nothing was more profitable, for
the obtaining, conseruing, or reconering of grace, then ever to live in fear
and holy care. When A Christian must ever live with a holy kind of fear and
(...).
we want grace, we must have fear, because we are ready to take a thousand
falls. When we have it, we must have care, because we are to work, in
conformity of the talent which God bestows on us thereby; and most care of all
when we loose it; because that favor went from us, by our negligence. The
Scripture does therefore say, Blessed is the man who does always fear.

CHAP. LVIII.
That we must be diligent to find out the knowledge of our selves; and by what
means this may be done; and that it is fit for us to have some private place,
into which we may daily retire our selves for a time.
BY that which here is said, and by much more, which has been said by the
Saints, in praise of the knowledge of ones self, thou will find how necessary
this Jewel is, for the coming afterward to know God. And since thou have a
mind, to build a house in thy soul, for so high a Lord, know thou, that God
will never inhabit a proud heart.
not the high, but the humble of heart, are his houses. Therefore let thy first
care be, to digg deep, in the earth of thy littlenes; till having freed all
that which thou have, from being esteemed by thy self, thou come at last, to
the firm stone, which is God; upon which, and not upon thine own false earth,
or sand, thou art to build thy house. For this did the blessed S. Gregory say,
Thou who think to raise up a building of virtues take into the first part of
thy care, the foundation, which is humility for he that pretends to have
virtue without it, is like a man that would carry ashes in his hand, against
the wind This he says, not only because virtues do not profit men without
humility (though rather indeed without it, they be no virtues) but for that
they are an occasion of great perdition, as a great building upon a slight,
and weak foundation, would be sure of a great fall.

According therefore to the height of other virtues, the foundation of humility
is to be laid low; to the end that the soul may be firm, and not puffed first
up, and then down by the wind of Pride. And if thou say, where shall I find
this precious jewel of the knowledge of my self? I tell thee, that although
it be of great value, yet Where humility is to be found.
art thou to find it in the stable; and in the midst of the dung of thine
own pouertyes, and infirmityes, removing thine eyes from looking on the lives
of others. Do not busy thy self to know curious things; but turn in thy
sight, upon thy soul: and continue in examining of thy self. And although at
the first, thou can not lay hold upon this knowledge (like one that goes out
of a bright Sunshine, into a dark chamber,) yet Observe, and practice this,
for thou wile find it most certainly true.
by continuing, in a quiet manner, thou shall see, by little and little, with
the grace of God, whatsoever is in thy heart, though it lie in the most secret
corners thereof. And that thou may know the means, which thou art to use, in
a thing that does so highly import thee, give ear to S. Hierome, who speaks
thus to a married woman. In such sort art thou to have care of thy house that
thou also may find some resting place for thy soul. Seek out some fit
corner, and retired from the noise of thy family, to which I would have thee
go, as one does into a haven flying from the stiff tempest of thy cares. And
there be thou in reading of spiritual books and continual prayer, and in the
thoughts of another life, and they so firm, as that all the employments of the
rest of the day, may be made light to thee, by this time of thy retraite. Nor
do I yet say this, to withdraw thee from the government of thy house, but
rather that so thou may learn thereby, and consider how thou art to carry
thy self therein. If this Blessed Saint do recommend to a married woman, that
she free her self from the business of her house for some time, and retire her
self into some quiet place, to read, and think of heavenly things; with how
much more reason is it, that a Virgin of Christ, who is free from worldly
cares; and who should think that she lives not for any thing else so
particulerly, as to frequent prayer, and to practice both interior and
exterior recollection, should seek out some private, and hidden place of her
house, wherein she may have her devout books, and devout pictures; and that the
same place may be only deputed, to the use of seeing, and tasting, how sweet
our Lord is.

The state of Virginity which thou have taken, is not meant for this, that thou
should be wrapped up in the cares of this world, which pass and perish. But
as it carries resemblance to the The noblenes of the state of virginity.
state of celestial spirits (for as much as concerns the entiernes and
incorruption of the flesh) so thou art to think (to the very out side of thy
power) that no thought of earth must have entrance into thy heart; but thou art
to be a living Temple, wherein the sacrifice of continual prayers may be
offered, and praises of him that made thee, sounded forth without intermission.
Let this only thought possess thy heart: how thou may please our Lord, as
Coloss. 3.
S. Paul says. Give thy self, for dead, to the world, since thou have
espoused thy soul to a celestial King. And Recollection is necessary for
soul* that pretend to serve God.
remember what he says to the Spouse, A Cant. 4.
garden shut up, O my sister and my spouse; a garden shut up. For not only art
thou to be kept clean in thy body, but thou art also to be very retired, and
recollected in thy soul. And because Virginity is embraced among Christians,
not only for what it is in it self; but because it helps to give the soul
to God, with more freedom of spirit; that Virgin, who is content with the only
Virginity of her body, and is not careful of progress in virtue, and prayer,
and taking gust in God; what other thing does she, then dwell upon the way; and
not procure to arrive to the iourneys end? And it were, as if thou had all
things ready to sew, and work, and should never set thy self about it.

A shameful thing it is for any Christian not to exercise himself in reading
of spiritual books; and not to carry holy thoughts in his soul; but for a
Religious man not to do it, or for a Priest, or for a Virgin, who have given
themselves away to Christ, is not only a thing shameful, but insufferable. And
therefore, if thou will reap the fruits of that holy Virginity, which thou
have promised to Christ, be an enemy both of seeing, and being seen. Go abroad
the least thou can, though it be even to holy places, and good works; for so
it is fittest for young folks. Do not plunge thy self into transitory cares;
and when thou have done working some what with thy hands, (which being
moderately used, will do thee good, both in soul and body) and having complied
with thy obligations, either of necessity, or Charity (according to that rule
of life which has been prescribed to thee) take as much time as thou can, to
be shut up in thine Oratory. And although at the first, it may chance to go
against thy stomach; thou will come to find, that they are the affairs of
heaven which are treated there; and that thou take not so much gust in the
expense of any time, as that which thou spendest there in peace.

CHAP. LIX.
Wherein he prosecuteth the exercise which conduces to the knowledge of ones
self; and how we are to profit in the use of reading, and of Prayer.
HAVING then found out this private place; retire thy self into it, twice
every day, at the least; Once in the morning to think upon the sacred passion
of Jesus Christ our Lord, as I will show thee afterward; and once again, in
the evening, at the shutting up of the day, to attend to the exercise of
knowing thy self, and let thy way to that, be this. Take first some book of
good instruction, wherein, as in a glass, thou may see thy faults; and
that thy soul may therewithal receive such food, A most excellent advise how
spiritual books are to be read with great profit of the soul.
as to be encouraged in the way of God. This reading, must not be used with any
trouble, nor by turning over many leaves; but with raising up the heart to our
Lord, to beseech him, that he will speak to it, with his living and powerful
voice, by means of those words which there thou read. And that he will give
thee the true understanding thereof; and with this attention, and reverence,
observe and hearken to God, by those words which thou read, as if thou
heardest himself preach, when he spoke here in the world. In such sort, that
although thine eyes be cast upon the book, do not thou fasten thy self to it,
with so great an anxiety of mind, as to make thee not so well to think of God;
but conserve a moderate and peaceful attention, which may not enthrall thee,
nor hinder the free, and superior kind of attention, which thou art to yeald
unto our Lord; and reading thus, thou will not grow weary.

By this means, our Lord will give thee, the living sense of the words, which
in thy soul may work, sometimes repentance of thy sins, at other times a
confidence in him, and his pardon of them; and he will open thy understanding
toward the knowledge of many other things, although thou read not many lines.
Sometimes, it will be fit to interrupt thy reading, and to think of somewhat,
which resulteth from thence; and then to return again to read, and so at once
thou shall profit, both in reading, and prayer. And with a heart thus devout and
recollected, thou may begin to enter, upon the exercise Of the knowing of
thy self; and then upon thy knees, thou shall think to what an excellent, and
sovereign majesty thou art going to speak. Which yet How we are to think upon
God when we go to pray.
thou must not conceive to be far from thee; but that he fills heaven and
earth; and that there is nothing wherein he is not; and that he is more within
thee, then thou thy self. And considering thine own poorenes, make thou a
profound internal reverence, humbling thy heart, as if it were a kind of Ant in
the presence of an infinite Essence, and desire that thou may have leave to
speak. Begin first to speak ill of thy self; and make thy confession in
general: and particulerly also (if it occure to thee) demand pardon of that,
wherein thou may have offended him, that day.

Resort then to some of those Some few vocal prayers, wherein moderation is to
be used.
devotions, to which thou art accustomed, but let the^ not be so many, as that
they may break thy brains, and dry up thy devotion; nor yet do thou leave
them altogether; because they serve to stir up the soul to piety; and for the
offering also of that service of our tongue to God, in token that he gave it to
us. For this reason, S. Paul teaches us, That we must pray, and sing, with the
spirit both of the voice, and of the soul. And these prayers must serve to
obtain favors of our Lord, not only for thy self, but for them to whom thou
have particular obligation; and for the whole Church of Christ; the care
whereof, thou art to have deeply fixed in thy heart. For if thou love Christ, it
is reason that thou be nearly touched, by that for which he shed his blood.
Pray as well for them that live, as for the souls that are in Purgatory, and
for all that infidelity, which is deprived of the knowledge of God: beseeching
him to bring al unbelievers to his holy Faith* since he desires that they
should all be saved. And these prayers, or the most of them, are to be
addressed two ways. By the one, to our Our B. Lady must be devoutly prayed to,
by us, as a great intercessour with her Son our Lord, for the pardon of our
sins. but especially Christ Jesus our Lord, who is the only hope of our
salvation.
Blessed Lady; toward whom thou must be sure to carry a very cordial love,
and to have entiere confidence, that she will be a true mother to thee in all
thy necessityes; and the other to Christ Jesus our Lord, which also must be a
most familiar refuge in thy troubles, and the only hope of thy salvation.

CHAP. LX.
How much the Meditation of death, does profit toward the knowledge of a man's
self; and of the manner how it is to be meditated, for as much as concerns
the death of the body.
AFTER If this Chapter and the two next do not move thee, I know not what will.
this, give over to pray vocally; and conuaye thy self into the most inward
part of thy heart; and make account, that thou art appearing in the presence of
Christ Jesus; and that there are no more in the world, but thou, and he.
Consider, that before thou came into the world, thou were nothing; and how
that Omnipotent goodness of our Lord God, drew thee out of that profound bottom
of not being, and made thee his creature; and that, not after an ordinary
manner; but he made thee a reasonable creature. Consider, how he gave thee a
body, and a soul; to the end that with them both, thou might labor in
doing service to him. Make account that thou art then, in the very passage, out
of life into death; and having the most true feeling of it that may be, say to
thy self, This hour of my end is once to arrive; and I know not whether it
shallbe to night, or to morrow; and since it must certainly come, it is reason
that I take it into my thought. Consider, how thou shall fall into thy bed; and
how thou must sweat, that sweat of death. Thy breast shall beat, and rise
upward; the very stringes of thine eyes shall break; the color of thy face
shall vanish; and through the excess of pain, that, so friendly society of thy
body, and soul, shallbe cut off.

They shall prepare thy body for burial; and lay it upon a Bear; and they
shall carry thee to the earth, some weeping, and others singing; and they shall
cast thee into a strait grave; and load thee with dust; and when they have
troaden well upon thee, thou shall remain alone, and be soon forgotten.
Consider all this, by which thou must pass; and think what kind of thing thy
body will be under ground, and how soon it will come to such a pass, as that
whosoever he be that loves thee most, will not endure to see thee, or smell
thee, or come near thee. Behold then, with attention, to what end this flesh,
and the glory of it does arrive; and thou will see, what fools they are, who
being to go out of the world so poor, do now walk on, with so much anxiety,
of being rich; and being so soon to be so defeated and forgotten, have such
thirst to rank themselves in higher places then others: and how deeply they
are deceived who regale their body, and walk in conformity of their desires;
since thereby they have done nothing, but make themselves cooks for worms;
being curious to dress the meat which they are to eat: and, the while, they
have made, by those short delights, a purchase of certain torments, which
shall never end. Consider, and behold with great attention, and leisure, thy
body stretched a long in thy grave; and making account that already thou art
there, procure to mortify thy desires, of flesh and blood, as often as they
shall come to thy mind; and so also mortify thy desires of pleasing, or fearing
to displease the world; and of making any reckoning of whatsoever thing, is
most flourishing, since thou art to leave both it, and thy self, so suddenly,
and so miserably. And considering how thy body (when first it shall have been
fed upon by worms) will be converted into filth, and dust, do not think of it
hereafter, but as of a dunghill covered with snow; the very remembrance
whereof, may turn thy stomach. And possessing thy body in this manner, thou will not be deceived in the estimation thereof; but thou shall obtain the true
knowledge of it; and shall understand how thou art to govern it; looking
forward upon the full point to which it must arrive, as he that places
himself in the poope of* the ship, that so he may direct it the better.

CHAP. LXI.
Of that which is to be considered in the meditation of Death, about that which
shall happen to the soul; that so we may profit the more, in the knowledge of
our selves.
TO this A most singular discourse.
which thou have heard, is thy body to arrive; it remains that thou hear,
what shall happen to thy soul; which in that hour of thy death will be full of
anguish, by the remembrance of those offenses, which, in thy life, thou have
committed, against our Lord. And those things seeming grievous at that time,
which before, thou thoughtst to be of little moment, it will be deprived of the
use of thy senses, nor will thy tongue serve thee for the asking succor of our
Lord. Thy understanding will grow so dark, as that thou will scarce be able to
think of God; and, in a word, by little and little, the end of that hour
draws on, wherein, by the commandment of God, thy soul is to spring out of
thy body; and when that resolution, concerning it must be taken, which shall
fasten it, either upon eternal damnation, or eternal salvation. It must
hear, from the mouth of God, either, Depart from me to eternal torment, or
remain with me in state of salvation, either inpurgatory, or in Paradise. Thou
art to be wholly depending upon the hand of God, and of him only, thou may
hope for remedy; and therefore thou ought, in thy life time, to fly far
from offending him, of whom then thou art to have so much need. The Devils
will not be wanting to accuse thee; and demand justice of God, against thy
soul; laying particulerly to thy charge* every sin which thou have
committed; and if then the mercy of God forget thee, what will thou be able to
do; thou poor, weak sheep, being environed by those ravenous wolves, who are
so full of desire to swallow thee up.

Consider then, in this time of thy recollection, how, in that strait passage,
thou art to be presented before the judgment of God, all naked* and There is
no company in death, but the good or evil which we shall have done.
deprived of all things; saving only, that thou shall be accompanied by the
good which thou have wrought, or by the evil which thou have committed; and
say to our Lord, that now thou do willingly present thy self to him, to the
end that thou ma^est obtain mercy in that other hour, when perforce thou art
to part out of the world. Make Help thy self to be confounded with sham and
sorrow for thy sins, by these co^parisons.
account that thou art some thief, who is taken in the manner, whilst he is
stealing; and whom they present with his hands bound before the Judge. Or
else, that thou art some woman, whose husband found her dishonouring his bed,
and who, through the excess of confusion, knows not how so much as to lift
up her eyes, and much less how to deny the fact. And do thou believe, that God
has much more clearly seen all that wherein thou have ever offended him,
then any eyes of man can see that which is done before him. And be thou full of
shame, for having bin so wicked, in the presence of so great a goodness. Cover
thy self with that very shame, which before thou did loose; and procure to
find, in thy self, confusion for thy sins, as one that stands in the
presence of her sovereign Lord and Judge.

Accuse thy self then, as thou shall afterward be accused; and especially draw
to thy memory, the most greiuous of those sins, which thou have committed;
though if they should be sins of the flesh, it is safer for thee not to
detain thy self very particulerly upon them; but only do it, all in gross,
as of a thing that stinckes; and the beholding whereof does greatly amaze
thee. Judge thy self, and sentence thy self for wicked; and cast down thine
eyes, upon those fyres of hell; believing that thou have well deserved them.
Lay If thou have a generous and noble heart this thought will pierce it.
on the one side the blessings which God has bestowed upon thee, from the time
of thy Creation; walking with thy discourse, both over thy body, and thy soul;
and think how thou were obliged to reuere him, and to be grateful to him; and
to love him, with thy whole heart; serving him with entiere obedience; and
observing the commandments, both of him, and of his Church with all the power
thou have. Consider how he has conserved thee, by a thousand other benefits
that he has bestowed upon thee; and as many miseries from which he has
delivered thee; and above all things remember, how (to inuit thee to be good,
by his example, and love) the same Lord of the world, came into it, by making
himself a man; and for the relief of thy miseryes, and the removing of the
blindness, wherein thou were, would needs endure many afflictions, and first did
sheed many tears; and afterward his very blood, and he did cast away his
precious life for thee. All Our Lord give us all grace, to make great use of
this certain truth.
which ponderation, in the day of thy death, and of the judgment which must
pass upon thee, shall be placed in one balance; laying it to thy charge as that
which thou have received; and an account shall be demanded at thy hand^* how thou
have served thy self of so great favors; and how thou have carried thy self
in the service of God, and with what care thou have kept correspondence with
that so great goodness; wherewith God has desired, and procured to save thee.
Consider well, and thou shall see, how much reason thou have to fear, since
not only thou have not answered by doing services, according to thy debtes and
obligations; but thou have paid him with evil for good; and have despised
him, who has valewed thee at so high a rate; turning thy back, and flying
from him, who did so fast follow thee, for thy good.

What thanks does it seem to thee, that thou art to give him, who by his
infinite mercy has delivered us from hell, we having so justly deserved it.
What shall we offer him for a present, who has so often stretched forth his
hand toward us; that the Devils might not strangle and carry us insta^tly
away to hell. And to us who have been cruel offenders of his Majesty, he has
been a piteous Father and dear defendour. Consider, that Yea, and without
Perhaps.
perhaps there are souls in hell, who have committed fewer sins then thou.
And in such sort weigh thy self, and serve God, as if for thy sins thou
had already entered into hell, and that he has fetched thee out from thence.
For it comes to the same account, for him to have hindered thee from going
thither, as thou did deserve, or to draw thee, out from thence through his
great Nay, the former is the greater mercy.
mercy, after thou should have been entered in. And if, by comparing the
blessings which God has affoarded thee, and the sins which thou have
committed against him, thou do not yet find in thy self that shame or sorrow,
which thou desire; be not yet afflicted therewith; but continue in this
discourse, and lay before the eyes of God, thy heart which is so wounded, and so
indebted to him; and beseech him that he will tell thee who thou art, and what
account thou art to make of thy self. For the effect of this exercise, is not
only to understand that thou art wicked, but to feel it, and to taste it, with
thy will; and to take fast hold of thy sinnefulnes, and unworthiness; as a man
would clap the stinking carren of a dead dog, to his nose.

Therefore are not these considerations, to be certain fleeting things; not
the work of one day alone, but they are to be of good length; and to be used
with much quietness; that by little and little, the will may go drinking up that
contempt and unworthiness, which by thy understanding thou do judge due unto
thy self; and this thought of thine thou art to present before God, beseeching
him, that he will lodge it in the most internal part of thy heart. And from
thenceforth esteem thy self, with great simplicity and verity, for a most
wicked creature; deserving all contempt and torment, though it were, even that
of hell. And The true use which is to be made of these considerations.
be thou ready for the patient suffering of any labor, or neglect which shall
occur; considering, that since thou have offended God, it is but reason, that
all the creatures should rise against thee, to revenge the iniuryes that are
done to their Creator. By Note this.
this patience of thine, thou shall understand, if in very deed thou think thy
self a sinner, and worthy of hell; saying within thy self, All the mischief
that they can do me, is very little; since I have deserved hell. Who is he,
that will complain of the biting of flies, when he has merited eternal
torments? And thus go thou wondering, at the infinite goodness of God, how he
can persuade himself, not to cast off, such a stinking worm; but to
maintain it, and to regale it; and to power blessings down upon it; both in
body and soul; but all this must be for his glory, and not that we, have any
thing to glory in.

CHAP. LXII.
That the daily examination of our faults, helps much toward the knowledge
of our selves; and of other great benefits which this practice of Examen does
bring; and of the profit which comes to us, both by the reprehension of
others, and those also which our Lord does interiourly send us.
TO end the Exercise of thy knowing thy self; two things there remain, for
thee to hear. The first, that a Christian ought not to content himself, with
entering into Judgment before God, for the accusing himself of those sins
which in former times he had committed; but of them also, which he commits
daily; because thou will hardly find a thing so profitable, for the reformation
of thy life, as to take account how thou spendest it; and of the defects which
thou do fall into. For that soul, which is not careful to examine her
thoughts, and words, and deeds, is like to some lazy husbandman, who has a
vineyard, and who, as Solomon says, passed by it, and saw the hedge fallen
down, and the vineyard it self full of thorns. Make account that they have
recommended the daughter of some King to thee, of whom thou art to have
continual care, that she be well taught; and that, at night; thou take account
of her; reproving her for her faults, and exhorting her to practice virtue.
Consider thy self The great obligation which we have to look to our souls.
as a thing reco^mended to thy self by God; and teach thy self to know, that
thou art not to live without a law, or rule; but in a holy kind of subjection,
and under the discipline of virtue; and that thou shall Mark this well.
never do any one thing, that is i^^, but thou shall be sure to pay for it.

Enter An earnest and an excellent lesson concerning the strict examination of
our conscience.
as it were, into the chapter house with thy self, toward night; and judge
thy self very particulerly, as thou would do any third person. Reprehend
thy self, and punish thy self for thy faults; and preach thou more to thy
self, then to any other body, how much so ever thou love him: and where thou
find most fault, there procure to apply most remedy. For believe me, that by
the continuance of this examen, and reprehension of thy self, thy thoughts
cannot continue long without being reformed. And thou shall ariue to a science,
which will do thee much good; and it will make thee weep, and not swell; and
it will keep thee, from that dangerous infirmity of pride, which enters even
insensibly, by little and little; a man thinking well, and taking contentement
in himself.

Be very watchful against the approach there of; and preserve thy self with
all care. Take not thy self into good conceit, but know, by the light of
truth, how to reprehend, and be displeasing to thy self; and so the mercy of
God will be near thee, in whose right they only are pleasing, who are
displeasing in their own. And he pardons their faults, with a great
liberality of goodness, who know them, and who humble themselves for them,
with But it must be a true one.
a true judgment, and who lament them, by their will. Thou shall also hereby,
decline two other vices, which are the ordinary companions of pride; and they
are, ingratitude, and sloth For by knowing, and misliking thy defects, thou will see thy weakness, and thy unworthiness, and the great mercy of God, in
suffering, and pardoning thee, and in bestowing benedictions upon thee, who
have deserved misery; and by this means, thou will be grateful. And on the
other side, considering the little good thou do, and the many sins which
thou committest; thou will be awaked, out of the sleep of sloth, and wilt
every day begin with new fervor, to serve our Lord, seeing the little that thou
have done hitherto.

For this, and many other benefittes, which grow, from a man's knowing, and
reproouing himself, a holy old man of ancient times, being asked, whether a
man might be more secure, by serving God in solitude, or in company of others,
did answer, That is he knew how to reprehend himself, he might be every
where safe; and if not, that he would be every where in danger. And because,
through the inordinate love which we bear our selves, we cannot know* or
reprehend our selves, with that impartial judgment which truth requires, we
must A hard lesson; but by the goodness, and grace of our Lord Ie^^^, it is
lear^ed and practiced, by (...) in the Catholic Church.
thank that person that does it for us. And we must earnestly beseech our
Lord, that himself will rebuke us with love; bestowing upon us light and
truth, that so we may believe of our selves, as we ought, in very deed, to
believe. And this is that, which the prophet Ierem. 10.
Jeremy desired, saying, Correct me o Lord in judgment, and not in sury; least
otherwise, thou do turn me into nothing. To correct with fury, does belong to
the last day; when God will send the wicked to hell, for their sins; and to
correct in judgment, is to reprehend his children in this world, with the love
of a Father. Which reprehension, carries a great testimony with it, that God
loves such a person. Nor is there any other so sure an one, as that; nor which
brings so good news, as being the preface to us of our receiving great
favors, from God. So does S. Mark relate, that our Lord Jesus Christ,
appearing to his disciples, did Mare. 10.
reprehend them, of incredulity, and hardness of heart; and then he after, gave
them power to do wonderful things. And the prophet Isa. 4.
Isay says, That our Lord, does wash away the uncleanness of the daughters of
Sion; and the blood, out of the middle of Jerusalem, in the spirit of
judgment, and in the spirit of heat. Giving us so to understand, that for our
Lord to wash way our faults by coming to us, is first to make us know who we
are, and this is judgment. And afterward he sends in, a spirit of heat,
which is love, and that provoke us to grief, and so he washes us, giving us
pardon by his grace.

Of this we must not presume, to allow our selves any part of the glory; since
it is he, who first, gave us, to understand our own wickedness, and
rashness. Nor A description of that true ^orrow for sin, which is of God.
yet art thou to conceive, that this reprehension is any afflictiue kind of
thing, which may excessiuely oppress thy soul, by making it offensive to
thee. For any such disposition as this, is either of the Devil, or of a man's
own spirit: and it must be fled. But it is a quiet knowledge of a man's own
faults: and as a iudg^ment of heaven, which is pronounced in the soul; and
which makes this earth of our infirmity, quake with shame, and fear, and love;
which clappe spurs into the sides, to make it mende and to serve our Lord,
with greater diligence. Yea it gives a man much confidence, that our Lord
loves him, as his son, since he exercises the office of a Father with him,
as it is written. And Prou. 3.
whom he loves he corrects. Be therefore careful, to behold, and reprehend,
and to present thy self, in the presence of God, before whom, an humble
acknowledgement of our own faults, is a matter of more security, then the
proud altitude of any other science. And be not like some, who love to have
themselves in good estimation; and who because they are loath to think ill of
themselves, they take pleasure in spending much time, to think of other devout
things: and, to pass lightly over the knowledge of their own defects,
because they find no savor in them, since they take no pleasure in the
contempt of themselves. Whereas in very Truth, there is nothing so safe, nor
which so makes God, withdraw his sight from our sins, as for us to see, and
to reprehend them, with grief, and penance; As it is written; If we did judge
our selves, we should not be judged by God.

CHAP. LXIII.
Of the estimation which we are to make of our good works that we may not fail
thereby, in the knowledge of our selves, and of true Humility; and of the
marvelous example, which Christ our Lord does give us, for this purpose.
THE second thing that thou art to observe concerning this knowledge, is, that
although it be good, and profitable (since thereby we come to have a contrite
and humbled heart) yet has it this fault, that it is ever grounded, upon our
having committed sin. And it is not to be much meruailed at, if a sinner do
know, and esteem himself to be a sinner. For being such, he should withal, be
a hideous monster, if he would esteem himself for just; as if a man, who were
all full of leprosy, should account himself to be in health. We Of the
humility which is to be exercised in the consideration of a man's good works.
must not therefore be contented to esteem only little of our selves, in respect
of our sins; but much more are we to do so, in our good works Profoundly
knowing, that neither the fault of sin is of God, nor the glory of our good
deeds, of our selves. But that of all the good that may be in us, we are
perfectly to give the glory, to the Father of lights, from whom all good and
perfect gifts descend. So that, although we may have a thing that is good, we
must look upon it as none of ours; and we must use it with so great fidelity,
as not to pretend for the glory which is due to God, nor that the honey (as the
Proverb says) may be found sticking to our fingers ends. This humility is not
of sinners, as the first was, but of just persons.

Not only is this kind of humility in this world, but in heaven also. For by
occasion thereof, it is written, Who is like our Lord God, who dwells in the
Altitudes, and looks upon humble things, both in heaven, and in earth. This
kept the good Angels fast on foot; and disposed them fitly for the enjoying of
God, since they would be subject to him. And the want thereof, did thrust down
those wicked Angels, because they had a mind to rob God of his honor. This
was possessed by the sacred Virgin Mary, our B. Lady; who being preached for
happy, and blessed by the mouth of S. Elizabeth, she puffed not up, nor did she
attribute to her self any glory, for the graces which were in her; but with
More humble, and more faithful, then all men and Angels put together.
an humble, and most faithful heart, she teaches S. Elizabeth, and the whole
world, that the glory of the greatness to which she was raised, was not due to
her, but to God; and with profound reverence, she begins to sing, My soul
does magnify our Lord.

This very humility (and that which was yet more perfect) did inhabit the most
blessed soul of Jesus Christ our Lord; which (for as much as concerned the
personal being, that he had, did not rest upon it self, but upon the person
of the Word) as it exceeded all the souls and celestial spirits, in other
graces; so did it exceed them, in holy humility; being further off from giving
glory to it self, and from relying upon it self, then all those others put
together. And from this heart did that proceed, which so often he most
faithfully preached to the world, That he had received his works, and words,
from his Father and that to him, he gave the glory. And he said, My doctrine is
not mine but of him that sent me; and again The Joan. 7.14.
words that I speak, I speak not of my self but the Father who is in me, is
he that does the works. And so it was fit, that the redresser of mankind,
should be very humble, since pride was the roo^e of all misery and mischief.
And our Lord, resolving to make us know how necessary it is, for us to have
this holy and true humility, he makes himself a master of it, in particular
manner; and he puttes his own example before our eyes, saying thus, Learn
Matt. 1^.
of me for I am humble and meek. To the end, that men, seeing their so wise
Master, recommend this virtue so particulerly, they might labor much in the
purchase thereof. And seeing that our Lord, being so soueraign, does not
attribute the good to himself, there may be no man so frantic, as to presume
upon the committing of so great a wickedness.

Learn therefore, O thou servant of Christ, of this thy Master, and Lord,
this holy humility, to the end, that according to his word, thou may be
exalted, For he Luc. 14.
that humbles himself shallbe exalted. And keep in thy soul, this holy
Poverty; for of this it is understood, Blessed Wats. 5.
are the poor in spirit, for of them is the kingdom of heaven. And of this be
sure, that since Jesus Christ our Lord, was exalted by the way of humility, he
that has not this, does loose his way. And he must vnbeguile himself, and
believe, that which S. Augustine says; If thou ask me which is the way to
heaven, I shall answer thee, Humility; and if thou ask me till the third
time, I shall answer thee the same; and if thou ask me a thousand times, a
thousand times shall I answer, that there is no other way I doubt much that
Protestants, are then out of the way, if it be but even for this.
but of Humility.

CHAP. LXIIII.
Of a profitable exercise, of knowing the being which we have in Nature, that
by it we may obtain Humility.
BECAUSE I beseech you ponder well, the four next chapters, for they will te^l
you ^ewes.
I think, thou desire to obtain this holy humiliation of thy self, whereby
thou may become pleasing to our Lord, I will say somewhat, of the means how
thou may procure it. And The means which are to be used for the procuring of
the holy virtue of humility.
let the first of them be, to beg it with perseverance, of him, who is the
giver of all good things; for it is a particular gift of his, which he
bestows upon his elect. Yea and the very knowing that it is a gift of God,
is no small favor.

They who are tempted with pride do well perceive, that there is nothing further
off from their own power, then this true, and profound humility; and that it
happens many times, that by the same means, whereby they hope to obtain it,
they fly furthest from it; and that by the very acts of humiliating a man's
self, the very contrary, which is pride, sometimes does grow. Thou Note,
must therefore (as I said in that discourse, which I made before, of Chastity)
take in hand the obteyning of this Jewel, in such sort; as that neither thou
give over thy endeavor, by saying What shall I get by striving for it, since
it is the gift of God; nor yet must thou put thy confidence, in thy arm of
flesh and blood; but in him, who is wont to grant his guiftes, to whom he
gives the grace to ask them, by means of prayer, and other devout exercises.

The course then which thou art to hold shall be this. Consider these two things
in order; The one a being, the other a good and happy being. As for the first,
thou art to think, who thou were before God made thee; and thou will find that
thou were a profound pit of being nothing, and a privation, of all things,
that are good. Consider then, how that mighty, and sweet hand of God, drew
thee out of that profound Abyss, and placed thee, in the number of his
creatures; giving thee a true and real being; and consider thy self, not as a
thing of thine own making, but as a present, which Our creation is of God.
God was pleased to bestow upon thee; and look upon thine own being, as a
thing as far from thy strengh to compass, as thou look upon another
man's; believing, that thou could as little create thy self, as him. And as
little could thou have come, out of that darcknesse, of not being, as they
can, who remain therein. And those things which are not at all, be equal to
thee, for as much as concerns thy self; and it is God, to whom thou must
attribute, the adua^tages which thou have above them. Be Our conservation is of
God.
sure, not to think, now that thou art created, that thou do conserve thy
self, in thy self. For thou have no less need of God in every moment of thy
life, to the end that therein thou may not again loose the Being which thou
have, then thou had before, to the end that, of nothing, thou might come
to the being, which now thou have.

Enter into thy self; and consider, that now, thou art a certain thing, which
has both being, and life. Ask thy self this question: Is this creature
depending upon it self, or upon some other? Does it sustain it self, or has
it need of some other hand? And S. Paul will answer thee, Act. 17.
That God is not far from us; but that in him, we live, and move, and have
our being. And do thou consider God, who is the being of all that which is;
and without him nothing is. And he is the life of all that which lives; and
without him all is death. And he is the strength of all that which has any
power; and without him all is weakness. And he is the entiere good of all that
which is good, without whom, the least of good things, can have no goodness in
it. Therefore does the Scripture Isa, 40.
say, All nations are before God, as if they were not; and they are reputed as
vanity, and as nothing, in his presence. And in another place, it is written,
He Galat. 6,
who thinks himself to be somewhat, whereas indeed he is nothing, does but
deceive himself. And the prophet Psalm. 3.8.
David, speaking to God, did say, In thy sight, I am as nothing. By which
passages, thou art not to understand, that creatures have no being, or life, or
operations, which are not proper even to them, and distinct from those of the
Creator, but because that which they have, they hold not of themselves; nor
are able to conserve it, but only of God, and in God, they are said not to be,
because they hold their being, and strength, from the hand of God, and not from
their own.

Learn therefore to sound well, into the bottom, of the being, and power which
thou have; and give not over, till thou arrive to the which is the power, and
wisdom, and goodness of Almighty God.
very first foundation thereof; which, as being most firm, and never failing,
nor being founded upon any other; but being the foundation of all the rest,
does mainteyne thee, that so thou may not fall again, into that profound
pit of Nothingnesse, out of which he drew thee, before. Know, that the
protection which he has of thee, and the hand which he carries over thee,
keeps thee still on foot; and confess thou with Psalm. 138.
David, Thou, O Lord, did make me, and thou did place thy hand above me.
And know, that thou do so hang under this power of God; that at the same
instant, wherein that should fail thee, thou would also fail; as the light
which was in a chamber would fail, if the torch which gave it, were removed;
or, as all light, is retired from the presence of the earth, by the absence of
the Sun.

Thou Our Lord Jesus make us able to do it.
must therefore adore this Lord, with profound reverence; as the sole beginning
of thy being; and thou must love him, as the perpetual benefactour, and
preserver of it; and say to him, both with thy heart, and with thy tongue. Glory
be to thee for ever, O thou Omnipotent power, by which thou do maintain me.
There is nothing, O Lord, for me to seek, out of my self; since thou art more
internally to me, then I am to my self; and by myself, and through my self
it is, that I must first pass, that so I may enter into thee. Come close with
thy heart, and un ^e it to him, in an amourous manner, and say to him, Psalm.
13^.
This is my joy for all eternities, here will (...) d^ell, because I have
chosen is. And N^te this well and beg of God that thou may est ^augrace (...)
practice (...).
from thence forward, know how to carry the presence of God in thy self,
withal reverence; since he is most present to thee. And as thou have
understood, by that which passes within thee, that it is God, who has given
thee thy being, and thy working; so art thou to understand the same in all the
creatures. And considering God in all things, they all will serve thee, for a
bright glass, which may represent their Creator to thee; and so thy soul may
go well united to God, and devoutly singing of his praises, if thou seek
nothing, but God in the creatures.

CHAP. LXV.
How the exe^cising of our selves in the knowledge of the supernatural being
which we have of grace, does serve toward the obteyning of Humility.
IF thou have been careful to resolve, by the knowledge of thy self, (for as
much as concerns thy being) to give the glory thereof to God; much more must
thou attend to know, that thy well being, is not of thy self; but that it is a
gracious gift of our Lord. For A necessary consequence.
if, (whilst thou ascribest the glory of thy being to him, by confessing that
not thy self, but his hands did make thee) thou should appropriate the
honor of thy good works to thy self; conceauing it to be thy self that made
thee good; thou would take so much more honor to thy self, the^ thou did
give to God, as a good or happy being, is a more excellent thing, then a mere
being. It is therefore necessary, that with extraordinary diligence, thou do
attend to know God, and to acknowledge him, for the cause of all thy good.

Live thou in such a fashion, that there may not be, so much as a seame, or
stitch, of foolish There is nothing which more properly does belong to Pride,
the^ that it is a fooli^h thing.
pride, in thy soul, but as thou know that thou can not have the least
being, that can be thought of, if God do not give it; so also know, that thou
can not possess in thy self, the least good thing, if God do not open his
hand, to bestow it on thee. Consider also, that, as that which is nothing, has
no natural being, amongst the creatures; so a sinner, to whom the spiritual
being of grace, is wanting; must be accounted (notwithstanding all the
greatness, and riches, that he may have otherwise) for nothing, in the sight
of God. S. Paul expresses this, in this manner; If I should have the gift of
prophesy, and should know all mysteries, and all science, and should have all
Faith; so far as to remove mountains, from one place to another; and yet
withal, I should not have charity, I were nothing. Which sentence is so highly
true, as that a sinner, is yet worse then nothing; because an evil being, is
worse then a not being. And there is no place so base, nor so cast out of the
way, nor so despicable, in the eyes of God, amongst all the things that are,
and are not; as a man that lives in offense of him, being disinherited of
heaven, and adjudged to hell.

And to the end, that thou may have somewhat to rouse thee a little up, in
the consideration of the miserable sta^e of a sinner, hearken to this. When
thou shall set any thing, which is very contrary to reason, and much out of
order, consider, that it is a most ugly, and abominable thing, to be in the
displeasure, and emnity of our Lord. Thou have heard men speak, of some huge
theft, or treason, or some other wickedness, which some woman may have
committed against her husband; or of some high irreuerence, which a son may
have expressed toward his Father; or some other crimes of this nature, which
in the eye of any ignorant person whatsoever, will instantly appear to be
foul; because they are against all reason. But thou must know that to offend
God by one only sin, is There is no comparison between these two.
a greater deformity, in being against the Commandment given by him, and the
reverence which is due to him, then all the wicked actions that can be wrought,
in consideration that they are against reason only. And since A natural and
reasonable address.
thou seeft, that al they are so much disesteemed, who commit wickedness of that
kind; do thou esteem thy self for a most contemptible creature, and sincke
thou down, into that profound pit of being despised, which is due to a person
who offe^deth God. And as, for thy knowing that thou were nothing, thou did
call that time to mind, wherein thou had no being; so now for the knowing of
thy baseness, and vileness, call to mind, the time when thou did live in the
offense of God. Behold as in wardly, as feelingly, as profoundly, and as
leasurely as thou can, when, in the eyes of God, thou were displeasing, and
deformed, and esteemed nothing, and less then nothing. For neither
unreasonable living creatures, nor others, which have no life, how ugly and
base soever they be, have committed any sin against our Lord. Nor are they
under the obligation of eternal fire, as thou were. And thus despise thou, and
abase thy self, the most deeply, and advisedly that thou can; for There is
nothing more assuredly true then this.
thou may safely believe, that how much soever thou do it, thou will never be
able to descend so low into the very abyss of contempt, as is deserved by him,
who is the offendour of an infinite good, which is God. For Our Lord grant that
we may see it there.
till in heaven, thou shall see how good God is, thou will not be able
outright to know, how wicked sin, is; and what misery he deserves that
commits it. But yet when thou have soundly felt in thy soul, and drunk
deeply of this disesteem of thy self, cast up thine eyes to God, considering
his infinite goodness, who drew thee out of such a deep pit, which for thee, it
was impossible to have done; and behold that supreme goodness, which, with so
great mercy, drew thee out, whylest thou did merit nothing toward it; nay,
when thou did greatly demerit. For till God give his grace, though all that
which a man does, be not sin, yet neither does he, nor can he do any thing,
which may deserve his forgiveness and grace.

Know, that he, who drew thee out of darcknesse, into his admirable light; and
made thee, of an enemy, a friend; and of a slave, a child; and of a creature,
that was good for nothing, to become acceptable in his sight; he, I say, who
did this, is God. And There is no reason of interest, in the love of God to us;
God grant there be nomotiue of interest in our love to him.
the reason why he did it, was not any former desert of thine; Nor any regard
which he could have, to the service which thou might do him afterward; but
it was for his own only goodness, and by the merit of our only mediator,
Jesus Christ our Lord. For thine own, thou art to esteem, the vile state
wherein thou were; and thou may account hell, to be the place so due to such
sins as thou did, or would have committed, unless it had been for God.
For that, which thou have more then this, acknowledge thy self to be a debtor
to him, and to his grace. Hearken to that which our Lord said to his beloved
disciples, and, in them, to us. You Joan. 15.
chose not me, but I you. Consider what the Apostle S. Paul Romans 3^.
says, You are justified gratis by the grace of God; by the redemption, which
is in Christ Jesus. And lodge this in thy heart; that as thou have thy being
from God, without any reason at all to give the glory of it to thy self; so
do thou also hold thy well-being from God; and thou have both the one, and
the other to his glory. And carry in thy tongue, and in thy heart, that which S.
Paul Cor. 19.
says, by the grace of God, I am, that which I am.

CHAP. LXVI.
Wherein the aforesaid exercise, is prosecuted in particular manner.
CONSIDER thou moreover, that as when thou were nothing, thou had no power to
move thy self, nor to see, nor hear, nor taste, nor understand, nor will,
any thing; but God (giving thee a being) gave thee also these faculties and
forces; so not only is the man, being in mortal sin, deprived of that being,
which is acceptable in the sight of God; but he is without all power, to do
the works of life, which may please him. When therefore thou see some lame
man without legs, or arms, think that so is a man, without grace in his
soul; and if thou see one who is blind, or deaf, or dumb, take him for a
glass, wherein thou may behold thy self; and in all those sick persons,
who were leapers, or paralytikes, and who had their bodies crookedly bent
toward the ground, not being able once to look up, with all that multitude of
diseases, which they presented in the presence of Jesus Christ, our true
physician; do thou understanding, that wicked men are as much defeated in their
spiritual parts as those others were in their corporal. And observe, that as
a stone, by the weight which (...) has, works downward; so through the
corruption That is, the ill inclination which it leaves behind, even after the
remission thereof in Baptism.
or original sin, which we carry about us, we have a most ardent inclination,
to the works of sense, of honor, and of profit; making idols of our selves,
and doing that which we do, not for the true love of God, but of our selves.

Most lively we are toward the earthly things which concern us; and all dead
toward the taking of any gust in the things of God. That Because our appetite
does naturally now command our reason.
exercises authority over us which should obey, and that obeys, which should
command. And so miserable we are, that under the persons and privileges of
men, we harbor the appetites of beasts, which lie hidden in us; and our hearts
are drawn down toward the earth. What shall I say to thee, but that, in as
many weak, and dry, and deformed, and disordered deeds, as thou shall see,
thou may observe, and conclude upon the corruption, and confusion, which the
man, who is without the spirit of God, does carry in his actions, and passions.
And A good lesson.
as soon as thou behouldest any of them, retire presently into thy self; and
ponder, that thy self, is the same thing; for as much as concerns thee, if
God had not given thee help. And if thou be Many do think that they are
recovered, who still are sick.
indeed recovered, thou will know that it was only God, who opened thy heart, to
the feeling of him, and who subdued thy affections to the dominion of reason;
and who made that distastefull to thee, which formerly was delightefull; and
who gave thee an appetite to those things, which before were so unsavory; and
who operateth new works in thee. It was God as S. Paul Philip. (...).
says, It is God who works in us, a will, and an executing of it, through
his good will. But Take heed of this monstrous, and unmanly arrour, and
consider this place of Scripture well expounded by this Author.
conceive not, under color of this, that the free will of man works nothing
in good works, for this should be a great ignorance, and error. But it is
said, that God works the willing, and the finishing* because he is the
principal operatour, in the soul of him that is justified; And he it is who
moves, and sweetly induces, the free will to work and cooperate with him, as
S. Paul ^. Cor. 3.
says, we are the helpers of God; who does procure, by inciting, and assisting
a man, that he may freely give his consent to good works. And therefore does
he work, because by his proper, and free will, he wills what he will; and he
works that, which he works; and it is in his power, not to do it.

But God does work more principally, in producing the good work, and helping
the free will, that it may concur to the production thereof: and the glory
both of the one, and of the other, is only due to God. And therefore, if thou will be sure not to err, be not curious, in sifting out the blessings of
nature, and of thy free will, and what gifts of grace thou have, for this is
fitter for such as are learned; but go thou, with thine eyes shut, after the
direction of sound faith, which admonishes us to give the glory of them both,
to God; and that we, as of our selves, are not sufficicient, so much as to
think, one good thought. Gonsider that which S. Paul says (reprehending such
an one as shall ascribe any good to himself,) What have thou, which thou have
not received; and if thou have received it, of what do thou glory, as if
thou had not received it? As if he had said, If thou have the grace of God,
whereby thou please him, and whereby thou performest works, though never so
excellent; do not glory in thy self, but in God who gave it.

And See how all kind of pride, is even, in all reason, to be for ever plucked
up by the roots.
if thou would glory, in the good use which thou do make of thy
free will; and in consenting to those good inspirations of God, and of his
grace, yet neither must thou glory in thy self for this; but in God who
wrought it, by inciting, and moving thee sweetly; and by giving thee, thy very
free will it self, whereby thou might consent freely. And Note this
excellent gradation.
if yet thou would feign glory, because when thou could resist that good
motion, and inspiration of God, thou did not do it; yet even of this little,
thou art not to glory; because first, that were not so properly to do any
thing, as to leave to do it; and next, thou did owe, even that to God. For
when he holp thee to consent to good, he did incidently assist thee, in not
resisting it. And whatsoever good use thou have made of thy free will, in that
which concerns thy salvation, is, all of it, the gift of God, derived from
For which his holy Name be ever praised.
that merciful predestination, whereby he determined to save thee, from all
eternity.

Let therefore all thy glory be in God alone; of whom thou hold all the good
thou have. And know, that, without him, thou have nothing of thine own stock,
but vanity, and impiety; and indeed, the thing which we call Nothing. And in
conformity of this, there is a gloss (upon that Text of Saint Paul, He Galat.
^.
that thinks himself to be somewhat, whereas indeed he is nothing, does
deceive himself) which says, A man of himself, is but vanity, and sin: and
if he be any thing better, it is by our Lord God, that he is so: And agreably
to this S. Augustine says, Thou See how humble the sublime S Augustine is.
O Light did open mine eyes, thou did awake me, and illuminate me; and I
saw that the whole life of man upon earth was but tentation; and that no good
man can glory in thy sight, nor is any man so justified that lives. For if he
have any goodness, great or little, thy gift it is; and that which is ours, is
but sin. In what then shall any man take glory? Shall he peradventure glory
in evil? This is no glory but misery. Shall he glory then, in the good he
has? No, for it belongs to another. Thine is the good O Lord, and the glory
must be thine. And agreably to this, the same S. Augustine says else where, O
Lord Love and imitate this incomparable Saint
our God, I confess my poverty to thee; and to thee, be rendered all glory; for
all the good that I have done, is thine. I confess, according to that which
thou have taught me, that I am no other thing then mere vanity; A shadow of
death; A deep and profound pi^t; An empty and barren soil; which without thy
benediction, does bring forth no other fruit then confusion, sin, and death.
And if in any sort, I have had any good thing, I received it of thee. And
whatsoever good I have now, the same I hold of thee. If at any time, I stood
fast on foot, I stood by thee; but when I fell, I fell of my self; and for
ever should I have remained fallen into that dirt, if thou had not raised me;
and for ever should I have been blind, if I had not been illuminated by thee.
When I was fallen I should never have risen, unless thou had reached forth thy
hand; and after I was once raised, I should instantly have returned to fall, if
thou had not held me. And so thy grace, and thy mercy, O Lord, did ever march
before me; delivering me out of all mischief; saving me from sinn^s; stirring
me up to avoid such as were present; preventing me in such as were to come; and
removing, from before my ne eyes, those snares of wickedness, by diuerting the
causes and occasions thereof. And if thou O Lord, had not done so, there is no
sin in the whole world which I might not have committed. For I know, that
there is no sin which has been committed by any man, in any kind, which
another man may not commit; if that guide retire himself, by whom man was
made. But thou did procure, that I should not do it; and thou did command
me that I should abstain from it; and thou did infuse thy grace that I might
believe thee. For thou O Lord, did conduct me toward thy self, and did
preserve me for thy self, and did give me grace, and light, that I might not
commit adultery, and all other sin.

CHAP. LXVII.
Wherein he prosecuteth the former exercise; and of the much light which our
Lord is wont to give by means thereof, whereby they know the greatness of God,
and as it were the Nothing of their littlenes.
CONSIDER therefore, O Virgin, these words of S. Augustine with attention; and
thou will see how far off thou art to be, from ascribing any glory to thy
self; not only of raising thy self from sin, but in determining thy self
from returning to fall. For, as I told thee, if the hand of God should once
retire it self from thee, thou would instantly fall back, into that
profound pit of being nothing, so if God should forbear to preserve thee, thou
would return to those, and more grievous sins then those, from which he
delivered thee. Be therefore humble, and grateful to this Lord, of whom thou
art, at al moments in so great necessity; and know, that thou art depending
upon him; and that all thy good is to be derived from his holy hand, as David
says, In thy hand, O Lord, are my lettes; for lettes he calls the grace of
God, and the eternal predestination which comes by the The first grace of
God is given upon no other ground, then his own mere goodness.
goodness of God; and they are granted to such, as to whom he grants them.

And, as if he should resume the being which he gave thee, thou would again
be nothing, so he retiring his grace from thee, thou would return to be a
sinner. I speak not this, that thou should fall into any deep
discouragement, or desperation, in that thou see, how thou art hanging upon
the hands of God; but to the end, that with so much the more security, thou
may enjoy the good things which God has given thee; and Let this be the
hope of any man, who by the goodness of God does live less sinfully, then he
was wont.
may have confidence, that through his mercy, he will finish that in thee,
which he has begun. And that so much the more, as thou, with greater
humility, and profound reverence, and holy fear, shall cast thy self
trembling, and prostrate at his feet; not relying any way upon thy self, but
having a strong hope in him. For this is a great good sign, that his infinite
goodness will not forsake thee, according to that, which that blessed, and The
humility of our B. Lady, was above all the humilities, of al pure creatures.
humble, above all humble creatures Mary, did sing, when she said, Luc. 1.
His mercy is from generation, to generation, upon them that fear him.

And if our Lord be pleased to give thee this knowledge of thy self, which
thou desire; thou The sweet and sublyme effects of holy humility.
wilt find, coming into thy heart a certain heavenly light; and a kind of
feeling into thy soul, whereby upon the driving away of all darckenesse, it
finds, and knows, that there is no being, nor good, nor strength, in any
thing created; but that which the blessed and dear will of God, has bin
pleased to give, and conserve. And then he knows, how true that part of the
other canticle is, The heavens, and the earth, are full of thy glory. For in
all, that is created, he sees nothing good, the glory whereof, is not due to
God. And he understands how truly God directed Exodus 3.
Moses, that he should say of him to men, He that Is, has sent me to you; and
that also which our Lord said, in the Marc. 10.
Gospel, There is none good, but God alone. For as all the being and all the
good which things have, whether they be of free will, or of grace, is given,
and preserved, by the hand of God, such a person will know, that God is more to
be said to be in them, and to work that which is good in them, then they in
themselves. Not How God works in man; and how man works with, and under God.
but that they do also work, but because they work as second causes, being
moved by God; who is the principal, and universal operatour; and of whom
they hold their power to work. And so looking upon them, he finds there no
hand-fast, nor resting place; but upon that infinite Essence, which vpholdeth
them; in comparison whereof, they do all (how great soever they be) appear but
as a little needle, which is cast into an infinite sea.

From This is an inestimable jewel. but pray hard for it, and by the goodness
of God, thou may purchase it.
this knowledge of God, there does result to the soul, which profits by it, a
profound and loyal reverence, to the superexcellent divine majesty, which
places in her, such a detestation of atributing any good thing to her self,
or any other creature, that she will not so much as once think thereof.
Considering, that as the chaste Joseph, who (though he were solicited by the
wife of his Lord) yet would not commit such a treason against him; so must not
a man rise up, and rob God of his honor, which he resolves to keep for
himself, as the husband does his wife; according as it is written, My glory I
will not give to another. And then also grows a man to be so grounded in this
truth, that although all the world should exalt him, yet would he not exalt
himself. But, as a true, just person, he depriueth himself of that honor
which he finds not to be his own; and he gives it to our Lord, whose it is.
And in this light, he finds, that the more high he is, the more he has
received of God; and the more he owes him; and the more poor, and base he is
in himself. For This is a most pure, and perfect truth.
he that does truly grow in other virtues, does so also, in humility, saying to
God, Thou must increase in me* and I must decrease in my self, daily. And if,
even with all these considerations already mentioned, thou find not the fruit
of the contempt of thy self, which thou desire, be not yet dismayed thereat.
But call upon our Lord, with continuance of prayer; for he knows how, and he
is accustomed, to teach, both interiourly, and by way of exterior comparisons,
the little that all things created are to be esteemed. And in the mean time,
till this mercy come, live in patience, and know thy self for proud; which is
a kind of humility; as for one to hold himself humble, is a kind of pride.

CHAP. LXVIII.
Wherein he begins to treat of the consideration of Christ our Lord, and of
the mysteries of his life and death, and of the great reason we have to
exercise our selves in this consideration; and of the gre^^ fruits which grow
from thence.
THEY He begins here and continues till the the 8^. Chapter a discourse
upon the meditation of the sacred Passion of our Lord Jesus* as excellently
written perhaps, as any has been seen in this age. I am sure I never saw any,
that I liked so well.
who are much exercised in the knowledge of themselves, (in respect that they
are continually viewing their defects so near at hand) are wont to fall into
great sadness, and disconfidence, and pusillanimity; for which reason, it is
necessary that they do exercise themselves also in another knowledge, which
gives comfort, and strength, much more then the other gave discouragement. And
against this inconvenience there is no other knowledge (which may compare with
that) of Jesus Christ our Lord, especially if we consider, how he suffered, and
dyed for us. This is the cheereful news, which in the new law was preached, to
all such as are of broken heart; and hereby is ministered a kind of Physic,
which is more efficacious toward their comfort, then they can be discomforted,
by the wounds, and soars of their ownesoules.

This crucified Lord, is he, who cheereth them up, whom the knowledge of their
own sins afflicts; and he it is that absolueth, whom the law condemns,
and makes them sons of God, who were slaves of the Devil. This Lord they
must procure to know; and they who are subject to the spiritual debtes, which
they have made by finne; and they who find straitnes, and bitterness of sorrow
at their heart, when they consider themselves; must approach to him, and they
shall find themselves well therewith; as heretofore others that were afflicted,
and indebted, did resort to David, and found help in his society. For as we use
to give counsel, that they who are to pass a river, should look upward, or,
at least, out of the water; least their heads may else be subject to some
trouble, by staring upon the running stream; so, whosoever shall find himself
dismayed, by the contemplation of his own miseryes, if he will cast up his eyes
to Jesus Christ upon the Cross, he may recover strength. For it was not said
in vain; My soul was troubled within me; and for this reason, I remembered
thee, of the land of Jordan, and of the hills of Hermon, and of the little
hill. For the mysteries which Christ did work in his Baptism, and Passion,
are able to quiet any tempest of distrust, which rises in the heart of man. And
so it does; both for that reason aforesaid; as also, because there is no This
is the book of Books.
book so efficacious, toward the instructing of a man, in all kind of virtue,
nor how heartily sin ought to be abhorred, and virtue loved; as the Passion of
the Son of God. And again, because it is an extreme ingratitude, to put such
an immense benefit of love, into oblivion, as that was, in Christ to suffer for
us.

It is therefore fit for thee, after the exercise of the knowledge of thy self
to employ thy mind* upon the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord. S. Bernard
teaches us this, by saying, whosoever has any feeling of Christ, does know
how much it belongs to Christian piety, and how necessary it is, and what
fruit it brings to the servant of God and a servant of the redemption of
Christ, to remember with attentio^* for, at least, the space of one hour in a
day the benefits of the Passion, and Redemption of Christ Jesus our Lord; to
enjoy it sweetly in our souls, and to settle it faithfully in our memoryes.
This S. Bernard said* and this he did. And besides this, thou art to know, That
God, when he was pleased to communicate the riches of his Divinity to men,
embraced the means of making himself a man, that by such baseness, and
poorness, he might conform himself to the small capacity of such as were
base, and poor (and by joining himself to them, he might raise them up, to
his own height;) so that the way, by which God has used to communicate his
Divinity to men, has been, by means of his sacred Humanity.

This is that gate, by which, whosoever enters, shallbe saved; and it is the
staire, by which we must ascend to heaven. For God the Father, is pleased to
honor the humanity, and humility, of his only begotten Son; so far, as not
to make friendship with any creature, who belieueth not in him; nor to grant
his familiar conversation, but to such as meditate upon him, with much
attention. Since therefore, there is no reason that thou should forbear to
desire so great blessings, see If we mean not to be wholly miserable, we must
become slaves to the Passion of Christ our Lord.
that thou make thy self a slave, to this sacred Passion. For as much as, by
it thou were delivered, from the captivity of thy sins, and from the torments
of hell; and those other blessings, do also come to thee by this. Do Note, and
be ashamed of thy ingratitude.
not esteem it a trouble to think of that, which he, through his great love
of thee, did think no trouble to endure.

Be thou, one of those souls to which the Holy Ghost speaks, in the Cant. 3.
Canticles, Go forth you daughters of Sion, and behold Solomon the King, with
that garland upon his head, wherewith his Mo there crowned him, in the day of
his espousall, and in the day, of the joy of his heart. In no place of the Holy
Scripture, is it read, that King Solomon was crowned with any crown, or
garland, by the hands of his Mother, upon the day of his espousall. And
therefore, because according to the history, it cannot agree to Solomon, who was
a sinner; we must necessarily (since the Scripture cannot speak untruth)
understand it of another true Solomon, who was Christ; and that with great
reason. For Solomon does signify peaceable; and that name was imposed upon him,
because he made no wars in his time, as his Father David had done. And
therefore God was not pleased, that David, who was a Not of cruelty toward his
subjects, but of conquest over his enemies.
man of blood, but his peaceable Son, should build that famous Temple of
Jerusalem, wherein he would be adored.

Now if the name of peaceable, were imposed upon Solomon, because he was
peaceable, according to the peace of the world (which sometimes wicked Kings
maintain); upon how much more reason, is this name, due Christ our Lord is the
true Solomon, the true Prince Peace.
to Christ, who made the spiritual peace between God and man, to his own so
great cost; the pain of all our sins, which caused the emnity between God
and us, falling headlong upon him. He also made peace, between those people
which had been so contrary to one another; namely the Jews and Gentiles, taking
away that wall of emnity, which stood between them, as S. Paul says; That is
to say, the Ceremonies of the old Law, and the Idolatry of the Gentills. To the
end, that both the one, and the other, having left their particularityes, and
th^se rites which they derived from their ancestou^^, might submit themselves,
to the new Law under one Faith, one Baptism, and one Lord; hoping ^o
participate the same inheritance, as being all the sons of one Father of
heaven, who begot the^ a second time by water, and the Holy Gho^^* with more
honor, and advantage, then they were engendered before of flesh, by their
Fathers, to misery and shame. All these blessings came by Christ Jesus, who is
the pacifyer of heaven, and earth; and of one people with another; and of a man
with himself; whose war, as it is m^^^ troublesome, so the peace is more
desired. Th^^ peace could not be made, by the other Solomon, but he had the
name of the true pacifier, only in figure; as the peace of Solomon, which was
temporal, is a figure, and shadow of that, which as spiritual, and which
has no end.

If then, thou do well remember, O thou spouse of Christ, (which in reason thou
must never forget) the Mother of this true Solomon, who was, and is the blessed
Virgin Mary, thou shall find her to have crowned him, with a fair garland;
giving him flesh, without any sin, upon the day of the Incarnation, which was
the day of the conjunction, and espousall of the divine word, with his sacred
humanity; and of the word being made man, with his Church, which Church we are.
From that sacred womb, did Christ issue as a spouse, who rises from his bed
of state, and he begins Psalm. 18.
to run his Carriere, like a strong Giant; taking the work of our redemption
to heart; which was the hardest thing, that he could enterprise. And at the end
of this Carriere, he did, upon the day of our Good friday, espouse Christ
espoused the Church to himself upon the Cross.
his Church by words de prasenti; For which, he had taken pains, as Genes. 19.
Jacob did for Rachel. And then was she drawn, out of his side, when he was
reposing in the sleep of death, as Genesis 2.
Eve was out of Adams, whylest he slept.

And for this work so excellent, and of so great love, which, in that day was
wrought, Christ called that day, his day, when he says in the Joan. 8.
Gospel, Your Father Abraham, rejoiced to see my day; he saw it, and he
rejoiced thereat. Which was accomplished, as S Chrysostom says, when the
death of Christ was revealed to Abraham, by the resemblance of his son Isaac,
whom God commanded him to Genes. 22.
sacrifice, in the mount Moria, which is mount Sion. Then did he see this
painful day, and he rejoiced at it. But at what did he rejoice? was it
perhaps at the scourges, at the^ afflictions, and at the torments of Christ?
No; it is certain that the affliction of Christ, was so great, as to be
sufficient for the making of any heart, though never so cheerful, to be even
oppressed with compassion. And if you believe not me, let those three beloved
Apostles tell you this truth; to whom he said, My Watt. 10. Mare. 14.
soul is sad, even to the death. What did their hearts feel in themselves, at
the sound of that word, which uses to wound their heart, with the sharp knife
of sorrow, who hear it spoken but a far off. And his scourges, torments,
nails, and Cross, were so full of torment to him, that whosoever should see
them, (though he had a most inflexible heart) could not choose but be moved by
them. Yea, and I know not, but that those very wretches that tormented him,
seeing his meekness in suffering, and their own cruelty in afflicting, must
needs sometimes have compassion, of one that suffered so much; and even for
them, though they knew not that. If therefore they, who abhorred Christ, might
be afflicted by the sight of his torments, unless their hearts were made of
hardest stone; how shall we say, of a man, who was so greatly Gods friend, as
Abraham was, that he rejoiced to see the day, whereon Christ was to endure so
much?

CHAP. LXIX.
Wherein he prose^uteth, that of the former Chapter; and pondereth this passage
of the Canticles, in contemplation of the passion of Christ.
BUT, that thou may not marvel so much at this, do thou hearken to another
thing, yet more strange; and which is expressed by these words of the
Canticles. That this garland, was put upon his head, in the day of the joy, or
triumph of his heart. The day of his so excessive grief, as that no tongue is
able to unfold it, do thou call the day of his joy? And that, no joy which
was counterfaite, and exterior only; but they call it, the day of the joy, of
his very heart. O Note, and learn hereby to love God.
thou joy of the Angels, and thou full river of their delight, in whose face
they desire to look, and by whose most puissant waters, they are swallowed up,
by finding themselves within thee, and by swimming, in that over abounding
sweetness of thine; and what is that, at which thy heart rejoices, in this day
of thine afflictions? At what do thou rejoice, in the midst of those
scourges, those nails* that dishonor, and that death? Is it true perhaps,
that they did not afflict thee? Yes verily, they did afflict thee; and more
thee then they could have afflicted any other; though it were but even for the
delicacy of thy complexio^. But because our miseries do afflict thee yet more,
then thine own afflictions, most gladly did thou resolve to suffer them,
because thereby thou did remove ours.

Thou art he, who said, to thy beloved Lue. 22.
Apostles, a little before thy Passion, With Note and wonder at these words.
desire, have I desired, to cate this paschall with you, before I suffer. Thou
art he, who said before, Lue. 12.
I came into the world, that I might bring fire; and what do I desire, but that
it should burn. With a baptism I am to be baptized, and how am I straightened,
till it be effected? This fire of the love of thee, which thou desyrest may be
kindled, till it may inflame, and burn us wholly up, and till it transform us
into thee, thou still art blowing, by the blessings, which by thy life thou
bestowedst on us; and thou make it burn, by the death which thou enduredst
for us. And who amongst us, is so well natured, as that he would have loved
thee, unless thou had died for the love of us; thereby to give us life, who are
dead, for lack of loving thee. But now, who will be wood so cold, and moist, as
that (seeing thee so fair, and flourishing a tree (whereof whosoever does eat,
shall live) to be thus kindled upon the Cross; and burnt up by that fire of
torments, which they gave thee; and yet more, by that love wherewith thou
sufferedst them) he will not yet be kindled now at last, to love thee; and to
do it, even to the death? Who will be so deadly obstinate, as to shut himself
up, against that importunate Our Lord Jesus does make no other suit to us, but
that we will love him, only it must be with true love.
request, wherein thou did persist, from the time that thou were borne of the
womb of the B. Virgin, and that she took thee into her arms, and laid thee
in the maunger; till the same hands, and arms of hers, took thee again,
when being dead thou were taken from the Cross, and were delivered over, to
the holy Sepulcher, as into another womb.

Thou Note.
did burn thy self, that we might not freeze in the cold; Thou did weep,
that we might rejoice; Thou did suffer, that we might repose; and thou were
baptized, even by the sheading of thy blood, that we might be washed from our
sins; and yet thou saydst withal, O Lord, How do I live, in the straitnes of
affliction, till this Baptism be accomplished. Giving us thereby to
understand, what an imflamed desire thou had to give us remedy, though thou
knew, that it would cost thee thy life.

And as the Spouse, desires the day of his marriage, that he may enjoy his
end; so do thou desire the day of thy Passion, to deliver us, by thy pains,
from our miseryes. One hour, O Lord, did seem to thee a thousand years till
thou came to dye for us; conceauing, that thy life, would be well employed,
if it were laid down for thy servants. And because that which is desired,
does carry joy after it, when it is accomplished; it is no marvel, if the day
of thy Passion, be called the day of thy joy, since it was so desired by thee.
And The vast love of God in Christ our Lord.
although the grief of that day, were excessive; in so much as it is said, in
thy person, O all you that pass by the way, attend, and see, if there be any
grief like mine; yet the love which flamed in thy heart, was incomparably
greater. For if it had been needful, in respect of our good, that thou
should have passed, through a thousand times as much as that; and that thou
should have continued upon the Cross, till the end of the world; thou did
place thy self upon it, with firm determination to do, and suffer, whatsoever
might have been necessary for our remedy. So that thou did love, more then
thou did suffer; and more was thy love able to prevail with thee, then the
want of love in those wretches that did torment thee. So then did thy love
remain conqueror; and that being so lively a flame, those great rivers of
many afflictions, that came against thee, were not able to quench it. And
therefore, although the torments gave thee sorrow, and sound grief; yet thy
love took pleasure in that benefit, which we were to receive thereby. For this
it is called, the day of the joy of thy heart; and this day, did Abraham see,
and he rejoiced* not that he wanted compassion of thy pains, but because he
saw that the world was to be redeemed by them.

In this day therefore, Go forth you, daughters of Sion (you being the souls,
who behold God, from the tower of Faith) to see your peacemaking King; who, by
his affliction, goes no conclude the desired peace. Look I say upon him,
since your eyes were given you for that purpose. And amongst all the ornaments
of his espousall, which he wears, look upon that crown of thorns, which his
divine head, does carry. Which although it were platted, and put on, by those
of the Court of Pilate, (who were Gentills) yet is his Mother said to have
placed it upon his head; which Mother in that sense, was the Synagogue, of the
race whereof Christ descended, according to the flesh. For by the accusation of
the Synagogue, and at the will thereof, Christ was so tormented.

Now A strange kind of marriage.
if any man say, that this is a new kind of ornament; for a spouse to wear a
dolorous crown, instead of a garland; for ornaments of hands and feet, sharp
nails, which might pass and pierce them through; scourges instead of a
girdle; and the hair of his head, and face glued together with his own
blood; his sacred beard, pulled off from his cheeks, and they discolored with
buffeting; and that soft bed, (which, in the case of persons newly espoused,
use to be filled with precious odours) being converted into a bitter Cross;
and that, erected in place where malefactors were put to death: what has this
extreme abasement to do with the ornaments of an espousall? What has this
being accompanied by thieves to do, with being in the society of friends, who
should joy in doing honor to the new spouse? What fruit, or musick^^ or
pleasure, may it be, which here we see; since the Mother, and the friends, of
the spouse, do ease grief, and drink tears; and the Angels of peace, weep
bitterly.

There is nothing further off from an espousall, then all that, which here
appears. But yet this nouelty, is not to be wondered at; because the Spouse,
and the manner of the espousall, is all new. Christ, is a new man; both because
he is without sin; and because he is both God, and man; and we are they,
whom he espouseth to himself; we who are deformed, poor, and full of misery;
and this he does not, to permit us to remain so, but to kill that which is
evil in us, and to impart to us that which is good in him. For this reason, it
was fit, according to the divine ordinance, that he should pay for us; taking
upon him our place, and resemblance; to the end, that by seeming a debtor,
which he was not, and by enduring that bitter chastisement which he deserved
not, he might take away our deformity, and might communicate his beauty and
riches to us. And The difference of Christ our Lord the spouse of our souls,
and carthly spouses.
because no man who seeks a Spouse, can make her good, if she be evil; nor
celestial, if she be infernal; nor can he give her a beautiful soul, if it
be deformed; therefore is it that men seek spouses, which are already
virtuous, beautiful, and rich; and upon the marriage day, they go well
adorned, to enjoy those advantages, which the others have, and which themselves
did not give. But this Spouse ours, does find no soul, either good, or fair,
unless he make it such. And that which we are able to give him, as a Dowry, is
the debt that we have contracted by our sins. And because he was pleased to
abase himself to us, we have He took our misery, that so he might communicate
to us his glory.
apparelled him, so, as we our selves were apparelled; and he has so clothed
us, as he is clad. For, destroying the Sin.
old man, under the habit which he took of a man; he has placed in us, a new
and celestial man, after his image. And this he brought to pass, by these
ornaments, which seem to be deformity and frailty; but are, indeed, most high
honor, and greatness; since they were able to defeat our so obdurate, and
inueterate sins; and to bring us, to the grace and friendship of our Lord,
which is the top of all that, which can be aimed at.

This is that glass, wherein thou art often, to behold thy self, every day;
to beautify thereby, whatsoever thou see deformed in thy soul. And this is
that figure, which is placed on high; to the end, that whosoever shall be bitten
by any serpent, may look up to it, and so his wounds may be cured. And
whenever any thing which is good does grow to thee, it will be conserved by
thy looking hither; giving thanks to our Lord, by the means of whose
affliction, all our blessings, are derived to us.

CHAP. LXX.
That the exercise of prayer, is most important; and of the great fruit which
is reaped thereby.
SINCE thou have already heard, that the light which thy eyes are to look
upon, is God humaned, and crucified; it remains for me to tell thee, what
means thou art to use in looking on him. Since the thing must be done, by way
of devout considerations, and by that inward speech, which is used in prayer.
But before I tell thee, of the course that thou art to hold in thy prayer, it
will be fit, that I let thee know, how profitable this exercise is, and
especially for The Lady to whom he wrote this book, was not a religious woman,
in clausure, but she lived devoutly in her own house; yet in state of
Virginity, and great penance: she was Don^a Sancha, daughter to the Lord of
Guadalcacar.
thee; who having renounced the world, have offered thy self wholly to our
Lord, with whom it will be fit for thee, to have familiar and strait
communication, if thou desire to enjoy the delicious fruit, of thy holy state.

By prayer, we do here understand, A secret, and interior speech, whereby the
soul does impart it self to God; whether it be, by way of thinking, or by
craving, or by thanking, or contemplating; and, in a word, all that, which does
pass between the soul, and God, in that private kind of speech. For although
to every one of these particulers, there do belong a several reason; yet my
intent, in this place, is but only to deliver in general, how important a
thing it is, that the soul do intertayn this choice kind of speech, and
communication, with her God. For Po^der this well; and believe the truth
thereof; and put thy self upon the practice.
proof whereof, it would suffice, (if men were not wholly blind) to tell them,
that God gives liberty, that all men who will, may enter, into speech with
him, once in a month, or in a week; and that, most willingly he would give
them audience; and redress their miseries, and enrich them with favors; and
that there should be between him, and them, a friendly kind of conversation,
as between a Father and a son. And if he would permit, that they might
speak to him every day; and if yet further, he would suffer that every day,
they might do it often; and lastly if they might have leave to be in
conversation with our Lord the whole day, and night; or as much of this time,
as they could, and would; and if he would be well content therewith; what may
that man be, unless he were a man of stone, who would not be highly thankful
for such a liberal, and profitable license as this? And who would not procure
to serve himself thereof, as much as it were possible for him; as of a thing
most convenient, for the gayning of honor, by being to treat with his Lord;
and of delight, by the enjoying of his conversation; and of profit also, for as
much, as they can never come empty handed from him.

And how shall not this be much esteemed, which the most high does offer us,
since it would be set at so high a rate, if it were offered by some temporal
king; who in comparison of this most High and of that which may be obtained by
conversation with him, the king is a worm; and that which any of them, or all
of them, is able to give, is a handful of dust. Why do not men joy to be with
God, Prou. ^.
since the delight of God, is to be with the sons of men? His conversation
has no bitterness belonging to it, but alacrity, and joy; nor is there
incident to his condition, any petty, or paltry miserableness, to deny the
thing that is asked of him; and in fine, our Father he is, in whose
conversation we were to joy, though no other advantage did acrew thereby. But A
strange progress of Gods love, to wicked stupide man.
if thou will accompany, all the other considerations with this, that he does
not only give us leave to speak with him, but that he begges it at out hands;
and counsels, and sometimes commands it of us, thou will see, both how great
his goodness and thirst is, that we would converse with him; and what wicked
things, we be, who will not go, being desired, and hired, to that, which we
ought to go, beseeching that we might have leave; and offering to pay,
whatsoever were demanded for it.

Hereby thou may discern, how little feeling men have, of their spiritual
necessities, which are the true ones; for as much as he, who truly feels
them, will truly pray, and desire remedy thereof, with great instance. There is
a Proverb, which says, If thou can not pray, get thee to sea* because the
many dangers wherein they are that sail, make them cry out, to our Lord. But
for my part I see no reason; why all of us should not use this exercise, and
that with diligence; since, whether we go by sea, or by land, I am sure we we
are in danger of death, either of the soul, if we fall into mortal sin, or
of soul and body if we do not rise by penance, from that into which we may
fall. And The miserable blindness of man.
if the care of transitory things, and the dust which we bear about in our
eyes, did give us leave but to consider; and to reflect upon the necessityes of
our souls, without fail we should go crying out to God, and saying with our
whole hearts, Suffer us not to fall into tentation, O Lord Psalm. 34.
depart not from me; and such other words we would use as these, agreeable to
the present necessity. But all our praying, depends upon that which passes
in our minds, which uses to be some temporal good, or evil; and yet, even
upon those occasions, we resort not It draws a mighty disadvantage upon us,
that although we go to God by Prayer, yet for the most part we do it late.
speedily to prayer, but are like people, whose last confidence is placed in
our Lord; and the first and chiefest in themselves, or others. Whereat our Lord
is wont to be much offended; and he says, Where Deuteronomy. 3^.
are thy Gods, in whom thy trust is put; let thy friends deliver thee whom a
blast of wind will carry away.

See therefore, O Virgin, that these things may not besayd of thee; but keep
thou quick, that feeling in thy soul, whereby thou may taste this truth,
That thy true misery, consistes in thy not serving; and thy true felicity, in
serving God. When How we are to carry our s^lues in the desire of any temporal
good, at the hands of God.
thou ask any temporal thing, let it not be with that kind of anguish, and
affliction, which uses to proceed from inordinate love. And whether the
question be, of much, or little, let thy first confidence be in our Lord; and
the last in those means, which he shall address thee to. And be thou greatly
thankful, for this benefit; that he has given thee leave, to speak, and
converse with him; and do thou serve thy self of it, both in thy prosperityes,
and afflictions, with much frequency, and care; since by means of this speech,
and conversation with the most high, the servants of God, have been enriched,
and relieved in all their necessityes. For they understood, that the dangers
wherein God left them, was to the intent, that being straitely assaulted
thereby, they might have recourse to him; and so the blessings which he
affoarded them, did make them go to give him thanks.

We Of the great power devout prayer.
read of the Gabaonits, that they being in great danger (when they were
besieged by their enemies) sent a messenger to Iosue, to whose friendship they
had recommended themselves; and by occasion whereof, they were grown into that
danger; but they found favor, and assistance by demanding it. And although
those five Kings, of whom the Scripture speaks, were overcome in the
valley called Siluester, and their Cittyes were sacked; yet because a young man
who had escaped out of the battle, went to carry the news of this defeat, to
the patriarch Abraham, those Kings, and their five Cittyes obtained remedy, by
the hand of Abraham, who succored them. So that by means, of one only
messenger, who goes to ask favor of him, that has a power and will to give
it, there is more to be obtained, then by a multitude of fighting men, which
are either in the City, or in the Camp. And without doubt so it is, that
whosoever shall send the messenger of an humble and faithful prayer to God,
howsoever he may be besieged, and defeated, and thrust even into the very belly
of the Whale, shall find our Lord to be Psalm. 144.
present; who is near to all such persons, as do with sincerity call upon
him. And if they know not yet what they are to do; by means of prayer, they
find light. For with this confidence it was, that King Iosaphat said, When
Paral. 20.
we know not what to do, one remedy we have, which is to lift up our eyes to
thee. And S. James Iac. 1.
says, That whosoever has need of wisdom, is to ask it of God. And by this
means, were Moses and Aaron taught by God, in those things which they were
to negotiate, with the people. For as they who govern others, have need of
double light, and to have it very near at hand; and that at all times; so have
they also need to make double prayer, and to be perfect in it, that they may
perform it without difficulty; and that so they may come to know the will of
our Lord, concerning that which particulerly they are to do; and that they may
obtain strength to perform it. And the knowledge, which is so obtained, does
as far exceed all that which we compass by our own discourse, and
conjectures, as he goes more certainly, who sees his way, then another who
goes groping in the dark. And the good purposes also and strength which is
gotten in prayer use to be incomparably more efficacious, and to prove more
solidly true, then they which are obtained out of prayer.

S. Augustine (as one who was able to speak by experience) said that doubts
were better dissolved by prayer, then by any other study. And for fear of
wearying thee, and because it would be impossible to reckon up all the
particular fruits of prayer, I say no more, the^ that which the supreme Truth
said, That Luc. 11.
the celestial Father would give a good spirit to them that ask it. And it
ought to suffice thee, that all the Saints did frequent this exercise of
prayer. For as S. Chrysostom says, Which of the Saints did not overcome by
praying? And he says again, That there is not a more puissant thing, then the
man that prays. And The excellency and necessity of prayer, showed by the
examples of Christ our Lord.
it should be enough, and more then enough, for us to know, that Christ Jesus,
the Lord of us all, did pray in that night of his tribulation, so hard, as that
it cost him a sweat of blood; and he prayed in the Luc. 21.
mount Thabor, before his body was tra^sfignred; he prayed before he raised
Lazarus Joan. 11.
from the dead; and sometimes he prayed so at large, that the whole night did
pass away with him, in prayer. And after such a long prayer as this, S. Luke
Luc. 10.
relates, that from out of his Disciples, he chose his twelve Apostles. Whereby
he taught us (as S. Ambrose says) what we are to do, when we begin to treat
any business, since he, in that first business of his, did pray, and that in
so great length. From hence it is, that S. Denis says, that at the entrance
into any work^, we must begin by prayer. S. Paul exhorts us, to be instant,
and earnest in prayer; and our Lord says, Luc. 1^.
That we must ever pray, and not give over; which signifies, that this work
must be performed with frequent diligence, and care For they who think it will
serve their turns, to take heed to themselves, in doing works pleasing unto
God; and yet make no account of using prayer, do swim, and fight, with one
only hand, and do walk with one only foot. For our Lord did teach us, that two
things are necessary when he said, Matt. 26.
Watch and pray that you may not enter into temptation. And the same did he
advise, when he said, Luc. 21.
Watch in prayer at all times, that you may escape from these things, which
are to come; and that you may be able to appear before the son of the
Virgin. And S. Paul Ephesians. ^.
does couple these two things, when hearmeth the Cauallier of Christ toward
the spiritual war which he is to make, against the Devil. For, as a man,
how well soever he fare, yet unless he rest, and sleep, he will be weak, and run
hazard of going out of his wits; so will it happen to one that works, and
prays not; for Prayer is that to the soul, which rest is to the ^ody.
prayer is that to the soul, which repose is to the body. There is not any
estate so great, which will not be brought to an end, if there be ever
spending, and no getting; nor are there any good works which will last,
without praying. For thereby that light, and spirit, is gotten for the recovery
of that fervor of charity, and interior devotion which is diminished by
business, though it be good.

How necessary it is to pray, seems plain, by the instance, and fastes
wherewith the prophet 1. Reg. 2.
Samuel prayed our Lord, That Mark this well.
he would deliver the people out of the captivity of Babylon, although the
seauenty years which our Lord had appointed, for the term upon which he would
deliver them, were accomplished. And if in that which God has promised that he
will do, or give, there be yet, need to beg it by earnest prayer; how much
more will it be needful to do it, in such case, as wherein we have no
particular promise from him? S. Paul, desires the Romans to pray for him,
that all impediments being removed, he might be able to visit them. whereupon
Origin says, that although the Apostle had said, a little before, I know, that
when (...) shall go to you, my going will be in the abundance, of the
benediction of Christ; yet notwithstanding all this, he knew that prayer was
necessary, even for the things which we expressly know, shall happen^ and
Because our Lord ordayneth the giving of his graces, by means of Prayer.
if there were no prayer, without doubt there would be no accomplishment of
that which is foretold.

Does it not seem to thee, that he had reason, who S. Gregory.
said, that prayer was the means, to obtain, what the omnipotent God, had
ordained in eternity, to bestow afterward in time? And again, That as plowing,
and sowing, is the means for the getting of corn; so is prayer for the
obteyning of the fruits of spirit; and therefore we are not to marvel, if we
gather so few, since we pray so little?

A Note this sound and certain reason.
most certain thing it is, that by conversation with a good man, it does
follow that one will love him, and he will conceive desires of being virtuous.
And so, if we did converse with God, with more reason, we might hope for these,
and other advantages, by his conversation. As Moses did, who after he had
treated in the Mount with God; he came down from thence, full of splendor.
And from no other root it grows, that we are so wanting to show pity to our
neighbors; but because we frequent not this conversation with our Lord. For
the man, who by night, lay prostrate in the sight of God, demanding pardon for
his sins, and mercy for his miseries; if upon the day following, himself
sind another, who asks that of him which he begged of God, he will not be
able to choose, but know those very words which himself used; and he will
remember the great affliction, wherewith he spoke them to our Lord; and with
how great desire to be heard; and he will do by his neighbor, as he desired
that God should do with him.

And to deliver to thee what I conceive of this, in a word; I represent to thy
memory, that which David Psalm 65.
said. Blessed be our Lord, who to the not my prayer, nor his mercy from me.
Whereupon S. Augustine Note.
says; Thou may well be secure, that if God do not take thy prayer from
thee, neither will he take his mercy. And remember yet again, what our Lord
said, Luc. 11.
That the heavenly Father, will give a good spirit, to them that ask it. And
with this spirit we fulfill the law of God, as S. Paul says. So that the mercy
of God is near us, and we fulfill his law, by means of prayer. Think Note.
then, what kind of Creature that will be, to whom by the want of prayer, these
two things shall be wanting. And I will advertise thee of an error of some men,
who think, that because Romans ^.
S. Paul said, I would have me^ pray in all places, it should therefore not be
necessary, to pray long, at once, not in any particular place; but that it
would suffice to enterlace, our prayers with the rest of our works. A The
answer to an objection.
good thing it is to pray in all places; but that will not serve our turn, if
we mean to imitate Jesus Christ our Lord, and to practice that, which his
Saints have said and done, in matter of prayer. And be thou well assured, that
no man will be able to pray with profit, in every place, unless first he have
learned to do this duty, in a particular place; and to employ some space of
time, upon it.

CHAP. LXXI.
That the penance due to our sins must be the first pace, whereby we come to
God; conceauing true grief for them, and making true Confession thereof, and
satisfaction.
THE first pace which the soul is to make, in approaching toward God, is to
be the penance of her sins. And to the end that this may be well performed, it
will profit much, that a man disimploy himself from all business, and from
all conuersations; and do attend with care, to draw to his memory, all the
sins of his life; helping himself for this purpose, by some Certain books
which instruct me^, how they may examine their consciences, for confession,
which are every where to be sold in Catholic countries.
Confessionary. And after, that he has lamented them, well, he must declare
them to some spiritual Physician, who has the power and knowledge, to
prescribe fit remedies for that infirmity; and who may lay his conscience, as
flat and even as if the man, were that day to dye, and to be presented before
the judgment seat of God. In this business, he may spend some month, or two;
dissoluing with bitter sighs, the sins which he committed by wicked
pleasures. And for this purpose, he may serve himself of the reading of some
good book, such as I spoke of In the discourse, of the knowledge of ones self.
long before; which may help him, to think of his death, and Judgment; and
with his thought to descend alive into that bottomless pit of eternal fire;
to the end that he may not descend after he is dead, to find the misery which
there is felt. It will also conduce to this purpose, that beholding some Image
of the Crucisixe, or else remembering it, he consider, how himself, by his
sins, was the cause why our Lord did suffer so great torments. And Woe will
be to us, if we do it not.
let him behold him with attention, from head to foot; and ponder every
particular pain of his by it self; and lament every particular sin; since
the afflictions of our Lord, do correspond to our crimes; he suffering
dishonor for the payment of our pride; and of scourges and pains, in payment
of our sensual pleasures; and so also in the rest. And let him think, that if
a son should see his father cruelly scourged, and tormented, for a fault
which not the Father, but that son had committed; and if he should hear this
Proclamation made, He that commits such a sin, shall pay for it with such
a punishment. This Son would have great compassion of his Father; and great
sorrow, for having done any such thing as was to cost that Father so dear. And
if he were a true Son, it would more afflict him to see his Father so
punished, then if they should have punished himself. And a stra^g thing it
would be, if he cried not out, through excess of grief; confessing, that
himself was the guilty person, and that him they should punish, and not the
Father, who had made no fault.

From hence let us take example, to conceans thereby, more grief, for having
sinned. For it is God, who was offended, and it is God, who was punished, for
every mischief, which might have grown to us, by every sin. It is Let every
one make this case his own.
I, O Lord that sinned, but it is thou that payest the pain thereof. My
wickedness, O Lord, did put thee in prison, and it made thee be proclaimed with
infamy, through those streets; and at last it laid thee upon a Cross. Let this
be thy lamentation, with desire to suffer all that for God, which he shall be
pleased to ordain. And when thou shall have made this Examen of thy
conscience, with sorrow, and satisfaction, according to the advice of thy
Ghostly Father, thou may (after thy having received sacramental absolution)
have confident hope of pardon, and receive comfort into thy soul.

CHAP. LXXII.
How the second pace toward the bringing us to God, is the giving of thanks
which we owe him, for his having so delivered us; and of the manner how this is
to be done, by means of diverse Misteryes of the Passion, which are to be
meditated, in diverse days.
WHEN the soul is thus purged, from the humors of sin, which gave it
death; it must employ it self upon giving of thanks, for so great, and so
undeserved a favor. Not A greater blessing it is to be made the adopted Son
of God, then to be freed from the pains of hell.
only in respect that God has forgiven him, the pains of hell; but because he
has received him for his Son; and has bestowed his grace upon him, and
certain interior guifs, by the merits of the true God, Jesus Christ, our
Lord, who dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification; killing
our sins, and our old life by his dying; and raising us up, to a new life, by
his resurrection. And if Job said, That the body of a poor man whom he had
clothed, would heap benedictions upon the man, who imparted that benefit; with
much more reason ought we to bless Christ Jesus crucified, when our soul does
find it self free from misery, and conforted with favors; believing, that all
our good comes from him; for it is strangely against all reason, to be
ungrateful to such love, and for such benefits. And although every time that
thou find thy self well, thou art instantly to praise Christ Jesus, with
particular gratitude; yet to the end that this may be don the better, and with
more fruit, it will be fit, That as, to think of thy sins, I advised thee to
seek some private, or retired place, there to look upon thy self; so now,
thou do with much more reason, employ another part of the day, in thinking of
the Passion of our Lord; and in giving him thanks for the benefits which are
come to thee by it; crying out from thy heart, I will never forget thy
iustifications, because in them thou did give one life.

The course then which thou shall hold, if no other better do occur, may be
this. On A distribution of the days, in the Meditation of the Passion of our
Lord.
Monday to think on the prayer of our Lord, and the taking of him in the
Garden; and that which passed, in the house of Annas, and Caiphas. On Tewesday,
the accusations which were presented against him; and the processions, that he
made from Judge to Judge; and of the cruel scourging, which he endured when he
was tied to the piliar. On Wednesday, how he was crowned with thorns; and what
scorn they put him to by drawing him out in a red coat, and with a Reed in
his hand, that all the people might see him; and how they said, Ecce Home. On
Thursday, we cannot displace, that most excellent mystery, how the son of
God, with profound humility, washed the feet of his disciples, and gave to them
afterward, his body, and blood for food of life. Commanding both them, and
all It was his Apostles, and in their person to all lawful Priests their
successors, whomour Lord commanded to do the like, and not to lay persons, as
the Protestants imagine.
preistes who were to follow, that they should do the same in memory of him.
Do thou make thy self present at that admirable Lauatory, and in that most
excellent banquet; and then trust in God, that thou shall not depart from
thence, either defiled, or dead of hunger.

Thou shall think on Friday, how our Lord was presented before the Judge, and
sentenced to death; and how he carried his cross upon his shoulders; and was
after, crucified upon it; with all that which passed there; till such time as
he recommended his spirit into the hands of his Father, and so dved. On
Satturday do thou rest in thinkng upon that cruel thrust of the lance into his
sacred side; and how they took him off, from the Cross, and laid him in the
arms of his blessed Mother; and afterward in the sepulcher. And go thou
accompaning his soul, to that Limbus, of the holy Fathers, and be present at
the joy, yea the paradise, which there was grannted to them. Be careful also,
upon this day, to think upon the much grief, which the virgin Mother felt;
and be a faithful companion in taking part thereof, with her. For besides,
that this office is most due to her from thee, it will be full of profit to thy
self. Of Sunday I say nothing, because thou know already, that it is
deputed to the consideration of the Resurrection, and of the glory, which the
inhabitants of heaven possess; and in this, thou art to employ thy self,
upon that day. In This may best be practiced, by persons who are of good
health; and who live not in co^munities; not are ordinarily of great penance
otherwise
particular I recommend to thee, that upon Thursday night, thou take as little
sleep as possibly thou can, to keep company with our Lord; who (after those
vexations of his arrest; and the long way that he went, between the house of
Annas and Caiaphas; and after many buffets and scorns, and other lewd
impieties that were put upon him) did consume the rest of that night, in
excessive affliction; and in a prison extremely hard; and with so great abuse,
by such as kept him, that neither had he a mind to sleep, nor would any other
man forbear to lament, and weep, if he well knew what passed there. Which was
so much, as, that S. Hierome says, will not be known, till Our Lord grant,
that we may know it then, to our comfortes, and not to our confusion.
the day of judgment. Demand of him a part of his pains, and take thou for
him, every thursday night, some such pain in particular, as himself shall
address thee to. For a great shame it is to any Christian, if he put no
difference between that, and other nights. And there was a certain person that
said, Who is he, that can find in his heart, to sleep upon a Thursday night.
And I believe, also, if the truth were known, that the same person, did not
sleep much upon Friday night.

CHAP. LXXIII.
Of the way which we are to hold in the consideration of the life and passion
of Jesus Christ our Lord.
THIS exercise of thinking upon the paces of the life, and death of Jesus
Christ our Lord; may be performed in one of these two manners. Either How we
are to think of the passion of Christ our Lord.
by representing to thy imagination, the corporal figure of Christ our Lord;
or, by merely thinking, without any imaginary representation. And Note.
do thou know, that since the most high and invisible God, did make himself a
visible man, to the end, that, by means of that visible, he might convey into
us the consideration of that which is invisible; there is no question, but that
it was a very profitable thing, to behold him with corporal eyes, that so men
might come to behold him, with the spiritual, which are of Faith; if the
malice of the looker on, had given no impediment. And without doubt, all that
which in our Lord was corporal, was excellently ordered; and did carry a
particular efficacy, toward the helping of a pious heart, to raise it self up,
toward spiritual things. Nor was it a small favor, for them to enjoy this
sight, which many Kings, and Prophets, desired to enjoy, but obtained it not.
And although we, that come after, do not enjoy this favor, in so complete a
manner; yet may we not forbear to help our selves thereby, in the best sort we
may. And to this purpose, our Mother, the holy Church, does, with great reason,
propose to us, the images, or pictures of the body of our Lord; that so being
stirred up thereby, we may remember his corporal presence; and he may
communicate to us, by means of his resemblance some part of the much, which
would have been communicated to us, by his presence. And since a picture which
is painted without my self, upon a piece of wood, does bring me profit;
without doubt, that which is painted within me, and in the imaginatiue part of
my mind, will also profit me, by taking it, as a step, whereby I may be
raised higher. For This is most certainly true* and our Lord be blessed,
because it is so.
all that, which has relation to our Lord, and which concerns, and
represents him; does carry a marvelous force, toward the conducting us
toward him.

And although these things may seem mean to thee; yet because they are a way
to higher things, these also must be esteemed, high. And by this meanness, God
will have them to begin, who are humbled, and whom by his hand, he will
advance to greater matters. But they Take heed of too high flying at the first.
who instantly give themselves to such high flying thoughts, as seeming to be
full of taste and more worthy of their consideration; may look for a fall sure
enough. For, as the Scripture Prou. 1^.
says, He that goes a pace, will stumble: And, Prou. 28.
he that makes have to be rich, shall not be without sin. And it happens
to these men, that if they would afterward return to think of such things,
as carry proportion with their poorenes, they cannot light upon it; because
they have been entered, with such a gluttonous appetit, upon greater matters.
And so they run, such a kind of hazard, as a bird may do, which makes too
much have out of her nest; whither it cannot return again, nor yet proceed,
by way of flight. Therefore it will be fit for us, to begin at the bottom;
with the consideration of our sins, as has been said; and then, with the
Meditation, of the sacred humanity of Jesus Christ our Lord; that so we may be
exalted, to those altitudes of his Divinity.

CHAP. LXXIIII.
Wherein the way of considering the life of Jesus Christ our Lord, to the end
that it may be of greater profit to us, is prosecuted, in a more particular
manner.
BEING then retired into thy Oratory, at the time which thou deputest to this
Exercise; first make thy According to that pious form, which is used in the
Holy Catholic Church, Confiteor Deo Ommuipotenti.
Confession in general; desiring pardon of our Lord for thy sins; and
especially them, which thou may have committed, since the time of thy last
Confession; and thou shall say a few vocal prayers, according to the former
advice which I gave, when I treated of the knowledge of ones self. Then read
that mystery of the Passion (which thou art about to meditate) in some book
that treates thereof. This The manner of reading spiritual books.
will serve thee for two purposes. The one, to teach thee, what did happen in
that mystery, that so thou may be able to think upon it; for as for the
life, and death, of our Lord, thou art to know them, and that, soundly known.
The other, for the recollecting of thy heart; to the end that when thou meanest
to think upon the Passion, thou may not have wandering, or tepide thoughts.
And although thou do not read, at one time, all that which the book delivers
of that part of the Passion, thou will be at no loss thereby; because upon the
same days of the weeks following thou will come to an end thereof. And, as I
told thee before, thy reading must not be such, as to make thee weary; but to
stir up the appetite of thy soul, and to prepare matter, for thee to think,
and pray upon.

The books which may profit thee, in the thought of the Passion, are amongst
others, the Meditations of S. Augustine in Latin; and those of the Father Lewys
de Granada in Spanish; and the Di^^ysius Carthusianus.
Carthusian, who writes upon all the Ghospells. When thou have ended thy
reading, cast thy self upon thy knees, and (having first recollected thine
eyes) do thou beseech our Lord, that he will send thee light of the Holy
Ghost, which may impart to thee, an amorous, and compassiue feeling, of that,
which Christ, with such dearness of love, did suffer for thee. Be very
Observe this excellent discourse with great attention.
importunate with him, not to permit in thee so great ingratitude, as that thou
(being bound to imitate his passion) should hardly find in thy heart, to
think upon it. Then place the image of that Mystery which thou would
meditate, within thy heart; and if this succeed not with thee, yet esteem, at
least, that thou have it near thee. And A necessary advice.
this I say, to let thee know, that thou art not to carry thy thoughts to
contemplate our Lord, at Jerusalem, where the Passion was accomplished; for
this would do thy head great hurt, and dry up thy devotion. But make account
that he is present to thee; and place thou the eyes of thy soul upon his feet;
or on the ground near to him; and behold, with all reverence, that which
passes, as if thou were present at it; and hearken to that, which our Lord did
say, with all attention. Above all Our Lord, make v^ fit to do so.
things behold with a pure, and quiet sight, his most sacred heart; which so
abounds with love toward us; and which did so much excel, in comparison of
that which he suffered exteriourly (though even that were also unspeakable) as
the Heaven does exceed the Earth.

But take heed, that thou do not afflict thy heart, with any forced grief,
which uses to fetch out some Take heed of forcing thy self to tears.
few tears with violence; for this, does hinder that quiet repose, which is
wholly needful, in the exercise of prayer, as the Abbot Isaac was wont to say;
and they dry up the heart, and make it unfit for the receiving of the visitation
of Gods spirit, which requires peace, and rest. Yea, and they use to prejudice
even our bodily health; and to leave the soul so frighted, with the disgust
which therein it found, that it fears to return again to prayer, as to some
painful thing. But if, with a quiet thinking of these things, our Lord do
give thee tears, and compassion, and other devout affections of mind, thou art
to take them under this condition, That the excess thereof be not such as to
ouerworke thee to wards the notorious prejudice of thy health; or that thou
becommest unable thereby, to resist them, and to hinder crying out; or, by other
such exterior signs, to make show of what thou find within. For if thou
do use thy self to this, thou will grow to make those expressions amongst
others, and with great note, to which thou art accustomed in thy Oratory,
without being able to resist them; but from this, it is reason that thou fly.

So How we are to carry our selves, when we have tears and tender motions of
the mind.
as, thou art to receive these spiritual gustes, and tears, in such sort, as
that thou do not greatly go after them; least That pious thought which was the
cause of tears, is to be cherished, and the tears t^es lues neglected.
in the pursuit thereof, thou loose that pious thought, or spiritual
affection, by which they were caused. But use thou great diligence, that the
thought continue; and as for the other exterior, and sensible feeling, let it
take the chance; and by this means thou may continue a long time together,
in a spiritual, and devout gust of mind. Whereas that other, which may be
accounted but as corporal, and to touch upon the sensible part of the soul,
cannot last. Nor yet, will it suffer the spiritual affection to continue, unless
it be withheld, from following the other which is more corporal. Only
Indulge^ce may be used toward beginners.
to such as are new beginners, a little leave may be allowed, that so they may
taste of this sweet kind of milk, a little more then such as are proficient.
For In this true devotion does consist.
these later, have an aim to feel in their soul, the high dignity of him
that suffers; and the deep indignity of him for whom he suffers; and the
mightily much that he suffers; and yet that the love wherewith he does it, is
still greater; and Do this and live.
they desire to imitate this love, and this passion, with all the strength,
that our Lord shall give. And if herewith, he give them the aforesaid gustes,
they drive them not away, nay rather they are thankful for them; but not, as
for the more principal. And Both these loves of God are excellent: but
generally speaking, men excel in the former, and women in the later.
although I make no doubt, but that there is a certain kind of love of God, so
inflamed, and so fyery, as that, it does not only not provoke tears, but it
hinders them, and dries them up; so do I also advertise thee, that there is
another tender kind of love, which procures those aforesaid gustes, in the
sensitive part of the soul; and in the eyes of the body; which yet, is not
blameworthy, since the doctrine of Christ, is not a doctrine of Stoickes, who
condemn even the passions which are good. And because Christ our Lord did
weep, and was sad, that suffices to make us believe, that these things are
good, yea even in the most perfect men. O how much hurt, has bin done by
certain unlearned men, both to themselves and to others, by their taking the
business, of directing souls in the way of spirit into their hands, and by
making themselves the Judges thereof, whilst yet they do but follow their own
ignorant opinion. And this I say, by occasion of men who have bin deceived
thereby; and to whom those other things, have bin displeasing.

CHAP. LXXV.
Wherein some directions are given for our greater profit in the aforesaid
exercise of Prayer: and for the avoiding of some inconveniences, which to
ignorant persons are wont to arrive.
Thou art also to be adu^sed, that It imports much that great care be had of
this. And ^ead this Chapter with great attention, for there is not any one, in
the whole book, more excellent, and practical then this.
thou must not labor much, to fix the image of our Lord too profoundly in thy
imagination; for danger is wont to arise thereby, unto the soul. To which it
seems sometimes, that it does really and exteriourly see the images, which it
has only within. And some fall into madness, and others into pride; and
though neither of these two happen, yet does it prejudice the health of the
body, and that even almost, without remedy. It is therefore fit, that thou
perform this exercise, in such sort, that neither thou do wholly forbear to
represent the image; nor yet, that thou procure to have it continually, or to
be fixed in thy self, with pain; but by little, and little; and so as that it
cost thee not, too much trouble. Thou may also have near thee some Devout
pictures do both address, and ease the imaginatiue part of man.
devout pictures, well proportioned to the several parts of the passion; by
looking upon which sometimes, thou may be eased; and so enabled, without
much difficulty, to imagine it without them.

Be also very careful, that not only thou fly from the danger which I have
told thee of, in imagining with too much trouble, but We must neither be too
extremely solicitous, on the one side, nor sloathful, or negligent on the other.
also from thinking, with too much earnestness of attentio^, and with too much
employment of the head. For besides the hurt, which such a head will receive
thereby; it causes a drienesse in the soul, which makes it abhor prayer. Do
not meditate in such sort, nor with so much force, that it may seem as if,
thou would do it by thy self alone, or by the strength of thine own arms.
For this would carry more resemblance, to the nature of study, then of prayer.
But undertake this exercise, in such sort, as that thou rely, and rest upon the
strength of our Lord, who helps men how to think. And if thou yet know not
how to do it; but that thou perceive thy head or thy temples, find notorious
trouble, do If thou will be sure, not to err; take counsel, from time to
time, of thy ghostly Father; according to the circ^^stances, wherein thou shall
find thy self.
not proceed forward, but quiet thy self, and cast away that affliction of
mind, and humble thy self in the sight of God with simplicity, and peace;
desyring grace of him, that thou may so think as he will have thee; and do
not, in any case, presume, in that high presence of God, to rely, and rest
wholly upon thine own reasons, or stiff attention. But humble thy self
before him, with a simple kind of affection, as a poor little Child, or an
humble disciple would do, who carries a quiet kind of attention, to learn of
his master, though yet withal, he resolves to help himself. And know, that
this is a business, which depends more How highly true this is.
upon the heart, then upon the head. For to love, is the end why we are to
think. And for want of understanding this, and that kind of peaceful mind,
whereof I have spoken; many have much wearied, both their own, and the heads of
others, with prejudice of their health, and with impediment to much good which
they might have done. And They who understand what he says, do understand the
truth, of what he says.
if God do vouchsafe the favor, to make thee able to meditate in this quiet
manner, that which thou feel, will both continue longer, and thou will be
able to spend more time in prayer, and without trouble. All which thou will
find to be very contrary, if thou proceed otherwise.

I have already said, how thy dwelling is to be in thy heart; where (as a
careful Be^, who makes her honey within her hiue) thou art to shut thy self
up; presenting to our Lord that which shall be brought to thee from abroad;
beseeching him to give thee favor, and light, as Moses did in the case of
that material Tabernacle. And if the gall of any temptation, shall offer at
thee, fly thou into thy heart; and then pull the door upon thee; and so joining
thy self to our Lord, thy enemies will remain out of doors with scorn
enough. For as the hurt which they might do thee, must be by means of thy
thought; when once that, is well shut up from them, there is no means for them
to enter.

And Note.
because that thou may continue and profit in this exercise, it is fit, in
any case, that thou do it with a quiet kind of rest, and peace; I advertise
thee, that if thou have strength to remain upon thy knees, during this
conference with God, it will be fit to do so; because all reverence is due to
that divine Majesty. And to this purpose, we have the example of our sovereign
Lord and Master, of whom the Evangelist records, that in the Garden of
Gethsemani, he prayed to his Father, upon his knees. But yet if the weakness of
thy body be such, as that in prayer which is long, thou can not remain
kneeling, without prejudice to the peace of thy mind; and that it make thee
unfit to attend to our Lord; thou art to put thy self in some such posture, as
may not hinder this quietness. For though prayer carry the fruit of satisfaction
with it, for the pain which we endure thereby; yet because that fruit, is
greater, which we gather by getting light, and spiritual gust, and other
benefits, which God gives in prayer; it must be embraced at the fittest
means, for the obtaining only of that which is best, if we be not able to
comply withal.

It is also to be considered that, when in thy prayer, thou art thinking of
some one thing, if thou find thy soul invited to pass on toward somewhat It
is impossible thus, by way of a general rule, to say that which shall fit, in
the particular case of all men, the present matter, being so full of variety
and difficulty; if therefore this be thy case, and that thou will not err, ask
counsel of thy Ghostly Father.
else; then (opening the gate to another good thought) thou art to dismiss the
former, and to take the latter, supposing yet, that both be good. Though
notwithstanding, thou art to be well advised, that this second thought may not
come by some fraud of the Devil, that so thou making the leap of a Pie, from
one thing to another, he may deprive thee of the fruit of prayer. Or else, that
it proceed not from the leuity of thine own heart; which, finding not that
which it desires in some one thought, disposes it self to make trial of
some other, and yet another. Thou art not therefore to forsake lightly, thy
former thought, unless thou be effectually invited to do it, from within; and
that, with such a Thou must not fail to advise herein with thy Ghostly Pather.
kind of satisfaction to thy self, as the heart uses to feel, when God
inuiteth it; and when he interposeth himself. And by asking light of our Lord,
and by taking accoumpt afterward what profit thou have gotten; and by often
taking of experience, thou will grow to do thy duty, in this business.

To this An advise concerning reading, and vocal prayer.
purpose it also makes; that if thou be reading or praying vocally, and that
our Lord do visit thee, with any profound internal feeling; thou art to cease
from that which thou were doing; and to feed upon the bit, which our Lord has
sent thee; and when that is done, thou may begin again, where thou did
leave. For since this exterior devotion, does serve but to stir up the
interior, we must be sure not to use it so, as that it may be a means to
hinder the other. Nor would I speak of so many particulers, if I had not seen
some people so tied to certain rules, and so resolved to task themselves in
such a fashion, that although there were reason for them to believe, that our
Lord would have them interrupt a thought, yet they will not do it. And if he
will conduct them by one way, yet they will needs go by another, relying upon
their own prudence. Whereas Humility is the best disposition toward Prayer.
notwithstanding, it is an infallible Truth, that nothing is more contrary unto
this Exercise, then for men to think, that they are able to play the masters
in it. And I have seen many men abound in rules, concerning prayer, and to be
talking of great secrets, and the same men to be very empty in the practice of
it For to rest upon those rules, and to reflect much upon them, in time of
prayer, depriueth them of that humility, and simplicity of a child; whereby
this business is to be treated with God, as I have said before. Yet Note.
do I not deliver this, to dissuade men from using that reasonable diligence,
which on our part we are to bring, especially when we are beginners in it; but
only that we may perform it, with such a kind of liberty as not to hinder us
from depending upon God, in expectation of his blessing; in such sort as he
shall be pleased to give it. And Who are sure to profit most, in being able to
use, mental Prayer.
be thou well assured, that in this exercise, he profits most, who does humble
himself more; and who does use more perseverance; and who sends out, more
deep sighs to our Lord; and not he, who has more rules, without book.

CHAP. LXXVI.
That the end of the Meditation of the Passion is to be the imitation thereof;
and what is to be the beginning, and ground, of greater things which we are to
imitate.
TO the end that thou may know, how to profit by this exercise, thou art to
be advertised, that the end of the meditation of the passion, is to be the
imitation thereof, and the accomplishment, of the law of our Lord. And A truth
most necessary to be known.
this I tell thee, because some there are who make much reckoning of the hours
which they spend in prayer; and of the gust, and sweetness which they find
therein; but they take no account, of the fruit which they gather by it. They
conceive, with an erroneous judgment, that he that prays most, and with
greatest sweetness of delight^ that he, forsooth, is the greatest saint;
whereas indeed, that other man is so, who together with the profou^d The
perfection of a Christian consists in having profound humility, and ardent
charity.
contempt of himself has the greatest charity; wherein consists the
perfection of Christian life, and the fulfilling of the whole law. And he that
lives well, and he that prays well, must do it all to this end; and not
content himself, with only having spent such a piece of his time well in
confessing, or communicating, or devout praying, or any other thing, of the
like nature.

We read of Moses, that having been forty days, and forty nights upon the
top of mount Sinay in continual conversation with the most high God; and
descending afterward to converse with men, he told them no stories, or vistons,
or revelations, or curious secrets; but he carried much light in his face, and
two tables of stone in his hands. In the one whereof, those He deuideth the
commandments by three, and seven, as we do, and as S. Augustine, did; and, not
by four and six as the Protestants do.
three commandments were written, which appertain to the honor of God; and
seven in the other which belong to our duty toward, our neighbor. Giving The
right fruit of Prayer.
thereby to understand, that he that treates with God, by the tongue of prayer,
must have light in his understanding; thereby to know what he is to do; and
then a fulfilling of the will of God, put in execution, as if the law, were in
his hands. And since he has the office of one that prays, he may also have
the life of one that prays; which must be such, as that, in all his actions,
it may appear; If this prove not so in some proportion thou do loose thy
labor.
that some part of that sovereign truth, and supreme purity, wherewith he had
so much to do, has stuck unto him. For they who employ a fit of time in
weeping, and in lamenting those buffetts, which they gave our Lord, in his
passion; if, departing from thence, upon the offer of the least of those
affronts, which were put upon our Lord, they have yet little patience, (as if
they had learnt nothing in prayer, but to be able to suffer nothing) I know not
to whom I should compare them, but to such, as (when they are sleeping) do
conceive, that they are doing some great matter, who yet, when they wake, are
found to have done the express contrary.

What A vicious, and a foolish thing.
more absurd, and foolish thing can there be, then that, when I do so much
esteem the patience of our Lord, in his pain, I will yet have none in mine.
But I will say, Carry thy Cross alone O Lord, though it be deadly heavy; for I
have no mind to help thee, by carrying of mine, though it he very light. The
Apostles had compassion, and they shed tears, for the Passion of our Lord; but
because they fled from the imitation thereof, they were cowards, and offended
God thereby, like evil Christians. Thou art not therefore to consider the
Passion, and to have compassion of out Lord, as one that would look upon a
business in the nature of a mere looker on; but as one who is to accompany
our Lord, in the point of sufferance. And by looking upon him, procure thou to
get strength, to drink of his Chalice with him, though it be never so bitter.
Let He advises to corporal penance as a disposition to the mortification of
our passions.
the beginning, and foundation of greater matters, wherein thou art to imitate
him, be in exterior austerities, and the mortification of thy body. That so
thou may carry some resemblance to his divine flesh, which was so full of
affliction, and torments; far greater, then can be expressed.

Behold him with stiff attention, how he tastes of vinegar, and gall; behold
in how strait a bed he is lodged; and how bare he is of clothes; and how
thick he is apparelled, with torments, from head to foot; and get thou force
from hence, to fly from the delicacies, and ornaments of thy body, in thy
clothes, in thy bed, and in thy food. And in this, and in all the rest, (which
thou can do, without much inconvenience) afflict thy body, and make it live
upon a Cross; and that, which thou can not do, let indeed, thy heart desire;
and beg strength of our Lord, for it; and lament, in that he, being upon the
Cross, thou deseruedst not to accompany, or to imitate him.

These must be the desires of a Christian, who exercises himself, upon
thinking on the Passion, if he have a mind to imitate it. For If there had been
any better way to Heaven, then that of the Cross, our Lord Jesus, would have
taught us how to find it but he taught no other.
when our Lord came from heaven to earth, to converse with men, and to teach
them the best, and most secure way to heaven; and when he was borne, did make
choice of poverty, of cold, and of banishment; and as he increased in years,
so did he increase in affliction; and the end of his life, was the addition of
others, which were greater then they. He honored these things, though of
themselves they were base; and by joining them to himself, he gave them such a
stamp of greatness, and such tokens of security, and beauty, as to make them
grow to be desired. For Note this comparison, for is does convince.
if a temporal king by apparelling himself in such or such a fashion, do
instantly make it honorable, and to be thought worthy of imitation by all his
vassalls; how much more shall this be done, by that sovereign King of Kings,
whose worth is infinitely more, then of all the creatures how high soever. And
he that follows not this dictamen, should be no true vassal of this Lord;
since he holds it not for a point of honor, to be like him. A delightful
thing it is, as says S. Bernard, to imitate the dishonor of him that was
crucified; but this only belonges to such, as are not ungrateful to him.

And Note this excellent comparison; and receive that light, and heat, which
God is willing to grant thee by means thereof.
now tell me, if a King should go on foot, and that bare; and weary; and
sweating, through the sharpness of the way; having his back laden with
sackcloth, and his face with tears; and all this to move compassion, as D^nid
did; what servant of his could there be, who either for love, or shame, would
not also go on foot, and unshod, and as like his King as h^ were able? And so
the Scripture says, that all the servants of David did, and all the people,
that went (...) his company. But if such a King, should commaun^ any of his
servants, that waited on him, to tak^ horse, and to ride at ease; a cruel
commaund^ment would that be, to such a servant. And from the roots of his heart,
he would beseech the King, not to put, such a huge affront upon him; as that, a
Royal Majesty, being treated in such a fashion, his servant, should be seen
so contrary to him. And if yet notwithstanding, the King should persist in the
Commandment, the servant indeed would obey him; but with so much pain, as that
(placing his eyes upon the affliction of the King) his heart would take no
contentment in that ease, which exteriourly he was at; but (esteeming himself
for more weak, and less favored then the rest) he would reckon it amongst
the greatest of his misfortunes, that he might not go more like his Lord. And
that which he should want to do indeed, he would not fail to perform with the
deepest wishes of his heart; taking that ease of his own, in patience, but in
his desire, having sufferance.

Such doubtless, is Christ crucified to those hearts, which employ themselves in
looking on him; if yet withal, they be grateful (as S. Bernard says) for so
great a benefit, as it is, for God to have abased himself so far, as to walk
through this desert, with such misery, as never man endured. For But it will
fall down, as we must do, by great abasement of our selves for the love of our
Lord Jesus.
where there is this gratitude, no lance can remain, in the Rest, any longer;
and both within, and without, there is an internal profound desire, to clap
this Crucifixe, as a seal upon his heart, and upon his arm; as a thing whereby
he is not only not afflicted, or to hold himself thereby less honored; but
(as S. James says) They have it in the place of ent^^re, and perfect i^ that
affliction may ^e offered them for his sake.

Such The great nobility of a true Christian heart.
is the height of the^, who are grateful to this Lord; as that, with the knife
of the lous of him being crucified, they do valiantly, destroy those Exodus 22.
Idols of Egypt, which worldly persons do so prize, and love; whether they be
honors, or treasures, or pleasures; giving him thanks that he vouchsafes to
admit them into his company. And they go in search (being all inflamed with
l^ue) after as many ways, as they can think on, to suffer more; like
Elephants being, as it were, enraged, with seeing, that the blood of their
Lord, is spilt. And if it happen to concern the service of the same Lord, that
they take their ease, or possess the honors, and riches of this life; they
accept them only by obedience, and they use them with fear. And you had need
give them much comfort, if you will make them content to go on horseback, when
they see him on foot, whom they love so much more, then their own lives.

Such I say, is the altitude of the state of Christian men; and such a change
has Christ wrought in things, since the time of the crosse^ as that the
bitter, and the base, he makes honorable and delightful; and A certain truth
nobly expressed.
he makes his servants ready, to cast the gorge, when they are but (...) take a
taste of that, for which worldlings, are upon the point to cut the throats of
one another. This fruitful, and firm love, do I desire, that the thought of
the sacred Passion (of which thou art so enamoured) should work in thy heart,
and As S. Pau^ says he did* and he says he did it, in his body, by punishing
its and not only in his thought, and in his tongue.
that thou may carry the mortification of our Lord in thy body. And if, there
be none, who fling stones at thee, or imprison thee, or scourge thee, as they
did our Lord, and his Apostles, who Act. 5.
went joyfully suffering for his name; yet seek thou also means to suffer, in
what thou may. And give No protestant will hold any such discourse.
God many thanks, when he offers thee any occasion; to the end that using
well that little, our Lord may give thee strength to suffer more, and may send
thee more.

And consider well, that thou art not to esteem little of these things, in
respect that S. Paul 1. Tim. 4.
said, That the exercise of these corporal things, is of little profit. For
although we should grant, that Where of many are yet in doubt.
he means it of such things, as we have here delivered; yet he will not
have us esteem How this place of Scripture is to be understood.
little of them, in themselus; but only in comparison of greater matters. For
the obtaining whereof, and for the satisfaction of the pain which is due in
Purgatory; and yet further, for the acquiring of more grace, and glory; and for
the serving of God, both with the interior, and exterior man; there is no
doubt, but that, since we are debtours to him for all, these other things are
very fit to be used. Whereof, our sovereign Master of light, did tell us,
what we were to think, when he said (speaking of greater matters) That is was
necessary to do them; and speaking of the lesser, that is was fit not to emit
them.

CHAP. LXXVII.
That the Mortification of our passions, is the second fruit which we are to
draw out of the meditation of the passion of Christ our Lord; and how we are to
use this exercise, that so we may gather admirable fruit thereby.
THAT which, in the next place, thou art to procure by the meditation of the
sacred passion (that so by little, and little, thou may go ascending, from the
lower, to the higher), is the curing of the wounds of thy passions, by the
medicine of the passion of our Lord, whom Isay Isa. 11.
calls the flower of the rod of Iesse. For Such as are medicinal by being
bruised.
as flowers, use to be the means of giving health, so Christ Jesus being
grinded upon the Cross, and applied by our devout consideration to our soars,
how dangerous soever they are, they will be cured thereby. Of this S. Augustine
Thou need not fear to take S. Augustins word, in a more doubtful matter
then this is.
had experience, and he said, When I am assalted by any deformed thought, I go
insta^tly to the wounds of Christ* when the devil lays any ambush for me I
run into the bowels of the mercy of my Lord; and so the devil flies from me
If the ardour of any dishonest conceit would put my body into disorder, it is
quenched, by my remembrance of the wounds of my Lord, the son of God* In all
my aduersityes, I have not found any remedy of so great force, as the wounds
of Christ; wherein I sleep secure, and discharge my care, without fear.

The same did S. Bernard say, and know by experience; as all they do, who
finding themselves, as it were assalted by their Passions, as the stagge is by
a kennell of dogs; do go with a pious heart, to drink of those sacred
fountaynes, of our Savior; painful indeed to him, but the causes of
restoration, and joy to us. And there, they learn by experience, how great a
truth that is, which Number. 21.
Moses, declared, in figure, by the commaundment of God, when he raised the
brazen serpent upon a staff; to the end, that being beheld, by such as were
stung by venomous serpents, it might free them from death, and restore them to
health. This serpent, although by the shape, it would seem to carry poison in
it, yet it had none indeed; for it was a serpent of brass. And in the same
manner, Jesus Christ our Lord, had true flesh, like the flesh of sin, whereby
it was subject to pain; but indeed it is far from all sin, because it is
the flesh of God; and framed by the holy Ghost; and kept, by him; and being
placed on high, upon the The infinite power of the Cross of Christ our Lord.
Cross, and being dead upon it, it delivers from death, and gives health,
to all such, as being bitten by temptations, have recourse to him, with Faith,
and Love.

And since thou have so powerful a remedy for thy recovery, so near at hand;
there remains no more, but that How necessary it is to be exact in making the
Examen of our selus; and especially concerning our passions.
thou take a very particular accoumpt, to know what serpents they are, which
sting thy soul; by daily and leasurely examining what inclinations thou have,
in the very bottom of thy heart; what are the quickest passions that thou art
subject to; what are the faults, into which thou fallest sometimes; and such
observations as these, whereby thou may be so perfect, and clear in the
knowledge of thy frailtyes; as that thou may have them, not only in thine
eyes, but even, at thy very fingers ends. Thou will not arrive, in short time
to this; no nor yet, in long, unless thou be assisted by light from heaven;
whereby thou may discern the very roots of thy heart; which is so deep, that
not thy self, but God alone can thoroughly sift it. It The most excellent
means, whereby we may come to know our selves exactly, is to consider
diligently the virtues of our Lord Jesus expressed, in his sacred passion.
will help thee much, toward this knowledge, to consider the virtues, which
our Lord did exercise in his passion; since he is to be the glass of thy
soul, instead of that other, by which women, that are married, use to dress
themselves, for the pleasing of their husbands.

Behold The unspeakable virtues of our Lord.
his meekenes, his Charity, his invincible patience; his profound silence; and
so thy faults will grow plain to thee, how hidden soever they may be. Yea and
thy virtues being compared with his, will appear to thee evidently, to be
faults. And thou will be ashamed both of the one, and of the other. Yet be not
thou dismayed, but present thy self with them all, before ou^ Lord; though not
without groaning sighs; A sweet and significa^t comparison.
as the Child would do, who lets the mother see, where the thorn has haspt
it self into his hand; and he beggeth of her with tears, that she will pull it
out; and so will our Lord do with thee. For, as he is a glass to declare thy
faults; so, by his example, and helping hand, he is the true remedy thereof.
And now, considering through how great shame he was content to pass, for the
love of thee, thy heart will be kindled, toward the casting away off, all
affection to honor; and his patience, will kill thy anger; and his gall, and
vinegar, will cure thy glottony; and thy seeing him obedient to his Father,
even to the death of the Cross, will tame thy neck, toward the obedience of
his holy will, even in those things, wherein thou may find the greatest
difficulty.

And when thou shall behold, how, that most high God, humaned, the Lord of the
heavens, and of the earth, and all that which they contain; did See here
whether or no thou have any reason to be impatient or proud.
obey those wretches, when they were pleased to strip him starcke naked; and
then to apparaile him again; and when they bound him; and when they unbound
him; and when they commanded him, to spread himself upon the Cross; and to
stretch out his arms, that they might be nailed thereunto; I am deceived, if
it will not give thee a desire, (and that with the deepest sighs of thy heart)
if it be capable of any feeling) to be obedient, not only to thy betters, and
equals, but to thy inferiors also; and to submit thy self, for the love of
God, (as S. Peter 1. Pet. 2.
says), to all the reasonable creatures in the world; and that, so far, as
even to be ill used by them. By this means also, will covetousness come to
dye in thee, if thou behold those hands boared through for the good of men;
that they may accomplish that, which formerly he commanded, when he said,
Joan. 13.
Love you one another, as I have loved you. And, in a word, thou will find by
experience, that S. Paul Romans 6.
said true, when he told us, that our old man, was crucified with Christ.

If thou do not find this cure, and conquest over thy self, to grow instantly,
as thou would desire; be We are so wicked, that we had need to have much
patience with our selves.
not yet dismayed; and give not over thy good beginnings. But If we have little
feeling of those things at the first, we must not yet despair, but be humble,
and diligent in prayer.
as now thou art come to know, that the hardness of thy heart, and thy
wickedness, is greater, then thou could have thought; so, do thou sigh out
so many more groans; and with so much the more humility, beg thou of our
Lord; that his mercy may not permit thee to remain sick, since he, being God,
did suffer and dye, to make thee whole. And have thou hope, that he will not
make himself deaf, who has commanded thee to cry out upon him; and that he
will not carry such bowels of cruelty about him, as to see thee sick, and to
hear thee cry out, at that gate of the hospital of his mercy, which are his
wounds; but that, some one day, or other, he will take thee in, to cure thee.
But The perfect cure of thy soul will not be wrought upon a sudden.
I advertise thee of this, that it is not a business, to be dispatched, in so
short a time. And, although S. Paul, Gal 18.9.
said in few words, That they, who were of Christ, had crucified their flesh,
with the vices and desires thereof; yet such, as are not content, with
departing only from mortal sin, but have a desire to obtain a perfect
victory over themselves; by ouercomming those seven generations of enemies,
which have taken possession of the land of promise, do find by experience, that
the thing which is said in one word, is not completely performed in many
years. But our sovereign Lord, is wont, to give such persons hope of perfect
health; vouchsafing them now, and then, the cure of some particular infirmity.

We A place of Holy Scripture excellently applied.
read of the Captain Iosue, that having overcome five Kings, he said thus to
his souldiars: Set Iosue 10.
your feet upon the necks, of these Kings; and do not fear; but take heart,
and comfort; for, as our Lord has overcome these, so will he also, all those
others, whom you fight against. Do If thou consider the reward even in this
life, which is here mentioned; thou will not think thy labor ill employed, and
therefore resolve upon the word of this holy Author, which is, Either to
conquer, of dye.
thou, in this manner; and resolve either to conquer, or to dye; for if thou
obtain not the victory over thy passions, thou will not be able to proceed, in
the exercise of this familiar conversation, with our Lord. For it is not
reason, that the most sweet repose, which is taken, with joyful peace, in the
arms of our Lord; be affoarded, but to them, who first have fought, and with
difficulty have overcome themselves. Nor can they obtain, to be the quiet
Temples of that peaceable Solomon; if first they be not hammered, by the
blows, of the mortification of their passions; and by the breaking off their
wills. For The smoke of the passions deprive the soul of being able to see
that sweetness and sublimenes Gods beauty.
the smoke, which unmortified passions raise up, in the soul, do not suffer
the sight to be so clear; as it fit, for the beholding of the King in his
beauty. Nor do they permit the soul, to have that purity which is requisite
for the uniting of it, with God; like a chaste Spouse; and in a manner, which is
particular, and secret, and kept safe for them, to whom our Lord vouchsafes to
give it; after they have labored many years, as Jacob did, for Rachel.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
That the most excellent thing which we are to meditate and imitate, in the
passion of our Lord, is the love where with he offered himself to the Eternal
Father.
AFTER having entered into the first exterior part of the Temple, of this true
Solomon; which is, to consider Christ, in the exterior man; and, after having
sacrificed thy disordinate passions, by the knife of the word of God; (which
office was executed in that part of the Temple, which was called Holy) it
remains (if we mean to proceed in our way) that we procure to enter into the
Sancta Sanctorum, the Holy of Holyes, which is a more precious place, and the
period of all the rest. If now thou ask me, which is this place; The precious
heart of our Lord Jesus, is the Sancta Sanctorn^.
I answer, That it is the heart of Jesus Christ, our Lord, who is truly, the
Holy, of Holyes. For as he did not content himself to suffer only in the
exterior, but with a cordial love; so thou art not to stay, upon the seeing,
and imitating that which exteriourly appears; but thou must enter into his
heart to behold, and imitate the same. And to the end, that this entry might be
more easy for us; and that, which was locked up in his heart, more manifest; he
permitted, after he was dead, that (howsoever he then, felt no pain) his heart
should be By the point of a lance.
disclosed; that so, as by an open gate, whereby we might discover a world of
admirable mysteryes, men might be induced to enter into it; and might be
invited, as to a thing wherein they were to behold that strange beauty, which
was there contained.

But who is able, with a tongue, to speak thereof, since he that has entrance
thither, and looks upon them, cannot reach to the greatness. And eue^ that
which he reaches, he is not able to express. S. John Apoe. 11.
delivers, in figure of this, that the temple of God was opened, and that the
Arc of the Testament, was seen therein; for in the heart of Christ, the law of
God is fulfilled; and there, is kept the Manna of celestial bread; and that
precious, and complete By the incarnation and passion of Christ our Lord.
sweetning of God, which was signified by that couerture of gold, of the
ancient Arc. And all this, in so great excellency, that it far exceeds the
very highest pitch of all our thoughts. David Psalm. 39.
says, Many meruailes have thou wrought, O Lord my God, and in those thoughts
which thou had for my good, there is none like to thee. Marvelous Mark this
gradation.
is all that which God has done, and more marvelous is all that, which he
has suffered. But yet, if thou consider the thoughts of his O bottomless
Abyss, of the lou: of our Lord Jesus, to mankind.
heart (which, even whilst lest he was suffering; did (through his love) think
as it were but little of any thing, except the same very love) thou will cry
out, with a loud cry of thy soul There is none O Lord like to thee. Do thou
desire him, O Virgin, when thou shall see him suffer his hands, and neck to
be tied; when thou shall see him endure buffets, thorns, nails, and death; to
do thee the favor to let thee know, why being so strong, and so powerful, he
should suffer himself to be treated, as if he were so weak, and without
ability of making resistance. To this, S. John A^oc. 2.
will answer thee in his name; He loved us, and he washed us from our sin,
with his blood. Ruminate well upon these words; and lodge them deeply in thy
heart; and entertain thy self in thinking, what an admirable and excessive
love that is, which burns so in his heart, as to flame out, by suffering such
things in the exterior. Say within thy self; What Observe well the
gradations of this chapter, which tend toward the making thee all enamoured of
our Lord Jesus; and it is the top of any thing, that I have seen in this kind.
person might there be in the world, for whom I, or such an one as I, would
endure such miseryes; without pretending any proper interest, but only for pure
love of that other person; and thou will see, that to suffer all that which our
Lord suffered, is not such a kind of thing, as which we may look to find
elsewhere; for there would be no forces fit, for so heavy a burden.

To endure some small part of what he endured, might perhaps be found betweens
fathers, and sons; brother, and brother; friend, and friend; man and wife; or
the like, to who^ either necessity, or blood, or friendship, may give strength
to suffer, yea and to dye; though this of dying, but very rarely. But to suffer
for strangers without any interest of a man's own; without being obliged to it;
yea, and to dye; and that for nothing, but for mere love; was a thing never
seen. And yet, if it should be seen, that a slave should offer to dye for a
King; and that, before his death, he would be scourged, and endure some of the
many torments, which our Lord did suffer; it would be such an act of prowess,
as that the slave, might deserve a Pardon, although he had committed many
faults. And all men would judge, that he had merited many favors, at that
Kings hands, if he were able to impart any, in the other life. Nor would this
famous action depart from the mouths of men, for a long time; yea and the King
himself, would recount it, both with much thankefullnes, and much tenderness.

But Give great attention.
now let us turn the story the other way, and conceive, that the King himself
(after having suffered greiuous torments and extreme reproach), would needs
dye for his slave; from whom he had received no service, but great offenses,
which deserved a most cruel death; and that the cause of the Kings dying,
were the mere nothing but the love, which he bare this slave: This would be a
thing never seen, and never heard before; and it would betoken such an
excessive kind of love, as would cast them that heard of it, into a horrible
kind of amazement; and would furnish matter to men, for publishing the
goodness of that King, all the days of their lives. And so admirable, so new,
and so sublime a love would this be; that some men, of superficial virtue, and
weak understanding, would be scandalized thereat; and would not make such a
judgment, of this work, as were convenient* affirming it to be a kind of
absurd excess, that the majesty of a King, full of all power and virtue,
should so cast away his precious life; to the end that his wicked slave might
live, who had most justly deserved death.

And Be still attentive, for these are circumstances of high importance.
if moreover, it were added to this story, that this King were so wise, and so
powerful, as that, with much facility, and without suffering the least
inconvenience, and without doing the least injustice to any, he could deliver
that slave of his, from death; and that yet nevertheless, he would make up his
love, into so huge a heap; and would give him to understand, that he were
resolved to endure such, and so many miseries, as never any man endured; and
all this, for no other reason, but because that so it would be better for the
slave; most certain it is, that few eyes would be found in the world, which
could be able to behold such a bright sun of burning love as this. And if any
man should have so good an apprehension, as to think thereof, as the thing
deserved; he would escape well, if he kept his wits, through the excess of
admiration, and amazement. And if this would happen, to such as in their own
person had not received this benefit from the King, but by the only thinking
what he had done for another man; what may be believed, that it would work, in
the heart of that very slave, (unless he were frantic) for whom that King,
should so, have dyed. Do thou not think, that such a knock of love as
this, would awake him; would change him; would so entitely captive him, to the
love of that King, as that he could never get leave of himself, to conceive
his praises, nor think of his merits, but with tears? Nor employ himself
upon any other thing, then the expressing of supreme gratitude, and love, by
doing, and suffering for him, all that possibly he could?

Have thou heard this Parable, which in the world did never take effect? Then A
miserable man thou art, if this do not mouethee to the very soul.
know; That what the Kings of the earth have not done; that very thing, has
been done by Christ Jesus, the King of heaven. Of whom, S. John Apoc. 19.
says, That in his thigh, he carried this title written, King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. For even, as he is man, and as he has taken humane nature;
(which is signified by the word Thigh) so great is his altitude, as that it
surmounteth all Lords, and Kings created; not only them of this world, but The
celestial spirits.
also of heaven. Enjoying a Name, which is above all Names; and a height, and
power of dominion, above all the highest men, and Angels. Behold this height,
which has no equal; and cast down they eyes, to behold that The infinite
God, for base and sinful man.
baseness, for which it suffers. And thou will see, as S. Paul says, That Romans
1.
we are weak, and wicked, and traitors against God, and his enemies. Which
titles, are of so much dishonor and baseness, as that they cast a man back,
and down, into the hindmost place, and into the lowest price, that can be set
upon any creature. Since there is nothing so base as to be wicked; nor nothing
so wicked, as a sinner is, in respect, that he is such.

Comparing therefore these extremes which are so different; of so high a king,
and so wicked slaves; behold now, the much that he loved them. Come If thou
refuse this inuitatio^, thou art undone.
hither, into the heart of our Lord; and if thou have the eyes of an Eagle,
here in matter for them to work upon. Nay, they will not serve thy turn, to
make thee sufficiently see, the brightly burning, and high heaped love, which
inhabited that most holy soul; with such extent, and latitude, that although
those highest Angels of heaven, for the great power which they have to Love,
are called Seraphims, (which signifies that they are set on fire;) yet if they
had come to mount Caluary, at the time, when our Lord did suffer there, his
excessive love would have cast them into wonder; in comparison whereof, their
own, would have bin no more, then mere tepidity.

For, as that most sacred soul, possesses greater altitude, and honor, then
can be had by any other, either in heaven or earth (for as much as, instantly
upon the creation thereof, it was united to the person of the Word of God;) so
was the Holy Ghost infused into it, beyond all measure; and such degrees of
grace, and love were given to it; that neither they could increase, nor could
the soul contain more. So that, it is with great reason applied to this most
holy soul, which is written, The Cant. 1.
King did place me, in the cellar of wine; and in me he ordained Charity. Or as
we read in another translation, he placed his Ensign, or Banner of love upon
me. For, in regard that this soul, as soon as it was created, did clearly see
the Divine Essence; and was carried to it, with an unspeakable force of love,
the banner of holy love, was planted on it. To give us to understand, that this
soul, was the most overcome by love, that ever man, or Angel was, either in
Heaven, or on Earth. And They only conquer, who are captiued, by the love of
our Lord Jesus.
because, in the war, of the love of God, he that is most overcome, is most
worthy, and most valiant, and most happy; therefore does this most blessed
soul, carry the Ensign of love, which stands upon it. That al they may know
who either on Earth, or in Heaven, do pretend to love God, that they must
follow the conduct of this Lord, if they mean to do it well; as the disciple
would do, his master, or the soldiar his captain; since he exceeds them all
in love, as he exceeds them otherwise, in dominion.

Now, since so great a fire of love was lodged in that most sacred soul; it is
If thy heart love deeply, it will find means, to express i^ self.
not strange, if the flame fly out, and scorch, and burn the clothes, which
are, his most sacred body, which was laden with such torments, as give
testimony of the interior love. For it is written, Who shallbe able to carry
fire in his bosom, and that his garment should not be burnt? And when thou
shall see, that in the exterior, they guide in his hands, with cruel ropes;
thou art to understand, that within, he is taken prisoner, by the nets of love,
which are so much stronger then those other, as chains of iron are beyond
threeds of flax. This Shall we not pa^ such love with love?
love, this was it, which defeated him; which over came him; which took him;
which tossed him, from Judge to Judge; and from the torment of scourges, to the
torment of cruel thorns; and which cast the Cross upon him first, and which
carried him to Mount Caluary, where he was after, cast upon the Cross.

There stretched he out his arms abroad, to be crucified; in token that his
heart had been opened by his love; and that so widely toward all; as that the
brightly burning, and puissant beams of love, did sally out from the center of
his heart; and went to determine themselves, upon every whereof thou, and I are
two.
man in particular; both such as were past, such as were present, and such as
were to come; offering up his life, for the good of them all. And if Note.
the high Priest do exteriourly carry the names of the E^^d. 28.
twelve Sons of Israel, written both upon his shoulders, and upon his breast;
much more excellently, does this Priest of ours, carry men upon his shoulders,
by suffering for men. And he carries them also, written in And our Lord make
us able to write him, i^ ^^t^.
his heart; for he does so cordially love them; that if the first Adam sold them
all, for an apple; and if they sell themselves, at a base price; and if so they
grow indeed to hate themselves, through the love they have of being wicked;
this enamoured Lord, does so highly prize them, and so much love them; that to
redeem them, out of such a miserable captivity, he gave himself as a price
for them. In testimony, that he loves them more, then they are beloved by any
other, or then they know, how to love themselves.

CHAP. LXXIX.
Of the burning Love, wherewith Christ Jesus loved God, and men for God; from
which love, as from a fountatine that did spring which he suffered in the
exterior; and that also which he suffered in the interior; which was much
more, then the other.
IF the heart of man be so wicked (as Jeremy Ierem. 17.
said) as that God only can tell how to sift it; and that the more deep a man
diggs in that rotten wall, the more abominable filthiness is discovered (as was
showed in figure, to Ezech. 8.
Ezechiel;) with how much more reason may we say, that since the heart of Jesus
Christ our Lord, is more good, then any other can be wicked; there is none who
can wholly diue into it, but only the same Lord, whose it is. It is worthy of
admiration, and which, in reason* ought to rob us, even of our very souls,
and to bind us as slaves to God to consider the excessive love of his heart,
which did express it self, in suffering the whole course of that Passion, and
death for us, as we have showed. But if thou dig yet deeper, with the light
of heaven in thy hand, and do look near, into this The heart of our Lord
Jesus, is the Reliquary, and the love, is the Relic.
Reliquary of God, which is so full of unspeakable secrets; thou will discern
such effects of love; as will cast thee into more wonder, then any outward
thing belonging to the passion.

For this purpose, thou art to remember, how in the town of Bethsaida, our
Lord, being in the cure of a deaf man, the Gospel says, That he cast up his
sacred eyes to heaven, and he sighed deeply, and that then he cured the
patient. That groaning sigh, which carried an exterior sound, was but one; and
it might pass in a short time; but it was a witness, of another sigh; yea and
of many profound internal sighs; and which lasted not only for a short time,
but for months, and years. For thou art to understand, how that most holy
soul, in being created, and infused into the body, in that virgineall womb of
our Blessed Lady, did then behold the divine essence, (which for the height
thereof, is called heaven, with great reason) as clearly as now it does. And in
seeing it, it did judge that it was worthy of all honor, and service; and so
it desired all honor to it; with that unspeakable force of love, wherewith it
was endued. And although the ordinary law, for such as see God clearly, be
this, that they must be blessed both in body and soul; and be subject to no
kind of pain; yet, to the end that we might be redeemed by the precious
afflictions of our Lord; it See the inuentio^s of the love the God.
was ordained, that felicity, and joy, should remain in the superior part of
his soul; and should not redound into the inferior part, or into his body;
renouncing all that sense of happiness, which so justly was due unto it; for the
accepting, and suffering of that pain, to which we, were liable.

Now, if that most holy soul, who cast the eyes of the understanding up to the
heaven of the divinity, had not had any other thing but that, to look upon; it
could not have been capable of pain, since God is such a Good; that nothing
can grow from the sight of him, but love, and joy. But, for as much as he saw
all the sins, which then had bin committed by men, from the beginning of the
world; and So that then, he saw all and every of my sins and al thy sins.
those also which would be committed even to the end of it; his grief was
fully as internal, and as profound, to see, that heaven of the Divine Majesty,
offended, as his desire was, that it should be served. And The infinite desire,
which our Lord Jesus had, that God should be served; and as infinite grief
that he is offended.
as no man is able to reach to the greatness of that defire, so neither can
any man arrive to the greatness of that grief. For the holy Ghost, which is
figured in Note this grief and love.
fire, which was given him beyond all measure, did inflame him to love God with
an incomprehensible Joan. 11.
love; and the same Holy Ghost, which is also figured in a Luc. 19.
Dove, did make him bitterly lament, to see him offended, whom he loved after
such an ineffable manner.

But to the end that thou may see, how this knife of grief, which passed
through the heart of our Lord, did not only wound him, on the one side, but that
it was doubly, and most sharply edged; remember that the same Lord, who
(looking up to heaven, did deeply sigh) did also weep, both over Lazarus, and
over Jerusalem. And then, (as S. Ambrose says) it is not to be wondered at,
that he greiued for all since he wept for one. So that to see God offended, and
to see men destroyed by sin, was a Our Lord grant us one touch of this knife
upon our hearts, by the merits of his.
knife, with a double edge; which did most lamentably pierce his heart; through
the inestimable love which he bare to God, as God; and to men for his sake;
desiring to make satisfaction to the honor of God, and to obtain a remedy for
men, how deerly soever it should cost him.

O The unspeakable affliction of our Lord Jesus, in his sacred Passion.
most blessed Jesus, to see thee tormented exteriourly in thy body, does even
break the heart of a Christian; but to see thee so tormented, and defeated
inwardly, with such deadly grief, there is no eye, there is no force, that can
endure it. Three nails, O Lord, did break through thy hands, and feet, with
excessive pain; and more then seauenty thorns, they say, did pierce thy
divine head; thy buffetts and thy affrontes, were very many; and the cruel
scourget, which that most delicate body of thine, received, they say, did pass
the number of five thousand. By occasion of these, and many other grievous
torments, which concurred in thy passion, (which no man arriueth to understand,
but thou that feltest them), it was said in thy person, long before, O all you
that pass by the way, observe, and see, if there be any grief, like mine. And
yet, nowithstanding all this, thou, whose love has no limit, did both seek
and sind, new inventions, for the drawing, and feeling within thy seife,
certain pains, which exceeded those nails, and scourges, and torments,
which exteriourly thou did endure; and which continued a longer time, and
which had sharper points, wherewith to hurt thee. Isay Psalm. 53.
says; Every one of us did loose himself, in his own way; and God, did lay
the sins of us all, upon the Messiah. And this sentence of the divine
justice, being so rigorous, thy love, O Lord, did find to be both just, and
good; and thou did take upon thine own shoulders, and did make a burden
for thy self, of all the sins (without the want of so much as one), which
all the men, in the whole world, either had committed, or then did commit, or
would commit, from the beginning thereof, until the end; That thou O Lord, and
our true loner, might pay for them all, with the sorrows of thy heart.

Who then shall be able to count the number of thy soars; since Consider and
know by this, what our Lord suffered for thee; or rather know, that thou can
never know so much of it, as is to be known.
there is no means to count the number of all our sins which caused them,
but only thou O Lord, who did endure them. Thou being made for us, the man of
sorrow, and who know indeed, what affliction is, by sad experience. One man
alone does say of himself Psalm. 3^.
, That he had more sins, then bayres upon his head; and besides that, he
desires God to forgive him those other sins, which he had committed, though
be knew them not. If then one man, which was David, had so many sins; who
shall be able to reckon up all the sins of all men, amongst whom there were
many, who committed both more, and more grievous sins, then David did.

Into what affliction did thou cast thy self, O thou lamb of God, to take
away the sins of the world; in whose person it was said, Psalm. 3^.
Many calves have come round about me; and the great bulls have circled me
about; they have opened their mouth against me, as a roaring lion, who is
feasting upon his prey. But although, into that garden of Gethsemani, there
went a full company of soldiers of the secular power, (besides them, who were
sent by the high Priests, and Pharisees, who with much cruelty came about to
take thee, and did take thee) yet he that should have beheld the multitude, and
grieuousnes of all the sins, of the world, which did hedge in that heart of
thine; will think, that the people who went that night to take thy person,
were very few in comparison of these others, who came to seize upon thy heart.
What This is that, which gave our Lord more torments, a million of times, then
the pains, which exteriourly he suffered.
horrible spectacle O Lord? What ugly representation and how painful would it
be for thee, to be compassed in, by our great sins, which are signified by
those Calves, and those others which are you more grievous, and which are
signified, by those Bulls? Who, O Lord, shall be able to recount, what ugly
sins have been committed in the world? Which being set before thy
unspeakable purity, and sanctity, would put thee upon astonishment; and like
Bulls, with open mouths, set upon thee; demanding at thy hands, O Lord, the
payment of that torment, which so great impiety had deserved. With how much
reason is it said afterward, That thou were spilt like water, by those
exterior torments, and, That thy heart, was melted a way like wax, by that
fire of inward anguish. Who O Lord will say, that the number of thy sorrows
may be told, since the number of our sins is past-telling.

CHAP. LXXX.
Wherein is prosecuted the tenderness of the love of Christ toward men; and of
that, which caused his interior grief; and gave him a Cross to carry, in his
heart, all the days of his life.
BY that which is said, thou will have seen, how many, and how grienous, the
sorrows of our Lord were; since our sins, by which they were caused, were so
many, and so grievous. But if we will dig into the most deep part of that heart
of our Lord, we shall find sorrow therein; not only for the sins, that men
committed; but sorrow also, for the sins which they committed not. For as the
pardon of the former, fell We owe all to the passion of our Lord; both the
pardon of all those sins, which we have committed, and the preuentio^ of all
them which we have not committed; and all the graces which we have received; and
all the good deeds that we have done.
upon thee, O Lord; so the preservation of men from the later, did cost thee
dolours, and death. Since thy grace, and those divine favors, which preserve
men from sin, are not given to any soul, for any reason, but only upon the
price of thy precious pain. So that all men lay heavy load on thee, O Lord;
both great, and small, and past, and present, and they that are to come; They
who have sinned; and they also who have not sinned; They who have sinned much;
and they who have sinned little. For they all, being considered in themselves,
were the children of wrath; without the grace of God, inclined to all manner of
sin, and exiled from heaven. And if they be to receive pardon; if they be to
receive grace; if to avoid sin; if to be the Sons of God; if to enjoy him in
heaven for all eternity, all this, O Lord is to be done at thy cost; by thy
enduring, bv thy paying, for our misery; and by thy purchasing of our felicity.
Yea, and all this is to be at that cost of thine, so far, as that thy sorrows,
are to be proportionable in number, and greatness, to that which these other
things are worth. And yet further, is thy price to exceed the thing which thou
do buy, that so thou may show us thy love, and that our redemption, and
consolation may be more firm.

How Infinite is the glory of our Lord, but it cost him dear
extremely dear, O Lord, does that name cost thee, which Isay Isa. 9.
put upon thee, of being, The Father of that age, which was then to come; since
as there is no man, according to the generation of flesh, which is called, the
first age, who comes not from Adam; so neither is there any of the second
generation, which is of grace, who comes not from thee. But Adam was an ill
Father; who, by wicked pleasure, did murder both himself, and his sons;
whereas thou, O Lord, did purchase the name of Father, at the price of those
dolorous lamentations, whereby (as a Lioness that were roaring whilst she
brings forth her young ones) thou give life to them, whom the first Father
killed. He drunk that poison, which the serpent gave, and so was made a Father
of serpents; for by his engendring them, they became sinners. But yet all his
sons (which being considered in themselves are venomous serpents) did lay
hold O Lord upon thy heart; and gave thee such pinches of pain, as were never
felt before, nor since, and that, not only during the space of eightteen hours
(which passed in the time of thy sacred Passion) but for the whole course of
three and thirty years, from one five and twentieth of March, when thou did
become incarnate, till another five and twentieth of March, and eight days
after, when thy life did leave thee, upon the Cross.

Thy The great love of God to us, is exempli^ied by diverse comparisons, and
proofs of holy Scripture.
self, did call thy self a Mother, when speaking to Jerusalem thou did
say; How often Watt: 23.
would I have gathered thy children, under my wings, as the Hen does her
chickens, but thon would not? And to give us to understand, that thy heart,
does carry a particular love, and tenderness toward us; thou did compare thy
self to a Hen, which is the creature, that is content, in extraordinary
manner, to cast away her comfort, and to afflict her self for that which
concerns her little ones. Nor only art thou like the Hen in this; but thou
exceedest both that, and all other mothers in the world, as by Isa. 49.
Isay, thy self did say, A mother perhaps may forget the son of her womb;
well yet, though she forget him, I will not forget thee; for I have written
thee in my hands; and thy walls, do ever stand before me. Who, O Lord, shall
be able, though he dig never so deep, to discover those unspeakable secrets, of
love and sorrow, which are in thy heart. Thou do not content thy self, O
Lord, with carrying the lone of a Father toward us, which might only be
strong, and patient, in suffering the afflictions and troubles of a Father; but
to the end that no delightful comfort might be wanting to us, not no vexation
to thy self, thou would needs, be also a Mother to us, in the tenderness of
thy affection, which causes an unspeakable kind of love toward her children.
Yea, and more art thou to us, then a Mother; for, of no Mother have we read,
that (to the end she might still remember her son) she has written a book,
whereof hard nails of iron were the pen; and her own hands the paper; and
that by pressing those hands, and passing them through, with the nails, blood
may issue out, instead of ink; which with grievous pain, may give testimony,
of the great internal love, not suffering that to be forgotten, which still
she carries in her hands.

And if this, which thou did endure upon the Cross by having hands and feet
so nailed to it, be a thing which exceeds all love of Mothers; who Christ
lesus our Lord, became upon the Cross, as it were a woman in travail.
shall recount that great love, and great grief, wherewith thou drewest all
men into the womb of thy heart, groaning deeply for their sins, with the
groans of labor, like them of childbirth. And that, not for an hour, nor for
a day alone, but for the whole time of thy life, which lasted three and thirty
years; till, at length, like another Rachel, thou diedst of travel, upon the
Cross, to the end that Genes. 35.
Benjamin, might be borne alive. The serpents which thou carriedst within thy
self, did give thee, O Lord, such gripes, that they made thee burst upon the
Cross, to the end, that, at the price of thy pains, those serpents might be
converted, into the simplicity, and mildness, of lambs; and that, in exchange
of thy death, they might obtain a life of grace. How justly O Lord, may thou
call men (if thou considerest, what thou have suffered for them) the Sonns of
thy grief, as Rachel called her son; since the grief which their sins
gave thee, was greater, then the pleasure which they took by committing them.
And greater was thy humility, and that breach of thy heart; then the
irreuerence, and pride was, which they expressed against the most high God,
when they offended him, by breaking his law; that so, thy pains might overcome
our sins, as the greater do the less.

More, The incomparable grief of Christ our Lord, for sin is excellently
desa^ibed.
O Lord, did the sins of others grieve thee, then any man has bin ever
grieved, for his own. And if we read of some, who had so great repentance for
their sins; as that (their heart not being able to conteyne such grief) it
did cost them their lives; what sorrow was provoked in thee, by that
unmeasurable love, which thou did carry both to God and man; since one spark
of the same lone, being cast into the hearts of those others, did oppress them
in such sort, that it made them break, as if they had bin blown up with
powder. Of many we read, and we know; that, by having heard a news, which was
very painful to them, did loose their lives. And tell us now O Lord, for thy
mercy, how thou had force to out-liue such a bitter news; when, all the
sins of all mankind were first presented to thee; thou loving men, much more,
then any man, ever loved another, yea or even himself. Especially, when thou
did consider, and know, that the misery which was hanging over the^ for the
same, was greater then any other that could happen. And where O Lord did thou
get strength, to endure, to see thy divinity oftended; and yet to live; since
the love which thou bear both to it and men, did exceed all measure. Yet
did thou live, O Lord, when thou heardst this news; yea and thou did live
with the grief thereof, all the days of the life. But unless particular force,
had bin given thee for the enduring of such sorrow, it would not have failed,
to have brought death upon thee, as less sorrow, has brought it upon others.
So that, O Lord, they are many, and not one only debt, which I owe thee. And
although, (in regard of these sorrows, which, as a mother, thou did endure
for men) with much reason, thou may term them, the sons of thy grief, as
has bin said; yet as thou also art their Father, thou may call them also,
the sons of thy right hand, as Genesis 35.
Jacob did. Because The reformation of men, does manifest the power of the
Cross of Christ our Lord.
in them, is expressed, and declared the greatness of thy hand, which is thy
power; since thou drawest them out of sin, and do place them in the state
of grace, even in this life; and at the later day shall rank them, upon thy
right hand, that so they may accompany thee in glory. Being seated there, in
great security of repose, as thou art, O Lord, at the right hand of thy Father;
where thou will esteem all that which thou have labored, and suffered for
them, to be well employed.

CHAP. LXXXI.
Of other profitable Considerations which may be drawn out of the Passion of
our Lord; and of other meditations which may be made upon other points; and of
some directions, for such, as cannot easily put that, which has bin said, in
practice.
IF thou have well considered, that which has bin said to thee, of the mystery
of the Passion of Jesus Christ our Lord, thou will have seen, how thou art to
observe, both his sufferance in the exterior of his body; and the patience,
and humility, and those other virtues, which were in his soul; and, above all,
his amorous, and compassiue heart; from which all the rest did proceed; and it
will animate thee both to follow him in sufferance, and to imitate him also in
other things. But thou art moreover to understand, that thou may intertayne
many other profitable considerations, concerning the passion of our Lord. For
thereby thou may know (as we are permitted We see not eleerly, but as in a
cloud.
to know it in this place of banishment) how glorious a thing, the joy of
heaven is; and how grievous those infernal torments are; how precious is
grace; how hurtful, and detestable is sin; since, for the purchasing of
those blessings for us; and the remoouing of these mischiefs from us; Christ
himself, (being what he is) was yet feign, to suffer so great miseries.

A book The Passion of our Lord Jesus, is a book, wherein we may read and
learn all saving knowledge.
this is, wherein thou may read the immense goodness of God, and the dear
sweetness of his love; and so also, the wonderful rigor of the divine Justice,
which did so punish the sin of others, upon the Judge himself, being made man.
And because I had, both a desire, and a purpose, to prosecute this matter more
at large; and to pass on, to the consideration of the divinity, by this step
of the most holy soul, of Jesus Christ our Lord; and that my little health
does keep me from all means to do it; I now say no more, and that which here
I write, is the last of this Of the Passion.
discourse; saving that I recommended to thee all perseverance, in the
Meditation of this sacred Passion. For Why we are to persevere in the
meditation of the passion of our Lord Jesus.
although I have seen some persons, exercise themselves therein, for a year,
and for more years then one, without gusting it much; yet by their
continuance, our Lord was brought to pay them at last, whatsoever he had
formerly deferred; in such sort, as that, when they considered the reward, they
thought their labor well employed.

I Many other courses of devotion, whereby a man may also profit in spirit.
do also advertise thee, that there are other exercises of Meditation, whereby
we may walk on, toward our Lord; as well by the consideration of the
creatures; and of the benefits of God; and by way of recollecting the heart,
that it may employ it self upon loving, which is the end of all thinking, and
indeed of the whole Law. And as there are diverse ways of exercises, so are
there several inclinations in men; and it is a very great blessing of our
Lord, when he applies a man to that; which is to be of most profit to him.
Which Light is to be asked of our Lord in the address: of our devotions.
every one ought to beg of him, with great instance; and to procure (for as
much as he sindeth in himself (when first, he shall have given relation
thereof, to such as know more then he) to judge what exercise of prayer is
fittest for him; for this is that, which he is to follow.

It is A gooddirection for such, as can not greatly frame to the recollecting
of themselves
also fit for me to let thee know, that there are some, so employed upon
exterior things, that they cannot give themselves (at least for any good space
of time) to these interior excrcises; at which they take discomfort and
disgust. But now, if lawfully they cannot forsake those employments, they must
content themselves with that state, which our Lord has given them; and with
diligence, and alacrity, they are to comply with their obligation; and to
endeavor (as much as they can) to have our Lord A blessed thing, to have, and
keep the presence of God.
ever present with them, for love of whom they must perform their works. And
because there are some, who have a kind of natural inquietude in their soul;
and who are wholly so undevout and dry, that although they employ both much
time, and care, upon these inward exercises, yet they profit nothing; it is
necessary to let them know, that since our Lord does not give them the spirit
of large, and inward prayer, they must content themselves with praying vocally,
upon the parts of the passion; and so praying, let them think (although it be
but brei fely) of that particular mystery. And let them have some devout
picture to behold; and let them read some devout books of the passion, for it
happens many times, that by these steps a man does rise, to the exercise of
inward thinking: and if our Lord be pleased, that yet they shall not rise; let
them give him thanks, for conducting them by that other way.

Let Concerning such as are scrupulous, and pusillanimous.
such also, as are scrupulous, and dejected, understand; That our Lord is not
pleased, that they should ever be thinking of the sins, which they have
committed; and so to be buried in discomfort, and grief, like a Lazarus in his
grave. But it is his will, that after mortification be used, and penance done
(wherein they imitate his passion) they may also receive comfort, by the hope of
pardon, whereby they may resemble his Resurrection. And when they shall have
kissed his most sacred feet (by lamenting their sins) they may raise
themselves up, to kiss his hands, for the benefits which they have receaned;
and let them walk on, between hope, and fear, which is the safest way of all
others. And I conclude, with telling thee, that although there be some, who
through ignorance, or pride, have committed errors; in the way of prayer, yet
We must not give over good things, by the ill use that is made thereof by some.
thou art not to take occasion thereby, to leave it; since the fault of others
must not make us give over, that which is good; but only we must attend to our
business, with greater caution. And it ought more to encourage us, toward the
following of it, to know that Jesus Christ our Lord, and his Saints, have
walked therein, for our example; then the few, who have erred, must discourage
us. For hardly will there be found that thing, whereof ill use, has not been
made, by some.

CHAP. LXXXII.
How attentively our Lord does hear us; and how piteously he does behold us;
if we manifest our infirmityes to him, with that grief which is fit; and how
ready he is to cure us, and to do us many other favors.
THE great goodness of our Lord has this; That to the end his Commandementes
and Laws, may be kept by us, he makes them easy in themselves, and more easy
by his having been pleased to perform them first. He has commanded us (as
has been said) that we should hear him, and behold him, and incline our
ear unto him, which is all most reasonable, and easy. For, such a master, who
will not hear? Who will not be delighted, in beholding such a delightful
light? Who will not incline his ear, to that infinite wisdom? But The example
of the holy life of our Lord Jesus.
to the end, that the thing which is light, might be yet more light, he was
pleased to pass by the same law, which he has imposed upon us; and he
performed it with great diligence. He hears us, he sees us, he enclineth his
ear to us; to the end that we may no longer say, there is none, who looks
toward me; none who hearkneth to my complaints. A Look attentively to this
consideraon.
great comfort it is, for one that is in distress to have some body, who at
all times of both day, and night, will be at good leisure, and in good humor,
to hear his difficultyes related; and if (without the failing of any moment)
he stand looking upon his miseryes, and infirmityes, and if he do not so much
as say, I am weary of seeing those afflictions; and thy wounds, and soars do
turn my stomach. And although such a person, were hard of heart, we would yet
be glad, that he should ever hear, and see us. For we would hope, that the
gutter of our sorrows (which would fall upon his heart, by the conduit of his
ears and eyes) would one day eat into him, and breed compassion; since how
hard soever, he were, he would not be more hard then stone; which yet is
wrought upon, by the fall of water, although sometimes that water cease to
fall. And although we knew, that he were not able to relieve our miseries, yet
should we comfort our selves much, by the only compassion which he might have
of our case.

Now The case, applied.
if we should owe much gratitude to such a person; how great must that be,
which we owe to our Lord? And how joyful ought we to be, in that his eyes, and
ears, are bent upon the sight of our afflictions; and that he does not at any
time retire them from us. And this is done by him, not with any hardenesse of
heart; but with internal, and profound mercy; and not with mercy of the heart
alone; but with entire power to relieve our necessities. Be God does ever hear
our complaints; he is inclined to pity our ease, and he is highly able to help
us.
thou O Lord eternally blessed, who art neither deaf, nor blind to our
afflictions; since thou do ever hear, and see them. Nor art thou cruel,
since of thee it is said Our Lord is, a worker Psalm. 10^.
of mercies, and he is of a merciful heart, he expects us, and he is very
merciful. Nor is he weak withal; since all the miseries, and sins of the
world, are both weak, and few, if they be compared to his infinite power,
which has no end, nor measure. We read, that in times; past, God gave a
marvelous victory to King 4. Reg. 10.
Fzechias, over his enemies; who as some relate, did not yield those thanks,
and sing those praises to our Lord; which were both due, and accustomed; to be
presented, in such cases. For which offense; God A great example of ^ods mercy,
and man's misery.
did cast him into a sickness, and that so dangerous, that (humanely
speaking), it could expect no cure. And least, (through a vain hope of life)
he might forget to set his soul in order, the Prophet Isay was sent to him;
and he said, by the commaundment of God, This says our Lord; Dispose of the
affairs of thy house; for know that thou shall dye, and not line. The King,
being frighted, by these words, turned his face toward the wall; and wept
with great lamentation, imploring the mercy of our Lord. He considered, how
justly he had deserved death; since he had not bin grateful to him, who had
given him his life; and he reflected upon the sentence, which had already
passed on him, which said, Thou shall not line.

Ho found not, that there was any thing superior, to him who had passed that
sentence* that so, he might procure to have it reuersed. And although there had
bin any such, yet would not his title have bin good; For, from the man who is
ungrateful, that is justly taken away, which was mercifully afforded to him.
He saw, that he was but a man of middle age; and that the line of David was to
fail in his person; for then he was to have dyed, without children. And
besides all this, he was assalted, by all the sins of his life past; the
fear whereof, is wont to press men most, in that last hour. And by these
things, his heart was even broken with grief, and troubled, like a tempestuous
sea; and which way soever he looked, he found reasons of sorrow and fear.

But They are sure of remedy, who have recourse to prayer, especially if they
resort to it, immediately after the occasion is ministered.
yet in the midst of so many miseries, the good King met with a remedy; and
it was, to ask physic at his hands, who had made him sick; and security of
him, by whom he had bin frighted; and to convert himself to him by hope, and
penance, from whom he had fled before, through pride. Yea, and of the judge
himself, he desires, that he will become his advocate; and he falls upon an
invention, how to appeal from God, (not as to any other, more high then he)
but from himself being just, to himself being merciful. And the reasons of
his defense, are no other, then the accusations of himself* and the Rhetorike
that he uses, are but sighs, and tears. And by these means, he is able to
prevail so far, in that court of Chancery of the divine mercy; that before
the prophet Isay (who was the proclaymer of the sentence, of his death) could
go but ha^fe way over the Kings chamber, our Lord said to him, Return, and say
thus to King Ezechias, that Captain of my people; I have heard thy prayer; and
I have seen thy tears; and I grant thee health; and I give thee moreover,
fifteen years of life; and I will deliver this City, out of the hands of
thine enemies.

What is this (O Lord)? So soon do thou sheath thy sword again; so soon
do thou turn thy anger into mercy? Can a few tears, which are shed, not in
the Temple, but in the corner of a bed; whilst the eyes, look not up to
heaven, but upon a wall, make thee so soon revoke that sentence, which thy
majesty had given, and commanded to be notifyed, to that guilty person? What
The pardon of God to man, is instant, and amorous without vpbrayding.
is then becom^, of coppying out the whole process; what of the costs of the
suite; what of the terms that have bin given; what of the producing of the
testimonies, both of the plaintiff and defendant? and what can be said to
this, That the judge ought to esteem himself to have received an affront, if
his sentence be revoked? Thou do pass over it all, by the love, which thou
bear; and by the desire which thou have, to power blessings down upon us.
And thou said, I have heard thy prayer, and I have seen thy tears. All
terms seem long, till thou may free him that is faulty; for never did any
man so desire to receive pardon, as thou do to give it; and more do thou
joy to pardon them, to whom thou desire to give life; then the sinner does
himself, for having escaped from death. Thou obseruedst no ordinary delays,
or laws; but the law shallbe, That he who has broken thy laws, shall afflict
his heart with grief, for what is past; and shall purpose an amendment of life,
for that which is to come; and shall apply the wholesome receites, of thy
Sacraments, which thou did leave in thy Church; or at least shall have
intention to take them.

And the delays shallbe these; That Ezech. 33.
whenever a sinner, shallbe deeply sorry for his sins, thou will remember
them no longer. And to the end that sinners, may take heart in craving thy
pardon, for their offenses; thou were pleased to grant this man more favor
then he asked of thee, by fifteen years of life; and the delivery of his
City, and the retraite of the Sun, as far as it is wont to walk in ten
hours; in token that upon the third day after that, the King should go up into
the Temple safe and sound. And thou were merciful, by vouchsafing him other
secret favors; who neither yet would suffer sin to approach to us; but
only for the bringing of greater good from thence; letting us see thy mercy, by
our misery; and thy pardon, and goodness, by our wickedness; and thy power, by
our weakness.

Therefore A conclusionful full of comfort.
thou, O sinner, whosoever thou be, who art threatened by that sentence of God,
which Ezech. 18.
says, The soul that sins, the same shall dye; be not yet all dismayed,
under the burden of thy great sins; and that insuportable weight, of the
wrath of God. But taking courage, in the consideration of the mercyes, of him,
who Ezech. 33.
desires not the death of a sinner, but that he may be converted, and live, do
thou humble thy self, by weeping in his sight, whom thou have despised by
committing sin. And then receive thy pardon, from the hand of that piteous
Father; who Infinite goodness of God.
has so very great desire to give it, yea and to impart greater blessings to
thee, then thou had before. As he did to this King, who rose up sound in
body, and sound ^n soul, as appeared by the thanks he gave in these words;
Thou Isa. 38.
O Lord, have delivered my soul, that it might not perish; and thou have cast
away my sins behind thy back.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
Of two threats, which God uses to express; One absolute, and the other
conditional; and of two kinds of promises, like those threats; and how we are
to carry our selves when they arrive.
Thou art not to be scandalized, in that the word, which was spoken to this
King, (Thou shall dye, and thou shall not live) was not accomplished. But thou
art to know; That sometimes our Lord commands that to be declared, which he
has determined to be effected, in his high counsel, and eternal will; and
that vvillbe sure, without all fail, to arrive. In this sort he commanded,
that it should be told King Saul, That he would cast him off, and choose a
better in his place. And so also, did he threaten Hely the Priest; and
accordingly, it was fullfilled. And in the same manner, he also menaced King
David, That he would kill that son of his, whom in adultery he had begotten
of Bersabee. And notwithstanding the earnest suit, which the King made for the
life of the child; by prayers, by hairecloth, and by fastes; it was not
granted; for God had resolved that the child should dye.

But That which sometime may seem to be denounced by God as absolute, is but
meant to be conditional.
at other times, he commands that to be published, upon which he has not
absolutely resolved; but only upon condition, of the mending, or not mending
such a fault. And in this sort, he sent word to the City of Niniue, That,
within forty days, it should be destroyed. But afterward by their penance,
he did revoke that sentence; for he had not determined to destroy them, because
he did it not. But he declared what their sins deserved, and what also would
have happened, if their lives had not been reformed. And although, considering
things after an exterior manner, it seemed to favor of inconstancy, to say
that it shall be destroyed, and not to destroy it; yet is it not so, in that high
will of God; because he did not absolutely mean to do it. For (as S. Augustine
says) God varieth his sentence; but he changes not his counsel. Which, in
this case, was not, to destroy it; but not to destroy it, by means of their
penance; which he resolved to incite them to, by that menace. And this is
that, which our Lord says by Hier. 18.
Heremy, Suddenly will I say to Nations and Kingdoms, That I will destroy
them, and root them out; but if that people do penance for their sins, I
will also repent my self, of the evil, which I meant to bring upon them; and
I will instantly say of Nations, and Kingdoms, That I will plant them, and
build them up But if they work wickedness in my sight, and do not hearken to my
voice; I also will repent my self, of the good which I said, that I meant to
do them.

The What use we are to make of not knowing, whether any thing which God
denounces be an absolute sentence, or a co^ditionall threat.
use which we are to make heerof, is this; That because we know not, when that,
wherewith God does threaten us, is but only a threat, or whether it be a
final determination; we must not cast our selves upon despair; nor forbear
to implore his mercy, that so he may be pleased to revoke the sentence, which
he gave against us; as he did to this King, and to the city of Niniue; who
did, both of them get their suits. And though David did not obtain his; yet
did he not sin, in beseeching our Lord to revoke the sentence, concerning
him; because it appeared not to him, whether it were a decree or a threat. And
in the same manner; if God make a promise to affoard us any blessing, we must
not use neglect in serving him, by saying, I have a byll, that is written by
the hand of God, which can deceive no body. For the same Lord Hier. 18.
says, That if we depart from doing his will, he will also repent himself of
the good he promised. Not that God can repent; since he is not capable of any
change; but his meaning is, That as one who repents himself; does undo the
thing which he had done, so will he discharge the sentence of punishment, which
he had given against a man if he do penance; and he will retract that promise
which he made of doing him good, if that man depart from him.

CHAP. LXXXIIII.
What a man is, of his own stock; and of the great benefits that we enjoy by
Jesus Christ our Lord.
RETVRNING then to our purpose, it is plain; how well this law and practice,
is fulfilled by Almighty God. He hears and he sees; since he did so soon
hear the prayer, and see the tears of this Ezechias.
King. And did comfort him, and not only him, but the same he does to others,
as David Psalm. 33.
says. The eyes of our Lord, are upon just persons, and his ears are bent
toward their prayers; to deliver their souls from death, and to sustain them
in time of hunger. I well believe that thou likest well this word; and yet I
believe also, that the condition under which it is said, does put thee into
some fear. A blessed thing it is, that the eyes, and ears of God, are present
to us. But yet thou will say, In what case am I, for he speaks that, of such
as are just; and for my part, I am full of sin. Thou say true; and see
that thou do truly believe it. For if there were any men, who had no sins;
who should they, in all reason, be, rather then the holy Apostles, of Jesus
Christ our Lord; who as they were nearer to him in conversation of body, so
were they also in sanctity of mind; and so, as that none do equal them,
excepting only the blessed Mother of God, who equalleth, and exceeds both
them, and the Angels.

And although S. Paul Romans 8.
do say both in his own person, and in that of the Apostles also, That they
received the first fruits of the spirit; which signifies greater grace, and
gifts, then were imparted to other men; yet nevertheless, our Lord commanded
them, to say that prayer of the Pater Noster, whereof this is a part, Forgive
us our debtes, or sins. And since this prayer, is for every day; it is
plain, that we are told thereby, that Be not rash in mistaking, but read on,
and thou will see, that this is meant of venial sins as distraction in prayer,
idle words or thoughts, and the like, and not of such others, as deprive the
soul of grace.
we have faults, and that every day we commit one, or other. And therefore 1.
Joan. 1.
S. John said, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
truth is not in us. Now if all men have sin, excepting him alone, who is God,
as well as man; and her, who is his true Mother, for whom were those words
spoken, That the eyes of our Lord, are upon just persons, and his ears are
inclined to their prayers.

I answer, that God is not humorous; nor yet does he pay men with words
alone; sines we see, that, as he said, so he performed with King Ezechias, and
in numerable others also, whom he heard, and saw. But See here the verity, and
purity of Catholic doctrine concerning grace and sin and works.
do thou know, that he is a just person, who is not in mortal sin, since
such an one is in grace; and is the friend of God; and of this sort there are
many, although they have venial sins. But now when there is speech of these
last, there is none, who can truly lay that he is wholly free. And to the end
that thou may be thankful for this grace and justice; to that Lord, through
whose merits they are given, to such as are well disposed; thou art to
understand, that just persons have in them, two kinds of good; some of nature,
and others of grace, though Pelagius be in a chafe at this last; who said, That
a man is just through the good works, which he does by the strength of his
own nature, without needing that grace, and strength, which is infused by God.
This error is condemned by the Catholic Church; which commands us to
believe, That of our nature, we are sinners; first, by original sin, and
them by others also, which with our will we commit afterward; and that in those
other works, (which yet are, after their manner) good, but yet still, within
the only latitude of morality (and these are the best, that we can work by
force of nature) true justice does no way consist.

For this it is, that S. Paul Romans 3.
says, That no man is just; that is to say, of himself; for we are all
sinners of our selves. The being just, is given to us; it grows not out of
our soil, or stock; for to have it Christ our Lord is only just originally
and of himself; al other creatures (yea even the pure mother of God her self)
were to be justified by his redemption. She was secured from falling into the
least sin either original or actual, because his passion wrought, in her
holy soul by way of Preservative; we are freed after falling, because it
works in us, by way of remedy.
so, is the privilege of Christ our Lord alone; who not by means of any
other, but of his only self, is the true just person; and in whose works, and
death, is true justice. For if in the works which we can do by our nature did
consist true Justice; or that by them, we could deserve it, Christ Jesus The
protestants will here find that they have no reason to slander us in this
point, according to their custom.
had died in vain, as S. Paul says, since we might have obtained that,
without his death, which he purchased, for us thereby. The same Apostle Galat. 3.
says, That Christ is made justice to us; and he says it, because the merit
of our justice, does consist in his works, and death, which Suspe^d your rash
judgment a while, if you be a Protestant, and read the 88. chapter, which will
deliver you from error in this point.
merit he communicates to us, by Faith, and by love, which is the life
thereon; and by the Sacraments of the Church, as we declared before. And thus
are we incorporated in Christ Jesus; and the grace of the holy Ghost, is given
us; by the infusion whereof, into our souls, we are made the adopted Sons of
God, and pleasing to him; and so we also receive virtues, and gifts, to the
end that we may work agreeably, to the high state of the grace, which was
given to us. By all which, we are made, truly just, in the sight of God, by a
justice which is ours, and which dwells in us; and Note this.
which is a distinct thing, from that, whereby Christ is just. And from hence it
comes, that although the works which we did before, were mean, and of a^^
imperfect kind of goodness; and which had no^ in them any true justice, (nor
could deserve (...) have it, as being of our own stock, and store) yet those
things, which now we do, being o^^^ in the state of grace, are of so high
value; and are works so truly just, as that they deserve an increase of
justice, according to that of Apoc^ 22.
S. John, He that is just, let him be yet more just; and they are worthy to
obtain the kingdom of God; as it was said by 2. Tim. 4.
S. Paul, That the Crown of justice, was kept for him.

This unspeakable benefit, do we owe to Jesus Christ; but See here how
honorable to Christ our Lord, the doctrine of the holy Catholic Church, is in
the point of works.
this is not all. For as it is the ordinance of God, that no man shall obtain
grace, and justice, but by the merits of this Lord; so is it also, that none of
them that have it, is able to increase or even to conserve it, but by their
being vpheld by this Lord; as a living member is, by his head; and as the
fruitful branch is, by his vine; and as the building is, by his foundation.
For, although by gayning grace, and justice for them, he gave them (as has
been said) a good Because God through Christ our Lord would have it so.
title, by the way of merit, to the kingdom of heaven; as also that they
should obtain, by prayer, that which they would ask, as they ought; yet if
they had a mind to enjoy the same, and to use it rightly; they must not do it,
like people which would disband from their captain; or divide themselves from
their head, or as if they could go upon their own feet alone, without the help
of any other.

No; a soul must rely upon, and be united to this Christ Jesus our Lord.
blessed head; to the end, that See the excellent and immaculate doctrine of
the holy Catholic Church.
Grace may be conserved to it; and that from thence, a certain spiritual
strength, may come; which may proceed, and accompany, and follow the good
works, that it shall do; and without which those good works cannot be
meritorious, as is declared by the Council of Trent. And by this means, the
prayers which that just person shall make, will be worthy of the ears of God;
and to obtain that which the man desires. Solomon 2. Para. 6.
did beg of God, That he who should pray in the Temple which he had made on
earth, might be heard by God from heaven, granting that, which should be
desired. And the true, and most excellent Temple of God, is Jesus Christ our
Lord, in respect that he is man; in whom (as S. Paul says) The accomplishment
of divinity, does corporally remain, That is, it remains in him, not only by
way of grace, as it does in the Angels, and in holy men; but in another
fashion of more weight, and value, by the way of the personal union, whereby
that sacred humanity, is raised up to have the dignity of being personated, in
the word of God, which is one of the three persons of the Blessed Trinity. This
is that Temple, whereof David said, God heard my voice, from his holy Temple.
And he, that in this Temple, shall utter the speech of prayer, which is
inspired by his spirit; and resting upon him, as a living member, which
demands succor by the merits of his head, which is Jesus Christ; this man, I
say, shall be heard by God, in the title of justice; as David was, and all just
men were, who were ever heard.

But, the prayer which is made without this Temple That is, we must be members
of Christ our head, by being in the state of grace; which requires, that we
resort to the sacrament of penance, with hearty sorrow for that sin which is
past, and a firm purpose to commit no more; for otherwise instead of receiving
a Sacrament, we should commit a sacriledg.
(by whomesoeuer it be made) is a oarse and profane prayer; and unworthy of
the ares of God. And not being inspired by Jesus Christ, it carries not that
broad seal, whereby (...) should be warranted, and held for just, in the
^btaining of what it asks. And to the end that Christ, in the quality of our
advocate, may give ^ispatch to our petitions; it is necessary that on ^arth, we
be his living members, and inspired to ^ray by him. For although his mercy is
so great, that many times he makes the petitions of his ^ead members to be
heard (which are they, that ^old the faith of his Church, but are not in state
^f grace) yet here we speak only of those which being made in Christ) have the
dignity, and the ^erit, of obtaining what they ask. And the ho^y Church, our
Mother, well knowing the necessity that we have of Christ, in our prayers, is
wont ^o say to the Eternal Father, at the end of hers, Grant us this, or
that, O God, through Jesus Christ ^ur Lord. This did she learn of her spouse,
and master, when he Joan. 16.
said, Whatsoever thing you ask the Father in my name, he will give it you.

Let thanks, O Lord, be given to thy name; ^ince through thee, we are heard.
For thou do not content thy self only with being our Mediator, to merit
that grace for us, which we receive by thee; nor with being our head, which
instructs, and moves us to pray by thy spirit, as we ought; but thou also
wilt be our He obtayneth that we may be heard by our selves when we ask in his
Name.
Bishop, in heaven; that so, representing to thy Father that sacred humanity
which thou have, and the passion which thou did receive, thou might obtain
the effect of that, which we desire on earth, by our invocation of thy Name. So
that as the holy G^ospel said, When Matt. 3. Marc. 1. Luc. 3.
our Lord was baptized, the heavens did open themselves to him; and although
many have followed in thither after him, yet they are opened to none, but by
his means; so may we also say, that the bowels of his eternal Father which
open themselves for the granting our petitions, are opened to Christ. And he
is the person heard by his Father; since the favor, and grace, where with we
are heard, we have by him. For if it were not for this; as no man would be just
in himself, so no man could be heard for himself. And, as through the great
love which our Lord did bear us, he took our miseryes upon himself as his
own; and he paid for them by his life, and death; so with the same love
which he carries toward us (although now he be in heaven) if any little one
of his, be either naked, or clad, or hungry, or well fed, he says, it is Matt.
25.
himself that is so. So that, As soon as we were, he was in us, as S.
Augustine says; and when we are heard by God, he says, that he is heard;
through the The unspeakable vn^o^ of Christ Jesus our Lord with his seruant^;
and his infinite love to them.
unspeakable union which is between him, and his; which is signified, by the
name of the Spouse, and the fellow spouse; and of the head in respect of the
body, which he loved so much; that howsoever in ordinary course, we see that a
man exposes his arm to receive the blow for the saving of the head, yet this
blessed Lord, being the head, would needs meet that blow, which was given by
the hand of the justice of God; and so dyed upon the Cross, to give life to
his body, which is our selves.

And after that he has quickened us, by the means of penance, and of the
Sacraments; he does regale us, and defend us, and maintain us, as a thing so
much his own; that he is Note.
not content, with calling us his servants, and friends, and brothers, and
sons; but to teach us yet better, how much he loves us, and that so, he may
raise us up, to greater honor, he endueth us with his An unspeakable honor it
is, if we had the grace to weigh it well, to be called Christians: yea and, as
it were, one Christ
own name. For by this unspeakable union of Christ the head, with the body,
which is the Church, he, and we, are called, one 1. Cor. 12.
Christ. And this most sweet mystery, full of all consolation, does S. Paul
give us to understand, in those words, when he said, That Ephesians. 2.
the heavenly Father did make us acceptable in his beloned Son; and that we
were created in good works, in Jesus Christ. And to the Corinthians he said,
You are, in Jesus Christ. Which manner of speech, by the word In, does point us
out to this union, of Christ, and his Church. So also our Lord says, by Ioin.
11.
S. John, He that is in me, and I in him, bears much fruit, for without me,
you are able to do nothing. Thanks A holy conclusion of this chapter.
be given, O Lord, to thy love, and goodness; who by thy death did give us
life. And thanks be given to thee also, because by thy life, thou consernest
ours; and thou do embrace us, so close to thy self, in this exile of ours;
that if we will persevere in thy service, thou will carry us to geather with
thy self; and wilt keep us for ever in heaven where thou art, as thy self
has said, Where I am my self, there shall my servant also be.

CHAP. LXXXV.
How loud Christ cried out; and does ever cry out for us, before the Eternal
Father: and with how great speed, his Majesty does hear the prayers of men;
and bestows benefitts upon them, by means of this outcry of his son.
Thou may already see by what is said, how great necessity all men have of
the favor of Christ Jesus, to the end that their prayers may be heard, as
acceptable in the presence of God. But it is not so with Christ himself; for
he has no need that any other should speak for him. He it is, and he alone,
whose voice is heard, in respect of it self. For, as S. Paul Hebr. 8.
says, he is able to go to his Father himself, to pray for us; he also says,
That Christ in the days of his mortal life, offering prayers to his Father
with a loud cry, and with tears, was heard for his reverence. Christ desired
his Father, that he would deliver him from death; not suffering him to remain
therein, by raising him up, to a life immortal. And as he desired, so was it
granted to him. He also offered up tears, and prayers, to his Father many
times; which proceeding from a heart which was full of love, are said to have
bin made, with a loud cry. And although that love which made him cry, was ever
all alike in him, (for as much as every tear he shed, and every What infinite
love therefore was that, and what love ought ours to be in answer of it.
pace that he made, was performed with as much love, as when he laid himself
down upon the Cross) yet considering the exterior, and the nature of the
work it self, which was wrought; so much difference there was, between the
offering of his most holy body upon the Cross, and the offering up prayers for
us; as there is, between suffering, yea and suffering death, on the one side,
and praying, or speaking on the other.

Remember that which God Genesis 4.
said to Cain; The voice of the blood of thy Brother Abel, does cry out to me,
from the earth. And of that also, which S. Paul Hebr. 12.
said, to us, Christians; You are come to a^hed^ing of blood, which cries out
better, then that of Abel. For The difference between the blood of Christ our
Lord, and the blood of Abel.
that of Abel, cried out to the divine justice, demanding vengeance, against
Cain who spilt it; but the blood of Christ, which was shed upon the earth,
cried out to the divine mercy demanding pardon. The former calls for anger;
the later for pity; the former for indignation; the later for reconciliation;
that of Abel asks vengeance against Cain alone; this other, asks pardon,
for all the wicked men, that ever were, or will ever be; (so far forth as
they shall be ready to receive it, with Penance,
such a disposition as is fit) yea it asks pardon, even for them which shed
it. The blood of Abel, was able to profit no man, because it had no such power,
as to pay for the sins of others; but the blood of Christ, did cleanse both
the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, as the Church does sing; and drew out
such as were detayned in the very pittes of Limbus, as the Prophet Zachary
affirms.

Without fail, the cry of the blood of Christ, desiring mercy, is a great cry;
since it hindered the hearing of that other cry, which was made by the sins of
the world, and which demanded vengeance, against the committers thereof.
Consider thou, O Virgin, if And thou also who art no virgin, consider of it;
for it speaks to all the world.
that one only sin of Cain, made such a noise, by asking vengeance; what noise,
what cries, what shouting out, do all the sins of all men make, demanding
the same, and greater vengeance, in the ears of the justice of God. But yet
nevertheless; how loud so ever they cry; incomparably more loud, cries the
blood of Christ, in the ears of the divine mercy, demanding pardon. And it
makes, that those others are not heard; and that the noise of our sins may be
so little, and so low, as that God may be to them, as if he were deaf. For
incomparably more acceptable to God, was the voice of Christ; and of his
Passion, and death, which demanded pardon; then all the sins of the whole
world, are offensive, demanding vengeance. What do thou think, that The
profound silence of Christ our Lord in his sacred passion.
the silence of Christ did procure; and that he made him self as deaf who did
not hear, and as a dumb man, who did not open his mouth, when he was accused?
Without doubt, since the sins of them, who by their mouth, accused Christ,
did make a noise which was full of lies, against him who was not guilty, and
when he, in the mean time, would needs hold his peace (who yet, might have
answered them, with all justice) it is but due, that the rest of the world, may
not be accused of their sins, by the Devils (though of it self, this might
be justly done) but that they should be dumb, because they had accused him who
was innocent. And that, since he would needs be Sic^^ mutus, non aperi^^s os
suum.
deaf (who yet was so well able to answer) it is but reason, that the divine
justice (to which Christ offered himself for us) should also make it self as
deaf, though we have done things, which require vengeance.

Rejoice therefore, O thou spouse of Christ, and let all sinners rejoice (if
indeed they be sorry for having sinned, and if they dispose themselves to take
the Contrition Confession and Satisfaction.
remedies, which are in the Catholic Church.) For God is deaf, toward the
punishment of our sins; but has his ears wide open, toward the hearing of
our prayers, with mercy. Fear not thy accusers, nor those outcryes (although
thou have given cause thereof) since Christ was accused, and by his silence did
strike dumb, the clamor of our sins. It was Isa. 35.
prophesied, that he would be silent, as the lamb is before the shearer. But
The great profit which we reap, by the silence that Christ our Lord did use in
his sacred Passion.
when most he was silent, and did suffer most in the sight of men; so much
greater were the out cries, which he gave to the divine just (...), by paying
for us. And these out cries were heard as S. Paul Hebr. 5.
says) for his reverence; that is, for his great humility; and for the
reverence wherewith he humbled himself to his Father, even to death, and that
of the Cross; reuearing (in as much as he was man) that superexcellent divine
Majesty; and loosing his life, for the honor of it. He was heard (I say) by
his Father; of whom it was written, He Psalm. 102.
regarded the prayer of the humble, and despised not their petition. Now who is
so humble, as our Blessed Lord, who said, Learn, Matt. 11.
of me, for I am me^ke, and humble of heart. And therefore he was heard, as
before it was prophesyed in his person, Our Psalm. 21.
Lord did not remove his face from me; and when I cried out, he heard me. And
the same Lord of ours, says in the Gospel, I give Joan. 21.
thee thanks, O Father, because thou do ever hear me.

Now since the Father does hear him when he prays for thee; and that the
obtaining of grace, whereby thou may be made just (that so thou may be
heard by God) did cost him so dear; procure to get it, if thou have it not; and
if thou have it, employ it in offering up prayers to God; since to such
prayers, his ears are open. And as we must hear our Lord, with the Prophet
Samuel, when he says, Speak 1. R^g. ^.
Lord, for thy servant hears; so does our Lord say to us, Speak servant, for
thy Lord hears thee. And as we said long before, that our hearing the voice
of God, must not be the only hearing of the sound of the words; but to believe
them, and to be pleased in them; and to put them in execution; so the ears of
our Lord, are opened by the love of Christ, not only to hear what we say (for
so also does he hear the blasphemies which are spoken of him, and which offend
him) but our Lord does hear our petitions, in such sort, as to perform them.
And to the end that thou may see, how true it is, that our Lord does hear
the deep sighs that we present to him, hearken thou to that, which the ^a^^^e
Lord says by Isa. 65.
Isaias, Before they call, I will hear them. O blessed be that holding thy
peace, O Lord; for both within, and without, did thou hold thy peace, upon
that day of thy Passion. Out wardly, by not cursing, or so much as answearing;
and in wardly, by not contradicting, but accepting, with great patience, those
blows, and cries, and pains, of thy passion. For thereby, thou did so
speak in the ears of God, as that we may be heard even before we speak. Nor
is this any great marvel; for The inestimable providence and goodness of God,
in Christ our Lord.
as much as (we being yet nothing) thou did make us; and before we could ask
thee any thing, thou did maintain us, both within, and without the womb of
our Mother; and before we knew what it was, that might do us good, thou gave
us the adoption of Sons; and the grace of the Holy Ghost in holy Baptism.
And before we had been overthrown by sin, thou did keep us; and when we
were fallen, through our own fault, thou did raise us up; and thou did seek
us when we sought not thee. And (that which is more) before we were borne, thou
had already dyed for us; and prepared heaven for us. It is not therefore any
wonder that of whom thou had so much care, before they had any of thee, thou
have it also, in this particular. And that thou do give us that, many times,
whereof thou see us to have need, without expecting that we should weary our
selves so much as to ask it; since thou did weary thy self so much, both in
asking, and procuring it for us.

What shall we give thee, O most blessed Jesus, for this silence, which thou
did use before them, who did so hate, and hurt thee. And what shall we give
thee, for those loud cries so full of love, which thou gave for us, before
thy Father. O A devout contemplation.
that it were pleasing to thy infinite goodness, to do us so great a favor, as
that we might be so silent toward the offense of thee; and so willing to
suffer that which thou would do with us, as if we were so many dead men.
And that we were so full of life, toward the uttering of voices in thy
praise; that neither we whom thou have redeemed, nor the heavens, nor the
earth, nor that which is under the earth, nor any of that which is in them all,
might ever cease with the very extremity of all our strength, and theirs, to
sing thy praises with great joy, and to serve thee, with most ardent love.

Nor do thou content thy self, O Lord, to open thine ears toward our
prayers, so to hear them with attentive speed; but as one that loves another,
in all truth of affection, and does take pleasure to hear him speak, or sing;
so thou, O Lord, do say to the soul, which is redeemed by thy blood, Show
Can^ ^ 2.
me thy face, let thy voice sound in mine cares; for thy voice is sweet, and
thy face is very fair. What is this, O Lord, which thou say? That thou
desire to hear us, and that our voice is sweet. How does our face seem
fair in thine eyes, which we (having defiled with many sins committed by us
even whylest thou were looking on) are a shamed to let thee see? Infallibly it
is true, that either we merit much in thy sight, or else thou do love us
much. But The true humility which is taught by the doctrine of the holy
Catholic Church.
far be it from us, O Lord, far be it from us, that out of thy merciful
proceeding, we should draw a reason of being proud. Since that, whereby we
please thee, and are acceptable to thee, is thine own grace, which thou did
give us. And besides that, thou do regale, and thou do reward thy
servants, more abundantly then becomes any merit of theirs. Let glory therefore
beg^uen to thee, O Lord, from whom all our good proceeds; and in whom all
our good consists; and to us, and in us let confusion be, for our
unworthiness and wickedness. Thou art our joy, and thou art that glory, wherein
we glory; and this we do not unjustly, but upon great reason. For a high honor
it is to be beloved by thee; and so beloved, as that thou would deliver thy
self over for our sakes, to the torments of the Cross, from whence all
blessings, are derived down upon us.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
Of the great love wherewith our Lord does behold such as are just; and of the
much that be desires to communicate himself to creatures; and to destroy our
sins, which we must behold with detestation, that God may look upon them
with compassion.
Now that thou have understood the speed, wherewith God hears the prayers of
such as are just; it remains for thee to know, the great love, wherewith he
behouldeth them; that God hears and sees our prayers, as he requires us to
look up to him, and to give ear to his holy inspiratio^s.
so he may entirely perform in himself, that of hearing, and seeing, which he
commands of us. The eyes of our Lord, says David, are upon the just to
deliver them from death; but the face of our Lord is upon the wicked, that he
may cast out the memory of them from the earth. Hereby it appears, that our
Lord places his eyes, upon the just, as the pastor does upon his sheep, that
they may not perish. And so also, does he place them upon the wicked, to the
end that they may not pass, without the punishment which their sins deserve.
Two What God made and what we make.
things there are in us; one which God made, and that is the creature,
consisting of a Body and Soul, with all the good that we have; the other,
which our selves did make, and that is sin. Now if we did not accompany that
good which we have of God, by somewhat else which is an evil of our own,
there could be nothing in us, which our Lord would behold with the eyes of
Anger, but only of Love; since it is a natural thing for any cause, to love
the effect of it self. But now, though we have defiled, and destroyed, that,
which the beautiful God had made fair in us; yet will he not totally cast us
off. Nor can our wickedness, hinder his supereminent goodness; which (for the
recovering of that which he made good* resolves to destroy that evil, which
our selves did make. For An excellent comparison, set forth with great life of
circumstance.
if we see, that this corporal sun, do, with so liberal a hand, impart it
self; and goes as it were inuiting men, to receive it, and bestows light,
and heat, upon all them who give no impediment thereunto; yea and when they do,
yet does it, as it were, even become obstinate in making them, remove the
same; and if it meet with any chinke, or crany, how little so ever, it does by
that, convey it self, and fill the whole house full of light; what shall we
say of that supreme divine goodness, which, with so great anxiety, as it
were, and force of love, does go circling round about the creatures; that he
may bestow himself upon them, and fill them with lively, and divine
splendours? What occasions does he seek of doing good to me^? And to many, for
some small services, he has vouchsafed to do no small favors. What entreaties
does he use to them, who depart, that they will return again? What
imbracementes does he give them, when they come back? What seeking of such as
are lost? What addressing such as are gone astray? What pardoning of sins,
without reproach? What joy in restoring men to salvation? Letting them know,
that he more desires to grant a pardon, then they care to sue it out. And
therefore it is, that he says to sinners, Why Ezech. 33.
will you needs dye? Know, that I desire not the death of a sinner, but that he
may return, and live. Return to me, and you shall live.

Our Note this excellent consideration.
death consists in our departure from God, and therefore to return to him,
is to live. Whereunto we are invited by Almighty God, whose principal
intention, is not, to lodge the eyes of his wrath upon the work of his hands,
which is our selves; but upon the work of ours, which are our sins. These
would God feign destroy, if we did not hinder him; but this we do, when we love
our sins; giving them life by our love, which, by being loved, do murder us.
And so great is the hungar which that sovereign bounty, has toward the
destruction of our wickedness (to the end that so, his creature may not be
destroyed) that Let all the Angels praise our Lord, for so infinite goodness.
when soever a man will; and how often soever he will, and how great soever the
sins be which he has committed; if he will dispose himself to do penance,
and to beg pardon of our Lord; for his part, he is ready to receive us.
Forgiving that which we have deserved; curing that which we made sick;
straightning that which we made crooked; and giving us grace to abhor those
things, which formerly were by us beloved. Yea in such sort does he destroy
our wickedness, and divide it from us; that David Psal^. 102.
says, Look what distance there is, between the rising, and setting of the
Sun, so far has he separated our sins from us.

So that the beginning, and first pace that the eyes of God do make, is not
against the man, whom he created; but against the sin, which we committed.
And whenever he looks upon a man to his destruction; it is then, when the
man will not suffer him, to execute his wrath against sin, which he would By
drawing that soul to penance.
feign destroy. But man would needs continue in sin; and give life to that
which destroyed himself, and displeased God. It is therefore but reason, that
his death remain alive; and that his life be for ever dead; since he would not
open the gate to him, who for love, and with love, both could, and would have
murdered his death, and endued him with life.

But some will say, what remedy shall I meet withal, that God may not behold
my sin, to punish; but that he may look upon his creature to save it. S.
Augustine Hearken to the great and good S. Augustine.
does briefly, and truly answer thus: Let thy self look upon thy sins;
that is, do thou consider them, and do penance for them, and God will not see
them; but if thou cast them behind thy back, then will God place them, before
his face. David did beseech our Lord, to forgive his sins, saying thus: Have
Psalm. 50.
mercy on me, O Lord, according to thy great mercy; and he also said, Turn thy
face O Lord from my sins. But what did he allege toward the obtaining of
so great a favor? Nothing less, then any service that he had done. For he well
knew, that if a servant should commit a treason, against his Lord; his services
would not be considered, though he should have served many years before, with
diligence. For if he served before, he was obliged so to do; and he brought not
his Lord in debt thereby; but his treason is the thing, that must be thought
of, which he was bound not to have committed; and therefore by paying that
which he did owe before, he came not to ransom himself from that penalty,
which afterward he incurred. Neither yet did David offer sacrifices; as well
knowing, that God takes no pleasure Unless it were accompanied by a penitent and
Religious heart; for if it were, it was acceptable to God in the old law, for so
himself had ordained.
in the burning of beasts. But he who could find no remedy, either in services
that were past, or in pious external works which then were present, did find
it, in an humbled, and contrite heart. And he desired to be pardoned, upon this
ensuing reason, For I know my wickedness, and my sin does ever stand before
mine eyes. An admirable power, did God give to this our beholding, and
profoundly sighing for our sins; since Gods seeing of them, does follow, to
the end that he may dissolve them. And we converting our eyes with grief,
toward that, which we did wickedly commit; he conuerteth his, toward the
salvation, and consolation of him, whom he did create.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
Of the many and great benefits which come to men, in that the Eternal Father,
does behold the face of Jesus Christ his Son.
BUT some will say, whence comes so great force, to our looking, and to our
weeping, that so instantly it should draw after it, Gods seeing, and that, so,
as to forgive us. It is far from coming, from our looking it self. For the
thief, deserves not to be pardoned the gallows, because he knows that he did
ill in stealing; and how much (and yet much more) soever, he lamenteth. But
this proceeds from another sight, which is more favorable; and withal, so
full of power, that it is the cause and fountain of al our good. This is that,
whereof David Psalm. 83.
says, Behold, O God our defendour, behold the face of thy Christ. He twice
beseeches God to behold; to give us thereby to understand, with how much
affection, we are to think of this; and how much it imports us to obtain
it. For as the sight of God upon us, does bring all benedictions to us; so Gods
looking upon Christ, does draw the sight of God to us. Do not think, O Virgin
How Almighty God comes to love mankind.
that the gracious, and amorous beams of the eyes of God, descend in a right
line upon us, when he receaueth us in^o his grace; or even, when already we are
in grace, that they desce^d upon us, as upon a different thing from Christ. For
if so thou think, thou art no better then blind. But know, that first they
address themselves to Christ, and from thence, to us, by him, and in him. Nor
No creature can obtain the least cast of an eye of ^erev, from God but only
for the love of Christ our Lord.
will our Lord utter one word, nor cast one countenance of love to any creature
of the whole world, if he see it separated from Christ; but for the love of
Christ, he so behouldeth all them as to pardon them, who (although they be
never so wicked) will behold and lament themselves; and in Christ he also
beho^ldeth such persons, for their preservation, and for their increase in the
good, which already they have received. Christ being beloved, is the cause that
we are received into grace. And if Christ Jesus were not, no creature at all,
would be acceptable, or beloved in the sight of God, as was said before.

Know therefore, O Virgin, what necessity thou have of Christ; and be thou Al
woe will be to such, as are not so.
internally and profoundly grateful to him. For the good which thou have, came
toward thee, by no other means, then by Christ; and in him is it to be
conserved to thee, and augmented by the eternal Father. And this is that,
which was figured in the beginning of the world, when the just Abel (that
Pastor of sheep) did offer a sacrifice to God out of his flock; which
sacrifice was accepted, as the Scriptore says, For our Lord did look on Abel.
and his gifts. And this looking on him, does import, that Abel was grateful
to him, and for that, again, his gifts were grateful. And in testimony that
so they were, God sent down visible fire, which consumed the sacrifice. Now
this is a figure, of our just* and sovereign Pastor, who says himself, I
Joan. 10.
am the good Pastor; and he is also a Priest; and consequently, as S. Paul
Hebr. 5.
says, he is to offer gifts, and sacrifices to God. But what can Leuit. 22.
Deuteronomy. 22.
he offer, that shall be worthy of him? Certainly not brute beasts; and much
less sinful men; for such do rather serve to provoke the wrath of God, the^
to obtain his mercy. Nor without cause, did God command in the old law, that
the beast which was to be offered, should be male, and not female; and of such
an age; and neither too little, nor too great; nor blind, nor lame, nor subject
to any of those conditions which are there described; to the end that the thing
which was to be offered, for the taking away of sin, might be subject to no
imperfection, or fault. Now The necessity which we were in, that Christ our
Lord should be sacrificed for us.
because no man was without sin, this great Priest of ours, had nothing else
to offer but himself; making him, that was the Priest, to be also the
sacrifice, offering up himself to himself, he being clean, that he might
cleanse us, who were defiled; he who was just, to justify us who are sinners;
he who was acceptable, and esteemed; to the end that we might be received into
favor; Who, in our own respects, were offensive, and vnbeloued. And this
sacrifice, was of so high value* both in regard of the thing it self, and in
respect of him who did offer it, (which is al one) that we, who were separated
from God like lost sheep, were brought back, all washed, and sanctified, and
made worthy to be offered up to God. Not that we had any thing of our own
stock, which was fit to please him; but being bedewed by the blood of this
Pastor, and being adorned with the beauty of his grace, and justice, which is
bestowed upon us for our Lords sake; and being incorporated to him, we are
cleansed from our sins, and we are beheld by God, and made acceptable to him,
as a sacrifice offered up, by this high Priest and pastor.

This did 1. Pet. ^.
S. Peter thus express, Christ dyed once for us, to the end that he might
offer us up to God, being mortifyed in the flesh, and quickened in the spirit.
And so it appears, how our Abel does offer up an oblation out of his flock,
which God beheld; because Agnus occisus ab origin inu^ds.
first, he had beheld his most dear son. And as there visible fire came
down upon the sacrifice, so also did fire come here, upon the day of
Pentecost in the form of tongues. And this happened, after Christ ascended up to
heaven, where he might appear, to the face of God for us. To the end that we
might understand, that from the cast of the countenance of God, upon the face
of Christ, which, as it is said Hester. ^wor^.
of Hesther, is full of grace, came that fire of the holy Ghost, which burnt
those gifts, which this great Pastor and Bishop offered up to his Father; and
they were his disciples, both such as were then present, and such others as
were to follow afterward. And as God promised to Noe, that whenever it should
rain much, he was to look upon the bow, which he placed in the clouds, in
token of the league which he made with men, not to destroy the earth any more
by water; so, much more, God beholding his Son, being laid upon the Cross
(having his arms spread abroad, in the form of a bow) does take the arrows,
which he was about to shoot, out of that other rigorous bow of his; and instead
of punishing, he does embrace us; being more overcome to show us mercy by this
strong bow, which is Christ, then he was induced by our sins to punish us.

And howsoever we went wandering away, with our backs turned toward the
light, which is God; and that we would not look upon him, but pass our days
in the darcknesse of sin; yet we are brought back by him, upon his
shoulders. And because it is It is only for the love of Christ, that God
behouldeth sinners with mercy.
he, that brings us, our Lord God looks upon us; and he makes us also
look on him. And he has so particular care of us, that not for so much as any
one moment of time, does he remove his eyes from us, least other wise we
should undo our selves. Whence do thou think, did proceed this amourous
word, which God did speak to a sinner, thereby to draw him to repentance, I
will Psal^^. 21.
give thee understanding, and will teach thee the way, wherein thou art to
walk; and upon thee, will I place mine eyes; but only from that amorous
countenance, wherewith God beholds Jesus Christ, who is the wisdom, which
teaches us the true way, wherein we may walk without stumbling; and the true
pastor (as he is man) by whom we are beheld; and who (as he is God) beholds
us. Remoouing Note here a lively and dear description, of the innumerable
ways whereby Almighty ^od shows mercy toward us, through Christ our Lord.
the dangers that are before us, wherinto he knows that we would fall
hereafter; holding us fast, against such as do assault us at the present; and
delivering us from them, into which by our fault we have fallen; ever thinking
of that which imports us, though our selves be full of negligence; remembering
our good, when we forget his service, watching over us when we sleep; keeping
us close to himself, when we would feign be gone; calling us back, when we
fly; giving us imbracementes when we return; being ever the last, in breaking
of friendship; and the first who begges the renewing of it, though he were the
person offended; and carrying, in all, and throughout all, such a watchful,
and amorous eye over us, as ordains all things for our good. What shall we
say, or what shall we do, for so great favors, but give thanks to this true
Pastor? who, to the end that his sheep might not be estranged from the eyes of
God; did offer his own face to so many affrontes. That his Father seeing him so
afflicted, and yet without all fault; might behold such as indeed were
faulty, with the eyes of mercy. And to the end, that we might carry this word,
engraven both in our hearts, and upon our tongues, Look. O Lord, upon the face
of thy Christ. Knowing well, by great experience, that God does much better,
both hear, and see, and incline his care to us, then we do to him.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
How it is to be understood that Christ is our Justice; least otherwise we
should fall into some error, by conceaning, that just persons have not a
distinct justice, from that, whereby Jesus Christ is inst.
SO much I beseech the Protestat reader upon my knees that he will read this
following discourse, without passion.
is the cockle which our enemy has sowed in their hearts, who will believe
him; that he induces them, to draw perverse opinions, out of the words of
holy Scripture, which speak of this most sweet mystery, of Jesus Christ our
Lord; and of the benefits, which we possess by him, and in him. Whereof I
thought it fit to advertise thee, that so thou might be free from danger. Do
not thou conceive, that because Christ is called our justice; or because it is
said, That Ephesians. 2.
we are made acceptable to God, in him, or in fine, by such other words as
these; that therefore I say, they who are in the state of grace, have not a
justice in them which is theirs; whereby they become just and acceptable to
God; and which is distinct, from that, whereby Jesus Christ our Lord, is just.
For to believe otherwise, were to embrace a very grievous error; which The
erroneous opinion of impu^tiue Justice, does extremly derogate, from the great,
and tender love of God to man, in Christ our Lord.
proceeds from the want of knowing the love, which Jesus Christ does bear,
to such, as are in the state of grace. Whom his bowels of mercy, and love,
would not permit; that, whyleft himself was just, and full of all good things,
he should say to such as he justified, Content your selves with this, that I
abound with these good things, and esteem them for your own as they are in
me; although in your selves, you remain unjust, impure, and naked.

There Think seriouly of this point.
is no head, which would hold such language as this, to his living members nor
one Spouse to another, if he should dearly love her; and much less, will that
celestial Spouse say so; who is given for a pattern to the Spouses of this
world; that after his resemblance, they may treat and love their
fellow-spouses. You men, says Ephesians. 5.
S. Paul, love your wines as Christ loved his Church, who gave himself over
for it, to sanctify it and to cleanse it, by Baptism, and by the word of life.
If then he sanctify, and wash, and cleanse it; and that with his own blood
(which is the thing, that gives power to the Sacraments, to cleanse souls, by
that grace of his, which they impart,) how can that soul, remain unjust, and
filthy, which is washed, and cleansed, by a thing of so extreme efficacy. Now
this cleanesse, God did promise, that he would give, in the time of his
Messiah, when he said, I will power forth clean water upon you, and you shall
be cleansed from all your filth. And our Lord, in the last supper, did testify;
That eleven of his disciples were clean; and not after an ordinary manner, but
that they were wholly clean. For the venial faults which are caused in the
soul by some inordinate affections (which stick like dust unto our feet) are
removed by help of the Sacraments; and their good disposition that receive them
(as corporal feet) are washed by material water; as our Lord then did use it;
washing both without, and within, and leaving them clean, from al sin,
according to this testimony of ^. Io^^. 1.
S. John, The blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse us from all sin.

This blood was called by the Prophet Mich. 7.
Micheas (long before it was shed) the sea, wherein all our sins are drowned.
And he said, God will shoot off all our sins, into the bottom of the sea.
Now if these, and many other places of Scripture, do give testimony, that a man
is pardoned, and cleansed from all sin; who is there, that will presume to
say, That a man does never come to be cleansed from it. For to say, that sin
remains in a man, which really, and truly shall be sin; and that yet, for the
love of Jesus Christ our Lord, the pain which is due to that sin, should be
released to him; is no I beseech our Lord that the truth of this discourse, may
sin he as deeply into thy heart, as there is cause.
such discourse, as will serve, either toward the verifying of the Scriptures,
or for the doing of Jesus Christ sufficient honor. For since the pain which
is due to sin, is a less evil to any man, then the guilt of the same sin,
and the injustice, and deformity which is caused thereby; it cannot be said,
That Christ does save his people from their sins, if by his merit he only
obtain, that they may not be imputed to them, for their punishment; unless
first he take the guilt away; by the gift of his grace; nor yet that he
obtayneth purity, and piety for men, that so detesting sin, they may keep the
law of God. And if the doctrine of the holy Scripture be well observed, it
will be found, that when the pardon of ^inne is granted, there is given with
all, a newness of life; and a clean heart, as if it were newly created, as
David did desire, according to that which it was Isa. 50. ^ge^h. 11.
prophesied that it should be, I will give you a new heart, and I will place a
new spirit, in the midst of you. And I will take away from you that heart of
stone; and I will give you a heart of flesh; and I will place my spirit in the
midst of you; and I will make, that you shall walk in my commandments, and
that you shall keep and work my judgments.

This does God promise, to such as formerly he had told, that he would cleanse
them, from all their filth. And afterward he says, I I will save you from them
all. To Be attentive.
give us clearly thereby to understand, That the saving us from our sins, is
not only to free us from the pain; but to impart an inward cleanesse; and such
a heart, and such a grace, and such a spirit, as may have power, to enable us,
to keep the commandments of God. S. John Apec. 3.
affirms, that our Lord says; I stand at the gate, and I knock; if any man
open to me, I will enter into him; and I will suppe with him, and he with me
Isay Isa. 55.
inuiteth such as are hungry, in the behalf of God, that they will eat, and
such as are thirsty, that they will drink. Our Lord says by the mouth of 2.
Cor. 6.
S. Paul, Get you out from the midst of the wicked, and do not so much as
touch any thing that is unclean; and I will receive you, and I wil^e a Father
to you, and you shall be my Sons, and my daughters. By which places, and many
others, it does evidently appear, that the benefittes which are imparted to
us, by justification, are more, and better, then Gods not imputing to us that
punishment, which is due to sin. Since withal, he gives us his grace, and
cleanesse of heart, and virtues; and infuseth the spirit of our Lord, whereby we
may keep his law; and so, that (under the title of being his children, and of
exercising our selves in good works,) we may eternally enjoy him. And because
Christ did purchase these blessings for us, together with the pardon of the
pain; he may well be proclaimed, with a full mouth, to be the Savior of us,
from our sin; and We are infinitely more bound to God, for freeing our souls
from sin, then if he had only forg^uen us the punishment thereof.
that much more, for the former respect, then for the later. Because, in virtue
of that former, he freeth us from the guilt, and brings us to a detestation
of sin; and obteineth for us a kind of participation of God, at the present;
and a good title, for our eternally possessing him in heaven. Whereby, he
delivers us from a greater mischeife, and obteineth blessings for us of
greater weight, then would have been, if he had but freed us only, from any
payn^ whatsoever.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
That sin does not remain in just Persons; but that the guilt of sin, is
destroyed in them; and that they are clean, and acceptable to God.
IS it possible, that the blindness of some, can arrive so far, as to
think, that the favor of Christ Jesus, reaches to this; that from them, in
whom they say, that sin it self, does still remain, yet not only the
punishment is removed; but that also (for as much, as they say, they are
incorporated into Jesus Christ, (who is so beloved by his Father) they are
beloved, and are asceptable, and clean, because Christ is so? Well howsoever it
may seem to them, that it is to honor Jesus Christ, to Behold the pleasing
mask of this er^our^ but look on a little, and you shall see it, taken off.
think so higly of the love, which his Father bears him; as that it
^uercometh the detestation which he carries to those persons, in whom sin
remains; yet such honor as this, is wholly contrary to true honor, and to the
truth of holy Scripture. It Note.
would certainly be no honor, for a Judge, that he should for bear to punish,
or that he should favor wicked persons, because they dwell with his Son. For
it would appear thereby, both that such a Son, were no perfect lover of
virtue, in that he so lou^d wicked ^^ruants; and that the Pather, were no lover
of Justice, since he tolerated and loved them, whom he ought to punish, without
any partial respect.

They who are to be the acceptable seruant^ of Christ our Lord, must not have
the guilt of ^ortail sin, in their hearts; since he is the head which gives
the influxe into them (as into living members) of his spirit, and grace;
whereby, they lead a life, estranged from sin, and like to his. For a
horrible corporal Monster, would that be; which should have the head of a man,
and the body of a brute beast. And They make ous Lord a kind of monster, who
ma^^ his living member^ unclean and sinful.
so would it be a kind of spiritual monster, that under a head, which were
just, and pure, and full of virtues, there should be living members, which yet
were so very contrary to it. The branches are fresh, and full of fruit, when
they live in the vine. And by this comparison, our Lord was pleased, that we
should understand, that the members, which are incorporated to him by grace,
are like those others; enjoying benefittes of their own, which they receive
from him, and by him; that so it may be accomplished, which S. Paul Romans 8.
says, That it is ordained by God, that they, who are to be saved, should be
conform to the image of his Son. But how can there now, be a resemblance
between that head, which ever kept the commandments of his Father; and those
members, which though, they may be pardoned, By imputation only as the
Protestants say; and not by any inherent justice.
and justified, are still breaking, with a perfect breach, the first, and the
ninth commandment of God. Nor is there any participation, between goodness
and wickedness; nor between Christ, and such as break the commaundments of
his Father. For as much as himself did preach, That not every one, who should
call him, Lord, Lord, should enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that
would do the will of his Father. And so far off is it from truth, that the
favor of Christ is to be thus understood, That they who break the
commaundments, should be in the grace either of God, or of him; as that our
Lord himself said, If Iean. 15.
you keep my commaundments, you shall remain in my love, as I have kept the
commandments of my Father, and do remain in his love.

Now who is he, that will hope, that whilst he breaks the commaundments, he
is believed by the Father, in respect of Jesus Christ; since Christ, by keeping
those commaundments, does remain in the love of his Father. But Protestants
would feign make themselves believe, that there were no necessity of keeping the
commandments, and yet forsooth, that God and they did love one another, very
heartily.
Without doubt, the slave shall not be loved, but by the same way, that the
Son was loved; nor will God embrace with his grace, and love, but such as
shall keep the commaundments, as has evidently been already showed. And (to the
end that no man may be deceived in this,) when he had formerly said, Be Joan.
15.
you in me, and I will be in you; he added afterward, Be you, in my love. And to
declare what it was, to be in him, and in his love, he said, If you shall be in
me, and my words be in you, whatsoever thing you would obtain, you shall
ask, and it shall be given you. So that whosoever disobayeth his words, must
not think that he is in his love; nor that he is incorporated into his body,
as a living member. For this sentence of holy Scripture stands fast, The Sap.
4.
wicked man, and his wickedness, is abhorred by God. And to declare how they who
are his, are not to be abhorred, but even, in themseues, to be loved; he said
to his disciples, I say not now, that I will pray to the Father for you; for
The eternal Father does not only pardon us for the love of Christ; but when we
are justified he does love our very selves.
the Father himself does love you, because you have loved, and have believed,
that I came from him. As if he had said, A Joan. 14. and 16.
while since, I said, I will pray to the Father; and he will give you another
comforter; but do not you conceive, that I will so pray for you, as in the
world a man desires his friend sometyms, to bestow somewhat upon some others,
to whom that friend is not a friend; and so that which he gives them, is only
because he loves the man much, that entreats him; and those others, are as
far from being beloved, and accepted, as they were before. But here it is not
so; For the Father loves you, in regard that you have loved, and believed me;
and you are pleasing to him; and you have leave (as people which is beloved, by
his love of your selves; and which enjoys grace, and justice, which is your
own) to appear in his high presence, and to ask all that, whereof you have
need, in my name. And that, which I ask of him, for you, is, as for people
that is beloved; and to which the Father, does impart his blesings; both
because I desire them, and because I desire them for you.

Such are they, whom Jesus Christ does carry incorporated with himself, as
living members; and for whom he obtained grace, whereby they might be pleasing
to the Father, when they had it not; and after it was obtained that they might
bring forth works, which All this originally by the only goodness and promise of
God and through the meri^s of Christ our Lord
carry a condignity to the deserving of eternal life; as a just reward of such
services, and as an inheritance duly derived upon sons. And if it seem a
thing disproportionable to the baseness and weakness of mankind, to do a thing
which carries a proportion of merit to the sublimity, and eternity of that
heavenly kingdom; Note, and be no longer scandalized at thyn own conceits; for
the Catholic doctrine, being rightly understood, will give thee no cause.
thou art not here, to look upon a man, as of himself; but as being
honored, and accompanied with that celestial grace, which is infused to his
soul; and so made These are great words; but it was the holy Ghost which
spoke the^.
partaker of the divine nature, as S Peter 2. Pet. 1.
says. And do thou consider him, as a living member of Jesus Christ our Lord;
which being incorporated to him does live, and work, by that spiritual
inffluxe, which comes from him, and whereby he does partake his merits. Now
Note.
these things are so high, as that they carry an equality with those other
things, which are hoped for; and they are sufficient, to enable us to say with
truth, That such as live so, do fulfill the law of God, and do that, which S.
Paul required of the Col 1.
Colossians, and the I h^s^. 1.
Thessalonians, when he advised them, To live worthy of God. Of Note this
inference.
whom, he would never have expected the discharge of so that by the means
aforesaid, it might be performed; and that it was more the work of God, then
of men. For instantly, the same Apostle gives thanks to God; For making them
worthy of the portion of the Saints, in light. And what kind of portion this
is, the Prophet Hieremy Thre^^.
declares saying, My portion is our Lord; and therefore I will hope for him.
And David says of God, Thou art my portion for ever. Of this portion he is
worthy, who does Et facere, and pati magn, Christianis est.
accomplish the law of God, by those works aforesaid; and who is found
faithful, in those trialls that God does send him; as it is written, Our Lord
did try them, and he found them worthy of himself. And both for these, and
those, it is also written, That God will give them, the hire of the labors, of
his Saints.

CHAP. XC.
That the granting, that there is perfect cleanesse from sin, in such as are
just, by the merits of Christ Jesus, does not only not diminish his honor, but
much more declare it.
LET no A wise and confortable, and well grounded discourse.
man fear, to attribute the height of spiritual honor, and the abundance of
spiritual riches, and perfect cleanes from sin, to them, whom the heavenly
Father does justify, by the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Let no man think,
that the qualifying of such persons so, does put the honor of the same Lord,
to any prejudice. For since all that which they have, descends upon them by
his means, not only does not their being so full of dignity dishonor him; but
it does publish, and magnify his honor. Since it is evident, that how much
more just, and more beautiful they are, of so much more value do the merits of
him, plainly appear to be, who purchased so great a blessing for them, which
of themselves, they neither had, nor could procure. The Scripture says, That
Th^en. 14.
where the manger is full the strength of the Ox is made apparent; and the
reason is, because by his labor, he filled the same full of meat. And S. Paul
1. These. 2.
says, to some whom he had helped forward, by his doctrine, and by his
labors, That they were his honor, and his crown, in the sight of our Lord.
And then, how much more, will they be the crown of our Lord Jesus himself?
They, who by him are drawn to the honor, of being his sons; and to be full
of treasures, and blessings; which honor is so much the more, as those
blessings are the greater.

Our Our aduersarves make him such a one; when they conceive that he allows
not that the Saints should be honored by our inu^cations whylest yet
themselves do give the same honor to sinful men.
Lord, is not like some persons, who are in pain, or, at least, not greatly
pleased with the honor, or virtue of their servants* as conceauing that it
does obscure their own; or like certain vain women, who fly from being
attended by fair servants, least so the flower of their own beauty should be
blasted. But make thou no doubt; but that Jesus Christ our Lord, has a
certain kind of Charity, which exceeds all humane conceit, as S. Paul says;
in In inf^^itev^n chating of God.
esteeming our good, as his own; and to the end that we might be made rich in
graces, he left his most worthy life, upon the Cross. The natural son he is
of God, and we are sons adopted through him; and he being the only son, did
exalt us to the title of brother hood; giving us his God, for our God; and his
Father., for our Father, as himself said. I Joan. ^0.
ascend to my Father, and to your Father; to my God, and to your God. And so,
as Joan. ^.
S. John says, (speaking of the same Lord) we saw the glory of him, as the
glory, of the only begotten son. And he says also of him, That he is full of
grace, and truth. Therefore the honor, and spiritual riches, of these adopted
sons, must be such, as becomes the sons of a Father, who is God. And if
grace, and truth, were made by Jesus Christ, as S. John Joan. 1.
says, it was not made, that it might remain alone in him; but that it might
be derived down upon us; and that we might take some part of his fullness; and
this, in such abundance, that S. Paul 2. Cor. 9.
calls it a gift, which as now we are, cannot be related by us. And to the
end that we may know, the riches of that inheritance, which in his company we
may hope to enjoy; the same S. Paul Ephesians.
beseeches God, To give him the spirit of wisdom, and of revelation; because
that blessing, is greater, then our reason, is able to reach unto.

Glory, and grace, and thanks, be to thee O Lord for ever; who so have
honored, and enriched us with present gifts; and have comforted us, with the
hope, of being the heirs of God, together with thy self; and who did carry
so great love to us, as that it wrought better with thee, then it did with Job.
41.
Job; That thou might not cate thy bitte of bread alone, but that the orphane
also, might take part thereof. And as in thee, there was the love of a Father,
and that no barren love, but fruitful of many blessings; so thou O Lord,
being pleased to make us thy companions herein, did pray Joan. 17.
the Father, in this manner; That If this be well penetrated, enough is said in
few words.
the love* wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them; and with this love,
those other blessings, whereof, one, did (both for himself, and for those
others, who were to enjoy them) speak after this manner, Rejoicing, I will
rejoice in our Lord; and my soul shall joy in God. For he has clad me with
the robes of salvation, and he has hemmed me in with a garment of justice; as
the man who is a spouse, is honored by wearing of a crown; and as the spouse,
who is a woman, may be adorned, with curious, and rich dressings.

Which Read here the true state of this question, between Catholics and
Protestants.
Confession, with such others as are made in the holy Scripture, of those
benefits, which come to us, by Jesus Christ, does certainly, ascribe more
honor to him, then, That neither the virtue of his blood; nor of his grace;
nor the use of his Sacraments; nor the infusion of the holy Ghost; nor the
incorporating a man to Christ himself; are sufficient to deliver him from
sin; but only, that he may not be condemned for it. What An opinion most
injurious to Almighty God.
is this but to think wickedly of God the Father? Who (promising together
with his only son) to send an entiere remedy against sin; and, that sin, in
his time, was to be brought to an end) does not yet perform what he promised*
Since, although his Son be come, yet sin remains even in very them, who
participate with the same Son of his. How then can that word be accomplshed,
which says, I Ezech. 36.
will power clean waters upon you; and you shall be cleansed, from all your
filth; if yet indeed, they cleanse me not; but that they cast a clean mantle
over me, by saying, That the justice, and purity of Jesus Christ our Lord, is
imputed to me, as mine own. Now this is rather, to cover my uncleanness, then
to take it away. And he that affirms this untruth, does consequently deny,
Jesus Christ our Lord An opinion most dishonorable to christ our Lord; for it
allows him, to be but a Savior by halues.
to be the messiah, who was promised in the law; and he must therefore expect
an other, who may deliver him, not only from the condemnation due to sin, but
from the sin also it self. Since it is clear, that he who should deliver us
from both, were to be a better Savior, then he that were to do it but from
one. To these huge and headlong precipices, does the blindness of pride
conduct such persons, as are governed by it.

CAAP. XCI.
How some passages of holy Scripture are to be understood; wherein it is said,
that Christ Jesus is our Justice; and such other propositions as that is, for
the better declaration of the precedent Chapters.
THE Ho prosecuteth the same discourse, in excellent manner, and it conuinceth.
manner which the holy Scripture holds, in saying that Christ is made unto
us, Wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.
Justice, Sanctification, and Redemption, should not give, any body occasion to
think, that just men have not a justice in them, which is their own. For if
we be only just, because Christ is just; and not for the justice which is in
us; as well may we say, that there is no wisdom in us, whereby we are wise;
neither yet any sanctification, or redemption. S. John 1. Io. 2.
says, That the unction of the holy Ghost, which teaches us concerning all
things, is in the Just. S. Paul 1. Cor. ^.
says, you are sanctified. And S. Peter 1. Pet. 1.
says, you are redeemed from your vain conversation. Now He does evidently
show, and at large, by many places of Scripture, that the Protestant
interpretation of this, concerning justification, is not only untrue, but most
absurd.
for as much as Christ was not redeemed, (as having not committed sin) this
redemption is to be in us; whereby we are said to be redeemed, notwithstanding
that the Scripture affirms, that to us, Christ is made redemption. For in
this, and those other manners of speech, the thing which it would say is this,
That th^se things, are given us by his merit. The Apostle Cole ^ 3.
says, That Christ is our life* but it will not follow hereupon that just
persons do not live, in respect that our Lord says, he that eats me, l^ueth
by me. Nor should he have the reason of a man, who, because he might hear it
said, That God is the beauty of the Rose, or the strength of the Lion, or the
like; would therefore deny, that these creaturs have a kind of beauty, or
strength, which is distinct, from the strength, or beauty of God. The holy
Deuteronomy. 30.
Scripture says, God is thy life, and the length of thy days; which manner of
speech does but employ, that God is the efficient cause of these things, and
he that gives them to us.

Neither yet, must error take away encouragement from this other speech of
holy Scripture, That we are made the justice of God, in Jesus Christ; and, that
the Father made us acceptable to himself in his beloved senne; and the like.
For this manner of speech, is but to make us know (as was said before) the
mystery of Christ his being the head; and that, just persons, are his living
members who rely upon him; to the end that the good which he bestowed upon
them, may both be conserved, and increased. For if, by such manner of speech,
we would understand, that just persons had these good things in them, no
otherwise then because Christ Jesus has them, what could we answer to what S.
Paul Romans 3.
says, That just persons, are justified, by the redemption which is, in Christ
Jesus; whylest yet, as he was in no captivity, so could not he be capable of
redemption; and therefore, it must be in them who are justified, although it be
procured for them, by our Lord. The same Apostle Romans 8.
says, Who shall separate us, from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus;
but it follows not upon this, that the love of God is not in us, and even
deeply in us; since, he says elsewhere, That Romans 5.
the love of God is powered into our hearts, by the holy Ghost, which is given
us. The same manner of speech, does he also hold, when he says, of natural
blessings, That Act. 17.
in God, we live, and move, and have our being. Yet will no man say, That we
have no being, or life, or distinct operations, from them of God. The Scripture
uses this manner of speech, to make us know, that neither we have that
blessing of our selves; nor yet that in our selves we can conserve it, and
sometimes the Apostle says, That 1. Cor. 2.
those blessings are not ours; and that we do not obtain them for our selves;
as where our Lord says to his disciples; You Joan. 15.
chose not me, but I chose you. And in another place he says, It Matt. 10.
is not you that speak, but the spirit of your Father, speaks in you. And
least any body might understand by this, that a man were not able to work^
well, and with liberty, the Scripture says, in other places, That Ezech. 30.
man, does perform such a good work, without making mention of any thing which
therein, is done by God. I (says God, by Ezech. 1^.
Ezechiel) will give you a new heart; and the same Prophet says, Make to your
selves, a new heart. S. Paul Romans 9.
says in one place, It is neither he that wills, nor he that runs. And
yet elsewhere he says again, I ( 1. Cor. 9.
will, that which is good; and I run, and not as to any thing uncertain. And
the like he says, often elsewhere, to give us thereby to understand, That The
true Catholic doctrine concerning this point, is here summed up, into one
sentence.
the good which we have, we have of God; and that both God and man, do concur
to the accomplishment of a good work; but yet so, as that the glory both of
the one, and the other, is due to God; since all that which is good does come
from him. And by the same manner of speech, our Lord expressed himself, when
he said, My Joan. 7.
doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. And so he might have said, My
works are not mine; my justice is not mine; but of him that sent me. And he
that by this manner of speech, should infer, that our Lord had not justice,
or doctrine, or other blessings in himself, would be easily discerned, to be
in a gross, and wicked error. His saying, My doctrine is not mine, does but
affirm thus much, I have it not of my self, but of my Father; and so, by the
like words, it ought not to be inferred, That just persons, have no justice in
them, which is their own. And with this agrees that, which is said in the
Sess ^de Iustif.
Council of Trent, That the justice is ours because we are justified by it,
whilst it is in our souls, as in a subject. And that which our Lord says,
both here, and elsewhere also, by that speech of his, The word which you have
heard, is not mine, does also agree with that which has here been said;
because howsoever justice is in us, yet have we it not, of our selves; but it
is imparted, by the hand of God; and therefore it is said to be the justice of
God.

CHAP. XCII.
That we must fly fast from pride, which is wont to grow up apace, by occasion
of good works; considering the much, which is merited by them; and of a
particular instruction which Christ has given us, whereby we may profit
against this tentation.
THERE It it a good thing to know a truth, which it does import us to know; but
it is better if we know how to use it well.
is a great deal of difference, between the knowing of a Truth, and the
knowing how to use it rightly; for the first, without the later, will not only
profit nothing, but do hurt. For as S Paul says, He that thinks he knows
somewhat, may perhaps not know it, as he ought. And this he said, because some
Christians knew, that the thing which was sacrificed up to Idols, might as
well be eaten, as that which was not sacrificed; but they served themselves ill
of that knowledge, because they did eat thereof, in the presence of such, as
were scandalized thereat. All The end that the Author had, in making this
discourie.
this have I said to thee, to the end that thou may not content thy self
with knowing this Truth, That such as are in the grace of our Lord, are just,
and acceptable, by that grace, and justice which is in them; and that the value
of their good works is so high, as to deserve, that this grace should be
augmented in them, and that glory also should be imparted to them; but that
thou may also procure to lodge this truth in his true place. For men there
are, who use it ill, more or less; the former running hazard of being proud,
and the later of pusillanimity, and sloth.

Many It is often, more easy to come to penance, from sin, then for men of
virtue, to mantaine themselus in humility.
have I seen, who by the goodness of God became free, in a short time, from
great miseries, wherein they had remained a long time; and the same men, have
not bin free in many years, from those dangers, which presented themselves by
occasion of their good works. Remember that which David Psalm. 139.
said, That wicked persons, did spread a snare for him near his way; yea and
that also they did spread it, in the very way. For not only do our enemies
pretend to draw us out of the good way, by inciting us to do ill; but even in
the very way it self of good works, they procure to do us mischief;
provoking us, not to use the good, as we ought. And so that comes to be
verifyed upon us, which the Eccles. 5.
Wise man says, Another mischeife have I seen, under the sun; Great riches,
heaped up, in prejudice of the owner. For it were better for a man, not to have
a thing, then not to use it as he ought.

To these men it happens, that seeing the good works which they do, and hearing
talk of the much which they merit by them; their heads run round, with the
vanity, and conceited delight thereof, Consideration, which may seru^ for the
preventing of pride; or at least for the curing of it.
without considering the many faults, which in those very works they commit;
and without acknowledging them to come from the mercy of God, as indeed they
do; and without procuring to pass further on, like people of a little, and
empty heart, which is satisfied with small matters. Whereas on the other side,
it is reason, as S. Bernard says; That we should not be negligent, whilst we
consider those things which God does in us; but sollicitous, to obtain the
much, which yet is wanting to us. Some others again there are so blind,
(through an ignorant kind of Pride) as that, how soever This seems not so
impossible, as indeed it is true.
their tongue be saying somewhat else, yet their heart does really believe, that
God is bound to give the^ all such benefittes for their meritts, (without
considering, that even they, are given them by the grace of God) as they shall
desire, or may hope for, at his hands. And this they expect under such a title
of more justice, as that if he deny them any thing, they are complaining in
their hearts; and do hold themselves agrieued; why lest they forsooth serving
him so well, he does them not justice, by denying them any thing.

Let not this wicked pride seize on thee; for How God abhors Pride.
it is now long since God complains of it by Isay Isa. 58.
saying, They demand the judgments of justice at my hands; and they come to
God and say, Why have we fasted: and yet thou have not behold us; we have
humbled our souls, and thou have not appreoued it. But, to the end that this
so dangerous poison, may not infuse it self into thy soul, (with others,
which do also flow from thence) thou art to lay hold, upon that excellent
doctrine, which our Lord Christ Jesus delivered in S. Luke, after this manner.
Which of you, having a servant who goes to plow and feeds the cattle; and
your self coming from the field you say instantly to your servant, Go thy
ways, and take thine ease; and does not rather say, Go dress my supper, and
make thy self ready, to come and serve me, till I have eaten and drunk; and
then, thou also, shall cate, and drink? Does peradventure that master, stand
thanking of his servant, for doing those things, which he commanded? I think
not. Well then, let it be so in your case; and when you have performed all
those things, which are enjoined, say, We are unprofitable servants, and we
did but that, which we were obliged to. From these words thou art to fetch a
knowledge, of how profitable a consideration it is, for a Christian to hold
himself, the slave of God; since our Lord, commands us so to call our
selves. And yet this must not be done, with that kind of heart, wherewith the
slave uses to serve, which is a heart of fear, and not of love. For as S. Paul
Romans 8.
says, You did not again receive the spirit of servitude in fear, but you
received the spirit of adoption, of the sons of God, wherein you cry out to
God and say, Father Father. For, as S. Augustine says, the difference between
the old law, and the Gospel, in a word, is that, which is between fear, and
love. Leaving therefore a part, To serve God; for fear, is less good; to do
it for love is excellent.
this spirit of seruility, (because it belongs not, so properly, to the
sons of God) and the spirit also of He speaks here of filial fear.
fear, (as less perfect though it be not cuill) since it is the gift of God
to fear him, even for the punishments which he inflicteth, do thou understand
by the name of servant, a person who is subject to God, by more strong and just
obligation, then any slave can be to his Lord, how dear soever he have cost
him. And A faithful and loving servant, well described.
looking ever upon this, whatsoever he does well, either within himself, or
exteriourly, he will do it for the glory, and to give gust to God; as a
true-harted slave, will give a just account unto his Lord, of whatsoever he is
able to gain. So also, will he forbear to be slack, or sluggish, in serving
him, upon the present day; notwithstanding that he had served many years
before. Nor will he hold himself disobliged, from the doing of one service, in
respect that he has done another. But, as the holy Luc. 17.
Gospel says, he carries a continual hungar, and thirst, after justice.
For he esteems all to be little, considering both the much that he has
received; and which the Lord, in whose service he is, has merited. By this
means, does he accomplish that, which S. Paul Philip. ^.
says of himself, That forgetting those things which were past, he gave
himself new spirits: toward the pursuit of that, which was then* to come.
He does also know, that from those things which he is able to do, how great so
ever they may be, no profit accreweth unto God; nor is God obliged to esteem
that, which he does, if the works be considered, as growing from our natural
power, and strength; since a man is not able to pay, even what he owes. And
therefore does the holy Luc. 17.
Gospel say, When you have done all those things which you have been
commanded, say, We are unprofitable servants; and we did but that, which we
were bound to do. I say How the best man is indeed an unprofitable servant; and
in what sense again he is not so.
unprofitable, in respect of God; but for as much as concerns themselves,
they gain life eternal; as shall be showed in the next Chapter. And in this
sort, understanding the name of slave, thou will find it to be a name of
humility, of obedience, of diligence, and of love. And this feeling thereof,
had the sacred Virgin Mary; when, being taught by the Holy Ghost, she The
unspeakable humility of the inco^prehensible virgin Mary the B. Mother of God.
answered, Behold Luc. 1.
here is the slave of our Lord; let that be fulfilled in me, which is
agreeable to his word. She confesses her own baseness; she offers up her
love and service, with a liberal heart; without ascribing any thing unto her
self, by way of any other honor, or interest, then only, in being careful,
to serve as a slave, in that, which our Lord was commanding her, for his glory.
All this did she feel within, and this did she outwardly express, by
delivering her self in the name of slave. S. Paul does call himself, and
prize himself by this name, when he Romans 1.
says, Paul, the slave of Jesus Christ. And, in a word, so are al they, who
serve God, to acknowledge themselves; whether they be high, or low; unless they
be content, that even the service which they are doing, prove to be of more
prejudice, then advantage to them.

Procure therefore to profit by this truth; and thou shall find a powerful
remedy against the danger, which grows by occasion of good works; not There
is no danger in good works; but in the vanity of man's heart who does them.
from the works themselves, but by the imperfection of such as do them. And
use thou to say, both with thy mouth, and with thy heart, very often, I am A
just and true acknowledgement which ought to be made by the heart and tongue of
all true Christians.
the slave of God; and I am so, because God, is that which he is; and for a
thousand millions of benefits, which I have received from his hand. And how
much soever I might do for him, I should never be able to pay the least of
those paces, which he, being made man, did make for me; nor the least of those
torments which he endured for me; nor the least sin which he has pardoned;
nor any other, which he has prevented; nor any good purpose which he has
given me, toward his service; nor one day of heaven, which I expect
hereafter; and, as Genesis 31.
Jacob affirmed, I am less, then any of the mercyes of God. And if our Lord do
say, that they who do all that which they are commanded, are yet to humble
themselves; and affirm, that Luc. 17.
they are unprofitable servants, and that they did but that which they were
bound to do; how much more then, am I to humble my self; since I fall into so
many faults, by ignorance, by weakness, or by malice. A slave I am, and a wicked
slave; and I serve not God, so much as I am able; and much less, as much as I
owe him. And if he had cast his eye upon that which I have deserved of him; a
long time is past, since he would have thrown me into hell, for the sins
which I have committed, and for many other also, into which he might justly
have permitted me to fall.

Let this be therefore, the feeling which thou have of thy self; let this be
the place wherein thou may put thy self; since this is that, which, for thy
part, thou do deserve. And let thy care be, to serve our Lord, the best thou
can, without reflecting greatly upon how much it is; and without conceauing
that God is bound to thank thee for it; or that thou art able, as Job Job. ^.
says, To answer him one for a thousand, of what thou oughtst him. And when
thou hear men speak of the much, that good works deserve; let not thy heart
grow vain upon it; but say, It is thy mercy O Lord thanks be given to thee;
who have imparted such dignity, to our unworthy services. And by such means as
this, be thou ever sure to remain, in thy true place, of being a negligent,
and unworthy slave.

CHAP. CXIII.
That a man being humbled and abased by the contents of the last Chapter, may
enjoy that greatness which our Lord vouchsafes to impart, to the works of such
as are just, with confidence, and gratitude.
THY soul being thus secured, from the aforesaid dangers, by this
consideration, which our Lord does teach us, thou may securely enjoy the
greatness, and dignity, which he gives to such, as are his, and thou art to
bless him, in regard that, even to such as naturally are but slaves, he
infuseth his grace, whereby they are made the adopted sons of God; and if
sons, they are heirs together with Christ, as S. Paul Romans 8.
says. Now because it is reason, that such as are received for the sons of
God, should live, and work, according to the condition of the Father; our Lord
gives them the Holy Ghost, and many guiftes, and virtues, whereby they may
serve him, and perform his law, and give him gust. And they, who for any
services which they could do, how great soever they were (being considered in
themselves) did not pass above the roof of their own houses, have now drunk
deeply of the water of grace. And How grace does dignify our works and by what
means this grows.
this is so powerful, that it makes a fountain, even in the bowels of them,
which sproutes up, as high as eternal life; by the value whereof, their good
works (how little soever they be) do also rise up, and reach to eternal life;
because they deserve it, for the reasons which are already touched. And now,
reflect upon the difference, that runs between thee, being considered in thy
self, and thee, when thou art considered in God, and in his grace. Of thy
self, thou art but a huge bill of debt; and how much soever thou do, thou
art not only unable to deserve eternal life; but not so much as to pay what
thou owe; whereas, in God, and in his grace, the self same service which
thou art bound to do, is received into account for merit of eternal life. And
our Lord, without being obliged, so much as to thank thee, and much less to
pay thee, for that which thou do for him; does yet ordain things in such
sort, as that, the good works of his servants, may be rewarded by their
possessing him in heaven. And though God owe nothing to any man, for that which
man is able to do for him; yet he owes it How divinely did S. Augustine
express this by saying that Deus is debtor bonitati suae; I he debtour to his
own goodness.
to himself, whose ordination is, in all justice, and reason, yea and that,
most entirely to be accomplished.

Give therefore glory unto God, for these favors; and know, that if he had not
bin a Father of mercy to S. Paul, in giving him a life, which was full of
merits; S. Paul would not have presumed to say, when he was near his death,
That the just judge, was to give him a crown of justice. God God shows his
mercy in first giving his grace, and then his justice, in rewarding it,
according to his promise; and it all redoundeth to his glory.
crowned him by justice; but first he gave him the merits of grace; and so
does all redound to the glory of God; either under the title of a just
Rewarder, of that which we have done well; or as a merciful, and primitive
Imparter, of the good which we have done; and no man can deny this, but he that
will deprive God of his honor. Put thy self therefore into thine own true
place; and esteem thy self worthy of hell, and of all miseries, and unworthy
of the least good. And See here the excellent immaculate doctrine of the holy
Catholic Church.
yet be not dismayed by this consideration of thine own baseness; but
discharging all kind of pusillanimity, hope thou in the mercy of God; that
since he has placed thee, in his way, he will strengthen thee so far, as to
proceed therein; till thou may gather the fruit of eternal life, from those
good works, which here by his grace thou did perform.

CHAP. XCIIII.
That from the love which we bear our selves, we must draw a reason of loving
our neighbors.
SINCE already thou have vnderstoood, with what eyes thou art to look, both
upon thy self, and upon Christ our Lord; it remains for the fulfilling of the
prophets words, which bid thee See, that thou know with what eyes thou art to
look upon thy neighbors; that so, on all sides, thou may have light; and
that no darkness may find thee out. And for this purpose, thou art to note that
he beholds his neighbor well, who beholds him with eyes, which The only
good pair of spectacles through which we are to look upon our Neighbors.
first did pass both though himself, and through Christ our Lord. My meaning
is this. When a man finds trouble, and pain, for as much as concerns his
body; or else affliction, ignorance, and frailty, for as much as concerns his
soul; it is plain, that he feels incommodity, and his sickness troubles
him; and he desires nothing less, then to be despised, or cast of for his
infirmityes, but to be endured, pitied, and relieved. Now by that which
passes in himself, as well in suffering afflictions, as in desiring the
redress thereof; let him learn to know, what his neighbor feels, who is
made of the same frail nature; and let him behold, and support, and relieve
him, with the same compassion, wherewith he beholds, and desires, that
himself may be relieved in like case, and so shall that be accomplished, which
the Eccles. 31.
Scripture says, The things of thy neighbor, understand thou of thy self;
For otherwise, what thing can be more abominable, then for a man to have
pity of his own infirmities, and to show rigor toward them of others; to
desire that al men should endure him with a great deal of patience, his own
errors seeming small; whylest himself, will have no patience with others, but
make of every moate of theirs, a beam.

A man who desires, that all men would look on him, and comfort him, whylest
himself will be careless, and cursed to others, deserves not to be called a
man; since he beholdes not men, with the eyes of a man, which, it becomes, to
be full of pity. The holy Scripture Prou. 10.
says, To have a weight, and a weight; a measure, and a measure, is an
abomination before God. Giving us so to understand, that he who has Note.
a great measure, wherewith to receive, and another little one, wherewith to
give, is disagreable to the eyes of his divine Majesty. And his punishment
shall be, that since he would not measure to his neighbor, with that mercy
wherewith he would be measured to; God will measure to him, with that cruel,
and strait measure, wherewith he measured to his neighbor. For it is written,
That Matt. 7.
with the same measure, wherewith you measure, it shall be measured to you
again; and judgment without mercy, shall be showed to him, who shows not
mercy. And An excellent advice.
therefore thou, O Virgin, in whatsoever condition thou see thy neighbor,
consider what thou would feel in thy self; and what thou desire that
others should feel concerning thee, if to thee that thing should happen; and
with the same eyes, which pass through thy self, have thou compassion of him:
and give him remedy in what thou may; and so God will measure unto thee, with
the same measure of piety, wherewith thou measurest to him. According to his
own words, Blessed Matt. 5.
are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. And thus shall thou draw, the
knowledge of thy neighbor, out of the knowledge of thy self, and thou will be
compassionate toward all men.

CHAP. XCV.
That from the knowledge of the love, which Christ bears to us, we are to
draw a reason, for loving our neighbors.
CONSIDER By the consideration of the love of Christ our Lord to our
Neighbors, we shall be dra^n to love them te^derly.
now, how thou art to draw this love of thy neighbors, out of the knowledge of
Christ. Consider with how great mercy, the son of God made himself man, for
the love of men; and with how great care, he did (throughout his whole life)
procure their good; and with how excessive, both love, and grief, he offered
his life for them, upon the Cross. And as, by reflecting upon thy self, thou
did behold thy neighbor, with humane and gentle eyes; so considering Christ,
thou will behold him An excellent consideration, sweet, and solid.
with Christian eyes; that is, with such eyes, as wherewith he was pleased to
behold thee. For if Christ remain in thee, thou will have the same sense or
feeling of things, which he had; and thou will see with how great reason, thou
art obliged to tolerate thy Neighbors fraylty, whom he loved, and esteemed, as
the head does, his body; as the spouse, his fellow-spouse; as a brother, his
brethren; and as an indulgent Father, his children. Beseech thou our Lord, that
he will open thine eyes, wherewith thou may see, that inflamed fire of love,
which burnt in his heart, when he went up to the Cross, for the good of all
men; little, and great; good, and bad; past, present, and to come; yea even for
them, who then, were in the act of crucifying him. And consider again, that
this love of his, is not grown cold; but that, if the first death were not
sufficient for our remedy, with the same love, would he dye again, wherewith
then, he dyed. And as he offered himself corporally once to his Father; so
does he often make this oblation, by acts of will, and with the self same
love.

Come He l^ueth not Christ, who loves not his neighbor, whom Christ did so
dearly love.
now, and tell me, who is he, that can find in his heart to be cruel to them,
to whom Christ was so full of pity. How shall he find a way to desire evil,
to one whose good, and salvation is so desired, by God. It cannot be spoken,
nor written, what a profound, and tender love, is engendered in the heart of a
Christian, who considers not his neighbors, according to external respects
(such as are riches, or kindred, or the like) but as parts of the very bowels of
Christ Jesus; and as a thing knit to Christ, by all the bands, both of kindred,
and friendship. How then can it seem much to thee, that a man, who is a lover
of Christ, should love his neighbors, considering, that they are his very
mystical body; and that the same Lord has said, by his own mouth, That the
good, or bad, which he shall do to his Neighbor, our Lord receaueth it, as
done to himself. And from the deep consideration of these words, the A man
that considers christ our Lord in his neighbor, will not only love that
Neighbor, but reuere him.
good Christian grows to converse amongst his neighbors, with a certain
profound reverence; and with a deep and tender love; and with a smooth kind of
meeknes; by having patience with them; and by a watchful care, not to offend,
or hurt them; but rather to profit, and please them. For it seems to him,
that he is conuersing with Christ himself; since he beholds him in them, to
whom, in his very heart, he does esteem himself more a slave, then if they
had bought him, by some mighty sum of money. For, considering that dear
price which Christ Jesus paid for man (when he purchased him upon the Cross,
with his precious blood) what can such an one be able to do, but to offer
himself all, to the service of Christ; desiring, that some occasion were
presented, wherein he might express the gratitude, and love, he bears to him.
And when he hears this from the mouth of God, If thou love me, feed me sheep;
and again, He that receaueth one of these little ones, receaueth me; and, He
that shows works of mercy to one of them, does show them to me; he, I say,
does esteem it, for An incomparable favor of God.
an incomparable favor, that he has so close at hand, so fit a means to show,
and exercise, the love which he bears to Christ Jesus; the He alludeth to
Jacob serving for Rachel.
labor seeming small which he endures for his Neighbor; and the years
seeming short; through the strength of that love, which he carries to Christ,
for himself; and to others, for the love of him, and in him. And ever does he
carry at his heart, that to which our enamoured Lord, did so straightly enjoin
us, when he said, My Joan. 13.
commandment is this, that you love one another, as I have loved you.

CHAP. XCVI.
Of another consideration which teaches us, in excellent manner, how we are to
carry our selves with our Neighbors.
ADD thou to this, another consideration, of how thou art to behold thy
Neighbors; and it is, That although, on the one side, it be a most certain
truth, that our Lord does not seek, or expect, any return of retribution for
the benefits that he bestows; yet, in other respects, we find it true, that
he gives nothing at all, for which he expects it not. Yet this, is not in
regard of himself, who is so rich, and who cannot increase in being so; and
what he gives, he gives men, for pure love; but the return that he desires,
is in respect of our Neighbors, who have necessity to be esteemed, beloved,
and succored. Just as if a man, had lent much money to another, and done great
matters for him; and then should say; For all that, which I have done for thee,
I have no need that thou should make me any payment; but all the title that
I make against thee, I transfer, and pass over, to the person of such an
one, who is in necessity; or who is my kinsman, or my servant. Pay that to him,
which thou owe to me, and I shall hold my self, for well satisfied.

In this A consideration of great force toward charitable conversation with
our neighbors.
manner, let a Christian enter into accoumpt with God; and let him consider
what he has received of him, as well, by the afflictions, and death, which the
son of God endured for him, as by the other particular mercyes, which, since
his creation, were powered upon him. Not punishing him for his sins, nor
driving him a way for his infirmityes; but expecting him to come to penance;
and pardoning him as often as he desired it; giving him benefits in requital of
the sins, that he committed; with other innumerable blessings, which exceed,
all possibility of being reckoned. And let him think, that this way of amorous
traffic of God toward him, is to be a kind of A good rule whereby we may
grow to esteem and love our Neighbors.
pattern, and rule, for the conversation which a man ought to hold with his
neighbor. And that the intention, where with God imparted to him so many
favors, was to give him to understand, that howsoever his neighbor might not
perhaps deserve, to be tolerated, or beloved, or relieved for his own respect,
yet God is pleased, that the benefit, which the other deserves not for
himself, should be imparted to that other, for the obligation, whereby he is
bound to God; and that he should esteem himself to be indebted, and even a
very slave to others, whilst he looks upon God. For God looking upon men,
did not find that he ought any thing to any body; and he will have that person
who is in necessity, to demand succor under this title, Do thou this for me,
since God has done the same for thee. And Apoint which it much concerns men
to consider.
let such a person, be sure to take heed, how he be unkind, or cruel toward
one that has need of help; least God be so toward him; depriving him of the
benefits, which already he had imparted, and punishing him as ungrateful for
the pardon of his former sins; as he proceeded with that wicked servant, who
having received at the hands of his Lord, a release for the debt of ten
thousand talentes; was of a cruel heart toward his neighbor, casting him into
prison, because he ought him a trifle; being neither content, to let him keep
his liberty, or yet to give him day. And that Lord, of whom it is not read,
that he was so much as angry with his servant, for imbezeling so great a sum,
as that of ten thousand talents is, but did show such mercy toward him, (as
that desiring time he gave him time, and liberty, yea and he pardoned him his
debt) is now in so great indignation, at the cruelty which he used toward his
neighbor, that severely he rebuked him, saying thus, Thou wicked servant, I
pardoned thee all that which thou owedst me, because thou did desire it at my
hands; How displeasing it is to God, that we be hard-harted, one to another.
had it not therefore bin reason, that thou should have showed mercy to thy
neighbor, as I showed it to thee? And in this wrath of his, he delivered him
over to the tormentours, till he should pay even that whole debt, which already
he had released to him. Not that God does punish the sins, which he has once
forgiven; but he punishes the ingratitud of the man who is forgiven; which
ingratitude, is so much the greater, as his sins forgiven, were greater, and
more enormous. And although it may well be thought, that the servant of whom I
have spoken, did cry out for pardon unto his Lord; yet is it likely, that he
would answer, as it is written, The man, who shuts his cares against the
cry of the poor, shall cry out, himself, and not be heard. Resolve therefore
thou, O Virgin, that ( beholding thy self, and beholding in Christ, both what
he is, and the benefittes which thou have received at his hands) it is reason,
that in thy heart there be engendered, an estimation of love toward thy
neighbor, so very great, as that nothing may be able to remove it. And when
the inclination, of flesh and blood, shall say to thee, What The practice of
this doctrine is of great force, toward the indaming us to the love of our
neighbors.
do I owe that person, that I should affoard him this benefit? or how can I
love him, who has done me such a mischief? Make thou this answer, That
perhaps thou would give ear to the motion, if the cause of thy love were no
other, then thy neighbor, as he is considered in himself; but since it is
Christ, who receives any benefit, or pardon, which is given unto a man's
neighbor, as if it were given to himself; what reason, I pray you, is there,
why my neighbors being this, or doing that, should have power to hinder my
affection, and the fruits thereon, which are good works; since therein, I
pretend not, to have any thing to do with him, but with Christ. And by this
means, will thy heart burn in charity; in such sort as that the many waters,
of the evil turns that shall be done thee, may not be able to quench it; but
it will prove victorious, and ascend upward, as a flame does, which lives
indeed; and thou will converse with thy neighbors, without stumbling upon
them; and without loosing thy virtue, by desiring their prejudice* And so David
says, Great peace have they, O Lord, who love thy law, and The true servants
of God turn all to good.
they stumble at nothing. Which law, is that of charity; whereby indeed the
whole law is completely performed, as S. Paul Romans 1^. Galat. 5.
says; He that loves his neighbor, has fulfilled the law. And this
estimation of our neighbor, whereby we honor him, as an adopted son of God;
and as a brother of our Lord Jesus Christ; and this love which we are to carry
to things, which do so truly belong to Christ, is that which S. Paul
recommendeth to the Philip. ^.
Philippians, and in them to us; saying, Conceive your selves humbly, to be
inferiors to one another; and make no reckoning of your own interest, or
ease; but consider what it is fit to do, for your neighbors; and do this,
after the example of Christ Jesus; who having the substance of God, did, for
our benefit, humble himself so far, as to take upon him the form of a
servant. And these two things, namely humility, and love of our neighbors, our
Lord himself did teach, and recommend to us, in that admirable action, which
he was pleased to perform so near his death; by loan. ^^.
washing the feet of his disciples. For Humility and Charity are the bottom,
and the top of all Christian buildings.
therein, humility was expressed to us, by the baseness of that office; and
charity by the help it gave to others. His will is, that we should learn these
two things of him; we, who are little servants, and disciples of his; when he,
who was the Lord and master, would needs show us the way.

Being therefore encouraged by this example, and by the rest which has bin
said; do thou weigh thy neighbors with the These are true scales which will
never deceive us.
scales of their being the adopted sons of God; and consider, that Christ
Jesus, gave himself for them upon the Cross; and do thou prize, and honor
them, whom God has honored so much, and love them who are joined to him, as
a most beloved spouse, might be; and as the parts of the body, are unto the
head. And so thou shall carry a strong, and firm love tow ards them; for
whatsoever springs not from this fountain, is but weak, and will be quickly
weary, and dry; and it falls instantly to the ground, upon the least occasion
of encounter that offers it self; as a house would do, whose foundation had
been laid upon sand.

CHAP. XCVII.
He begins to treat of that word of the verse which says, Forget thy
people. And of the two sorts of men which there are; good, and bad; and of the
names which are given to evil men, and of their several significations.
HERE follows now, this other word, which says, Forget thy people, and the
house of thy Father. For the declaration whereof, it is to be noted, That all
mankind, is divided into one of these two different parties, or Cittyes; one of
the good, and the other of the bad. Which Cittyes are not diuersified, by any
difference of place; for the inhabitants of them both, do live in the same
town, yea and even in the same house; but they are distinguished, by the
diversity of affections. For as S. Augustine says, Two A consideration most
worthy of the great S. Augustine.
Loves, did build up two Cittyes. The love of a man's self, which makes a man
despise God, does erect the earthly City. The love of God, which makes a man
despise himself, does build up that City which is cele^tiall. The first is
raised up in it self; the second, not in it self, but in God. The first, will
needs be honored by men; the second, holds it for honor enough, to have a
conscience, which is clear in the sight of God. The first, does lift up the
head, in the glory of it self; the second, says to God. Thou art my glory,
and he that does exalt my head The first, is desirous of command, and dominion
in the second one serves another, for charity; the superiors do benefit the
inferiors; and the inferiors, obey their superiors. The first, does
attribute the ^^rength to his own forces, and does glory in them; The second
says, Let me love thee, O Lord my strength. In the first, they who hold
themselves for wise, do seck for no other good things, then such as are
created; or if they knew the Creator, they did not honor him as such; but
became giddy-headed in their own vayn thoughts; and saying that they were wife,
turned fools; but in the second, there is no wisdom, but the true service of
God; which expects no other reward, but to honor the same God in company of
the Saints, and Angels, that so God may be, all in all. Of the first, all the
sinners of the world, are inha^itantes. Of the second, all the just.

And because all they, who descend of Adam (excepting only the Son of God,
and his Bl^^sed Mother) became sinners, even by their very being begotten; we
must all therefore go, for natural inhabitants of this City of ours, out of
which Christ draws us by grace, that so we may be the inhabitants of his.
This Of the na^es and properties of the ci^ty of ignorance and sin.
wicked City, which is no uniting of streets, or houses, or market places, but
of men that love themselves, and presume upon themselves, is called by several
names, which signify the wickednethereof. It is called Sin leads, or keeps
us, in darkness.
Egypt, which signifies darcknes, or misery; because they, who dwell in this
City, either have not the light of the knowledge of God, through the want of
faith; or if they have it (as those Christians have, who live wickedly,) yet is
it dead, through want of charity, which is the life thereof. For this, does S.
John ^. Joan. 4.
say, That he, that loves not God, knows not God, because God is love. He
means, That such an one, has not that kind of enamoured The knowledge of God,
will not save us, unless it be accompanied by love.
knowledge, which is necessary for salvation. And so (one sort of them, living
in the darkness of infidelity; and the other, in the obscurity of other sins)
they have no joy at all, but all is anguish, and affliction For, as Tobias Tob.
5.
says, What joy can I have, who cannot see the light of heaven.

It is also called Sin leads us into confusion.
Babylon, which signifies confusion This name was imposed on it, when that
proud people, had a mind to erect a Tower, which might reach, as it were to
heaven; so to defend it self from the wrath of God, if he should descend to
drown it a second time; and that also by the setting up of such a building,
their name might be celebrated, throughout the world. But our Lord did hinder
their folly, by giving them different Genesis 17.
languages, that so they might not understand one another. Whereupon they fell
into brawles; every one conceauing, that the other mocked him; one man saying
one thing; and another answering him another; and so the end of their pride,
was confusion, unquietness, and division.

Most Why the name of confusion, agrees to sinners.
properly does this name, agree to the City of wicked persons; For they would
feign sin, and not be punished; and they will not avoid the judgments of God,
by forbearing to offend him; but if they could sin, and decline the
punishment, either by force, or slight, they would attempt it. Proud people
they are; and al their end, is but that their name may be renowned in the
world; and if they can, they set up the towers of vain works; and if they
cannot do it in deed; at least they do it in desire. God destroys such men as
these, even when they are tasting the sweetest bit. As it is written, God Iac.
4.
resists such as are proud. And because they would not live, in the unity of
one language, performing obedience to God; they are punished so far, as that
they shall neither understand themselves; nor understand God; nor understand
one another; nor any one of the creatures; for as much as when the wisdom of
God is wanting, they understand nothing, for their good, as they ought.

How A lively description of the vain and variable heart of sinful man.
many things do work in the heart of wicked men, which put them past their
own skill; and they know not how to help themselves. Sometimes they desire
one thing, sometimes another; yea sometimes they desire a thing, that is the
contrary of the former. Now, they do, and then they undo; they weep, and they
rejoice, and all to no purpose. Now, they are ready to despair, and soon
after, they are vainly puffed up. They seek a thing with much labor; and
when they have obtained it, they are sorry, that they did, so much as seek it.
They find not that, which they imagined; yea they desire one thing, and they
do another; being governed, not by reason, but passion. And from hence it
grows, that man being a reasonable creature, whose principal part is his
soul, whose office is to live under reason, (whereas these men will live
according to appetite) it is plain, that they turn the wrong side outward;
since they lead a kind of life of beasts; which is a life of bodies; and not a
life, that is reasonable, which is proper to men. And upon this it rises, that
as God is a spirit, and must be served, not by a beastiall manner of life, but
by a spiritual; such persons as these, do not serve him, as has bin said; for
their life is contrary, to his law. And since the union of Christians, grows
from the union of themselves within themselves, and from the union of
themselves with God; these Citizens, being divided from How true do we find
this by experience,
God, cannot have any good, or stable peace with one another; but rather,
certain paltry quarrelles, do spring from their discourses, from their works,
and conuersations; every one living according to his own fancy, without caring
to content any other body. And on the other side, they have a quick sense of
any affront, or injury, which is done to themselves, without regarding that of
others.

These Self love is the bane of Charity.
are the men, who neither use themselves, nor other things, to that end, for
which they were created; but they use both themselves, and all other things,
to their own advantage; making themselves the last end of all things. And
therefore with reason they are called, by the name of Babylon, since all goes
contrary to the creator.

They are also called sometimes, Chald^ans; sometimes of Sodom; and sometimes
of Hedom; with a thousand other names, which decipher the wickedness of this
people; which names are yet all unable, to declare the malice thereof. This is
that people, which is called world (not because God created it so) for the
world is good, as being created by him, who is supremely good; but because
these men, (who are such as I have, here described) have no other feeling, nor
no other love, but of the visible world; which, by 1. Joan. ^.
S. John, is called the pride of life; the desire of the flesh; and the
concupiscence of the eyes. He that loves these things, shall perish, as says
the same S. John; but he that will do the will of God, shall remain for ever.
And S. Paul Romans ^.
says, He that has not the spirit of Christ, is not of Christ; and
consequently, he is to be of the world; and S. James Iac. 4.
says, That the amity of the world, is e^nity with God.

CHAP. XCVIII.
That it does much import us, to fly from this City of the wicked, which is
the world; and how ill it treats the citizens thereof; and of the sad end
which they all shall have.
THOU have already heard sufficient reason, to abhor this people; and to
understand how much God desires, that thou should depart from thence, to
save thy self. For this is that true spiritual Egypt, out of which God
commanded Israel to depart with speed; and to go on, though it were, with a
great deal of pains, toward the Land of promise. And this is that people,
out of which, God commanded Abraham Genesis 12.
to depart; Go out of thine own country, and from thy kindred, and from thy
Fathers house, and come into the land that I will show thee. Which he
accomplished with a simple and sincere obedience; without knowing whither he
was going, as S. Paul Hebr. 11.
affirms. Out of this very people, and City, God commanded Let to go; that
so the punishments which he was resolved to inflict upon that place, might not
lay hold upon him; and he commanded him to save himself in the mountain, by
which the height of Christian Faith, and of good life may be understood.
Finally, How the people of God is to carry it self, and why.
this is the people, whereof God says, to such as he will have to be his own,
Do 2. Cor. ^.
not keep company with infidells. For what conversation, can goodness, and
wickedness, or light, and darkness, have together; and what society can there
be, between Christ, and Belial; between a faithful man, and an infidel; or
what composition, or agreement, can there be, between the Temple of God, and
that of Idols. For you are the Temple, of the living God, as God says. And I
will dwell amongst them, and I will converse amongst them; and I will be their
God, and they shall be my people; and therefore I have come out of the midst of
them. And, Depart, says our Lord, and touch not any thing that is unclean;
and I will receive you, and I will be your Father, and you shall be my Children,
says our Lord omnipotent.

Having heard these promises, thou art to procure, with courage, to make thy
self a meer^ stranger, to this people, both for the good which is promised,
and for the evil, which thereby thou shall avoid. It The extreme danger, of
ill company.
is no safe thing for thee, to remain under a house, which infallibly will
fall, and ouerwhelme, as many as are in it. And we would not give him mean
thanks, who should advertise us of such a danger, which we might decline. Well
Hearken well; for here it is the Angel of God that speaks.
then, know thou for certain* (and I advertise thee of it, on the part of God)
that the day will come, wherein that vision shall be spiritually accomplished,
which S. John Apoc. ^8.
saw, concerning this wicked people, when he said; I saw another Angel, that
descended from heaven, who had great power, and he made the whole earth become
all light, by his bright splendor; and he uttered a voice, with great
strength; and said; Babylon the great is fallen; it is fallen; and it is made
the habitation of Devils; and of every impure spirit, and of every horrible,
and unclean bird. And afterward he said. That an Angel took up a huge stone,
like such an one as they use in milles, and threw it into the sea, and said;
with this force shall the great City of Babylon, be plunged into the sea; and
it shall be heard of no more. And to the end that such as have a desire to save
themselves, may not grow careless, by conceauing perhaps, that the scourge of
God will not lay hold upon them, whilst they are in company with the wicked;
the same S. John affirms, that he heard another voice, which said thus, from
heaven; Get thee out from Babylon, O my people, and be not partaker of her
sins; and do not receive of her marks; for her sins, have reached up to
heaven, and our Lord has remembered her impietyes.

And In what manner the society of the wicked is to be fled.
although it be a thing very profitable, to a good man; even corporally to fly
the company of the wicked; and for such an one, as is but a beginner in
goodness, it is even necessary (unless he mean to undo himself); yet that
going out of the midst of Babylon, which here is commanded by God, is to be
understood (as S. Augustine says) for a going out with the heart, from amongst
the wicked, loving that which they abhor; and abhorring that which they love.
For if we look but upon that which is external, Jerusalem, and Babylon, may
be not only in the same City (for as much as concerns corporal presence)
but even in the same house. But if we respect their hearts, they will be found to
be far a sunder; and Jerusalem which is the City of God, will be found to be in
the one; and Babylon, the City of the wicked, in the other.

Forget therefore thy people; and get thee up to the people of Christ; being
well assured, that thou shall never be able to begin the leading of a new life,
unless with grief thou first forsake thy old. Remember how S. Paul Heb. ^3.
says, That our Lord Jesus, for the sanctification of his people, by his
blood, suffered death without the gates of Jerusalem. And since that is so,
let us go toward him, out of our tents, and let us imitate his dishonor.
This says S. Paul; giving us this lesson thereby, That Christ did therefore
suffer without the City, to give us to understand, that if we mean to follow
him, we must also go our of the City, whereof we have spoken, which is the
congregation, of such persons, as The very root of all sin.
love themselves, after an inordinate manner. Christ our Savior could easily
have cured the blind man in Marc. ^.
Bethsaida; but he chose to draw him out, and so to give him his eyesight; and
thereby to make us also know, that when we shall be retired, from that common
life, which is lead by the multitude, we are to be cured by Christ, in
following that Matt. 7.
strait way, wherein, truth it self has told us, that few do walk.

Let If we pretend to serve christ our Lord, we must forsake and forswear the
service of the wicked world.
no man deceive thee. Christ will none of them, who will both perform his
will, and the will of the world. And by his own blessed mouth, he has assured
us, That Matt. 6.
no man, can serve two masters. And since he said, That he was not of the
world; and that his disciples, were not of the world; and that his kingdom was
not of the world; it is not reason, that thou be of it; if it were but for
fear of not coming to such an end, as ouertooke the disobedient 2. Reg. 1^.
Absalom. Who being hanged by his hair, upon an oak, was transpierced with
three lances, by the hand of Ioab, and so, as he was hanging, he dyed. For thus
shall it happen to the man, who is disobedient to our Lord of heaven. Which
Lord, he does even persecute by his wicked life; and whose affections and
thoghts, like so many hairs of the head, do hold him hanging, upon this world.
For all his ambition is, how he may be made great upon earth; and that he may
have fair days, in this transitory life of his. But what can he get by this,
since the tree, whereon he hanges, is an Remember the story of the prodigal son.
Oak, which yealdes no fruit, but for swine. And so this world, gives no
contentment, or fruit at all, but to bestiall men, whom the Devil does pass
through, with three lances; pride of life; the desires of the flesh; and
concupiscence of the eyes, the How miserably sinners at treated by the devil,
not only in the next life, but even in this.
Devil, I say, who is called the prince of this world; because he rules, and
commands wicked men; whilst yet he treats his followers, in such a
fashion; as that he fills them not, with so much as the food of swine; but like
as to another Iud. 1^
Adonibesech, he cutteth off the ends of their feet, and of their hands; to
disable them, from doing any thing that is good; and then he casts them under
the table, that they may feed; yet still, not upon full dishes, but upon the
crumms that he knows not how to bestow elsewhere. He keeps them hungry for
the present; and he will carry them afterward with himself, to a place where
there will be eternal hunger; in company of other torments, for that is all
that he can give. Such is the entertainment that he makes; which were
sufficient (if men would but look upon it) to make them fly from the Devil,
and the World; and to draw near to God; as the prodigal son did; who
finding himself put to so base an employment, as to keep swine; and that he
could not have enough even, of the very food which they fed upon; he grew at
last, to get his wits again; and to observe the difference which there was,
between being in the house of his Father, and in that other house of the World;
and he left the ill condition wherein he was, turning home, and dema^ding mercy
of his Father, which he quickly found.

Do How we must carry our selves toward God, if we desire to take comfort in
his service.
thou also, in like manner; and if thou have a mind, that our Lord should
receive thee, Forsake thy people. And if thou will have him remember thee,
forget thou it; and if thou will have him love thee, do not inordinatly love
thy self; and if thou will have him take care of thee, do not thou confide, in
the care of thy self; and if thou will be acceptable to his eyes, take no
pleasure in thine own; and if thou resolve to please him, do not fear to
displease the whole world, for him; and if thou desire to find him, make no
difficulty to give away thy Father, thy Mother, thy Brothers, thy house, and
thy very life for him. Not, for that thou art to abhor these things; but
because it is fit for thee, to look with truth, and with entire love upon
Christ; and The just obligation of a Christian.
not to fail of one hairs breadth, in pleasing of him, though it be with the
displeasing of that creature, of the whole world, which is most beloved by
thee, yea and of thy very self. S. Paul 1. Cor. 3.
requires, That We must do nothing, nor have any thing so much at the heart as
to estrange us from conuersing with almighty God.
they who have wives, should have them, as if they had them not; That they who
purchase, should be as if they possessed not; That they who sell, should be, as
if they had not sold; They that weep, as if they wept not; and, They that
rejoice, as if they rejoiced not. And the cause that he adds, is this,
Because the figure of the world passes quickly. So then, do I say to thee, O
Virgin, that thou art to put the world, and thy self, away. The Note.
first, because it passes quickly; and the second, because it is none of
thine. And so, have thou thy parents, thy brothers, thy kindred, thy house, and
thy people, as if thou haddst them not. Not but that thou art to reverence,
obey, and love them, since grace does not destroy the order of nature; (yoa and
even in heaven it self, the child shall carry reverence to his Father) but How
this discourse is to be understood.
to the end that it may not take up, and employe thy heart, and divert it from
the love of God. Love them in Christ, and not in themselves. For Christ did not
give them, as meaning that they should be impediments, to keep thee from that
which thou should ever be doing, which is, to serve him. S. Hierome
relates, of a certain Virgin, who was so mortified in the point of affection
toward her kindred, that she cared not much to see a sister, which she had,
though she also were a Virgin; but contented her self to love her in God.
Believe me; A sovereign truth; and most fit to be so.
that as thou can not write in parchment, if it be not well, and clean taken
off from the body of the beast that wore it; so is not that soul prepared, for
our Lord to write particular favors in it, till such time as the affections
which rise from flesh and blood, be very well mortifyed. We read, how that in
times past, They placed the Arc upon a carre; to the end that two kine, being
yoaked in front, might lead it on, and the calves were shut up, in a certain
place. And although the kine, did low in the way of sighing, for their calves;
yet did they never leave the high way, nor turn back, nor degresse, as the
Scripture says, either to the right hand, or to the left; but, by the will of
God, who so disposed thereof, They carried the Arc to the land of Israel, which
was the place where God dwelt.

They A figur of the old testament excellently applied.
who have placed the Cross of Jesus Christ our Lord, upon their shoulders,
(which is the Arc where he remains, and wherein he is truly to be found)
must not give over, nor so much as slack their pace, for these natural
affections, of the love of parents, or children, or houses, or such other
things, as these. Nor are they to be giddy-headed, upon the enjoying of
prosperity, nor to be afflicted for adversity. For the former of these two, is
to turn out of the way, on the right hand; and the other, on the left. But
thou art to follow on in the straight way, with fervor; beseeching our Lord to
guide both the one, and the other to his glory; and to be as dead to such
things as these, as if they did nothing concern thee; or, at least, not to
suffer thy self to be overcome, either with joy, or grief, howsoever they may
be felt a little. This was figured by those 1. Reg. 6.
kine, which though they uttered certain shows of tenderness, toward their
calves, yet did they not, for all that, give over to conduct the Ark of God.
And if Fathers do see their Sonns serve God in some good As when they make
themselves Religious men or women.
fashion, (which yet is not pleasing unto them) they must consider, what is
pleasing to God. And although they may sigh deeply, for the love of their
children, yet let the love of God, ouercom that love. And let them offer them
up to God; wherein they shall be like to Genesis 22.
Abraham, who in obedience to God, was resolved to kill his only Son; not
caring what his sensuality could say, to the contrary. And How good is God?
only he will be served as God.
the natural grief which is felt in such traunces as these, is to be endured
with patience, which yet shall not be without reward. For as much as, our Lord
has ordained us to carry those affections, and for the love of him it is, that
we overcome them; and it is like the case of him, that suffers Martyrdom.

Forget therefore thy people, O thou Virgin; and be thou like to another
Melchisedech, of whom we read not, that Heb. 7.
he had any Father, or Mother, or any kindred; whereby, as S. Bernard says, an
example is given, to the servants of God, that they must so truly forget their
people, and their kindred; that, in their hearts, they may be a kind of
Melchisedech, in this world; without having any thing in those hearts, which
may captive them, or so much as foreslow the pace, which they make in the way
of God.

CHAP. XCIX.
Of the vanity of being nobly borne; and that such persons must not brag
thereof, as desire to be of the kindred of Christ.
I would not have thee blinded, by that vanity, which blinds many, whilst
they presume upon the extraction of their blood. And therefore I will tell
thee, what S. Hierome says, to a certain virgin: I will not (says he) have
thee behold those Virgins, who are Virgins of the world, and not of Christ. And
who, not remembering their good purpose begun, do take joy in pleasure; and do
please themselves in vanity; and glory in corporal things; and in the
antiquity of their descent. Who if The extreme value of temporal nobility,
shows that men understand not the true value of that nobility which is
spiritual.
they did, indeed, hold themselves for the Children of God, they would never,
after they had bin borne divinely of him, make any estimation of this temporal
nobility. And if they felt, that God were become their Father, they would not
value the nobility of other parents. Why do thou glory in such nobility of
descent? God, made one man, and one woman, in the beginning of the world; from
whom the multitude of mankind, descends. This In nature there is no
difference of nobility.
Nobility of lineage, is not given by nature, which is alike to all, but by the
appetite of ambition. Nor ought there to be any difference That in spiritual
nobility, there is also no difference between one and another.
between them, who are begotten, according to this second spiritual birth*
whereby as well the poor, as the rich, the slave, as the free man, may be
accoumpted to be of noble lineage; and without which, they are never made the
sons of God. The descent of flesh and blood, is wholly obscured by the
brightness of this heavenly honor; and appears not to be any thing at all;
now that they w^o, before were unequal, in respect of worldly honor, are
equally apparelled, with the Nobility of that ot^^er honor, which is
spiritual, and divine. No place is there left for this vain kind of lineage;
and none of them can be thought, to be without Nobility, who are beautifyed by
the height of a heavenly birth. And if that former be esteemed, it is but in
the mind of them who value temporal things, more then eternal. Which
temporal advantage although the^ have, how vainly do they proceed, who
esteem themselves more for less things; then they esteem others, whom they
know to be equal to themselves in greater things; and who esteem others, as
men creeping upon the ground and far inferior unto themselves* whom yet they
believe to be their equals, in celestial things. But whatsoever thou be of
birth, O Virgin, (thou who art of Christ, and not of the world) fly away from
all glory of this present life, that thou may obtain all that, which is
promised in the life to come. All this is said by S. Hierome.

Hereby thou may see, how necessary it is, for thee, To forget thy people,
and the house of thy Father; remembering well, that the privilege which thy
parents gave thee, was to be conceived in sin, and filled full of many
miseryes; and to be borne in the wrath of God, by the first sin of Adam,
which we inherit by our conception. A The baseness of the body.
body they bestowed upon us, which was begotten in such a loathsome manner,
that it would cost a man shame to speak of it, and makes him loath, to think
of it. Into which, the soul being infused, after the creation thereof, does
grow to be spotted with original sin; which yet by the hand of God, was
created without it. Our body is besides, full of a thousand necessityes; and
subject to sicknesses, and death; and made fit to do penance by suffering it.
Such a body it is, that Consider seriously of this.
if thou should take of, but the first thynne skin, that couers it, the
most beautyfull creature, would be abominable. A body, which if thou observe
to be exteriourly white, and yet consider the trash which is shut up within;
thou will say, it is some dunghill, over cast with snow. A body whereof I would
to God, the worst condition were, to be full of pain, and shame; but this is
the least matter, of all the rest. That The emni^y of a sinful body to a
soul.
which imports, is, that it is the greatest enemy which we have, and the
greatest traitor it is, which was ever seen; who goes up and down in
pursuit, how to plunge that The soul.
thing into death, and death eternal, which gives it bread to eat, and
whatsoever else is necessary for a body. And which, for the enjoying of a
little pleasure, does set, at nothing the giving of any offense to God, and the
casting of the soul into hell fire. A body; which is as sloathfull as an ass;
and as malicious as a mule. And if thou believe not me, let it but go a while,
without a bridle, and do thou but neglect a little, to keep it in order; and
thou shall see, whether it be a wicked thing or no.

O Vanity, which deserves to be despised, in them, that presume upon their
descent; whereas all the souls of men, are created immediately by God; and we
have not them, by inheritance. And as for the flesh, which is inherited; it
ought to serve us, but for matter of shame, and fear. Let such give ear, to
that which God has said by Isa. 4.
Isaias. Cry out; and what shall I cry out upon, says the Prophet. Our Lord
made this answer, That all flesh, is but withred grass; and all the glory
thereof, as the fading flower, of the field. God commanded his Prophet, to cry
out; but yet deaf men did not hear him, who resolved to A preposterous and
absurd kind of pride.
glory more, in that filth which they drew from their flesh; then in that
height of dignity, which by the holy ghost was granted to them.

Be not thou blind, be not unthankful, O thou spouse of Christ. The
estimation which God makes of thee, is not for thy birth of blood* but for thy
being a Christian: not because thou were borne in that sumptuous Chamber; but
because thou were borne again, by holy Baptisime. The former of these births,
was of dishonor; the later was of honor; the former of baseness, the later of
nobility; The first of sin, the second of Justification from sin; The first
of flesh, which kills, the second of spirit, which quickens. B^ the first, we
are made the sons of men; by the second, the sons of God; By the first as
we be out Fathers heirs to their estates; we are also there heirs in being
made sinners by them, and full of many other miseryes; but by the second, we
are made the brethren of Christ, and jointly the heirs of heaven, with him.
For the present, we receive the holy ghost; but we hope hereafter, to see God
face to face.

Well An ignorant and most inexcusable error.
then; and what do thou think that God will say to that person, who shall
prize himself more, as being borne of men, whereby he became a sinful and
miserable creature; then for the being borne again of God, whereby he presently
becomes just, and may, afterward, be happy These Note this comparison.
men are like to some one who being begotten by a King, upon the body of some
most ugly slave, should prize himself, for being her son, and should talk
much thereof; and should never consider, or remember himself, to be the son
of the King* Forget therefore thy people; that so thou may be of the people
of God. The wicked people is thine own, and therefore it is said, Forget thy
people; for of thy self thou art a sinner, and a very vile one. But if thou
will shake of, that which is thine, our Lord will receive thee into that, which
is his; into his nobility: into his justification; into his love; but as long
as thou will cleave to thy self, thou shall not be enriched by him. Christ
will have thee all naked; for he means to give thee a dowry; and he has
where withal Of thy self thou have nothing but to be full of debts. Forget We
must forget our people, more ways the^ one.
thy people; That is, forget to be a sinner; and grow a stranger, to thy
ancient faults Forget thy people, and set not so high a price upon Nobility of
blood. Forget thy people, by casting all kind of tumult out of thy heart; and
make account, that thou art in some desert, hand to hand with Almighty God.
Forget, in fine, thy people, since there are so many, and solid reasons, why
thou should forget it.

CHAP. C.
Wherein he begins to declare that other word, And forget the house of thy
Father. And how much it imports us, to fly from our own will, in imitation
of Christ our Lord; ^or the avoiding of those inconveniences which grow from
thence.
THERE follows here, another word, which says, And forget the house of thy
Father. This Father is the How the devil may be called the Father of sinful
men, and why.
Devil; for as S. John says, He that commits sin, is of the Devil; for
the Devil did sin from the beginning. Not that he did create, or beget wicked
men; but because they imitate his works; and he, according to the holy
Gospel, is said to be another Son, who imitates the works of that other.
This wretched Father, lives in the world; that is, in wicked men, as it is
written in Job. 4.
Job, He sleeps in the shadow, and in the hollow part of a reed, and in
moist places. A A place of holy Scripture excellently pondered.
shadow, are the riches of this world. For they give not that rest which they
promise; but pricking the heart which cares, like so many thorns; the owners of
them do find by experience, that they are not true riches, but they are a mere
shadow of riches; and they are, true poverty; and nothing less, then that
which their name does pretend.

A The vanity of transitory honor and glory.
cane or reed, is the glory of this world; and how much the fairer and bigger
it appears exteriourly, so much the more hollownes does it hold. Yea, and even
that very exterior, is so very subject to change, that with reason it may be
called a reed which declines, at the commandment of every wind.

Moist The baseness and weakness of men, given over to worldly pleasures.
places, are those souls which are dissolved by carnal pleasures, after which
they run, without any bridle. Just contrary to them, of whom the holy
gospel says, That Matt. 11.
the unclean spirit, departing out of that man, whom he had formerly
inhabited, goes seeking where he may be, and he walks his round, through dry
places, desiring entertainment but finds none. For in souls, which keep a
loofe from these carnal appetites, the devil cannot find a lodging; but his
place of abode, is in covetousness, ambition, and sensuality. Therefore is it,
that he is called the Prince of this world; the ruler and the Lord thereof; not
still, in any respect of his having created it; but because wicked men, who are
of God by creation, will needs be of the Devil by imitation. Conforming
themselves to his will, that so, with justice, they may also be made conform
with him, in the torments of hell; as, at the latter day, it will be sadly, and
plainly said to them, by the mouth of Christ; Go Matt. 25.
you cursed, into everlasting fire; prepared for the Devil, and for his
Angels. And if we consider well, what kind of thing this house of the Devil
is, we shall find, that it is, the lewd will, of wicked men; wherein How the
Devil is seated, in a sinful will.
the devil takes up his seat, as he would do, in a chair, commanding from
thence, the whole man.

To forget therefore, thy Fathers house, is no other thing, but to forget, and
to forsake thine own will; wherein thou may have sometimes given
entertainment to this wicked Father; and to embrace, instead thereof, the will
of God, with an entire, and faithful heart, saying to him, Thy will O Lord, and
not mine, be done. This admonition, is one of the most profitable, that can be
given us. For by casting away our will, we shall put away our sins, as The
will is the root; and the sin is the branch.
branches, are cut off from the root. This 2. Tim. 3.
S. Paul does note, when recounting the multitude of sins, which These days
of ours.
in the latter day, would be committed; he says, That men would be lovers of
themselves. Giving us thereby to understand, as the commentary declares; That
the inordinate love of a man's self, is the head, and root of all sins; and
that upon the taking away thereof, a man grows to be in subjection to God,
from whom, all his good proceeds.

Again, A most profitable consideration.
the cause of all our disgustes, our melancholies, and our affliction, is no
other thing, then our own will, which we would feign have to be accomplished;
and when it is not, we are in pain; but this being taken away, what is there
that can trouble us? For Note.
as much as, sadness does not necessarily rise, from the very coming of any
troublesome thing, toward us; but from our unwillingness, that it should
come. Nor is the pain alone of this world, put away, by the putting away of
our will, but of the other also. For, as S. Bernard says, Let the will of man
cease to do ill, and there will be no more use of hell. But as it is the most
profitable of all things, to deny a man's own will; so There is no taming of
the will, but by the hand of God.
is it also, the hardest of the whole world. Yea, and how much soever we may
labor, we shall never arrive to the obtaining of it; if that Lord, who
commanded the grauestone of the dead, and buried Lazarus, to be removed, do
not also remove this hardness, (which oppresses such as it lies upon) and
unless he kill this strong Golias, whom none can conquer, but only he, who
is invincible.

But though we are not able, of our selves, to retire our necks from under
these massy chains; yet Our own endeavor must not be wanting.
must we not fail to use our best endeavor; according unto that proportion of
strength, which our Lord shall give us. Whom also with our hearts we must
inuoke for his assistance; and withal consider, the mischief that we fall
into, by following it; and the blessings that we obtain by flying it.
Consider also, the sublime example of Christ our Lord, who says thus of
himself; I Joan. 6.
came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but his that sent me. And
this he did not, in matters only, of small importance, as some do; but in cases
of great affront, which might even arrive to the very soul. Such was Christ's
enduring of the Passion for us; but therein he conformed himself, to the will
of his Father, casting away the inclination of flesh, and blood, which might
have been, not to suffer. To give us an example hereby, that nothing ought to
be so beloved by us, which if God do so command, we will not be ready to cast
away; and that nothing also may be so painful, which we may not for love of
him, embrace.

CHAP. CI.
Of a kind of practice, in the denying of our own will; and of the obedience
that we owe to our Superiors; which is a way, how to obtain the abnegation of
our will; and how a superior is to carry himself, with his subjects.
Now because we cannot get up to the top, if we begin not below, I do advertise
thee, that to the end thou may arrive to the height of denying thy will, in
greater matters; thou must accustom thy self to do it in things, that are
small. Not to rest therein, but to pass on, by them, to such others, as are of
more importance. Do not perform, or say, yea There is great difference
between a bare thinking; and a thinking with consent.
or think, any thing with consent, which may be directed to the end, of
performing thine own will, and pleasure. But, as soon as thou find thy
self, carried with much mind to any thing; let that serve thee for a rule,
that thou art not to do it. For An excellent truth, and which enricheth that
soul, by which it is faithfully put in practice.
exterior things, ought not to take, and carry thee prisoner to them; but
thou, with This is another manner of Christian liberty then that of Protestants.
Christian liberty, art to bring them home, to thy self. Before thou eatest,
thou art to A direction full of profit, and fit for practice.
mortify, any appetite which thou may have to gluttony; and ordain thy
meal, as an act of obedience to God, who commands thee to eat, for the
maintenance of thy life. So before thou go about any business of gain, thou
art first to mortify thy covetousness; and then, to go about thy business,
because God commands it, toward the relief, either of thine own
necessityes, or of thy neighbors. And by these examples, thou may learn how
to put away the propriety of thy will, in all things; and to do them because
God, or thy Superiors, command them.

Remember, that this is the manner, wherein those old Fathers of the wilderness,
did breed up their disciples; depriving them of that, which they desired; and
making them do that, which they misliked; to the end that they might wholly grow
to an abnegation of their will. And such persons, as they had satisfaction of,
in this particular, they hoped would arrive to perfection; and of others, they
had an ill opinion; as thinking, that they, who would fail in t^^fles, would
do it more, in greater matters. For a will, which is accustomed, to do what
it has a mind unto in things of little moment, will find it to be very
rebellious, when in greater matters, it should contradict it self. I would
therefore have thee, abase thy self; and become subject to This doctrine is
very high and hard; but it is most true.
all creaturs, as S. Peter says; and be content that any one might pass over,
and tread upon thee, and contradict thy will; and use thee like a handful of
durte. And whosoever shall assist thee most in this; him love, and be grateful
to him; because he helps thee to overcome thine enemies, which are thine own
opinion, and thy will.

Make therefore account, that He speaks here to such as are religious,
professed by vow.
thy Abbess, is thy mother whom thou art to obey, with profound humility, and
without being weary. And be not as some are, who in taking a kind of gravity
upon them grow unruly, and cast off all that obedience, which they owe to their
parents, and Superiors; not submitting themselves to them, even whylest they
are in house together. Yea some do part house, without leave; and all, under
pretense, of serving God; whereas indeed there is nothing more contrary to
that, then the thing which these persons do.

Christ The admirable obedience of Christ our Lord.
our Lord, was obedient to his Father, both in life and death; and so also, did
he obey his most holy Mother, yea and S. Joseph also, as is related by Luc. 2.
S. Luke. And let no man think, that without obedience, he shall be able to
please him, who was so great a friend to this virtue; as that rather then loose
it, he would lay down his life, upon a Cross. And do not wonder, that I so
earnestly recommend obedience to thee; For as the greatest danger that thy
state is subject to, is, that thou art not in religious clausure; so unless
thou provide well for thy self, by denying thine own will, and to be subject
to another, thou will have added one danger to another; and it will go ill
with thee in the end; for Neither will all this serve, unless extraordinary
recollection be used withal according to the judgment of this Author in
diverse places of this book; and of S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, and all the Fathers.
thy security must consist in the renunciation of liberty. Do not therefore
content thy self, with obeying thy parents only; but do it also, to the rest
of the house, who are thy elders. And if perfectly thou will be obedient, obey
also thy inferiors; so that yet the government and order of the house, be not
disturbed thereby. But yet if there be a necessity, that thou should command
exteriourly, at least, hold thy self for inferior, in thy heart.

And for the doing of this with the more courage; remember, how our sovereign
Lord, and Master, did Joan. 13.
kneel down to the ground, as if he had been an inferior, and subject to
wash the feet, not only of them that loved him; but of him who employed those
very feet being washed, to give up, into the hands of death, that very man who
had washed them, with The ineffable humility and chaof our Lord Jesus.
so great humility, and love. Call this passage many times to mind; and let the
word, which then he said be rooted in thy soul; If I, being your Lord, and
Master, have washed your feet; how much more ought you to wash the feet of one
another? And so love thy inferiors, which are in thy house, as if thou were
their Father or Mother; and labor for them, as if thou were their slave;
taking the impertinency of their conversation, the superfluity of their speech,
yea and the injurious works of their hands, with patience. Be not humble
toward them who live abroad, and proud amongst them whom thou have at home.
Practice virtue with them, whom thou have under thine eye, and near at hand;
and make trial of thy self at home; that thou may know how to converse
abroad. And remember that holy woman, S. Catherine of Siena, who was instructed
by God; and whose life I desire that thou should read; not to make thee covet
her revelations, but to breed in thee an imitation of her virtues. For although
her parenas, did hinder her in the way which she had taken, toward the service
of God; she did neither trouble her self, nor abandon them. They cast her out
of her little Oratory, where she used to perform her devotions; and they
appointed her to serve in the Kitchen. But because she humbled her self, and
obeyed them, she found God in the God is every where the rewarder of humility.
Kitchen, as well, or better, then in her Oratory.

Do not torment thy self, if at the time when thou have a mind to pray, thy
parents, or He seems here, to mean the Ghostly Father.
Prelates would have thee do somewhat else. But offering that desire of thine
to our Lord, do that which is enjoined; by thy Superiors, with much humility,
and peace of mind; being confident, that in obeying thy superiors, thou
obeyest God; it being so appointed by him, in his fourth commandment. Neither
yet, is it forbidden hereby, but that, with humility, thou may beseech thy
parents, to allow thee some retired place, and some vacant time for thy
spiritual exercises. And first having begged it of our Lord, have thou so
firm a trust in his goodness, that whether it be granted thee or no, it
shall be all for thy profit, if thou take at from the hand of God, with Two
parts, worth the laboring for.
obedience, and peace of mind. And as for thy parents, they shall give account
to our Lord, of that which they command thee, and it shall be no superficial
account. But thou art not to consider that; let them look to it; for, as S.
Ambrose says, It is a favor of God, and full of profit, for a man to have a
son, or daughter, who will serve his divine Majesty, in state of Virginity;
with contempt of the world, by a particular vocation to a spiritual life.

CHAP. CII.
That, not all those things which we desire to do, or demand to have; are to
be called a man's proper will; and how we may know what our Lord demands at
our hands.
IF thou have well considered, that which has bin said to thee, in those
former words; thou will easily have perceived, that two things were
recommended to thee. The one, The flying of thine own will; The other the
following of the will of God. Now for the declaration of these two things, I
must let thee know; that for thee to desire, or beg in particular manner of
Almighty God, that he will deliver thee out of any spiritual inconvenience,
whereof thou art most in danger; or, that he will impart some virtue to thee,
whereof thou art in particular need, is not any vicious act, of thine own will,
but it is a means, and that a good one, to enable thee to fulfill the will of
God; who commands us, to depart from evil, and to do good. For, if thou
observe it well, thy begging of a thing in particular, through It is good to
beg any particular grace of our Lord in a particular manner, for so it will be
done with more zeal.
the particular necessity thereof, wherein thou art; does help thee to ask it,
with greater efficacy; and with a more profound sigh of thy heart; which are
means, whereby God is induced the more easily to grant that which is desired.
Which very thing would not perhaps be granted, if it were asked with that
tepidity, which uses to accompany requests which are made in general
terms. And this doctrine is agreeable, to the holy Scripture. since our Lord
himself does teach us, in that prayer of the Pater Noster, to ask things in
particular manner. And so also, did the Prophet David, as his particular
necessities did present themselves; and so have other Saints used to do, when
they asked any thing, either for themselves, or others. And although, the same
may also be done, whylest we are desiring temporal things, of God, (as we
read of the Marc. 10.
blind man, who begged his sight, and of many others) yet because nothing that
is temporal, deserves to be much esteemed; (and the love whereof, does use to
carry danger with it, (and the contempt whereof, deserves praise) so great
liberty is not given us, to discharge our hearts wholly in the desire, and suite
for such things, as for spiritual; although it be not ill done of us, to
demand temporal things; so that it be without excess of earnestnes, and
under this condition, if it so be pleasing unto our Lord.

Concerning the accomplishment of the will of our Lord, (wherein consists all
our good) thou will ask perhaps, How may I know, what that is? To which I
answer, That A certain rule how to know what is the will of God.
whenever the word, or commandment of God, or of his Church, does ordain
any thing, thou art to make no further inquiry; but to rest assured, that it
is the will of our Lord. And when there is no such express commaundment,
esteem that to be of the same rank, which is imposed on thee by thy
superior; if it do not evidently appear to be against the law of God, or of
his Church; or the light of Nature. For since S. Paul Romans 1^.
says, That although the superior be an infidel; yet the Christian man must
obey him; and that, not only to avoid punishment, but by obligation of
conscience; how much more then, must this be true, in the case of Christian
superiors; of whom we are to Unless, we do expressly see the contrary.
believe, that God will enable them to command just things And when any of all
these commandments shall be wanting to thee; thou shall embrace and follow (as
the will of our Lord) that counsel which any such person shall give, of whom
thou ought to take it. And do not think, for all this, that thou art
exempted, from the necessity of begging the light of the Holy Ghost; that so
thou may take right, to the service of God. For our necessityes are so many,
and do press us in so particular manner; that no Master, without this, will
serve the turn. And so, The King will grow to desire thy beauty.

CHAP. CIII.
Wherein he begins to declare that word, which says, And the King, will
desire thy beauty. And how great a matter it is, that God should be content to
place his love, upon a man. And that this is no corporeal beauty; and how
dangerous such kind of beauty is.
A Strange thing it is, that there should be any such beauty in a creature; as
to draw the blessed eyes of God upon it; so far, as to be desired by him. It is
a most happy thing, for a soul to be enamoured upon the beauty of God; but
neither is it strange, that an ugly thing, should love the perfection of al
beauty or is it worthy of thanks, if a creature, do love his Creator; since
he owes him all that, and does yet further, receive for it, an eternal reward.
But, for God to be enamoured, and delighted in any of his creatures; this
indeed is to be admired, and most soueraingly to be acknowledged; and it gives
us reason, of incomparable glory, and joy. If A strange thing it is that the
great God should be taken with the love of the base creature, Man.
it be matter of much honor for a man to be imprisoned for Jesus Christ (and
S. Paul did call himself, as by the most noble title he could have, a Ephesians. 1.
Phil^p. 1.
Prisoner of Jesus Christ, having his body restrained by chains of iron, and
his soul by chains of love;) what kind of thing shall we say it is; for man,
to have taken God prisoner, by the love of God. If it be great riches, for a
man not to have any heart of his own, but wholly to have given it to God; what
kind of thing will it be, for us to have the heart of God, as our own; which he
gives to them, to whom he gives his love; and after his heart, he sends all
that, which he is; for theirs without doubt we are, to whom we give away our
hearts.

Many, and great are those benefits, which that infinite divine goodness,
imparteth to men. But yet as if all the rest deserved to be little esteemed, in
respect of this, Job Job. 7.
said. O Lord, what thing is man that so thou should magnify him, and place
thy heart upon him. Giving us so to understand; that since, by Gods giving his
heart to man, he gives himself; there A sovereign cordial, against all the
corosiues of this life.
is as much difference, between giving the heart for love, and the giving of
other things, as there is, between giving of God, and giving of creaturs. And
if we owe our thanks to him for other of his guiftes; the principal reason is,
because he imparteth them with love. And if we ought to rejoice by occasion of
the benefits themselves, much more ought we to do it, in regard that we have
found favor, and love, in those most sublime eyes of God.

This The true glory of a Christian.
indeed, is our true greatenes wherein we may glory, and not because we love
him. For And now let Protestants consider, what shrewd presumptuous people
these Papists are.
cursed is that man, who makes any account of himself, and who prizeth
himself, for the works he does; but only, in regard that so high a King,
(whom all those quires of Angels do adore) would, through the excess of his
goodness, be content to lone so base things, as our selves. Consider therefore
now, O virgin, if it be not reason for thee to hear, and to see, and to
incline thine care to God; since the reward thereof, is, that he will desire thy
beauty. Certainly, although the things that he should require, were full of
difficulty, they would grow easy, to be accomplished, by the addition of such
promises as these. And how much more then must it be easy, since the thing it
self, which he commands, is, by his grace, not hard. But thou will say
perhaps, how comes the soul to have beauty, since of it self, it is
sinful? and of sinners it is Th^en. 4.
written, That the face of such, is more black, then coals.

If this Lord of ours, went in search of the beauty of bodies, it were no
miracle if he should find such a kind of beauty as were corporeal. For as
himself is beautyfull, so did he create all things beautyfull; that so they
might carry with them, some little obscure trace, of his own incomprehensible
beauty; in comparison whereof, al other beauty, is mere deformity. But we
know, that David speaking of the spouse, of this great King, Psalm. 44.
says, That all her beauty is interior, and in her soul. And this he says,
with great reason. For What a toy exterior beauty is.
the beauty of a Body, is a mere toye; and may be enjoyed by him, who is the
owner of an ugly soul. Now for what does it serve, if a man have deformity in
that, which is of more value; and if he have beauty, in that which is of no
importance? For what does that beauty serve, which the eyes of men may look
upon; when yet there is deformity within, which is penetrated by the eyes of
God? On the outside an Angel, in the inside a Devil.

Not Beautiful persons have no such great bargain of it as they conceive.
only, does this corporeal beauty not profit a person, toward the making him
beloved by God; but for the most part, it gives occasion of making him,
vnbeloued. For, as spiritual beauty gives understanding and wisdom; so is
the other wont to take it away. It is no small war, which many times is
waged, between Chastity, humility and recollection on the one side; and beauty
of the body, on the other. And much better had it been for many women, to have
had a countenance extremely deformed (that so they might not have been fought
withal) then great beauty with great vanity, whereby they were vanquished. God
delivers it thus, for no small mischief, when he says, to such a soul,
Thou Ezech. 16. and 28.
have lost thy wisdom, by thy beauty. And he says elsewhere, Thou have made
thy beauty abominable. And this he affirms; because when lewdenes of mind is
accompanied with beauty of body; such beauty becomes abominable, and grows
to be true deformity.

I well see, and confess, if the minds of men and women, which look upon
objects of beauty, were Di quibus in terris.
pure in seeking God, and none but God in his creatures; that how much more
beautiful the objects were, so much more, would it be to them, a bright
glass, wherein they might behold Gods beauty. But where now lives he, or she,
who has not cause to fear, what the Scripture says; That Sap. 14.
the creatures are grown to be as a snare, and as a trappe for the feet of
fools? such, as they are, who use them toward the offense of God; and who
remain and rest, only in them; whereas they were created, to the end that we
might the better serve God, and ascend to him, by their means, as by a ladder.
Of this troop was S. Augustine, for a while; but he lamented it And so, as
that never man, I think, did it more bitterly, and yet more sweetly, then he.
afterward; and said, I rushed, O Lord, upon those creatures, which thou had
made fair; and I, the while, was deformed. And where, is now so great purity,
in any woman of beauty, as that she will so much more carefully keep clean her
soul, as men discern more beauty in her body?

We do, naturally, more fly, from defiling our selves, when we are very clean,
then when we are not altogether so; and yet many, proceed in contrariety to
this rule; who if they were foul, would And so much the more will they have to
answer for.
not sin so much; and even from their being clean, they fetch a kind of
reason, to become filthy. Of these it is, that the Prou. 11.
Scripture says, As the ornament of gold, is in the snowt of a boar, so is
the fair woman, who is foolish. Little honor, would the boar think that he
received, by having that gold in his snowt; nor would he, for all the shining
thereof, forbear to foul it, and to thrust it into stinking dirt. Just so, is
the sensual woman, who imployeth her beauty, (without so much as the rising of
her stomach), in a thousand dishonesties, and loathsome actions, both of body
and soul.

Now He grows on to another excellent consideration.
if beauty do not help, but hinder the keeping of ones own soul clean, what
think thou that it procures, in the souls of them that look upon it? O how
happy a thing it were, for them, not to have eyes, wherewith to look, nor
feet wherewith to go; nor hands wherewith to adorn themselves; nor humor
either to see, or to be seen; since by occasion of these things, there
grows a resolute desire, of an unjust delight; and the giving of so many
mortal wounds, to their soul, as they entertain such resolute desires. And
of these who shall be able to count the number?

What will here, these wretched men; and these miserable women be able to say,
(who in appearance are so fair, and in very deed so deformed) when that
beauty of their body, shall once fail, whereupon they have employed so much
pains? And when they shall be grown to stinck, as truly in their sepulchers,
as their souls did truly stincke, whilst here they went, under the cover of
their fair bodies. And when they shall be presented, wholly naked, and destitute
of all graces, before the eyes of him, whom they took no care to please; and
when they shall be confounded, with the shame of their secret sins. Finding
then, by experience, that the day is come, wherewith God threatened them thus so
long before, I destroy the names, of the Idols, of the earth. An An Idol she
is more ways the^ one.
Idol, is this beautiful and sinful woman, who will needs be counterfayting
the true God, and painting her self as God did not make her; and procuring
that the hearts of men may wickedly be employed on her; and executing, to this
purpose, all she can; and desiring, even to do that, which she cannot. The
names of those men, who are so often mentioned by these women, God will
destroy; and they shall know, that it serves for nothing, to be so mentioned in
the mouths of flesh and blood; if withal, their names be razed, out of the
book of God.

Concerning this kind of beauty, I admonish thee, O Virgin of Christ, that thou
do not so much, as call it to mind. For Note this reason, which is so well set
of, by an excellent comparison.
if even women, who are vain, do pass without any great care thereof, (where
they are not seen by men) and do (as it were) lay up, their beauty, against
such a time, as when it may be seen, either by store of people, or some
renowned Prince; how much more, is the Virgin of Christ to proceed thus?
Expecting that day, when she is to be seen, by all the Angels of God, at
once; yea, and by the Lord, both of Men and Angels. Then, will a face of
lamentation, show fairer, then a countenance of gamesome pleasure; and a mean
garment, then a precious; and virtue of mind, then beauty of body. Yet do not
think, that it suffices, if thou keep thine own heart free from this vanity;
for it concerns thee also, to take heed, and heed again, that thou give no
occasion, that such as look upon thee, may divert their heart, one hours
breadth from God.

The vain Virgins of this world, desire to seem handsome in the eyes of men;
but the Virgin of Christ, ought to fear, and fly, from nothing so much, as to
seem pleasing and handsome. For How true is this and yet how little considered.
what greater folly can there be, the^ to desire that, which is dangerous, both
to themselves, and others Remember, what S. Hierome says to a Virgin, Take
heed, that thou give no occasion to any, of conceauing any ill desire. For thy
spouse is jealous; and a worse thing it is to commit adultery, against Christ,
then against a husband. And elsewhere, he says, Remember how I have told thee
that now thou art made the sacrifice of God. And the sacrifice, is the thing
which gives sanctification, to other things; and whosoever shall worthily
partake of this sacrifice, shallbe also partaker of the sanctification. Procure
An advice and the reason of it; which well becomes the wisdom, and sanctity
of that great Doctor.
therefore in this manner; that (by occasion of thee, as of a divine sacrifice)
other women may also be sanctified, with whom thou art so to live, that
whosoever shall touch thy manner of life, either by looking on it, or hearing
of it, may feel in themselves the force of thy sanctification; and desiring to
behold thee, may become worthy, of being made a sacrifice. All this is said by
S. Hierome.

CHAP. CIIII.
That the dignity of being a spouse of Jesus Christ, requires, that great care
be had in all things* and of the example which they, are to lo^ke upon, both
in the exterior, and in the interior of their soul; who have a desire to
enjoy this dignity.
HEREBY thou will have seen, that the great honor, which it is to be a spouse
of Christ, does not go alone; nor is it to be conserved without care. But as,
in it self, it is the most high Title that can be expressed; so does it exact
a greater circumspection, then any other, for the keeping thereof, as it is fit.
Do The great obligation of a soul which professes to be espoused to God.
not think, that because thou have not a husband of this world, that therefore
thou may live, after thine own fancy. But rather know, that thou art obliged
to take heed to thy self so much more, and yet more, by how much thy Spouse is
greater; and the particular respects, which he demands at thy hands, are of
many kinds. A woman may comply with her husband, and yet still, be full of
faults; but it proves not so, with the celestial spouse, unless thou love him
withal thy heart, and withal thy force. And one fit of time idly spent, yea or
a word, that shall be indecent, is not to pass without punishment. Nor yet let
this seem rigorous unto thee. For, even Note.
in this inferior world, it goes somewhat after this manner; and a woman, is
bound, to be so much the more punctually a good wife, as she obtains a more
noble spouse.

Well now, consider if thou can, who that is, whom thou have taken for thy
spouse; or rather who has taken thee, for his; and thou will see, that
Whatsoever comes from God, by way of commandment; and whatsoever goes to
wards him, by way of offense, is after a sort infinitely great, how little
soever it be, in it self.
although the thing which he commanded were small, yet, because it is he who
commands it, no commandment is small; and no sin also is small, which is
committed against it, as S. Hierome says. And to the end, that thou may not
possess, such a dignity as this, unworthily; and that thy honor may not grow
into shame; I will set a pattern before thee, whereupon I would have thee
look; and according to which, I wish that thou would draw thy self. It A
fair pattern of a noble Roman Virgin.
is of a Roman virgin called Asella, of whom S. Hierom speaks thus: There
was nothing more cheerful, then her gravity; nor nothing more grave, then her
alacrity. Nothing was more sweet then her sorrow; nor more sorrowful then her
sweetness. Her face was grown wane, which gave a sign of her great abstinence*
but it was not to make any ostentation. Her speech was silent, and her silence
was speaking. Her pace, was neither very swift, nor very slow; her habit was
ever after the same manner. Her cleanliness, was without being studied; she
was clad without curiosity and adorned without any ornament of dressing. And
for the pure, and perfect goodness of her life, she deserved, that, in even the
City of Rome, where there And yet, in the midst of all this pomp, and loxe,
S. Hierom affirmed the church communicating with the church of Rome, to be even
then, the only true Church of Christ; and that whosoever should be found out of
that Arc, would infallibly de drowned; and he that should eat the paschall
Lamb, out of that house, was a profane person; so as dissolutenes of manners
in any particular place or person, is not always a good argument, against that
entire truth of Religion.
is such abundance of pomp; and where humility is esteemed for misery; good
men speak well of her; and wicked men dare not presume to do otherwise. This
is that pattern, which I would have thee behold, for as much as concerns the
exterior. For, as for the interior, there is no other, but that of Jesus
Christ, as he is placed upon the Cross. To whom thou art to conform thy
self, so much the more, as thou enioyest the name of a straiter union, which
ariueth to be even that of marriage.

CHAP. CV.
That the dignity of this State, must not dismay Virgins; for as much as their
Spouse, who is our Lord, does give them that, which is necessary for it. And of
the advice, by which they are to undertake it; and of the cheerefullnes,
wherewith they are to undergo it: and of the great blessings which are
contained in it.
BUT take heed, thou be not dismayed, by the consideration of that great
sanctity, which thy state requires, by having more fear, then joy therein.
When thou hear men advise thee, to such high things as these; thou must not
deiect, but encourage thy self. For as the obligation, and undergoing the
charge, which is incident to marriage, does not chiefly rest upon the wives
shoulders; but she complyeth with her duty, if she keep that well which her
husband has gotten (especially if she also labor, according to the little
strength she has) so We cannot confide too little in our own strength, nor too
much in the goodness of God.
do not think, that our Lord took thee for his spouse, so to leave upon thine
own shoulders, the labor of keeping thy soul alive; for neither would thou
be able to effect it; nor will he be content, that the honor, of thy being
that which thou ought to be, Make thou this prayer, to our Lord Jesus, from
thy very heart, and he will make thee happy.
shallbe thine. I beseech God, that thou may know, how to give him thy heart:
and to answer the inspirations which he will send thee; and that thou may
not, either by tepidity, or negligence, or indiscreet feruours, or pride,
pollute that pure water, which he will rain down upon thy soul. And as for
the rest, let thy heart repose, not in the confidence of thy self, but of thy
spouse; who has skill, and power, and will, to maintain thee well; if
voluntarily thou will not leave his house. Yea, and concerning those things,
which before I said that thou were to do; do not expect them of thy self
alone; but beseech our Lord that he will help thee. For in all things, thou
shall find him, to be both a piteous Father, and a tender Spouse.

The Perpetual chastity must not be vowed but with maturity, and after good
experience of ones self; especially by such as still do live in the world; for
as for such Religious as are enclosed, the means of keeping chastity are so
great, as that they may sooner undertake that course, though still great
prudence must be used heerin.
state of virginity, which thou have embraced, ought not to he lightly
undertaken, upon every fit of devotion, which may happen; nor yet, because thou
know not, where to find a husband. But as a thing of mighty importance, it
must be considered of, with much advise; and experience is to be taken, of ones
self; and one must practice first, the service of Christ; and must have
recommended it to God, and that very cordially, both days, and years; least
that be negligently performed, which was not grounde^ly intertayned. But when
it is once undertaken, both in that manner, and for the end that is fit; the
person who imbraceth it, is to grow cheerful upon it; because it is a state
of incorruption, and yet a state also it is, of fertility. For, as the Blessed
Virgin Mary, (who through her excellent, and incomparable pure Virginity, is
called the Virgin of Virgins, and is the patroness of Virgins) did both give
fruit, and yet retained the flower of her purity; so other Virgins, if indeed
they be true Virgins, do give fruit in their souls; and yet have en^iernesse
in their bodies. For this celestial spouse of Christ Jesus, is not like them
of this world, who despoile their spouses, of their true beauty, and integrity;
but he is so truly a conseruer of their beauty; and so great a lover of their
purity, as that they may say to him, with The sweet S. Agnes, virgin and Martyr
said so, when she was but 13 years of age.
S. Agnes; To him alone, do I keep my Faith; to him alone do I recommend my
self, with entiere devotion; whom when I love I am chaste when I touch him, I
am pure; and when I receive him, I am a Virgin.

Nor will there be wanting children, as the fruit of such marriages as these;
whereof, they are delivered without torment, and their fruitefullnes is every
day increased. And this did S. Agnes say, as one who had tasted the suauity of
this celestial espousall. And It is a shame to Virgins if they aspire not to
the imbraceme^t of their heavenly Spouse.
a confusion, (and that no small one) it ought to be, to a Virgin, who calls
her self the spouse of Christ, to have no more taste of the qualities, and
sweet condition of her spouse, then if she were a mere stranger to him.

O how many afflictions does virginity prevent; how many cares, how much
unquietness? Some, which the very state it self of Matrimony, between persons
who are made of flesh and blood, does necessarily bring with it; and others,
which grow from that untoward disposition, which is so often found, either in
the husband, or in the wife. Others again, from the ill proof of the
children. But The great difference between a spiritual and corporal marriage.
in our case, all the children, are, Joy, Charity, Peace, and such others (like
to these), which are recounted by Gal. 5.
S. Paul. This spouse, is full of goodness; he is peaceable, rich, wise,
beautiful; and, as his fellow Spouse, says in the Cant. ^.
Canticles, He deserves, to be wholly desired. Does it not therefore seem to
thee, that this King, does an incomparable favor, to the person whom he
takes, I say not for a slave, or servant, but for a spouse? Does it not seem
to thee, a good exchange, of a birth with torment, into a birth with joy; of
Children, which afflict with care; to Children, which are full of comfort; yea,
and such as bring their dowry in their hands, which is, both honor, and
pleasure. Verily, (said S. Hierome, (when he was speaking to the mother of a
certain virgin) I cannot understand the reason, why thou should be angry
with thy daughter; for refusing to be the wife of a particular Cauallier, that
so she might be espoused, to a Christ our Lord.
King; by means whereof, she has made thee, the mother-in law, of Christ.

It does therefore now, but remain, O Virgin, that thou take comfort, in the
state, which our Lord, of his goodness, has called thee to. And that thou have
care, to be that very thing to him, which thou should be. And be no more
fearful, of thine own weakness, then thou art confident in our Lord; that he
will perfect that in thee, which he has begun. That The middle way is the
right way between fear and hope, till we arrive to the iorneyes end which is
perfect love.
so, neither the favor that he has done thee, do intoxicate thee, with any
giddy kind of gladness; nor yet, the thought, of the much thou owe him, draw
thee down into any dismay. But walk thou on, between fear, and hope; till
the fear be taken away, by that perfect love, which is found in heaven. And
hope also, may be then dismissed, when we shall have The very vision of God,
and that for ever.
that thing present with us, which here we hoped for; and so, as that we have
no more fear, to loose it.

CHAP. CVI.
Of four conditions, which are requisite for the making of any thing
beautiful; and how all of them, are wanting to a soul, that is in sin.
WE have made a long digression, from the question that we asked, How the
soul could come, by such beauty, as that God should be drawn to a desire of
it. But the cause of this digression, was the doubt, of our conceauing, that
the King perhaps might care for the beauty of the Body. Let us now return to
our purpose.

Thou art to know, that for the making a thing to be of perfect beauty, four
conditions are necessary. The first, That it must have all the parts that
belongs to it; for if any of them be wanting; as a hand, or foot, or the
like, it cannot be termed beautyfull. The second is, that one part have
proportion with another; and if it be the picture of any life, it must be made,
very like the original. The third is, that it must have purity of color. The
fourth, that it must have a competency of greatness. For that which is little,
though it be well proportioned, will not arrive to be absolutely accounted
beautiful.

Now, if Every soul that is in state of sin, is out right deformed.
we consider all these conditions in a soul, that is sinful; we shall find
that it has no one of them. Not completenes; because if it want either faith,
or charity, and the gifts of the holy Ghost, which it was to have; that cannot
be called beautiful, to which so many things are wanting. Again, one part
thereof carries no proportion to another; for neither does sense, obey reason;
nor reason, God. Especially, considering, that the soul, being created after
the image of God; it was reason, that for the preservation of her beauty, she
should have resembled her Original, in virtue, as she does in the natural
being which she has. But now God, being good, and the soul being wicked; God
being pure, and the soul polluted; God being mild, and the soul impatient;
and so in the rest; how can there be beauty, in that image, which is so unlike
to the original? As for the third, which is, a certain spiritual light of
grace, and the notions which are to refresh, and as it were revive the beauty
of the soul ( as colors do of the body) they are also wanting to it; for it
walks in darkness; and it is obscured, beyond Thren. 4.
the black of coals, according to that lamentation of Hieremy. Least of all,
has it, the fourth condition; since there is nothing so miserably little, as
to be a sinner; who is nothing, and less then nothing. So that, all the
conditions of beauty being wanting, to such a soul, it will not fail to be
deformed. And because all those souls which are infused into the bodies that
descend of Adam, be Christ our Lord and our B. Lady, are excepted; and
therefore he uses the word ordinary, to oppose it to that other way which is
extraordinary.
ordinarily sinners, it will follow, that they are all deformed.

CHAP. CVII.
How the deformity of sin, is so wicked a thing; as that no force, or law of
Nature, or of Scripture, were sufficient to abolish it; but only Jesus Christ;
in virtue of whom sin was ever taken away, and grace was given.
THIS deformity of sin, is so hardly, or indeed so impossibly to be taken away,
by the force of any creature; that all of them together, are not able, to
beautifye any one deformed soul. Our Lord declares this by the Prophet Hier.
2.
Hieremy saying, If thou shall be washed with salpetre, and with abundance of
soap, yet art thou defiled in my presence. The meaning whereof is, That for the
taking away of sin; neither the salpetre, or the reprehensions, of the
Prophets; nor the rigorous punishments of the old law; nor yet the fair
speeches and promises which God did make, at that time, were sufficient. Men
were defiled then, in the midst, both of their punishments, and of their
comfortes; of threatninges, and of promises; For no man was justified, in the
sight of God, as S. Paul Gal. 3.
says, by the works of the old law; and therefore the soul could not have such
beauty in it, as to make it desirable by Almighty God; because there was a want
of justification, which is the cause of beauty in a soul.

Now if, in that law, and in those sacrifices, which were given by God
himself, beauty could be imparted to the soul; it is evident, that it must
less have bin, in the law of Nature; for as much as that, had not so great
remedies against sin; and in particular it had no written law. But No soul
was ever purged for sin, but by the precious blood of our Lord Jesus.
the beauty, which then inhabited the souls of men, (as well under the law of
Nature, as that other, which was written) was obtained, by the shedding of the
blood, of that precious lamb, Jesus Christ our Lord: who (as S. John Apoc. 13.
does teach us) was slain from the beginning of the world. For although he
dyed upon the cross, in the latter days thereof (for so the Apostles, do
call the time, of the coming of Christ) yet is he said, to have been slain
from the beginning of the world, because, even from that time, did How the
blood of our Lord the^ did work before it was shed.
his death begin to obtain pardon, and grace, for them, who grew to have it.
So taking that up (as a man would say) upon trust; which he would after pay,
upon the cross. For God ordained, that as there was one Father, who was the
head and fountain of sin, and death, to all such as were to descend from
him, in an ordinary course; so in like manner, there should be one, by whom
all such, as desired, might be free, both from that mischief, wherein the other
had placed them; and from those others also, which they should bring upon
themselves.

So says Saint Rom 5.
Paul, That as by the inobedience of one, many were made sinners; so by the
obedience of one, many should be made just. And Let the Protestant note this
truth, without passion.
as the obedience, which Jesus Christ performed to his Father, even to the
death, yea and the death of the Cross, does not only make men just, by a kind
of resemblance, but by giving of true justice; so the hurt that Adam did us,
was not by giving us an example only of sin, but by making us, through his
sin, true sinners. And so, that which Act. 4.
S. Peter said, That there is no other name under heaven, then that of Jesus
Christ, wherein we may think of being saved, is not only to be understood,
from the time that God became incarnate, but from the beginning of the world,
as has been said. Since they, who, at any time, have been in grace with God,
were so, by the merits of this our Lord, by Faith, and penna^ce, are the means
of applying the merits of Christ our Lord, to a soul.
means of faith and penance.

And although, by the circumcision of Children, Grace were given, whereby they
became just, and their original sin was pardoned; yet was it not, the
circumcision alone which gave the grace (for that precious gift, was reserved
for the Sacraments of the new law) but What that was which gave grace in the
old law.
it was, A protestation of Faith, in the Messiah, who was afterward to come;
which protestation, was to be made unto him, then. And when, after, being
grown in years, they came to loose their grace, by any mortal sin; they
offered up some such beast, as God commanded; the blood whereof, was to be
shed in the Temple. Not, to the end, that it might justify, (for that, it had
no power to do) but that the sinner, might protest the Faith which he had, in
that Lord, who was to come. And by this says, and by that inward sorrow, for
his sins, which God inspired; he was made partaker of that precious blood of
Christ, which for the pardon of sins, was to be shed.

Not The same blood of our Lord, was the remedy also of sin, under the law of
Nature.
only, was there a remedy, in the written law, against sin, by faith and
internal penance (as we have said), but also in the law of nature, although
it were not then required, that their faith in our Lord, should be so
explicit. But so also were there, such exterior protestations of their Faith
as our Lord (who would have all men saved) did inspire. To the end, that
although the nations were diverse, and their In several places, several
external rites may be used, by the members of the same Church, so that the
Church allow the same; as we see it is in Milan, and many other places; but the
doctrine, must be every where alike.
external rites were different; yet the Savior and Mediator, between God
and man, as 1. Tim. 2.
S. Paul affirms, might be but one.

CHAP. CVIII.
That Christ our Lord, takes away the deformity of the soul, by his blood;
and that it was convenient, that rather the Son, should become man, then
either the Father, or the holy Ghost; and of the great force of the blood of
Christ our Lord.
CONSIDER then, how deformed the spot is, which sin does cause; and how far
we are to fly from it; since being once received, into the soul, it could
neither be washed away by the shedding of so much blood, as was offered in the
Temple, by the commaundment of God himself; nor could all the force of man,
arrive unto it. And if that, beautiful, and dear Christ our Lord.
Word of God, had not come down to beautify us, the deformity of sin, would
for ever have remained in us. But that lamb, without spot, coming down, he
had the power, and he had the way, and he had the will, to put away these
spotts; and he destroyed our deformity, and he endewed us with beauty.

And to the end that thou may see, with how much conueniency the Son of
God, rather then God the Father, or the holy Ghost was to be he, that should
beautify our deformed souls with his blood; Consider, that as Eternity is
attributed to the Father, and Love to the holy Ghost; so, to the Son of God,
as God, is attributed Beauty; because he is most The first quality of Beauty.
prefect, and without the least defect; and he is the The second quality of
Beauty.
image of the Father, as S. Paul Heb. 1.
says; and so lively an one, that in regard he is engendered, by way of the
understanding, he is, to all purposes, as his Father; who gave him the same
essence that himself has; in such sort, as that he, Joan. 14.
who sees him, sees the Father, as the holy gospel says. Now by reason of
this proportion, between the Son, and the Father, which is so absolute; most
justly, is beauty ascribed to him, since the image is taken, in so lively a
manner, out of the original.

Light The third quality, of Beauty.
is not wanting to him; for he is called the Word, which is a thing engendered
by the understanding; and in that understanding, as S. John Joan. 1.
says, which was true light. Greatness is not The fourth quality of beauty.
wanting to him; since he is infinitely immense; and therefore was it
convenient, that this beautiful God, by whom we were made when we were not,
should come to restore us when we were lost; and who, apparaylling himself
with our flesh, should take upon him, the resemblance of our deformity; and so
imparte to us, the excellency of his own beauty. And although, neither our
being punished, or spoken fair, was able to free us, from our spots; yet was
the value so great of the punishing of that beautiful person, that the sharp
salpetre of his passion, falling upon his shoulders, there distilled down upon
us, the sweet dew of his witness. And howsoever God does say, to the sinner,
Although Hier. 12.
thou wash thy self with salpetre, and with the Fullers herb, thou shall not
be clean; yet telling us, that he would send a remedy, against this spot, he
says, in another place, If thy sins, be as red as scarlet, they shall be made
white like snow; and if they shall be as red as blood, they shall become white
like woll.

Very truly well, did David believe this, when he Ps. 50.
said; Thou shall sprinkle me, O Lord, with The inward meaning of this place,
delivered.
^yssope, and I shall be clean; thou shall wash me, and I shall become more
white then snow. Hyssope is a little herb, and somewhat hot, and has the
property to purge the lunges, whereby we breath. This herb they brought to a
wand of Cedar, and they tied it thereunto, with a string of crimson, double
died. And so being bound together, they called it that Hyssope, wherewith,
(when first it had been steeped in blood, and water; and then with water, and
ashes) they sprinkled both leaprous persons; and such as had touched any dead
body; and thereupon they were held for clean. Full well knew David, that
neither the herb, nor the Cedar, nor the blood of birds or beasts, nor yet
water or ashes, could give any cleanness, to the soul; although it were
figured by them. And therefore, he desired not God, that he would take into his
hand, a branch of Hyssope, and sprinkle him with it; but That hysop was a
figure of the humility and Passion of Christ our Lord.
he says so, in respect of the humanity, and humility of Jesus Christ our
Lord, which is called an herb, because it grew from the earth of the Blessed
Virgin Mary; and because he was begotten, without the help of man, as the
flower springs in the field, which is neither plowed, nor sowed. For this it
is, that he says, I am Can. 2.
the flower of the field. And this her be is called little, for the meandness
which he took upon himself in the world; so far forth, as to say, A Psalm. 21.
worm I am, and no man; the dishonor of men, and the very outcast of the
people.

This The passion of our Lord is the only soueraign cure of pride.
humbled flesh of our Lord, is such a remedy, against the puff of our foolish
pride; as that it may be cured, by this so great humility; since there is no
color, for a worm, to exalt it self, when the King of Majesty is so abased.
And forget not, that Hyssope is hot. For Christ, by the fire of that love,
which was burning in the roots of his heart; was pleased to abase himself, to
purge us; thereby to make us know, that if he who was so high did abase
himself, how much reason there is, why we (who have so true cause to abase our
selves) should not, by our selves, be exalted. And if God be humble, how much
more should a man be so.

This Of our Lord Jesus.
flesh, so full of true physic, was then put to the stick of a Cedar, when
it was placed upon the cross; and tied by that delicate third of wool, twice
died. For, although the nails which fastened thereunto his hands, and feet,
were hard, and great, and long enough; yet, if the third of his ardent love had
not fastened him to that cross; and unless he had been willing, to deliver up
his life, for the killing of our death; those nails, would not have been
strong enough, for such a businsse. So that, it was not they, but the love he
bare us, that held him there. And The double aspect which was carried by the
love of our Lord; the reparation of Gods honor; and the remission of man's sin.
this love carried a double aspect, as crimson which is double died: for he
suffered, that which he suffered, to satisfy for the honor of his father, who
was offended by our sins; and for the love of sinners, who were lost thereby.

CHAP. CIX.
That the sacred humanity of Christ our Lord, was figured in the ga^^ent of the
high Priest; and in the veyle which God commanded Moses to make. And what
that was, which David begged, when he desired to be sprinkled with Hys^ope,
that he might so be cleansed.
THE garment, which the high Priest, of the old Law did wear, was to be double
died in crimson; because How the figurs of the old Testament, were perfected,
and fullfilled in the person of our Lord Jesus.
the holy Humanity of Christ, which is the garment of his soul, was to be dyed
in blood, being shed, both for the love of God, and man. And this flesh, being
nailed upon the Cross; is that veyle which God commanded Moses to make, of
the Exodus 18.
color of Hyacinth, Crimson, and Purple, double died; and of white, and well
and strongly wouen linen, made with the needle; and curiously diuersified by
several works. For, this holy Humanity, is died with blood, like crimson; it
is of a fiery color, which is signified by the purple, as has been said; and
it is white like fine linen, through Chastity and Innocence; and it is well
and strongly wouen, for it is not loose or weak, but firmly, and fast put
together, under all kind of virtuous discipline, and much affliction. And The
color of the flower hiacinthus is blew, though the color of that stone, which
we know by that name is of a deep yellow.
this is well signified by the Hyacinth, which is of a celestial color;
because his body, was framed by the supernatural work of the holy Ghost. For
this reason, is it called celestial; and for many other virtues, and
perfections thereof, which were contrived by the admirable knowledge, of the
wisdom of God! The commaundment was, that this veyle should be hung, upon
four pillars, which were to uphold it; which signifies, that Christ was to be
placed, upon the The cross was made of four parts. One was the length, two
the breath, and the other, whereupon the little was written.
four arms of the Cross; and four Ghospells they also be, which do publish
and preach it, throughout the world.

Now, for as much as David (being a Prophet so illuminated by God, in the
knowledge of those mysteries which concerned Christ, who was to come) seeing,
how deformed himself was grown, by the foul sin, of The murder which he
committed, upon the person of Vrias, that so he might continue to enjoy
Bersabee his wife.
stealing the sheep, and murdering the shepherd; and fearing the wrath of
the Omnipotent God, wherewith he was threatened, by the mouth of the Prophet
Nathan; he beseeches God, to take away his The deformity of sin and the
beauty of grace.
deformity; and to give him beauty; not with material Hyssope, since the same
David said to God, That he took no Not in any thing that was only external,
but the external sacrifices were to be accompanied by internal sorrow for
sin.
delight in the sacrifice of beasts; but he beggeth to be sprinkled by the
flesh and blood of Jesus Christ, being tied with the strings and cords of
love, upon the Cross. Believing that though his deformity were great; and that
otherwise it was impossible to remove it; yet he should grow white, beyond the
whiteness of snow, by the blood, which was to fall from the cross.

O Beautiful blood of Christ our Lord who art so Beautiful. For although thou
be as red as Rubies, thou have power to make a thing more white the^ snow. O At
the least, we must now consider it and lament the cause thereof, which is our
sin.
if a man had seen, with what violence it was drawn down by those wretches,
and with what love it was shed by thee, O Lord, when thou did stretch forth
thine arms, and feet, to be let blood therein, for the remedy of that so lewd
disorder, and distemper, which we made by our ill desires, and deeds? With
great force, did thine enemies come upon thee, but with much more violence, did
thy love assault thee; for it was that, and not they, which overcame thee.
David, did style Christ Psalm. 44.
beautiful above all the sons of men. But this beautiful creature, who
surpassed not only men but Angels, would needs as it were dissemble that
beauty of his; and he apparailed the exterior of his body, with the
resemblance of that deformity, which possessed our souls. That so, the same
deformity might be swallowed up, in the Abyss of his beauty; as some little
straw would be consumed, in a huge fire; and that he might give us his own
beautiful Image, and make us so resemble him.

CHAP. CX.
How Christ did as it were dissemble those four conditions of his beauty; so
to make us beautiful; to which purpose there is a passage of the Prophet Isay
declared.
IF we do well consider the conditions, which have bin showed to be requisite
for the making a man beautiful, (al which, are in the divine word after a most
excellent manner) we shall find, that he dissembled, and hid them all; that so
being concealed in him, they might grow to be disclosed in us. Most The first
condition that any thing must have if it will be beautiful was hidden by
Christ Jesus our Lord in his sacred passion.
entire, and perfect, and full, is the word of God; which wants nothing, nor
can it want, and which remooueth the want of all things. But yet, though in
the bosom of his Father he be so rich; (if thou look upon him, being made
man, in the womb, and in the arms of his mother, as also throughout the whole
course of his life, and death) thou will see, how he wanted both to eat, and
drink; yea and a bed whereon to lie, when the Virgin laid him in the manger.
For neither was there any bed for him in the stable of Bethleem, nor any other
place then that. How often did he want means, to put away both heat, and
cold; and nothing he had, if they gave him nothing. And if in his life time, he
had not a place where to lay his head (as himself affirms) what shall we
say, of that extremity of poverty, to which he was subject in his death; at
which time, neither had he any thing, whereupom so much as to lay his head. For
either he was to have leaned back with it, upon the Cross (and so to endure
excessive pain, by the thorns which might prick him so much the deeper) or
else he must let it fall, and so remain without a rest; but not without
exceeding pain.

O sacred head, whereof the Spouse Cant 5.
says, That it is of purest gold; as being the head of God; and how much to
thy cost, do thou pay for that resting place, which (in prejudice of the love
that we owe to thy self) we procure to find upon thy creatures; both How true
is this and how truly ought it to be reformed.
loving them, and desiring to be beloved, and praised by them; making that to
be our lodging, which should be only our high way, whereby we might ariue to
repose in thee? Now the reason, why he passes through such want, and poverty,
is declared by S. Paul, who says, You know well, O brethren, the grace which
our Lord Jesus Christ, imparted to us; who being rich, did make himself poor,
for us; that so we might grow rich, by his poverty. And the while, thou see,
that the first condition of beauty, which was to be complete, is altogether
hidden, and as it were dissembled by him, since to him, there was so much
wanting, upon earth, who in heaven, was abundance it self.

If now thou will consider, the second condition of the Beautiful word of God,
which is to be The second condition of the beauty of our Lord was hidden by
him, in the passion.
the most perfect image of his Father, and proportionable to him, and equal to
him; thou will find, that on earth, he dissembled this condition, no less then
the former. For tell me; what is the Father but Strength, Wisdom, Honor,
Beauty, Bounty, Joy, and such other excellencies; which all together, do make
up, an infinite Good. Well then; do thou place, on the one side, this admirable
Original, which is all glorious in it self; and adored by the Angels; and If
ever thou will, lend me thy attention, and thy compassion, I beg it now.
then call to mind, that passage, (which in reason, ought to pass, yea and
pass through, the most internal parts of our very souls) when this
beautiful image of the Father, Jesus Christ our Lord, was brought out from the
Tribunal of Pilate, most cruelly scourged, and vested with a purple robe; and
tormented with that crown; which was of scorn, in their eyes that saw it, and
of insufferable pain, in him that felt it. His hands, in the mean time, were
bound; and a Cane or Reed, was put into them; His eyes full of tears, and of
blood with all; which ran down from his head. His cheeks, pale and wanne, and
full also of blood, and defiled with filthy spittle, which they had darted
out upon his face. And under this pain, and shame, was he brought out, to be
seem by all the people, and thus it was said, Behold the man. And this was
done, to the end, that his shame might increase, in being seen by them; and
that, compassion might once grow in their hearts, when they perceived in
what case he was; and so, they might give over the persecution, of a man,
vvho^ they saw, in such a passion. But Infinite patience and love of our Lord,
and inscrutable malice of the wicked Jews.
O, with how wicked eyes, did they behold the pains of him, (who yet did
feel more pain for their perdition, then for those very pains of his own;)
since instead of quenching that fire, of their frantike malice, with the water
of the dishonor which they saw him in, it burned, but more, and more, like
wild-fyre which burns in water. They would not hearken to that word, which
was said to them, by Pilate, Behold the man; for they cared not for seeing him
there; but said, that they would see him upon a Cross.

But thou, at least, O soul which art redeemed by the torments of Christ, do
thou hearken, and let all of us hearken to this word, Behold the man; least
otherwise we grow aliens from the redemption of Jesus Christ; if we cannot find
in our hearts, to be mindful, and grateful to him in respect of them. When we
A consideration which will pierce the hearts of al such as hauethen^ not of flint.
bring forth any thing, to the end that it may be seen, we are wont to dress
it, the best we can; that so it may enamoure the lookers on. And when we bring
forth any thing, that we would have to be feared; we set it out, with a show of
Arms, and Trophies; and we accompany it with such other things, as may make
them tremble, that behold it. And when we make any representation that should
move a man to tears; we apparail it in mourning, and we give it all those
additions, that may induce men to sorrow. Then tell me, what was the intention
of Pilate, in drawing Christ our Lord, into the view of the people? It was
certainly, not to make them love him; nor to make them fear him; and
therefore they did neither beautify him, nor set him out with Guardes and
Caualliers; but he brought him forth, to appease the cruel hearts of the Jews,
by that spectacle of our Redeemer. And this was not to be done, by the way of
love; For well did Pilate know, how cordially, and profoundly they abhorred
him; but he had a desire to pacify them, even by the pure force of those
excessive torments; which were endured by that delicate body of his, so much to
his cost. For this it was, that Pilate did dress Christ, our Lord, with such a
dressing of torments; which were both so many, and so great, as might have
served to move compassion in all such as saw him, how much soever they did
detest him.

It No Christian soul can doubt of this.
is therefore to be believed, that he brought him forth, the most afflicted,
the most abased, and the most dishonored, that he could devise. Making it his
study, how to deforme him (as one would study, to beautify, and adorn some
gallant bird) that so, he might appease the wrath of such as hated him; since
he found by experience, that he could not do it, by other means.

And now tell me, if Christ was brought forth in such a fashion, as might have
served to quench the fire of hate, in their hearts that abhorred him; how It is
more the^ reason.
mightily, is it reason, that the sight, and show of him, should kindle the
fire of love, in their hearts, who know him to be God, and who confess him to
be their Redeemer. Isay the Isa. 5^.
Prophet, saw this passage long before, it was brought to effect. And, being in
contemplation of our Lord, he said; He Here give thyn ears, and thy heart to
God.
has no beauty, nor delicacy; we have seen him, and there was nothing to be
seen in him; and we desired to have him despised, and the most abased thing
amongst men; a man of grief, and who did even possess the knowledge of
torments. His face was, as if it were hidden, and despised; and therefore, we
had him in no estimation. It was truly he, that bare our infirmityes; and
himself did suffer our pains, and we esteemed of him, as some leaprous
person, and as stricken, by the hand of God, and so dejected. If thou will weigh
these words of Isay, one by one, thou will easily see, how the beauty of
Christ, was all concealed, in that day of his affliction, for the beautifying
of us.

The Here see the different christ our Lord, grew to be from himself; and it
was all, for our sakes.
Spouse speaking to Christ, does say in the Cant. 5.
Canticles, Thou art fair, thou art sweet O my beloved; and here Isay says,
That he has neither sweetness, nor beauty; and he, whose face is beheld with
such attention and ardent desire by the Angels, is here affirmed, not to be
worth the looking on. And he, who at his entrance into the world, was (by
commaundment of the Father) adored Heb. 9.
by all the Angels, is now (at his going out of it) despised, by the basest of
men. David says of Christ, That Psalm. 88.
he is exalted, above all the works of the hands of God; and Isay says, That
he is the most abased amongst men. And Be attentive.
if this had been yet delivered, by way of comparing him, with some worthy
persons; the reproach would not have been so great. But what will thou say, if
being put in balance with a Barabbas; that robber, that murderer, that
sedicious man, they hold him better then Christ, who is the giver of life it
self, and the maker of all the peace, that is made, between his Father, and
the world? And so far off, he was, from taking away any thing which belonged
to others, as that he paid, what he had never taken.

There was no cause, why Christ should suffer any pain; since the cause of
pain, is the sin, which came into the world; but yet Isay calls him here,
The very man of grief; which signifies, that he did strangely abound therein.
For although, by experience he knew not what belonged to wicked pleasure; yet
was he the man, who knew well, what did belong to rigorous pain, because he
felt it. And that, in so full a measure; as that he says, by the mouth of
^auid, My soul is very full of pain. Christ, is called The third condition of
beauty, was all hidden in christ our Lord, in the time of his sacred passion.
light, because he did by his admirable words, and works, give joy, and drive
darkness, out of the world; but this light* says Isay, had the countenance
thereof, almost all hidden. For if he be looked upon, with the eyes of flesh
and blood, I know not who will be able to recover him, by his countenance,
through the excessiuely ill, that they had treated him before. Which is the
less to be marueyled at, because although the virgin. (who be blessed for
ever (and who was upon that day the most The unspeakable grief of our B.
Lady; whose holy soul was pierced through with the sword of sorrow according
to the prophesy of S^m^o^.
afflicted of women) had brought him forth into the world, and swathed him;
and used to behold her self in his face, (as in a most pure, and perfect
glass) yet I easily believe, that if she was present, at that spectacle, of so
excessive sorrow, she would look, and look again, (with as great attention,
as the tears of her eyes, and the bitter grief of her wounded heart, would
give her leave) to see, if that were her most blessed Son; who now was grown
to be of a complexion, and a fashion, so very different, from that which
formerly she had observed in him.

And Anoother point, which is also highly to be considered.
if they, who saw our Lord, had believed, that he endured all that; not because
himself did owe it, but because he loved them, who were true debtors to the
justice of God; it might have given some ease, to the pains of Christ; but
what shall we be able to say, since Isay tells us, That they held him, for a
man, who was dejected, and stricken, by the hand of God. For they thought, that
God abased him so for his sins; and that he deserved all that, and a great
deal more; and therefore they desired, that he might be crucified. So that
(for as much as concerned his exterior), they took off their eyes, from
looking on him. For they did loath the sight, as of a leaprous person; and in
their hearts they held him for a most wicked man; and worthy both of that misery
and more. A strange, and lamentable thing it was, that if they looked toward
him they did spit, withal; if they looked not, it was because they had some
mighty auersion; as men would have, from the sight of some ugly thing. That
which they spoke of him, was most reproachful language, which might afflict
him no less, then his very pains; and yet they said, that he had not all
which he had deserved, and that therefore he was to be nailed to the Cross.

CHAP. CXI.
Of the many and wonderful things, which our Lord did draw out of that
greatest wickedness, which they committed who murdered Christ and of the
several effects which these words Behold the man, being spoken by Pilate, and
preached by the Apostles, have brought to pass, in the world.
WHO is he, that will not wonder, and give praise to God, for his infinite
wisdom; who by so strange a means, could redeem the world; drawing the
greatest blessings, out of the most wicked sins, that ever were committed by
men? What more impious thing, either was, or ever can be committed in the
world, then to dishonor, profane, torment, and crucify, the Son of God. But
yet, on the other side, from what other thing, has there grown so much
benefit to the same world, as by this blessed Passion, there has done. It was
then conceived, that when Pilate bestowed such a dressing of torments upon this
spouse, that he had dressed him only, but to have bin seen by the eyes of that
people. But he dressed him, as it proved, to be seen by the eyes of the whole
world; God can serve himself as well of them that offend him, as of them that
love him.
doing service thereby, (although himself knew not of it) to that, which God
had promised so Isa. 52.
long before, by saying, All mankind shall see the salvation of God: And this
salvation, is Christ Jesus, to whom the Father said, I do not much esteem
that thou should awake the tribes of Jacob to serve me, and convert the
dregs of Israel to me. I Isa. 49.
gave thee, for a light to the Gentills, that so thou might be my That is,
the Savior of my people.
salvation, to the uttermost parts of the earth.

Christ Jesus, in person, did only preach, to the sheep of the house of
Israel, which had perished; and afterward, his holy Apostles, did begin to
preach to the same people of Israel; and they converted some, but not all the
Jews; and therefore, they are called dregs. But the salvation of the Father,
which is Christ, did not stay only with the people of the Jews; but The faith
of Christ, was spread into the world by the Apostles; and it is still spreading
in the furthest corner thereof by Apostolical men.
sallied out into the world, when it was preached by the Apostles; and so also,
at this day, is the preaching of the name of Christ, stretching it self out to
the Nations, which are furthest of; that so, he may be a light, not only to the
Jews who believed, upon his preaching to them in person; but to the Gentills
also, who lived in idolatry, far off from God. And then was it fulfilled, which
Luc. 2.
Simeon, that holy Swanne, did singe; when he said, out of his desire to dye,
Now Lord, thou let thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word; for
mine eyes have seen thy salvation; which thou have prepared, in the sight of
all Nations; A light to the Gentills, and a glory to thy people of Israel

If we consider, that Christ was placed by the hand of Pilate, to be seen
first by that people, in his own house; and afterward from the top of the
Cross in Mount Caluary; it will be evident to us, that although, (in respect
there came to the Paschall, men of all conditions, and Tribes (as well of
naturalls, as strangers) there must needs be great store of people; yet was
not Christ, therefore placed in the view, and presence of all people, as
Simeon, in his Canticle, had sunge. And therefore Christ, was placed in the
view, and presence of them all, when he was preached through the world, by the
Apostles, and their successors. Of whom, David Psalm. 18.
said, That their sound went out through the whole earth; and that their words
did reach to the very ends thereof. For Our Lord is the light, both of Jews
and Gentills: Of the Jews he is more particulerly the honor, because he took
their flesh in the pure womb, of the perpetual Virgin.
Christ, being thus preached, was light then, and is so now, to those Gentills
who will believe in him; and so he is both light, and honor, to the Jews, who
also will believe in him; as S. Paul expresses, speaking of them, of whom
Christ came, according to the flesh, who is God, being blessed, above all
things, for all eternity.

Let us now consider, how far otherwise, this was ordained by God, from that,
which Pilate did intend. He conceived, that he but placed Christ in the
presence of that people, and no more; and he said, Behold here the man; and he
thought, when they would not let him dismiss him, but demanded that he might
be crucified, that he should never more, have been seen by any. But, How
different the thoughts of God, are from the thoughts of men.
because the eternal Father, saw it was not reason, that such a spectacle as
that was, of his only begotten Son (being the image of his own beauty),
should be beheld by so few, and those, so wicked eyes; or should be presented
only to so hard hearts as theirs; he ordained, that another voice, more loud
then that, should be sounded forth, throughout the world, by the mouth of many;
and they most holy publishers thereof, who should also say, Behold the man. The
voice of Pilate, could not sound far off; for it was but one, and a wicked one;
inspired by fear, through which, he sentenced Christ to death. He deserved not
to be the proclaimer of this word, Behold the man; and therefore, did God
command it to be proclaimed by others. And that, so far from any fear of
theirs, that rather they did desire, and rather they do resolve to dye, then to
fail of one The courage of the Apostles, and of Apostolical men.
tittle, in preaching, and confessing, the truth, and glory of Christ Jesus.

Pilate, was a profane, and foul person, for he was a sinful and an
unbelieving man. But of the other proclaymers of this word, Behold he man, I
say prophetizeth Isa. 52.
saying, How beautiful upon the mountains be their feet, who preach the good
news of peace, and of benediction, and who say, In Sion thy God shall reign.
The God of Sion, is Christ Jesus; in whose person David prophetizeth saying,
Psalm. 2.
I am made King, by the hands of God over Sion, that holy mountain of his,
preaching his commandment. And this King, who preaches the Fathers commandment
(which is the word of the Holy Gospel) began to reign in Sion; and he was
received upon Palme-Sunday, for the King of Israel in the Temple, which was
placed upon Mount Sion. And to the end we may understand, that this Kingdom
was to be, over spiritual things; it is said, by David, that he was made King
over Mount Sion; which is the mountain, where that Temple stood, wherein the
worship of God was performed. And How the spiritual kingdom of Christ our
Lord, grew to increase.
afterward, when upon the same Mount Sion, our Lord sent the Holy Ghost upon
his disciples, and he was preached publicly in the midst of Jerusalem, and
in the ears of the High Priests, and Pharisees; and when, by the first sermon
of S. Peter Act. 2.
upon the point of three thousand men were converted; then was this Kingdom of
his increased. And when more people were yet converted, the Apostles did preach
and say to Sion, Thy God shall reign. As if a man had said, Though yet, this
Lord of ours, be known but by a few; yet shall his kingdom ever go
increasing; till such time, as that at the end of the world, he may reign over
all men; rewarding the good with mercy; and punishing the wicked, with the iron
rod, of his rigorous justice.

This is the voice of the preachers of Christ, which says, Thy God shall
reign. And If a preacher will profit others, he must begin with himself.
because Christ reigns not in the heart of an unclean person (for as much, as
sin reigns therein) it is not fit that he should preach the Kingdom of
Christ to others, who will not give him leave to reign in his own soul.
Therefore is it, that Isay Isa. 5^.
says, The feet of such as preach peace unto us, are beautiful. By the feet
which are to be beautiful, are signified the desires of the soul. And
therefore Christ would not have the feet of those preachers covered with shoes,
on These are Sandalles which still are used, by many holy Orders in the
Catholic Church.
the vper part, because God does place the beauty of them in public, for the
example of many. But yet, whosoever has his feet clean, is to be very
careful not to think, that himself made them so; but he must give thanks to
him, that washed the feet of his disciples, with visible water, upon Holy
Thursday; and who washes the souls, of all them, which ever come to be
washed, with his sacred blood.

It was not therefore reason, that so clean a king as Christ was, should be
proclaimed by such a filthy mouth as that of Pilate; or that there should be,
but such a proclaimer, as could speak no louder, (and who was but one) to
publish a spectacle, wherein so many, and so great wonders, were to be
declared, as were, in Christ; when he was brought forth, to be seen by the
people. And though The difference between a Pilate, and a pious Christian.
Pilate, might conceive, that quickly, there would be no more thought of
Christ; nor any, that would have compassion of him; yet God ordained, that
instead of those few, who did spit upon him, there might be, and may be, and
shall be, many, who are with reverence to adore him. And that, instead of them
who, for the loathsomeness of the spectacle could not endure to look upon him;
there should be many, who might joy in beholding that most blessed face, as a
most pure, and perfect glass, though it were placed, upon a The place of the
greatest reproach, that could be tho^h^ of.
Cross. And instead of the^, who thought him to deserve, all that which he
suffered, there should be so many, who might confess, that he committed no
evil for which he ought to suffer; but only that themselves had sinned; and
that he suffered for the love of them. And lastly, if their cruelty were so
great, as not to have compassion of him; but demanded, that he might be
murdered upon the cross; God was pleased, that there should be many, who
would desire to dye for Christ; and who with all their souls would say, I see
The words of a soul, which is the spouse of Christ our Lord.
O thou my friend, that thou art wounded, and full of pain, and I would to God
I could suffer it for thee. Let not therefore Pilate think, that he dressed
Christ so, in vain; though he could not move them, who then were present to
compassion; since now, so many, upon the remembrance of those afflictions of
Christ, have so great pity of him; that in their hearts, they are scourged, and
crowned, and crucified together with him; as S. Paul affirms, both of
himself, and, in the person, of many others.

CHAP. CXII.
How great reason it is, that we should behold this man Christ, with those
eyes, wherewith many of them to whom the Apostles preached, did behold him:
that so we may grow beautiful. And that this beauty is given us, through his
grace, and not through our own merits.
A Most reasonable thing it is, O Virgin, that these motives, which are so
pregnant; and these examples which are so full of life, should move thee (thou
having first, cast away all tepidity) to fix him in thy heart, with a profound,
and cordial love, who, so much to his torment, was placed, and nailed, upon
the Cross, for thee. And that thou be none of those hard-harted persons, who
heard those words spoken in vain; but of those others, to whom the hearing
thereof, has been a cause of salvation. Be none of them, who had not the
grace to esteem that, which was present to them; but of those others, in whose
person, Isay says, We desired to see him; for many Kings, and Prophets, have
desired, to see the face, and to hear the voice of Christ our Lord.

Behold How necessary it is for us to behold Christ our Lord, crucified.
therefore, O Virgin, this man, Christ Jesus, who is published by the voice of
one, that is not worthy to proclaim him thus. Behold this man; that thou may
then come to hear his words, for he is that master, which the Father gave
us. Behold this man; that thou may imitate his life; for there is no way,
whereby thou can be saved, but he Behold this man; that thou may have
compassion of him; for he was brought to such a pass, as might have moved,
even his enemies to compassion. Behold this man, to lament over him; for it is
we, who by our sins, have brought him, to the case he is in. Behold this man;
that thou may love him, for he has suffered infinitely for us. Behold this
man; that thou may beautify thy self by him; for in him, thou shall find
all the colors of beauty, that thou can desire. Red, by the new buffetts
which they gave him; Blew, by those which he had received the night before;
Yeallow, by the abstinence of his whole life, and by the affliction which he
had passed through, in that night. White, by the spittle which they had
discharged upon him; and Black, by those blows, wherewith they had new molded
his sacred face; his cheeks all swelled, and of as many colors as those
wretches could paint upon them. For Isay Isa. 50.
prophesied thus, in the person of Christ, I gave my cheeks to those that
would pull them; and my body to them that would afflict it. What waters, what
enamells, what white, and red, may thou find here, wherewith to beautify
thy self, if, by thy negligence, thou leave them not.

Behold this man, O Virgin; for whosoever beholds him not, shall not escape
from death. For, as Moses did exalt the serpent in the desert upon a staff,
that they who were wounded, might recover by looking on it, and those others,
dye, who did not look; so It is not with faith alone, that we must look upon
our Lord, but with faith and love.
whosoever shall not look with faith, and love, upon Christ, (who is placed
upon the wood of the Cross) shall dye for ever. And, as I told thee before,
that we must beseech the Father by saying, Look, O Lord, upon the face of thy
Christ; so also does the Eternal Father command, and say to us, Look O man,
upon the face of Christ our Lord is not only, the Christ of God, but of us also.
thy Christ; and if thou would have me look upon his face, to pardon thee;
look thou upon his face, that, by him, thou may desire me, to give thee
pardon.

In The great God and this wretched man, can only be made to meet in Christ our
Lord.
the face of Christ, our Mediator, the Fathers sight, and ours do come to
meet. There, do the beams of our believe, and love; there do the beams of
his grace, and pardon, determine themselves. Christ, is called the Christ of
the Father, because the Father engendered him, and gave him what he has. And
Christ is called our Christ, because he offered himself for us, bestowing upon
us all his merits. Behold therefore, the face of thy Christ; believing in him;
confiding in him; and loving him; and all others, for him. Behold the face of
thy Christ, by meditating on him; and by comparing thy life with his; that so,
as in a glass; thou may see thy faults; and how far thou art off, from
him; and so knowing the sins which deforme thee, thou may take, of his
tears, and of his blood, which stream down, over that beautiful face of his;
and, with grief, may wash away those spotts, and so thou may become
beautiful, and just. But as the Jews took off their eyes from Christ,
because they saw him so ill handled; so does Christ take his eyes off, from
that soul which is wicked, and which as leaprous, is abhorred by him.

But when he has beautifyed it, by the grace that he gained for it, by his
afflictions, he places his eyes upon it, saying; How Cant. 4.
beautiful art thou O my Friend, how beautiful art thou. Thine eyes, are as
of a dove, besides that, which is hidden within. He says, two several times,
That she is beautiful; because The soul that serves God must have, both good
desires, and good deeds.
she must be so, both in body, and soul; within, by desires, and without, by
deeds. And because that which is within, is to exceed that which is without; he
therefore says, Besides that, which is within. And for that, the beauty of the
soul, as S. Augustine says, does consist in loving God, he therefore says,
Thine eyes, are as of a dove. Whereby is noted, that sincere, and amourous
intention, which only aims at the pleasing of God, without any mixture of
proper interest.

Then, Behold thou Christ, that Christ may behold thee. And We must give all
glory to God; and take the shame to ourselves.
as thou must take heed of thinking, that he had done any thing for which he
might deserve, to take upon him, the show of being deformed; so be sure, thou
have no imagination, that thou have deserved the beauty, which he gave thee, of
mere grace. For without any obligation, did he vest himself with our
deformity; and without any obligation, but of mere grace, he has apparailed
us with his beauty. Of such men, as think that the beauty which they have in
their souls, they have of themselves, God says by Ezech 16.
Ezechiel, thou were perfected by the beauty which I had placed upon thee; and
yet having confidence, in that beauty As if it had been his own, and not only
imparted by God.
of thine, thou did commit fornication, in thine own name; and thou did
expose thy self in that sin to all such as passed by, to be made theirs.
This God does say; For when a soul, ascribes to her self, the beauty of
Justice, which God gave her; she does, after a sort, commit fornication with
her self. For as much as, she desires to joy in her self, and not in God,
who is her true spouse; and from whom she has all her being beautiful; and
she resolves rather to glory in her own name, (which is to commit fornication
in that name) then to glory in God, who gave her that which she possesses.

For this cause, does God, with great reason, take away the beauty which he
gave her; since she rebelled from him, by occasion thereof. And because this
vain and wicked complacence, which she takes in her self, is pride, and the
beginning of all mischeife; therefore it is said, Thou did offer thy self,
in the way of fornication, to every passenger. For A just punishment.
the proud man, leaning and resting upon himself (who is but a mere vanity) is
carried away with every wind, and taken prisoner by every sin, that passes
by; and that, most justly; because he would not humble himself so, as to be
established, by putting his confidence in God. Behold therefore this man Christ
Jesus in himself; and behold him, in thy self. In thy self, that so thou
may see, who thou art. In himself, that so thou may see, who he is. Those
ignominyes, and abasements of his, thou did deserve, and therefore they are
thine; The good which is in thee, is his; and he gave it, without any merit in
thee.

CHAP. CXIII.
Wherein is prosecuted, the way that we are to take in beholding of Christ; and
how he is beautiful in all things; and that those things, which in our Lord
seem ugly, to the eyes of flesh and blood (such as are troubles, and torments)
be of great beauty.
IF thou know how to make the right use of that which has been said, thou will
employ all thy intention, in beholding this Lord of ours, with thy spiritual
eyes; and thou will find it to be of more profit to thee, then if thou did
see him, with the only eyes, of flesh and blood. For to these eyes, Christ was
made deformed; but in the eyes of faith, he was full of beauty. Isay says,
That, to the eyes of the body, his face was, as if it had been hidden; but How
clear and piercing are the eyes of Faith.
nothing is hidden, from the eyes of faith; but like the eyes of a Leopard
(which looks as it were through walls) they pass through all exterior
impediments; and striking in, they find divine strength, under that humane
weakness; and under contempt and dishonor, they find beauty with glory. So that
the words which Isay said. We saw him, and he had no beauty, were spoken in
the person of such, as beheld him, with the only eyes, of their body.

But thou, O Virgin, take in thy hand, the light of faith, and look further
in; and thou will perceive, that he who comes forth, in likeness of a sinner, is
both just, and a iustifyer of sinners; and that he, who is murdered, has in
him the innocence of a lamb. And he that has his* face all discolored, is of
himself most beautiful; and did but dress himself so, for the making of them
beautiful, who were deformed. And There is nothing that ought so to enamour a
soul upon the beauty of christ out Lord, as to consider, that our sins and
his love, did cause his deformity.
how much the more, the spouse does suffer, and abase himself for his
fellow-spouse; so much the more is she to exalt him; and how much the more he
comes wounded, and steeped, as it were, in sweat and blood; so much the more
beautiful is he, in her eyes; considering the love wherewith he resolved to
suffer those afflictions for her. And in fine, it is clear, that if we ponder
the cause, why Christ took upon him this deformity, so much the more
beautiful will he seem to be, as he shall seem to be more deformed.

Tell The four conditions of beauty recapitulated. The first.
me therefore now, if the first condition of beauty, were hidden in him; when
being rich, and abundant, he abased himself, to the want of many things;
what cause can be assigned thereof, but that he did it to prevent every want of
ours. And The second.
if he grew to seem unlike the image of his beautyfull Father; it was for no
other reason, but because the Father, resolved not to give us beauty, but by
the sons taking upon him, our deformity. And The third.
if the third condition, which is light or heat, did hide it self from that
sacred face, which was obscured, and mortifyed; and those bright shining eyes
were darkened, when he was dying, and after he was dead; why was it, but to give
light, and to put a lively color upon our obscurities. According to that which
himself figured, when, of spittle (which signified himself, as God; and of
earth which signified his humanity) he made dirt (which signified his
contumelious passion) and so the blind man (who signified, mankind) received
sight? And The fourth condition of beauty.
if, when he made himself man, and that, the most abased of men, he hid the
fourth condition of beauty, which is to be great; why was it, but to make his
greatenesse stick to us, by conforming himself to our littleness, as it was
figured, in the great 4. Reg. 4.
Elizaeus. Who, to revive the little boy, that was dead, did shrincke up into
the making of himself, a just measure, for the other; and so he restored him,
to life? For, if as Saint Augustine says, by loving of God, we are made
beautyful, it is clear that we are made more beautyfull, by acts of greater
love. Now wherein did Christ Jesus, so much show the love which he carried to
his Father, as in suffering for his honor, as himself has said; That the
world may know, that I love the Father: rise up, let us go hence. But whither
went he? It is evident, that he went to suffer. And This is excellently, and
most truly inferred.
therefore, since so much the better as a work is, so much is it the more
beautiful (for good is fair; and bad is foul) it is plain, that the more
Christ suffered, so much the better was his work. And therefore, the more
abased, and deformed he seemed; the more beautyfull he is, in the eyes of such
as know him. For he was not obliged to what he suffered, but he endured it for
the honor of his Father, and for the good of us.

These, are then the eyes, wherewith thou art ever to Behold this man, that he
may ever seem beautiful to thee, as indeed he is. As also, to the end, that
Pilate may know in hell, (where he now remains) that God does give a kind of
eyes to Christians, wherewith (they, looking upon Christ) he appears so much
the more beautiful to them, as he endeauored to deforme him. And now hear,
how all this is said by S. Augustine was able to say this and more, for in
another place he affirms of himself that God had shot his heart quite
through, with the love of him.
S. Augustine. Let us love Christ; and if we find any thing in him, that is
deformed, (though he found many deformities in us, (and yet us he loved) but
still I say, if we find any thing deformed in him, let us not love him. For
whereas he was apparailled with flesh, for which it is said of him, We saw him,
and he had no beauty; if thou confider the mercy, wherewith he became man, he
will then appear beautiful in thine eye. For that which Isay Isa. ^1.
said, we saw him, and he had no beauty; he said, in the person of the Jews.
But why did they see him without beauty? because they saw him not, with
understanding; But they who understand, that the Word is made man, do hold it
for a high point of beauty. And so it was said by one of the The great S. Paul.
friends of the spouse, I glory in nothing but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Does it seem a small matter to thee, O Paul, that thou, art not
ashamed of the dishonours of Christ, but that further, thou will needs glory
in them? But yet again, why had Christ no beauty? Because Christ crucified, is
a scandal to the Jews, and seems folly, to the unbelieving Gentills. But
now, on the other side, How can Christ be said to have had any beauty, upon the
Cross? How, but because the things of God God is infinite in all things.
which seem folly, are more full of wisdom, then the wisdom it self, of
all mankind. And the things of God, which seem weak, are more strong, then
the strength, of all mankind. And since this is true, let Christ thy spouse
appear beautiful in thine eye, since God is beautiful, and that he is the
Word of his Father. Beautiful he also was, in the womb of his mother, where
he took his Humanity without loss of his Divinity. Beautiful, was the Word,
when he was borne an infant; for although he were an infant that spoke not; yet
even whilst he sucked, and when he was carried, in his Mothers arms; the
heavens did speak; the Angels sung his praises; the star lead on the three
wise Kings; and he was adored by them in the manger, where he was laid, as
the food Men who have mortifyed affections; and to such our Lord becomes food,
after an admitable manner. It is S. Augustine who speaks thus.
of innocent, and quiet beasts. Beautiful then, he is in heaven; Beautiful,
upon earth; Beautiful, in the womb of his Mother; Beautiful, in her arms;
Beautiful, in miracles; Beautiful, in those scourges; Beautiful, when he
inuiteth us to life; Beautiful, in despising of death; Beautiful, in leaving
his soul, when he expired; Beautiful, when he took it again in his
resurrection; Beautiful, in the Cross, and Beautiful in the sepulcher;
Beautiful, in heaven; and Beautiful, in the understanding of man, on earth.
He is in fine the true, and sovereign Beauty, and Justice. All this S.
Augustine says.

And certainly, if thou will behold Christ our Lord, with such eyes as these,
he will not seem deformed to thee; as he did, to those carnal persons, who
put reproach upon him, in the passion. But as it happened to the holy Apostles,
who Luc. 9.
beheld him in Mount Thabor, his face will seem to thee, as bright as the
Sun; and his garments, as white as the snow; yea so white, as S. Mark
records, That no earthly Dyer, could have raised them, to such a height of
whiteness. Which signifies, that we, who are the A noble and comfortable
application, of that place of Scripture.
garments of Christ (because we go round about him (and because we adorn him,
by believing and loving and praising him) are so whitened by him, as that no
man on earth, could have given us that beauty of grace, and justice, which he
gave us. Let him seem to thee, as a Sun; and the souls redeemed by him, to
be white as snow. Those souls I say, which confessing, and with grief
abhorring, their own deformity, desire to be beautified in this The precious
blood of our Lord Jesus, is that only true Piscina, which is able to recover us
out of all diseases.
Piscina, or Poole, of the blood of our Savior; from whence they issue out, so
beautiful, so just, and so rich, through the grace and other gifts which they
receive by him, that they are able to enamoure, even the very eyes of God. So
that these words aforesaid, may be sung, with great joy, and much truth, The
King will desire thy beau^^ty.

FINIS.
THE TABLE OF CHAPTERS, Contained in this Cabinet.
CHAP. I. Wherein is treated, How necessary it is for us, to give ear to God;
and of the admirable Language, which our first Parents spoke, in the state of
Innocence: Which being lost by Sin, many ill ones, did succeed in place
thereof. page 1. Chap. 2. That we must not hearken to the Language of the
World, and Vainglory; And how absolute dominion it exercises over the hearts
of such as follow it; and of the punishment that they shall incur. page 4.
Chap. 3. Of what remedies we are to serve our selves, toward the contempt of
the Vayne-glory of the world; And of the great force, which Christ our Lord
does give, for the ouercomming thereof. page 8. Chap. 4. In what degree, and to
what end, it is lawful for a man to desire Honor in the world; and of the
extreme danger which there is, in holding places of Authority, and Command.
page 13. Chap. 5. How much we ought to fly from the pleasure of flesh and
blood; and what a most dangerous Enemy this is: and of what helps we are to
serve our selves, for the subduing thereof. page 20. Chap. 6. Of two causes
that there are, of sensual tentations; and what means we must use against
them, when they rise, from the Malice of the Devil. page 25. Chap. 7. Of the
great peace, which our Lord God gives to them that sight manfully against this
Enemy; and of the much that it imports us, for the ouercomming of him, to fly
from familiarity with women. page 30. Chap. 8. How the Devil, uses to deceive
spiritual men, by means of this enemy of our Flesh, and Blood; and of the
course that we are to hold, in keeping our selves from error. page 33. Chap.
9. That one of the principal remedies for the conquering of this Enemy, is the
exercise of devout and fervent Prayer, whereby we many find gust in divine
considerations, which makes us abhor all worldly pleasures. page 39. Chap.
10. Of many other means, which we are to use when this cruel Enemy does
assault us, with his first blows. page 44. Chap. 11. Of other means, besides
the former, whereby some grow to loose their Chastity; that we may fly from
them, if we also will not loose ours; and by what means we may strengthen our
selves. page 49. Chap. 12. That God uses to punish such as are proud (...) by
permitting them to loose the treasure of Chastity, thereby to humble them; and
how necessary it is to be humble, for the ouercomming of the enemy to this
virtue. page 55. Chap. 13. Of two other dangerous means, which are went to
make way for the loss of Chastity, in such as endeavor not to avoid them.
page 60. Chap. 14. How much we ought to fly from the vain confidence of
obteyning victory against this enemy, by our own only industry, and labor;
and that we must understand it, to be the gift of God; of whom, it is to be
humbly asked; by the intercession of the Saints; and in particular of the
Virgin, our Blessed Lady. page 63. Chap. 15. How our Lord disposes not,
equally of the guist of Chastity, unto all; because to some, he gives it only
in their souls; and of the great profit which the temptations against
Chastity, do bring, if they be well borne. page 67. Chap. 16. How the gift of
Chastity, is granted to some, not only in the interior part of the soul, but
in the sensual part also; and this, after two manners. pa. 71. Chap. 17.
Wherein he begins to discourse of the languages, spoken by the Devil; and
how much we ought to fly them; and that one of them, is to make a man proud,
and so to bring him to great mischeife and error; and of the means, how to
avoid this language of Pride. page 77. Chap. 18. Of another snare all contrary
to the former, which is Despair, whereby the Devil procures to conquer Man;
and how we shall carry our selves against him. page 87. Chap. 19. Of the much
which God the Father gave us, in giving us Jesus Christ, our Lord; and how
thankful we ought to be, and to help our selves by this favor; and to
strengthen our selves thereby, for the excluding of all desperation, wherewith
the Devil is wont to assault us. page 92. Chap. 20. Of some means, which the
Devil uses against the remedy that is spoken of, whereby to fright us; and
how for this, we must not faint; but animate our selves the more, considering
the infinite mercy of our Lord. page 96. Chap. 21. He proceeds in the discourse
of Gods mercy, which he shows to them that cordially ask pardon. This is a
consideration, of power to conquer all Despair. page 100. Cap. 22. Where he
prosecutes the treaty of the mercy of God, which he uses toward us; his
Majesty ouercomming our enemies, after an admirable manner. page 106. Cap. 23.
Of the great mischeife which despair does work in the soul; and how we must
overcome this enemy, with spiritual alacrity, and diligence, and fervor in
the service of God. page 110. Chap. 24. Of two remedies for the getting of
Hope, in the way of our Lord; and that we must not turn coward, although the
remove of the temptation be differred; and how there be certain hearts, which
know not how to be humbled, but by the knocks of tribulation; and therefore,
that they must so be cured. page 118. Chap. 25. How the Devil procures to
draw us to despair, by tempting us, against faith, and the divine mysteries;
and of the remedies that we must use, against these temptations. page 122.
Chap. 26. How the Devil endeauours, by means of the aforesaid temptations, to
remove us from our devotion and good exercises; and that our remedy is, to
increase therein; laying aside all superfluous desire of feeling spiritual
sweetness in the soul; and to what end these also may be desired. page 126.
Chap. 27. That the conquest of these temptations, does consist more in having
patience to bear them; and in the hope of the favor of our Lord; then in
procuring forcibly that they may not come. page 132. Chap. 28. Of the great
remedy which grows against these tentations, by seeking a wise and well
experienced ghostly Father, who must be entirely informed and credited; and how
the ghostly Father ought to proceed with such persons; and of the fruit which
rises from these temptations. page 135. Chap. 29. How the Devil procures, by
exterior means, to make us give over good exercises; And how we must
strengthen our heart by confidence in our Lord, for the ouercomming of him; And
of other things, which help to free us from this fear; and of the fruit of
this temptation. page 139. Chap. 30. Of many reasons which there are, why we
must hope that our Lord will deliver us, out of all tribulation, how greiuous
soever it be; and of two significations, which this word Believe, may be
accounted to have. page 150. Cap. 31. That the first thing which we are to
hear, is divine Truth, by means of Faith, which is the beginning of all
spiritual life; and which teaches us so high things, as that they exceed all
humane discourse. pa. 159. Chap. 32. How agreeable to reason it is, to believe
the Mysteries of our Faith, although they exceed all humane reason. page 163.
Chap. 33. Of, how firm, and constant, and authorized witnesses, our faith has
had, who have given their lives for the truth thereof. page 166. Chap. 34. That
the perfect life of such as have believed our faith, is a great testimony of
the Truth thereof; and how far Christians have exceeded all other Nations, in
goodness of life. page 169. Chap. 35. That the very conscience of him, that
desires to obtain virtue, does testify, that our Faith is true; and how the
desire of leading an evil life, does both procure the loosing of Faith, and
hinder the getting it. page 175. Chap. 36. That the admirable change which is
made in the heart of sinners, and the great favors which our Lord does do them,
who follow him with perfect virtue, and do call upon him in their necessityes,
is a great testimony to the truth of our Faith. page 179. Chap. 37. Of the
many, and great good things, which God works in the soul that follows
perfect virtue; and that this is a great proof, that our Faith is true;
because that, did teach us means, how to obtain those graces. page 183. Chap.
38. That if the power and greatness of the work of Believing, be well pondered,
we shall find great testimony, to prove, that it is much reason, that the
understanding of man do serve God, by embracing of Faith. page 188. Chap. 39.
Wherein answer is given to an objection which some make against our Faith; by
saying, that God teaches things, which are too high. page 191. Chap. 40.
Wherein answer is made to the^ who object against the receiving of Faith, that
it teaches mean, and low things of God; and how in these mean things which
God teaches, most high glory is contained p. 193. Chap. 41. That not only the
glory of our Lord does shine in the humble things, of God, which our Faith
teaches, but also our own great profit, our strength, and virtue. page 200.
Chap. 42. Wherein it is proved, that the Truth of our Faith is infallible, as
well in respect of them that have preached it, as of them who have received it;
and of the manner how it was received. page 203. Chap. 43. That such is the
greatness of our Faith, that none of the aforesaid motives, nor any other,
that can be delivered, are suff^cient to make a man believe with this divine
Faith; unless our Lord do incline a man to believe by particular favor. page
207. Chap. 44. That we must give our Lord great thanks, for the gift of Faith;
and that we must use it, to the end for which it was given; in such sort, as
that we attribute not that to it which it has not; and what both the one, and
the other is. page 214. Chap. 45. Why our Lord did resolve to save us, by the
means of Faith, and not of humane Reason; and of the great subjection which we
must yield to those things which our Faith does teach; and of the particular
devotion which we owe, in especial manner, to that which our Lord Jesus taught
us by his own sacred mouth. page 223. Chap. 46. That the holy Scripture must
not be declared by what sense one will; but by that of the Church of Rome; and
where that declares not, we must follow the uniform exposition of the Saints;
And of the great submission, and subjection, which we must perform to this
holy Church. page 227. Chap. 47. What a terrible chastisement it is, when God
permits men to loose their Faith; and that it is justly taken away from
them, that work not, in conformity of what it teaches. page 232. Chap. 48.
Wherein the former discourse is more particulerly prosecuted; and it is
declared what dispositions are requisite, for the beginning to read, and
understand the divine Scripture, and the holy Doctors. page 237. Chap. 49.
That we must not grow in pride, for not having lost our Faith, as others have
done; but rather we must be humble, with fear; and the reasons which we have
for being so. page 244. Chap. 50. How some use to be much deceived, by giving
credit to false Revelations; and it is particulerly declared, wherein true
liberty of spirit does consist. page 249. Chap. 51. Of the way wherein we are
to carry our selves, that we may not err by such illusions; and how dangerous
the desire is of Revelations, and such things as those. page 256. Chap. 52.
Wherein some signs are given of good, and bad, or false Revelations, or
Illusions. page 260. Chap. 53. Of the secret pride, Whereby many use to be much
deceived in the way of Virtue; and of the danger that such are in, to be
ensnared by the illusions of the Devil. page 264. Cap. 54. Of some propertyes
which they have, who^ we said to be deceived in the last Chapter; and how
necessary it is to take the opinion of others; and of the mischief that men
are brought to, by following their own. page 267. Chap. 55. That we must fly
fast from our own opininion; and choose some person to whom for the love of
God, we must be subject, and be ruled by him, and what kind of man he must be,
and how we must carry our selves with him. page 274. Chap. 56. Wherein he
begins to declare the second word of the verse, and how we are to consider
of the Scriptures; and how we must restayne the fight of our eyes, that we may
the better see with those of our soul, which the freer they are from the sight
of creaturs, the better shall they see God. page 279. Chap. 57. That the first
thing which a man must see, is himself; of the necessity which we have of this
knowledge, and the inconveniences that grow upon us, through want thereof. page
284. Chap. 58. That we must be diligent to find out the knowledge of our
selves: and by what means this may be done; and that it is fit for us to have
some private place, into which we may daily retire our selves for a time. 291.
Chap. 59. Wherein he prosecuteth the exercise which conduces to the knowledge
of ones self; and how we are to profit in the use of reading, and of Prayer.
page 296. Chap. 60. How much the Meditation of death, does profit toward the
knowledge of a man's self; and of the manner how it is to be meditated, for as
much as concerns the death of the body. page 299. Chap. 61. Of that which is
to be considered in the meditation of Death, about that which shall happen to
the soul; that so we may profit the more, in the knowledge of ourselves. page
302. Chap. 62. That the daily examination of our faults, helps much toward
the knowledge of our selves and of other great benefits which this practice of
Examen does bring; and of the profit which comes to us, both by the
reprehension of others, and those also which our Lord does interiourly send us.
page 308. Chap. 63. Of the estimation which we are to make of our good works,
that we may not fail thereby, in the knowledge of our selves, and of true
Humility; and of the marvelous example, which Christ our Lord does give us,
for this purpose. page 313. Cha. 64. Of a profitable exercise of knowing the
being which we have in Nature that by it we may obtain Humility. page 316.
Chap. 65. How the exercising of our selves in the knowledge of the
supernatural being which we have of grace, does serve toward the obteyning of
Humility. page 321. Chap. 66. Wherein the aforesaid exercise, is prosecuted in
particular manner. page 326. Chap. 67. Wherein he prosecuteth the former
exercise: and of the much light which our Lord is wont to give by means
thereof, whereby they know the greatness of God, and as it were the Nothing of
their litlenes. page 332. Chap. 68. Wherein he begins to treat of the
consideration of Christ our Lord, and of the mysteries of his life and death,
and of the great reason we have to exercise our selves in this consideration;
and of the great fruits which grow from thence. page 336. Chap. 69. Wherein he
prosecuteth, that of the former Chapter; and pondereth this passage of the
Canticles; in contemplation of the passion of Christ. page 343. Chap. 70. That
the exercise of prayer, is most important; and of the great fruit which is
reaped thereby. page 350. Chap. 71. That the penance due to our sins must be
the first pace, whereby we come to God; conceauing true grief for them, and
making true Confession thereof, and satisfaction. page 361. Chap. 72. How the
second pace toward the bringing us to God is the giving of thanks which we
owe him, for his having so delivered us; and of the manner how this is to be
done, by means of diverse Misteryes of the Passion, which are to be meditated,
in diverse days. page 363. Chap. 73. Of the way which we are to hold in the
consideration of the life and passion of Jesus Christ our Lord. page 367. Chap.
74. Wherein the way of considering the life of Jesus Christ our Lord, to the
end that it may be of greater profit to us, is prosecuted, in a more particular
manner. page 369. Chap. 75. Wherein some directions are given for our greater
profit in the aforesaid exercise of Prayer; and for the avoiding of some
inconveniences, which to ignorant persons are wont to arrive. page 374. Chap.
76. That the end of Meditation of the Passion is to be the imitation thereof;
and what is to be the beginning, and ground, of greater things which we are to
imitate. page 380. Chap. 77. That the Mortification of our passions, is the
second fruit which we are to draw out of the meditation of the passion of
Christ our Lard; and how we are to use this exercise; that so we may gather
admirable fruit thereby. page 388. Chap. 78. That the most excellent thing
which we are to meditate and imitate, in the passion of our Lord, is the love
wherewith he offered himself to the Eternal Father. page 394. Chap. 79. Of
the burning Love, wherewith Christ Jesus loved God, and men for God; from which
love, as from a fountain, that did spring which he suffered in the exterior;
and that also which he suffered in the interior; which was much more, then the
other. page 403. Chap. 80 Wherein is prosecuted the tenderness of the love of
Christ toward men; and of that, which caused his interior grief; and gave
him a Cross to carry, in his heart, all the days of his life. page 409. Chap.
81. Of other profitable Considerations which may be drawn out of the Passion
of our Lord; and of other meditations which may be made upon other points; and
of some directions, for such, as cannot easily put that, which has bin said,
in practice. page 415. Cap. 82. How attentively our Lord does hear us; and how
piteously he does behold us; if we manifest our infirmityes to him, with that
grief which is fit; and how ready he is to cure us, and to do us many other
favors. page 420. Chap. 83. Of two threats, which God uses to express; One
absolute, and the other conditional; and of two kinds of promises, like those
threats; and how we are to carry our selves when they arrive. page 426. Chap.
84. What a man is, of his own stock; and of the great benefits that we enjoy
by Jesus Christ our Lord. page 429. Chap. 85. How loud Christ cried out; and
does ever cry out for us, before the Eternal Father: and with how great
speed, his Majesty does hear the prayers of men; and bestows benefittes
upon them, by means of this outcry of his son. page 438. Chap. 86. Of the
great love wherewith our Lord does behold such as are just; and of the much
that he desy^eth to communicate himself to creatures; and to destroy our
sins, which we must behold with detestation, that God may look upon them
with compassion. page 446. Chap. 87. Of the many and great benefits which come
to men, in that the Eternal Father, does behold the face of Jesus Christ his
Son. page 451. Cap. 88. How it is to be understood that Christ is our
Justice; least otherwise we should fall into some error, by conceauing, that
just persons have not a distinct justice, from that, whereby Jesus Christ is
just. page 457. Chap. 89. That sin does not remain in just Persons; but that
the guilt of sin, is destroyed in them; and that they are clean, and
acceptable to God. page 462. Chap. 90. That the granting, that there is
perfect cleanesse from sin, in such as are just, by the merits of Christ
Jesus, does not only not diminish his honor, but much more declare it. page
467. Chap. 91. How some passages of holy Scripture are to be understood;
wherein it is said, that Christ Jesus is our Justice; and such other
propositions as that is, for the better declaration of the precedent Chapters.
pa. 472. Chap. 92. That we must fly fast from pride, which is wont to grow up
apace, by occasion of good works; considering the much, which is merited by
them; and of a particular instruction which Christ has given us, whereby we may
profit against this tentation. page 476. Chap. 93. That a man being humbled and
abased by the contents of the last Chapter, may enjoy that greatness which our
Lord vouchsafes to impart, to the works of such as are just, with confidence,
and gratitude p. 483. Cap. 94. That from the love which we bear our selves, we
must draw a reason of loving our neighbors. p. 486. Cap. 95. That from the
knowledge of the love, which Christ bears to us, we are to draw a reason, for
loving our neighbors. page 488. Chap. 96. Of another consideration which
teaches us, in excellent manner, how we are to carry our selves with our
Neighbors. page 491. Chap. 97. He begins to treat of that word of the
verse which says, Forget thy people. And of the two sorts of men which there
are; good, and bad; and of the names which are given to evil men, and of their
several significations. page 497. Chap. 98. That it does much import us, to
fly from this City of the wicked, which is the world; and how ill it treats
the citizens thereof; and of the sad end which they all shall have. page 503.
Chap. 99. Of the vanity of being nobly borne; and that such persons must not
brag thereof, as desire to be of the kindred of Christ. page 512. Chap. 100
Wherein he begins to declare that other word, And forget the house of thy
Father. And how much it imports us, to fly from our own will, in imitation
of Christ our Lord; for the avoiding of those inconveniences which grow from
thence. page 517. Chap. 102. Of a kind of practice, in the denying of our own
will; and of the obedience that we owe to our Superiors, which is a way, how
to obtain the abnegation of our will; and how a superior is to carry
himself, with his subjects. page 522. Chap. 102. That not all those things
which we desire, to do, or demand to have; are to be called a man's proper
will; and how we may know what our Lord demands at our hands. page 5.7.
Chap. 103. Wherein he begins to declare that word, which says, And the
King, will desire thy beauty. And how great a matter it is, that God should be
content to place his love, upon a man. And that this is no corporal beauty;
and how dangerous such kind of beauty is. page 530. Chap. 104. That the dignity
of being a spouse of Jesus Christ requires, that great care be had in all
things, and of the example which they are to book upon, both in the exterior,
and in the interior of their soul; who have a desire to enjoy this dignity.
page 538. Chap. 105. That the dignity of this State, must not dismay Virgins;
for as much as their Spouse; who is our Lord, does given them that, which is
necessary for it. And of the advice, by which they are to undertake it; and of
the cheerfulnes, wherewith they are to undergo it; and of the great blessings
which are contained in it. page 540. Chap. 106. Of four conditions, which
are requisite for the making of any thing beautiful; and how a^t of of them,
are wanting to a soul, that is in sin. page 545. Chap. 107. How the deformity
of sin, is so wick^d a thing; as that no force, or law of Nature, or of
Scripture, were sufficient to abolish it; but only Jesus Christ; in virtue of
whom, sin was ever taken away, and grace was given. page 547. Cha^. 108.
That Christ our Lord, takes away the deformity of the soul, by his blood; and
that it was convenient, that rather the Son, should become man, then either
the Father, or the holy Ghost; and of the great force of the blood of Christ
our Lord. page 550. Chap. 109. That the sacred humanity of Christ our Lord, was
figured in the garment of the high Priest; and in the veil which God
commanded Moses to make. And what that was, which David begged, when he
desired to sprinkled with Hyssope, that he might so be cleansed. page 555.
Chap. 110. How Christ did as it were dissemble those four conditions of his
beauty; so to make us beautiful; to which purpose there is a passage of the
Prophet Isay declared. page 557. Chap. 111. Of the many and wonderful things*
which our Lord did draw out of that greatest wickedness, which they committed
who murdered Christ, and of the several effects which these words, Behold
the man, being spoken by Pilate, and preached by the Apostles, have brought to
pass, in the world. page 566. Chap. 112. How great reason it is, that we
should behold this man Christ, with those eyes, wherewith many of them, to
whom the Apostles preached, did behold him; that so we may grow beautiful.
And that this beauty is given us, through his grace, and not through our own
merits. page 572. Chap. 113. Wherein is prosecuted, the way that we are to take
in beholding of Christ; and how he is beautiful in all things; and that those
things, which in our Lord seem ugly, to the eyes of flesh and blood (such as
are troubles, and torments) be of great beauty. page 578.
FINIS.

