THE ESTATES, EMPIRES, and PRINCIPALLITIES OF THE WORLD.

Represented by ye description of Countries, manners of Inhabitants, Riches of
Pro: uinces, forces, Government, Religion; and the Princes that have governed
in every Estate.

With the begin^ing of all Military and Religious Orders.

Translated out of French by Edw: Grims tone Sargeant at Arms. S. T.

LONDON Printed by ADAM: ISLIP: for MATHEWE: LOWNES; and JOHN: BILL. 1615.

TO THE MOST NOBLE AND WORTHY OF ALL HONORS, AND ALL TITLES, THOMAS EARL OF
SVFFOLKE, LORD HIGH TREASVRER OF ENGLAND.
MY most honored Lord, as it would argue avaine presumption to importune you
with trifles, of whom the weighty burden of this Estate does chiefly depend;
so to distrust of your Noble acceptance of the least tributes of duty and
service which shall be presented unto you, would show a weakness and want of
judgment in me, having had such worthy testimonies of honorable favor, both
in countenancing my poor and weak labors, in bringing me again into the
world, and giving me new life: for after eight years spent for the public
service of this Estate, in France, seeing my Star without light in our
Horizon, and the hopes of my service, or of further employments dead, I retired
my self to this fruitless course of life, to the end I might deceive the
hours of my idle time, and leave some testimony to the world of my lives
employment; during the which I have past over France, the Netherlands, and
Spain, under your L. honorable protection; and now declining toward my
grave, and being ready to bid the world adieu, I have adventured to take a
general survey of all the world, and to bring a trauellor home, to make us a
true relation of all Estates and Countries in our own language, I doubt not
but he will give your L. some content, if your most weighty affairs will lend
you any spare hours to peruse him. The title he bears on his forehead, shows
the subject whereon he treats. My most humble suit is, That your L. would be
pleased to patronize this last labor of an old man, whom a desire to show his
dutiful observance, has enabled, beyond the faculties of his weak body, to
finish this work, to the end he might leave as it were a dying testimony of
his service, and let future ages know, that he did both live and dye

Your L. most devoted, EDWARD GRIMESTON.

THE TRANSLATOR to the Reader.
GEntlemen, It is an usual custom for men in my case to write some Appologie
or Preface unto the Reader, either in commendation of the subject he treats of,
or for his own justification and defense: I should be loath to be held less
respectfull than other men, in omitting any necessary complement that might
give you content. Touching the subject of this Book, I will speak little,
mine Author has given you full satisfaction in his Preface, the which I have
set down at large; his Title shows the profit you may reap by him, and every
discreet and well advised trauellor knows, That the true use of travel into
foreign countries, is to know that which he teaches; wherein he has showed
much diligence, and great reading, as I found by my own travel, confronting
him with diverse good Authors that have written of the same subject: but I will
leave him to your judicious censures, and to the mercy of the Booke-seller,
who, it may be, will commend him in the sale, if he be not interessed in some
other book of the like nature. My chiefest care is, to give you an account of
my labors: I may not aduow it to be a mere translation, for that I have not
tied my self strictly unto the laws, but have added unto it in diverse places,
whereas by my own search and study, I have found somethings (happily not seen
by him) which might beautify the work, and give content unto the Reader. I
have also in other places omitted some things, wherein my Author had been
abused by the relations of others, and in some sort taxed the honor of some
Nations, the which in mine own knowledge were mistaken: it had been no
discretion in me, nor any good plea to have said, I followed mine Author, as
one did lately in the translation of Nassaus victories, where he has fasly
depraved an honest and worthy action at the seige of Berghen, the which was
held by all the great Commanders that were then present, to be honest and
commendable. I have also, treating of the Religion of every State, bin forced
to vary something from his phrase, but not from the truth of the subject.
There remains nothing but your kind acceptance of those my endeauous: give
them leave to pass with the rest of my labors; and if you find it not written
in elegant terms, consider that it is no Historical discourse, but a
Description of countries, and that mine Author studied more for matter than
words. Such as it is, I bequeath unto you as my last Legacy, if it shall give
you content, I shall think my pains well bestowed; but if you find it
defective in any thing that concerns me, let my desire to do well make
satisfaction for that which is amiss. And so I rest.

Yours, E. G.

THE AUTHORS PREface to the Reader.
SOme men are borne so far in love with themselves, as they esteem nothing
else, and think, that whatsoever fortune has set without the compass of
their power and government, should also be banished from their knowledge. Some
others, a little more careful, who finding themselves engaged by their birth,
or abode, to some one place, strive to understand how matters pass there, and
remain so tied to the consideration of their own Commonweal, as they affect
nothing else, carrying themselves as parties of that imperfect body, whereas
in their curiosity, they should behave themselves as members of this world.
And there are others, which lie groueling in the dust of their studies,
searching out with the sciences, the actions and manners of the Ancient, not
respecting the Modern, and they seem so to admire the dead, as they have no
care of the living.

As for the first, they must needs confess their fact to be merely brutish,
seeing that men are not borne solely for themselves, that humanity requires
company, and the knowledge of that which other men practice, and that to frame
a man's life, as it ought to be, it is needful to see the actions of many. As
for the second, we see in them a childish and simple curiosity: for what know
they if the Commonweal, which contains them, be a cage of fools, and whether
they have need to borrow something from strangers, to better the Estate
thereof, or else to settle themselves there? And how can they judge if affairs
in their own Estate be well ordered, if they do not confront them with their
neighbors, or with some more remote to the end they may repair the defects,
or better the beginnings? Touching the third rank, observe in them a vanity,
worthy of blame, for that besides they busy themselves about dead things, and
which are for the most part out of use, they perceive not that at the same
time, whilst they debate of the rolling of the Heavens, they are ignorant
after what manner the earth, whereon they live, does roll and move with their
Seigneuries and Estates; yet after another sort, than a subtle and
fantastical Mathematician of this age, following the opinion of some of the
Ancient, propounds it.

Of these three sorts of men, leaving the first to their pasture, with Lions
and Bears; and passing over the second, as incapable to see any farther, I
wonder at the blindness of the last, who being endowed with excellent spirits,
and exceeding curious, fill them with frivolous things, contemning the learning
of that which imports them most, and as a man may say, know nothing in knowing
all things.

They that make a distinction of the clear and certain knowledge of things,
divide all Sciences into Speculatiue and Practique; and they subdiuide
speculatiue knowledge, into natural Phylosophie, the Mathematickes, and
Metaphysickes, lodging physic under the first; Arethmaticke, Music,
Geometry, and Astrology, under the second; and uniting to the third,
Divinity, to the which they give also for an adjunct the Canon Law. As for
practiue science or knowledge, they first of all make it to embrace moral
Phylosophie, which they divide into three, that is to say, into Ethique, which
frames the manners of every particular man, into Oecanonicall, which disposes
of domesticke actions; and political, which comprehends the civil actions
that concern the government of a Commonweal; and this contains under it in
a manner all the knowledge of the Civil Law. They do also lodge under
practice, Logic, the art of Memory, Grammar, and Rhetoric, to the which
may be added Poesy, and History.

But they which by their divisions (the which I will not draw out at length, as
tedious, and in a manner unprofitable in this place) have in their opinions
truly described all arts and sciences, do not consider that they have
forgotten the most necessary, which is called the Science or Knowledge of the
world, the admirable Book of that great and religious Anthony. It is this
knowledge which more than any other thing does advance men to honors and
dignities, which makes Families and Commonwealths to flourish, and the actions
and words of those that understand it, pleasing both to great and small; which
causes all things to succeed wishfully, and does in a manner force the
Destinies. This knowledge is gotten by the conversation of many, by diverse
discourses and reports, either by word or writing, by the managing of affairs,
conference with strangers, voyages into diverse places, the knowledge of diverse
humors, and in a word, by the judicious consideration of the manners and life
of one and other.

But ^o come to the point, I say, That a good part of this knowledge is
comprehended in the discourse of this Book, where you may see all sorts of
persons and nations lively and naturally described, and represented with their
manners and customs, as curiously as might be: so as if there lackes
perfection in any part, this defect proceeds rather from the want of true
relation, than from my diligence. I never undertook this work, but with a
firm desseigne, not only to make it pleasing, as Geographers do in the
description of the Earth, describing and setting down such singularities as
they find: but also profitable, laboring to observe not lightly, but in
intelligible terms, whatsoever may make the life of man either more happy,
or more civil.

And for proof, if any one will vouchsafe to cast his eyes upon this work,
although ill pollished, he may in a manner at the first view, observe what I I
say, and seeing the distinction which I use, and the order which I hold
throughout all the whole book, he may easily judge, that beside the Readers
content, I have sought their profit, giving them herein all the satisfaction
they could desire upon this subject. For although my first and chief desseigne
was to deal only with politic and civil matters; yet to the end, they
might find all together, and not be forced to seek for the description of
countriess, whose custom I represent, I have made the Corographie, and would
not fail in that point, painting out the provinces, whose discourse I
undertook, it may be with as much care, as my desseigne would give me leave,
setting down the most remarkable places.

But for the that this representation of countries would be unprofitable, if
they understood not their quality, I have added it unto the rest, with all
that the country yields, and the beasts which naturally live there, and have
their breeding. Yet all this were little, to spend much time in the curious
search of things the which are void of sense or reason, if I should not spew
you the man which dwells in euere country, and for whom all those things seem
to have been made, first in his ancient posture, and with his old customs,
either altogether, or for the most part abolished; then in his modern habit,
either with more civility, or with more rudeness, according to the changes
and reuolutions of the world, to the end that every man may judge which is the
better of these two Estates, and make use of part of the one, and part of the
other, having carefully balanced the most considerable particularities of both.

And for that all this labor were little, to give the Reader a solid content,
if I should have left it thus naked and bare, it importing little to know the
actions of nations, if they had not means to judge by the commodities which
the place does yield, what they should add or take away from their manner of
living, and to know the causes for the which they suffered themselves as it
were to run headlong into some error and defect, or else have loved or
embraced something worthy of great praise and commendation: and if withal
they did not understand the means which these people have to live in the
Estate where in they are borne; I have next unto their manners, joined their
wealth and riches, which show by their abundance, how men which enioie them
have abandoned themselves to delights, or else given themselves unto Sciences,
and by the want thereof in what manner some have con tinued rude and barbarous,
and others have applied themselves to arts and trades, to the end, they might
repair the defect of nature by the perfection of their industry and labor.

Moreover, knowing well that although a country be furnished with commodities
which suffice or abound, yet the inhabitants are subject to be dislodged, if
they be not able to repel them which shall undertake to wrest that violently
from them which they hold: for this cause, I have presently after the discourse
of their wealth, added that of their forces, to the end the Reader may observe
the means which Nations have to resist either the envy of their neighbors,
or to withstand the fury of a multitude of strangers, the which have come from
some miserable country to seize upon another man's right; and to end they may
judge if the Estates whereof I discourse may be easily overthrown and changed,
and if for their defense they make use of any which is unknown to us, and
which might yield unto us some profit, we might apply it to our own use, and
have consideration of the forces of another nation, to make our own more
fearful: but all this being without policy, is like unto a building which is
in the Air, without any support or foundation, I have joined unto the rest,
the government and conduct of the Estate, whose discourse I have undertaken,
to the end that knowing the humors of those that are subject unto it, they may
judge if they be governed according to their natural disposition, and by this
judgment they may understand that all nations are not to be ruled after one
sort; and if under such a conduct, the nation whereof we treat, has not
succeeded well, or has been often afflicted or ruined, they may seek out the
defects of this government, to make the country more calm and quiet, and
others which are not engaged under the like command much better instrusted in
that which they have to do for their assurance.

Having done this, I would not omit the principal pieces of Commonweales, the
which is Religion, whereof I have discoursed, to show that it is the fear of
some divinity which maintains people in their duties, makes them obedient to
their princes, and diuerts them much more from all bad desseignes, than arms
and soldiers which enuiron and threaten them. I do it also to show, that
whereas religion wants, of what sort soever it be, policy and order fail in
like manner, and barbarism, confusion, and rebellion, reign there in a manner
continually: whereas they that seize on them, should presently settle in their
rude minds the apprehension of some power over all, to dispose of things at
pleasure.

Yet I was not contented herewith, so desirous I was to give satisfaction to
all men: but I have annexed and joined hereunto the names of those which have
governed the countries which I describe; and if this curiosity has not
extended to every discourse, the Authors which have gone before me, are to be
accused of this defect; for that having forgotten to treat particularly of this
subject, or being not able to do it for want of sufficient instructions, they
have taken from me the means to acquit my self worthily of that which I have
undertaken, and in like manner they have as it were deprived the Reader of that
satisfaction which he might have desired or expected.

Thus I have labored to make this work, not perfect and complete in every
point, yet at the least in that estate, as it may yield both pleasure and
profit to those that shall vouchsafe to lend it some hours, and which shall
resolve to read it at leisure, and not in have, as they do commonly which
desire only to pass the time, and not to employ it commendably in some
worthy search: for who so will look narrowly to the benefit which may be
drawn from these discourses, shall easily find that there are very few men
but should be invited to the reading thereof, either to exercise their
judgments, or for to make the dessigne of some fortune, or else to be
profitable and commodious to their countries, or for their own entertainment,
or for the entertainment of others, or for both together.

If they duly consider of all that is treated of in this Book, they shall
first see that Princes, besides the relation of diverse sorts of places, whereon
they may ground some enterprises, fortify themselves with more advantage,
better the trade of their subjects, and employ them either to the beautifying
or enriching of their Provinces, and shall here find means to augment and
increase their revenues, making use of some foreign inventions, and applying
them to the Nations which they command, according to the disposition of times,
and the humor of their subjects, bringing them always in with wisdom and
judgment.

Noblemen shall draw instructions from hence to please their Sovereign Lords
and Princes, and also to make their own subjects pleasing and humble; they
shall make themselves capable of some worthy Embassage, whereof they shall
acquit themselves much better by this kind of course, and they shall be much
better enabled to undertake or execute any enterprise, be it near or far off.

As for simple gentlemen, they that are advanced in years shall find
wherewith to entertain themselves, and withal to instruct youth: They that
are of a middle age, may observe particularities, whereof they may make use,
whether that their courage carries them far from their houses for any
dessigne or enterprise, or live in Court, whereas the reading hereof may
purchase them reputation and credit, and draw them unto good employments, if
they can make true use of it, conferring iudiciously that which passes in the
State wherein they live, with that which is done in many others. Finally, young
men before they see any thing, shall in a manner see all things; they shall
know the Court, and the humors of Courtiers, before they know themselves; and
if their generous inclinations thrust them on to the profession of arms (as it
does commonly fall out) whenas peace is settled in their own countries, they
shall find here others which are in action, they shall sound their means and
forces, according to the quality of those places whither they will go, they
shall see if their natures be able to endure the extreme cold, or violent heat
of those countries where the war is; they shall consider of their manner of
living, and judge if their humors will be compatible with that of the
inhabitants of those places; if strangers, especially they of his nation, may
purchase any honor there, which is the chief end of Nobility; and to
conclude, to the end they may win reputation, having considered all these
circumstances, they will seek to force their own nature if it be wayward, lay
aside all their passions whatsoever, support all kind of discommodities, and
fit themselves to any thing that may happen.

Simple soldiers, which seek to raise their birth and fortunes by the proof
of their valor, have in a manner the same things to consider of: And to this
end, hearing of any levy of men to go into countries which are in question,
they may instruct themselves before they dislodge of that which they shall
encounter there, and by this means resolve with more assurance of the voyage;
they shall not find themselves surprised with any thing that is strange, having
learned the truth before their departure, and seeing it, shall hold it, as a
thing well practiced among them.

They that will deal in the managing of affairs and businesses of Estate,
shall draw many Maxims from hence, the which they may use to so good purpose
(although they be borrowed from the customs of other nations) as they shall
seem their own, and will make them appear inuentiue, judicious, and capable
to give some good and wholesome council for the welfare of their Commonweal.

The Aduocat who seems only to have need of the laws, ordinances, and
customs, which are in force in the place of his abode, may, by the means of
this Book, mingle in his pleading, some custom or foreign law in favor of
his client, and making the most curious Judges to observe it, it may be he
shall move them to have such regard thereof, as many times it shall win him his
cause, or at the least purchase him reputation.

And is not the Merchant to be held happy that shall meet with these
discourses, seeing that in short time he may know the places whither he is to
traffic, and instruct himself sufficiently of the nature and quality of the
countries, where he may find that which he seeks, or sell that which he has;
and also have means to learn after what manner commodities are bought and
sold in those places, either by exchange, or for ready money, and by what
means they must gain the Barbarians which sell, or prevent the wiles and
tricks of the most subtle and wary, who know how to disguise or impair
their merchandise.

As for Artizens and Tradesmen, they have news here of Provinces which seem
to have need of their arts and professions; and therefore (me thinks) it is no
difficult thing for them to resolve to change their aboads, whenas they shall
assuredly know that the change will be profitable unto them, and that they
shall benefit themselves more in other places, than where they have first
planted themselves. To conclude in few words, there is no sort of people but
may reap some profit by this book, which contains, as I have said, a good
part of that great and most necessary science of the world, the which cannot
sufficiently be esteemed, for that it makes men worthy of esteem.

I have not spoken all this for any account I make of that which I have
writtan, neither will I ever confess, that any desire of glory has invited
me to praise mine own work: my humor will not suffer me to be so vain;
only a desire I had to be profitable to my country to whom I have vowed all
the good I can, with the loss of mine own rest. And I protest with truth,
that if I have given any rank or commendation to this work, I will give much
more to those that shall labor to make it perfect; for that in my opinion it
is not yet fully finished, and that any man may add something daily unto it,
for that from time to time they have more certain advice from all parts,
especially from those countries which have not been much frequented, either by
reason of the distance, or for their barbarousnesse.

I would willingly end my speech, as desiring the Reader should speedile make
some trial of the truth of my words. But before I proceed any farther, seeing
I discourse of the Seigneuries of the world, I desire to show as in a brief
table from what stocks, in a manner all the Commonweales, and Monarchies of
the Earth at this day are descended, to the eud that they may observe the
changes and alterations here below, and see after what manner free people were
made subject to the power of those that were more mighty. This may be chiefly
done by the means of the four sovereign Empires, the which after some
continuance being divided into many branches, have suffered a great number of
principalities well known to us, to rise out of their shipwrecks, and which in
time may feel the like accidents, either by their increase, or by the cutting
off of some parts.

The first of these Monarchies owes his beginning to mighty Nimrod, whom some
have called Saturn of Babylon. This was he which he founded the principality
of the Babylonians (the which was confounded with that of the Assyrians) one
hundred thirty and one years after the Deluge: and some hold that the five
and fortieth year of his Empire, he sent Aslur, Magog, and Mosc, with certain
troops to people countries, and to erect kingdoms by their own names.

This Nimrod had for successor Bell, called Jupiter Bell, who seized upon all the
countries toward the West unto Sarmatia in Europe: and his son Ninus, who
held the Monarchy after him, extended his bounds farther. After the death of
Ninus, his wife Semiramis reigned, and brought Ethiopia under her subjection,
and made war against the Indians. But her son Zameis remained quiet, and
did nothing worthy of memory. Arius, who succeeded him added the Bactrians
and Caspians to his Empire. After whom they put these that follow: Aralius,
then Baleus, who extended his bounds unto Judea, and after him, Armatrite, then
Beloch, who had for successor a second Baleus. This man was followed by
Altadas, Mamite, Mancalee, and Sphere: after whom there reigned Mamele,
Sparete, and Ascarades, who reduced all Syria under his Empire. After him they
reckon twenty kings unto Sardanapalus the eight and thirtieth Emperor, who
was forced to burn himself with all his treasure, being reduced to that
extremity by two of his Lieutenants, who afterward divided the Monarchy
betwixt them; so as Beloch was king of Babylon, and Arbaces of the Meedes and
Persians. This Monarchy had continued one thousand and three hundred years,
unto the end of Sardanapalus.

Beloch was the nine and thirtieth, or first king of Assyria in the new
Monarchy, and made Manahem king of Israel his tributarie; whom the holy
Scripture calls Phiel and not Beloch. He had for successor Phul-Assur surnamed
Tiglat Pillesser, who seized upon some towns of Judea, and led the people
captive into Assyria Salmanazar followed him, who made himself master of
Samaria, and he had for successor Sennacherib, who was slain by his own
children. These murderers fled, and yet they took arms against Assaradon
their brother, who had seized upon the Monarchy. Merodach, Lieutenant of the
country of Babylon, revolted and having vanquished all, he joined the
monarchy of the Assyrians to the Babylonians. Some authors place after him Ben
Merodach, and Nabuchodonosor, or Nabuchadnezar, of whom the Scripture makes
mention after Merodach. He made war against Egyptians, and took from them
all the country which lies betwixt the river of Euphrates, and Pelusium or
Damietta: then having vanquished the kings of the Ammonites and Moabites, in
the end he subdued all Egypt. After him reigned Euilmerodach, then
Labassardach, and after these Balthazar: but some put Balthazar presently
after, Euilmerodach his father. This Balthazar was the last Emperor of Babylon,
as all authors hold.

Darius of Media, who ruined the Empire of the Assyrians, and took Babylon is
called Cyaxares, son to Astyages the eight, king to the Medians, called by
Daniell, Assuerus, who gave his daugter to Cyrus of Persia, his sisters son.
This was the beginning of the monarchy of the Persians, the second in number;
for that after the death of Darius, all came into the hands of Cyrus, who alone
enjoyed the countries of Assyria, Media, and Persia, and had for successor his
son Cambyses: after whom reigned Darius son to Histaspes, to whom succeeded
Xerxes his son, who was slain by his own followers, after he had spoiled
Greece with two millions of men and had been chased from thence with all his
po^er. Artaxerxes Longuemain held the Empire after him: then Darius the
basta^^; and after him Artaxerxes Mnemon, whom Ochus the last of Darius the
th^^ds sons, succeeded. This monarchy was afterward governed by the last
Darius, ^anquished by Alexander, who ruined the monarchy of the Persians,
which had continued two hundred years and more.

Alexander was the author of the third monarchy, the which was presently
dispersed, for that it ended with the life of this Prince, after whose death
the empire was torn in pieces, and divided among the Noblemen and Captains of
his train, which were, Ptolomeus, Laomedon, Cassander, Antigonus, Leonatus,
Eumenes, Python, Lysimacus, Antipater, Meleager, and Seleucus; among the which,
the chief were, Seleucus King of Syria, Ptolome of Egypt, Antigonus of the
Lesser Asia, or Natolia, and Cassander in the end King of Greece, and
Macedonia. These ambitious spirits not able to live in rest, there grew great
wars among them, and betwixt their children and successors, which gave occasion
to the Romans to invade them, and in the end to become Masters of all that
part.

As for the empire of the Romans, for that I have made an ample relation
thereof in my discourses, I will pass it over with silence, sending the Reader
to that which I have formerly said, to the end he may see how all the countries
have been since divided, and after what manner they have drawn the
principalities which we see at this day, from those four great and principal
pieces dismembered.

Now that I have freed my self from this little scruple which remained, I will
only tell them that shall busy themselves in the reading of these discourses,
that I have transplanted some pieces of certain Authors which might serve my
dessigne, as well to avoid the reproach of some defect, as to spare the Readers
pain in seeking that in many places which they might find in one. Moreover,
this, which is a History, except in some places which are subject to the
consideration of more important matters, requires no points of wit or subtle
inventions, but a naked report of the truth which has been learned by the
writings or verbal relations of men worthy of credit. And of the two
principal pieces which shall be found, the first is an Abridgement of the
History of the Kings of Persia, compiled by a Portugal, who traveling through
Persia, and having recovered the Chronicle of Taric Mirkond, a Persian borne,
one of the most famous Historians, and of greatest credit and autheritie among
the Persians, took the pains to translate it into the Portugal tongue. This
work contains a true relation of the beginning, descent, and succession of
the kings of Persia and Hormus, unto the entry of the Arabians and Portugals
into those kingdoms; with a List of the Califes of Bagadet or Babylon, which
have commanded in Persia since the entry of the said Arabians into those
countries. This abridgement of the History contains truth in stead of lies,
which antiquity would make us believe of the Persian Monarchy: and shall
serve for a great light touching the affairs of this realm, the which are
very confusedly written, with great contrarieties and disagreements, by
Procopius, Agathius, Genebrard, Zonaras, Tornamira, and other ancient and
modern writers. You shall also find another discourse of the beginnings of
Knighthood, and Military orders of Christendom, and how, by whom, and at what
time they were instituted, and to what intent, and under what rules and
disciplines, with the blazons and devises of the said order.

The other piece which we have held necessary for the finishing of this work,
is a discourse of the beginning of Religious orders instituted in Christendom:
the which, for that it could not be fitly inserted in all the places where we
have discoursed of the religion of States, I have annexed it to the end of this
Book. The reading of this little discourse is not only pleasing and curious,
but profitable, yea necessary, for such as finding themselves unfit for
worldly affairs, desire to embrace a contemplative life, and leaving the
temporal, give themselves to the spiritual.

I do willingly offer you this work, such as it is, and wish you may have as
great a desire to read it, as I had to trace it, and that taking some taste in
the reading thereof, you may receive as much pleasure, as I have had pains.
Read it then I beseech you, not rashly, but with care and diligence, and if any
thing dislikes you, blame not the whole body for one blemish or wart. Pass on
still to content your self, and seek the subject that may give you
satisfaction; and whatsoever you find, if you will not spare me for mine own
defense, do it at least in regard of my dessigne.

Farewell.
The order of all the Estates contained within this book.
1. A Discourse of the Estate of the king of great Britain, possessing
England, Scotland, and Ireland. Fol. 1. 2. Of the French kings Estate. 37. 3.
Of the Estates and dominions of the king of Spain, both in Europe, Asia,
Afric, and America. 102. 4. Of the duke of Lorrains Estate. 283. 5. Of the
Estate of the Low Countries, which are now subject to the Archduke Albert of
Austria, and Isabella Clara Eugenia his wife, and the donation made unto them
by Philip king of Spain before his death. 289. 6. Of the general Estates of
the united Provinces of the Low Countries, and what they now hold, with the
articles of truce, which they have made with the king of Spain, and the
Archduke. 319. 7. Of the Commonweal of Geneua. 349. 8. Of the Communalties or
Cantons of the Suisses. 353. 9. Of the Estate of the duke of Sauoy. 381. 10. Of
the Estate of the Church, with a chronologicall Catalogue and succession of
Popes unto this day: together with the order, names, and titles of the
Cardinals which now live. 394. 11. Of the Estate of Florence. 472. 12. Of the
Estate of the duke of Vrbin. 484. 13. Of the Estate of the duke of Mantoua.
488. 14. Of the Estate of the duke of Modena. 493. 15. Of the Commonweal of
Lucca. 498. 16. Of the Commonweal of Genoua. 503. 17. Of the Commonweal of
Venice, with a List of the dukes and princes which have governed in that
Estate. 516. 18. Of the Commonweal of Ragouse 541. 19. Of the Estate of the
Emperor, with a brief description of the Emperors of the East and West, which
have reigned unto this day. 548. 20. Of the Realm of Hongarie, with a short
relation of the differences which happened in the said realm, since the peace
made with the Turk in the year 1605, unto this present. 613. 21. Of the
Estate of the king of Poland. 627. 22. Of the Estate of the king of Denmark.
653. 23. Of the Estate of the king of Sueden or Sweueland. 670. 24. Of the
Estate of the great duke or emperor of Muscouie. 685. 25. Of the Empire of the
great Cham of Tartaria. 700. 26. Of the Estate of the king of China. 714. 27.
Of the Estate of the king of Iapon. 745. 28. Of the Estate of the king of Brama
or Pegu. 751. 29. Of the Estate of the great Mogor. 760. 30. Of the Estate of
the king of Calicut. 766. 31. Of the Estate of the king of Narsinge. 772. 32.
Of the of Estate of the Sophy of Persia. 779. with a discourse of the kings of
Persia, according to Greek and Latin writers 978. Another History of the
kings of Persia, drawn out of the Chronicle of Mirkond a Persian. 872. 33. Of
the Turks Estates in Europe, Afric, and Asia. 936. 34. Of the Empire of
Presbiter John. 1077. 35. Of the Estate of the king of Monomotapa. 1092. 36. Of
the Realm of Congo. 1095. 37. Of the Emperor of Marocco. 1108. 38. Of the
Estate of the knights of Malta. 1141. 39. Of the beginning of Military Orders,
as well Regular, which has been approved by the Sea of Rome, under some rule
and discipline, as Secular, instituted by Emperors, and Kings, Christian
Princes, with their Blazons, and other devises. 1174. 40. Of the beginning of
all Religious Orders, wherein is briefly set down, who were the Authors,
under what Popes and Emperors, and at what time they were instituted. 1195.
The Estate of the King of great Britain
A DISCOVRSE OF ENGLAND.
The Contents.
1. ENgland in old time called Albrov, or Britain, and of their Etymology. 2.
Description

Albion, the imaginary son of Neptune; or else according to the Latins, it
was so called, by reason of the white Rocks which are seen upon the shore;
afterward it took the name of Britain, of the word Brit,

The C^pe of Cornwall. The second is that of Cantia, which bends to the East,
called at this The North Foreland, of the which all the country of that Island
which lies toward the East, has taken the name of Kent, according to the
Vulgar. The third is that of Orcas, of Trauedee, or Trauise, toward the North,
called by some Dunghumbehead, or Dunsbihead, and by some others Houuburne. This
Island is situated toward the West of Europe, one and fifty degrees from the
Equator, and is opposite upon the West to Ireland, upon the East to the Low
Countries, upon the North to the Islands of Orcades, and on the South to
France. As for the circuit, the English, who have more curiously surueied it,
measure it after this manner. They account from the cape of Trauise, unto that
of Belleria, for that the way goes serpent-wise, by reason of the crooked
shoares, taking it from the West, eight hundred and twelve miles. From that
place unto

Quality of the Country.
Constantine, has much commended the fertility. It brings forth all kinds of
trees at all seasons, except the fur tree and beech trees: but at this day
there are great numbers found of the latter sort: Yet it wants Olive trees,
Oranges, and other trees, which do commonly grow in hotter regions. The
stocks of Vines are rather for show than any profit unto their masters, for
that they carry but few grapes, neither do they ripen in



There are goodly Rivers which water the country, as the rivers of Thames,
Seuerne,

The English have very good fish, and amongst others the turbot, and the pike:
As for the pike (which in former times was not in request) it is now much
esteemed; for that being taken out of pooles, and put into smaller ponds, they
grow wonderful fat, eating the small fish and eales. When as they bring any to
sell, they open his belly with a knife, and if by chance the fisherman cannot
sell him, he dies not by reason of this opening, but being sowed up again,
they put him among Tenches, where the wound is soon closed up, by reason of
the glutinous substance of this fish. Their oysters are more delicate than in
any other place of the world, and in greater abundance.

Suetonius does observe in the life of Caesar, that the hope of finding pearls
in Pliny also says, that the pearls which are found in England are small,
and of a bad luster: Yet notwithstanding that, Caesar would have it known,
that the corslet which he offered unto the image of Venus, was imbroydered
therewith. This country has also fountains

Hitherto we have made mention of the commodities of England, Now let us in few
words show the discommodities, and what it wants and borrowes from others,
either for necessity, or for pleasure. Amongst those things which she
receives, we must make special mention of Spices, Sugar, and all sorts of
fruits which come from France and Spain; the Wines, Oils, and Hops,
necessary to make Beer, (whereof now they

Manners of the ancient English.
Platoes Commonweal, renewed in our age by the Anabaptists. But they
principally which had Suetonius terms them barbarous, for that having great
abundance of Tacitus writes, That the English were accustomed to have women to
command over Armies: and according unto Dyon of Niceas, they never tilled
their land, and did live only of hunting, and of the fruits of trees, never
eating any fish, although they had very good, and in great abundance. They
did easily endure hunger, cold, and all discommodities and toiles: for being
plunged up to the neck in water, they endured hunger for many days, and they
were nourisht in forests with the barks and roots of trees. They made diverse
figures upon the bodies of their children, the which did grow with them. They
were wonderfully given to

Their Manners at this day.
they have quick spirits, prompt and subtle, capable of all arts and sciences;
and their bodies have also this particularitie, that they are wonderful
nimble, and fit for all trials of actiuitie, and for all exercises. The men of
quality have a pleasing behavior, and a sweetness mixed with gravity, a
thousand times more seemly than the lightness of many, to whom some give the
name of propernesse or neatness without forcing: and to speak the truth, I
do not see that their actions are forced, for that they seem to have received
this grace from nature, and not to have gotten it by art. They take delight to
feast strangers, and they spare not any thing to make good cheer, with as
great freedom as bounty. It is a thing worthy observation, that any stranger
of fashion may go and

Riches of England.
THE wealth of private men in this Kingdom grows first from the sale of their

Guicchardine did think, that the traffic of England, before the tumults of
the low Countries, did amount yearly to twelve millions of gold. Behold what
may be spoken of the peoples wealth: Now we will treat of the Treasure and
revenues of the king, which are necessary to maintain an estate; for that we
have seen how prejudicial it has been to Princes that Henry the eight did
withdraw himself from the Church of Rome, it is reported, that the ordinary
revenues of the Crown of England amounted to above Henry the eight, and the
Annats in like

There is no man which doubts, whenas they have no war within the Realm (for
Elizabeth, the only expenses of the Court for diet amounted near to
threescoore thousand pounds starling yearly. The revenues of the Crown then
came from these heads, and a great part of them are spent by these means; for,
that when things are best husbanded, there remains not over great surplusage
for extraordinary necessities, either of war, or any other public
occurents. There remains one point only to be added, which is, that the Law
imposes a

Forces of England.
ENgland is better seated than any other Realm, for the strength thereof; for
that it has two excellent properties, which Aristotle seeks in the situation
of a Town; add to the strong situation, the sea and land forces. For as for
those at sea (besides the Edward the third past to the enterprise of Calais,
and since, Henry the eight to the siege of Boullen, with a thousand sail of
all sorts. So as it must be a great and difficult enterprise to invade this
Island, whereas their ports are not only for the entry, but also for the
access very difficult, besides the fortifications which are made. We must add
to these difficulties, the valor and experience of that nation at sea, and in
those



As for their horsemen, they choose men of a mean stature, which are nimble and
active. Their horses are not good for the shocke, like unto the low Country
and Germane horses (their country being to fat to breed them,) But their
horsemen are of two kinds, the one has his arms complete, and serve with
lances, and they are for the most part gentlemen: the other are lightly armed,
like unto the light horsemen of Italy, wearing a corslet and a morrion, like
unto the pikeman, and carrying long slender staves. Although they may put to
field above two thousand men at arms, and a great number of light horse, yet
do we not find that their horsemen were ever so famous in any combat Edward
the fourth, who had fought so many battails, meaning to show in which sort of
men he had most confidence, left his horse, and did fight among Henry the
eight, when as he made the enterprise of Boullein. This king past the sea with
^n army divided into three parts, There was in the foreward 12000 foot, and
five hundred horse lightly armed, besides a thousand horse with shirts of maile
and tassets, all which were clad in blew, guarded with red. The rereward was led
by the duke of Norfolk, which consisted of the like number of foot and horse,
and ware the same liuerie. Betwixt these went a thousand Irish men, wearing
long and straight shirts, with a thousand foot, and two thousand English horse,
all clothed in red, guarded with yellow. They drew after them a hundred great
cannons, besides smaller pieces. They carried a hundred mils in carts, every
one of which was turned with a horse, and were brought to grind their corn;
they had ouens also upon wagons to bake their bread. The number of carts was so
great, as they did inuiron the whole army like a trench; and to draw these
carts, the artillery, and baggage, there came out of the Island about 25000
horse; and beside all sorts of victuals, they brought fifteen thousand Beeues,
with an infinite number of other cattle. I should be too tedious in my
discourse, if I should particularise the great quantity of ladders, bridges,
bullets, powder, munition, wood, and

As for men of action, some hold that the king is able to arm five and twenty
thousand Corslets, besides the Noble men and private Barons, wherewith every one
of them is furnished according to his train and means. And although they be
not all trained soldiers, yet being in the company of them that have been
practiced (for that many of this Nation, as well as of others, go here and
there to the wars) they would work great

Government of England.
THe Crown of England is successively hereditarie to them that are nearest of
the blood, and whenas the Males fail, the Females succeed; and hereupon the
English allege that which is written in the book of Numbers, That whenas a
man dies without any sons, the succession shall belong unto his daughters;
which custom is not received in France. The realm is divided among the
Nobility, Gentry, Burgesses, and fathers life time shall be called Earl; and
the son of an Earl, Vicount, or Baron* but Rise up Sir Knight. The knights
Edward the third, and it is the most honorable in England: I will not speak of
the Subject, for that it is held base, and for that this order is no kind of
policy, but an ornament to the Realm: I will leave this discourse to come
unto the rest. Esquiers are they which carry the mark of their nobility in
their Arms, and some hold that this name comes of the Scutchion

Les Communs ont assenty, The Commons have consented: and contrariwise, if the
Lords allow of that whereof the Commons are author, they write, Les Seigneurs
ont assenty, The Lords have assented. When as the Lords and Commons concur
not in opinion, they choose certain Committees of either house to debate that
which is in question, and to propound their opinions together, after which they
do many times yield one to an others opinion: So as nothing can be of force,
unless it be allowed by both houses; which is not sufficient, unless it be in
the end confirmed by the king. The last day (the King being present) the Clarke
reads the title of every Act, and if it shall pass, he says, Le Roy le veult,
The king will have it so; if not, he says only, Le Roy s' aduisera, The king
will be advised, and then the Parliament is either dissolved, or proroged to an
other time; and all public Acts are presently printed.

The king of England has absolute power to pardon all crimes; yet in former
times some Earls, and the Princes of Wales have challenged this right. They
do commonly speak unto the king kneeling, and no man dare presume to walk in
the presence chamber, although the king be absent, no more than in France,
neither may any man be covered there.

There are three kinds of trial in England, that of the Parliament, the
Combat, and Britton. These two first kinds of trial are absolute and without
Appeal, like unto that which the Judges decree in their assemblies. The kings
Bench is so called, for that the kings of England were wont to sit there, and
that all causes which concern the Crown, and which are pleaded at the kings
instance, are tried there. The chief Justice of England is judge in this
Court, with three assistants. The

Wolsey Archbishop of York was Chauncelor. The

There is also an Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, called the Christian Court,
whereas the Archbishops and Bishops do preside; Their jurisdiction does
chiefly consist in four causes; in Testaments and Legacies, Tithes,
Mortuaries, Marriages, Adultery or fornication: finally of all that concerns
the preservation and ornament of the Church, and which belongs to the
en^^^^ainment of Religion. And this is the order of the justice of England, and
their form of government.

Religion of England.
THe English as some write, received the Christian Religion from Joseph of
El^uthere, by the preaching of Fugare and Damian, who baptized king Luce, and
many of his people, about the year of our Redemption 180. But the Island being
afterward held by the English Saxons, Pope Gregory the great sen^ Augustine
and Me^^te, with many others thither, who renewed the Faith, and confirme^
Ethelbert king of Kent, about the year 506: from which time it did begin still
to deg^^^rate into the late^ Roman superstition, until king Henry the eight,
finding some oppo^^^ions and notorious fraud at Rome, upon his divorce from
Katherine of Castile, who had been wife unto his elder brother Arthur, withdrew
himself from the obedience of the Pope of Rome, and took upon him the title
of Supreme head of the Edward the sixth his son and successor, abolished the
Mass, and all the superstitious ceremonies of the Romish Church, planting
Marie his sister coming to the Crown, restored the Mass, with all other
Popish ceremonies; whereupon followed great persecutions of those that made
profession of the Gospel, and did impugn the Pope, so as many were forced to
fly into other Countries for refuge, during this storm, the which continued
about four years. After whose death, Queen Elizabeth her sister succeeding
her, she settled the same Religion which her brother king Edward had embraced,
calling home all those that had fled from persecution, giving them spiritual
dignities, according to their merits. This profession of the Gospel did
flourish all the time of her reign, James the first now reigning. Thus having
related at large all the parts and conditions of this Realm, we must end this
discourse, to come unto that of Scotland: having first represented the names of
the Kings of England, with the ancient Archbishops and Bishops of that Realm.

Kings of England.
THe history of England is full of confusion, until Egbert, who reigned in
the year

EGbert began his reign in the year 801. he reigned 37 years, and died in
the year 838, There succeeded him, Edelphe, who reigned 20 years: he died in
the year 858. Ethelbald reigned 5 months. Ethelbert reigned 5 years: he died
in the year 863. Ethelrede reigned 9 years: and died in the year 872.
Alurede reigned 28 years: he died in the year 900. Edward the ancient reigned
24 years: he died in the year 924. Adelstan reigned 16 years: he died in the
year 940, having subdued the whole Island. Edmond reigned 6 years: he died in
the year 946. Eldred reigned 9 years: he died in the year 955. Edwyn reigned
4 years: and died in the year 959. Edgar reigned 16 years: he died in the
year 975. St Edward the Martyr reigned 3 years: he was slain by the ambushes
of his Alfrede, he was afterward put in the Catalogue of Saints. He died in the
year 978. Ethelrede reigned 38 years: and died in the year 1016. Edmond
Ironside reigned 1 year: and died in the year 1017. Canutus king of Norway
and Denmark, and afterward king of England, having expelled Edmond and
Edward, children to Edmond Ironside, reigned in England 20 years, he died in
the year 1037. Harald reigned 4 years: and died in the year 1041. Canutus
the second, he reigned 2 years: and died in the year 1043. Edward, a holy
king reigned 23 years: and died in the year 1066. Harald the second reigned 3
years: he died in the year 1067. William Duke of Normandy, expelled Harald,
and made himself master of all England: he reigned 21 years: and died in the
year 1088. William Rufus reigned 13 years: he died in the year 1101. Henry
the first reigned 35 years: he died in the year 1136. Stephen Earl of
Boulloin, nephew to Henry, seized upon the realm, he reigned 19 years: and
died in the year 1155. Henry the second reigned 33 years, he died in the
year 1190. Richard the first reigned 10 years: he died in the year 1200.
John reigned 17 years: and died in the year 1217. Henry the 3 reigned 56
years, he died in the year 1273. Edward the first reigned 35 years, and died
in the year 1308. Edward the second reigned 19 years, he died in the year
1327. Edward the third reigned 51 years, he died in the year 1378. Richard
the second reigned 22 years, he died in the year 1400. Henry the fourth
reigned 14 years, he died in the year 1414. Henry the fifth reigned 9 years,
he died in the year 1423. Henry the sixth reigned 38 years, he died in the
year 1461. Edward the fourth reigned 23 years, he died in the year 1484.
Edward the fifth reigned two months, he was murdered by his uncle being but
Richard the 3 reigned 2 years, he died in the year 1486, being slain in
battle by his Competitor Henry. Henry the seventh reigned 24 years, he died
in the year 1510. Henry the eight reigned 37 years, and died in the year
1547. Edward the sixth reigned 6 years, and Mary married to Philip of Spain,
reigned 5 years and three months, she died in the year 1558. Elizabeth
reigned 45 years, and died in in the year 1603. James king of Scotland has
succeeded her in the Realm of England, and reigns at this present.
Archbishops and Bishops of England.
Aubert a Chanon of Andwerpe, entitled, Notitia Episcopatuum Orbis Christiani,
as follows.

Archbishopricke of Canterbury.
London. Winchester. Ely. Lincoln. Salisburie. Bathe and Wels. Couentrie and
Lichfield. Peterborough. Exeter. Gloucester. Hereford. Norwich. Rochester.
Chichester. Worcester. Bristow. St. David's. Bangor. Landaffe. St. Asaph.
Archbishopricke of York.
Durham. C^ester. Car^^^l.
A DISCOVRSE OF SCOTLAND.
The Contents.
1. SCotland in old time called Albania. Description, and the Provinces 2.
Chief.

THe most Northern part of great Britain is called Scotland, and (...) small
province more fer^^^^ (...) ^he rest, in the which is the town of Saint
An^^^^es:

Q^^^itie of the Country.
SCotland is rough and hilly, and nothing so fertile as England, but it
abounds more with Fish. The sea which enuirons it, has great store of Oysters,
Herrings, Corrall, and Co^^els, an^ in the valleys there are many lakes,
marshes, rivers, and fountains,

Manners of the ancient Scots.
Boethius saye^ ^hey were very sober in their eating and drinking, and slept
little;


But before we proceed any further, we must note, that the Scottishmen are
divided

Riches of Scotland.
THe country of Scotland is in some parts lean and barren, The traffic of
come, (...) ports they find there. But a great part of merchandise, especially
of that which

For^es of Scotland.
AT this day that Scotland and England are under one King, I do not see that
any other does exceed this Realm in strength of sci^uation; for that it is
compassed round about ^y the Sea, and within it, the Country is so full of
rocks, mountains, and ^orr^sts, as it is held for this cause to be invincible.
For if the inhabitants be forced to fly, they (...) to the mountains, where
^hey live of dried fish, and of the flesh of wild beasts. Ptolomee called the
winged Castle; for that Edemborou^h signifies a winged Castle. This is the
capital Town of Scotland, seated on high, being a mile long from East to
West, but much less in breadth. This Town is

Government of Scotland.
SCotland is composed of three Orders, that is to say, of the Nobility, the
Clergy, and the third Estate. The King, to speak after their manner, is
direct Lord of all the lands, and has Royal authority and jurisdiction both
over Secular and Clergy. The kings eldest son, as soon as he is borne, is
called Duke of Rothsaie, and Seneschall of Malcolme the third of that name,
(...) of Scotland, gave the title of Earl and Baron, received from the
Normans, to gentle^^n of best merit. Since which time there is also crept into
Scotland as well as into England the titles of Dukes, Marquises, Earls,
Vicounts, and Barons. The first that brough^ the title of Duke, was Robert the
third, about the year 1400, as the king of England (...) reigns at this
present, has brought in the honorable titles of Marquis and Vico^^^^* These
are held for the chief of the Nobility, and have place and voice in
Parliame^^ they are called Lords, like unto the Bishops.



That which holds the first rank next unto the Parliament, is the College of
Justice, James the fifth, in the year 1532, appointing a President, and
fourteen Counselors; whereof seven were Clergy men, and seven of the Laity,
(to whom they have since added the Chance lor, who holds the first place, and
five other Counselors) three chief Registers, and as many Advocates as shall
be thought good by the Parliament. This Court is held every day except Sunday
and Monday, from the first of November, unto the 15 of March, and from the day
after Trinity Sunday, unto the first of August. The rest of the time is spent
in vacations. They judge according to the Laws and ordinances of the Realm;
and whenas they fail, they have recourse unto the Civil Law.

There are also Subalternall Courts in every County, whereas the Vicount, or
his

As for criminal causes, the chief Judge Royal has his seat at Edenborough,
(this (...) out the murderer to death, so as he be taken within twenty four
hours: but

Religion of Scotland.
Victor the first, in the year 2^3, and Idolatry did quite cease under king
Crakinte, who died in the year 313. Celest^^ the f^st sent Palladius thither
to root out the Pellagien heresy, which began to increase there under Eugenius
the second, who died in the year 460. Since this time the Realm continued
long in the profession of the Romish Church, until these latter days, when as
it began to embrace the true profession of the Gospel* the which has been so
carefully pla^^ed* si^ce the Raig^e of king James, who now lives, as all
Romish (...) quite extinct and abolished, at least in the public profession of
Religion and orders of their Church government.



Kings of Scotland*
FReguz was the first which carried the name of king of Scotland, 320 years
before

To him succe^ded these that follow.

Ferritare reigned 15 years. Maine reigned 29 years. Darnadille reigned 28
years. Reuthere reigned 26 years. Reuthe reigned 14 years. Theree reigned 12
years. Iosine reigned 34 years. Fimam reigned 30 years. Durst reigned 9
years. Euene the first reigned 19 years. ^illes reigned 2 years by
usurpation. ^^ene the second reigned 17 years. (...) reigned 48 years* and in
his time (...) Britain was made tributarie to the ^^manes. E^ene the (...)
reigned 7 years. Me^ellan raign^^ in the time that our Savior came in^^ the
world, his reign was of 39 years, and he died in the year of grace 34.
^^rratace reigned 20 yeare^ ^he died in the ^^ate 54. Corbrede reigned 18
years: he died in the year 71. To Corbrede, Dardan succeeded, he reigned
almost 4 years: and died in the year 74. Cothrede G^lde reigned 35 years: he
died in the year 109. Luchtach reigned 3 years: and died in the Mogalle
reigned 36 years: he died in the year 148. Conare reigned 14 years: and died
in the year 162. Ethodie ^he first succeeded him. S^trahel succeeded him.
Donalde the first reigned 21 years: and died in ^he year of grace 216.
Ethodie the second succeeded him. Athirce succeeded Ethodie: of these two the
one was slain, and the other slew himself. Natha^^^e succeeded, and was
slain as a Findoce reigned 10 years, he died in the year 263. Donald the
second reigned 1 year, and was slain. Donald the third was also slain.
Cratinthe succeeded him. Fincormach succeeded him. Romach succeeded Fincormach.
Angusan. Fetelmache. Eugenius the first reigned three years: he died in the
year 379 and then Maximus being sent by the Emperor, and and afterward
becoming a tyrant, invested himself of the Island of great Britain, so as
Scotland remained forty four years without a king, unto the year of Grace
423. Ferguz the second nephew to Eugenius was made king: he reigned 7 years,
and Eugenius the second reigned 31 years, he died in the year 461. Dongard.
Constantine. Congal, he died in the year 501. Co^ran, he reigned 35 years.
Eugenius the third succeeded him. Conu^ll reigned and died in the year 578.
Rima^ille. Aidan reigned 27 years, he died in the Kenneth Keir. Eugenius the
fourth reigned 13 years, he died in the year 632. Ferguheard, he was put in
prison. Ioheuard reigned 14 years, he died in the year 646. Ferguhard
succeeded him. Malduin died in the year 684. Eugenius the fifth. Eugenius the
sixth. Ambirkelet. Eugenius the seventh a religious Mordac. Ethfin. Eugenius
the eighth. Fergus the third. Saluathie. Acheue, he died in the year 820.
Congal. Dongal. Alpin. Remeth. Donald the fifth, he died in the year 860.
Constantine the second Ethe Gregory reigned 22 years, and died in the year
893. Donald the sixth. Constantine the third, who in the fortieth year of his
reign became Malcolme 1. Duffe Culen. Kemet died in the year 1000.
Constantine the fourth reigned 3 years. Grinne. Malcolme the second reigned 13
years, he died in the year 1040. Duncan. Macachee. Melcome Camnoir, reigned
30 years, he died in the year 1097. Donald the seventh. Ethgar, he was the
first which caused himself to be anointed in Scotland. David. Mal. come 3.
William the Lion, he reigned 49 years and died in the year 1204. Alexander the
third who having no heirs of his body left Scotland in great troubles, the
which was governed by six men during the contention for the succession betwixt
John Balliol son to the eldest daughter of king David, and Robert Bruis
father to Alexander the third. John came unto the crown by the means of the
king of England, to whom he did homage contrary to the will of the Scottishmen:
In the end the English led him as a prisoner into England, and the country was
governed by regents, at the devotion of the English. Robert was called to be
king of the Scottishmen, he defeated Edward the third, and made himself
peaceable master of Scotland. David son to Robert succeeded him, but he was
expelled by Edward son of John Bailliol, and fled into France: yet this
Edward is not put into the number of lawful kings. Scotland also was governed
by Robert Stuart, in the name of king David the second who did valiantly until
the return of his king out of France. After the death of David the Estates of
Scotland chose Robert Stuart nephewe to the last king David, and son to his
sister, and to Robert Governor of Scotland during the absence of king David.

John base son to Robert, who also took the name of Robert. James the first.
James the second. James the third came to the crown at the age of 7 years, in
the year 1463. James the fourth. James the fifth who first married with
Magdalein of France, daughter to king Francis the first, and after, with the
Duke of Guises daughter, of whom came Marie, who was married to Francis the
second the French king, and after his death to the Earl of Lenox son, by whom
she had James the sixth king of England and Scotland now reigning.
A DISCOVRSE
The Contents.
1. IReland, what names it carried in old time, the description and situation
according unto Ptolomee the Geographer, the length and breadth. 2. Division of
Ireland into five principal Countries or Provinces, and how many Counties
there 3. The air sweet and temperat, and what diseases the Irish are subject
unto. 4. Singularities of this Island in the production of Beasts, Fish, and
Foul. 5. Marti^ets, birds of an admirable property, which being dead putrify
not. 6. Irish in old time lived of man's flesh, and did eat their parents dead
bodies. 7. Agilitie and great courage of the Irish. 8. The Irish pra^e com^only
to the new moon. 9. Galloway and Waterford good Towns of traffic. 10.
Soldiers of Ireland divided into three ranks. 11. Forts built in Ireland 12.
When Ireland was made subject to the English. 13. Wild Irish how they are
governed by their Lords and Judges. 14. Jurisdiction and Officers of Ireland.
15. Cristian Religion when received in Ireland. 16. Archbishops and Bishops
which be in Ireland.

^tolomee little Britain, lies betwixt great Britain and Spain; toward the
East it has ^^gland, divided by a tempestious sea, of about a days sailing.
This Island is near of an O^^^ form from South to North, and is not half so
big as great Britain. Some make the ^^^th from South to North to be of 70
Germane leagues, Every league is four English miles.
and the breadth from Wes^ ^^^st, 23 German leagues; and others measure it after
another manner: but Camden, w^^^s worthy of credit, teaches us that it has
four hundred thousand paces in length and (...) hundred thousand in breadth.
Some affirm that Ireland contains in length^ from ^^ockbrandon in the South
(which is West, and by North Saint alias C^rnagh in the North of Vlster (which
is West upon Dunferris in Scotland) three hundred and twenty, Irish ^iles: and
in breadth from Dublin (which is South-West from Chester) to Crough ^^^icke by
West of Galloway* two hundred miles



A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE PROVINCE OF LEINSTER, DIVIDED INTO EIGHT COUNTIES.
alias Washford, Kilkenny, Kings County, Q^eenes County, and Wickloe.

The first County.
THe county of Dublin contains all the land from Ballrothery (near to the
county

There are also in this county fifteen towns, that is to say, the town of
Dublin, Swords, Ballrothery, Luspicke or Luske, Clenshane, Hothe, New Castle,
Kingsland, Towns,
Ballamore, Fowldes town, Bray or Breen, Wickloe, Macboygon, Arckloo, and
Cloulerkin.

There are moreover in this county twenty four castles, that of Dublin,
Swords, Castles.
New Castle, Tulloy, Dunshaglin, Poores Court, Castle Knock, Malahide, Castle
Keuen, Rathfernan, Moncton, Merion, Turuey, Dronnaugh, Donber, Belgard Lucan,

The names of the lords and chief gentlemen of this county of Dublin, are,
the Archbishop of Dublin, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, Ierlande, Lord of Hooth,
Lords and Gentlemen.
Sir Dudley Loftes, Fitz-Williams, Wingfield, Obernes, Otooles, Collier, the
Deane of Saint Patricke, Barnewell, Bathe, Neuteruill, Feaugh Mac Hugh Allin
warren, Segraue, Fitz simons, Burnell, Finglas, Talbot, and Wealch: In the
tenth year of King Richard the second Robert Veere Earl of Oxford was created
Marquis of Dublin; and afterward made Duke of Ireland in the same kings reign.


THe second county in the province of Leinster is the county of Kildare, and
it is placed between the counties of Dublin, Caterlough, the Kings and Queens
counties, and Mead: it has Dublin toward the East, Caterlough to the South,
the Kings and Queens counties to the West, and Mead upon the North.

There are in this county seven towns, the names of which are Kildare,
Manouth, Athy, the Naus, Kilcullen, Leixlip, and Castle Dermot. Towns.


There are in this county 21. castles, that is, the castle of Kildare, that of
Manouth, Lectawe, Castles.
Woodstocke, Carbery, Marlace, Conall, Rath Goffy, S. Katherines, Killka,
Castle Marten, Donfrit, Monaster, Rathangan, and Osbertes town.

The lords and chief gentlemen of this county are, the Earl of Kildare,
Lords and Gentlemen.
the Bishop of Kildare, the Baronet of Rebin, Wedseley baronet of Narcowe,
Eustace, Fitz-Geralds, (...); Wh^^; Fitz G^r^et, S^reewe^^, C^oley, Saint
Michaell, Lie, Woogan, Banerells, Al^^^ ^rimgham, De la ^ide, Boys, Sutton,
Le^, and Flatzberry.

The Ea^le of Kil^^te^ eldest son is lord Gerald and baron of Ophaly.

The Earl was created in Queen Mary's time, by the name of Gerrard
Fitz-Garret baron of Ophaly

The third County.
THe third county in the province of Leinster, is Caterlough, alias Carlough,
and it is a long slip of land lying for the most part between the rivers of
Slane and Barrowe, and contains diverse lordships aunciently inhabited by the
Englishmen; but not long after, it was recovered by the Cauenaughes, which do
inhabit both it, and much of Edm^^d Butler. it is bounded with the county of
Kildare to the North; to the West and South with the Queens county; and with
Kilkenny to the North-West.

Towns.
There are in this county but two towns of any note, that is, Caterlough,
(from which the county takes the name, the which also Lionell Duke of Clarence
began to wall, and Belling^^m a most renowned lord deputy fortified with a
castle) and Leighlin, where there was an Episcopal chair, now united to the Sea of Fernes, as Camden reports.

Castles.
As for castles, this county has the castle of Caterlough (as I have said)
that of

Lords and Gentlemen.
The lords and chief gentlemen of this county, are, the Bishop of Lawghlin or
Leighlin, Sir Edmund Butler, Ragnal, Turlo Mac Donel Gallo-gl^sse, Hugh Mac
Ihane, Harpole, Daeuells, Olive, Oge, Brian Mac Cauer, Cauenaughes, and
Og^rmagon Barry.

The fourth County.
THe fourth county of the province of Leinster is Wexford alias Waterford,
this contie contains all the land between the haven of Waterford, to the
demesnes of A^kloo Castle upon the sea coast. It has the sea to the East, and
South; the county of Wickloe to the North; the river of Barrow near Rosse,
and the county of

Town^s
This county has but few towns of any importance and these are, Wexford,
Rosse, Fearnes, and Colmine.

Castles.
But it is well fortified with castles, for there are the castles, of Wexford,
Fernes, Inishecorth, the tower of Hook, Belmagir, Donbrody, Bally hac, Adams
town, Bromston, Tniterne, Doncannon, Rossegarland, Old Cross, Mountgarret.

Lords and Gentlemen.
The lords and gentlemen of this county are, the Bishop of Ferres Sir Henry
Wallop, Deurox, Brown, Stafford, Lamports, also the Sep of Crean Mac Morough,
Donel Spainaugh, Thomas Masterson seneschall, Williams in the right of the Lady
Colcloughe, Neuel, Cheuers, Mailons, Hayes, the three lords of the
Knisheloughe, Mac Vado, Mac Damor, and Edmund Duffe, Ketinge, Sinots, Roches,
Powers, Isames, Turners, Surcots, and Cauenaughes.

The fifth County.
THE ^it county in the province of Leinster is called Killkenny: This county
has the mo^^ ^^ew of civility of any other of the bordering counties, in
respect of the fair feats, of hou^es, the number of Castles and English manner
of enclosure. It is bounded on the East by the ^^uer of Barrow; on the South by
the river of Shewer; with the Queens county and O^^eri^ ^o the North; and
with Tipperary to the West.

Towns.
The chief towns in this county are the Towns of Kilkenny, Thomas town,
Cal^an, Inystrong, and Ganran.

Ca^^^^.
There are also the ^astles of Kilkenny, Ganran, Balley rigate, Kelhs,
Ballingto^gh, (...) Church, Grace town, Whites haule, and others.

Lords and Gentlemen.
Lord Vicount, Mount Garret, Cantwells, Archdeacons Arches, Blancheuits, Birth
Louet, and his sons, the Bishop of Ossery, the Baronet of Burnt Church,
Comberfordes, Welshes, Dormers, Saint Legers, Bromesford, Butlers, Graces,
She Is, Denes, Rothes, Stonge, and of the English Staffords. The Earl of
Ormonds eldest son is lord Butler and vicount Thurles.

The sixth County.
THe sixth county of this province is called Kings county; but it was in old
time called Ophaly, and is both wealthy and quiet, because it is by nature
strong, and has

Philips town is the chief town of this couutie, Towns.
which took the name of king Philip, as also this county was in honor of
him, called Kings county.

In this county there are the castles of Fort Dingan, Crohan, Bally Burley,
Castles.
Bally Britain, Minster Oris, Eaton Dirrey.

Gentlemen.
Sir George Burcher Lieutenant, Sir Edward More Constable of the fort, Sir John
Mac Cowghlan, More, Cowley, Fitzgarrets, Philips, Omeloyes, Morris, Sankey,
Tirrill, Lany, Rosse, Denises, and Foxes.

The seventh County.
THe seventh county in the province of Leinster is the Queens county, alias
Leese, this county contains all the land in effect between the river of
Barrow and Ormond, including all that did belong to Omore, Odiun, upper Ossery,
and Slemarge. It is bounded with the county of Kilkenny to the South, with
Tipperary to the West, with

There are not any towns of account in this county, but the chief town is
Maryborough, so called by Queen Mary. Towns.


The castles of this county are the Queens Fort, the Shian, the Abbey of
Leese, Strudballey, Donamaze, the Black Fort, Ballicockan, and Diserte.
Ca^^^^s.


The lords and gentlemen of greatest reputation in this county, are, Lor^s and
Gentlemen.
the baron of Upper Ossery, Warham Seintleger, Lieutenant, George Haruy
Constable of the Fort, Brian Mac Douel, Pierce Butler brother to the Earl of
Ormond, Cosbies, Harpoole, Bowen, Mac Callough, Bruerton, Dauels, Pigot,
Barington, Lamden, Odni, and diverse others.


THe eighth and last county of the province of Leinster, is the county
Wickloe, this was lately made a county in the government of Sir Arthur
Chichester; It is bounded on the East with the sea, on the South with the
county of Wexford, on the West with the counties of Carlough and Kildare, and
on the North with the county of Dublin:

Asfor towns in this county there is no mention made of any of importance and
therefore I pass them over at this time.

There is the castle of Lamtaddon and diverse others of less importance.
Castles.


The chiefest gentlemen of this county are Sir Charles Occaroll, Gentlemen.
and diverse others of

A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE PROVINCE OF MUNSTER, DIVIDED INTO SIX COUNTIES.
The second Pro^^nce.
THe second province is called Munster, and is of all the other provinces the
most

The first County.
THe first county of this province is Waterford, which contains all the land
between the river of Shoure (which falls into the sea beneath Waterford) and
the river of Younghull, called the Black water, and much of the land between
the river of Preudergraftes lands, and Powers country. It has for bounds upon
the East and South, the sea; upon the North the Shoure; part of the county of
Cork upon the South; and part of Limericke, and Tipperary to the West.

Towns.
The^e are in this county these towns of importance, the town of waterford,
Dongar^an, Lismore, and Kill-Mac-Thmas.

Castles.
There are moreover in this county these castles: that of Dongaruan,
Kill-Mac-Thomas, the Passage, Derinleir, Cappalmi, Bellecouehin, the Hook,
Moncollop, Pilton, Domano, Kilmadin, Strangally, Kilmanahim, Ardmore, Clouey,
Carraghmore, and Shian.

Lords and Gentlemen.
The lords and chief gentlemen in this county of Waterford are these, the
Bishop of Waterford and Lismore, the lord Power baron of Carragmore, the heirs
of Fitz-Gerrald late vicoun^ baron of Dromano, Powers, Welshes, Wises, Maddens,
Geraldines, Whites, Mandeuiles, Condons, Cragh^s, Madings, Sherlockes,
Preudergrafts, Newgents, Brownes, Dobnies, Leas, Lies, and others.

The second County.
THe second county in this province is Limericke, and it contains all the
land from the mountain near the red Shard joining to the county of Cork, to
the Shenin, as well above Limericke as beneath, in a manner as far as
Carigfoile, and from the Mac Bri^^^gonoughes country. It has for bounds upon
the North-East, Tipperary; to the West, Sle^^ougher; to the South the county
of Cork; and the river of Shenin to the North-We^^.

Towne^
The c^^efe towns of this county are these, the town of Limericke, and the
town of Kilmalloc^^^

Castles.
The castles o^ this county are those of Blinity, Rakell, Carigonell
Carignilishe, Adar^, Crome, Newcastle, Loughiray, Asketin, Shenet, Roberts
town, Castle Doiell, or Canell.

Lords and Gentlemen.
The lords and gentlemen of chiefest note in this county are these, the Bishop
of Li^^^icke, the lord Burcke of Castle-Conell, Burckes, Laceys, Stretches,
Geraldines, Purcells, Su^^les, Welshes, Obrines, Riens, Arthures, Fauts, She Is,
Foxes, Whites, Iordens, Flamings, and some others.


THe third county of the province of Munster is called Clare, and it takes
the name of the Castle of Clare, now in the possession of the Earl of Twomond.
It contains nine Lordships, and has in it two small Bishoprics: It has
for limits, from the Bay of Limericke to the Bay of Gallway, the sea: On the
West, the county of Gallway: to the North, and all the coast East and South it
is environed with the river of Shenin: Some place this county with the county
of Cork; others hold it to be the same that Twomond, in the province of
Connaught.

The towns of note in this county, are the town of Inchequin, Towne^
and the town of

As for Castles, there is that of Clare, Inchequin, Ballwanghan, Bouraty,
Clowrane, Castles.
Bridgetowne, and Donsany.

The chief lords and gentlemen of this county are, the Earl Twomond, Lords
and Gentlemen.
the Bishop of Killmaco, the Bishop of Killalloe, Mac Macon, O Gardy Ochanch
etc. the Baron of Inchequin. The Earls eldest son is called Baron of
Ibracan, Sir Turlo Obrien, Mac Ne Marro Reagh, Mac Ne Marro Fenn, O L^ughlin, O
Veylane, and others.

The fourth County.
Barray and Farmoy. It has for bounds on the East, South and South-West, the
sea; on the West, the mountains of Slewlongher; and on the North, partly with
the great water, and patly with the county of Limericke.

The principal towns of this county are those of Cork, Cloue or Clone,
Rosse, Towns.
Younghull alias Yoohill, Butiout, and Kinsale.

There are also in this county these Castles of no^e, that is to say, Castles.
the Castle of Liffmen, Ballimartor, Castleton, Corckleb^ge, Moyallo, Roch,
Butevunt, Bear, Ballmsolly, Glanuer, Couceys, Barreys Court, Shondon,
Closshoe, etc.

Lords and Gentlemen.
the Vicount of Buteuunt or Barrey, the Vicount Rothe, or F Aermoy, the lord
Courey, Sir Owin Osuliuan, Meagh, Donohe Okeife, Finien, Mac Carty, Cormocke,
O^raldines, Coudons, Barrots Waters, Meaghes, Skides, Russells, the Bishop of
Cork and Clone, the Bishop of Rosse, S. Warrham St Ledger, Sir Owen Mac Carty
Reagh, Mac Thomas B^rry Oge, Sir F^nn Odriscall, the sons of Sir Dertmott,
and Sir Cormock Mac Teage, Ogallegan Mac Auly, Donell Pippo Mac Cartie
Fits-Edmonds, seneschall of Imokelly Desmond, Osuliuan More, Flemings, and
diverse others of good note.


THe fifth county in this province, is that of Kerry, and it contains only
that land which lies between the river of Manger, and the river of Shenin,
and includes the most part of the mountain Slewlougher, which being the most
Easterly part of the country boundeth upon the county of Limericke, and Cork
to the East, upon the Shenin to the North, upon the Sea to the West, and upon
the river of Manger to the South.

The chief towns of this county are those of Ardsert, Dingley, and Trayly,
Towns.
as for the rest, they are of no great importance, and therefore I will not
trouble the readerwith too tedious relations thereof.

Castles.
the Island Tarbrett, Castle Mange, and Carig^oyle

The lords and gentlemen of greatest reputation in this county, are, Town and
Gentlemen.
the Baron of Lixsuaue, alias lord Fitz-Morice, the Bishop of Ardfert, Patricke
Fitz-Morice, Fitz-Garrets, Rice, More, Trant, andothers.

The sixth County.
THe sixth co^^^i^ of this Province is Tipperary, and it is divided into two*
the one called the C^osse of Tipperary, the other the county Palatine or
liberty of Tipperary* and it has ^wo shirlfes, that of the Cross is under
the Archbishop of Casshell, the ^^her is v^^er the Earl of Ormond. It
contains all the land in a manner from the town of Kallan in the county of
Kilkenny, to Mac Ibrion Ogonoghies country, in the county of Limerick;
containing all the countries of Omitrians Mac Ibrion Arra Od^ye^^; Vpp^^
O^mond, and Nether Ormond, Conisshinaugh, Cossheshery, Muskry-Ouricke,

Towne^.
(...) these towns of good note, that is to say, the town of (...) and
Carigall, and these four are strong and very well walled: then, the town of
Emely, Tipperary, and that of the Holy Cross: but these last are in a manner
all ruined and wasted.

This county comprehends the castles of Carig, Caier, Nenaugh, Thurles, and
Kil^henan; and of these the Earl of Ormond is Vicount: then that of
Temple-More,

Lords and Gentlemen.
And this county has in it many old religious houses, whereof Acashill is chief.

The Lords and Gentlemen of greatest account in this province, are, the
Archbishop of Cashe^^* the Bishop of Emely the lord of Donboyne, the lord of
Caier or Kercy, the Baroner of Loughmay: Butlers, Purcells, Cantwells,
Kedenyes, Odwyers, Englishes, Burkes, (...) L^ughearne^, ^^ites, and others.

A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF
The ^^ Proui^ce.
THe province of Mead has his name of Medium, or the middle part of the land,
for it is placed in the midst of the other four Provinces: and at the first
it contained but one shire or county, commonly called by the name of Mead:
but in the time of K. Henry the eight (to the end that justice

The first County.
EA^^^ ^^th contains all the land between Balrothery in the county of
Dublin, and the (...) Boyne, nee^e Dro^g^ad, then not far from thence it
extends it self from that riue^ ^^d contains all the land to the border of
Cauon, and from thence in breadth to the King county, and to the county of
Kildare: so that it has the sea to the

(...)
There are in this coun^^^ the towns of Trim, Nouan, Athbuy or Abbey, Kellis,
D^^^ghada, and Calicke.

Castles.
Armoham, Stane, Goltrim, Castle Ricard, Dullerston, Gormanston, Donimore,
Crixton, Cellcarne, Trimbleston, Rathmore, Molingar, Bedlowes town,
Stackallon, Riuerston, Castle Jorden, Arberchane, Gilliaston, Colpe, Vest,
Moynaltie, Does, Maylaugh, New Castle, Castleton of Athbuy, Moynet, Dingan,
Bellebogan, Culmolen, Murmudry, Platten, Castle Twerby, Bectiue, and many
others.

The lords and chiefest gentlemen are, the Bishop of Mead, Lords and Gentlemen.
the Vicount of Gormanston, the Baron of Donsany, the Baron of Kilny, the Baron
of Trimbleston, the Baron of Stane: Barnewells, Haspenies, Darricotts,
Segraues, Missets, Drakes, Bathes, Wessels, Flemings, Eeuers, Roch^erts,
Polnkets, Cheuers, Whites, Prouefoote, Ecostaces, Casackes, Newteruiles, Hills,
Darceys, Prestons, Mores, Bethanghes, and others.

The second County.
THe second county in the province of Mead is called West-Meath, this county
contains all the land from the Red more beyond Athbuy to the Shenin and Deluin
Mac Coughlan, and in breadth from the kings county to the county of Longford.
It has for bounds upon the East, the kings county: upon the South, the
Shenin: upon the West, the county of Longford: and the county of Cauon and a
part of East-Meath

The chief ^ownes of this county are, the town of Molingar, Athlone,
Ballimore, Towns.
Four, Deluin, and Kelkenny West.

The Castlesof this county are those of Killucan, Castleton of Deluin,
Waterstone, Castles.
Tutestone, and others of less importance, as Ruwier, Tristermaugh, and
Robstone and others.

The lords and gentlemen of greatest reputation in this county are, Lords and
Gentlemen.
the Baron of Deluin, Nugents, Delamers, Sir Thomas le Strange, Darcyes,
Tyrrells, Daltons, Tuts, Diltons, Laccis alias Pettits, Hopes, and the heirs
of Sir George Stanley, and others.


THe third county of this province is Longford, and it is a large quantity of
ground possessed by a people called Offarolls. It is bounded on the West by the
river of Shenin, and a part of the county of Latrim; on the North by the
county of Cauon; and on the East, and South, by the county of West-Meath.

There is not any town nor Castle of importance in this county, but the town
and Castle of Longford. Town and Castle.


The names of the gentlemen of greatest note in this county are, Off^r all
buy, Gentlemen.
Offar all bane, Nugents, Eirgus Offarall, and diverse of the same name, and
Dillons, and some others.


THe Province of Connaught, bends all Westwards from the river of Shanin, The
4. Province.
between Camden writes, that Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy of Ireland, has
joined to this Province the county of Clare: but because it did in former
times belong unto the province of Munster, you shall find it amongst the
counties of that province, in the description thereof.

The first County.
THe first county of the province of Connaught is called Slego, this county
contains all ^he land between the borders of Magl^^^gh, and the plains of
Connaught, by the skirts of the mountains of the Corlewes, to the river and
Lough of Boil in Mac Der^o^s coun^rie, and from thence North-West by the river
of Moyne, which divides the county of Maio from that of Slego. It has for
bounds to the East the county of Magl^n^ugh, to the West Maio, to the North
the sea, and the county of Roscouen to the South.

Towns.
There are not any towns of importance in this county but the town of Slego.

Castles.
There are the Castles of Slego, and that of Ballimote, then those of Bondrois,
and Bleeke, both which are belonging to Odonell.

Lords and G^ntl^^en.
The chief gentlemen of this county are Odonell, Ochous Slego, Mac Phillippin,
Mac (...)

The second County.
THe second county in the province of Connaught is Maio, and this county
contains all the land of Mac Willam Ewters, and all the lands of Omailes, Mac
Donnells, M^^ M^^rice, Mac Io^den, Mac Ou^terlough, and the Owls: it has also
certain Islands in

There are no towns in this county of any importance.

Cas^^^^.
Th^^^ ^re some Castles in this county, which are these, Castle Bar,
Ardenary, and the Ca^^le of Brownes, belonging to the Ea^le of Ormond.

Lo^d^ and G^^^tleme^.
The men of greatest note and reputation in this county, are the Bishop of
Alladen^is or Auadonne, Sir Richard ^urke, Mac Jorden, Mac Morris, Sir Richard
Iure, Sir John ^urke Vastian Mac Do^nell, Mac C^s^eloughe, Burke^, Mac Devil a
currane.

The third County.
THe third county of ^his province is the county of Gallway; this county
contains a great quantity of land lying in manner square, between Maio and
Twomond, North and South, and the Shenin East and West, saving the Northerly
part thereof, it has the river of Sack and Roscomen to the East. It has
three Islands in the sea within ken^ing of the town of G^llway.

Tow^^^.
The chief town i^ Gallway, which is exceeding ^aire, and that of Artheury an
ancient town, but ruined and in decay, and there is also that of Toam.

C^^tle^.
There are in this county the Castles of Clanfer^, Mileeke, Gort, Portumno,
Ouram Diuilaughlin, Letrim, Balliloughreugh, and Louford.

Lo^ds and Ge^tlemen.
The lords and chief^ gentlemen of this county* are, the A^^hbishop of Toam the
(...) of Clanrica^^, the Lord Brunegham, Sir H^bbert Mac Dauy, the Bishop of
Clonfert upon (...) Shenin, the Bishop of Kil^aco, the Baron of Letrim, Man
C^ug^, and the Burkes. The Ea^^^ eldest son is Lord Burke, baron of Dunkellin
or Ekelline.

The fourth County.
THhe fourth co^^^ie of this province is called Roscoman, and it contains all
the

Towns. Castles.


This county has in it these castles, that of Roscoman, Athlone, Saint Jones,
Castles.
Ballincabler, Ballimestow, and Alege.

The chief lords and gentlemen of this county are the Bishop of Elphine,
Lords and Gentlemen.
O Canor Dun, O Hanley, Mac Edmond, Brabson, Tuts, Dillons, O Conor Roo, Mac
Dermot, Obern Offlangan, Mac Gerrot, S. Thomas le Strange, Nugents, the heirs
of S. Nicholas Maulby, and others.

The fifth County.
THe fifth county of this province of Connaught is called Letrim: It has the
county of Slego to the South and West; the Shenin to the South and South-East;
the county of Longford to the South-East; and the counties of Donagall, and
Fermanagh

There are no towns of importance in this county.

There is but one Castle of importance in this county which is the castle of
Letrim. Cas^les.


As for the gentlemen, O Rorcke, and those of his kindred are the chief in
this county. Gentlemen


A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE Province of Vlster divided into ten Counties
The fif^ Province.
and with the Breney which is O Releys country on the South part: and on the
South-West part, it boundeth upon Connaght, nameby upon O Rorckes country, and
O Conor Slego: the rest is environed with the sea. It has in it ten counties,
namely, Louth, Down, Cauon, Antrim, Armaugh, Monaghan, Fermanaugh, Tyrone,
Donegall, and Londonderry.

Lionell, son to king Edward the third, was created Earl of Vlster in the
time of his fathers reign.


THe first county of this province is called Louth: and this county
contains in it all the land by the sea side, from the river of Boyne near
Drogheda unto the haven of Caringford. It confines toward the East, with the
sea; toward the South, with the province of Mead; with the county of
Monaghan to the West; and with the county of Armaugh to the North.

The chief towns of any importance are, Louth, Drogheda, Dundalke, Ardec,
Towns.
and Carlingford.

The lords and gentlemen of chief note in this county, are the Bishop of
Ardeigh, Lords and Gentlemen*
the lord of Louth, Brandons, Taffies, Casshells, Barnwells, Reytons, Dowdalls,
Sir Garrat More, Sir John Bedlow, Plunkets, Bedlowes, Clintons and many others.


THe second county of the province of Vlster is called Down: this county
contains all the countries between the haven of Carlingford, and the Bay of
Knockfergus, with the lordship of Newry, and some others. It has for bounds to
the East, the sea; to the South, the haven of Carlingford, and that river; to
the West, the county of Armaugh; and the Bay of Knoc-fergus to the North.

The chief towns of this county, are the town of Down, and the Newry.
Towns.


There are in this county these castles, that of Dondrom, Scatricke, Raunhedy,
Castles.
Green Castle, Castle Reagh, and the Castle of the narrow water.

The lords and gentlemen of greatest reputation in this county, are, the
Bishop of Henry Bagnall, Sir Hugh Mac Guines, Mac Cartan, Iuan Roo Mac Coulle,
Savages, Lords and Gentlemen.
Bensons, Russels, Fitz-Simons, Doudals, Cormake O Neale, Brian Oge-O Neale,
and ^ome others.

The third County.
THe third county of this province is called Cauon; and it contains all the
lands called heretofore Oreighles country. It is bounded with the county of
Letrim to the (...), with the county of Fermanaugh, and Managhan to the North,
and with the

(...)
There are in this county no towne^ nor castles of importance but the town and
(...) of Ca^^^^

(...).
The chi^^^ ^en of this county are the O Reileys.

The fourth County.
THe fourth county of the province of Vlster is called Antrim. It contains
all the land (...) the ba^ of Knoc-sergus and the river of Ban, to the sea. It
has the (...) West, the sea to the East, Cland^boy to the South, and the maine
sea to the North.

Towns.
The chief towns of this county are those of Antrim Knoc-fergus, Kellis, and
Colerane.

Castles.
The chief castles of this county, are, Castle Marten, and Dunluce.

(...)
The chief gentlemen of greatest reputation in this county are, Sir Brian Mac
Phelin, and (...)

The fifth County.
THe fifth county of this province is called Armagh: it contains all the land
between the river of Dundalke, and the Black water. It is bounded to the South
with the county of Louth; with the Black-water to the North, with the river of
Newry to the Ea^^, and with the county of Monaghan to the West.

Towns.
There are no other towns of importance in this county but the town of Armagh
from whence the county has the name: it is an Archicpiscopall See, and the
Metropolitan of the whole Island.

Castles.
The chief castles are, the fort or castles called Elizabeth, where the Earl
of Effex built a bridge, and the fort of the Black-water.

Lords and Gentlemen.
The lords and chief gentlemen of this county are, the Archbishop of Armagh,
Pri^^^^ and Metropolitan of all Ireland, Art Mac Baron, the clergy of Armagh,
O Hanlons, Tarlough Brasilough, Turlo Mac Mahon, Mac Henry's sons, Turlo O
Neale, and some others.

The sixth County.
THe sixth county of this province is that of Monaghan: this county was in
times past Reginald Fitz-Vrse or Bearesonne, supposed to be one of the four
knights that slew Thomas Beckett. It bordereth upon thecountie of Louth,
Eastwards; upon the county of Cauon to the South and South-West; upon the
Longharne South-West; and upon the county of Armagh toward the North.

Town and Castle.
There are not any towns or castles of importance in this county but the town
and castle of Monaghan.

Gentlemen.
The chief men of this county are at this day called the Mac Mahons, and were
at first the offpring of the Fitz-Vrses.

The seventh County.
THe seventh county in the province of Vlster is Fermanaugh: It confines on
the North with the county of Tyrone; on the West with Orwarkes country; on
the South with the county of Cauon; and with the county of Monaghan on the
East.

In this county there is not any town of importance.

Castles.
There are the Castles of Kneskellin, and the Abbey of Leekoole.

Gentlemen.
T^^ ^^^^fe gentlemen of this county, are the offspring of MacGwier, who was
very noble an^ ^^werfull until he overthrew himself and his state in the late
rebellion.

The eight County.
THhe eight ^^^ntie of this province is Londonderry: it contains all the
country called O (...) country, the county of Colran, and one Baronie of
Tyrone, formerly

There are no towns of ^^p^rtance in this county.

Castles.
This county has diverse castles, that of Colran and others, with two small
frieries.

O Chaues or O Canes, Gentlemen.
who are the chief that create O Neale, by casting a shoe over his head upon
a hill in Tyrone.

The ninth County.
THe ninth county of this province in called Tyrone, and it contains all the
land between the Black-water, and the rivers of Liffer and Finne. It has for
bounds the North, the county of Londonderry: on the South the countries of
Fermanagh, and Armagh: and Tirconell on the West.

It has not any towns of importance in it.

The chief castles of this county are these Dongannon, Omagh, Strabane,
Benburb, Castles.


The chiefest lords and gentlemen of this county are, the Earl of Tyrone,
Lords and Gentlemen.
the Bishop of Clohere, Sir Turlo O Neale, Turlo Lenough, and O Cane.

The tenth County.
THe last county in this province is that of Dongall or Tyrconell, and this
county is the greatest and longest of all the countries of Vlster. It has for
bounds, on the East, North, and West, the sea: and the river of Finne on the
South.

There is not any town of importance in this county but the town of Dongall.
Towns.


There are the castles of Dongall, Ballishewin, Red Castle, Leefe, Finne, New
Castle, Castles.
Beleeke, and Bondroies.

O Donel, Lords and Gentlemen.
the Bishop of Derry, the Bishop of Raboo, Hugh Duffe O Donell, O Golghan, Sir
John O Dohery, Sir Owin O Gallohac, the sons of Con O Donell, Mac Swyn Natoo,
Mac Swyn Faued, and others.

There are also in this county these Abbeys, that of Dongall, Asherowe, Derry,
and other small Frieries.

Thus having showed to you (as briefly as might be) the whole description of
Ireland, I will now come to speak of the Quallitie of the country.

The Quality.
(...) and head, and usually ^iueth in heathie grounds. There is also great
store of Girald writes that from a certain wood which floats upon the sea,
(...) seem (...) be Barnacle^ which breed on ship sides or any old ^imber and
are in great abundance in the North, and are good meat.
there flows a gum which does harden afterward; and that within it there
breed certain creatures which first have life, then they take wings and a
bill, and in the end they fly into the air, or swim upon

The Manners of the Ancient Irish.
STrabo says that the Ancient Irish were more savage than the inhabitants of
great Solinus adds more, that when they were victors they rubbed their faces
with the blood of them that were slain in the fight, after they had drunk
some, when a woman was delivered of a man child, the laid his first meat upon
her husbands sword, and thrust the point of it gently with the meat into the
Infants mouth, wishing (according to the ordinary desire of all the nation)
that he might not die but in battle, and in the midst of arms: they that
would make any show of bravery among them, did put upon the hilts of their
swords the teeth of certain great fishes which they found along that coast;
for that those teeth were white as Iuory, and the chief glory of the Irish
consisted in arms. This is all that can Girald, from whom many others have
drawn what may be spoken.

The Manners of the Irish at this day.


Leau^ us in as good health as thou have found us. The^ hold that a ^ree or
green bush planted before their doors the first day of May will (...) their
cowes yield abundance of milk. It is not lawful to commend a hor^e or any
(...) beast unless they say presently, Godblesse it, and they spit against a
horse when he (...) or rowseth himself, if any mischance happen to the horse
Pater (...) in his ^are: the w^^men have enchantments for all diseases, and
they do allwaies (...) a Pater noster and an A^e Marie at the beginning and
ending of all their enchantments (...) their seedi^g, they live upon herbs,
roots, shalghane, and with butter mingled

The Riches of Ireland.


The Forces of Ireland.
THeir warlike bands consist of foot and horse; the horsemen have horses so
tractable and well taught, as they do easily leap on them, although they be
armed, and this is as well by reason of the dexterity of the horse, which
yeeldes unto them, as the disposition of the Irish of whom we have lately
spoken. As for their footmen there are Pharo, Pharo, when as they go to
battle. The Irish are many in number, and valiant; so as they might be held
invincible if they were not opposite one unto another: but they have been ever
divided, and for this cause they have given entry to the kings of England. He
that reigns at this day maintains diverse forts manned with horse and foot,
the which were begun by Queen Elizabeth, after the late enterprises of Pope
Gregory. There is the Archiepiscopall town called Armaugh, the

The passage of this channel is very dangerous, by reason of the rivers which
fall from many contrary parts; so as they cause a confusion of waters with a
contrary current,

The Government of Ireland.
Roderick king of Conaught termed himself king of all Ireland, who seeking to
make himself king of the whole Island, fought against the other kings, who
submitted themselves, without any effusion of blood, to Henry the second king
of England, since which time all the kings of England have bin called
Sovereign Lords of Ireland, until Henry the eight, who had the title of King
given him by the Estates of Ireland. Finally the king of England sends a
Viceroy thither to govern, and these Vice-Royes were first called Conseruers
of Ireland, O Neale, Mac Mahowne, and these have a particular right, by reason
whereof they live with an insupportable authority, and dispose of their
followers goods at their pleasures: These lords have their Judges whom they
call Breahans, as the Goths had their Bellagines. These Breahans are
altogether ignorant, and and yet they do Justice unto the neighbors at
certain days, upon some hill: they that are accused, and can deny it, escape
easily; and if they be taken in open thest they are Henry the seventh, for in
the tenth year of his reign they were confirmed in Ireland by the authority
of the Parliament; but since, they have had their private statutes. Besides
these civil magistrates, Ireland has a military officer, that is to say, the
Marshall, which

The Religion of Ireland.
Fincomarc reigned in Scotland; and this happened by means of a woman among
the Pictes, who growing familiar with the Queen, in the year 322. preached the
Christian Faith unto her, and converted her: the Queen won the King, showing
him what had been preached unto her, and the king disposed his people to
receive baptism, about the year 335. The Irish have lived since in the Romish
religion until the time of king Henry the eight when as the Protestants
religion began to be preached, the which has been since in that country
planted by Queen Elizabeth, and by King James now reigning: yet the Irish are
gerally Elizabeth. Ireland has four Archbishoprickes, that of Dublin,
Armaugh, Cassill, and Toame: and these four have nine and twenty Suffragans.

Of France

The Contents.
1 Gaul what it did in old time contain, according unto Caesar and Ptolome.
2. Description of France as it is now, the length, breadth, and limits. 3.
Number 4. Ample description of the Provinces of France, and first of Picardie.
5. Of the Pruostie and County of Paris, situation and stately buildings of
this City, and of the Isle of France, and consequently of all the other
Countries and Provinces of the realem. 6. Number of the Islands, Capes,
Forests, and chief Rivers of France. 7. Fertillitie of the Provinces of
France, and wherein every Country does abound. 8. Custom of the ancient
Gauls, to wear long heir; they were studious of eloquence, and did worship
Mercury, and Hercules, Ognien. They did offer men in sacrifice. 9. Druides
instructers of the youth of Gaul, and Administers of Justice. 10. Gauls
fearful in war to all Nations, and what arms they used, and their manner
of proceeding in battle. 11. Attire of the ancient Gauls, their living and
12. Nature and manners of the Parysiens, Chartrains, and of all other Provinces
of France. 13. Manners and disposition of the French in general. 14. Civility
of the French Nobility, and their exercises in time of peace. 15. Riches of
the Realm of France, whence it grows. 16. Revenues of the Kings of France,
whereunto it amounted during the reigns of Francis 1. and Henry 2. 17.
Ordinary tax of one year what it comes to in France: and what money has
been leuyed, as well ordinary, as extraordinary, since the year 1542. unto
the year 1580. 18. Forces of France at Sea. 19. Companies of horse entertained
in France at this day. 20. French footmen, and what companies of foot are
entertained at this present. 21. Ordinance of France reduced all to one form,
and what length the Canon of France has. 22. Number of the forts and best
places of France. 23. Realm of 24. Privileges and authority of the Queens
of France. 25. Ancient and modern form of Crowning and annoynting the Kings
of France. 26. Beginning and institution of the Peers of France, and other
Officers of the Crown. 27. Number of the Presidiall Courts and other
Jurisdictions under every Parliament. 28. Number of the Bishoprics of France,
and what parishes every Diocese contains. 29. Catalogue of the Kings of
France, the Reign and death.

Pyrenee Mountains, the Mediterranean sea, and the Alps. But Caesar divided
Gaul Caesar's Celtica) Belgia and Narbonese. And of these parts Belgia is now
for the most part belonging to Germany.

This is 600. English miles.
from the Island of Heissant, opposite to the furthest shore of Brittanie, unto
the banks of Rhyne, has in length little more than three hundred French
leagues or else if we shall measure the length according unto others, from
North-West, to South East, from the Isle of Aldernay in Normandy unto Glice,
we shall find three hundred and thirty leagues, which is almost as much ground
as there is betwixt Paris and 440. English miles.
This realms is enclosed betwixt the 13. and 19. parallele, that is to say, it
holds in breadth from the midst of the fist climate, whereas the longest day
is of 15. hours, unto the midest of the eight, where it is of 16. hours and a
half. And as for the length, ^it contains all the Meridiens, which are
comprehended betwixt the 15. and the 19 Meridien. Finally to divide France
into all her parts, I thinkefit it to take it according to the Parliaments,
being subject to their jurisdiction.



The Archbishopricke of Reims. The Archbishopricke of Sens. The Archbishopric
of Lion. The Bishopric of Soissons. Of Boullen. Of Amyens. Of Noyon. Of
Senlis. Of Beauuais. Of Paris. Of Chartres. Of Orleans. Of Angers. Of Man's. Of
Cleremont. The Archbishopricke of Bourges. The Archbishopricke of Tours. The
Bishopric of Laon. Of Chalon in Champagne. Of Neuers. Of Auxetre. Of Troys in
Champagne. Of Meaux. Of Poictiers. Of Maillezay. Of Lusson. Of Angoulesme. Of
Saint Flour. Of Langres. Of Mascon.
And the chief Provinces where the above named Archbishoprickes, and
Bishoprics

The Parliament of Tolouza has under it,
The Archbishopricke of Narbonna. The Archbishopricke of Auch. The
Archbishopricke of Tolouza.
The Bishoprics be.
Vsez. Lodeua. Saint Pons de Tomieres. Alet. Montpelier. Besiers. Agde.
Carcassonne. Mende. Alby. Puy. Rodez. Vabres. Cahors. Pamiers. Mirepoix. Saint
Papoul. Montauban. La Vaur. Rieuz. Lombez. Cominges. Couserans. Tarbe.
Laictoure. Viuiers.
The principal Provinces are called high and low Languedoc, which is of a
great circuit, high and low Viuarez, Velay, Geuaudan, Albigeois, Rouergue,
Laulaguois, Quercy, the country of Foix, and a part of Gascoine.



The Archbishopric of Rouen.

The Bishoprics be.
Auranches. Eureux. Bayeux. Seez. Costance. Lisieux.
This is the Parliament of Normandy.


Bayonne. Aqs. Basaz. Air. Saints. Perigueus. Sarlat. Again. Limoges. Condom.
Tulle.
The chief Provinces are a part of high and low Gascoine, Biscaie, Xaintonge,

The Parliament of Reins has under is these Bishoprics.
Saint Brieu. Saint Malo. Triquier. Cornouaille. Eij Saint Paul de Leon.
Nantes. Vannes. Dol. Renes.
This is the Parliament of Brittanie.

The Parliament of Dijon has under it,
The Archbishopric of Autun. The Bishopric of Chalon upon Sone.
This is the Parliament of Bourgondy.

The Parliament of Grenoble has under it
The Archbishopric of Ambrun. The Archbishopric of Vienne.
The Bishoprics be,

Valence.

Die: these two are governed by one Bishop, and yet one vsurps not upon
another rights.

Grenoble. Gap. Brianson. Saint Paul three Castells.
This is the Parliament of Dauphine

The Parliament of Aix has under it, The Archbishopric of Aix. The
Archbishopric of Arls.


The Bishoprics be, Digne. Grass. Glandeue. Senas. Saint Paul de Vences. Apt.
Riez. Frejuz. Cisteron. Marseille. Tolon.


This is the Parliament of Prouence.

The Parliament of Bearn has under it, The Bishopric of Escar, and that of
Oloron.


The Parliament of Saint Palais has under it,

Biscaie, Nauarrois, or base Navarre.

The Parliament of Metz has under it the Bishoprics of Metz, Toul, Verdun.


Philip of Valois, after the battle of Cressy in Ponthieu, in the year 1347.
and was recovered during the reign of king Henry the second, by Frances of
Lorraine Duke of Guise in the year 1557.

This is all that remains at this day of Gaul Belgike. Now it is sit to
treat of France taken more particularly, which is of Gaul Celtique, and which
lies near unto Picardie Henry the Henry the great, who has surmounted the
desseine of his predecessor, and made this bridge pleasing and very profitable.
This quarter does also comprehend our Ladies bridge (made of stone like unto
the new bridge) where there is nothing to be seen but shops full of rich
merchandise, and so well furnished, as we cannot see any better. And if you
pass from thence to the Changers bridge, the Goldsmyths have such store of
Jewels and glistring stones, as the most curious of such things cannot but
content himself. After all this if you come to the merchants bridge (which was
sometimes the millers bridge) you will presently say, that it is one of
ornaments of Paris, and that the street which is upon this bridge, exceeds all
the rest in beauty. As for the Vnuersitie, it has the gates of Saint Victor,
Saint Marceau, Saint i^ all eleven doors, whereof three which are in the front
have over them 28 statues Lewis, having no pillar in the midst to support the
great and high vault, but only on the sides. In this chapel they keep (as
they say) a part of the crown of thorns, the purple robe, the reed, and the
sponge of the passion. There are many Monasteries, whereof that of the Temple,
taken from the Templers in the year 1309, and given unto the Joan Queen of
Navarre, wife to Philip the fair, is the most famous. The College of Sarbonne
was instituted by Robert of Sarbonne a Divine, in the time of the king Saint
Lewis. As for the shops of handicraftsmen, they have certain places appointed
them in Paris, that is to say, for parchment-makers near to Saint Michaels
bridge, for clothworkers by Saint John in Grieve, and so of the rest. There are
very many goodly houses, whereof the most remarkable are Soisson place, that
of Longueuille, Montmorency, Guife,

The second part is that which is vulgarly calledla Goelle, the which is little
known, and whose name remains only to some villages. In this country is
contained the county of Danmartin, which is a borough seated upon a little
hill.

The isle of France (which is in the third place) contains all which is from
S. Denis, Poissy, and Mortmorency, and generally all that is betwixt the
turnings and windings of the river of Seine, bending toward Picardie, and
Normandy. Some give it other bounds: but my intent is not to dispute it. Saint
Denis is stately, by reason of the sepulchers of our kings, and for many holy
and precious relics, and a great number of rich ornaments. At Poissy you may
see a goodly convent of religious Women of the best houses of France. At Saint
Germain in Lay, which is betwixt Poissy, and Paris, Henry 4.

Then follows Vexin Francois, or Vulxin, which does reach to Cleremont in
Beauuoisis: but the memory is almost lost, and is not preserved but in some
old records. And thus much for the prouostie and county of Paris, with the
four parts. The other

The country of Hurepois begins at Seine under the little bridge of Paris, and
runs along the river unto Corbeil, Melun, and Moret, where it is divided from
Gastinois by the river Verine, which falls into Loing. In this countri^ stands
Fontainebelleau the goodliest, most pleasing and stately building of our
kings, beautified after that manner by king Henry the fourth.

In the fourth place they set Gastinois, which comprehends the Duchies of
Estamps,

Now follow Beausse, which some divide into three parts: the higher extends
from Ablys, to the country of Chartres, and beyond, containing the counties of
Dreux, and Montfort: base Beausse contains the countries of Orleans, Soloigne,
and Lorris: and as for the middle, in it they place the county of Blois, under
which is that of Dunois, then the Duchy of Vendosme, and that of Touraine. The
town of Orleans is famous for the deeds of arms of Joan the Virgin. Soloigne
contains the towns of Gergeau, la Ferte, Clery, and Saint Laurens. Touraine
lies betwixt Blois, and Saumur. Ambois is of Touraine, where there is one of
the best castles of France. There

Anjou begins at the bank of Chouzay, and ends betwixt Montcontour, and
Herraut, whereas Poictou begins, which lies upon the South of it: upon the East
it has Touraine, and Vendosme, on the North Main, and Laual, and on the West
part that touches Britain. There are many rivers in this province, as Loire,
Meine, Vienne, Diue, Loir, Sarte, and many others. The chief town is Angers;
the others are Saumur, Montreneau, Bauge, Beaufort, Brissac, Monstreul Belay,
Mauleurier, Chantorceau, Lewis the eleventh, by the death of Charles the last
Duke, nephewe to Rene.

Maine, which ioynes unto Anjou, and Touraine, comes next, and this Province
has three principal rivers, Meyne, Loir, and Sarte: the chief town is Man's.
This Province comprehended under Aquitaine was sometimes subject unto Dukes,
until the accord made betwixt Lewis the ninth king of France, and Henry the
third king of England, that the English should rest satisfied with Guyenne,
which should be limited on the North part by the river of Charante, and on the
South with the Pyrenee mountains, and that he should quit his pretensions to
Normandy, Main, and Anjou,

As for the country of Perch, it is divided into two parts, whereof the one
is called Perch Gouet, and the principal town is Nogent le Rotrou; the other
is properly the county, whereof the chief town is Mortaigne, where the Bay
life's seat is. For bounds it has Verneuil toward Normandy, and Meniers upon
Maine. Champagne is bounded in with the countries of Brie, Bourgondie,
Charrolois, and Lorraine. It is divided into high and low: the low
comprehends Troies, Iuig^y, Bassigny, and Vallage. Iuigny is a county which
seperats Champagne forom Bourgondy, and is near unto Sens; the chief town of
Iuigny. Bassigny has the rivers of Marne, and Meuse, and a small part of the
Moselle. The chief town is Chaumont which they Esclaron, and Arsy upon the
river of Aube. High Champagne contains Partois,

They add unto these two parts, that which is joining unto it, that is, the
Duchies of Reins and Langres, and the Counties of Chalons, Ligny and la Motte.
The county of Champagne was united unto the Crown of France after this
manner, Theobald the second, Earl of Champagne, had one son named Theobald
the third, who died without children, and had for successor Henry son to
Stephen King of England, who was brother to Theobald the second. Henry had one
son of the same name, who dying without children, his brother Theobald (who
called himself Count Palatine of Henry, whose daughter Ioane married to Philip
the fair, united Champaine and other Provinces to the Crown.

Commonly they put Champagne with Brie, which ioynes unto Hurepois: This
country begins near unto Pont Charanton, whereas the river of Marne ioynes
with Seine, and the river of Marne diuides Brie from Champagne, as Seine does
from Gastinois; and in a manner all that lies betwixt these two rivers, unto
the Duchy of Bourgondie, is commonly called Brie: There is also in this
country, the town of Brie Count Robert, so called of Count Robert sometimes
Lord of Brie, who made his

The last part of Gaul, which they call Celtique and Belgique, and which are
under the Parliament of Paris, is the country of Lyonnois, which has for
limits on the North side, Bresse, on the East, Sauoye, on the South, Dauphine
and Viuarez, and on the West, Forests and Auuergne. The chief town of this
country is Lion, seated upon the rivers of Soane and Rosne, whereof Soane
passes through the midst of the city. The greatness, beauty and
reputation of this town is so well known, as it needs not more discourse.

I must now come to the provinces of Aquitaine, which acknowledge the
jurisdiction Ambrose, both very rich. There are three of women, the first of
the Annonciade, the second of S. Laurence, and the last of the begging sisters
of S. Clare. They make much cloth there, and it has the Faires of Saint
Laurence, S. Lazare, S. Martin and S. Oursin, where there is a great concourse
of Merchants. The other towns of the Duchy of Berry are Yssoudun, Dun le Roy,
Vier^on, Me^un, Concressant. They do also place in this country, the counties
of Sance^re, and S. Aignan and the Baronie of Montsaucon. There is also in this
country 40. Chastellenies. Sancerre has under it, Sancergues, Beaufeu,
Chapelle, Anguillon, Boucard, Ialonges, Tarenay, Verdigny, Menesme, Charen^ony,
and other places. Hugh Capet, when as Godfrey was governor for the king: Of
this Godfrey descended Harpin, who bought the county of Berry from king Henry
the first: he going to war, sold the said county to Philip the first, to be
united to the Crown. Some years after, John of Valois obtained John for his
portion. John dying without heir male, the Duchy returned unto the Crown. It
was afterward given to John son to Charles the sixth, who dying without
children, left his brother Charles for his successor, who coming to the
succession of the Crown of France, and chased, in a manner, out of it by the
English, he was called in mockery king of Bourges: So by the means of
Charles the seventh it came unto the Crown.

The country of Bourbonnois has for bounds on the West part, Berry and
Limosin, on the North, Niuernois, on the East, Bourgondy, and on the South,
Lyonno^. This country was sometimes under Dukes, whereof, the last was
Archimbaud, who had no heir but one daughter, called Agnes, who was married to
John Duke of Bourgondie, Beatrix, he married her to Robert, son to Lewis the
ninth, king of France, and gave him the Duchy of Bourg^ndie, upon condition
that he should carry the name of Bourbon, the which was done. Robert, son to
S. Lewis, begat Lewis, surnamed the great, who was made the first Duke of
Bourbon, by Philip of Valois, about the year 1329. He had for his successor,
in the direct line, Peter the first, (who had a brother, called James, of whom
came the Earls of March and Vendosme) then Lewis the second, Bon, John the
first, Charles, and John the second: He dying without children, Peter, the
second, succeeded him, whose daughter and heir Susan, being married to Charles
of Bourbon, Earl of Montpensier (son to Gilbert of Bourbon) she made her
husband Duke of Bourbon. It is this Charles, who Charles the fifth, against
king Fra^ncis the first, was slain before Rome, in the year 1527. After the
death of Susan, the king seized upon the Duchy of Bourbonnois, and then the
Dukes of Vendosme took only the title and arms by the right of parentage.
The country of Bourbonnois is divided into high and low: the lower contains
the towns and two counties: the chief town is Molins, seated upon the river
of Allier, abounding in fish, especially in Salmons. There is a goodly castle
at Molins, and as pleasing a garden as can be seen, where there are many
Lemmon and Orange trees. The other towns are Bourbon, Archambaud, and Bourbon
Ancy, Montmeraut, Montl^sson, S. Porcin (which some put among the towns of
Auuergne) Cuffet, Chancelle, Charroux,

Goths, who were expelled by Clouis and out of all Aquitaine. The Emperor
Lewis Pepin. And Charles the bald having expelled Charles and Pepin, the sons
of Pepin, and put them into Monasteries, he seized upon this principality, and
gave it unto Arnold his kinsman, but upon condition, that all these countries
should from thenceforth carry but the title of a Duchy. Arnold had for his
successors, William the good, Eblon 1. and 2. William 2. and 3. Guy William 4.
and 5. and his daughter called Elenor, being sole heir, was married to Lewis
7. king of France, who doubting some treason, and suspecting her of adultery,
put her away, and she suddenly married with Henry duke of Normandy, who
succeeded Stephen king of England. Henry had for his successors, as well in the
realm of England, Richard and John. But it happening that Arthur son to
Godfrie (who was also son to king Henry) contesting that he should be
preferred to king John, and being persuaded and solicited by king Phillip
Augustus to take Poictou from John, he attempted to make himself master
thereof by force: but he was defeated by John, taken prisoner, and carried to
Rouen, where he dyed in prison: whereupon John beind accused of Parricide
before king Phillip by Constance mother to Arthur, he was condemned, and his
goods presently adjudged to king Phillip, as direct Lord, when among other
things Poictou did accrue unto him. But Lewis 8. his son gave it to Alphonso
his son, who dying without children, it came unto king Phillip, and ren^ained
in the possession of our kings, until that Edward 3. recovered it in the time
of Phillip of Valois, and held it more amply with all Aquitaine, by the
treaty which was made betwixt him and king John King Edward gave the
principallitie of Aquitaine to his son; who having ouer-charged the country,
he lost a great part of it, which yielded to Charles 5. king of France, and
afterward Charles 7. expelled the English out of all Guienne, in the year
1453. and left it to his son Lewis 11. he gave it to his brother Charles,
after whose death, king Lewis left it to Charles 8. Since which time Guienne
(whereof Poictou is a principal part) has remained in the hands of the French
kings. The chief town of all this Province is Poictiers, from which, the rest
of the country has taken the name: the other towns are Niort, Fontenay le
Conte, whereas the little river of Vendee does pass, Lusignan,

Angoumois is bounded on the North side, by Poictou, on the East, by Xaintonge,
on the South, by Bourdelois and Perigort, and on the West, by Limosin. From
East

Charles the French king surnamed the wise, gave the Earldome of Angoulesme
taken from the English, to his son Lewis, who being king left it to his
son John, to whom Charles succeeded. Charles had for successor Francis 1.
who coming to the crown of France, made this Earldome a Duchye, and gave it
to his mother, after Charles carried the title of Duke of Angoulesme, and he
dying without children, the Duchy was united unto the crown.

The country of Aulnis comprehends the territory of Rochelle, and is of a
very small compass.



These are all the Provinces, which are under the jurisdiction of the
parliament of Paris, let us now come to those, which acknowledge the parliament
of Tolouse.

Quercy has for limits, the Country of Perigord, that of Rhodes, Auuergne and
Lymosin, in which are two Dioceses, that of Cahors and Montauban upon Tarn. The
lesser towns are Burelle, Nazaret, Souillac, Gourdon, Martel and others.

The country of Rouergue ioines to Quercy upon the East, the rest is environed
by Languedoc and Auuergne. The chief town is Rhodes, the others are
Villefranche of Rouergue, Estauges, Espeyron.



For that Gasconie has some part of the jurisdiction of Tolouse, it is fit now
to discourse thereof, that we may commit no disorder.

Gasconie in our time comprehends all that which is betwixt the river of
Garonne, the Pirenee mountains, the Ocean and the Guienne of Lewis xj. Some
parts of Gascoine are bounded by the river of Garonne, as Armagnac and Bigorre:
others lie as well on the one as the other side of the river, as Agenois, the
Duchy of Albret and

The county of Bigorre is betwixt the countries of Bearn and Cominges near to
the Pirenee Mountains, whereof a great part is under this county, from the
mountains of Aure, unto those of Saut and Aspe which are of Bearn. The chief
town is

Agenois has for limits to the East, Quercy, to the North, Perigord (and on
this side Agenois reaches unto Biron in Perigord) on the West, Gasco^ne and
Garronne, which is also upon the South. This country contains two Bishoprics
Again and Condom. The smaller towns are Villeneufue, of Agenois: Clairac,
Marmand, Foy the great, and some others upon the river of Garonne, with Valence
upon Baise, Lainac, Romien, Montreall.

The country of Cominges is divided into high and low, the high is in the
mountains,

The parliament of Rouen comprehends all Normandy, which after it had been
taken from the English by Charles 7. falling afterward into the hands of
Charles his son, it was taken from him by Lewis xj. his brother, and in
exchange he gave him Guienne, since which time, Normandy has always
remained in the power of our Kings, and has not been given to any of the
children of France. This Province has Clothaire ^. who slew Gautier Lord of
Yuetot Yuetot is in ^ C^^x.
besides the town of Constance, and the realm of Yuetot, the

The parliament of Bordeaux has under it the countries of Perigort, Limosin,
Xam^onge, Bordelois, the Tandes, Albert, Basadois, high Gascoine, and part of
Biscaie and

Ausonius (one of the ornaments of France) was borne. The other towns are
Blaye, Bourg upon the sea, Libourne, Condat. There is also in the Seneschallcy

The chief town of Basadois is Basas a days journey from Bourdeaux, the
others are saint Bazeille and Reulec seated upon Garonne, Monseguer upon the
river of Drot, saint Ferme, Castle Morou, Geronde, and Sameterre, and there are
many villages even

Then follows the country of Lapord, or Lourde, which has two Dioceses, that
is to say, Bayonne and Aqs. Bayonne is the chief town of the country, whose
jurisdiction extends to the river of Iron, which is beyond saint John de Luz.

The country of Xaintonge has on the North side Poictou, on the East
Angoumois and Perigort, on the South the river of Garonne, and on the West the
Ocean. The chief town is Saints: the others are saint John d'Angely,
Lorgaire, Archaut, Pont, Loubleze, Taillebourg, Iarnac, Barbesieux, Iosac and
Brouage, famous for the salt which is made there.

The parliament of Rennes contains the higher and base Britain, and has
upon the Henry 2. king of England, and was united to France after the death of
Anne of Britain, who being contracted to Maximilian of Austria son to the
Emperor Frederick was in the end married to Charles the eighth, the French
king, and after him to Lewis the twelfth, and by this means

The Parliament of Dijon comprehends at this day that which is called the
Duchy of Bourgondie, which they say was so named of a place called Bourg-ogne
in the country of Langres. The limits are upon the North, the countries of
Champagne and Auxerrois, whereof a part is of this Province: on the West,
Niuernois and Bourbonnois: on the South, Beaujolois and Lyonnois: and on the
East, the river of Rosne, which diuides it from Sauoy, Bresse, and the Franche
County. The chief town of this Duchy is Dijon, seated almost upon the
frontier of France, on the river of Ousche. Although this town were burnt, in
the year 1227. yet is it now fairer and more stately than ever. Charles the
last Duke of Bourgondie, who was slain before Nancy, for that presently after
his death Lewis the eleventh seized thereon. As for the county of Mascon, the
king S. Lewis bought it of John Earl of that country, and of Elie his wife.

The parliament of Grenoble comprehends all Dauphine, which has for bounds, on
the South part, Prouence, and the town of Ambrum is the Metrapolitan of this
country, which is called high Dauphine: on the North it has the countries of
Lyonnois and Bresse, and on this side is base Dauphine, of which Vienne is the
Archbishops seat: on the West it has Rosne, which parts it from Lyonnois and
Viuarez, and to the East Philip of Valois got this province of Hu^bert Dauphin
of Viennois, in the year 1340. upon condition that the eldest son of France
should carry the name of Dauphin.

The parliament of Aix contaynes Prouence, which is bounded toward the North
by Dauphine and the river of Durance: on the E^st, by the Alps and the river
of Vare, upon whose banks, on the left hand, stands Nice: on the South part,
the mediterranean Sea: and on the West part of the princi palitie of Orange,
and part of the county of Auignon. The chief town of Prouence is Aix, the
seat of the parliament. The rest are Marseille, Arles, near unto which is the
Camarque, which is a piece of ground lying between

Betwixt Aix and Marseille, is Saint Baume, whether Mary Magdalen had retired
Ioane Queen of Naples, and countess of Prouence, left for her successor, in
her other principallities, and in this Earldom, Lewis of Anjou, son to John
the French king, after that she had adopted him to be revenged of her enemies.
Lewis had for his successor his son Lewis the second, and he, Lewis the
third, adopted also by Joan the second, Queen of Naples, to be king of Sicile,
and Duke of Salabria. Lewis the third, dying without children, left his estates
(with the consent of Ioane the second) to Rene of Anjou his brother, who
refusing to resign his rights to the realm of Naples, and county of
Prouence, to Rene of Lorraine his grandchild, issued from his daughter Yoland,
transported them to his brother Charles Earl of Main, who having lost his
son Charles, made Lewis the eleventh his heir general. Others say, that
this was done by the testament of Rene, not without grievous complaints of Rene
of Lorraine.

The Parliament of Bearn contaynes two bishoprics, that of Escar, and Oledon.
This country lies all at the foot of the Pirennee mountains, the length being
from South to North, and it has upon the South side the county of Bigorre,
and on the North, Biscay the royal, from the which, Bearne is separated by the
river of Gave. The breadth is from East to West, and it has on the East, the
country of the Lands and Chalosse, according unto Adur, and on the West Biscay
of Navarre.

The country of Bearne is divided into two, on the one side are the
mountains, where Oleron stands, on the other, the valleis where Escar is
situated. The chief town is

The parliament of Mets contaynes Toul and Verdun, which are under the
protection of the French king, who keeps garrison in them. The town of Mets
was made subject to the French by king Henry the second. This town is watered
by the rivers of Moselle and Seille. It was sometime the chief of the realm
of Austrasia, and now all about it is called the country of Messin.



The Island of Dieu, or God, where there are two or three good villages.

The Island of Marmotier, where there is an Abbey, commonly called the White
Abbey.

The Island of Raiz, right against Rochelle, abounding in wine, in which is the
town of Saint Martin, at this day it carries the title of a Duchy.

The Island of Oleron, where they make great store of salt.

The Capes or Promentories of France are that of S. Matthew, or du Four, which
extends beyond all France toward the West.



The Cape of Talmond.

The Cape of Buch.

The Cape of Gercel is to be seen in the Mediteranean sea, it is called by
some Cabo de Saint Sigo, and by others Cabo baxo.

The Cape of Sete, which is in Languedoc.

The Cape of la Haque.

The Forests of France are many. In the country of Main, are found the
Forests of Versay, Longoulnay, Persi, Sille, Charnay, Audain, 'Mayne and
Concise. In base Britain the Forests of Bost blanc, Toriant and Guierche. In
Poictou the Forests of Mouliere, Dine, Brosse and Ligne. In Berry, the Forests
of Robert and others. In Anjou, those of Loursay and Marson. In the country of
Boullein, the woods of Surene, Celles, Hardelot, Dalles and Boursin. In
Vermandois, Recoigne and Bouhan. In Picardie, the woods of Baine, la Fere,
Beaulieu and Coussy. But above all we must esteem the Forest of Orleans,
which is much greater than any one in

The chief rivers of France are Seine, which has her spring in the mountain
of Voge in Bourgondie, and from thence it runs to Paris, then to Rouen, and
so goes and discharges it self into the Sea.

Seine receives into her stream the river of Marne, which comes out of the
mountain of Faucilles, a little above Langres, and passing by Ianuille, Saint
Didier, Chalon Dormant and Meaux, and receiving some small rivers of less
note, as Saut, Bloisse, Ourq, and Tresme, it mingles it self with Seine, at
pont Charanton, near

Oyse comes from a place above Guise, toward the East, near unto the village
of Orgny, it passes through Picardie, and watering Guise, la Fere, Compiegne,
Saint Maixant, and some other towns; it falls into the river of Seine, near
unto Poyssy, a little beneath Pontoise. The river of Aisne is according unto
Caesar in Gaul Belgic upon the extremities of the Diocese of Rheins. Her
spring is in Barrois, above Clermont, near unto a village called Souilly.

The river of Loyre has her spring in Auuergne at a place called la Font de
Loire. This river having run a great country, and passing by Roane,
Marcigne, Desise, Neuers, Seuilly, Gyen, Gergeau, Orleans, Blois, Amboise,
Tours, Samur and Pont de

Rosne comes out of the mountain of Fourche in high Valois, and passes by the
Lake of Geneua, and then to Lion, whereas Soane enters into it. This river
descends from thence to Vienne, Tournon, Valence, Auignon and other places,
until that it casts it self by two branches into the Mediterranean Sea, near
unto Arles in Prouence. This river receives Soane at Lion, Isere betwixt la
Roche and Valence, and besides these, Droume and Durance.

Soane has her spring near unto the springs of Mense and Moselle, it passes
through Bourgondie, and falls into Rosne beneath Lion, near unto the Abbay of
Esnay.

Ise^e passes by Grenoble and Romans in Dauphine coming from Sauoy, and falls
into Rosne near to Valence in Dauphine.

Droume descends from the Alps, and then joins with Rosne beneath Valence.

Durance comes also from the Alps, and is the most troblesome river in France,
having no safe foord.

Garonne according unto Caesar, did divide the Gauls from the Aquitains. It
comes



Quality of the Countries of France.
AS France has diverse provinces, so they have diverse quallities, which I will
seek

Beausse is one of the most fertile countries of Europe for wheat, so as
neither Sicile nor England do equal this Country in fertility, being one of
the chief Garniers and nurseries of Paris: There is but one river in all this
Country that has any current, the whole country being flat and plain; So
as Beausse being without water,

Soloigne is a sandy country, where there grows much Rye.

The soil about Bloys abounds in corn, wine, fruits and other commodities
which serve for the use of man, it has much underwoods and timber, many
rivers, brooks, Pooles and fountains, wherein it exceedes Beausse. There is
Terra Sigillata found betwixt Orcheze and Blois.

The country about Orleans is as fertile as any other in all singularities.
There they shall find pleasure, whether they will fish, hawk or hunt, for
that there is abundance of fishes, foul and game. But above all, the soil of
Orleans is famous for the excellent

The Country of Gastynois is not very fertile, sandy in many places, and
yields little, yet pleasing for her forests and rivers.

The soil about Sens abounds in all things that may serve for the life of man.
There is store of corn and delicate wine. Flesh is very cheap, they have
plenty of butter, cheese, wool, and other commodities. There is abundance of
fish, and oil of nuts, for that the whole country is covered with
wal-n^t-trees, especially the Champian which lies betwixt the rivers of Yonne
and Seine, from Montreau faut Yonne unto Sens: and on this side the river of
Yonne toward Gastinois, there are goodly hills covered with

The country about Auxerre is no less profitable for vines, for there is such
abundance of wine, as it does furnish Paris a great part of the year.

Champagne is a fl^t country and fit for tillage, yet in some places the soil
is very light, and yields little. As for Brie, although it be full of woods,
yet it is a good country, having a clear heaven, a sweet and temperate air,
and great ^i^ers. Finally, there wants not any thing that is necessary for the
life of man: There is wine, corn, cattle, fruit, wood, foul, game for
hunting, and abundance of fish.

The country about Prouins is famous for the conserve of roses which is made
there, and sent into all parts of France. They fetch wine from their
neighbors, but it abounds

Picardie, which is watered by the Rivers of Some, Oyse, Aynan, L^s^a^, Scarpe
and others, is one of the chief Garniers of France, neither does it want any
thing but wine, which grows not rather for that the inhabitants ca^e not to
plant any vines, than for any defect in the soil, which might carry grapes,
and they would ripen as well as in many other places, which are not so fit for
this plant.

Niuernois has three nauigable rivers, Loire, Allier and Yonne, with others
that are not nauigable, as Nyeure, recommended for the goodly meadows which it
does water: There is also Lixentes, Laubois, Aron, Alene, Acolin, Bresbre,
Arrou and Quieure. The Champian country is full of wood and pasture, which
makes the people to attend the feeding of cattle, and not greatly to care for
tillage, nor Vines, but in some places betwixt Neuers and la Charity, and in
some other Chastellenies. That which is most rare in this country, it abounds
with mines of silver and Iron. In former times they drew out silver near unto
S. Leonard, but the mines of Iron are at this day more used, and the country
has this commodity, that they have store of wood, and they use

The country of Berry is fertile for the greatest part, and abounds in all
that is necessary for the life of man, having woods, vines, arrable ground,
flesh, fruit and wool, with many rivers, as Cher, Indre, Creuse, Azin,
Choestre, Colin, Tripand, Moulon and Auron, whereof the greatest part join
together, and falling into Loire, is a means to carry commodities out of Berry
into other places.

Touraine is one of the most fertile countries of France, and is that which
they call

The country of Main is warred by the rivers of Main, Sarte, Loir, and many
other smaller rivers and brooks, which do fatten it, and make it fitter for
pasture than for tillage: So as the Manceaux may better furnish cattle than
corn or wine; yet the country is not wholly unfurnished, for that they have
it in some places; so as neither Anjou nor Touraine exceed it in bounty of
wines, nor abundance of grain, but it is

The country of Anjou is uneven in many places, and has little hills covered
with vines for the most part: and as for the Champian country it is beautified
with forests and woods of grown timber, and with valleis, where there are good
meadows and pastures for the feeding of cattle. To conclude, all things
necessary for man's life, yea and for delight, are to be found there: the white
wines which grow in this country are much esteemed, as the best of this
realm. It is also watered with many rivers, which some say to be forty, not
comprehending the fountains, Pooles (which are many) marshes, brooks and
reseruers for fish; and to speak in one word, it is one of the pleasingst
aboades in France, from thence comes a great part of the slate which we see
in France.

As for Normandy, there is first about Rhoan many fair and fertile plains,
as that of Rhommois, which is one of the best of France. But this country is
rather given to traffic than to labor, and so in a manner is all Normandy,
by reason of the commodity of the Sea. The soil about Caen has this
particularity, that although Normandy bears no wine, yet there grows some
which is passable: but at Argences, which is three leagues off, the wines are
very good, and there the inhabitants of Caen do commonly

As for Britain, it is a good Province, it has excellent ground for tilt,
store of meadows; pasture and forests for many uses: It has the sea for
traffic, from whence the Britains draw salt made with the heat of the
sun, the which they send into their neighbor Provinces. They have iron and
lead, and in some places mines of silver. They have also some wine growing,
but not in such abundance nor so delicate, but the inhabitants of the country
seek it elsewhere, and go into Anjou and to Bourdeaux

If we come unto Poictou, we shall find that the country is good, fat and
rich having no want of any thing that is held necessary; for there is store of
corn, flesh, wine, wood, fish, wool, flax and fruit, neither do they want
forests, whereas huntsmen may find game to exercise themselves.

Xaintonge abounds in corn and wine, and is one of the best Provinces in
France, so as it does furnish Spain, England and other countries with there
commodities. And the country of Angolesme is no less fertile in corn and
wine, whose bounty is well known. There are also valleis so fit for gardens as
there are not any more beautiful in Italy, and in these valleis there does
also grow abundance of hemp. There is also great store

The country of Perigord is hilly, stony and rough, and for the most part
wooddie, whereof there is some oak, which the call Iarry in their Language;
but most commonly they are Chestnut trees, the which are very profitable to the
poor people, as well for their own nourishment, as for to feed their swine.
But one of the greatest commodities of this tree is, that being cut it grows
again soon, and caries a fairer and better fruit. And if this were not, it
were impossible to entertain so many forges of iron and steel as are in this
Province. So as it seems this country is barren, and bears not any grain
for the nourishment of man: But they have corn enough: yea of wheare to feed

Auuergne which is divided into high and low, is of diverse qualities according
to the division. For high Auuergne does chiefly abound in pasture, and has
much rye, but

The country of Messin is fat and fertile, and it abounds in corn, wine,
flesh, fish, hay,

As for Bourgondie, the soil does scarce yield sufficient for the inhabitants.
That of Beaune is reasonably fertile, especially of good wine which is famous
throughout all France. The air is very temperate, and there is great store of
water. That of Autun is lean in many places. Those of Chaalons, Mascon, and
Toumus are reasonably good, where there are delicate wines, and in abundance,
especially at Tourn^s.

Lionnois is lean in some parts, and the land very light; but it is a goodly
thing to see that part which they call franc Lionnois along the river of Saone,
where there is much good ground, and store of vines and meadows, with a great
number of fruit trees, which make this country very pleasing.

Dauphine yeeldes much corn in the mountains, especially rye; there is much
good pasture, where they feed an infinite number of cattle, and so by
consequence they have much butter and cheese. As for wine, all that mountanie
country bears little: In regard of Champian country, it is in a manner all
good and fertile along the river of Rhosne, and caries very good wine, whereof
the most famous is that of Vienne, Tein, Valence and Montelimar: within the
country, and near to Grenoble is Graisinodan, which abounds in corn, and
bears excellent wine, especially near to Grenoble, where they make great
account of that which they call of saint Martin: Three or four leagues from
thence, there is very good ground and goodly meadows, near unto Moyrans. Then
you shall see Valoire, which does not yield to any country of France in
abundance

Province bears all that which is commonly found in the most fertile countries
of France, and exceeds them in many things: for there are places which abound
so in corn, as the Isle of France is not better furnished, and namely the
Camarque of Arles and the plain of saint Chamar, Miramas, Senas and Malemort,
from Orgon unto Aix and Marseille, and from Marseille unto Years, Frejus and
Antibe, and unto the river of Var.

Languedoc in my opinion is one of the Provinces of France most to be
considered. For if you look unto the soil which is about Tolouse, you shall
find it one of the best of France, abounding in corn and wine, and so fat a
country, as it is almost impossible to get out of it after any great rain.
You may travel almost seven or eight leagues in this country and not find a
flint stone. The county of Lauragais has all that can be necestarie for man,
and there wants not things which nature has given more for pleasure then
necessity. Albigeois is a country in like manner furnished with all things,
and if you bend toward Carcassonne you shall find one of the fattest soiles
of Europe: near to Bezieres you shall find the ground good, with many olive
trees and vines which

Velay and Geuaudan are two countries of one nature, they yield abundance of
Rye and pulses, and have scarce any other thing, only great store of milk,
wherewith they make cheese, which the inhabitants sell in other places, as they
do their Rye to have wine. To conclude, Languedoc is one of the best provinces
of France, for that it not only has whatsoever is needful, but also
wherewith to furnish many other Countries.

The country of Rouergne is rough and hilly, and not very fertile: But Quercy
has

The mountains of Foix are full of good pastures, and infinite mines, which are
discovered by their waters which taste of Sulphur. Doubtless, there is not any
Country where there are better mines of iron than in Foix. There is also much
rosin, turpentine, Pitch, incense, cork, marble, Iaspis, slate, and other
stones, and great store of venison, maruailous lakes, fearful precipices,
fertile valleis, toward Pamies, and pastures upon

As for the country of Comi^ges it is almost like to that of Foix in many
places, and

In regard of the country of Armaignac, all that toward Lectour, Auch and Vie
is most fertile; but approaching near the lands of Bourdeaux, it bears nothing
but chestnuts and other trees, and there is nothing but pastures and wast
ground, yet in some places out of the high way it is very profitable to the
owners.

Bigorre is of a diverse quality: for the valley from Bagneres unto Armaignac,
along the river of Aulbe is one of the most fertile places of Guienne, and that
which is by the river of Adour yields nothing unto it, having on the one side
woods, and on the other

The country about Bourdeaux bears excellent wine; so as the wine of Grave is
well known in all the Western and Northern parts of Europe. Besides Graves
wine there is that of Larmont la Bastide and the neighbor places, with the
white wines which come from Melion, which are not inferior unto the Greek.
They also make great esteem of the bread of Potensac near to Bourdeaux. There
is also great store of flesh and fish, and to speak in a word, Bourdeaux were
one of the best aboade in France, if the air of the sea, and the waterie
vapors did not make this town so subject to diverse diseases, and often to the
plague. The country of Buch abounds in pine trees which yeald rosen,

Bearn has in it the country of Iuranson, where there is wine equal in
bounty to the best of France. Moreover, there are excellent baths, which they
call Aigues-caudes, or Caude-aigues, and Cauderets, the best simples that can
be found, and store of mines. This country abounds in millet for the most
part, and yet they want neither corn nor wine in many places. Above all there
are good pastures, and by that means much cattle, milk, butter and cheese.
There is also much hemp and flax, and this province has this particularity,
that it is better furnished with goats than any country of France, for that
they have means to feed them, without any hurt to their fruit trees, in the
rocks and heath whereof the country abounds.


CLement Alexandrinus and Strabo write, that the Gauls were accustomed to
keep their hair long, and Agathie says, that the kings of France did never
use to cut their hair, but divided it in two, on the top of the forehead.
Diodorus says, that they wash their heads often with lyme, to make their hair
white. Strabo writes also, that the noblemen did shave their cheeks, and did
let that of the chin grow, and that they did avoid by all means to be fat and
great, bellied, and if any young man were bigger than a certain measure, he
was blamed. Simmacus commends them for their industry to learning, and Cato in
his originals says, that the Gauls did affect two things, war, and to
speak Diodorus does blame them for their short and obscure speech. He says
moreover, that they were given to preach their own praises, and to contemn
others, that they were full of threats, slanderous, and had a good opinion of
themselves. So Vercingetorix vaunts in Cesars Commentaries, that he would make
an assembly of all France, which all the earth should not be able to resist.

As for the religion of the ancient Gauls, and their customs touching sacred
things, Caesar says, that they were much given to religion, and the service of
the Gods; that they did chiefly worship Mercury, whom they held to be the
inuenter of all arts, and the guide of travelers: and they though also that
this God had great power over merchandise, and did rule in game, and govern in
all things. After Mercury, they did worship Apollo, Mars, Jupiter and Minerua,
concurring almost in opinion of these Gods with other nations: They did think
that Apollo did drive away diseases; that Minerua Jupiter governed heaven, and
Mars did preside in war, and had all power over arms. Pliny says that
Xenodorus made an image of Mercury, greater than any of his time in a town of
Auuergne. Strabo writes that Diana of Ephesus had a Temple at Marseille. But a
Marble stone that was found, shows that the Gauls did also adore another
Diana surnamed of Ardenne. Lactantius, Lucian and Minutius report, that the
Gauls did worship the gods Hese, Teutate and Zarane: but many learned men do
hold that they are the same that Mars, Mercury and Jupiter. Ausonius names
Bellenus for god of the Gauls. Lucian says also, that they worshipped
Hercules furnamed Ogmien. The Gauls did worship their gods turning toward the
right hand, as Atheneus writes. They did sacrifice men to their gods, Mars, as
Caesar does witness in these words: When they have resolved to fight, they do
vow unto him, that which they shall take in war. They offer up the beasts
which they take, and bring all the rest into one place. In many towns you may
see heaps of such things, and it does seldom happen that any one in contempt
of religion does conceal those things that are taken, or embesle any thing
that has been so laid up: and there was a grievous punishment ordained
against them that should infringe this custom. They that were visited with any
grievous sickness, or in danger in battle, or in any other place, offered up
men, or else made a vow to offer some; and they use the Druides in such
sacrifices, thinking that the gods cannot be pacified, but in giving the life
of one man for another. They hold that the sacrifices of them that are taken
Strabo also says, that they were accustomed to strike him on the back with a
sword that was appointed to be sacri^iced, and that they did presage what
should happen unto them by his starting. Tertullian writes that they spent
whole nights about the Tombs of valiant men to receive Oracles from them. And
the Gauls never made any sacrifice without calling some Druide. The Bardes
were the Gauls Poets, who did write the praises of famous men, and did blame
cowards. Ammianus Marcellinus makes mention of the Eubages, who made profession
among the Gauls to search out the deepest secrets of nature. Laertius and
Suidus make mention of the Seumothees, who differed nothing from the Druydes,
no more Dodorus Siculus: and Pliny does many times term the Druydes
Magitiens. For the Druides in Gaul were the same thing that the Magitiens in
Persia,

year upon the frontier of the country of Chartres, whether all came that had
any suits, Caesar notes, that this place was no other but the town of Dreux,
which does yet in some sort retain the name of Druydes. They were not
accustomed to go unto the war, and did not contribute to any thing that was
imposed upon the country. So as these privileges did inuit many to be their
disciples, and many fathers to send their sons to be instructed by them, and
to make themselves capable to be of this rank. They that submitted themselves
under their discipline, did learn a great number of verses, and held it not
lawful to write them. One only of their opinions was published (says Melo)
that the souls were immortal, and according to Diodorus, that they past from
one body to another, as Pithagoras held. Strabo a Guy the new year, come of
that the Druides were accustomed to send by their disciples, Guy to all men, in
the beginning of the year, as wishing it happy unto them. These were the
manners of the ancient Gauls touching sacred things.

As for profane, they were accustomed to go armed to assemblies. Plutarch
writes, that the weomen determined of peace and war, and that their
resolutions were followed. Strabo writes that if any one interrupted him that
spoke in an assembly, an officer came and threatened him with a sword in his
hand, and enioined him silence, if he

Elianus says that they were the promptest men in the world to expose
themselves to all dangers. Vopiscus says, that they were men of turbulent
spirits and could not live in rest. Titus Liuius holds them for men that could
not command when they were in choler. Liberty was in such recommendation
with them, as Florus reports that certain Gauls being taken in the war,
sought to break their chains with their teeth, and in the end they presented
their throats one unto an other to be strangled. Caesar holds that they were
ready Titus Liuius says, that the Gauls in the beginning of the fight we are
more than men, and in the end less than weomen. But Leo is of annother
opinion, saying that the Gauls never faint, and that they hold the least
retreat for a shameful fight. And Salust says, that in his time the Gauls
were so feared, as they had made all Italy to tremble, and whereas they did
fight with other nations for glory, they were forced to take arms against
these to defend their lives. And Iustine says, that the kings of Asia, and all
others did so esteem the courage of the Gauls, as they thought they could not
well preserve that which they had gotten without them, nor recover what they
had lost. Aristotle says, that the Gauls did not fear the quaking of the
earth. We read in Strabo, that Alexander having demanded Elcanus teaches us,
that they held all flight to be so ignomioious, as oftentimes they would not
retier out of a house that was falling down or burning, so as they were
sometimes consumed in the flames. But to come unto Caesar says, that before
they began any war, they caused an assembly to be published, whether all
should come armed that had attained to the age of fourteen years, and he
that came last was put to death before all the assembly with strange torments.
Men of all ages went to the war, and no man was exempt by reason of his many
years. They had a care never to want victuals, and on the other side to have
their enemies distressed, burning to that end their bouroughes and towns.

The Gauls arms were a weighty sword, according to Polihius, and long
according to Titus Liuius, but without a point, being not fit as Strabo says,
to thrust, but to Diodorus does witness. They did also carry long targets; and
in like manner two darts. They did also use lances, whose head was a cubit
long. They had their heads armed with a Morion, upon which they had horns
graven, or the representations of birds, or some four footed beast, which was
the cause that Caesar's ninth Legion consisting of Gauls was called Alouette or
Lark, for that on the head pieces of the soldiers of this Legion, there were
Larkes graven, or else the crests. Or else it was so named as some think, for
that the soldiers used Morions made like the crest of a Lark. The Gauls did
also use bows and slings. They did also garnish the hilts of their swords with
coral, as they did their targets, and some put gold upon their corslets. Many
Gauls did fight naked above the wast, as Titus Liuius does write in his
discourse of the battle of Cannes. They did esteem the horsemen much more
than the foot, and Caesar himself had a feeling of the valor of the French
horsemen, which he employed against Petreius and Afranius, and afterward in
Afric against the rest of the civil wars. They used great squadrons in their
battles, yea, to the number of six thousand, as we may see in Vegetius. When
they entered into fight, they made fearful cries, leapt, stroke their targets,
and made so great a noise with their arms, as it seemed all the places round
about did echo again and cry out with them: They did also use Trumpets; And
as for their valor in the midst of combats, the Author of the African war
says, that they were free men who were accustomed to fight, not with ambushes,
and strattagems, but in open war. As for Athaeneus; and Strabo writes, that
they did hang the heads of their enemies about the necks of their horses, and
then did fasten them to their Towne-gates to serve for a spectacle.

There were two sorts of men in reputation amongst the Gauls, that is, the
Druydes and the Knights, whereof the one assisted at the service of their Gods,
and did deliver and presage their wills; and the other went to the war when
occasion was offered, Caesar) were for the most part in forests, or near unto
rivers, to avoid the heat of Summer. They did never shut the doors, if we
shall believe Stobeus, and they used stones as they do in Germany, as we may
see in the Misopogon of the Emperor Julian. As for Pliny says. They did use
earthen vessels very thick, and pouldred with diverse flowers that were
represented. They did not eat sitting, but lying upon the ground upon dogs and
Wolves skins and according unto Str^bo, upon beds: and they were served by
young children. They made the fire near them, where was to be seen the pots
and spits covered with meat, especially of hogs flesh both fresh and fal^. But
most commonly they had nothing but milk for their meat. The richest drunk
wine, which they sent for out of Italy, or from about Marseille, for that
there were not any vines Atheneus reports, that aunciently they were accustomed
to set members of Mutton, or of some other beast, upon the Table, whereof the
most valiant took the thigh: If any one thought that this title was better due
unto him than to the other who had challenged it, they did fight unto the
death. He says moreover, there were some which took gold and silver in
Theaters, or some certain number of pipes of wine, swearing they should endure
that for the which they received these presents; then distributing them unto
their friends, they laid themselves flat upon their targets in the presence of
them that should cut Amianus Marcellinus says, that they were much given to
swimming and hunting, where they did use poisoned arrows. Their funerals were
stately among the Gauls; for Caesar says, that they cast into the fire
whatsoever the deceased had loved best in his life time. And Melo says, that
there were some men did cast themselves into fire, in the which the dead
carcass did burn, as thinking to go and live with him. They did also cast, as
Diodorus writes, letters into the fire, as if the dead man should read them.
And Valerius the Great reports, that the Gauls did lend money in their life
times, upon condition to be paid another day in hell.

Manners of the French at this day.
Caesar speaks of their ancestors.

The Chartrins are loving, courteous, affable and kind to all men, and
commonly

They of Beausse are almost of the same disposition, that the Chartrains, of a
reasonable good humor, given to labor and traffic of corn. In many places
they are subtle, by reason of the number of passengers that come from all
parts. The inhabitants of Chasteaudun have good wits sharp and subtle, they
understand by a word what a man would say, and they use not many words. But
their speech is so quick, as they do not sometimes hear one an other, neither
do they suffer them that speak to end their discourse, which is natural vice
of the country.



The Vendosmois are of a mild disposition, courteous, and given to all things
that are most neat: yea borne to be excellent in some thing, as Peter Ronsard a
gentleman of this country was, whose works are well known to all Europ, and
have made him not only the honor of this country, but also the ornament of
France.

They of Orleans and there abouts are neat and civil, and have a very pleasing
speech,

They about Sens have given good testimony in former times how courageous they
were, being the first that resolved to pass with Brennus into Italy. The
people are reasonable good, and less crafty than in many other places, and
they are in a manner all well

As for them of Champagne and Brie, although their neighbors blame them for
their obstinacy, and call them headstrong, yetthis imperfection is hidden with
a number of virtues which makes them commendable, for that reason makes them to
subdue choler, from whence this vice proceeds wherewith they are taxed. They
are affable, ready to do pleasure, fearing God, and are not subject easily to
embrace new opinions.

The Picardes are of as good an humor as any people of France, wonderfully
free,

They of Touraine are very courteous, and affect traffic, but above all
things they are faithful to their kings, as the retreat of king Charles the
seventh to Tours, and that of king Henry the third, does witness. The country
is so good, as it inuites them to take delight in play and in all sorts of
sports, so as they are called the Laughers of Tours.

The Manceaux are given to labor, industrious, of a subtle wit, hard to
deceive, good husbands, and something more politic than their neighbors:
finally they are fit for any thing they undertake, and this country does breed
up as brave and valiant gentlemen as any be in this realm.

The Angeuins and Poicteuins have good wits, but the Poicteuins are more
cunning. They jest with a good grace, and encounter very fitly. The Pesants are
very subtle, and if I may so say, wicked, and the gentlemen are gallant and
courageous, as they be in Anjou.

The Normans are cunning and subtle; they are not subject to the laws and
customs of any strangers, but live according to their ancient policy, which
they defend obstinatly. They are very cunning in suits, and know all the tricks
quirks and surprises that pettifogging William Duke of Normandy, who made
himself king of England, and of the sons of Valonges, and of Hauteuille
Guischard, who made themselves lords of Pouille, Calabria, Naples, and Sicile,
give us assured proofs.

As for the Brittons they are more or less civil, according to the countries
they inhabit: For that they that are nearest unto the Sea are not by nature so
courteous as the rest: but all the Brittons in general are sociable enough,
and of a good conversation,

In regard of the Angoumoisins, they that live in Angoulesme have good wits:
they seek to maintain themselves in reputation, they vaunt willingly, take
small delight in traffic, live for the most part of their revenues, and play
the gentlemen: they love learning, and are sumptuous and courteous, and take
delight (like to most of the French) in new things. As for them of the Champian
country, they are gross and rude, given

The Perigordins are nimble, active, and sober, they content themselves with
little, and use great exercises; and although they be taxed to be rude and
gross, yet they that shall converse with them, shall find them discreet and
fit for all honest exercises, be it either of learning or arms. The
gentlemen's houses of Perigord are true

The Lymosins are sober, and drink little wine, but in good towns. They are
good husbands. Kinsmen live always in concord, so as you shall see houses in
villages whereas an old man shall see his children unto the third generation,
yea, there are families whereas you may see above a hundred of the same blood,
which live in common, as in a College. They are for the most part laborious
and subtle; but they have this fault,

The Auuergnaes are wonderful subtle and cunning, very laborious, greedy
after gain, and given much to traffic: They are dissemblers for the most
part, quarrellers, full of violence, and dangerous men to deal with. The
Nobility is very courteous and valiant, but the people love suits, and contest
maliciously for a small matter.



They of the country of Messin savor something of the rudeness of the
Germans, and participate of their freedom. They are valiant, strong,
laborious, religious and simple, but obstinate to maintain their liberty all
they can. They are not given to love learning.

As for the Bourgondians, they of Dijon are resolute in their opinions, they
love and frequent together, they are jealous of their honor, covetous of
greatness and offices, and are familiar. The women go bravely, and yet they
are chaste and loyal to their husbands.

The people of Forest are subtle, cunning and witty, they can wisely provide
for their affairs, they love gain, and to this end they traffic throughout
all the world. But they are charitable to them of their country, when as they
are reduced to any necessitiein a

The Dauphinois, to speak generally, are much affected to their Prince, but
very jealous of their liberties, constant in the pursuit of their affairs,
and careful to keep their own. The inhabitants of towns are courteous,
affable and witty, capable of sciences, and above al of the Mathematics,
curious searchers into the secrets of nature, free of speech,

The Prouensals are of a strange disposition, and are very sober when as they
live of their own charge, they are valiant enough, but inconstant, covetous,
dissembling and faithless. They are all great talkers, and take delight to
vaunt and tell tales of themselves. They are arrogant and proud in their own
country, and carry no respect unto their Lords, or to them that are in
authority over them, whom they have many times wretchedly slain. The women
are very sumptuous after the Italian manner. The

If we shall stay to survey Languedoc, we shall first see the Tolousains bred
to learning, and to have good spirits, but subject to be moved upon the least
bruit: vncourteteous to strangers, but they are devout, good Catholics, and
very civil: yet they agree not well among themselves. They about Carcasonne,
Beziers, Montpelier and Nismes,

If we come unto Viuarez, we shall find, in the Champian country which is
very narrow, a people which is nothing given to delights or idleness, but
loves labor, and makes the best of that little land he holds. The husbandman
is chiefly given to manure his vines, which do commonly yield him great
profit. They keep good cheer and

They of Velay and Geuaudan are to be put in the same rank with the
inhabitants of the mountains of Viuarois: For the nobility and the people
live there after the same manner, except that in Velay they are fuller of
quarrels, and the people are not of so good a nature as in Viuarez. And there
are also troops of Bandoliers or

The inhabitants of the country of Foix are given to labor, they endure all
discommodities, be it to march in a bad country, whereunto they are
accustomed, or to remain long without eating, They are also full of courage.
But the country has this inconvenience, that many not able to live in a worse
country, demand a courtesy of passengers, with a Petronell in their hands
like thieves. Yet for the most part they have this good humor, that if you
content them willingly they do you no harm, and sometime the first you meet
and give contentment unto, will set you out of danger, and free you from

The country of Cominge abounds with valiant men; but they are little given to
learning, notwithstanding that they have as good wits, and are as apt to all
things as any nation of the Earth. They do easily endure all discommodities;
they are sober discreet in words, and hate all superfluity of apparel and
delights, or any thing that may make

In Armaignac the people are gross, simple, and good husbands; making profit
of every thing, they are given to traffic, especially of cattle, and they
want no courage.

As for Bigorre, the people are proud, borne to arms, sudden in their
enterprises, and yet great dissemblers, discourteous, intractable and
unpleasing, unless it be in towns. Moreover they endure not an injury easily,
and commit murders for a small occasion yet they are good and loiall, and
naturally simple. The nobility is brave, sociable, courtous,

The Gascoignes are of an active spirit, prompt and sudden all fiery and full
of courage, and fit for any thing they shall undertake: But they are proud and
will always have the better, so as most commonly they make themselves odious
and insupportable. Yet when they see themselves among other nations where they
are too weak, they hide their natures and become tractable. But this is no
hinderance but a man may discover their insolency, which they cannot
dissemble. They take delight to preach their own praises, and to hear them.
By their own saying no man is poor among them, and when they are in any
unknown place, the most wretched and needy plays the prince. They are for the
most part covetous, and greedy to get by what means soever, they are wary and
know well

As for Bearn, the people are active, affable and courteous, but cunning and
subtle, well spoken in their language, valiant, and a friend to liberty. They
are also proud,

We have discoursed particularly of the people of France one after an other;
now it is fit to consider what may be spoken in general.



younger sort busy themselves, are running at the ring, or at the quintin, or
fighting at This is written of Henry 4.
If France in former times has had gracious and affable kings, she may now
vaunt to have one who without blemish to his rank, lends

Thus far I have followed mine author touching the disposition of the French,
who has not forgotten any parts worthy of commendation in his country men,
and has

Riches of France.


I should never end if I should number the Jewels which are in the Abbey of
Saint Dennis, the which are inestimable and without number. The Chartrains make
great gain of their traffic of corn, wheat and rye, which they sell into
all parts, like unto them of Beausse and Soloigne. But I will not make any
account of this profit seeing it comes not from foreign countries. The wine of
Orleans draws not only the Merchants

The territory of Beauuais has a little town called Bule, near unto which
grows the finest flax that can be seen; and for this cause the Flemings, and
Hennuyers come thither to traffic and to buy this flax, wherewith they make
their finest cloth, which they afterward carry to be sold throughout the
world, both by sea and land. In this soil

The country of Niuernois has iron, which they carry into foreign provinces,
in like manner a thousand toys of glass which are made in the town of Neuers.

Besides the wine which Anjou sends into England and other places, there is
also cloth as in Poictou, from which they draw great sums of money, especially
from Spanish merchants, who have great trade for it.



As for Bretagne, there is the Parchemin of the country of Lambolois, which
passes every where; in like manner iron, lead, and some little silver which
they draw out of their mines, besides the great traffic which is in the
country, by reason of the sea ports which abound there. Rochell is also very
rich, by reason of the neerenesse of the sea,

In Xaintonge they make much money of their corn, which the Spaniards come and
fetch every year, or else merchants go and sell it there. In Angolesine
beside their corn they have abundance of hemp, which they gather together to
sell unto strangers.

Perigort has Hogs whereof they make great traffic, yea into Spain: and
there are also mines of iron and steel, and many men put it in work and draw
money from all parts. Limosin has great store of cloth which they carry out of
the Realm: and above all, the town of Limoges, although it be far from the
sea or any river, is one of the greatest traffic in France; for there are
such excellent workmen, as they make the ^arest works that be in France, and
these are carried into foreign countries, and so are the

As for Auuergne, it sends forth great store of Cheese, hairie cloth, Chamlets,
and Tapestries, whereof they make great sums of money, as also of Saffron,
and their Moyles which go into Italy and Spain. Bourgondie sends corn into
Spain and Italy, and draws from thence much silver.

Lion is a town of as great traffic as most be in France; so as all Italy
and part of Spain (which is from the strait of Gibraltar toward the
mediterranean Sea) have comerce there. And by the kings edict, silks and such
like merchandise must pass there, and be viewed at the Doane or custom house:
yet the traffic and gain is not so great as it has been, for that the
ships pass rather by the Ocean sea. There are Bankers also who have
correspondencie not only in Europe, but also in Asia and Afrike.

Forest sends her works of Iron and steel into all parts, especially the
town of Saint Stephens, where there are as many excellent workmen, as any be
in France. There are many very rich merchants of this country, who are well
accommodated without the

Dauphine makes much money of the corn they send into Spain. They of the
mountains enrich themselves by the Moyles, horses and other cattle which they
sell in Piedmont and Italy. They have also their Chamois which bring them money.

Languedoc has woad which they send into foreign countries, and it grows
principally in the county of Lauraguaez, and the plain of Montpelier. This
traffic alone is able to enrich this province, it is in such request in all
parts of Europe, and elsewhere for dying, so great abundance there is in this
country. The Albigeois make great profit of their saffron: A good part of
Languedoc is enricht by their Oil of Olives. They that are about Florensac and
Pomerols, and they of Lauraguez also make great sums of

As for Prouence it sends corn out of the realm which grows in great
abundance in

Foix makes great profit of Iron, and of cattle, as those countries do which
are near to the Pirenee mountains: They make no less benefit of their rosin,
turpentine, pitch, incense and cork. Armagnac makes no less profit of honey
and wax. As for them of the parliament of Bourdeaux, they of Albret vent out of
the realm much cork, pitch and rosin. All Gascoigne, especially Bourdelois,
make great profit of their wines which

We have related as particularly as we can of the riches which France receives
from foreign provinces, and have discoursed of the means it has to draw
money for that which is sought for by neighbor nations.

And although it be the usual manner to come from general things to
particular, yet I have herein followed a contrary course, to the end, that
after we have seen wherein this realm abounds, and wherewith it may furnish
others, we may the more easily see, that it has means to pass without their
neighbors, and that her neighbors are forced

Katherine de Medicis, said, That there were more nauigable rivers in France,
than in all the rest of Europe: wherein she did not much stray from the truth.
The fertiltie of the soil, and the commodity of rivers, for the transporting
of wares, is the cause of the multitude and beauty of the towns and places
Bodin writes, that in a computation made in the time of king Henry the second
(in the which Bourgondie was not comprehended) they did number seven and
twenty thousand places inhabited, which had steeples. As the towns of France
are favored with many rivers, so have the castles and houses of private
gentlemen many pooles and lakes near unto them. And although there be no
lakes in France equal in greatness to them of Italy or Suisserland, yet
those we see, are full of very good fish, which supply the want of their
greatness by the multitude. We may a mass of money yearly, as it would be
teadious to undertake the account, for that strangers carry away so much wine
out of this realm. We must add hereunto woad and

A million of gold in France is three hundred thousand pounds of sterling money.
as it was fit. Lewis the twelfth, did not raise in the whole realm, but about
a million and a half of gold yearly. Francis the first, made three millions:
Henry the second, came to 6: Charles the ninth, to seven: and Henry the
third, past 10 millions. Lewis the twelfth, left the realm full of gold and
silver, and was for this cause called the Father of the Francis the first,
although he had great wars, and much cause of expense, yet he left eight
hundred thousand crowns in his cofers. But Henry the second, dyed indebted
many millions of gold: so as Charles the ninth, and Henry the third, his
sons, were forced, not only to charge the people, but also the Clergy, with
great impositions. Which shows, that we may not esteem kings rich when they
have great reuenews, but when they know how to manage them well; for that king
Francis the first, maintained greater wars with less revenues, and left
ready money to his children; whereas Henry the second, had not such wars,
neither did he entertain armies so long time, and yet he left debts to his
sons, and misery to the realm.

As for our time, we cannot make an exact account of all the king receives of
his taxes,

An extract made upon a breuiat of the taxes of the year 1609. of such sums of
money as
The Generality of Paris.
For the tax, Every French liver is two shillings of English money.
769000 livers. For the payment of officers wages. 147000 livers.
The generality of Soissons.
For the chief of the tax, 362465 livers, 18 soulz, 10 deniers. For the
payment of officers wages 2634 livers, 1 soulz, 2 deniers.
Chaalons.
For the chief tax, 473000 livers. For officers wages, 72000 livers.
Amiens.
For all the tax, 263000 livers. 36000 livers.
Rouen.
For all the tax, a millionand 72000 livers. For officers wages, 110000 livers.
Caen.
For the tax, 638280 livers. For the wages of officers, 9720 livers.
Orleans.
For the tax, 537500 livers. 70500 livers.
Tours.
For the tax, 919000 livers. For the wages of officers, 102000 livers.
Bourges.
For the tax 360740 livers. For the wages of officers, 49260 livers.
Moulins.
For the tax, 423993 livers 10 soulz. For the wages of officers, 66406 livers
10 soulz.

For the tax, 670000 livers. For the wages of officers, 75000 livers.
Rion.
For the tax, 656000 livers. For the wages of officers, 9000 livers.
Lion.
For the tax, 365000 livers. For the wages of officers, 45000 livers.
Bourdeaux.
623036 livers 7 soulz. For the wages of officers, 40663 livers 13 soulz.
Languedoc, Tolouse, and Montpelier.
For all that is leuyed, 651517 livers 4 soulz 3 deniers.
Dauphine.
For the ordinary grant comprehending the tax, 20160 livers. Moreover, to
supply the affairs of the said country, 30000 livers. Taillon was a tax
imposed to increase the pay of the men at arms.
For the taillon, 27513 livers. Sum, 77673 livers.
Prouence.
86463 livers.
Bourgondie and Bresse.
The kings rights there, amount unto 168250 livers. For the wages of officers,
9445 livers.
Bretagne.
There is imposed upon it, 380460 livers.
Limoges.
For the tax and subsidies, 670000 livers. For the wages of officers, 75000
livers.
But to let you see, in some sort, the riches of the realm, and what comes
unto the Henry the second unto the Crown, which was in the year 1547. unto
the year 1580. during the reign of Henry the third.

A million of livers is a hundred thousand pounds starling, and a liver is two
shillings.
FIrst, of the particular receivers of the demeanes, the sum of seventy nine
millions

Of extraordinary sines and amerciaments, seventeen millions six hundred
thousand livers, besides those that were farmed out.

Of extraordinary confiscations, twelve millions seven hundred thousand livers,
besides the confiscations reserved to farmers, and general undertakers of the
demeanes by their grants.

Of legittimations, escheats, and successions of bastards, nine millions three
hundred thousand livers, besides the right, part, and portion due to farmers
and undertakers of the

Of the increase or decrease of the price of pieces of gold and silver, of the
lords right upon quoynes and mines, the sum of nine millions of livers.

Of free gifts, or duties laid upon houses, threescore nine millions of
livers; not comprehending therein the money which the estates appoint for the
wages of provost Marshals and their gards, for fortification, renewing of
corn, wine, and other victuals, for the munition of frontier places.

Of the sale of wood taken in the kings forest, the sum of nineteen millions
of livers, not comprehending the fines for the which the receivers of the
demeanes make a particular account.

Aid was a kind of tax or subsidy imposed upon merchandise that was sold.
Of the farms, aides and elections of this realm, as well alienated as not
alienated, and

Of the Douane or custom of Lion, two and twenty millions of Livers, not
comprehending many abatements made to Italians and undertakers.

High passage is an imposition laid upon merchandise.
Of the equivalent or toale and imposition of exportage and high passage, forty
nine millions of livers, comprehending the sums of money granted by the 3.
estates of some provinces, for the suppression of foreign imposition of
merchandise imported.

Of the custom of salt, a hundred forty eight millions of livers,
comprehending the increase and diverse new impositions. Some write that in the
year 1581. the king being forced

Of the prelates and clergy men beneficed within the realm, a hundred twenty
four millions of livers, whereunto do amount the ordinary and extraordinary
subuentions of tenths, not comprehending the 6 deniers, 12 deniers, 18 deniers,
and other sums, imposed upon every liver, besides the principal sums which came
clearly unto our kings; and not comprehending also the sum of 36000 livers or
pounds, granted every year unto the receiuor generalof the subuention for his
wages, and the 12 deniers upon the liver which the particular receivers took
for their wages.

Of free fees and new purchases, nineteen millions of livers, for the which
the prelates Henry the second, Francis the second, Charles the ninth, Henry
the third.

Of the plate, jewels and relics, taken from churches or the clergy, nine
millions of livers.

Of the sale of clergy land, thirty nine millions of livers.

Of Churchwardens for the building of Churches in the realm, ten millions of
livers, whereunto do amount the divisions made every time by reason of twenty
livers for the steeple of every parish.

Of the pay of fifty thousand foot, the sum of forty nine millions, levied
upon all the walled towns of the realm: and upon all persons privileged from
taxes, except gentlemen.

Taillon was a tax raised to increase the payof the men at arms.
Of the ordinary taxes, fourscore and fifteen millions of livers,
comprehending the two soulz, and four soulz upon the liver, with other
increases.

Of the pay of the taillon or tax, increase or augmentation for the men at
arms, a hundred and two millions of livers.



Of the imposition of five soulz for the entry of every pipe of wine twenty
eight millions of Livers.

Of general and particular loanes, fifty eight millions of Livers or pounds,
leuyed at diverse times upon them that were best able within the realm.

Of aides in the elections of this realm, six millions, five hundred thousand
Livers.

Of casual parties, a hundred thirty nine millions of livers, whereunto does
amount the composition for the sale of offices, accustomed to be taxed; were it
by death, resignation,

Of the confirmation of offices eighteen millions of livers paid at the
coming of kings.

Of the subuention of a subsidy for suits, nine millions of livers or pounds,
Every French pound or liver is two shillings.
according to the edict, ordaining 10. s. which was wont to be paid before
contestation in any cause.

Of the suppression of offices, nine millions of livers.

Of the contribution of the Ban and Arriere-ban, fee and arriere-fee, Ban and
Arriere-ban are gentlemen which hold of the Crown, and are called to serve the
king in person
eleven millions of livers.

Of the cutting of the wages of officers, nine millions of livers.

Of the impost of corn and wine sent into foreign countries, ten millions of
livers,

Of wracks and prises at sea, one and twenty millions of livers, the rights of
the admiraltie, officers, masters of the ports, and Sergeants being paid both
in the Leuant and Western seas.

Of the freeing them that were subject to taxes, nine millions of livers.

Of the increase of many officers wages, fourteen millions of livers, given by
many officers that would have the said augmentation.

Of wastes, commons, and pastures, with confirmation of privileges, creation of
free fayres, and such like rights, seven millions of livers.



Of unexpected sums, nine millions of livers, growing of the forfeitures of
many offenders.

Of the new subuention or subsidy, five and thirty million^^ fliuers, leuyed
upon all the cities, towns, and walled boroughs of the realm.

Of Iron, copper and other metals, three millions of livers, for a certain
subsidy which was extraordinarily imposed upon them.

I account that only which has been clearly received, which in show would
have exhausted a greater realm than France: And if we shall enter into
consideration of the spoils and ^uines which the wars have bred, wasting a
world of things without profit,

And if we consider, that the French king does at this present draw much more
from many things than they did in former times, as of salt; where finding the
^armers to make an excessive profit, paying them little; they have augmented
their rents, so as now they receive very great sums, as of the Polette, of the
entries of wine and cattle into towns, Polette is a duty which an officer
pays yearly unto the king to assure his office unto his h^ires if he dies
within the year.
and of many other things which pass within the realm.

And if France has undergone (with the spoils of continual war) the charges
which we have mentioned, and yet remains very rich, and does at this day
flourish, who will

But before we end this discourse of the Kings revenues, it shall not be
impertinent to add something of the officers which have the charge and
mannaging of these revenues. The supreme officer is the superintendant of the
finances or the Eschequer, without whose warrant nothing does pass: he is
equal in authority to our Lord Treasurer here

The Forces of France.
THe realm of France, being in the midst of Christendom, is more commodious

Francis resolved to employ the Turks at sea. True it is, that there was never
any need of foreign succors to defend the realm, for that in the Ocean they
might draw together about two hundred sail, and in the sea of Prouence, they
have sometimes armed forty galleis, the which are reduced to a smaller number,
and these galleis have sometimes served in the Ocean sea, but more to pass men
into Scotland than to put any prince in jealousy, or for any other effect. But
the chief strength of the French consists in land men, and more in horsemen
than in foot, for that the commodity they have of Germans and

The Kings company of light horse. The Queens company of men at arms. The
Dauphins company of men at arms. The Duke of Orleans company of men at
arms. The Duke of Anjous company. The Duke of Vendosmes company. The
Chiualier of Vendosmes company. The Marquis of Verneuils company. The
Constables company. The Master of the horse his company.
And these be all the companies of horse which are entertained at this present
in France.

But if any war should happen, we should presently see such multitudes of horse
fall upon the enemy, as they should be able to amase them, and to break
them; for all the Nobility does practice riding at this day more than ever,
and all other exercises which make a horseman active, and more disposed to
fight. And as for the common people, there are many which have been in the late
wars, who yet take delight to keep good

As for the foot, although the Gascoins and they that approach near unto Spain
are held the best footmen of all, as more able to endure the pain and
discommodities of

In former times the kings of France did not much imploie their foot, fearing
some revolt, and although that Charles the eight knowing the necessity of
footmen, would ha^^ five thousand French foot entertained, and king Francis
afterward would have fif^ie Lewis the second was the first, who to pass what
he pleased, kept the people unarmed, and levied Suisses in steed of French,
the which has been followed by his successors. But he is much deceived that
thinks, that his subjects are faint hearted and weak, if he leuies strangers:
for resolution is gotten

At this day there are few footmen entertained in France, and yet they would
make the greatest force of an army. And these they be.

The four companies of the guard of the kings person, who have for their
captains Vitry, Montespan, Lafforce and Pra^in.

The regiment of the gards, which should consist of twenty companies, it has
for collonell monsieur de Crequy.

The regiment of Piemont which should be also of twenty companies, the
collonell is monsieur de Vauselas.

The regiment of Picardie of twenty companies, it has for collonell monsieur
de

The regiment of Navarre, of twenty companies, their collonell is monsieur de
Boisse.

The regiment of Champagne, which should be of twenty companies, the collonell
is monsieur de la Guesle.

The regiment of monsieur de Nerestan, which is of ten companies.

The regiment of monsieur du Bourg Espinasse, which is of ten companies.

Moreover there is a regiment of Suisses, and the hundred Suisses of the guard
of the kings person.

But if the king had need of men, there are also four thousand old soldiers
entertained

Finally, there is such abundance of victuals in France, as it is able to
feed any army whatsoever, and the victuals may so easily be transported from
one place unto an other, by reason of the commodity of rivers. Wherefore when
as Charles the fifth entered France Charles the ninth, there was found twenty
thousand horse, and thirty thousand foot, all strangers, and fifteen thousand
horse, and a hundred thousand foot French, and yet there was no dearth within
Charles the eight, who determined the number, and confirmed their pay, training
them in exercises, and distributing them into frontier places, under Captains,
Lieutenants, Ensigns, and Guidons; and divided them into men at arms, and
archers, adding moreover Harbingers, Treasurers, Paimaisters and Commissaries,
and giving the charge of them to the Constable, Marshalls of France, and the
chief Noblemen of the realm. With all these soldiers above mentioned, the
precedent kings of France have not only gotten a great estate, and been able
to defend it against the force of all neighbor princes, but also to make their
arms known in Asia and Affricke, to fight against Germany and Spain, go
into Italy, and to make all the world to tremble: for that the French are by
nature prompt, hardy and courageous

As for the artillery, there is one thing in France worthy of consideration,
which is,

All these things added to the natural situation of France, make this realm
powerful, especially under so great a prince, so full ^f valor, wisdom and
foresight, and furnished with so great treasure and all things necessary. For
as for an offensive war, this realm has left the marks of her power in many
Provinces both near and far off. And to speak of things more ancient, the
French have in old time spoiled Italy, overthrown in a manner the greatness
of the Romans, and done many exploits in other countries. Charlemaine was so
powerful with the force of this realm, as he subdued Saxony and Bauaria,
fought in Spain with the Sarrasins, ruined the kingdom of the Lombards,
conquered the best and greatest part of Italy, and left to his posterity,
almost the moitie of Europe. We cannot read of any thing more famous than the
enterprise of Jerusalem and of the Holy land, resolved in France at the
counsel of Clermont, and executed by the French at their private charge, with
Lewis; who notwithstanding that he was taken had this advantage, That the king
of Tunes yielded to pay him forty thousand ducats of yearly tribute. And at
the same time, Charles of Anjou conquered Sicile, and the realm of Naples, and
his posterity past into Hungary, where they reigned many years. And since,
in the time of our fathers, Charles the eight, with a strange and wonderful
success and course of victory, seized upon a great part of Italy Lewis the
twelueth, Francis the first, and Henry the second had the same will and desire,
who won goodly victories, and had carried it all, if fortune had bin answerable
to their courage.

Charles the ninth, according to a calcule which was made; and the victuals and
artillery wherewith it is sufficiently furnished, and also the favorable
situation, there are so many strong places, and in every part, as there is not
any country that can have so many. There are diverse things which have been the
cause of these Forts. The one is, that when as the realm was divided into

I will not speak of Paris which is a world, the which although it had not any
walls, (as in truth they are weak in many places) yet there are so many
inhabitants, as this city

Corbeil might be made wonderful strong, if it were not commanded by two
hills, but that which is toward Gastinois, near to the Magdeleine, is not so
offensive, for that it is far off, as the other which is toward Seyne coming
from Ville-neufue Saint George.

Chartres is strong enough to stay the fury of an army, as we have seen
during the last wars: And Chasteaudun, which is seated upon a rock, where the
access is very difficult, and it is a town of importance: This was the fort
and castle of the Dunois, being a retreat in time of war; for that the enemies
could have no access but of one side, which is toward the Port of Beausse.

Orleans is of more regard than the precedent towns, as being stronger and of
greater importance, by reason of the passage of the river of Loire; and the
testimony of her strength may be drawn from the siege of Attila king of the
Huns, who was stayed (with his victorious army) before Orleans, and from the
siege which the English laid before it, in October 1428. which continued
until May, and was raised by Ioane the virgin. Gergeau six leagues from
Orleans, although it be but little yet is it reasonably well fortified, and it
is of importance, by reason of the bridge and passage over Loire. Montargis is
also a good place, but not so well fortified as Orleans, nor of such
consequence. Chasteau-landon is a town which has done harm enough during the
last wars, and it is able to resist for a while with a mean garrison. The
town of Sens seated upon the

Auxer^e stands upon the banckes of Yonne, and is a good strong place, which
begins in a valley, and rises to the top of a little hill, on the which it is
built, and whereas the

Troie in Champagne is also strong and has good walls, with resolute
inhabitants, ready upon any occasion, as well as they of Auxerre. Chaumont in
Bassigny has always had good and strong walls, with many towers and good
ditches, and the Dungeon is now called Haute-feuille. But Vitry le Parthois was
reedified and fortified in the time of king Francis, as being upon the frontier
of Champagne, not in the old place, but in a village called Montcourt, upon a
little hill half a league from the place where it formerly stood; Ieronimo
Marino a Boullonois was employed to make the dessigne, and according

de Vic the governor, with her Richban, we shall find that this town exceeds
all the rest of Picardie in fortification, and when it shall be finished
according to his dessigne, I think there will be few defects, and little
means to offend it.

Langres is a place whose situation is exceeding strong, and the walls good.
Mo^^esclair Francis the first and Henry the second, for that it is the first
strong place in the power of the kings of France toward Lorraine.

Neuers is a town lying far within the country, having good walls and deep
ditches, and a bridge upon the river of Loire: This town is of good defense
and great importance for the passage. Bourges has also good ditches and walls,
and is one of the best places in France. Sancerre seated upon the top of a
mountain, is able to make head against the most obstinat: and la Charity upon
Loire is able to stay a good army. Yssoudun in Be^ry is also a strong and well
rampired place, having a castle standing somewhat high, the which is well
fortified and flanked, and has good ditches. Argenton which is

The city of Tours is well fortified, and has good walls and ditches, with
the river of Loire that ioines unto it, the which makes it a place of
importance. The castle of Amboise which is seven leagues off upon the same
river, is also held for one of the best places in France. Saumur upon the same
river has been well fortified and has good walls, but the castle especially
would give much annoiance.

The castle of Loches is exceeding strong, standing upon an high rock, having
but one entry, defended by a great bulwark, strong walls, and double ditches
which are very

Angers is a strong town, whose ditches are almost flat at the bottom, and
the walls are strong and good. But the castle is one of the best places of
France, having the ditches in the rock, and being as well fortified as may be.
This town is of importance, standing

Normandy has many good places within the country, as Rouen, which is able
to maintain a long siege, and has in old time stayed great armies. Bayeux is
also a town of good importance. Falaise is so seated, that although it be set
in a vallie, and environed round about with hills, yet all the approches and
suburbs are lower than it; and above all, it has a good castle seated upon a
rock, which commands the town, it has very deep ditches, and good walls.
Caen, which is held for the second town of Normandy, to the which the sea
flows, as it does to Rouen, and passes farther, is none of the least Charles
the seventh took from the English, when he expelled Francis the first, to
make head against the English for that the situation is exceeding good, except
it be of one side where there is a little hill which seems to command it, but
yet it cannot annoy it much.

In Bretagne you shall find Rhenes the chief of the country, a good and
strong town. Nantes is nothing inferior unto it. Dol, Vannes,
Quimpercorentin, and S. Malo. But Blauet and Breast exceed all the other places
which are upon the coast, being many in number and strong.

In Poictou you have the town of Poictiers, which has (almost in our time)
endured a furious siege of fourscore thousand men. Maillezais, Ganach, S.
Michel in Her, which during the troubles has resisted long and furious
assaults. Niort, Fonteney, Chasteleraud and Lusignen, all places of good
importance.

In Sainctonge you have Xainctes (where they have made one of the best
Cittadels of France) Saint Iean d' Angely, Blaie and Ponas, strong places: and
in Angoumois you have Angoulesme which is reasonably well fortified, but the
cittadell or castle will always make more resistance than the town. But in
the country of Aunis you have Rochell a sea Port and one of the keys of
France, able to annoy great armies: going on further you have Perigueux a town
well fortified, the which is not commanded but of one

As for Limosin, her chief town has in former times troubled great princes,
and Vzerche is so situated as they hold it impregnable. In Auuergne you hane
the town of Clermont which is of good strength, and the castles of Vson and
Nonnette which may be said almost impregnable. But we must make most esteem of
Saint Flour seated upon a high rock cut straight up, so as there is not in a
manner any means to take it,

Then you see Moulins in Bourbonois a place of good import upon the river of
Allier, which did never yield to the attemps of any enemy during our last
wars. Montaigu in Combraille is also able to make a good defense.

As for Bourgondie for her chief and strongest places, she has Dijon, Chalon,
Seurre,

Charles the fifth long, having great store of ordnance, and an army able to
terrefie a whole world. It has also a citadell which is one of the strongest
places of France.

If you go on further toward the South, you shall find the city of Lion,
which is exceeding strong on that side where the citadell was ruined, where is
also the bulwark of Saint John a very strong place: on the other side of the
river of Saone is the castle of Pierre-Ancise seated upon a rock, which
defends the entry; on the other side of Lion is Rhosne which serves for a
defense, and to speak in a word, although it be not very strong toward
Fouruierres and Saint Just, yet this town is able to endure

In Dauphine along the river of Rhosne you have Vienne, which is a good place,
where are the forts of Pippet and Bastie which command round about. Lower, is
Valencia, one of the best towns of war in France. Going downward half a
league from the river of Rhosne is the town and castle of Montlimar, able to
make a great resistance. Within the country is Romans upon the river of Isere,
which is reasonably strong: then you have the castles of Moras and Quirieu,
whereof the last is much stronger than the first. After all these you have
Grenoble, a town lately fortified by Monsieur de les Diguieres, gouernuor of
Dauphine, who has made it one of the best places of

As for Prouence, you have within the country for strong places, Aix, Arles,
Cisteron, Ourgon, Brig^oles, and Pertus. But the sea towns, as Marseille,
Tolon, Castle d'If, our Lady of la Guard, the tower of Bouc, Antibe, and some
others, are better than they seem to be.

In Languedock, Tolous may vaunt it self to be strong, but Narbone which

In Gasconie the town of Bourdeaux will not much fear a siege: Castelnau of
Barbarens is a very strong place, and inaccessable: the town of Auch is built
upon

This is all which can be in a manner said touching the places. If we come to
consider the men which are in France, and which serve for a support, we shall
find that there is not any country in the world that can say it has more
valiant men;

As for their neighbors, France might well fear the English, if they had
Guien Caesar would have prevailed little in France, if the Gauls had not hated
one another, whose divisions drew him into the country, and was the total
ruin of this estate. France might fear the Spaniards, but whenever they
would assail her toward Spain, they shall do it so uneasily, and have so
bad a passage, as upon any little resistance made by the French in so bad a
country, the Spaniard would have no courage to proceed any further; and
moreover the strong places upon the frontier, toward Langeudoc and Guien will
stay them suddenly to their shame.

As for the Netherlanders, France does not fear them: first, for that they
cannot make any great attempt against this realm: secondly, for that the
Estates are well united unto this crown, and will be always constant for her
against their neighbors: thirdly, for that the Netherlanders do not reap
sufficient to live by, for that they are under a cold Climate, having neither
corn nor wine to suffice them; the which they are forced to fetch from
Picardie, Bourgondie and other Provinces of France: and besides, the
inhabitants of the low Countries live of their labors, and make many works,
which they sell chiefly at the faires of France: and for this cause, if they
should break with the French, they should not only want victuals, but also
means to vent their wares. We may say the like of the Germans, and moreover
that the frontier of Germany,

As for Lorraine, it is so weak, as France has no cause to fear it, and
moreover there are good forts which bridle it; as there are also to stop the
incursions which might be made by the Franch county, which is a little
country where they must bring an army from far; so as the length of time
would make them stand upon their guard, and then all the frontier should be in
arms. We might doubt the Suisses by reason of their neighborhood, and the
sudden incursions which they may make, the which cannot be in time prevented.
But first of all they are allied; and moreover, the frontier places on that
side are well furnished with all things necessary; so as it would hinder them

As for the Estates of the Duke of Sauoie, they have no great apprehension, for
that they are bridled of all sides, and also Italy, by a great number of
strong places, and by the Alps which make the passage very difficult; and
besides, at the foot of

The Government.
This law is but supposed by the French, and no where extanz.
but the crown comes by succession, and the males are only admitted to
reign, and not the females; according to a very ancient and fundamental
law. The king has power to resolve of war against his enemies, and to make
peace with them, and alliances with other princes and commonweals; as also to
impose Taxes, create Magistrates, make Laws and Ordinances, give Privileges

The queens of France have great authority, so as they have sovereign
jurisdiction Lewis the great, in the year 1317. The mother of the king
reigning, if she be not queen of France, gives place to the queen reigning.
Gifts of kings to their wives during marriage are of force, although that among
other persons they be void. The household servants of a queen or mother to a
king, have the like privilege to them that are the kings. But they have no
community in purchases made by the kings their husbands, during their reign,
but in such as they had made before their coming to the crown after marriage.
The widow queen is commonly called queen Blanch, and this custom has
continued since the mother of S. Lewis called Blanch, who lived long, and
queen Blanch widow to king Phillip of Valois, who lived until the reign of
Charles the sixth.

This is a fabulous invention
was only to serve at the baptism of king Clouis, and since at the
inthronizing of the kings of the second and third race. They have anointed
most of our kings at Rheims, after this manner. Mass being begun, the priest
turned himself, before the epistle, toward the king, and expounded unto him
the catholic faith, demanding of him if he did believe it, and would defend
Victor had given by that cross, as well to him as to his church, the Te Deum,
and the Archbishop did anoint the king. After which, being returned to his
seat, they brought the privilege given by Pope Victor, the which was read
before the Prelates. Thus I have in few words set down the ceremony which was
observed, and should yet be followed. I have omitted many formalities, for that
I thought they would seem tedious.

As for Regencies, they are ordained either for minority or absence, or for
the indisposition of kings: and they that have bin regents, have disposed of
all matters as if they had

The sons of the house of France in old time divided by equal portions,
wherein the eldest had no prerogative; and base sons being aduowed did inherit
with the lawful children: every one holding his part with the title of a
realm. The third race rejected bastards, not only from the crown, but from the
aduow and surname of France, the which is now allowed to kings base children:
and since Hugh Capet, kings younger sons have

The daughters of France, if there be sons, do not inherit but in mouables
and purchases, according to the Salique law; and they are also perpetually
excluded from the crown by custom, and a particular law of the house of
France, grounded upon

Charlemaigne, as the fabulous Romans would make us believe, for that their
authority, rank, and pre-eminence were established by Hugh Capet, and by the
kings issued of his line, who by this means won the hearts of them that were
worst affected; such as were the Earl of Flaunders Capet being a usurper, and
stopped rheir mouths by the example of these men, who might have bred some
alteration, and having given them authority by this dignity, he bound them by
oath, to hold their lands of the crown, and to be faithful unto him and to
all his posterity, so as Hugh Capet, the better to ratify this thing, caused
his son Robert to be crowned, calling thereunto such as he thought might
oppose themselves. There were twelve of them, whereof the six temporal were the
dukes of Burgondie, Normandy, and Acquitaine, and the earls of Flanders,
Tolouse and Champagne, and the clergy were, the Duke and Archbishop of Rheims,
the Dukes and Bishops of Laon and Langres, with the Bishops and Earls of
Noion,

The lord Steward, whose charge is almost like unto that of the ancient Majors
of the Palace, has the oversight of all the Officers of the kings house, and
it is his charge to take a yearly survey thereof, and to place or displace
even unto the meanest Officer, and to command over them; so as not any one
that has wages of the king and is of Anne of Montmorency who was Constable at
the same time, and the other was Francis of Lorraine Duke of Guise, who was
Lieutenant general to king Henry the second.

The name of great Chamberlain does sufficiently show his charge, for that he
is as it were the chief of all that concerns the kings chamber. It is he
that may give or refuse access to them that would enter to speak with the
king, and who has commandment

As for the Master of the horse, he has charge over the kings stables, and
has commandment

There is nothing more seemly for a prince than hunting, for that it makes
his body more apt to ^ndure labor, and to the idleness, which is the plague
of souls: he

The Stewards or Clerks of the kitchen are as it were good husbands of the
kings house, of the expenses whereof they must take knowledge and hear the
accounts.

There is also for the kings table the great Pantler, the Sewers and the
Caruers, whose names show their charge. The great Pantler in former times had
the government of corn and bread, to see if the weight were just, and the
measure lawful, and they did

And for that the kings household consists of men of diverse humors, and by
reason of the great number of Princes and Noblemen which do commonly follow
the court, there are many men, either for their affairs, or without warrant,
who many times commit offenses, as thefts, murders and quarrels; to prevent
the which, they have ordained the provost of the household, whose title shows
his quallitie to judge of civil and criminal matters betwixt those that
follow the court. The provost of the household does pass, and allow of pardons
given by the king to them of the court, and his jurisdiction

The hundred gentlemen, are the kings company, and are appointed for his more
safe and honorable guard, and do yet retain the name of a hundred,
notwithstanding that since the reign of king Francis the first, they were made
two hundred; either company having a captain and a lieutenant, and they march
under the kings corner.

The kings guard is divided into three, there being French, Scottish men, and
Suisses. There are both of Scottish men and French which wear Cassocks, and
they are called Archers of the guard; and there are others which wear not any,
and they are called Exempts; they carry a staff, and are as it were heads of
squadrons, going before the Archers,

There being such a multitude which follows the court, there must of
necessity be some to lodge all this train, and to this end they have created
Marshalls of the lodging, and harbingers, whose office is to mark the places
and houses, as well for the king, as for princes, noblemen, officers and other
his majesty's servants.

There are also certain officers of state which follow the king, and they are
the chief of the realm, through whose hands affairs of importance must
pass: so as no dispatch can be lawfully made without them: These have the
chauncellor for their head, who is also the chief Justice of France. He does
correct even the graunts which the king

Kings had always Secretaries, and therefore there are to the number of six
score of the house and Crown of France, among the which there are four
chief, which are called Secretaries of estate and commandments, who make all
dispatches, and have their charges divided according to the provinces, as well
within as without the realm. There is also the Secretary of the Cabinet, who
makes the kings private dispatches the which

They have also erected two Councels of the kings house for the State, whereof
the one carries the name of Privy Council, the other of Great Council; which
were sometimes all one, when the Parliament was ambulatorie: but matters being
changed, according to the necessity of the time, they were forced to divide
the offices.

The Privy Council consists of diverse great personages, whereas the king
appoints a president, when he does not assist himself, where, of right, the
Princes of the blood have place, with the Chancellor, and many of the most
honorable and iuditious persons of the realm. In this Council they determine
all affairs, both of war and peace, and of other matters which concern the
State; and sometimes they call matters of consequence

The Constable has command over all both foot and horse, for that he is
General over all the armies that are leuyed in France, and over garrisons
wheresoever they be. For the exercise of this jurisdiction, Princes have
granted unto Constables a seat of

Next unto him we must consider of the Marshals of France, who cannot (as in
former times) be dismissed from their charges, the which continue with them
during their

The Admiral, who has his office during his life, is the chief and
Lieutenant general at sea, and in all places which are upon the sea coast, and
has charge of all that which is attempted at sea, as also he takes knowledge
of all offenses which are there committed. No man can put a ship to sea, though
it be at his own cost, without his permission, nor enter into any port of
France. He decides all controversies which happen, as well by reason of
contracts made for matter of war, merchandise, and fishing, as for other civil
and criminal causes, proceeding from that which is done at sea; and he makes
what lieutenants he thinks good to determine of them. It belongs also to him
to take the tenth of all prises, and of all gain or profit which is made by
sea, by any person whatsoever; and to give license to go a fishing for herring
out of season, for that without his license

Lieutenants general of ^rmies are appointed to supply the kings place, whose
person it is not fit to hazard, as many accidents have taught us by experience;
and these are set in their places to command over armies, and to have the same
authority which the king should have, if he were there in person.

Governors of provinces (which should be many in France, by reason of her
spatiousnesse) Lewis the twelfth revoked these privileges by an edict, and did
abrogate this power. They have yet great authority, but the ordinary Justice
depends not of them; but only those things which concern the war. And
although the Governor represents the king, yet if there be question of any
Citizen, that makes no profession of arms, he may not punish him, but his
ordinary Judge, and the appeal goes not before him, but before the Justice
established in Courts. The like may be said of them that are Lieutenants
general for the king in Provinces.

As the order of the Star was instituted by king John, and that of S.
Michaell by king Lewis the eleventh at Amboise, so king Henry the third was
author of that of the holy Ghost, the which continues yet, and whose knights
enjoy as goodly, yea greater privileges, than those of the other orders.



The first Bailiwicke which is under the parliament of Paris, is the town of
Laon, then that of Rheims, then Amiens, Abbeuille, Boullein, Senlis, Sens,
Auxerre, Troies, Vi^ry in Partois, Chasteau Tyerry, Chaumont in Bassigny,
Meaux, and Prouins (whereof the two last, as Chasteau Tye^ry) are comprehended
in the country of Brie. There is afterward Melun, Poictiers* A^gers, Man's,
Tours, ^lois, Bourges, Orleans, Chartres,

In Paris you have the Presidial Court of the Chastelet, where there were four
and twenty Counselors, by an edict made by king Henry the second, in the
year 1560. To this Presidial, repair the court of the Prouostship and
Vicontie, the preservation of the royal privileges of the University of
Paris, the ancient jurisdictions of the said Prouostship, Brie Count Robert,
and la Ferte Aleps. There is also in the Chastelet a Provost, with

As for the court of Parliament of Paris, whereas the Princes of the blood are
borne



Under the Parliament of Paris, are these principal courts of justice that
follow.

First, in the town of Laon a Presidial Court, where, by the edict of king
Henry the second, there should be ten Counselors, and one register of
appeals. To this Presidial Court should repair, in cases of the edict, the
town of Laon, the courts of Saint Quentin, Ribemont, Noyon, Coussy, Chauny,
Soissons, Guise, Peronne, Montdidier, and Roy.

Moreover, in the town of Rheims, an other Presidiall Court, there should be
eight Counselors by the said edict, which we will always follow. And to this
Presidial

In the town of Amyens there is a Presidial Court, where are seven
Counselors, and one register of appeals for the Bayliwicke of Amyens.

In the town of Abbeuille another presidiall court, in which are seven
Counselors,

At Boullein a presidiall court, seven Counselors, and one register for the
Seneshalship of Boullein.

In the town of Senlis a presidiall court, eight Counselors, and one
register, whereunto repair theiurisdictions of Senlis, Compiegne, Clermont in
Beauuoisis, Creil, the Prouostship of Angy, Chaulmont in Vexin, Pontoise,
Beaumont upon Oyse, Crespy, la Ferte Millon, and Pierrefons.

In the town of Sens a presidiall court, ten Counselors, and one register,
whither resorts the jurisdiction of Villeneufue le Roy.

At Auxerre a presidiall court, seven Counselors, and one register for the
Bayliwicke of Auxerre.

At Troyes a presidiall court, eight Counselors, and one register, to which
Court repair the jurisdiction of Troyes, the preservation of the faires of
Brie and Champagne, for that it extends into the said Bayliwicke, the courts of
Bar upon Seine, Mussy l'Euesque, la Ferte upon Aulbe, Nogent, Pont upon Seine,
Eruy le Chastel, and Saint Florentin.

In the town of Vitry in Parthois, a Presidiall Court, seven Counselors, and
one Register, to which Presidiall Court, repair the jurisdiction of Vitry, S.
Menehoust, S. Disier, Rouuray, and Passeuant.

In the town of Chasteau Tierry a Presidiall, seven Counselors, and one
Register, whereunto resort the courts of the said Chasteau-Tierry, Chastillon
upon Marne, Treffons, Ouchil-Chastel and Milly S. Front.

In the town of Chamont in Bassigny a Presidiall Court, seven Counselors and
one Register, to which Court repaires the said Chamont with the Bayliwicke of
Bar upon Aube.

In the town of Meaux a Presidiall Court, seven Counselors, and one Register,
whereunto repair the jurisdictions of Meaux, Cressy, Coulommiers in Brie, and
la Ferte Gaucher.

In the town of Prouins a Presidial Court, seven Counselors, and one
Register. The

At Melun a Presidiall Court, seven Counselors, and one Register, whereunto
resort the said Melun, with the jurisdictions of Moret, Nemours, Chasteau
landon, Chapelle la Reyne and Milly in Gastinois.

At Poictiers a Presidial Court for the Seneshalship of Poictiers, twelve
Counselors, and one Register. To this Court repair the jurisdiction of
Poictiers, and the maintenance of the privileges of the University of the
said place, with the courts of Lusignen, Chasteleraut, Montmorillon, Base
March and Dorat, Fontenay le Comte, Niort, Giuray

At Angers, for the Seneshalship of Anjou, a Presidiall Court, ten Counselors,
and one Register. Thither resort the jurisdiction of Angers, with the Courts of
Saumur, Bauge and Beaufort in the valley.

At Tours a Presidiall Court, eight Counselors, and one Register, to the which
repair the Courts of Tours, Chinon, Lodun, Langest, Amboise, Loches, and
Chastillon upon Yndre.

At Man's a Presidial Court for the Seneshalship of Maine, 8 Counselors, and
one Register: thither repair the jurisdictions of Man's, of Chasteau de Loir,
Laual, Beaumont, S. Susanne, Chasteau Gontier, la Flesche, and Maine la Iuhaiz,
Sable, and la Ferte Benard.

At Lion a Presidiall Court, eight Counselors, and one Register: thither
resort the Courts of Lion for the preservation of the faires of the said place,
with the Bayliwickes of Mascon, Forest, and Beaujolois. At Lion is also kept
the Court of Parliament of Dambes. And at this day Forest depends of Montbrison.



At S. Pierre le Monstier a Presidial Court, seven Counselors, and a Register:
thither resort the Bayliwicke of S. Pierre le Monstier, comprehending Donziois,
Saucrains, Cusset, and the Borough of S. Stephens de Neuers.

At Rion a Presidiall Court for the Seneshalship of Base Auuergne, eight
Counselors, and a Register: To which there repaires the courts of justice of
Rion, Montferrand,

At Orillac a Presidiall Court for the Seneshalship of high Auuergne, eight
Counselors, and a Register: thither resort the Courts of Orillac, Saint Flour,
Carlat, and Murat.

At Bloise a Presidiall Court for the Bayliwicke, seven Counselors, and a
Register: to which resort the jurisdictions of Bloise, Romorentin, Millansay,
Chasteaudun, and the country of Dunois.

At Bourges a Presidiall Court for the Bayliwicke of Berry, eight Counselors,
and one Register: to which repair the Cour^ of the said Bourges, with the
preservation of the University of that place, with the Courts of Yssoudun, Dun
le Roy, Meun upon

At Orleans a Presidiall seat for the Bayliwicke of Orleans, twelve
Counselors, and a Register: to which repair the jurisdiction of Orleans, as
well of the Bayliwicke, as of the Prouostship, with the maintenance of the
privileges of the University of the said place, and the courts of Bois
commun, Chasteau Renard, Yenuille, Yeure le Chastel, Neufueille aux Loges,
Gien, Montargis, Lorriz, Meun upon Loire, and Baugency.

At Cha^tres a Presidiall court for the Bayliwicke, ten Counselors, and one
Register: thither repair, besides the jurisdiction of Chartres, the courts of
Chasteauneuf, Thimerays, great Perch, and Perchegouet, Estampes, Dourdan,
Nogent le Roy, Bonneual, and the temporal Justice of the Cathedral Church of
Chartres, and the Abbey of Bonneual.

At Angoulesme the Presidial court for the Seneshalship of Augoumois, seven
Counselors, and a Register: thither resort the seat of justice of Angoulesme,
with the courts of Coignac and Chasteauneuf.

At Rochel a Presidiall court, seven Counselors, and a Register: to which
resorts the jurisdiction of Rochell, with the country of Aulnis, and the
bounds and limits of the government of the said town.

At Montfort l'Amaury a Presidial court, seven Counselors, and a Register: to
which repair the jurisdictions of Montfort, Houdan, Mantes, and Meulan.

There are moreover, some Presidials added since king Henry the second, as the
number

Normandy contains seven Bayliwickes, which are under the parliament of
Rouen, that is to say, Rouen, Caux, Caen, Constantin, Euureux, Giso^s, and
Alencon. King Lewis the twelfth erected the parliament of Normandy at Rouen,
and there established four Presidents, and eight and twenty Counselors*
whereof thirteen were Clerks or Clergy men, and fifteen of the Laytie, two
Registers and one Examiner, with the kings two Attourneys, and the Solicitor
general; but since they have much augmented the number of the officers of this
Court, as they have done all others of the realm.

Charles the seventh, consisting of two Presidents, eleven Counselors, a
Register, two Attourneys for the King, and one Solicitor, three Vshers, and a
Receiver and Paymaster, and these judge definitiuely of all matters concerning
aids, imposts, taxes, increases, gifts, grants, loanes, provisions and such
like. Of these Judges depend many seassors, overseers

To set down more particularly the Presidiall Courts and Bayliwickes, they put
in the first place,

The Bayliwicke of Caudebec; and next, The Presidiall Court of Eureux. The
Bayliwicke of Gisors.
The Bayliwicke of Alencon: this is comprehended under the generaltie of Rouen,
where there are twenty Viconties, and twelve or fifteen good and royal
jurisdictions.

The Presidiall court of Caen,

The Bayliwicke of Constance: this is comprehended under the generality of
Caen, which has seven Viconties, and some royal jurisdictions.

The Court of Parliament of Tolouse has under it these Presidiall Courts and
Bayliwicks which follow.

The Seneshalship and Presidiall of Tolouse. The Seneshalship of Carcassonne.
The Seneshalship of Villefranche in Rouergne. The Seneshalship of Cahors in
Quercy. The Seneshalship of Tarbe in Bigorre.
These Courts are comprehended under the generality of Tolouse, where there
are five good Courts depending of the Seneshall of Quercy and others.

The Presidiall of Montpelier, the court of Aides, and the chamber of Accounts.

The Presidiall of B^ziers.

The Seneshalship and Presidiall Court of Beaucaire and N^^mes: this is under
the Generality of Montpelier, where there are four good jurisdictions.

The Parliament of Bourdeaux contains these countries following: The
Presidiall of Bourdeaux. The Presidiall of Perigueux. The Presidiall of Again.
The Presidiall of Bazas. The Presidiall of Lauues. The Presidiall of Xain^es,
and fifteen other jurisdictions.


The Parliament of Bourgondie has under it these Courts: The Bayliwicke of
Dijon. The Bayliwicke of Nuys. The Bayliwicke of Beaune. The Bayliwicke of
Auxonne. The Bayliwicke of S. John de Lone. The Bayliwicke of Chaalon upon
Saone. The Bayliwicke of Mascon. The Bayliwicke of Autun. The Bayliwicke of
Semur. The Bayliwicke of Mon^ceniz. The Bayliwicke of Charolles. The Bayliwicke
of Auxois. The Bayliwicke of Analon. The Bayliwicke of Arnay le Duc. The
Bayliwicke of Montag^e. The Bayliwicke of Bar upon Seine. The Bayliwicke of
Bellay. The Presidiall Court of Bourg in Bresse.


The Parliament of Bretagne contains under it these Courts which follow: The
Presidiall of Rhenes. The Presidiall and Chamber of accounts at Nantes. The
Presidiall of Vannes. The Presidiall of Quimpercorentin. The Seneshalship of
Ploruiel.


The Parliament of Dauphine, resident at Grenoble, has under it these Courts:
The Bayliwicke of Gris^uaudan at Grenoble. The Bayliwicke of Vienne. The
Bayliwicke of Valence. The Seneshalship of Montelimar. The Bayliwicke of
Ambrun. The Bayliwicke of Gap. The Bayliwicke of Nyons. The Bayliwicke of Die.
The Bayliwicke of Chabeul. The Bayliwicke of S. Marcellin. The Bayliwicke of
Briancon.


In the Parliament of Prouence they reckon:

The Seneshalship of Aix, and at the least, twenty royal jurisdictions: and
note that all the towns of Parliament in France have their Chamber of
Accounts, except Tolouse and Rennes.

Religion of France.
Epiphanius does teach us that Saint Luke preached the Christian faith in
France: and Saint Clement, in his first Epistle against the Jews, writes, That
he was sent into Gaul by the commandment of Saint Peter to James, brother to
our Savior. They hold that Crescentius, Martial, Denis Areopagita, Eleutherus,
Aphrodiseus, Rusticus, and others, did much increase the faith which had been
planted; so as Tertullian says, That in his time many Gauls made profession
of the Christian faith. Finally, all the realm was converted to the faith
about the year 495, under King Clouis, the History whereof is well known.
Moreover, France contaynes a hundred and seventeen Diocesses, whereof there
are fourteen Archbishoprickes, and a hundred and three Bishop^ickes, whose
names were formerly set down.



The Bishopric of Meaux contains four hundred and ten parishes or steeples
with Hamlets.

That of Chartres 609 parishes or steeples. That of Soissons 380 parishes or
steeples. That of Beauuais 592 parishes or steeples. That of Noyon 404 parishes
or steeples. That of Boullein 460 parishes or steeples. That of Amiens 498
parishes or steeples. That of Chalons 360 parishes or steeples. That of Troyes
509 parishes or steeples. That of Sens 930 parishes or steeples. That of
Orleans 700 parishes or steeples. That of Angers^ 668 parishes or steeples.
That of Tours 1035 parishes or steeples. That of Poictiers 709 parishes or
steeples. That of Man's 451 parishes or steeples. That of Lusson 213 parishes or
steeples. That of Bourges 1260 parishes or steeples. That of Neuers 211
parishes or steeples. That of Lymoges 411 parishes or steeples. That of
Angolesme 411 parishes or steeples. That of Clermont 306 parishes or steeples.
That of Lion 411 parishes or steeples. That of Mascon 307 parishes or steeples.
That of Chaalon 420 parishes or steeples. That of Autun 1300 parishes or
steeples. That of Auxerre 460 parishes or steeples. That of Erez 960 parishes
or steeples. That of Senlis 211 parishes or steeples. That of Rouen 1338
parishes or steeples. That of Caen 509 parishes or steeples. That of Alencon
390 parishes or steeples. That of Eureux 355 parishes. That of Nantes 385
parishes or steeples. That of Rhenes 450 parishes or steeples. That of Vannes
405 parishes or steeples. That of Bayeux 211 parishes or steeples. That of Seez
213 parishes or steeples. That of Constance 319 parishes or steeples. That of
Auranches 362 parishes or steeples. That of Trignee 307 parishes or steeples.
That of S. Malo 314 parishes or steeples. That of Quimpercorentin 202 parishes.
That of Xantes 291 parishes or steeples. That of Perigueux 302 parishes or
steeples. That of Langres 960 parishes or steeples. That of Bourdeaux 918
parishes or steeples. That of Montauban 414 parishes or steeples. That of
Tarbie 292 parishes or steeples. That of Ax 259 parishes. That of Bazas 504
parishes or steeples. That of Auchs 768 parishes or steeples. That of Bayonne
349 parishes or steeples. That of Cahors 422 parishes or steeples. That of
Tolouse 1152 parishes or steeples. That of Chastres 412 parishes or steeples.
That of Carcassonne 319 parishes or steeples. That of Narbone 972 parishes or
steeples. That of Again 629 parishes or steeples. That of B^ziers 306 parishes
or steeples. That of Montpellier 491 parishes or steeples. That of Agde 77
parishes or steeples. That of Mirepoix 89 parishes or steeples. That of Nismes
509 parishes or steeples. That of S. Paul 62 parishes or steeples. That of la
Vaur 1^4 parishes or steeples. That of Viuiers 155 parishes. That of Alby 309
parishes. That of Rhodey 219 parishes or steeples. That of Vabres 500 parishes
or steeples. That of S. Pons 482 parishes or steeples. That of S. Flour 202
parishes or steeples. That of Lodeue 203 parishes. That of Rieux 500 parishes
or steeples. That of S. Ligier 125 parishes or steeples. That of Puy 428
parishes or steeples. That of Vienne 800 parishes or steeples. That of Valence
325 parishes or steeples. That of Gap 204 parishes. That of Ambrun 211
parishes. That of Dye, which is now joined to Valence, 147 parishes or
steeples. That of Briancon 170 parishes or steeples. That of Digne 185 parishes
or steeples. That of Sisteron 200 parishes or steeples. That of Arles 311
parishes or steeples. That of Marseille 820 parishes or steeples.
Besides in France there are a great number of Abbeys and Priories, whereof
some have been ruined during the wars, and others do still subsist.

France is divided into two sorts of religions; the one follows the Romish
Catholic Church, and the other does adhere to the opinion of Calvin. In the
beginning they did employ the sword and persecution to root out the followers
of this new sect, as they them; but for one head which they cut off, there came
up seven, like unto a Hidra: yea

It were now fit to discourse something of the privileges and liberties of the
French Church, but there are whole books written of that subject, to the which
I will send them that desire to know any thing.

The Kings of France.
PHaramond.

Clodion the Hairie reigned 20 years, he died in the year of Grace 447.

M^ro^ee reigned 12 years, he died in the year 459.

Childeric the first, reigned six and twenty years, and dyed in the year four
hundred eighty four.

Clouis, the first Christian King, reigned thirty years, and dyed in the year
five hundred and fou^e^eene.

Childebert was king of Paris, and his other brethren reigned elsewhere: for
Clotaire Clodomir of Soissons, and Theodoric had the realm of Mets and
Austrasia. This Childebert reigned 45 years, and died without children in the
year 559.

Clotaire king of Orleans succeeded Childebert in the realm of Paris, he
reigned fifty years.

Aribert, or Cherebert, king of Paris. Chilperic, son to the said Clotaire
the first, reigned 23 years, and died in the year 587. Clotaire the second
reigned 44 years, and died in the year 631. Dagobert the first reigned 14
years, and died in the year 645. Clouis, called by some Lewis, reigned 16
years, and died in the year 662. Clotaire the third reigned 4 years. Childeric
reigned 12 years. Theodoric reigned 14 years, and died in the year 693. Clouis
the third reigned 4 years. Childebert the second reigned 18 years, and died in
the year 715. Dagobert the second reigned 4 years. Clotaire the fourth reigned
2 years. Chilperic the second reigned 5 years. Theodoric the second reigned 15
years, and died in the year 741. Childeric the third, who was deposed by Pepin,
and put into a Monastery.
The second race from Pepin to Hugh Capet.
Pepin reigned 18 years, and died in the year 768. Charles the Great, otherwise
called Charlemaigne, died in the year 814. having reigned 46 years. Lewis, the
first of that name, surnamed the Gentle, reigned 26 years, and died in the year
840. Charles the second reigned 38 years, and died in the year 879. Lewis the
second, called the Lisping, reigned 2 years, and died in the year 881. Lewis
and Caroloman bastards, Kings together, whereof Lewis died a hunting, being
slain by his own servants; and Caroloman, running after a maid, was bruised
by his horse, and died in the year 885. Charles the third reigned 5 years, and
died in the year 891. Eude reigned 9 years, he died in the year 899. Charles
the Simple reigned 27 years, and died in the year 926. Raoul reigned only two
years, and died at Auxerre in the year 928. Lewis from beyond the Sea reigned
seven and twenty years, and dyed in the year Lothaire reigned 31 years, and
died in the year 987. Lewis the fifth reigned 1 year, and in him ended the
second race.
The Kings from Hugh Caepet to Philip of Valois.
Hugh Capet reigned 9 years, and dyed in the year 996. Robert reigned 34 years,
and died in the year 1031. Henry the first reigned 30 years, and died in the
year 1060. Philip the first reigned 49 years, and died in the year 1109. Lewis
the Gross, the sixth of that name, reigned 28 years, and died in the year 1137.
Lewis the seventh reigned 43 years, and died in the year 1179. Philip Augustus
reigned 43 years, and died in the year 1223. Lewis the eighth reigned 4 years,
and died in the year 1227. S. Lewis, the ninth of that name, reigned 43 years,
and died in the year 1270. Philip the third reigned 15 years, and died in the
year 1285. Philip the fourth, called the Fair, reigned 28 years, and died in
the year 1313. Lewis the tenth reigned 18 months, and died in the year 1315.
Philip the Long reigned 5 years, and died in the year 1320. Charles the Fair
reigned 7 years, and died in the year 1328.
The Kings from Philip of Valois unto Lewis the thirteenth now reigning.
Philip of Valois reigned 22 years, and died in the year 1350. John reigned 14
years, and died in the year 1363. Charles the fifth reigned 16 years, and died
in the year 1380. Charles the sixth reigned 42 years, and died in the year 1422.
Charles the seventh reigned 38 years, and died in the year 1460. Lewis the
eleventh reigned 23 years, and died in the year 1485. Charles the eighth
reigned 14 years, and died in the year 1497. Lewis the twelfth reigned 17
years, and dyed in the year 1514. Francis the first reigned 32 years, and died
in the year 1547. Henry the second reigned 13 years, and died in the year
1559. Francis the second dyed in the year 1560. having reigned 16 months.
Charles the ninth reigned 14 years, and died in the year 1574. Henry the third
reigned 14 years, and died without children in the year 1589. in whom the race
of the royal branch of Valois was extinct.
Henry the Great, fourth of that name, was made king of France by the decease
of Henry the third, as the nearest allied unto the Crown, being issued in the
direct line from Lewis of France, Earl of Clermont in Beauuoisis, son to S.
Lewis. He vanquished all them that opposed themselves to his just pretentions,
and has afterward vanquished himself in pardoning them that had banded
against him. France had never the like, and they that shall come after, may
justly desire to see the reign of so mighty and so good

Lewis the thirteenth, whom God has given us as a Sun rising over our
darkness, and as a goodly and lively image of that incomparable Monarch
Henry the Great. And we must believe that his reign, which has begun by the
innocence of his age, will be a reign of piety, justice, and peace; which
God will continue with his blessings as he has begun.

Of Spain
A DISCOVRSE OF
The Contents.
1 THe names in general of all the Estates that are under the king of Spain.
II.



The king of Spain does at this day enjoy in Europe, the realms of Spain,
the realm of Naples, the du^chie of Mylan, the Islands of Maiorca, Minorca,
Euse or Yuisa, of Sicile and Sardinia. In Africa he holds the best Port which
is upon Magellan dyed. The other parts of the catholic kings estates lies in
America: all which is divided into Islands and firm land. The Islands of the
Northren sea are so many, as they are not yet known, for the Lucais only
exceed the number of four hundred. That of Borichen is very great, as also
Iamaica, Cuba, and Hispaniola.

As for the firm land, the Spaniard does actually possess all that runs a
long the coast of Florida, noua Hispania and Iucatan, and also all the great
Southern Peninsula unto

Let us now examine in particular the most remarkable things which are in this
Monarchy, and let us first speak of Spain, whereas their kings do make their
ordinary residence.

Spain which is the first part of firm landlying near unto Afric, beyond
the straight of Gibraltar, was in old time governed partly by kings, princes
and lords of the country, of Carthage, against whom the Romans sent diverse
armies; from whence after Honorius the Emperor, the Vandales a people of
Affricke chased away the Romans, and made themselves masters of a part of the
country; but the Goths dispossessed them, and did peaceably reign over all
Spain for many years. In the end, the Moors and Sarazins of Affrike invaded
Spain with a mighty army, and ruined the kingdom of the Goths; yet some
remainders of them being re^ired into the mountains, made head against the
Moors, and prevailed so by their arms, as in time they have utterly expelled
and driven them out of the country. It is bounded toward the East by the
Pyrenee mountains, which extend from

The Romans have in former times divided Spain into the Hither, or that which
was

At this day they divide Spain into three governments or realms, that is to
say, Aragon, Castille and Portugal. Aragon contains Catalogne, Valentia,
Maiorca, Minor^a, Sardinia, Sicile and Naples. Castille comprehends Biscaie,
Leon, the Asturies Galic^^ Estremadura, Andalusia, Grenado, Murcia and the two
Castilles with the Canaries, the ^^^lme of Navarre, the duchy of Milan, the
Newfound world, the Philippines and other countries. Portugal has under it the
realm of Algarbe, Portugal it self, with tha^ (...) ^^e Spaniards hold in
Guien, in Aethiopia, at Brasill, at the East Indies and in ^^ny Island^.



Then follows Perpignan which is in the county of Rossillon, and was engaged
by John king of Aragon unto the French, for a great mass of money, and
afterward restored unto the king of Spain by Charles the eight, upon a
promise which he drew from the Spaniard not to hinder him in his enterprise of
Naples. This Earldom lies betwixt two arms of the Pyrenee mountains,
whereof the one goes to Salses, and the other to Golibra, which the ancients
called Illiberis. Upon the sea shore or near unto it, we se

Aragon has for limits, on the East part the river of Cinga, on the West, the
mountains of Moncado, and Molina, on the North, the river of Ebro, and to the
South, the mountains of Brabance. We see in this realm, or to speak more
properly, in this province of Spain, the towns of Iaca, Huesca, Venasca and
the town o^ Mouson, famous for the courts and assemblies which have bin kept
there; whether the king must of necessity come every third year, if he will
receive six hundred thousand crowns, which the Estates of Aragon pay him for
that time. The chief town of the country is Sarragosse upon the river of
Ebro; the fairest town in Spain if we regard the beauty of the

As for Valencia it takes the name of the chief town, and is bounded toward
the East, with the Mediterranean sea, toward the North, with Aragon, on the
East, with old and new Castille, and on the South, with the realm of Murcia.
There are two good towns Horiuel^ and Valencia, they did number in this realm
about two and twenty thousand families of Moors.

The chief river is Guadalauiar, which is to say, a pure and clear water, it
passes by Valencia and Xucar, which the ancients called Sucron, whereof the
bosom or Gulf of

Murica has for bounds the confines of Alicante, and Cape de Gates, there are
few ^^wnes well peopled, and those that be, are of small importance; Murcia is
the chief Andrew Doria said, That he held three ports very safe in the
Mediterranean sea, that is to say, that of Carthag^na, Iulie, and August. The
town is a small thing and ill built. Lorca is another port, (...) ^omewhat
within the land.

The realm of Granado extends from Vera unto Malaga: and here we may see of
what importance tillage is, for that in the time when as the Moors ruled, this
country was wonderfully well inhabited, and full of all sorts of commodities,
the hills were planted Ferdinand king of Aragon and Castille ended the conquest
of this realm with the town, in the year 1490.

Andaluzia extends it self almost from the beginning of the Straight of
Gibraltar, unto the river of Guadiana. It is almost near the entrance of the
Mediterranean sea, by means of the Straight of Gibraltar, of which we will
make some mention, although it does more properly belong to the Realm of
Granado, than to this province. This Straight is seven miles broad, with the
ordinary flowing and ebbing of the Ocean, which entering by this port, gets the
name of Mediterranean sea, and extends it self unto the farthest bounds of the
Great sea, Mare mayor.
by the space of three thousand and seven hundred Hercules Straights, by reason
of two pillars of brass that were in Hercules temple, or (as some will have
it) by reason of two mountains, whereo^ the one called Calpe is in Spain, and
the other named Abile in Affricke, the which p^ets have made famons, writing
that they were pillars planted by Hercules for the ^^unds of his voyage. The
Latins do also call this Straight, Gaditane, by reason of the (...) of the
Island of Giliz called by the Latins Gades: the Moors have given it the name
of Gibraltar, by reason of a castle which is built under the mountain of
Calpe, of sm^ll^^^t, but so high, as a far off it seems an Island divided from
the maine land. Having pas^ the Straight you come unto the Island of Caliz,
which is about seven hundred ^oot from the land, whereunto was joined an other
little Island, which had not above Sraho writes, that it did not yield to (...)
town of the Empire, neither in greatness, magnificence, nor in number of
inhabitants

When as Ferdinand the great took Seuille, they did number in this territory
20000. villages or hamlets, but at this day the number is nothing so great, yet
they say there are 200. walled places. The river of Guadalquiuir (which is to
say in the Arabian tongue, a great river; and it may justly be so called for
the capacity and bounty of the water good to dye cloth, and to make the face
fair) runs by the town: the tide flows two Ferdinand said, it was best to
live at Seuille in summer, and in winter at Bourgos, which is a very cold
city, yet, it has wonderful defenses against the cold. Besides Seuille,
there are also in Andaluzia many towns and places of importance; but the chief
is Cordoua, to the which they may pass up the river either in great or smaller
boats: it is a town of great circuit, but with few houses by reason of the
multitude of gardens: it abounds with water which makes the country both
pleasant and fruitful. There are near unto it many castles and strong places,
whereof Lorena is one. Iaen is also a remarkable town, whereof the kings of
Spain term themselves lords in their other titles. There are also in this
Diocese Vbeda, Baesa, Andujar, great towns,

Estremadura extends from Villareale to Badajos, and from Sierra Morena to
Tagus. The river of Guadiana runs through it, upon whose banks stands the
towns of Badajos and Merida. And here is to be seen a very remarkable thing
which is, that this river loses it self, and runs under the ground for the
space of ten leagues, and rises again Ferdinand Cortez who conquered Mexico:
in all that space whereas the river runs under the ground, are excellent
pastures; so as among other miracles of Spain, they were wont to say that
there is a river on which cattle do seed. In this country is the image of our
Lady of Guadalupa, whether infinite ^^mber of people run for devotion.

The two Casteilles are almost alike in situation, but that Castille the new
has more Iacomo Cremonese. Neere^vnto Toledo they discover a great plain
which is very pleasant in such places, whereas they bring the water out of
Tagus. Upon the North side of Toledo, stands Madrid, in a reasonable good
country, the which (by the residence of former kings, and especially of
Phillip the second, being invited thereunto by the wholesomnesse of the air,
and commodity of woods for hunting) is now become one of the best peopled
towns of Spain. On this side the river of Guadiana, is Ximenes. But passing
into Ca^^ille the old, we may see Burgos, the chief city, as I have formerly
said. This town is ancient and well built* but the streets are narrow, and it
is compassed in round abo^^ with mountains, which make the dai^s shorter than
the latitude of the p^ace does ^eare; for that they keep back the sun
beams in the morning, and they Ferdinand bethought himself h^^^ to give them
both content; so as he caused the city of B^rgos to speak first, saying that
he would speak for Toledo. Then may you see upon the river, To^mes and (...)*
where the^^ is a very fa^ous Vni^ersitie: and beyond it toward

Galitia is contained betwixt the river of Auia and the Ocean. The roughness
of the situation and the scantnesse of water is the cause that it is not much
inhabited. The greatest and most famous places are upon the sea, whereas those
people for the most part get their living, by fishing and traffic. This
country is held to be rich in copper, lead, and vermillion or minium, the
color whereof gives the name unto a river that runs by it. Some write also, that
there are many mines of gold in diverse places: and Pliny reports, that James
the Apostle and Protector of Spain is reverenced with great devotion. Alphonso
the ninth (having miraculously vanquished the Miralmumin of Marocco in a cruel
battle) instituted the order of the knights of S. James, the which is the
most honored and noblest in Spain. This province has a most excellent port at
the Groine, whereas the Emperor Charles the fist ordained, that they should
make their traffic for spices, but it took

The Asturies is a country full of mountains, and is divided into those of
Ouiedo and Santillana. They extend from the river of Ribadeo to Saint Ander.
The chief town is Ouiedo whether some few Goths retired themselves at the
inundation of the Moors. From thence the Idalgos of Spain take their
beginning. The town of Ciuidadreall

Biscay, Guipuscoa and Alaua are Provinces of one nature and quality, rich in
iron and wood and full of people who are very valiant: they are freed from all
taxes, and they

Guipuscoa diuides France from Spain. The chief towns are Deuia, Oria, S.
Sebastian which is the Bishops seat, it has a good haven at the mouth of a
river, Fontarabie which is a strong fort upon the frontier of France, and
Passage, a good port betwixt the

Navarre lies betwixt the river of Ebro and the Pyrenee mountains. The
Metropoli^a^e town is Pampelona, the rest are Stella (which is some twenty
mil^s off) Tudela, Tafalla, (...), Calahorra and others. This realm has two
passages toward Bearn. That which (...) to the French king may be esteemed
about a sixth part of the realm, the which has been unjustly usurped from the
kings of Navarre, and does of right belong Katherine of Nau^rre, countess of
Foix and Bigorre, and princess of Beam. The mischief grew, for that this
Princess having married with John son to Allain duke of Albret, who embraced
(...) French ^ing, and assisted him against the Venetian^ (...), yea against
Pope Iulie the second, the Pope being incen^ed ((...) that realms were at his
disposition) having excommunicated the king of Navarre he interdicted his
realm, and abandoned i^ to Ferdi^^nd, who having made himself master of
Pampelona, and almost of all Navarre, has transported this v^iust usurpation
to his discendants, the which cannot be of any long continuance. They that are
descended from John have still retained the title with a small part of the
realm, whose

John son to A^lain duke of Albret. - His wife Katherine of Navarre. They had
issue Henry of Albret king of Navarre, ^^ince of Bearne, earl of Foiz etc. His
wife was M^rg^ret of Valois, sister to Francis the first. Ioane of Albret
queen of Na^^rre* daughter to Henry, married Antony of Bourbon. Henry of
Bourbon king of France and Navarre son to Ioan^ -- Lewis the thirteenth, king
of France and Navarre.
Charles who dyed near unto Naples without children. Some daughters.

Now, that we have run over all that concerns the crown of Castille and
Aragon, let us turn ba^ke and take a view of Portugal. This realm (being
sometimes called Lu^itania or the fu^^her Spai^e) has for limits on the North
side, the rivers of Minio and

Sacrum Promontorium) there is Villa noua and some other smaller places.
Portugal contains three Archbishopricks, Braga, Lisbone, and Euora; and they
have under them, besides Algarbe, nine Bishoprics. It has three excellent
ports, that of Setubal (twenty miles from Lisbone toward the South, in a
gulf 20 miles long and 3 broad) that of Porto which Duero makes, and that of
Lisbone which is the greatest, made by the river Tagus, by the which they enter
15 or 20 miles within the land with great shipping. Lisbone in the opinion of
all men is the best peopled city in Chris^endome except Paris; it contains
five small hills, betwixt which there is a plain John the thirda s there is an
other built at Euora by cardinal Henry who was afterward king) Lamego, Viseo,
Miranda, Porto, Portalegra, Guarda, Liera, and Eluas. And although that
Bragance has no cathedral church, yet does it enjoy the privileges of a
city, and is under so powerful and rich a Duke, as it seems an incredible
thing, that besides the king, there should be so great a prince in so small a
realm; for they hold that a third part of the people are his subjects and live
upon his lands. Besides this duke, there are also two others, three Marquises,
18 Earls, one Vicont, and one Baron. Besides the cities, some write that
Portugal has above 470 Castles or other walled places, which for the most part
lie betwixt the rivers of Tagus and Minio. For that part of the realm which is
betwixt Tagus and the river of John, who passed into Affricke with above forty
thousand men, the which was seconded Alphonso the fifth with great forces, who
for this reason was called the Affrican: But since the discovery of the Indies
king Emanuell had much a do to send an army of twenty thousand foot and two
thousand seven hundred horse to the enterprise of Azamor. This power of the
Portugals has decreased by little and little by reason of the foresaid voiages
and enterprises, so as king John the third lost Cape d' Aguero and abandoned
Safny, Azamor, and Arzilla: and king Sebastian (in the year 1578 meaning to go
in

This want of men has been the cause, why both the one and the other have
given over many enterprises of importance, and that they proceed slowly with
them they have in hand: and hence it grows that the Castillians are scarce
able to defend the Islands and shoares of the new world; nor the Portugals them
of Brasil, Cape Verd, and others; neither have the one or the other been able
to resist the men of war and pirates which have attempted them; no nor the
Negros which rebel daily in the Island of Hispaniola, S.

The Quality of the country.
Strabo writes that toward the straight of Gibraltar, the tonnies grow
wonderful fat, with akorns which fall into the sea from the oaks which grow
upon the shore. And the reverend father Lewis of Grenado has written, that in
the year 1575^ the sea did cast up (near to Penique in Portugal) a fish that
was 40 Pliny does much esteem the copper of Mont Moriana, which is at this
day called Sierra Morena. There is also great store of fine wools. But to come
to every country in particular.

Cattellogina is generally barren, and yields more fruit than corn, neither
has it any store of good plants. Near unto Vich, the country is rough and
stony, and half desert:

In Aragon near to the Pyrenee mountains, they may travel whole days, and
find not any inhabitants; yet there are some valleis which yield reasonable
store of fruit and corn, and the waters work great effects in all places
where they pass. Near to Callatajub, the air is good, and the country
fruitful.

Valencia stands in the most temperate and pleasing air of all Spain: the
country is full of gardens and places of wonderful delight, where there
grows abundance of rice, sugar, corn and fruit; and this country is much
like in quality, to that which is about Naples. As for the rivers which water
this realm of Valencia, the chief are Gualdalauiar, which signifies a pure
and clear water, it passes near unto the city of Valencia, and

The realm of Murcia is not well peopled, neither does it yield any thing of
importance; for that the mountains are rough and stony, and the plains not
well watered with rivers, and so by consequence barren, for that it raines
seldom in Spain.

As for Grenado, it is one of the most fertile soiles of Spain, especially,
whereas Genil

There is no part of Spain that yields more fruit and come than Andaluzia, nor
that has more troops of cattle, especially of horse; and this country is
such, as it may be justly termed the storehouse, fruiterie, wineseller, and
stable of Spain, yea and a birdcage, where there are such store of birds,
especially of those which we call thrushes, or felfaires Pliny did hold that
there were veins of vermillion near unto Almaden, the which in those days
were much esteemed. About Marchena are bred the best and goodliest gennets of
all Spain.

Estremadura is a country more exposed to the sun than any one in Spain; and
therefore as in Italy they drive their cattle from Abrusso to the plains of
Apulia, when winter comes; so in Spain they pass from the Northren parts of
Estremadura, where in summer the heat is excessive, which is the cause they
have no great towns. In all that tract

New Castille is watered by the river of Tagus, the which has many other
rivers falling into it. It has more plains than Castille the old, and
therefore abounds more in corn; yet it lies more to the South. Castille the
old has her greatest revenues by cattle: the river of Duero passes through
it, the which does so swell by reason of the abundance of waters which fall
into it, as it becomes the greatest river of Spain. True it is, that by reason
of her swift course and narrow channel (restrained for the most part with

Galicia is a rough country, and has no store of waters. There are good wines
near unto Orens as has been said, and they have good fishing, and great store
of game for hunting. Asturia is of the same nature and quality that Gallicia,
but it is more rockie and less inhabited.

There grows very little wine in Biscay, and therefore in some places,
especially at S. Adrian, they plant apple trees in steed of vines, of which
fruit the inhabitants make cidar,

As for Portugal the air is very good, and it is refreshed by the flowing of
the water, which is very great upon all that coast being full of creeks of the
sea. The situation is hilly, and it yeeldes excellent fruits, with many other
rich commodities, whereof I have formerly made particular relation in my
description of that country.


FIrmicus terms this nation to be full of arrogancy and vaunting: Vopiscus
says, That they are full of subtlety, active of body, restless, and
desirous of innouations: and Iustine writes, that they have spirits more like
beasts than men. The Spaniards in old time, says Diodorus, did wear short and
black robes. Isidore calls these garments Striges. Ptolomee and Diodorus say,
That they took delight to be neat; but one of them blames them for that they
were so beastly, as they washed all their bodies and rubbed their teeth Strabo
affirms, that the women were accustomed to follow husbandry, and other
rusticke works. Diodorus tells us, that they did eat great store of flesh,
made a drink with honey, and drunk no wine, but what they bought, having none
growing. Florus affirms, That they used a drink made with wheat Atheneus puts
the Spaniards among those people that were accustomed to be drunk. Iustine
makes them sparing, abstinent and very sober; so as notwithstanding that they
were very rich (as we may see in Atheneus yet they drank water, and did eat
alone. And Trogus says also, that upon festival days there was no
preparation for a feast. Pliny writes, That in his time they did use akorns at
their second service: and Strabo says, That they made bread of ground akorns.
Pliny affirms, That they fed lying upon the ground. After the second Iustine,
and Valerius the Great, say, That their bodies were able to endure hunger and
toil, and that they were courageous and resolute to death. Seruius writes,
That they were much given to theft. They loved wars more than idleness,
according unto Trogus. In the wars they did much esteem them that were best
able to endure labor, were they horsemen or on foot. The horsemen being
victors in battle (as Diodorus says) they left their horses, having two
swords, and did help their footmen. Their swords (according to Liuie and
Polibius) were short, and fit to come to handie blows, and their manner was to
thrust and not to strike. Atheneus says, that they used darts; and Diodorus,
that they did carry head p^eces of copper, and had boot-legs made of hair.
Strabo writes, That Polibius says, That they came to fight covered with a
certain linen cloth bordered with purple, and that they did wear very white
cassocks. The mothers did relate unto young men which went unto the wars, the
goodly exploits of their fathers and predecessors, as Salust observes in his
History.

They did set up as many small pillars about the Sepulcher of a dead man, as he
had slain enemies, according to the testimony of Aristotle. Caesar says, That
they did willingly swim over rivers. Iustine affirms, That they did more
esteem their horses of service, and their arms, than their own blood.
Diodorus writes, That they were cruel to their enemies and mild and courteous
to strangers. Seruius and Salust affirm, That there were many Strabo does
affirm: and a son, by his fathers commandment, slew all his kinsfolks,
being prisoners, having found a sword to that end: and a woman did cut off the
heads of such as were captives with her; and we also read, that some being laid
upon a Cross to be executed, began to sing. And their resolutions are
commended by Iustine in the person of a slave, who, during the time of the
Punike war, having taken revenge for his master, laughed heartily in the
midst of his torments, so as by cherefulnes he surmounted the cruelty of his
tormentors. That which notes the fidelity of the Spaniards, is, as we read in
Suetonius, that Caesar had Spaniards for his guard who Strabo affirms, that
the Spaniards did use to carry poison, which made them die without pain, to
the end, that if any unexpected accident did happen, contrary to their liking,
they might have it ready to kill themselves. Sillius affirms, that they were
accustomed to have their dead bodies eaten by vultures. But Elianus writes
that, particularly of the Barceens, and of those only that were slain in the
war, saying, That such as died of sickness were burnt.

The manners of the Spaniards at this day.


When they are in camp, there is not any nation in the world, that does
longer, and with more patience, endure hunger, thirst, watching, and all kind
of toils. They have more art than fury, when they come to fight. Their
agilitie and lightness of arms makes them apt to follow the enemy, and they
do as easily fly when there is cause. Although

The Riches of Spain.
tonnie which they fish there, and which yields them much money: the greatest
part of

From Candie they bring muscadels aad malmseys, the which are afterward sent
unto the East Indies, where, by means of their long voyage, they prove
excellent, and are An Arobe is 25 pound^ weight.
which is called an Arobe. They bring also from this Island Sanguis Draconis,
or Dragons, blood, and some other things, but of small importance. In like
manner from S. Thomas they have yearly above two thousand Arobes of sugar, and
two hundred Negro slaves. It is not many years since they brought in cottons to
Lisbonne, whereof there came the first year threescore thousand pounds weight,
and is increased daily. From Paranes they have great store of rice, nuts, apes,
and blew parrats. From the Island of the Prince comes sugar, rice, and Negro
slaves. From the Island of Cape A kintall is a hundred weight.
which was wont, with all other spices, to belong wholly to the king, who paid
for it at Malaca after three ducats the kintall, being worth ten pounds
sterling; and



The commodities which pass commonly from Lisbonne unto the Indies, are wines
of Candie and Spain, silks and woollen cloth, with many other small wares.
They send into China, and to the Negros country, certain great rings made of
latten, which come from the Low country, paying for every one six pence, the
which they sell afterward to the Negros for a third part of a duckat. To
Brasil they send wines, woollen cloth, and much apparel ready made, for that
there are no workmen in that country, neither are they vented to them that are
borne in the country (for that they are accustomed to go naked, to live in
woods, and to eat man's flesh) but to the Portugals themselves, and other

Into England they send wines, oil, sugar, spices of all sorts, as also into
the Low Countries, besides the great quantity of salt which is made in the
mines of Portugal; and some that have good judgment, assure that there parts
from thence every year (for foreign Provinces) at the least four hundred
hulcks, whereof every one is commonly four hundred tonne burden.

The ships of Italy lade spices at Lisbonne with much sugar, and in the town
of Lagos, and in Alga^be much tonnie, whereof they send a great quantity
throughout all Spain.

As for the reuenews of the king of Spain, it is certain that he draws
yearly above A million of gold i^ her^ valued ten hundred thousand crowns.
abo^e two millions from Portugal, about three millions of gold from the
Indies, one year with another; from Maiorca and Minorca fifty thousand
crowns, and from Castille a million and some four hundred thousand crowns.
But all these tributes and impositions are little, in regard of that which he
draws extraordinarily, and for the most part usually, as the Croisado which is
worth unto him the reuenews of a kingdom, the subsidies of the Church, with
the which you may entertain yearly a hundred good galleis, and the fall of
offices, which import more in Italy and Spain than is imagined; moreover, the
ordinary and extraordinary free gifts of his subjects. For the realm of
Naples gives him every third year about a million and two hundred thousand
crowns: and in like manner Sicile, Sardinia, m^^^^^) recompense and enrich his
servants and officers, or whomsoever he please, as

Forces of the king of Spain.
(...)
consisting of disunited members, and mediocritie in the greatest part of
Augustus with an army which he entertained at Rouenna, and another which he
held at Messina, did assure all the Roman Empire: so the king of Spain
entertaining two armies, one in the Mediterranean sea, and another in the
Ocean, would hold all the members of his Monarchy, and all the estates which
he enioyes in Europe, and at the Indies, well united together, for that a good
^^^ber of gallions and ships of war which Augustus did put to rout the army of
Egypt, with that of Italy; and in our time the Christians have defeated the
Turks, who confess that our galleys are better than theirs, and they fear to
encounter them: and for proof, whenever the emperor Charles the fifth meant
to arm, he drew together such a power, as the Turk durst not make head
against him; he carried to the enterprise of Algier 500 sail, and above 600 to
that of Tunes. And Andrew Doria carried such forces into Greece, as he took
Patras and Corone without any difficulty. I will speak nothing of the sea
forces which this king has alwais entertained in the German seas, for the
recovery of the Low Countries.

were 32000 men strong, and that the charge cost the king 30000 ducats a day.

Charles the fifth brought into Prouence, had such ill success, as those
troops which remained were forced to retire miserably. As for the Italian
footmen of the king of Spains dominions, they are able to do their prince good
service. In regard of horsemen, the Spaniard has the best races for horses in
Europe, that is, the gennets of Spain, the coursers of Naples, and the horses
of Bourgondie and Flanders. It seems that nature would arm these men with the
mines of iron in Biscay, Guipuscoa, and Molina, with the tempers of Bilbao,
Tolosette and Calatajub, by the means of the workmen of Millan, Naples and
Boisleduc; and that she would also furnish them with victuals by the store
houses of Apulia, Sicilie, Sardinia, Artois, Castille, and Andaluzia, and also
with the wines of Calabria, S. Martin Ayamont, and many other places. Moreover,
the king of

The king of Spain does commonly entertain in his estates great numbers of
horse, for that he has in Spain 3000 horse: in the duchy of Millan 400 men at
arms and 1000 light horse: in the realm of Naples 1100 men at arms, which is
the greatest strength that is in Italy; and in Sicile they should furnish him
with 1500 horse. It is not a matter

As for forts there are not many in Spain, only upon the frontiers and upon
the coasts toward the Sea, upon Languedocke side he has Salfes which was made
to be opposite to Laucatee, which belongs to France. Perpignan which is on this
side in the country of Rossillon, is a good town, and has one of the best
castles in Spain: Barcellona is also well fortified. Philip the second knowing
the importance of the port of Carthagena has caused it to be fortified, least
the Turks should surprise it, and lodge themselves there. There are many strong
places in the realm of Granado, by reason of the abode which the Moors made
there. The citadel of Pampelona is one of the strongest places of Europe, and
Fontarabie is able to make a great defense. The city of Lisbonne in Portugal
is one of the best of the country. There are three Storehouses for arms,
which are able to arm 15000 footmen with corslets, and many horsemen with
cuirasses. There are other Storehouses Jerome built by the king of Portugal,
whereas all the kings and princes of the royal blood are interred. Before this
Monastery there is a tower environed with water, having 30 pieces of

As for other princes or commonweal of any consideration for their forces,
which confine upon the king of Spain, there is but the French king, the Turk,
and the Venetians.

The French king is now in league and at peace with the king of Spain, and
there can be no subject fit to trouble the peace of these two kingdoms, but a
pretention of certain lands which the French king might demand. But admit
there were a breach, and that they were in bad terms, I think that if the
French should enter by Languedocke or Gascoigne, de les Diguieres, has

As for the Venetians (since that the estate of Millan was made subject to the
Spaniards) matters have passed quietly betwixt them, and this commonweal is
more careful of her defense, and of the fortificatio^ of her places, than of
any dessignes to make new conquests: for that this State having her foundations
laid upon peace, it were not fit for her to alter it by troubling her neighbors
affairs. Moreover, the Spaniards have employed themselves in favor of the
Ve^etians, in the most dangerous wars which Bajazet, Soliman and Selim the
second made against them in Cephalonia, at Preuese and Lepanto, and yet they
had and have yet upon their flancks, Algier, Tunes and Africa, which are much
nearer unto Spain, Sicile, Sardinia, the Islands of Baleares, and the realm
of Naples, than Cypres, or the

The Government of Spain.
THe king of Spain uses many titles with the which he comprehends the realms
and estates belonging to his crown, stiling himself as follows: Title of
the king of Spain
Philip by the Lord of Friseland, Salines, Machlin, Vtrecht, Oueryssell, and
Groninge, and great commander Francis the first ieasted very wittily, who
having received a letter from Charles the fifth, with all these titles, he
only styled himself Lord of Gentilly, which is a little village near unto
Paris. And in truth it is a mere vanity to take upon him these titles, for
that most of these realms which he names in Spain are no better than
provinces in France; and moreover, many of these titles are built in the air
upon no pretentions, and others are so full of vanity, and so void of color,
as no man of judgment but would laugh at it. But let us come to that we have
undertaken.

James, Alcantara, and Callatraua. He is absolute master of peace and war. He
does elect and choose all Presidents, Counselors, Viceroys, Lieutenants,
Governors and Captains. But the king cannot confer any benefices or
spiritual livings, but to natural borne Spaniards, or to such as have been
naturallized by him. And the greatest part of Maximilian said, that he was
kings, and the king of Spain, king of men; for that he could not have from the
Germains but what they pleased, and the Spaniards refused not to give unto
their king more than they ought by their laws and statutes.

The king of Spaines Counsels.
There are many Councels in Spain by which the king gouerns his estate, that is
to say, the Privy Council, the Council of Castille, the Council of Arragon,
the Council of Italy, the Council of the Indies, the Council of Treasure,
the Council of Orders, the Council of Inquisition, the Council of war, the
Council of the chamber, the Council of discharges, the Council of Portugal, and
the Council of Woods. The king refers to Council of State.
whereof the chief is, The Council of State; whereas they treat of all that
which belongs to the government of his realms, and which concern the
authority and dignity of the crown, the king presides himself in person:
there are none admitted to be of this Council but men of great dignity, and
the number of them is few, they have commonly 2000 ducats a year pention, and
there are two

Council of Castille.
The Council of Castille, or the kings Council, where they consult of customs
and provisions of the realm, and all suits of other courts and jurisdictions
of the Crown of Castille come thi^her by appeal. The President is most
commonly a Nobleman, and sometimes a Prelat, or at least a Clergy man, who
has 1604 ducats, and 2 s. for his yearly A Doublon is worth 4 royals
that at Vaillado^d and Granado there are two Chanceries which take no
knowledge of any suit upon the first instant, but in matters which concern
pupils, orphans, widows, and miserable persons: but by appeal they judge of
al matters belonging to the crown of Castille, after sentence given by the
ordinary Judge; where if it happen that the sentence given by the Chancerie be
conformable to the first, he that is condemned may appeal to the same
Chancerie, who commits the cause anew to some other Auditor (yet of the same
Chancerie) who ends the suit if it agree with the other two sentences; neither
is it lawful to appeal any more, unless the matter exceed 4000 ducats; and
then he may appeal to the kings

In the sovereign Council of Arragon they treat of the government of the
realm of Council of Arragon.
and they take knowledge of matters concerning grace and justice. It has a
President or Vice Chancellor, who has 3000 ducats wages by the year. Five
Regents or Counselors, every one having 1000 ducats. Two Reporters with 300
ducats a piece. The Aduocat Fiscal 1000 ducats. The Treasurer general 300
ducats yearly. His Lieutenant 600 ducats. Three Secretaries, to either of
them 500 ducats a year, and so of the rest of the officers of this Council
which are very many in number.

In the Council of Italy they treat of matters concerning the government of
the realms of Naples, Council of Italy.
Sicile, and the duchy of Millan, and of that which belongs to grace and
justice. In this Council they appoint governors, and Judges in cities, and give
reward to soldiers

In the Council of the Indies, Council of the Indies.
they have a care of all matters which belong to the government of the Indies.
They appoint Viceroys for Perou and Noua Hispania, and they dispose of all
other offices and spiritual livings. They appoint visitors to go into those
Provinces to examine the actions of officers, and to hear the peoples
grieuances; ducats, Four and thirty Marauedis make six pence.
9 rials, and 32 Marauedis. Two Vshers of the Council, having 166 ducats,

There is a Viceroy in new Spain, and a Viceroy in Perou, who have twelve
thousand ducats for their entertainment. There is a Chancerie for new Spain
at Mexico. A Chancerie in Guatimala. A Chancerie in the city of King. A
Chancerie in S. Francis at Quinto. A Chancerie in the new kingdom of Granado.
A Chancerie in the Islands of Philippina. And a Chancerie in the city of S.
Dominico, in the Island of Hispaniola.

Council of Hazienda.
The Council of Hazienda, or of the Treasure, deals with the kings reuenews,
they make leases for farms and assignations, and they keep an account of all
that is to be paid or received in the provinces of Spain. This Council is not
unlike to our Exchequer of England It has a president who has 6000 ducats a
year; he that keeps the accounts 267 ducats, and 4 rials, four Counselors,
one Treasurer, a Secretary, a Fiscal, and four Vshers, to every one the same
wages.

Council of Orders.
As for the Council of Orders, you must understand that in Spain there are
three kinds of knights brought in by precedent kings. The first is the order of
S. James, which is the chief, the others are that of Calatraua and Alcantara.
These three orders have many towns and Castells under them; and for that their
jurisdiction is very great, they James, the king after his ordinary titles,
puts in his letters, And perpetual administrator of S. James etc.

The Council of ^he Inquisition.
The Council of the Inquisition deals with matters of faith, and calls men in
question for heresy, or for any thing that has been said against the Church
of Rome. They appoint all the Inquisitors, Prouosts and Secretaries within the
realm, who condemn not any offender before they have sent him unto this
Council to determine of him. This Council was first erected, for that in the
conquest of the country which the Moors did sometimes hold in Spain, it was
needful to contain those people, who had been newly baptized in their duties,
and to have a care least religion should be any ways infected: yet this
Inquisition has brought in many abuses, and committed horrible cruelties. The
chief of this Council is the Inquisitor general which is the Archbishop of
Tolledo, who for

Council of war.
The Council of war treats for that which belongs to the war, either for
defense, or for invasion by sea or land; and in like manner, for fortification
and necessary provision for all the frontiers of Spain. It prouides for
Generals and all Commanders, with the advice

Council de Cam^ra.
The Council which they call de Camera has a president and 3 audi^ors or
counselors

The council of discharges deals only for the payment of the old kings debts,
Council of discharges.
and the execution of their last wills, and by this means, daily the debts of
the Emperor Charles the fi^t are diminished: it has a President, three
Auditors and a Secretary.

The council of woods treates of all matters that belong unto his ma^esties
woods, Council of woodss.
and take knowledge of all spoils done unto them; they provide for guardes and
other

The council of the Croisado has charge to divide the Croisado which is
granted by the Pope to the king of Spain, Council of Crusado.
according to the Bishoprics, and to send forth Commissioners for the leuying
of the money.

There is a council of accounts where they treat of matters of Justice
concerning the treasure, Council of Accounts.
and do end suits; touching subsidies and taxes, and appoint Collectors for
the same.

There is a council for Portugal, Council of Portugal, Navarre and others.
Navarre, Galicia, Siuille, Aragon, Valencia, and Catalognia, in every of the
which there is a Regent, six Counselors and four Alcades or Prouosts, who
have the hearing and determining of all civil and criminal causes

There be always in the kings court four Judges, who take knowledge of all
matters both civil and criminal which pass within five leagues round about
the court, and throughout the whole realm also by commission. They have very
great authority, especially in criminal causes, wherein they proceed with
much rigor, neither is it lawful to appeal from their sentences. There are
one and thirty Alguazilz or Sargeants of the court, and many criminal
Registers, who have their seat apart and also their prison.

The king of Spain has been accustomed to reward old soldiers which have
done him good service during his wars, or that have been maimed; yea and this
recompense

There are in Spain many dignities, and charges which are hereditarie, and
there be many noblemen of mark and title, as they call them in Spain, as
dukes, marquisses and ^arles; all which I have endeauored to set down under
the names of their houses and families, with an estimate of most of their
revenues.

The House of Velasco.


The Earl of Nieua of the same house: he has his palace at Nieua, and his
estate in the province of Rioja, his rent is 10000 ducats.

The Earl of Ciruela is of the same house of Velasco, and has 14000 ducats
yearly ^ent.

The house of Velasco is one of the noblest of Spain, from whence are issued
the

Mendoca, their tilte, house and revenues.
THe Duke of Infantasgo, Marquis of Cenete and Santillana, Earl of Saldana,
and lord of the roialty of Mansanares, he is head of the Mendoces, his house is
at Guadalajara, and his estate in Castille the old, in the realm of Toledo,
and in the province of Alaua: his revenues are one hundred thousand ducats.

The Duke of Francauilla Prince of Melito is of this house, he has his house
in Francauilla, and his estate in the realm of Toledo and Naples: he has in
rent forty thousand ducats.

The Marquis of Mondejar Earl of Tendilla: he has his house at Mondejar, and
his estate in the province of Alcaria, he has in rents forty thousand ducats.

The Marquis of Montesclaros has his house at Guadalajara, and his estate in
the province of Alcaria: he has ten thousand ducats a year.

The Marquis of Canete of the house of Mendoces, he has his house at Cuenca,
and his estate in the dependances thereof: his yearly rents are ten thousand
ducats.

The Earl of Combrade of the same family: he has his house at Guadalajara,
and his estate in Alcaria: his rents are ten thousand ducats.

The Earl of Castro of the same house: he has 80000 ducats rent.

The Earl of Montagudo, he keeps his house at Almancan, and his estate in the
country

The Earl of Orgas a great Nobleman, and as some hold the chief of this
family of Mendoces: he holds his house at S. Olalla, and his estate in the
realm of Toledo: he has ten thousand ducats rent.

This family of the Mendoces is very noble and of the principal of Spain:
they draw their extraction from a great personage called Don Curio lord of
Biscay.

Henriques, with the titles of the Noblemen.
THe Duke of Medina del Rio Secco, Marquis of Modica, Earl of Melgar and
Vicont Henriques: he has his house at Vailladolid, and his estate in the
province of Campos in Catalognia, and in Sicile: he has in rent one hundred
thousand ducats.

The Duke of Alcala de los Gazules, Marquis of Tarifa, and Earl of Ornos and
Villamartin, chief President in Andaluzia: he has house in Ciuille, and his
estate in Andaluzia: he has 80000 ducats rent.

The Marquis of Villanoua del Rio is of the house of the Henriques: he has
his house at Seuille, and his estate in Estremadura: and has twenty two
thousand ducats in yearly rents.

The Marquis of Alcanizes is also of this house of Henriques, and has twelve
thousand

The Earl of Alua de Lista, he has his house at Zamora, and his estate in
Castille the old and Estremadura: he is a Councellor of state, and chief
Huntsman to the king, and one of his chamber: he has thirty thousand ducats
rent.

The Earl of Cuba, his county is in Portugal, and his estate in the realm of
Castille.

The Earl of Fuentes is of this house, he makes his abode at Salamanca, and
his estate is in Castille the old: he has in rent ten thousand ducats:

It is one of the most renowned families of Castille, whose descendants are
issued from Don Henriques master of S. James, base brother to the king Don
Pedro the cruel, and from an Infant of France. This Don Henriques slew Don
Pedro the cruel his brother, and


THe Duke of Medina Celi, Marquis of Cogollado, Earl of Port S. Maria, chief
of the family of the Cerdas: his house is at Medina Celi, and his estate in
the realm of Toledo and Andaluzia: he has 40000 ducats in yearly rent.

The Earl of Geluas is of this family: he has 60000 ducats in rent.

This family of La Cerda takes her extraction from the two royal houses of
Castille and France, as you may see in the genealogy of the king of Spain,
and in the history of Lewis king of France.

Manriques de Lara, and their titles.
THe duke of Najera, Earl of Valencia and Treminio, head of the fam^lie of
Manriques: he has his house at Najera, and his estate in the province of Roja:
he has in rents forty thousand ducats.

The Marquis of Aquilar, Earl of Castaneda has his house at Carrion, and his
estate in the realm of Leon, and in the province of Campos: his rents are
forty thousand ducats.

The Earl of Paredes, of the same family: his house is at Paredes, and his
estate in the

The Earl of ^forno, his house is in Vailledolid, and his estate in old
Castille: his rents are twelve thousand ducats by year.

Some hold that the valiant and ancient Earl Fernand Gonsalez of Castille was
of this line, and that from him all these are descended.

Cordoua, and their titles.
THe Duke of Sesa and Terranoua, Earl of Cabra and Baiena, is head of the
Cordouas he has his house at Cordoua and Granado, and his estate in the realm
of Naples

This family is issued from the lords of Andaluzia, called Fernand Neunez and
Aluar Perez: from them are descended many gallant knights, and among others a
great captain called Gonsalo Fernandes of Cordoua.

The Earl of Alcaudette is also of the Cordou^s: his house is in Alcaudette
and his estate in the realm of Cordoua.

Toledo, and their titles.
THe Duke of Alua and Guesca, Marquis of Coria, Earl of Saluetierra, Vicont of
Toledo: his palace is in Alua, and his estate in Castille the old, in
Portugal, and in the realm of Granado: he has in rent eighty thousand
ducats.

The Duke of Veraguas, Admiral of the Indies: his house is in the city of
Saragossa, and his estate in the realm of Aragon.

The Marquis of Ville-Franch: he has his house at Ville-Franch, and his estate
in the realm of Leon and Naples: and his yearly rents are twenty five
thousand ducats.

The Earl of Navarre, of the family of the Toledos: he has his estate in the
right of his wife being of the blood of Navarre, and of the Beaumonts: he has
his house at Pampelona, and his estate in the realm of Navarre: and his rents
are twenty thousand

The Earl of Altamira is of this house of Toledo: his estate is in Galicia,
and has eight thousand ducats rent.

The Marquis of Cortes: he has his house in Cortes, and his estate in the
realm of Navarre.

The Earl of Oripesa is of the house of Toledo and Pachecos: his house is at
Tallauera,

They of this family (as some think) are descended from a knight called Don
Stephen Illan brother to an Emperor of Greece, who came into Castille to
succor the king against the Moors, and stayed there.

Suniga or Estuniga, and their titles.
THe Duke of Bejar, Marquis of Gibraleon, Earl of Benalcacar is the chief of
the Sunigas, and of the family of Soto Mayor: he has his house at Siuille and
at Bejar,

The Marquis of Ayamont of the family of Sunigas, and Soto Mayor: his
residence is at Siuille, and has twenty five thousand ducats*

The Marquis of Ville Manrique: he has fiftteene thousand ducats of rent.

The Marquis of Auilasfuentes, of the house of the Sunigas: he holds his
estate and house in Castille.

The Earl of Miranda, Marquis of Baneza, he is of this family and head of the
Auillanadas: his house is at Peneranda, and his estate in Castille the old, he
has thirty five thousand ducats rent.

This family is issued from a daughter of Navarre. In Castille the Duke of
Bajar is of great command.

Borias, and their titles.
THe Duke of Gandia, Marquis of Loyba chief of the house of Borias: his house
and estate are in the realm of Valencia, and has twenty thousand ducats
rent.

The Marquis of Tabara, Lord of Montesa of this house of Borias: his estate is
in Castille the old, and his house in Valeidolid, and has fifteen thousand
ducats rent.

This family comes out of Valencia, from whence are descended noble men of
great account.

Guzmans, and their titles.
THe Duke of Medina Sidonia, Marquis of S. Lucar of Barrameda, Earl of Niebla,
chief of the Guzmans: he has his house in Siuille and S. Lucars, and his
estate in that country: his revenues are one hundred thirty and five thousand
ducats yearly rent.

The Marquis of Ardeles, Earl of Tobar, of the family of the Guzmans: he has
his house at Malaga, and his estate in Andaluzia, and has fifteen thousand
ducats rent.

The Marquis of Algaue de Guzmans: he has his house at Siuille, and his
estate in Andaluzia: and has fifteen thousand ducats rent.

This family is very noble and ancient in Castille, for that it is issued
from a famous king of the Goths called Gundamira from whence are descended
many generous knights.

The Earl of Oliuares is also of this house.

Cardenas, and their titles.
The Duke of Maqueda, Marquis of Elch is head of the Cardenas: he has his
house in Toledo, and his estate in the same realm: his revenues yearly are
fifty thousand ducats.

The Marquis of Baretta has his house at Llerena and his estate in
Estremadura: he

The Earl of Puebla, has his house in Llerena, and his estate in Estremadura.

This family is of great esteem in Catalognia, and they say it comes from the
noble house of Anjou in France.


THe Duke of Feria, Marquis of Cafra, is chief of the family of the
Figueroas: he has his house at Cafra, and his estate in Estremadura, and has
forty thousand ducats rent.

The Marquis of Pliego, lord of the house of Aguilar, of the family of
Figueroas: he has his house at Cordoua, and his estate in the country of
Cordoua: he has sixty thousand ducats rent. This family lives in the
^ountrie of Galicia, and is the chief of that Province.


THe Duke of Albuquerque, Marquis of Biedma and Cuellar, Earl of Ledesma, is
chief of the Cueuas: he has his house at Cuellar, and his estate in
Estremadura and Castille: his revenues are forty six thousand ducats.

The Marquis of Ladrada is of this house he has his estate in the realm of
Toledo, and his house at Ladrada: he has eight thousand ducats rent. This
family is very noble and is descended from Arragon, and yet some will say that
it comes from Aguilar de Campos.


THe Duke of Escalona, Marquis of Moya, Earl of Esteuan, is head of the
Pachecos: he has his house at Toledo, and his estate in the realm of Murcia
and Mancha: his revenues are one hundred thousand ducats. They of this house
are descended from Portugal.

Girones, and their titles.
THe Duke of Ossu^a, Marquis of Pegnafiel, Earl of Vrena, is head of the
Girones: he has his house at Pegnafiel, and his estate in the countries of
Siuille and Castille:

Ponce de Leon, and their titles.
THe Duke of Arcos, Marquis of Tara Earl of Marchena, is chief of the Po^ces
de Leon: he has his house at Siuille, and his estate in Andaluzia: he has
forty thousand ducats rent.



The house of Ponce de Leon is noble and very ancient in Spain, from whence
is descended a very famous knight called Don Ponce de Minerua.

The royal House of Arragon.
THe Duke of Villa Hermosa, Earl of Ribagorca, is chief of the house of
Arragon: he has his house at Saragosse, and his estate in Arragon: he has
in rent twenty thousand ducats. It is one of the noblest families in Spain,
descended from the king of

The Duke of Sogorue and Gordoua, Marquis of Comares, Lord of Lucena, of the
blood royal of Arragon and of La Cerda: he has his house in the city of
Valencia, the duchy of Sogorue in the realm of Valencia, and that of Cordoua
in Catalognia: his greatest estate is in the realm of Cordoua.

The Earl of Sastago and Pina is also of this family: he has his house at
Saragosse,

Siluas, and their titles.
THe Duke of Pastrana, Prince of Eboli, is head of the Siluas: he keeps his
house at Madrid, and his estate in Alcaria, his revenues are sixty thousand
ducats.

The Marquis of Montemajor is also of this house: he has sixty thousand
ducats yearely^^ent.

The Earl of Ci^uentes; some say he is the head of this family of Siluas, he
has his John the first, from whom these noblemen are descended.

Roias and Sandouall, their titles.
THe Duke of Lerma and Cea, Marquis of Denia and Villamisar, Earl of Ampudia,
is head of the house of Roias: he has his house at Denia, and his estate in
Castille the old, his revenues are forty five thousand ducats. But his credit
and power is so great with king Phillip the third that now reigns, as he does
in a manner dispose absolutely of

The Marquis of Posa is of this house, he has his house at Posa, and his
estate in the province of Bureua, and has twenty thousand ducats rent.

The Marquis of Altamira of the same family, he has fifteen thousand ducats
rent. They of this family are very noble and famous in Castille, and their
ordinary abode is at Bureua near to Berbiesca.

Cardonas.
THe Duke of Soma, Earl of Panamos, Admiral of Naples, is of the family of
the Cardonas, he has his house at Belpuche, and his estate in the realm of
Naples.

Osorios^
The Marquis of Astorga, Earl of Transtamara and S. Martha, lord of the house
of Villalobos, is head of the Osorios: his houose is in Astorga, and his estate
in the realm of Leon: he has fifty thousand ducats rent.

The Earl of Osorio is of this family and of the Man^iques: he has his house
at Vailladolid, and his estate is in Castille the old: he has fourteen
thousand ducats rent. This ancient and noble family of the Osorios comes out
of the realm of Leon.

Castros.
The Marquis of Sarria, Earl of Lemos and Andrada of Castro and, Villalua, lord
of Vlloa, he is head of the family of the Castros: he keeps his house at
Montfort de Lemos, and in Sarria, and his estate is in the realm of Galicia:
he has in rent sixty thousand Crastinius, who was the first at the battle
of Pharsalia that did charge Pompey.

Flauin Caluir was also of this family, he was one of the ancient Judges of
Castille before they were governed by Earls or Kings.

Pimentels.
The Earl of Benneuent, head of the Pimentels, he has his house at
Vailladolid, and his estate in the province of Campos: he has twelve thousand
ducats rent.

The Marquis of Viana of the same family, he has his house in Vailladolid,
and his estate in Galicia. This family of the Pimentels (according to the
opinion of many) is issued from the realms of Portugal, Galicia and Castille,
and it is of great esteem in

Haro^
The Marquis of Carpio, Earl of Adamus, of the family of the Haros: he has in
rents four and twenty thousand ducats. This house is descended from Don
Curio Lord of Biscay.

Auilaes. Auilla.
He has his house in Auila, and his estate in that territory. He has thirty
five thousand ducats revenues. This house is descended from the noble Earl D.
Blaise, who in the time of king Alphonso S. of Castille, made himself famous
in the wars against the Moors, where he was general of an army.

The Marquis of Valle son to that Fernando Cortez, who conquered new Spain,
Cortes.
he has his house in Siuille and at Mexico, and his estate in new Spain,
where he has a hundred and fifty thousand ducats revenues. This house comes
out of Arragon, from which many famous knights in Spain are descended.

Peraltas, Peraltas.
he has his house at Marcilla in Navarre, and his estate in the Realm of
Navarre, he has in rents six thousand ducats. This house is very noble and
ancient, as being descended from the kings of Navarre.

The Marquis of Veles and of Mula, Adelantado of Murcia, is the head of the
Faiardos, Fajardo^
he has his house in Murcia, and has fifty thousand ducats rent. The
Governors of the city and Realm of Murcia have bin always of this house. The
beginning of this family comes from Gallicia at S. Marta of Hortiguera. There
was a valiant young man of this house, who to get honor went into the Realm of
Murcia, where he won many victories against the Moors in service of the K.
of Castille. For these exploits, among others, he had the title of Viceroy of
Murcia given him, which has continued in this house.

Puerto Carreros, he has his house at Asa, and his estate in the Realm of
Cordoua, his revenues are eighteen thousand ducats.

The Earl of Palina is of this house, his estate is in the Realm of Cordoua.

The Marquis of Alcala, of Johannes de Horta is descended of the Carreros,
Puerto Carreros.
he has his house in Siuille, and his estate in the same Realm, and has
sixteen thousand ducats rent.

The Earl of Medellin is of the same family, his house is in Medellin, and
his es^ate in Estremadura. This noble house comes out of Portugal, from whence
certain knights of that name passed in Castille, and served king D. Alphonso
the great with such valor, as they received many recompenses.

Basans, he has his house at Viso, Basan.
and his estate in the Realm of Tolledo, he has twenty five thousand ducats
rent. It is one of the noblest families in the Realm of Navarre.

The Marquis of Aunon, chief of the family of the Herreras, Herrera.
he has his house at Madrid, and his estate in the province of Alcaria, he
has thirty thousand ducats revenues. Their ordinary residence is in
Castille* and it is held to be very noble and ancient.

The Earl of Buendia, Lord of Duenas is of the house of Acugna, Acugna.
his dwelling is at Duenas, and his estate in the province of Campos. This is a
very honorable house in Spain, and comes out of Portugal.

The Earl of Barajas, of the family of the Capatas, he has his house at
Madrid, Capata.
and his Abarca king of Arragon, from whence are issued many valiant knights in
Castille.

The Earl of Fuentes in of the house of the Heredias, Herredia.
he has his estate in Arragon which yields him eight thousand ducats rent.
This Earl was sent into landers, where, after the death of the Duke of Parma,
he governed the country, and did many memorable exploits. Afterward he was
made governor of Milan where he died: He had many other rents besides them of
his Earldom.

The Earl of Belchite comes from this house, he has his estate in Valencia
and Arragon. This family of the Heredias is descended from the Goths.

Sarmientos, Sarmie^ta.
he has his house at Bourgos and his estate in Biscay. His yearly revenues
are twenty thousand ducats: this house is very noble and of great reputation
in Spain.

The Earl of Onante is head of the Gueuares, he has his house at Onante,
Gueuara.
and his estate in Guypu^coa, with six thousand ducats rent. This family is
issued from Arragon and Biscaie. It was one of the thirteen houses which made
election of a king of Navarre.

Ayala.
The Earl of Fuensalida is head of the Ayalas, his house is in Tolledo, and his
estate in the same Realm.

The Earl of Gomera which is in the Island of the great Canarie, he has
fourteen thousand ducats rent.

The Earl of Saluatierra is also of the Ayalas, he holds his estate in
Castille the old. This noble family is issued from the ancient kings of
Arragon, from which many great personages are descended.

Quignones.
The Earl of Luna is head of the Quignones and Villafanes, his house and estate
are in the Realm of Leon; he has twenty thousand ducats rent. It is an
ancient and noble

Azeuedo.
The Earl of Montierre is head of the Azeuedos, he has his house at Salamanca,
and his estate in Gallicia. His yearly revenues are forty six thousand
ducats.

Luna.
The Earl of Morata is head of the family of the Lunas, his house is at
Saragosse, and his estate in the Realm of Arragon. He has seven thousand
ducats revenues. This family is of the Realm of Arragon, from whence many
famous personages are descended, namely D. Aluaro de Luna, who in the time of
king John the second was great Master of Saint James, and Constable of
Castille, but fortune was as auerse unto him in the end, as it had bin
favorable in the beginning.

Mexia.
The Marquis of Guardia Earl of Saint Euphemia head of the Mexias. He has his

Vloa.
The Marquis of La Mota is of the family of Vloas in Galicia, near unto a
river called Vloa. He has sixteen thousand ducats in revenues. There are
many good knights come out of this house.

Arellianos.
The Earl of Aguilar, Lord of Los Cameros is head of the Arellianos, he holds
his estate in the Province of Rioja, and has 15000 ducats in rent. His abode
is in Navarre.

Benauides.
The Marquis of Fiomesta, of the family of the Benauides and Henriques. He has
his house at Fiomesta, and his estate in the Province of Campos. He comes out
of Galicia.

Auellenada.
The Marquis of Benesa is of the house of the Auellenadas.

The Earl of Ribadauia is of the same family. He has his house at
Vailladolid, and

Carrillo.
The Marquis of Caracena is of the family of the Carrillos and Tolledos.

The Earl of Pliego, of the house of the Carrillos and Mendosa. He has this
house at Guadalajara, and his estate in the mountains of Cuenca. He has in
rents eight thousand ducats. they say that the extraction of this family
comes from Bourgos, and is much esteemed in Spain, for that many good knights
and prelates of great esteem are descended from it, and namely an Archbishop of
Tolledo.

Sayauedras.
The Earl of Castellar is head of the family of the Sayauedras. He has his
house at

Portugal.
The Marquis of Frichilla and of Malagon, brother to the Duke of Bargance: he
has his estate in Castille, and is of the house of Portugal. He lives in the
city of Ebora in the same Realm.

The Earl of Gelues is of the house of Portugal. He has his house in
Siuille, and his estate in the same Realm.

Cobas.
The Marquis of Cameraca and Sauiota, and Earl of Riscla: he was Adelantado of
Cobas and Mendosa.

Centuriones.
The Marquis of Stepa of the family of the Centurions at Genoua. He has his
estate and house in the country of Siuille.

Padilla.
The Earl of S. Gadea is head of the family of the Padillas: he is a gentleman
of the The Earl of Citona of the house of Moncada and Heredia. Moncada,
The Earl of Ayllon of the house of Leon and Cordoua. Leon.
The Earl of Chinchon is head of the house of the Bouadillas: Bouadilla.
he has his house in Madrill, and his estate in the realm of Toledo. The
Earl of Ierra of the family of the Carios. Cario.
The Earl of Oliua of the house of the Gentillas. Gentilla.
The Earl of Puno in Rostro, is head of the Sarrias: he has his house at
Madrid, Sarria.
and his estate in the realm of Toledo. Tells, Girones and Pachecos: Tells.
he holds his estate in Estremadura. The Earl of Cosentania, of the house of
Corella: Corella.
his estate and house are in the realm of Valencia. The Earl of Delda of the
family of the Colomas: Colomas*
his estate and house are in the realm of Valencia. The Earl of Villermedina,
he is of the family of the Taxis. Taxis.



There are many Marquisses and Earlss whose houses and families I do not find
specified in any authors, and therefore I have only set down their names as
follows.

The Marquis of Molina. The Marquis of Villada, chief Steward to the king. The
Earl of Gajan. The Earl of Costania in Valencia. The Earl of Coruino. The
Earl of Mayalde. The Earl of Mirabel. The Earl of Galua. The Earl of
Villaflor. The Marquis of Laguna, chief Steward to the queen. The Marquis of
Sarral^o. The Marquis of Cuellar. The Earl of Casarubios. The Earl of Los
Arcos. The Earl of Salasar. The Earl of Villalonso. The Earl of Risco. The
Earl of Malpica. The Earl of Torrejon.


There are six Priors of S. John in Spain.

The Prior of S. John of Castille, who has fifty thousand ducats in yearly
rent. The Prior of S. John of Leon has thirty thousand ducats. The Prior of
S. John of Arragon has four thousand ducats rent. The Prior of S. John of
Cattalognia has twelve thousand ducats rent. The Prior of S. John of Valencia
six thousand ducats rent. The Prior of S. John of Navarre four thousand
ducats rent.
James, Calatraua and Alcantara, whereof the king is great master and perpetual
administrator, by the Popes bull. These masterships are sometimes rented out
unto farmers, who pay yearly to the king 13000 ducats: besides that they are
bound to give to every knight of the said order (who has no Commandarie, About
nine pound sterling
and is professed) twelve thousand Marauiedes yearly for his bread and water as
they term it.

There are many and great Commandaries under these orders: that of S. James
has in Castille 42 Commandaries, whose revenues are some 12000 ducats rent,
some 10, some 8, some 6, and some less, whereof many are affected and
commanded by noblemen. Comandaries belonging to the three ^rders i^ Spain
The great Commandarie of Castille has 14000 ducats renuenues. The order of
S. James

The order of Calatraua has 36 Commandari^s belonging unto (...), whereof the
duke of Alua of the horse of Toledo is great commander: it is worth 105000
ducats rent

The order of Alcantara has 32 Commandaries depending upon it whereof the great
Commandarie is worth ten thousand five hundred thirty four ducats yearly.
And besides

Orders of knights in Porugall.
There are three orders of knights in Portugal: the first is called of Christ
bearing a red cross bordred with cords of gold, and in the midst one of
Silver: the second is of S. James with a red cross like unto that of Castille:
and the third of S. Barnard, as that of Calatraua.

The king disposes of many Commandaries of this order.

There are two Dukes in Portugal: the first is the Duke of Bragance; (whose
eldest son has the title of Duke of Barcellos) he is held to be very rich,
and to have 100000 crowns of Portugal in rent: the second is the Duke of
Auero, who has 50000 crowns



There parts most commonly every March 4 or 6 great ships which return no more
the same year; so as all the ships remain abroad for the space of 18 months:
but every year there parts a company in March, and another in September; these
ships disperse themselves to take in their loading in diverse parts of Affricke,
and likewise at the Indies and in Asia: and for that in their return they have
none but^marriners, and some few merchants,

This navigations of the Indies is become very easy, and their merchandise is
assured for six or seven in the hundred. I have heard reported by a mariner
(being threescore years old) that he had made twenty three voiages to the
Indies, having passed the Cape of good Hope forty six times; that having
passed the equinoctial (whereas they discover not the North) they may sail
with the same compass which they use in our seas: for that, having passed
toward the West of the Canaries, the star of the compass (as the mariners
say) turns toward the North East and from the East, having passed the
Meridian

Religion and matters which concern the Church of Spain.
Toledo being fallen into the Barbarians hands, the Archbishop of Braca enjoyed
this dignity, as the records of the church of Braca do witness: but after
that the christians had recovered Toledo, the Archbishop of that city
redemanded that dignity, and he of Braca contended with him for it, seeking to
retain the thing which he had gotten; so ^s some hold, this question is not
ye^ determined.

If any one desire to know the Bishops which have been in Spain (since the
times of the Romans and Goths) let him read the cronicle of Vaseus, and the
history Mayerne Turquet, where he may content his curiosity. After that the
Spaniards had recovered

The Archbishop of Tarragone (who has eight thousand ducats in yearly rent:
some write sixteen ^housand) has under him these Bishoprics.

Girona, which is worth four thousand ducats. Vicq d Ossuna, which is worth
five thousand ducats. Lerida, which is esteemed to be at five thousand
ducats. Vrgill has in yearly revenues seven thousand ducats. Dertosa, which
is worth eight thousand ducats a year.
The Archbishopricke of Saragosse is worth twenty thousand ducats a year, it
has under it these Bishoprics.

Pampilona, which is worth six thousand ducats, others write twenty two
thousand.



Segouia has 3000 ducats, yet some write that he has four and twenty
thousand.

Twy, whose revenues are four thousand ducats.

The Archbishop of Toledo is held the chief clergy man of Spain, and has
most authority with the king: he is primate of Spain, and chauncellor of
Castille; his yearly revenues are above 200000 ducats, he has these
Bishoprics under him.

Moruedra, which is worth twenty thousand ducats rent. Vbeda, which has six
thousand ducats. Burgos, which has thirty thousand ducats in revenues.
Plaisance, which is worth thirteen thousand ducats. Curia, which has eight
thousand nine hundred ducats.
Cordoua, which is worth two thousand ducats: others write that he has
forty six thousand ducats in yearly revenues. This Archbishop is temporal
lord of seventeen places that are walled.

The Archbishop of S. James of Compostella has twenty thousand ducats rent,
and some say twenty four thousand: he has under him the Bishops of Auilla,
which is worth eight thousand ducats a year, and some write 20 thousand.
Palenca, which is held to be fifteen thousadd ducats a year. Salamanca, ten
thousand ducats, and some write twenty four thousand. Astorga, which is
worth four thousand ducats a year, and others write 18 thousand. Cite Rodrigo
is worth ten thousand ducats a year. Mondonedo has twelve thousand ducats
rent in revenues. Zamora, which is worth twelve thousand ducats a year. Leon,
which has eight thousand ducats in yearly revenues. Badajos, which is worth
six thousand ducats.


The Archbishopricke of Siuille is worth one hundred and ten thousand ducats
of rent, and some say but eighty thousand. It has these Bishoprics under it.

Iaen, which is worth fifteen thousand ducats in rent; some write twenty
thousand.



Cadis or Calix, which is worth eight thousand five hundred ducats a year,
others write twelve thousand.

The Archbishop of Valencia has thirteen thousand ducats yearly rent, he
has under him the Bishops of Granado, who has a thousand ducats a year:
these two have the privilege to wear cloakes.

The Bishop of Orihuela is worth eight thousand ducats. The Bishopric of
Segorua is worth ten thousand ducats. The Bishopric of Vluestre is worth six
thousand ducats.
The Archbishop of Lisbonne in Portugal is worth sixteen thousand ducats a
year

Ebora, which is worth twenty thousand ducats a year rent. Porto whose
revenues are not set down. Diuidat, which is worth four thousand ducats a
year. Leiria, whose revenues are worth eight thousand five hundred ducats a
year.
The Archbishopricke of Braca in Portugal which is worth eight thousand ducats
a

Coimbra which is worth twelve thousand ducats in rent. Lamego six thousand
ducats in yearly revenues. Viseo which is valued at eight thousand ducats.
Almarie which is worth eight thousand ducats. Lugo which has fifteen
thousand ducats in yearly revenues.
There are some Bishoprics which are exempt from their jurisdictions, and go
directly to the court of Rome, the which are: Osma, which is worth one thousand
ducats a year. Malaga has one thousand ducats a year. Guadix is worth two
thousand ducats a year. Orense which is valued at three thousand ducats,
Pasa which is worth four thousand ducats. Canaria which is valued at eight
thousand ducats.


But if any one desire to know more exactly, what revenues all the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and Priors have, let them read what Damian de Goez
a Portugal has written upon that subject.

A Geneallogie of the kings of Spain.
IN the time of Attila, Spain was divided into twelve kingdoms, afterward it
was Alaric and Ataulphe) they fled into Spain with their king who was called
Sigeric.

The succession of the kings of the Goths throughout all Spain.
Sigeric, or Segeric.

Vallias, and according unto some Valia.

Theodoric, whom others call Roderic, he was made king in the year 491, others
write that it was in the year 440.

Thor^smond, who had to his brethren Theodoris and Henry, both which (some
write) reigned after him.

Alaric son to Henry, he made his first residence at Tolouse, but he was
chased from thence into Spain by Clouis king of France.

Gensalaric, he was base son to Henry or Euric, and usurped the crown.

Amalaric son to Alaric.

Tendie or Thendie son (as some hold) to Alaric, he was slain in his
chamber by a Iester,

Tendosil, and according unto others Theodegosil or Theodiscle: he was slain
by the Goths, for that he sought to abuse honest women and of noble families
with his unlawful lust.

Agla or Agila, he was slain by the faction of Athanagilda who succeeded him.

Athanagilda, he was slain near unto Toledo, others write that he died of his
natural death.

Lenogild or Leouigild, who had Luibe or Luide for a companion, he was an
Arrian like unto all his predecessors: he had Siuille subject to the realm of
Castille. He did persecute his son Hermogild and slew him in the year five
hundred seventy and two, for that he was a good Christian.

Rich^red son to Lenogild was a good Christian and was converted by S.
Leander.

Luibe the second succeeded his father Richared; he was murdered by Victeric
who usurped

Victeric, who had murdered an innocent prince, was also miserably slain by
his own subjects.

Gundamir reigned two years, and died at Tolledo.

Sisebut, he was a worthy prince, and ruled over all Spain.

Richared the second, his son, but some put him not in the Catalogue of the
Kings of Spain, for that he lived but three months after his father.

Suintilla, who had been a great captain to Sisebut, was chosen King, he was a
good

Sifinand was chosen in his place, before whom, some put Rachimir; he died
after six years reign.

Suintilla the second.

Tulca a virtuous prince; he died in the second year of his reign.

Vinde, whom others called Vindesuind or Cuidasiunthe; Some hold that he was
poisoned, having reigned ten years.

Recensuind or Reccesiunthe; he reigned nineteen years, and died at Tolledo.

Bamba, he defeated a great number of Moors which crossed through Spain; he
was Eruing or Hering.

Hering or Eruing usurped the kingdom of the Goths; he took Egica his son
in law to be his companion; he died at Tolledo, having reigned seven years.

Egica succeeded him, and reigned about thirteen years, and died at Tolledo.

Vitisa who put out the eyes of Theodebert, son to Resensuind, to whom the
realm did belong, being but yet an infant; being blind, he married and begot
Roderic, who defeated Vitisa in battle, and revenged upon him and his
children the wrong done unto his father.

Roderic, in whom the kings of the Goths ended after this manner: He had an
Earl called Julian, whom King Roderic had made Provost in Mauritania
Tingitania. Others Roderic forced his daughter; the father hearing of this
violence done unto her, thought speedily of a revenge, having good means by
the commodity of the place where he then was: for he solicited the Moors to
come into Spain, who entered by the straits of Gibraltar, in the year 714,
under the conduct of Musa, sent by the king Miramamolin, whom some call Vlit,
and made themselves in a manner masters of all Spain, within the space of two
years. They say that during this time there died of both sides about seven
hundred thousand men. The Christians which remained of this defeated army,
retired themselves into the Asturies and Gallicia, with their prince Pelagius,
(who was uncle by the father side to Roderic) and took from the Moors the
city of Leon,

Fafilla his son succeeded him; some write that he was slain by a Bear
going a hunting.

Alphonso the first, surnamed the Catholic, who lived in the time of
Childeric, and of Pipin, was son in law to Fasilla, and succeeded him; some
write that he married Ormisinda sister to Fasilla.

Froilla his son succeeded him in the year 671; he slew his brother Vimaran,
and was afterward slain himself by his other brother Aurelius,

D. Sillo brother in law to D. Froilla succeeded in the realm, where having
reigned nine

D. Maurigat, base son to Alphonso the first, expelled his nephew D. Alphonso
the chaste, and usurped the crown; he made an unworthy accord with the Moors,
promising to pay them a tribute yearly of fifty virgins of noble families, and
as many of baser condition: for the which he was hated of all men, and died
without children.

D. Veremond, the son of Sillo, and grandchild to Alphonso; having been of
the D. Alphonso, the second or third year of his reign.

D. Alphonso was sole king of Ouiedo after the death of his brother, in the
year 795; he was surnamed the Chaste, for that he forbear the company of any
woman, notwithstanding that he was married; he lived in the time of
Charlemaigne.

D. Ramire was son to the king D. Veremond, called the Deacon, and adopted by
D. Alphonso his uncle; he was a generous and worthy prince.

D. Ordogno son to Ramire.

D. Alphonso the third, surnamed the Great, son to D. Ordogno, a prince
endowed

D. Garcia, the first, his son; he deposed his father Alphonso, who, of a
king, became his sons lieutenant against the Moors; and died in the year
887. D. Garcia having reigned three years, died without children.

D. Ordogno the second, brother to D. Garcia, succeeded him in the realm; he
was a worthy prince.

D. Froilla the second, surnamed the Cruel, brother to D. Ordogno, usurped the
realm from his nephews D. Alphonso and D. Ramires, sons to the deceased; his
life was infamous, and he died a Leper, having reigned only fourteen months.

D. Alphonso, the fourth, son to D. Ordogno, resigned his crown to his
brother D. Ramire,

D. Ramire was king of Ouiedo and Leon in the year 904, and died in the year
924.

D. Ordogno, his son, succeeded him in the realm of Leon.

To D. Ordogno there succeeded D. Sancho the first, surnamed the Fat, in the
realm of Leon.

D. Ramire, the third of that name, his son, succeeded him in the year 923;
and for that he was too young, and the Moors breaking the peace which they had
made with the Spaniards, they made Veremond or Bermond, son to D. Ordogno
their king, in whose time Almansor took the city of Leon, and spoiled the
Church of S. James in Gallicia: Bermond took courage and gathered his forces
together, with Garcia Earl of Castille (for at that time the Castillians had
no king) and took many places from them.

D. Bermond or Veremond, son to king D. Ordogno the third, united the two
realms of Leon and Gallicia; he was much given to his lust and pleasure, so as
he became full of the gout, and therefore was called the Goutie.

D. Alphonso the fifth, son to D. Bermond, did succeed in the realm of Leon.

D. Veremond or Bermond, his son, the third of that name, succeeded his
father D. Alphonso; he was slain in the war he had against his brother in law
the king of Castille, and died without children, by which means the realm
fell to his sister, who had married Ferdinand the first of that name, son to
Sancho Earl of Castille; and so the Castillians

D. Ferdinand being king of Castille and Leon, did afterward usurp the realm
of Navarre, having slain D. Garcia the king his brother in battle; he
recovered the town of Conubra in Portugal from the Moors, and in a manner the
whole realm; and died in the fortieth year of his reign, and of Grace 1064.

D. Sancho and D. Alphonso the sixth, brethren, sons to D. Ferdinand, were
both kings, one of Castille, the other of Leon, but D. Sancho would not suffer
his brother to reign D. Alphonso to the ^rowne.

D. Alphonso the sixth was king of Castille and Leon after the death of D.
Sancho Fernandes Vrraca, who was married to Alphonso king of Nauar^e and
Arragon; she had a son named Alphonso the seventh by Ra^mond Earl of
Barcelonne, her first husband: he succeeded his grandfather, and had these
children, Sancho king of Castille, Ferdinand king of Leon, Alphonso the eighth,
Alphonso the ninth, and Beatrix. This Alphonso the seventh recovered Cordoua.

Sancho, the third of that name, king of Castille, had to his son Alphonso
the eighth, who had many children, Henry the first, king of Castille, Blanch,
mother to S. Lewis, Berengarie, wi^e to Alphonso king of Leon, Vrraca, wife to
the king of Portugal, and E^lenor wife to the king of Arragon; he died in the
1160, or as some write 1214, the five and

D. Henry the first, his son, succeeded him in the realm of Castille and
Tolledo, he being but eleven years old, and died upon a hurt which he received
with a tyle that fell from a house, having reigned but two years.

D. Ferdinand the third, son to D. Alphonso the ninth, was a king of Leon and
Castille; he recovered all Spain, except the realm of Granado.

Alphonso the tenth, son to ^erdinand the third, was king of Castille and
Leon; he was much given to Astronomy.

D. Sancho, called the Brave, son to Alphonso the tenth, succeeded him.

D. Ferdinand the fourth, son to D. Sancho, was king of Leon and Castille.

Alphonso the eleventh, his son, succeeded him.

Peter the first, son to Alphonso the eleventh, king of Castille and Leon; he
was surnamed the Cruel, and was slain by his base brother Henry Earl of
Transtamara.

Henry the second, base son to Alphonso the eleventh, having slain his
brother D. Pedro the Cruel, he made himself king.

John the first, son to Henry the second; this John, king of Castille, and
his wife Ellenor daughter to the king of Arragon, had Henry the third, king of
Castille and Leon, and Ferdinand king of Arragon; Henry had two children, John
King of Castille, and Marie Queen of Arragon.

John the second, king of Castille, who succeeded his father, had Elizabeth,
and Henry

Ferdinand king of Arragon had four children, Alphonso king of Arragon and
Sicile, John who was king after his brother, Marie Queen of Castille, and
Ioane Queen of Portugal. John who succeeded his brother Alphonso, had
Ferdinand, who marrying Elizabeth daughter to king John the second, and heir
of Castille, was king of both the realms.

Ferdinand, the sixth of that name, son to John king of Arragon, had three
children, John who married Margaret daughter to Maximillian, Katherine who was
Queen of England, first, wife to prince Arthur, and then to king Henry the
eighth, his brother, and Io^^e who married Philip Archduke of Austria.

John died without children during the life of his father Ferdinand, who
presently took Philip of Austria, his son in law, for his adopted son; he
was father to

Charles the fifth, Emperor and king of Spain.

Philip the second, his son.

Philip the third, who reigns at this present.

The Kings of Portugal.
THe realm of Portugal is of the noble house of Lorraine, from whence came
Duke Henry, who employed himself with so great valor against the Moors, for
Alphon- Tiresia in marriage, with the country of Portugal, which had then but
the title of an Earldom: it was in the year 1110.

Alphonso the first took upon him the title of king; he recovered Lisbonne
from the Moors, and defeated five infidel kings in battle: in remembrance
whereof, he took five scutchions for his arms.

Sancho the first, the second king. Alphonso the second, the third king. Sancho
the second, the fourth king. Alphonso the third, the fifth king. Denis the
first, the sixth king. Alphonso the fourth, the seventh king. Peter the first,
the eight king. Ferdinand the first, the ninth king. John the first, a bastard,
the tenth king. Edward the first, the eleventh king. Alphonso the fifth, the
twelfth king. John the second, the thirteenth king. Emanuell the first, the
fourteenth king. John the third, the fifteenth king.
Sebastian the first, grand child to king John the third, was slain in Afric
in a battle against the Moors, in the year 1578, and left not any children,
to whom succeeded Henry the Cardinal his great uncle, who being about
threescore and seven years old, Pretendance to the crown of Portugal.
and not likely to leave any successors, there were many which pretended an
interest to the crown, as Philip the second, king of Spain, who came of
Isabella, eldest daughter to king Emanuel, the Duke of Sauoy, who was son to
Beatrix the second, daughter of Ramurcia Farnese issued from Marie, eldest
daughter to D. Edward, son to king Emanuell, and the Duchess of Bragance,
daughter to the said infant D. Edward: and last of all, D. Anthony, Prior of
Crato, whose father D. Lewis was son to king Emanuel, to whom the crown did
of right belong, being issued from a male; but they objected bastardie against
him, and he pleaded his Letters of legitimation, saying, That D. Lewis, his
father, was secretly married to his mother, and therefore was legitimate. King
Henry dying, the King of Spain fortified his title by arms, sending the Duke
of Alua with a great army into Portugal, to force obedience and subjection, if
they refu^ed, which bred a great confusion in the realm, during the which the
Portugals proclaimed D. Anthony king at S. Iren, and reciued him into
Lisbonne, but they were not able Philip, and the justice of his cause, and the
will of the Portugals, were forced to yield to the power of the Spaniards, who
are at this day masters.

Of the Islands of Maiorca, Minorca, and others.


The Islands of Balliares, in old time called Gymnasies, and now Maiorca and
Minorca, make one realm, whereof the king of Spain takes the title.

Maiorca, called by the vulgar people Malorca, is nearer unto Spain than
Minorca, and is within four or five hours sailing, and foureteen miles from
Minorca; some say that it is in circuit two hundred and forty miles, others
write three hundred, and some four hundred and fourscore miles. A stade is
125. paces.
Strab^ makes it six hundred stades long, which are seventy five miles, and
five and twenty miles broad, but late writers have found it much broader, that
is to say, about a hundred miles: and so by this means it should be much
longer than Strabo has written. There is a town of the same name with the
Island, which is the chief of all the Islands. It was in old time called
Palma, and at this day there is a good University, whereas R^imondus Lulliu^
is in great reputation; so as they do entertain there continually, a learned
man with great wages to teach his doctrine publicly. There


THis Island is rough and barren toward the Sea, but upon the sides of hills,
and in the plains and valleis it yields good store of wine, oil, wheat, and
fruits. But especially they have good oils, which is carried from thence in to
Valencia, into Flanders and Italy. They make excellent good cheese there, the
which exceeds in bounty all that is sold in Rome or in Spain. Moreover the
inhabitants make great traffic of course woollen cloth, which they carry unto
all parts that lie about the Island, yea into Sicile. There

Manners of the Inhabitants.
THe Inhabitants of these Islands were in old time great Pirates at Sea, cruel
and savage: they dwelt in rocks, and had no other care but to watch who passed
by sea. They had small vessels, ill appointed, but very light. On a time they
discovered the Roman army a far of, and thinking it had bin some pray,
they wen tto encounter them, where at their first aboard they covered the
Roman ships with stones: but in the end the Romans

The Island of Minorca.
Ptolomees time there were two towns, Iana, which is now called Citadella, and
Mago, which they name at this day Minorca of the name of the Island. It has
many Villages, upon the Sea shore, it is environed with high mountains very
full of trees: And although that this Island be less than the other, yet does
it not yield any thing in bounty, but contrariwise it feeds more beeues and
other cattle, and especially of great Moyles, which have a louder cry than
any other. This Island has two ports, that is to say, Mayon, and Fernelle. In
our time these Islands were made a distinct Realm, the which does also
comprehend

The other is Euissa, some ten miles of, and fifty from the maine land, it is
above a hundred miles about. The nature of this soil is to drive away
serpents, neither can it endure any hurtful beast, but Conies, who do
commonly eat up their corn: This Island abounds in corn and in all kinds of
fruit. They do gather every year great store of salt in this Island, for at a
certain time the Sea ouerflowes the land, and then the Inhabitants stop the
passages by the which the water entered, and so let it stand untroubled, of
which

But to show how the Realm of Majorca was united to the crown of Spain, you
m^st understand, that the Moors of the Affricke held these Islands until the
year 1240. when as Ferdinand king of Castille chased them first out of
Majorca. But the Moors being entered again, James of Arragon (son to king
Peter who was slain before Muret, Ferdinand, expelled the Moors, and took
upon him the title of Majorca and Minorca about the year 1240. This is the
right which the kings of Arragon have unto these Islands, so as the Realm of
Arragon being united to that of Castille by the marriage of Ferdinand and
Isabell^, the kings of Spain which are descended, hold them by a just title.

About the I^lands of Fromentera and Euissa are also three little Islands, that
is, Vedran, Conerella, and Dragomago. And above Euissa betwixt Majorca, and the
mouth of the river of Ebro, is a little desert Island, which they call
Moncolibra, and in the mouth

Finally, near unto the port of Carthagena there is an Island commonly called
Scombraria, the which is little and has nothing in it that merits a discourse.


The Contents.
1 Diverse appellations of the Realm of Naples in Histories: and the
description of the bigness and bounds. II. Divided first into six Provinces, and
at this day into twelve,

THis Realm which contains in a manner a moitie of Italy, Roger the first
king was invested. This denomination might be, for that Roger being then Earl
of Sicile, and desiring to honor his Estate with this royal title, he would
that this other part which joined unto it, should be called Sicile by him that
did inuest him; for the lo^^ of him, and for that he had violently seized
thereon, whilst that William (who held it with the title of Duke of Pouilla or
Calabria) was gone to Constantinople to marri^ the Emperor Alexis daughter: and
after this manner the whole Realm was called the two Siciles. And in truth the
essential title is the Realm of the two Siciles, although that at this day it
be commonly called the Realm of Naples, by reason of the ordinary Peter king
of Arragon seized upon Sicile, whereas the king had bin accustomed to remain,
the which notwithstanding, the kings of Naples did not ^^lly possess, but
after that the Realm of Naples fell unto ^erdinand of Spain, by whom it
descends unto king Philip the third.

This Realm begins at the river of Tranto, whose mouth tends toward the
North,

Alphonso the first, king of Arragon, Naples, and Sicile, divided it into six
provinces, Ferdinand king of Spain, and Lewis 12 the French king divided it
into equal parts; so as Pouillia and Calabria remained to Spain, and Terra di
Laoro, with the city of Naples and Abruzzo unto France. At this day they
divide it commonly into 12 parts; that is, Terra di Lauoro, Abruzzo both on
this side and beyond, Pouille the plain, Capitenate the principality both on
this side and beyond, Basilicata, Calabria high and low, the land of Bari and
Otranto. It contains 2700 towns and villages that are peopled, whereof there
are 20 Archbishoprickes 127

Coasting along the sea, you find Terra di Lauoro or Campania the happy
(whereof Capoua whereas Haniball with his whole army grew effeminate with
their delights) was in old time the chief city. Touching the which, there is
an Ancient which has written, That there were three towns capeable of the
majesty and greatness of an Empire, that is to say, Carthage, Corinthe, and
Capoua: The two first lying far from Rome, were ruined by the Romans, who
consulted long, whether they should do the like unto Capoua: but in the end
for that they would not seem cruel by the ruin so noble a town in Italy,
they assured themselves thereof by the confiscation of their lands, and
depriving them of all former government. They suffered their buildings to
stand, to the end they

This province of Lauoro, or Campania Felice has a most temperate and delicate
air, and is so fertile, as it does not only produce all things necessary for
the life of man in abundance, but also for delight and pleasure. In this Noble
region you may see large and fertile fields, pleasant and fruitful hills,
thick and delightful woods, sweet fountains, physical and wholesome springs
of water, as well for the restoring of man's health, as for his content and
delight. At this day the chief town, not only of this province, but of the
whole realm, is Naples, in truth a royal city. It has about seven miles in
compass, Charles of Anjou. There is not any city where there is so great a
concourse of Noblemen, or where they make so great profession of riding, and
whereas knights do make a better show of what they are, and give themselves
more to all virtuous exercises; the gentlemen repair to five places to spend
their time in honorable exercises, which they call seats. This city has a
port or haven, the which is neither very great nor very safe, but they help it
by means of a peer: There is an Arcenall at Naples, whereas they do
continually make many gall^is and ships for war. They

The principality has for her bounds on the West Terra di Labor, or the land
of Labor; Pasquier has sufficiently refuted in his Recherches, showing by some
passages of old French Poets, that this invention is more ancient. Of this
town, the coast of Amalfe (which looks toward the South takes his name, and
runs about twenty miles in length: it has high

Basilicate contains Lucania, and a part of Pouillia. It has for bounds upon
the West the river of Silare, which is the limit of Campania: upon the Sou^h
the Tuscan sea, upon the East the river of Iae and base Calabria, with a part
of the higher, and toward the North the land of Bar^ It contains the towns
of Melfe, Venosa, Potence, Cerence, Tricarie, Lauell, Montpelosa, Marsico,
Rapolla, with ninety three castells or walled places.

Base Calabria has for her bounds upon the North, high Calabria called in old
time by the rivers of Crathide, and Busente, and is at this day reasonable
rich, but it

High Callabria, according unto Ptolome, has for her bounds toward the East,
the Adriatike sea, upon the South, the river of Alice, and base Callabria,
toward the West, the river of Crathide with the Apennin and Basilicate, and
upon the North, the gulf of Tarentum, and the land of Bary. There is upon this
side two Capes which are very famous, the one is that of Colonnes, in old time
called Lacinia; the other is that of Scylace, which is ex^eeding dangerous. The
chief town of this country is Catanzara; then have you Hierace, which
carries the name of a Marquisat: Bellcastro or Fair Castle, a town eight
miles from the sea: Croton a very ancient and famous town, which does now
carry the title of a Marquisat, yet is it not so rich nor so well peopled as
it has been: Cariathe, which is an Earldome: Bisignan, a principallitie with
a strong Castle, Archites, it is now a principallitie.

The land of Otranto begins at Tarentum, which does bound it upon the South
side with the sea unto Cape Sancta Maria. Upon the East it has for confines
the same Cape, with the Ionian sea, upon the North from Otranto, unto Brindes
or Brundusium, and upon the We^^, the land of Bari and a great part of high
Calabria. It is in form like to a Peninsula, for that it is environed with the
Adria^icke and the Ionian seas; It is thirty Pliny writes, and according unto
Rassan forty miles: The navigations round about it, is of two hundred miles, so
as the circuit of the whole country will be about two hundred and forty
miles. The chi^fe towns are Locci, which is thirty miles from Cape Stancta
Maria, it is a rich town, well peopled, and well built: O^ranto a very
ancient town, which is at this day reasonably well peopled, having a strong
Castle upon a rock which ouerlookes the sea, and a good capable Port, yet
subject to Northerly winds. Brindes is an ancient town, but in a manner
^bandoned at this day by reason of civil discordes. Her port was so good in
former times, as it was numbered among the chief, but it is so choked at this
day, as Gall^is can hardly enter: Castrois, a sea town considerable for the
losses it has received by the

The land of Pouille is divided in two by the Ancients, that is to say, into
the land of Bari called Peucetia by the Ancients, and Pouille the plain, which
they also called Daunia, and these two countries were divided by the river of
Lofante. They comprehend in the second part Capitenate, which contains Mont S.
Ange and the dependances: there are in all thirteen towns, and ninety
Castles or walled places. The towns are Saint Ange, Manfredonia, Siponte,
Salpe, Lesina, Viesta, Ascoli, Bouina, Firenzola, Volturare, Trem^la, and
Troy. It seems that all the riches of Pouillo the plain are gathered
together upon Mont Saint Ange, which has almost one hundred and twenty miles
in circuit. D^omedes would have reduced it to an Island, for that his Istinus
is not above



Pouille the plain, although the soil be light and sandy, and the grass
thin and short, yet is it so fruitful as it does furnish Naples, Sclauonia,
Venice, and Tuscaine, with fat cattle. It has for bounds the land of Bari,
and the river of Lofante, upon the South, the Apennin hills, upon the West,
Abruzzo, and toward the North, a part of the Adriaticke sea.

The country of Abruzzo is the coldest part of all the kingdom, it was
sometime the Henry the fourth, in exchange of a certain tribute remitted to
the Church of Bambergue, where he was borne, by Leo the ninth, and this town
having Frederick the second, who led the people of Amiterne and Forcoigne
thither to assure the realm on that side. They do also comprehend the country
of Molisi in Abruzzo, which has a hundred and four walled places or castells,
and four towns, that is Bojano, Guardialferia, Isernia, and Triuento.

There are in the Adriaticke sea, right against Pouille the plain, the Islands
of Diomedes,

There are also in the gulf of Pouzzoli and of Naples about eighteen Islands,
whereof the most noted is Ischia, the which has eighteen miles in compass, and
is so environed with high rocks, as there is no entrance but by one way. The^e
is a place which they hold to be a Fort, the which is by reason of the
situation. Near unto Ischia is Prosida, whose circuit is about six miles. The
last Island is that of Capri, whether Augustus went so often: the rest which
are to be seen are of no regard.

Cleomines the Lacedimonian, and Alexander and Pyrrhus, both kings of Epirus,
passing out of Greece into Italy, did always make use of this port, for that
it was capable, safe, and near.

Quality of the country.
Gellius writes, according to the authority of Theophrastus, of some other
beasts. The Chersidres or Adders do also breed in this country, and it
receives more hurt from Grasshoppers, than any part of Italy, for that they
leave nothing where they pass, but devour the corn that is ripe in one
night; yet it seems that nature has provided for this inconvenience, by the
means of certain birds they call Gauies which do persecute these beasts.
The country is also much


THere is an Ancient which says, That they of the land of Labor were proud,
by reason Strabo writes, they did enter by sacrifices, after that they had
pacified the Gods, according to the foolish belief of the Ancient. The Priests
of the false Gods were there to conduct them that entered: there was a
fountain, which they held to be Phlegeton, by reason that the waters did
stink. The Priests received them that came to consult with the Oracle, Homer
said, that they never saw Sun. These men were afterward rooted out by a
certain king, who found their predictions false. There was at Naples every
fifth year a combat of Wrestlers and Singers, by the commandment of the
Oracle. In this realm, and not far from Rheggium, was the town of Locres so
well governed by Zaleucus, where they were wont to come with a halter about
their necks when they would propound any new law, to the end they might die if
it were not allowed. The Sabarites were also of this country, whom they did
tax to be so effeminate and delicate, as they had taught their horses to
dance by the sound of Instruments. Finally, all the Inhabitants of this
country were so given to delights, as Haniball suffering himself to be
corrupted with their manners, and changing his natural disposition, lost

The manners of the Neapolitans at this day.
ALl the Neapolitans in a manner are active, and of good spirits, embracing
pleasures more than any people in the world, and take great delight to
entertain Ladies. The nobility for the most part retire to Naples, as well to
enjoy the good air of that city, as to spend their time, and to see the good
company that is commonly there. And

I have said that the Neapolitans had gentle spirits, yet the rule is not so
general, but

The Riches of the Realm of Naples.


The king of Spain draws out of this realm two millions and 500000 ducats
yearly, comprehending the free gift of a million, and two hundred thousand
ducats, which is given every two year to his Majesty, the which is now
reduced to an ordinary rent, like to the one and thirty grains which are
paid for the lodging of soldiers, and entertainment of certain gentlemen
that do accompany the Viceroy, and are called Continuels:


THe Neapolitans have been always inconstant and wavering, and wonderfully
subject

As for these frequent rebellions, although the subjects have been diverse, yet
we may set down two principal causes, that is to say, the greatness and
power of the princes of the realm, and the election of the king, which did
belong unto foreign princes, subject to change their wills, as well by reason
of the short life of Popes, as for the diversity of them. For a part of the
realm having always been divided among the princes that were borne in the
country, who were great by reason of their dependances and their great
revenues, have always had the hearts of their vassals obedient to their wills;
so as they have often dared to threaten, yea to take arms against their own
kings, and for their private

And having truly considered to this purpose him that gouernes, and him that
is governed, the one imperious and hautie, the other proud and untamed; the one
hated for his sudden greatness, and by the inclination of many, and the other
inclined to rebellions, and for this cause easy to be moved and favored by
pretendants: the one being so settled in the realm, as the other cannot easily
shake of the yoke: they may justly either for the time, or for the wise care
of him that gouernes, wonder at this success, concerning and limitations:
punishing enemies and suspected persons severely, and nor admitting Clement 7.
and Paull 4. hate bred. He has also very good intelligence with the Seigneurie
of Venice, both for the good of his subjects of this realm, as to assure
himself on that side, as well in this realm, as in Lombardie; wherefore he
lives at quiet on that side, and has no cause to fear others in this realm:
for that he is prepared against the French and Turk, by the peace and
friendship which he entertaines in Italy, seeking to make himself as strong
as possible he can by Sea, the which has been always held to be the chief
force of this realm, wherein all former invasions have bin

As for the men of war, there are four thousand Spanish footmen, which he
does commonly entertain in this realm, under diverse captains, with a
Coronell and an Auditor, and this body of soldiers is called the Regiment or
Terzo of Naples. In the Castles of the realm, and Towers made for the guard of
the coast, they do commonly maintain a thousand six hundred foot,
comprehending the officers which are accustomed to be in these Castles. There
are a thousand men at arms divided into sixteen Marc Antoine Colo^^e, of an
hundred and ten.

There are also four hundred and fifty light horse divided into five
companies. Moreover

These are named by the magistrates of every country: yet if they do not
please the Captains, they must provide them others to their liking. They are
reasonably well armed, and fitter to defend than to make a war, and these
footmen are called the Battallion: and although that they be not paid but when
they serve their Captains, yet the other officers have their ordinary
entertainment.

There are thirty and seven Galleis in this realm, that is to say, thirty
and three of

In like manner the Garrisons of Castles, as well of the three of Naples, as of
others which are throughout the realm, are two third parts less than the king
of Spain paies: and the greatest force of their artillery is in the new
Castle, and in that of S. Erme at Naples, and in the Fort of Gaiette and the
Castle of Capoua, for all the rest is of no great moment. All their munition is
not great, which does plainly show the sparing and fraud of the kings
Officers, as in other things which abound in the realm.

This realm is very well peopled: the lands are for the most part divided
among particular men of the realm, under diverse titles, who have increased in
number and decreased in reputation, both for that they are fallen to base
persons, either by purchase or Paull the fourth raised against them, did levy
in this realm twenty thousand foot, seven hundred men at arms, and one
thousand five hundred light horse. The chief Forts are Naples with her three
Castles, that is, the new Castle, Castle Ouo, and that of S.Erme, Mancia,
Crotona, Tarentum, Gallipoli, Otranto, Brindes with the Fort of Saint Andrew,
Monopoli, Bari, Trani, Barlette, Manfredonia,

The Government of the Realm.
THe king of Spain has commonly a viceroy in this realm, who remains at
Naples, Naples, as it shall seem best unto the parties; the jurisdictions of
the chief town have

There are also seven principal officers in this realm, besides the Viceroy,
that is, the Constable, the Chancellor, the chief Justice, the high Admiral,
the high Treasurer, the great Protonotarie, and the great Seneshall. There are
four courts which they call seats, That is Capoua, Nide, Montane, and Saint
Gregory, whereas the Princes, Dukes, Marquisses, and all the principal of the
realm, and the other orders assemble to confer

The Religion, and that which concerns the Church.
ALl the inhabitants of the Realm of Naples are held to be affectionat to the
Romish Religion. As for the estate of the Church of this Realm, it is composed
of twenty Archbishopricks, the which have many Bishops under them, and they
are set down in this order.

The Archbishop of Naples has under him the Bishops of Nola. Pouzzole. Cerre.
Ischia.


The Bishop of Auerse is not subject to any one.

The Archbishop of Capoua has under him the Bishops of Sernie. Thiano.
Caiazzo. Carinola. Cessa. Calui. Caserte. Venafri. Aquino.


The Bishop of Mont Caffin, and the Abbot of the Monastery of the same place,
so ordained by Pope John the two and twentieth, is not subject to any one.

The Archbishop of Salerna has under him the Bishops of Champagne. Capaccio.
P^licastro. Nu^co. Sarno. Marsico. Nocera delli Pagani. Acierno.


The Bishop of Rauel and Cave are not subject to any one*

The Archbishop of Amal^y has under him these Bishops Lettre: Scala. Capri.
Minori.


The Archbishop of Surrente has under him the Bishops of Vica. Massa.
Castell'a Mare.


The Archbishop of Conze has under him the Bishops of Muro. Cagiano.
Monteuerde. Alcedonia. Saint Angelo de Lombardie. Bisache is united to that of
Saint Ange.


The Archbishop of Cirenze has under him these Bishops Aquilonia. Potenza.
Grauina. Tricaria.


Matere, which is now an Archbishopricke, it was informer times under the
Diocese ofCirenze, and is now united unto it.

The Archbishop of Tarentum has under him the Bishops of Motula. Castellaneta.




Hostuni.

The Archbishop of Otranto has under him these Bishops Castro. Galipoli.
Vgento. Leccia. Capo di Leuco.


The Bishop of Nardo is not subject to any one.

The Archbishop of Bari has under him the Bishops of Malfetta. Giouenazzo.
Ruu^. Salpe. Pulignano. Moneruino. Lauello. Conuersano. Bitetti. Andri. Bisegli.


The Archbishop of Trani has under him the Bishops of Montepeloso. Rapollo.
Alessano.




The Archbishop of Maafredonea, called Siponto, to whom that of Mont S. Ange is
joined, has under it the Bishop of

Vieste.

The Archbishop of Beneuent has under him the Bishops of Luceria. Ascoli.
Firenzola. Telese. Saint Agata di Gotti. Monteuerde. Marsico Vecchio. Monte
Marano. Auelin is joined wi^h Frequentin. Vico della Baronia. Ariano. Bojano.
Bouino. Turibulense. Dragonaria. Vulturaria. Larino. Can. Termuli. Lesina.
Treuento. Guardia Alfana.


The Archbishop of Ci^ita di Chietti has under him the Bishops of Aquila.
Sulmona.




The Archbishop af Laucian has under him the Bishops of Sora. Theramo.


The Archbishop of Reggio has under him these Bishoprics Cassano. Nicastro.
Catanzaro. Crotone. Tropea. Castella Mare della Bruca. Geraci. Squillaci.
Nicotera. Boue.


The Archbishop of Cosence has under him the Bishop of Martoran.

The Archbishop of Rossan has no Bishop under him.

The Bishop of Bissignan is not subject to any.

The Archbishop of S. Seuerin has under him the Bishops of Vmbriato. Saint
Marco. Belcastro. Isola. Ficorentino. Strongoli. Mileto. Cariati.


The Bishopric of the Island of Lipari is united unto that of Parenze, and
both are

The Archbishops and Bishops have good revenues, and I will speak one world in
the conclusion of this discourse, that among all the places of devotion which
are at Naples, there is one which is called the mount of Pity, which spends
sixty thousand crowns a year, either in the feeding of them that are in it,
or in alms, or in the nursing of 2000. Infants throughout the realm.

Kings of Naples.
THere was never realm like unto that of Naples, which has been so often
taken and not ruined, and which being an enemy unto it self, has made a show
of liberty in a

Roger Earl of Sicile, and by the testament of William Duke of Pouillia and
Calabria, was descended from Tankred, son to Richard of Normandy: he took
the city of Naples from the Emperor of Constantinople, about the end of
September in the year 1130. and suddenly was declared king of Naples and
Sicilie at Beneuent, by Pope Anacletus 2. who retained the homage.

This realm continued to the discendants of Roger, until that king William,
surnamed the good, being dead without lawful children, and the Barons of the
realm having chosen king, Tankred, base nephewe to this William, Clement 3.
pretended that this realm was diuolued unto the church, made war in
Pouillia, and after him Celestin 3. crowning and confirming the Emperor Henry
6. upon condition that he should recover this realm, as a fee of the church,
invested him publicly, and so the S^^gneurie passed from the Normans to the
Germans, who held it with little good fortune, for that the Emperor Frederick
2. son to the said Henry, being a persecutor of the ^^urch, was deprived of
the Empire by Innocent 4. and withal, of the realm of Naples, the which was
given to a son of the king of England, but he did not endeavor to expel
Fredericks children, who had

Vrbain 4. transported it to Charles of Anjou, Earl of Prouence, and brother
to S. Lewis, who was invested by Clement 4. upon condition, that he should pay
40000. ducats yearly unto the holy See, with a white Hackeney.

The succession of this realm continued by direct line in the house of Anjou,
unto Ione 1. niece to king Robert, at what time Vrbain 6. transferred it to
Charles of Duras, who descended from a brother of the said king Robert, and
quite deprived this Queen, as excommunicate, for that she had been a
Partisan in the creation of Clement 7. the Antipope, made at Fundy.

After Charles, the children of Ladislaus reigned successively, who was also
king of Hungary, Ioane also, but not without difficulty. Lewis of Anjou,
second son to the French king, was adopted by Ioane with the consent of
Clement the Antipope: but he was slain before Bar, iby the troops of Charles
of Duras.

Lewis his son was crowned and invested in the realm by the same Clement:
but he

His son of the same name, being called to the conquest of this realm by
Martin 5. who invested him, gave occasion to queen Ioane, to make offer thereof
to Alphonso king of Arragon, who was then in Sardinia; but for that Alphonso,
being come to Naples, could not endure that the whole government of the realm
should pass under the queens (...)* he sought to put her in prison, but she
fled away secretly and declared the said Lewis her heir, disanulling the first
adoption of Alphonso, who notwithstanding, after the death of Lewis, the queen
declared Rene brother to Lewis her successor, and that after the queens death
Eugenius 4. pretended the realm to be fallen unto the Church: Alphonso took
Naples by force, and remained Master thereof, after which he did easily
obtain the inuestiture of Eugenius; and in this manner the realm past from
the French to the Catalans. Rene left Lewis 11. the French, king for his
successor in the realm of Naples.

Charles 8. succeeded him, and made himself absolute Master of the realm of
Naples. In the end, Lewis the 12. the French king, and Ferdinand king of Spain
divided it betwixt them, after the flight of king Frederick: but the French
lost it by their bad government, so as the Spaniards enjoyed it all: and the
misfortune which fell upon king Francis at Pania, and the troubles which have
since hapened in France, have taken from our kings all

SICILE.
The Contents.
THe situation of Sicile, her triangular form, and the Capes which bound it,
in ancient time joined to Italy, but since separated by an Earthquake, or by
the fire of Montgibel. II. Division of this Island into three regions,
containing one hundred seventy three towns. III. It ^bounds in bit^men,
corn, muskadell, honey, pitch, saffron, wool, sugar canes mineral salt,
precious stones, porphyre, marbell, alablaster, and mines of gold, silver, and
Iron. IIII. Montgibell vomiting out flames of fire incessantly, yet covered

THis Island which yields not to any in the Mediterranean sea, lies Strabo and
Ptolomie make it one hundred and eighty.

This Capo Boco is from Cape de Calaris in Sardinia, one hundred and ninety
miles, or according unto others, two hundred; but in those places which are
nearest unto Italy, it is not distant above one thousand five hundred paces,
and those which are most remote are three hundred miles distant, which is
betwixt Drepane in Sicile, and Naples. And therefore all Authors in a manner
are of opinion, that Sicile was in old time joined to Italy, as a Peninsula,
and that since it was disioyned from the firm Land by an Earthquake, or else
by reason of the burning of Montgibell, or else by the continual flowing and
ebbing of the Ionian and Tuscane seas. There are great presumptions hereof, for
that the sea in this strait, is not above 80 paces deep, and Rhegium, a town
seated upon

Finally, although that this Island be of a triangular form, yet her sides are
crooked: for that part which is toward the East, is concaue, and that which
bends to the North, is somewhat crooked. That part which lies upon the North of
Capo Boco, unto Cape de Faro, contains two hundred eighty one miles, or
according unto others, two hundred eighty five, the South part, from Cape de
Boco* unto Cape de Passero, one hundred ninety three miles, or as others
write, two hundred and forty, upon the East, from Cape de Passero, unto Cape
de Faro, it contains one hundred and fifty miles, or according Possidonius,
by the report of Strabo, sets down but five hundred and fifty.

This Island is set like unto Sardinia, in the fourth Climat, betwixt the
eleventh and twelfth Parallel, whereas the longest day in Summer is of
fourteen hours, and two third parts, and in these two Islands the Star
Canope is seen, which is the cleerest Star of all those that are in the ship
of Argos, which Star is scarce seen in any part of Italy.

The whole Island is divided into three Regions, which are called valleis; of
those, Ptolomie, it imbraceth the towns and countries of Messina, Catania,
Melazzo, Tauromina, Cifalu, and Montgibel. The valley of Necti, or Noto, is
compassed in by the rivers of Teria and Gele, containing all the Angle of Cape
de Passero, and it was the place whereas the Siracusans had their abode, and in
it are contained the towns and countries of Noto, Siracusa, Lentini, Augusta,
and Castrogiouanni. The valley of Mazara contains the rest of the Island, in
which is the Angle of Capo Boco, there did the Orbites and the Segestains
dwell: it comprehends the towns and countries of Termine, Palermo, Monreale,
Mont Saint Julian, Erice, Trapani, Mazara, Marsala, and

The noblest part of the Island, is that which lies toward the East: for that
it contains in it the famous cities of Messina, Catania, and Siracusa, with the
ports of Messina, Saracusa, and Augusta; among which ports, that of Messina,
has the praise for beauty and pleasantness, and that of Augusta, for
greatness, the which was so spacious, as it could not be fully fortified.
There is also that of the Island of Magnisi, the which was, as some hold, the
great port of Siracusa. The Island of Magnisi, is called a Peninsula, and may
contain about thirty miles in compass, with an Istmus, not above twenty or
five and twenty paces broad. An excellent situation for a city. Siracusa was
in old time a great city, whose walls had in compass, according unto Strabo,
one hundred and eighty An Italian Stade contains 125. paces.
but now it is joined to the rest, whereas at this day the city stands; there
does rise with an admirable spring of water, that famous fountain of Aretusa.
Toward the North, there is not any famous city, but that of Palermo, where
the Vice-Royes make their residence, in which there is an University: this
city, for the greatness of the situation, for the multitude of inhabitants,
for the concourse of nobility, for the stateliness of the building, and for
the pleasantness and riches of the Territory is such, as it might do honor
to two Sicilies. It had no port, but they have made a very spacious one, with
an admirable Peer, not unworthy the greatness of Rome. Then follows
Trapani, a strong town with a large port: in this country grows delicate
wines, called Bocasie: the inhabitants and near unto it, there is a forest
which has eight miles in compass, Next is, Lentini,

The Quality of the Country.


This Island does also yield some precious stones, for they find the Agate,
upon the shore of the river of Agatha, and they dig the stone called Berill
near to the town of Grateria. There is also Porphire of two kinds, that is
to fay, red, mingled with white and green, and of diaper red more precious
than the Porphire.

There are quarries of black marble, and others of diverse other colors.

There is also marble in the valley of Mazara, and mines of gold, silver and
iron, and also of diamonds: and there grows corrall betwixt Drepane, and the
Island of Elie.



The Manners of the ancient Sicilians:
Minos. There were also colonies sent by the Roman^ into Sicile, in the time of
the first punicke war, and by Augustus. It has been held by the Emperors
of Constantinople, then it was possessed by the Goths, who after seventeen
years, where expelled by Bellissarius. The Sarrazins became Masters thereof,
and were afterward chased away by the Normans. Then came there a great
multitude of Lombards into this Island, and after them Germans, but they were
expelled by Clement 7. and the French succeeded them, then the Arraganois
became Masters. So as the manners and humors of the Inhabitants of this Island,
have been diverse, according to the people that have held it; and this change
has bred a strange medlee of their dispositions. They say, among other things
of them of Agrigentum, that they did build as if they should live ever, and did
banquet as if they were dying

They had a sacred place, where they did swear and take their oaths; writing
that which they did swear upon a table of wood, the which they did cast into
the water which came from a fountain, called by them Crateres: if they swear
truly, the table floated upon the water, if otherwise, it sunk unto the
botome. The humors of the Sicilians have always been found inconstant and
subject to all winds, neither had they ever any certain resolution: they were
eloquent in their speech, and Diodorus and Aristotle affirm that they invented
the art of Rethoricke and the Eglogues; and Pliny and Plutarche say, that they
have innented Clock^s, and some Engines for war. This was the country of
that great Mathematician, Archimedes.


THe Sicilians are for the most part subtle witted, and eloquent by nature; by
reason whereof, Apul^ius terms them men with three tongues. Moreover they are
pleasant, full of sentences, and witty in their answers, but very great
talkers: Moreover they are full of suspicion, envious, and sometimes
troublesome in their conversation: they offend others easily, and are soon
drawn to take revenge of any injury that is done them: They are great
flatterers; yet they have this good in them, that they entertain strangers
courteously, they are fit to invent, and apt for the study of speculatiue
sciences and for Protheus, submitting themselves to any one, whom they think
able to give an end to their dessignes, and they serve them in such sort, as
they

It is an old humor of the Noble men of Sicile, to seek some intelligence in
the King of Spaines Court, sometimes with him that is in greatest credit,
sometimes with the secretaries; in writing they lay hold of every bruit and
flying tale: the which they do the more

The Riches of the Island.


The Forces of the Island.
THe king of Spain does commonly entertain good garrisons, especially upon
the sea coast, which the Viceroy does fur^ish, when there is need, with men
and captains. Palermo and Messina are good and strong towns. There are many
strong castles, which would trouble him much, that would attempt the conquest
of this Island.

The Government.


The Viceroy calls these men by his letters, commanding them to come at a
certain

The first point which they most commonly treat of, and for the which they are
called, is touching the free gift, and whether they shall give it or no: so as
if they conclude,

There are three Sovereign Seats, or Jurisdictions in Sicile, which manage
all matters of Justice, the great Court, the sacred Conscience, and the
Demeanes or Patrimony.

In the first, there is a President, six Judges, the kings Advocate, and the
Protector of the Demeanes when he pleases. The President and the kings
Advocate are most commonly for life, the Judges are changed every two years.
There are three civil, and three

The second Seat, called the sacred Conscience, which signifies as much as the
court of Appellations, is composed of a regent for life, and of three Judges,
whose offices continue but two years, and it is at the disposition of the
Viceroy to appoint the Judges of other causes.

The third Court or Jurisdiction called the Demeanes or Patrimony, which is
like unto the Chamber at Rome, or the Summarie at Naples, has a President, a
Conseruator, a Protector, a Judge, and four Masters of Accounts; and for that
of necessity all the Officers of the said three Courts (except the
Conseruator, and Protector of the Demeanes, who may be strangers) must be borne
within the realm, or have married Sicilian

Matters of Justice are thus handled by persons, to whom the Viceroy gives
great authority, according to occasions, and especially in criminal causes,
and they that exercise this Jurisdiction, are called Captains at arms. These
Captains are of three sorts: the

are more prejudicial to a realm, than banished men themselves, if the
Viceroy keeps

Besides the said officers, there are two other private jurisdictions at Messina
and Palermo; at Messina, there is a Court established by the king, with Judges,
and sovereign authority, as well in civil as criminal causes; and Palermo
has a Praetor for civil causes, and a Captain for criminal: No Citizen may
be drawn out of his jurisdiction, and if a cause of the Territory of Palermo
be in the great Court, it shall be sent back to the court of Palermo, and the
like is done with them of Messina.

There is also another member of Justice, which consists in the Audience, as
well public as private, which the Vice roy gives, wherein he dispatches many
causes summarily

There is the kings sacred Council, whereas all the Officers of the great
Court of the D^meanes assist, and sometimes the Master of the Portulane. This
Council is assembled for matters of great importance, whenas the Court alone,
or that of the Demeanes may be suspected, and whenas the Viceroy will
proceed, with greater assurance of Justification, in some dangerous
particulartie, or whenas they are to make any good provision for occasions of
war.

In the Court of the Demeanes, they are to keep an account of the kings
revenues,

The quantity of wheat comes to the Viceroys knowledge, either by
revelation, or by the estimate, and computation of their ha^^est. Revelation
is, whenas the Viceroy sends forth commissioners, forcing every man to
discover his wheat, wherein there is always some fraud committed. The
Estimate of the harvest is made after this manner; they make account, that they
sow in Sicile a thousand charges of wheat, and then they

The price rises from the quantity, which is set by persons deputed by the
Viceroy, who are judicious and of a good conscience, and this is the second
consideration.

The third consideration is of requests which comes from abroad, whereof the
king must be well advertised, before that he does publish the new impost.

The fourth consideration, is the quantity of the ordinary, that is to say,
the charge which does always follow the transportations without other
imposition, and this must be known, to be able to make the dessigne of a new
impost.

Touching this business for whea^e, there is a principal Commissarie called
the Master Portulane, who has a particular charge, and there are other
Portulanes under his jurisdiction, yet they are not created by him, but by the
Viceroy: To him all the Viceroys letterstouching, the transportation of
wheat and such like matters, are directed. There are eight Chargers within the
realm, five principal, and three that have but small dealings. Private men
bring their wheat unto these Chargers, to be delivered into the ships: Every
Charger has a Keeper of his Magazine or Storehouse, which is an office that
the

Affaiers, by reason of the reueneues, are troublesome to the Viceroy, and
bring danger to his reputation; they are troublesome, for that the kings
necessities force him to be sharp, and a bad payer of his debts: from whence
grows, the common discontent of those which have credit in Court, and the
continual complaints which come unto the kings ears, the which are such, many
times, as it were fit they were satisfied. The danger grows only from the
business of wheat, whereof they treat in the Court of the Demeanes, for
interests of rates: for that the officers have always some dessigne, and the

Sometimes upon complaint made by them of the Island unto the king, there are
commissioners sent, to examine and censure the actions of the Vice roy, his
favorites, and officers, and this is called a Syndication. Syndication, what it
is.
This Syndication, may justly be termed the guard of justice and laws, the
remedy of grieuances, the bridle of officers, the general content of the
whole people, and the greatest sign of the princes holy intention. For this
cause they are all inclined to send often, and to grant it willingly when the
Estates demand it. But for that so good a medicine is given with contrary
conditions to that it

As for the Syndication which is required by the realm, the king does
presently conceive one of the aforesaid opinions, if he have it not before: and
moreover, he finds that

The Religion, and that which concerns the Church.
THe inhabitants of this Island follow the Romish Religion: They have the
fathers, Inquisitors,

The Kings.


Of the Estate of the king of Spain
THE ISLAND OF SARDINIA.
The Contents.
1 DEscription of this Island, her length, breadth, and under what Climat.
Little inhabited



Quality of the Country.
THis Island is duided into two Regions or parts, that is to say, into the Cape
of Calaris, Strabo says, a goat, and their horns like to a sheep, but
bending backward: they live in the mountains, and run very swiftly, their

The Manners of the Ancient.
THe Carthaginians (who made themselves masters of Sardinia) would not suffer
them that were borne in the country to till and manure the ground: The
Sarrazins have held it, and then the Pisans, and lastly it fell into the hands
of the kings of Arragon, so as now the king of Spain carries it among his
other titles; and they have lived sometimes after one sort, sometimes after
another, according to the Conquerors

The Manners of them at this day.
THe Inhabitants of Sardinia are strong of body, and of a brown and swart
complexion, by reason of the heat of the sun. They are not very civil, and
are much given to labor and to hunting: they eat gross meats willingly; but
they entreat strangers courteously and live quietly among them, yet some say
that they are full of cruelty. They are much given to theeuing and piracie at
Sea.


THey make good store of money of their wine which they carry to Rome, and of
their horses, which they fell at a good rate to strangers, they are so
courageous and of great toil. They make also some money of their Muscrions
skins, which they carry into Italy.

The Forces.
THe king of Spain does always entertain some garrisons in this Island, but
the small number of the Inhabitants will always make it to be of less force.
Calaris is the

The Government.
THe king of Spain has a Viceroy in this Island, who remains at Calaris, and
disposes of all things. The Justice is in a manner like unto that which is
practiced in Sicile.

The Religion, and that which concerns the Church.
THe Sardinians are Romish Catholics, and there are Inquisitors in this
Island, as in that of Sicile. There are three Archbishops, that is to say, he
of Calaris, who has under him the Bishops of Sulo, Dolia, and Puella: He of
Saffaris, who has under him the Bishops of Sora, Plonata, Ampuria, Gisace, or
Gerarda, Castre, Othae, and Bosane: He of Albore has under him the Bishops of
Vssella, Saint Just, and Terra Alba: They of Siuita and Galtella are
priueledged.

The Princes.
THe Carthagenians possessed this Island, but they were expelled by the Romans:
The Sarazens invaded it afterward, upon the declining of the Roman Empire;
after which, it was taken by the Geneuois and the Pisans, and the Pope having
wrested it out of their hands, gave it in fee to the king of Arragon, and by
this means it came into the power of the king of Spain.


The Contents.
1 CIrcuit of the Duchy of Milan: The chief towns: among others Milan
peopled with two hundred thousand inhabitants: in former times possessed by the
Gauls,

THe Duchy of Milan has in circuit about three hundred Alexander the second,
Urban the third, Celestin the fifth, and in our time Gregory. They admire
three things in this city for their magnificence and stateliness, the Castle,
the Domo or Cathedral Church, and the Hospital. Cremona stands in this
Duchy, where there are goodly buildings, as well public as private: and the
town of Lodi, which is rich. But these towns yield in greatness to Pauia, a
good and an ancient town, sometimes the abode of the Lombard kings, in which
there is an University.

There is also Nouara seated upon a little hill, wherein there are noble
families: and Strabo writes, that it has eight and thirty miles in length,
and four in breadth. The river of Adda passes through the midst of this
Lake, and yet their waters do not mingle, but the river does float over the
other. There are many castles and villages about this lake, which do beautify
the place and make it

The city of Milan was for a long time under the dominion of the Gauls,
until that M. Marcellus the Consul, having defeated Virdumarus king of the
Insubrians, made it subject to the Romans. The power of the Emperors growing
weak, this city was spoiled by many barbarous Nations, that is to say, by the
Goths, Huns, and Lombards. Charles the Great, this city obeyed the kings of
France, and afterward the Emperors of Germany. In the end it ^ebelled in the
times of Frederick the first, and Frederick the second, Emperors, and had new
lords, that is to say, the Galeaces, Viscontes, who had the title of Dukes
given them afterward by the Emperor Wenceslaus, in the year 1395. These
coming to fail, the Sforces succeeded in their place, who ended in the person
of Francis. The French kings have long held this city, but in the end it fell
into the hands of the King of Spain, with the whole Duchy, whereunto
notwithstanding, the French kings do rightly pretend, as does appear by the
Genealogy of the Dukes of Milan.

The Quality of the Country.


The Manners of the inhabitants.
THis Country breeds men fit for learning, arms, and merchandise, yet in
some

The Riches.


The king of Spain receives from this Estate yearly eight hundred thousand
ducats of ordinary, besides the free gifts and other extraordinary matters:
And to show, that this king can tell how to draw as much as is possible from
this Estate, or that his officers make it for him, the proverb of Italy
says, That the officer of Sicile does gnaw, He of Naples does eat, but He of
Milan does devour.


THe king of Spain does entertain continually in this Estate three thousand
foot (Spaniards) one thousand light horse, and six hundred men at arms, for
the guard

The king of Spain has no cause to fear any, in regard of Milan, but the
Venetians, who have remained a long time quiet, and as it seems demand
nothing but rest; or the duke of Sauoy, who may much annoy him, either by
entering suddenly into this Estate, being assisted by some greater prince, or
else in giving passage to those that would undertake to invade it: but the
Alliance which is betwixt them two may free him from all

The Government.
THe king of Spain has a Governor in this Duchy, who is also Captain
General of the foot and horse which are entertained there, and carries the
title. The knowledge

Genealogy of the Dukes of Milan.
Matthew Visconte in the year 1312. Galeace Actio. Marc.
John Bishop of Milan. Luchin. Stephen. Matthew Galeace. Barnabie. John Galeace,
son to Galeace: John Maria. Philip Maria. Blanch married to Francisco Sforce.
Galeace. Lewis, Duke. Ascanio. Philip. Octauio.

Valentine.
Yoland.



Genealogy of Sforce.
Francisco Sforce. Lewis, Duke. Maximilian. dead without heirs. Francisco.
dead without heirs.
Ascanio. Philip. Octauian. Galeace. John. Blanch Maria. Bonna married to
Sigismond king of Poland. Francisco Sforce the last duke led captive into
France.



By what right the king of France pretends the Duchy of Milan.
John Galeace son to Galeace was first Duke, created by Wenceslaus, he had
John Maria the second duke, who died without heirs. Philip Maria the third
duke, who had no lawful issue. Blanch his base daughter married to Francisco
Sforce, who usurped by force the Duchy of Milan.
Valentine who was married to Lewis duke of Orleans, upon condition that if her
two brethren died without sons, the lawful successors of Valentine should be
heirs of the Duchy of Milan: and they say the Pope signed this treaty, for
the which many thousands of Christians have lost their lives. Philip Earl of
Vertus, who died without heirs. Galeace governor of Milan. John Galeace
whosucceeded. Blanch Maria. Bonna married to the king of Polonia. Francisco
Sforce the last duke, led captive into France.

Lewis Sforce who was made duke by the Emperor after his brothers son, whom
some say he poisoned. Maximilian died without children. Francisco died without
children.
Lewis the twelf^h, duke of Orleans, who also made war to recover the Duchy of
Milan, and being king he took Milan by force, and carried Lewis Sforce away
prisoner. Claude daughter to Lewis, married to Francis duke of Valois, and
afterward king of France. Francis of Valois the French king. Henry 2. king.
Charles Earl of Angoulesme, Loyse his wife, sister to Philibert duke of
Sauoy. Francis 2. the French king.
Charles Duke of Orleans, who after his uncles death went with an army against
Milan. John Earl of Angoulesme.



THe Ancients place these Islands in the Atlantic sea, and call them the
Fortunat Islands, but they do not agree in their names. And modern writers are
very different from the ancient, touching their disposition and situation.
They were unknown since the ruin of the Roman Empire, until that a French
gentleman called John of Betancorte made conquest of some of them, in the year
1405; which conquest was afterward continued by D. Fernando de Castro, by the
order of the infant, D. Henry

The Quality of the Country.


The Manners.
THe inhabi^an^^, whom they call Ganches, were in former times so gross and
rude, as they (...) the use of fire. They did believe in one Creator of the
world who rewarded the good, and did punish the wicked, and herein they all
agreed, but in other things they disagreed much. They had no iron, but did
esteem it much (if any came to their hands for use. They made no account of
gold or silver, saying, that it was a madness

The Riches.
THe Islands of the Canaries vent their excellent wines into all Europe, as
also, their ^^gars, for which cause the Spanish and Italian Merchant come
thither to buy it,

The Government.
THere is in the Island of great Canaria, a seat of justice, whereas they hear
all causes, and do justice to the other Islands. The laws of Spain are
practiced there.

The Religion, and matters which concern the Church.
THe people of this country in former times did worship the Sun, Moon, and
Stars: but the Spaniards having made themselves Masters thereof, in the year
1404, settled

The Islands of Cape Verd.
SOme think that these be the ancient Islands of Hesperides: They have taken
the name of Cape Verd, from Cape d'Africa, which stretches it self into the
sea, right against the said town. They be nine in number, and were discovered,
in the year 1455, by Lewis Cadamuste, others write, that they were found out
by Antonio de Nolli a Geneuois, and began to be peopled in the year 1440.
Their names are, Saint James, and

When as the Sun passes into Cancer, it raines in a manner continually
there. Upon the West of Saint James, is the Island of Fire, and that of Bra^a,
of small importance, yet the Island of Fire, has some dwellings in it; and
upon the North, is the Island of May, where there is a broad Lake, two leagues
long, full of salt, a common thing in those Islands: but there is one has more
of those salt pans, than all the rest, and therefore it was called the Island
of ^alt, which is otherwise barren, but only of wild goats. Bonauista has a
name, contrary to her quality, for that it is without

The Island of the Prince.
THis Island del Principe stands three degrees from the Equinoctial Northward;
it is so called, for that the revenues thereof were assigned to the Prince of
Portugal for his entertainment. It lies from the Island of S. Thomas, Northward
one hundred and twent^e mi^es* it is little, but good, and therefore reasonably
well ^anured, their greatest wealth grow^ by sugar, whereof they send great
store into other countries: There grows


MOzambique is distant from the firm land about half a mile: It is a town
situated in the Island of Prase, which Island contains in bigness about
half a mile, and is plain. There is a very good Port, whereas the Portugals
ships lie without danger, having a Fort which couers them.

The quality of the country.


Their Manners.
THere are in this Island some forty or fifty Portugals which are married
there, and dwell commonly in this Island; these men live after the manner of
their own country. Besides these forty or fifty Portugals, and the Mestiz
which are engendered of Indian women by Portugals, there are some four hundred
families of Negros which dwell there, and their houses are covered with straw:
these live partly after the manner of the Portugals, and partly like the other
Negros. But they that live betwixt Mozambique and the Cape of Good Hope, are
altogether barbarous and savage, without either God or


THere is a mine of gold near to Sofale; which is three score French leagues
from Mozambique, toward the Cape of Good Hope; there is much gold drawn out
of this mine, and an other kind of gold which they call Botongo, and Ouro Po,
that is to say, poulder of gold, for that this gold is thin, like unto sand,
and yet as good as any that comes from the East. The governor of Mozambique
has a Lieutenant which remains in the Fort of Sofale, and sends vessels
called Pangajos to Mozambique, which go along the coast and carry gold to the
governor. These vessels are made of a light wood, and the boords are joined
together with thread having but one nail only to hold Sofale and Angola. They
carry from Mozambique to the Indies, gold, ambergreece,

The Forces.
THe Portugals have a Fort in this Island, which was made perfect in ten or
twelve years, it is as well fortified as any one that is in all those parts.
But there is very small store of Artillery, and munition for war; neither
are there many soldiers. Notwithstanding, at any time of need, all the
Portugals which dwell in this Island are

The Government.
THe governors charge which is sent to Mozambique continues three years, at
the

The Religion.
Some of the Negros which remain in the Island of Prase, whereas Mozambique
stands, are Christians, but the rest hold the Mahometane law, and the opinion
received by the Turks, who had bin in those countries before the Portugals.
But they whom they call Mestiz are all very affectionat to the Romish religion.

The town of Ormus.
I Place Ormus in the Monarchy of Spain, for that it is tributar^e to the
Spaniards,

The Quality.
THis Island is full of rocks, stony, and in a manner barren, where there is
not any grass to be seen. The rocks are all covered with salt, and their
houses built of salt

The Manners.
THe inhabitants of the Realm of Ormus, participat of the humors of the
Persians and Arabians, but I will not make any long discourse of their manners
and humors, but will speak more particularly thereof when I shall come to the
realm of Persia, and shall treat of Arabia.


BY reason of the situation, and commodity of this Island, it abounds in all
things, and is frequented by the merchants of Persia, Arabia, Turkey, and the
Indies, and with all the neighbor countries; but the greatest numbers are of
Armenians, Persians, they of Asia, and the Venetians, who are very curious to
recover the precious stones which come to Ormus from the Indies, and they
return from Ormus to Venice by land. They bring to this Island, from Persia,
Coracon, and Dias, goodly tapistries which they call Alcatiffes, and Grogerans
of diverse sorts from Turkey; in like manner from Arabia, many herbs and
physical drugges, Dragons blood* Manna, Mirre, Incense, and excellent horses
from Barem; with many goodly pearls from Masca^te, which is a Port

The governor of Ormus reapes more commodity than any other at the Indies,
except A Rickes is five shillings starling.
so as a horse of a mean bounty shall be sold for four or five hundred
Pardauues, every one of which, is about a Rickes Doller. The most convenient
time to go from Goa

The Forces.
THe chief strength of the realm consists in the Fort which the Portugals
have built there, the which is well fortified, and there are Cesternes in this
Fort as in that of Mozambique, by reason that the Island has great want of
water. This Fort is reasonably well furnished with soldiers and Artillery, to
keep the Mahometans in awe. All other places are of very small importance.

The Government.
THe Portugals govern themselves after the manner of their country, and the
captain or governor of the fort carries himself, as they do in other places
of those quarters where they obey the king of Spain. The king of Ormus
remains in this Island, but not in the place where as the Portugals are. They
that are made kings hold it for a maxim of State in the beginning of their
reign to put out the eyes of their brethren, and of all those of the blood
royal; which done, he gives them all the contentment that they can desire,
except that which may satisfy the sight: For there is a settled law, that no
blind man may govern the realm, so as by this means they are freed from all
fear of civil

The Religion.
THe king of Ormus and all his subjects are Mahometans, and follow the Persian
Religion; but they that are Portugals, or issued from Portugals, are very
zealous Catholics: and moreover, there are some of the Country which have
been converted by the preaching of father Gasper a Jesuit of Zeland.

The Island of Diu.
THis Island of Diu, sometimes called Alambater, is distant from the river
Indus five

The Quality of the Island.
THere is small store of fruit in this Island, but it is full of things
necessary for the life of man. There is plenty of oxen, kine, sheep, foul,
butter, milk, garlike, pease,


THe town of Diu is inhabited by Portugals, with whom they that are borne in
the Province are mingled, as at Ormus and other towns at the Indies which the
Portugals hold. Some follow the manners of the Portugals, others hold those of
their neighbors, whereof we shall hereafter make mention: yet the ordinary
conversation does daily give more credit to the fashions of our Europe.


THis town has a very commodious Port, whither many merchant strangers come,
so as it cannot fail to be rich: it lies betwixt two rich countries, Sinde,
and Cambai^. There are always great numbers of Turks, Persians, Armenians,
Arabians and others. They pay great customes^here unto the king of Spain, for
that the Banjanes, Gusarates, Rumes, and Persians, which traffic into Cambaia
and go toward the red Sea, do most commonly lade and unlade their ships here,
by reason of the commodity of the Island.


THe Portugals have so well fortified the town of Diu, as they have made it in
a manner impregnable, whereof they have made good proof by two terrible
sieges, the one by the Souldan of Cambaia, in the year 1539, and the other by
the Gusarates, in the year 1546: but they defended it so well, and interated
their enemies in such sort, as they raised the siege with much loss and shame.
This town is Maistris of all the navigations and traffic of those seas. Some
eight leagues from thence is a little Island called Betel, as near unto the
continent as Diu, and a league in compass, the which a king Badurius thought
to compass in with a wall, and to make it a Fort, but Magno de Acugna
interrupted him, and cut his garrison in pieces.

The Government.
THis Island did sometimes obey the kings of Cambaia, being seated in his
realm: and this king had suffered the Portugals to build a Fort there, the
which he afterward repented, and sought by treachery to dispossess them:
but in time the whole Island is come into the Portugals power, who govern
themselves as in other countries which they hold in those parts.


THis coast of the Indies is properly called the Island of Vaquas unto the
gulf of Camb^ia, other places have their proper names, as Mozambique, Melinda,
Ormus, Cambaia, Choromandel, Bengala, Pegu, Malaca and others. This country
has many Ports and Islands, which are under the Portugals dominion, with
diverse strong forts which they have built there. Daman is the first of all, and
fifteen miles from thence and nineteen degrees and a half of elevation, is
the town of Basaijn: ten miles from thence, and in the nineteenth degree, is
the town of Chaul, with a good fort: five

The Quality of the country which is near Daman,
ALl this country does yield abundance of rice, pease, and other pulses, of
oil, Indian nuts, and plenty of butter: But there is no oyle-oliue to be
found in all the East Indi^s, but what is carried out of Portugal: it has
abundance of all other things necessary for the life of man: it does also
bear great quantity of ginger, but they do not much esteem it. This
country called the Northern part does enjoy a temperat air, yea the best of
all the Indies.

The Riches.
THe Towns of Daman, Chaul, and Basaijn have very good and commodious Ports,
where there is a great concourse of merchants: but Chaul is the most famous,
for the great commerce it has with the Inhabitants of Ormus, Cambaia, Sinde,
Mascatte and Bengola, near unto the red Sea. There are in this city merchants
which are exceeding rich, and a great number of ships: in all the country they
make certain works of cotton, but no great store. There is a place near unto
Chaul, whereas they make many stuffes and garments of silk: and this silk is
brought from China, and then wrought by the Inhabitants about Chaul, whereof
they make great store of money*

The places which the Portugals hold upon the Coast of Malabar.
THe Coast of Malabar, begins at Cape de Ramos, which is ten miles from Goa
toward the South, and ends at the Cape of Comorin, in all which space there
may be about four and fifty French leagues. The Portugals have in this part
the Fort of Onor, ten miles from Cape de Ramos.

The Quality and Riches.
THere is great store of pepper in this place, so as they transport from thence
yearly seven or eight thousand pound weight: and this pepper is held the best
of all the Indies. It is not many years since they did traffic thither for
pepper; but it is now much in request. The Queen of Baticole (to whom this
country belongs) sels this pepper, and delivers it unto their Factor that
transports it, who remains at Onor: but he must pay his money six months
before he can receive his merchandise. There grow^^ also much rice in this
country.

The Force.
THe Fort of Onor, which the Portugals have here, is not much frequented, but
at such times as the ships come to lade pepper; the rest of the time it has
little company: the Fort is reasonable good and well furnished. They have also
along this Coast the Fort of Barzelor, five and twenty miles from Onor, where
there is much rice and good store of pepper, as at Mangabor, whereas the
Portugals have also a good Fort, nine miles from Barzelor.

The Fort of Cananor.
THere is also a Fort in Cananor ten miles from Mangalor, and this place is
much

The Fort of Cochin.
THe Portugals have also a place very well fortified in the town of Cochin,
whereas the Viceroy, and the Bishop of Cochin remain.


THere is also a fort in Coulon, which is twelve miles from Cochin, whereas
they do every year lade a ship with pepper.

The Fort of Colombo in the Island of Zeylan.
THey have also a strong place in this Island, the which has been besieged by
a king of Zeylan, and did so resist him, as he returned with great loss. But
the Portugals have no kind of commerce with them of the Island. The governor
has not in a manner

A Town in the realm of Bisnagar.
THe Portugals have also a Town in this Realm, called the City of Saint
Thomas, or Malepur: it is the place (as they say) whereas Saint Thomas was
buried, it was in a manner desert, but now the Portugals do inhabit it, and
there are some Jesuits. They have built a fair Church of stone, whereas before
it was but a Chapel of wood, and the door of this Church is made of the wood
of that Chapel. The Portugals do vainly and superstitiously attribute many
miracles to this place. This

The Town and Fort of Malaca.
MAlaca is seated upon the river of Gaza, and is a good fair Town, having in
circuit near twenty miles. The originarie or first inhabitants of this place
report, that the beginning came of six or seven fishermen, which came to dwell
there, but their number increased, by the arrival of other fishermen of Siam,
Pegu, and Bengola, who bi^i^ a town* and framed a particular language, taking
all the best kind of speech from other nations. They named their town Malaca,
which is grown so rich and mighty in a short time by reason of her
s^ituation, as she contends for precedence with the greatest

The Quality of the Country.
THe air is so troublesome, as not only strangers, but even they that are
borne there are many times troubled with diverse infirmities, which fasten
chiefly to the skin and hair: so as it is almost a miracle if any one
escape with life: which makes many forbear to go thither; yet the desire of
gain does incite many to hazard their healths by this voyage. The country
yields not any fruit, but some little corn in certain places. Finally, all
the realm of Malaca, which runs two hundred and seventy miles in length,

The Manners of the people.
THere are in this place about a hundred families of Portugals, which live
after the

The Riches.
THere is a Staple in this Town or a Market place, with the traffic of all
the Indies, of China, and of the Islands which are called Molucques, and other
neighbor Islands: and there may you see many vessels from China, the
Mo^ucques, Banda, ^a^^, Sumatra, Siam, Pegu, Bengola, Choro^^andel, and other
places, which return laden with merchandise. This place yields great profit
unto the gou^rnour, and more than any other, except Mozambique and Ormus.
Every year there parts a ship from Portugal for Malaca, a month before all
the rest, and goes not to any other part of the


THere was sometimes a Mohammedan king at Malaca, but he was dispossessed by
Alphonso of Albuquerque, for that he sought to annoy Lopes of Seguiera a
Portugal all he could; so as both the town and realm are now under the
dominion of the king of Spain, and this realm is now governed like unto the
rest which obeys this prince. They coin money both of gold and silver there,
whereof the Inhabitants before had

The Religion.
THe Portugals which remain at Malaca do all hold the Romish religion, and
they that are borne in the country, whom they call Mallayes, are for the most
part Christians: but there are many merchants whose aboade is sometimes long,
which are of diverse religions, and live at liberty. There is (as I have said)
in the town of Malaca a Bishop, as at Cochin, but he is under the Archbishop
of Goa.


FRom Malaca they go by Sea to Banda and Amboyna, whereas the Portugals have
Forts and Captains to make the traffic easy. Banda is an Island five
degrees in altitude beyond the equinoctial. The Portugals frequent there, for
that there are very good nuts, which they call Maciz, the which they preserve,
and they also make oil thereof which is much esteemed, and carried to Malaca,
and from thence to other places. All the traffic in a manner here, is made by
exchange, as at Sunde, and at Iaua. They must not easily trust the Inhabitants
of this Island, who are commonly great deceivers of merchants;

Twenty miles from the Island of Banda, toward the West North-West are diverse
Islands which are called Amboyna, of the principal among them, whereas the
Portugals have also a little Fort; they were discovered in the year 1512. The
soil is very rough and barren, and the manners of the people bad and wicked:
they are men eaters, and demand one an others parents when they are old to
devour them. By reason that their soil is barren, they are given to the Sea,
and do much annoy the neighbor Islands with their Piracies. There is not any
great store of spices in this Island; but the ships which go from Malaca to the
Molucques, refresh themselves, and water in this Island.


BEnding toward the East, a hundred miles or thereabouts from the country of
Cambaia, we see the Islands called Lussones, the which are otherwise called
the Islands of Manillia, or the Philippines, either by reason of the principal
town or famous Port, which is called Manillia, or in honor of Philip the
second king of Spain, at whose charge they were discovered first by
Magellanes, who died in Cebu, which is one of the chief Islands of the
Philippines: but afterward more fully by Michaell Lopes Don Lewis of Valesco
Viceroy of Mexico, by commandment from king Philip the second in the year
1564. The town of Lusson or Manillia, lies in fourteen degrees of height
from the Pole Artike. The Island has about one thousand miles in compass.
About this Island there are many others, whereof the principal are Tendaiar,
which is properly called the Philippina, and is the fairest and most pleasing
of all the rest; it has one hundred and sixty leagues in compass: and
Mindanao, in which Island there are many good towns, as Cailon, Pauados,
Subut, Dapito, and Suriaco. The Spaniards have been so hautie and ambitious,
as to call all them the

The Quality of the country.
THe whole country is very fertile in wheat, and there is store of stagges,
horses, oxen, kine, goats, and hogs: There are also many ciuet cats, and all
kind of fruits, with great abundance of honey and fish. The Spaniards say that
they bear spices, but there is

The Riches.
THe Inhabitants make much silver of their gold and iron which is transported
to near places, and also into Spain, their ciuet cats yield them no small
profit: but that which makes them more rich, is the great commerce they have
with the Chinois, who brings great store of merchandise thither, as silks,
cottons, Porcellaine dishes,

The Forces.
THere are good places in these Islands, whereas the Spaniards entertain great
garrisons, being resolved not to leave them in any sort. The loss which they
made of late years, of that which they held in the Molucques, has made them
resolute to defend

The Government.
THe king of Spain entertaines a governor in the town of Manillia, or of
Lusson, who has charge of all these Islands: he is sent thither from New
Spain. These Islands were sometime under the Monarchy of the kings of China,
but being abandoned by the Chinois upon certain occasions, and the Inhabitants
not supported by any, it was easy for the Spaniards to make themselves masters
thereof.

The Religion.
THe Bishop of all these Islands r^maines at Manillia: there are many persons
catechized daily, and which receives the Christian religion.


The Contents.
1. DEscription of the Island of Goa, the climat and circuit. II. Barrenness
of the Isl^^d, which abounds in nothing but in wine made of Palms. III.
Beginning of winter in April, and of summer in September, contrary to other
countries. IIII. Ordinary diseases in Goa. V. Nature and disposition of the
Inhabitants of Goa, and of the Portugals in all the Indies. VI. What titles
they bear, and what distinction there is among men. VII. Ceremonies observed
in the celebration of marriages

THe town of Goa is the chief of all the Indies, whereas the

The Quality of the Island.


Wint^r an^ somer at ^ne time with^^ 70. miles.
being seated upon the same coast of Choromandel, and toward the mountains of
Ballagatte which they must pass to go into the other country, see on the one
side the fields wonderful pleasant and well m^^ured in Summer, and on the
other side, a country spoiled with rain^* darkened with clouds, and full of the
horror of thunder and lightning. And this is not seen alone in this country
of the Indies, but also near unto Ormus toward the Cape of Rosalgatte,
whereas the ships have a clee^e and calm season; but having once past the
Cape, and being on the other side, there is nothing but wind, rain, and
storms, with the same alteration of Winter and Summer as is seen in other

They that remain at Goa fall into many diseases by reason of this change, for
they Mordexin, which comes unto them with so great a vomitting, as they are
ready to give up the ghost: this disease is common and mortal. The flux is
also contagious there, as the plague is with us continual fevers kill men
often in three or four days. The Portugals find no better remedy, than to
draw blood: the Heathen draw it with certain herbs, sandall, and unctions.
These diseases kill many Portugals yearly, for that they eat nothing which is
of good nourishment, and abandon themselves to glut their lusts with lascivious
women. We may see the experience in the kings Hospital, which is a retreat for
Portugals only, out of which there are carried

The Indians are ignorant of the plague. Many are tro^^led with the stone, and
a looseness of the bowels, especially they that are married, for that they
drink water continually, and commit infinite excess and disorders. They stand
always with their bellies naked, in their low galleries, which are in the
e^^^ing of their lodgings, receiving the wind there, having near unto them
their servants, whereof the one rubs his toes, another his


THe country of the Bardes* is inhabited by people which are ru^e, and gross,
who to see any thing more arrogant; for they have so grave a gate as a man
would hold Hidalgos da casa del Reynosso Segnor, that is to say, Gentlemen of
the kings house: others M^ssos Hidalgos, which are gentlemen's children, or such
Cauelleros Hidalgos, that is to say, Knights, which carry this title for some
deed of arms whereby they have made themselves famous, or for the service they
have done their Prince: or to speak more truly they obtain it of the
General when he is ready to go unto the wars, or else for money; so as at
this day men which are come from base places in Portugal carry this quality,
Mosos de Camera, and de seruitio; these be gentlemen or grooms of the kings
Chamber, and this name is of such esteem among them, as they desire it more
than great riches. There are also Esquires or Escuderos Hidalgos, who have a
rank among (...): all the rest are termed Hombres Honrados, that is to say,
honorable persons: and they that are of baser condition among them carry the
^ame of soldiers, without any other title: and so he is advanced in quality
as he does service to the king, and according to their titles they have
recompenses. The gentlemen do willingly entertain and feast the common
soldiers when they are retired into towns, and call witnesses of this boun^ie.
The Portu^^ls, Mestiz, and Christians, are stately

Whe^^s there is a marriage celebrated at any ones house, that is esteemed
wealthy,

The ceremonies of baptism being ended, they return in the same order with
the after this manner at their ease. But the greatest profit of some of them
grows from the

First of all, Captains who made account of soldiers, do not now much regard
honor, and they give little to them they hire. The soldiers also remain
always miserable with this pay, and although they have many attestations and
certificats, which should make them expect some recompense, yet they cannot
bear that great charge which they must undergo from thence to Portugal, nor
make presents unto them who can do any thing in Spain, and yet do nothing
without gain. And moreover there is this inconvenience, that although they
obtain some dignity, yet must they many times attend the death of some one
that goes before them, and spend their whole lives



The men of those Eastren countries are wonderful jealous, and do not suffer
any one to see their wives or daughters, be he never so dear a friend, except
their Gossips. If any one knock at the door to speak with the husband,
presently the women fly away and hide themselves, leaving the husband alone to
entertain him that comes, yea their nearest kinsemen, and which is more, their
sons, having past the age of fifteen years, are banished the places where
the women remain, and have their lodgings apart. For

And to make these poor cuckolds recover their senses, they wash their feet
with cold water, but they have no remembrance of what is past. The wives do
often kill their husbands with poison, the which they do apply as they think
good, to the end it may work his effect in the time which they have prefixed;
so as some have lived six years after they have taken it. Husbands do also
kill their adulterat wives, or that are suspected to have done them wrong, with
the testimony of three or four persons, who witness that they have broken
their faith in wedlock. For by the customs of Portugal, a man that kills his
wife upon this occasion is not punished, but he may lawfully take another. that
the magnificence of Litters and Chaires is defended in such occasions: the
women

The Pagans which live at Goa, hold the encounter of a raven to be ominous,
notwithstanding that there are many of these birds at the Indies; he that has
seen any one,

The Portugals when they are sick, disdain not to confer with those Pagan
Physicians, and the Archbishop with all the Church men trust more in them than
in the Portugals themselves: this is the reason why these physicians are
wonderfully honored, and gather great wealth. The laborers or husbandmen
about Goa, are in a manner all Christians, yet they differ little from Pagans,
from whom they have taken many ceremonies, whereas the Inquisitors do wink,
by reason of their long custom. There are in the same town, at the end of
every place, Changers, Indian Christians, who are called Xaraffos: these men
have great knowledge in me^talls, and tell if a piece be good or false

There are many Gusarates and Banjanes of the country of Cambaia, which dwell
at Goa, Diu, Chaul, Cochin, and other places of the Indies, for the traffic
of wheat, cotton, rice, and such like things, but especially for precious
stones, wherein they have more skill than any man. They are learned in
Arithmaticke, and not only exceed other Indians

Many Canarins and Decanins, which are of the country of Decan, make their
abode

The Canarins, and Corumbins of the Indies, employ themselves only to labor
and fishing, and have a care of the Indian Palm trees which carry Cocos.
There are some Meynattes, and the other Patameres, that is to say, messengers
by land. These (which are the basest among the Indians) live of little; they
forbear to eat the flesh of cow, ox, bufle or bugle, and hog, and they live
like unto the Canarins and Decanins. They go all naked, having nothing but
their privy parts covered with a little cloth. The women cover themselves with
a linen cloth, which hangs to their thighs; whereof they trusse a part upon
their shoulders, so as half the breast is seen. Many of these Canarins make
profession of Christian religion, for that they do all in a manner live near
unto Goa: for there are many palm trees near unto the banks, as also Rice,
which is the Canarins food, and grows in a low land. These men bring fowls,
milk, fruit and eggs from the firm land unto the town: their houses use no
other mystery but to wash them with water; so as they grow strong and active,

There are many Moors and Jews remaining at Goa, Cochin, and other places,
whereof many are come from other countries, and many Indians also by birth, who
have sucked Mahomatisme and Iudaisme with their milk: as for their families,
they follow the custom of the country where they remain. They have among the
Indians, Temples, Sinagogues, and Mesquites, where as they exercise their
religion at their pleasure. In the Portugals towns every man lives in
liberty of conscience: yet no man may make sacrifices after his own manner
for fear of scandal, and it is forbidden upon pain of death. The Jews have
most commonly fair wives. There are many come from Palistina, and yet they
speak Mahome^s law (the which we will describe in the Tu^kes Empire) and
traffic toward the red sea, whither they carry spices: and although that
many of them live among the Portugals, yet they hate them deadly, and hinder
the advancement of the Christian faith, the which they make as odious as they
can to the Indians.

The Riches.
Leylon, and they go up and down this place with chains of gold, jewels,
precious stones, and other ornaments, being accompanied by a great number of
slanes of either sex, to sell, and when as any one offers to buy any of these
miserable people, they bring them forth to view as we do beasts. They have
also at Goa, Arabian horses, all kinds of spices and drugs, gummes which smell
well, goodly tapestries, and many other curiosities of Cambaia, Sinde, Bengola,
China, and

Many of the Pagans dwelling at Goa are rich merchants. There is a street in
which there is nothing but shops of these people, full of silks, vellets, and
other stuffes, and of Porcellains. They buy all these things first in gross by
the means of their Brokers, then they sell them by retaile, being wonderful
witty in these businesses. In the same street there are other merchants right
against them, who sell linen cloth of all sorts, and shirts ready made as well
for the Portugals, as for their slaves, with much other small ware. There is
another street, whereas they dwell that ^^ll all kind of works for women, and
hemp to make ^ailes and cordage. In another street are the Banjanes of
Camba^a, who sell pearls and precious stones, coral, and such like. There is
also a street whereas

The chief and most ordinary kind of coin is the Pardauue Xerafin which is
of silver, and made at Goa: it has on the one side the image of saint
Sebastian, and on the other three or four arrows bound together; it is worth
three Testons or three hundred name Pardauues of Larins, and then the Pardauue
is worth five Larins. These are the

These changers are careful to provide all kinds of silver for them that
demand it, having tables prepared where there are heaps of silver
distinguished by Tangas. A Tangas is worth seventy and five Basarucs, and in
the exchange of a Pardauue for three

The waightes of Goa, are like unto them of Portugal, and are distinguished
into Quintalls, Arrobes, and others: yet they have another weight called M^o,
which signifies the hand, and wayeth twelve pound, the which they use in
selling of butter, honey, sugar and such like. They measure pepper with the
Bharo, which makes three Quintalls and a half of Portugal weight, and every
Quintall is a hundred pound. They have a measure which they call Medida, which
is about nine ounces: Four and twenty of these measures make the hand, and
twenty hands the Candil. They measure rice, wheat, and other dry things after
this manner, and lade their ships, making the account of their lading by
Candils or Bharos. They sell rice also in the straw well bound up in bundels:
^^e bundell contains commonly three hands and a half. The best rice is called
Girasall, Chambasall. There are also other sorts of rice of less value: when
it is in the husk, they call it Batthe and it is very like unto barley.

As for the Viceroys they are accustomed to visit the places and forts which
are under the king of Spain, fifty, sixty, and eighty miles from Goa, as
well toward the North as South. This survey brings him as great profit as any
other thing. It is most certain that the Vicerois have great revenues, and
dispose of the king of Spaines at their pleasure, growing exceeding rich by
this means, for that the king gives them absolute power. Besides the revenues
and ordinary profits they receive presents from all parts, which enrich them:
for all they that have any alliance with the king of Spain send (according to
the custom of Ambassadors) to the Vi^^roy newly arrived, with presents

The Forces.


The Island of Goa toward the sea, for the most part discouers it self with
high rocks: but the land of Bardes toward the sea, has a goodly shore of sand
five hundred paces long. This is the guard of the Island: toward the East
there are three or four ports near the river upon the extremity of the
Island, right against the firm land of Salsette and Bardes: every port has a
captain and a secretary, without whose permission no man may go to the firm
land; by reason whereof, when the Indian Decanins and other Ethiopian Idolaters
which remain at Goa, go to the firm land for any traffic, or to seek for
victuals; they must in these passages have a mark set upon their naked arm,
Benesterijm, and now the passage of S. James, by reason that the Church of
Saint James is near it. The second passage called Sec is upon the East part of
the Island, and it is the common passage to go to the firm land, for that the
river is easier to be waded through there, than in any other place. The third,
which is called the passage of Daugijn, or of the mother of God, is upon the
South side, and near unto the town; the wall reaches unto it, beginning at the
passage of S. James: and as for the rest of the Island it has no other
defense. From this passage they ferrie over unto the other Island, which
answers unto the firm land, and this fourth is called Nor^^^. The fifth and
last passage is from the town unto half the river, upon a low flat bending
toward Bardes: this is the strongest of all, and is called the passage of
Pangijn: and here they stay all vessels which go in, or come out of the river.
These are all the fortifications of this Island, which notwithstanding does not
much fear the attempt of her neighbors, being carefully guarded and full of
people. Yet that which might hurt the Portugals is the great multitude of
Idolaters and Mahometans which are in this Island. But if there be any fear of
that side, the Portugals do set so good an order and keep so careful a
guard, as they may well live in assurance. Moreover, their armies at sea which
scour the coasts, k^epe them from surprise, and their entertained soldiers
which are many in number secure them.


THe Viceroy of the Indies which remains at Goa is sent thither for three
years with full power, and sometimes he continues longer, according to the
kings pleasure, but it happens not often, and is very extraordinary. This
Viceroy has within this town his Council, his seat of justice, his
Chancerie, and his Judges after the manner of Portugal, and for this cause he
decides all suits and controversies in the name of the king of Spain, to whom
notwithstanding they may appeal in civil causes which are of great
importance, and this is the only point that is reserved. As for criminal
causes, no man may appeal from the sentence that is given at Goa, unless he
be a gentleman; and the

The book wherein they write the names of such as go from Portugal to the
Indies, is sent to one that has the particular charge at the Indies, and this
office is for three years a General who has many Captains under him, whereof
every one commands a ship,



There is not any other that may ^ell pepper upon pain of death, and this law
is rigogorously observed. They may not diminish the sum of money which is
prepared for the buying of pepper, nor take any part of it, for what cause
soever, be it never so necessary. There is no man may gi^e any hinderance when
as they lade the ships with pepper, yea they lay aside the kings affairs at
that time, and the Viceroy with the other captains at the Indies have no other
care, but give them assistance when they demand it. The

The Religion.
Mahomet. The Moors eat all things indifferently, except hogs flesh, and they
are

The ancient profession of Christianity at the Indies.
Thomas the Apostle (after that this part was fallen to him in the distribution
of the world) transported himself first into the Island of Socotera, where
Sagam and the Idol Priests did cross him what they could) there fell out an
accident which did much avail to manifest the power of Christ and the Thomas
having then tied his girdle to a little sprig which grew out of the body
thereof after that he had made the sign of the cross, he drew it without any
difficulty within the walls, to the great amasement of all the people. Then
having set up a cross of stone, he Thomas increased continually, with his
miracles: whereat the Bramins being discontented, for that they saw their
credits (...) gain to fail one of them seeking to ruin him, slew his own
son, and accu^^^^ Thomas then turning himself unto the body, said unto him,
That in the name of Christ, whom he preached for the God and Savior of the
world, he should declare who was the author of his death: at the name of
Christ, this body spoke, and did witness, That saint Thomas (...) of the true
God, and that his father ^ad slain him, for rage and envy which he (...) the
Saint. The king who had some inclination to the law of Christ, Thomas after the
(...) of Christ did use to retire himself to medi^ate and pray; in this place
he first (...) with a stone, and a wound with a dart; and in the end he was
slain with (...) this body was taken up by his disciples, and buried in a
church, where they did also put a pe^ce of the lance which had pierced him,
and a staff with an iron which he used in his iournies to support him, and a
vessel full of the earth where his blood had fallen. Some hold that the
miracle of the timber was not done at Malipur, but at Cran^onor, and that king
S^gams successor put him to death at Calamine, and that his body John the
third, king of Portugal, according to the common opinion, enioined Edward de
Meneses his lieutenant at the Indies to do what he could possibly to find out
the body of saint Thomas upon the coast of Choromandel, and to have a care
that his holy relics (which some hold are all in Mesopotamia) might be laid
up in some place to be kept, with reverence: Meneses gave this charge to
Emanuell Fria, who went to Malipur with some Priests, and an Archi^e^^. There
among ^he ruins of the ^owne, they found the marks of a stately church, where
there was not any thing standing but a little chapel with many crosses,
printed within and without* (...) of the country said that the Apostles body
was in that place; and there they found a stone ^^hereon was written in an old
language Thomas, and that king Sagam had given the tenth^ of m^rchandise which
came into his towns, for to entertain it. They found under this stone (as
they of the country assured) the kings body: but digging deeper, they ^ame
unto a place which was compassed in, first with a wall of earth, and then with
st^^^ nine foot high, with diverse coue^ings, they said that the Apostles body
was under it Whereupon two Portugals (who confessed themselves and communicated
before) opening this place, found certain bones very white mingled with lime
and sand, a tron^hon of a lance, a travelers staff, and a vessel of e^rth*
so as they knew by these marks that it was the body of the Apostle: and the
rather for that the body of king Sagam, and of another disciple of saint
Thomas was near unto it* but these two were d^formed and fearful, as the
color only did distinguish the Apostles bones from the rest. The Saints body
was afterward put into one sh^ine, and those of his two disciples into
another, and the keys of the place (...) brought unto the Viceroy and
delivered into his hands. Two years after, the said (...) were hidden by two
Portugals under the Alter of the Chapel, and in the end (...) transported
unto ^oa by a religious man of the order of saint Francis, whenas D^^ ^^^anti^e
of Braganc^ was Viceroy at the Indies. There are at this day Christians at the
(...) which are called of saint Thomas: it is ^rue that they have diverse
errors, being borne (...) in the heresy of Arr^^^, and partly in that of
Nestorius. This mischief Thomas according to my Author, not as an autenticke
authority,

The new profession of Christianity at the Indies.
THe first which past unto the Indies to preach the Gospel, were the religious
of the order of S. Francis, whereof the first was Friar Henry, since Bishop of
Senta, who Peter Alua^o Capral, in the year 1500, with some Priests, but
neither he, nor his companions could make any great profit of their tallents,
by reason of the continual wars. Afterward there went Friar Anthony
Petroine, and soon after Friar Anthony Laurere, who stayed at Socotera, and
there did some good. Finally, Lopes Sequeyra Viceroy at the Indies built a
Church at Goa under the name of Francis, and a Convent for the religious men of
that order: the which he did to the and they might have means to employ
themselves in those parts, for the service of God, and the conversion of the
Indians. So as from that time they made few enterprises either of peace or war,
where they did not assist. For Anthon^e Petroine was the first that said Mas^^,
and preached at Daman in Cambaia, and Friar Anthon^e Casal was at the succor of
Di^ with D. John de Castro, and there did his duty. The first Bishop at the
Indies was one Friar Fernandes of the order of S. Francis, who went in the time
of Nugnez d' Acc^g^a; he in administering the Sacraments, preaching to the
Portugals, and drawing the Gentiles to the faith, did execute the office of
Bishop commendably, and it is credible Fernandes had for his successor John of
Albuquerque of Castille, of the same order of S. Francis, who came unto the
Indies with D. ^^rzia of Norogno; and brought with him one Friar Vincent fit to
teach the doctrine o^ Christ; and James of Borba a Portugal, and a famous
preacher. But unto that time, there w^^ (...) seen in the Portugals an ardent
desire to advance the Christian religion at the (...), than any effect of
importance: for that the governors and captains were bu^^^ in the building
efforts and making of ships, to gather together soldiers for the (...) of the
sea, and to invade the enemies country: and the religions of S. Stephen de
(...) at the Indies, which was in the year 1540, some good men, (...) Michaell
Vaz, Vicar general of the Indies, and James of Borbe with ^word Annia,
instituted a Seminary of young men of diverse Nations, to the end they Michael
Vaz: and they called this Seminary, The College of the holy faith, and
afterward of Saint Paul, by reason of a Church so named. They intended to
bring up in the College a good number of young men of all Nations and to in
struct them in the doctrine of Christ, to the end they might be afterward fit
to preach, and to reduce their countriemen to the truth of the Gospel. At that
time there was a goodly purchase made unto the Church by chance. They call
those people Paraues, which dwell ne^re unto the Cape of Comorin, who are simple
and of a good disposition, living for the most part of the fishing of pearl;
so as the coast John de la Croix, (who had been converted some years ^^fore and
did traffic in those parts) they resolved to send their chief men to Cochin,
to demand succors, promising to embrace the Christian faith if they were
relieved. Their deputies being come to Cochin, the better to assure the
Portugals, they caused themselves to be presently paptised. The Portugals
thought it not fit to contemn their demand, nor their offer, so as having
armed a good number of ships, they not only John being advertised hereof,
spared neither cost nor pains to remedy it; and that which did incite him
much thereunto, was, that he knew well he could not levy the tenths of the
country, nor the taxes, nor yet make war against the Gentiles, to maintain
and augment the glory of God and the preaching of the Gospel, if the Gentiles
opposed themselves in the beginning. D. Pedro Mascarogne, his Ambassador at
Rome with Paul the third, to obtain of father Ignasius founder of that Simon
Rodrigues a Portugal, and Francis Xauier a Nauarrois, to whom there afterward
joined Paul of Camerin in Italy, and Francis Mansilla in Portugal. Of these,
Rodriguez remained afterward in Portugal, and Xauier went to the Indies. They
parted from Rome in the year 1540. Being in Portugal, and the King infor^ed of
the virtue of father Xavier he did him much honor, and having recommended
(...) him with great affection* the advancement of Christian religion at the
Indies, he (...) a Brief from the Pope* by the which he was made Nuncio to the
holy See, with (...) power at the Indies. He ar^iued at Goa the sixteenth of
May, in the year 1542, (...) he was received with great honor by the Bishop
and began presently Paul Mansilla to instruct and confirm them, and to this
end he learned their language with much pain. He was forced often to encounter
the Bramins, who could not endure that he should take from them their,
followers and their reputation, and discover their vanities and deceipts. He
stayed no longer in any one place than was needful: but he made choice of the
Neophi^es who had more virtue and better wits, and left them in his place to
have ca^e of the rest. Being come to the end of one province, he returned to
the other, and demanded an account of those things which he had taught,
especially of those whom he had Xauier was busied in these good exercises, they
sent unto him to assist him John Beyra of Ponteuedro, Nicholas Lancelot of
V^bi^, and Anthony Criminell of Parma, and in the year 1548, he had Gaspard
Berze, and Anthony Gome, with eight other companions, and at the same time
there arrived at Goa twelve religious^men of the order of saint Dominicke,
whereof James Bermude was the ^^ie^t, and there they built them a fair church
in a short time, with a commodious Xauier having left the charge of the church
of the Paraues to father Anthony Criminell he gave him means to die
gloriously; for the Bramins and the Badagues s^ew him.

(...) these accidents the king of Tanor caused himself to be baptized. Tanor
is a town some four score leagues distant from Goa toward the South. This
king being informed of our faith, by father Vincent of the order of saint
Francis and by John Suares, who went often unto him, in the end he caused
himself to be baptized. The Queen and two great personages of the realm did
the like soon after, but secretly, and the king himself, after his baptising,
carried about his neck (for fear of sedition) the three strings, according to
the custom of the Bramins of whose sect he had been. Afterward he had order
of Christ. They have built many houses for catachising, and eight Seminaries
for Constantine of Bragance was Viceroy there, who employed for the conversion
of Infidels not only the kings revenues, but also his own. He did assist
himself at baptismes, honored the baptized, and gave them means, and to
conclude, he showed himself a father in all occasions to the Neophites. With
this kind of proceeding he did not only advance religion, but did strengthen
the Portugals command at the Indies. During his government; in the year 1557,
the Jesuits alone baptized one thousand and eight hundred persons, and in the
year following somewhat more: but in the year 1559, they baptized three
thousand two hundred and sixty, and in the year 1560, there were Domi^icke,
and saint Francis, converted in a manner all the town of Goa, which is of the
bigness of Genoa: so as the years following they did not baptize so man^^*
ye^ there has searce past any year, but they have baptized one thousand or
more either within the town or near unto it. In the year 1587 (for that the
(...) upon the coast of Malabar being pressed with hunger and extreme want, sold
(...) children, and set price of themselves) there were two good decrees made
for the ^^^^ase of the faith: the one was that such as were put to sale, should
not be bought but by Christians: and the other was, that such as had been
already bought by the Gentiles should be set at liberty if they became
Christians. The conversion of Gentiles does also

The (...) gethere, whereas they teach grammar, humane sciences, (...) great
number of scholars: as also at Chaul, whereas the work of conversion is in
(...) hands of the religious of saint Francis, and also at Nagapatan.

We have (...) such places of the Indies as were held by the Spaniards: ^et us
now pass to the new found world, and in passing let us take view of some
places and Islands subject to the king of Spain.

(...), Septa^or Seuta.
THe (...) towns are in the realms of Fezin the country of Elabat. Arzilla is
a


THis Island carries the name, for the Spaniards discovered it on the one and
twentieth (...) of May, being S. Helens day. It contains sixteen miles, and is
half a degree (...) all toward the Antartike Pole, and five hundred and
fifty leagues (...) Cape of Good hope, and three hundred and fifty leagues
from Angola.

The Quality of the Country.
THis Island is ^^^^ie; and the wood which grows the^e is not fit for any
thing but for ^he, it is so burnt; which shows that there are veins of fire in
this Island. The soil (...), and in some places there is a substance of
sulphur. Before the coming of the Portugals, there were no beasts, neither
did the trees bear any fruits, so as all that it could yeald was fresh water,
which falls from the mountains, and Howes abundantly in the (...) near unto
the Chapel, and from thence it runs into the sea by torrents. The Spania^ds
or Portugals water the^e, and was^ their linen. They have also by little and
little brought all sorts of beasts, and have planted fruit trees in the
valleis, so as there is at this



(...) has made an Edict, by the which they are forbidden to build and (...),
least this common use thereof should be lost, for that it were to be feared
that the inhabitants would make it private unto themselves, and appropriat that
(...) and profitable to so many. Some years past there was an (...) (...) are
the names of many graven in the barks of sigge trees, and these names do

The Island of S. Thomas.
THis (...) that the Portugals discovered it on S. Thomas day; it is (...) is
of a round form: it has in Diameter forty miles (...) it was full of great
trees whose branches gr^w (...) the plague. The air is hot and sound, yet
there are few Christian^ (...) live to the age of fifty years, and it is a
wonder to see any one with a

The Portugals when they discovered this Island, found it desert: There is now
a Colonie, and they (...) a town which they call Paucasan, in which there are
about

The Island of Madera.
THis Island is the Queen of all the Islands, in the Atlanticke Ocean. It is
so called, for (...) when it was discovered, which was in the year 1420, being
before desert, it was (...), the which were set on fire to make the land fit
for tillage^ it is hilly as Sicile (...) as they began to sow it* it did yield
threescore for one: and for a time the (...) did amount to three^core thousand
Arrobes, every Arrobe being 25


The Contents.
THe beginning of the word Asores, and why these Islands were so called. II.
Description of the Tercere, and other Islands of the Asores. The chief towns
and boroughes. III. Singularities of the fruit which they call Batates, and of
a plant whose root serves in steed of feathers to fill their beds: Of Wo^d,
Canarie birds, of (...) of hot waters, wherein they may sees eggs. A fountain
which turns wood into stone (...) of an incredible beauty called Teixo, which
no man may use by the king of Spaines Edi^t (...). Diseases peculiar to the
country. V. Whereunto the Inhabitants of these Islands (...) and their manner
of keeping wheat, which corrupts in a year. VI. Forts of the Islands of
Ter^er^ kept by Spaniards. VII. Angra the chief town of all the Islands
whereas the gouer^^^^ (...), who forbids strangers to go about the Island, or
to view their approaches.

Ribera dos Framengos, that is to say, the river of Flemings.

The chief of all these Islands is the Tercere, called commonly the Island of
Jesus (...) Portugal, and other places of the East or North, by means of the
flags

The Quality of the Islands.
ALl the Island of Terce^e bears store of wheat and wine; but their wines
cannot be transported far, by reason of their weakness, for which cause, rich
men use Madera, and Ca^^rie wines: the Island has fish, flesh, and other
things necessary to suffice. They (...) only oil that comes from Portugal*
and it also wants salt, pots, dishes, and (...) ve^sell, and such like; i^
beare^ abundance of peaches, of diverse sorts, but there (...) cherries, (...).
There is reasonable good store of apples, ^eares, oranges, (...) f^uit, and the
ground does hear cabbages, tur^ups,

The air is generally good, and there are very few disease^ pecu^iar to the
^ou^trie,

The Manners.
THe ^^^^^itans of Tercere are either Portugals, which live after the manner of
their

The Rich^^*
THe English, Scot^ish and French* ^ra^^^cke much for (...) in the Isl^^d of
Tercere, (...) for, the which (...)* The inhabitants do also make some^^oney
(...) ^r^at numbers, which other prouin^^^ (...) this country which (...) an^
other i^ Europe o^ ^he inhabitants (...) Ioyners (...), and other wooden (...)
West Indies bu^ as they pass to sell it



The Forces of the Islands.


The Government.


The Religion.
THe Inhabitants of these Islands are Romanists, and nothing given to the
reformed religion, nor infected with Mahometisme. There is a Cathedral Church
in the town

A general consideration of the Islands described, and places which the
Spaniards hold in Afric, Asia, and at the Indies. Of the profit, riches, and
forces of these Estates. Of the Islands of Philippines. Of Princes which are
friends and Tributaries to the king of Spain, and neighbors to this country,
and of his great enemies which pretend.
FIrst the Islands of Acores are so important for the crown of Spain, in
regard of their Prester Ian, for that they hold it not to be far off: and it
(...) ^^ephants, and of all sorts of victuals and other necessaries, as it
were very (...) for this enterprise. Congo confi^es with Angola; with whose
king, Paul (...) contend touching certain mines of silver.

(...) had as much esteemed things that were near them, as they did those
(...), and had employed their forces, with the which, having passed the Cape of
(...) they arrived at the Indies at Malacca and at the Moluccos; if I say they
had (...) them to the enterprise of Afric they might with more ease, and
less charge (...) treasures: for that there is no country in the world richer
of gold and (...) realme^ of Mandique, Aethiopia, Congo, Angola, Butue, of
Toros, (...), Monomotapa, Caphati, and Monoemugi: but the covetousness of man
esteems another man's more than his own, and things afar off seem better

As for the Estates of Asia, they are divided into them of Persia, Cambaia and
the Indies. The Portugals have in Persia the realm of Ormuz, and in Cambaia
the Islands of Diu, of Daman, and Bazain. At the Indies they hold Chaul, the
Island of Goa, with others John the third, king of Portugal assigned this
country to old soldiers. G^a is of very great importance for the commodity
of the ^^ituation, together with the fertility of the soil. The king of
Spain has here also some Princes his friends, and some others that are his
tributaries. The first and the richest Paul de Lima defeated the king of Yor,
and took from him a sort which he had made near unto Mallacca, where among
other things he found nine hundred pieces of brass ordnance: yet this Estate
is in great danger for that the king of A^hen is so powerful, whose only
desire is to ruin it.

As for the Philippines they belong unto new Spain, not that they are
comprehended within the co^fines of the New world; but for that they were
discovered in the year 156^ by Michael Lopes of Legaspe, who was sent to
discover them by Don Lewis of Velasco Vi^eroy of New Spain. Some think that
in this sea (which extends it self

The force of the Spaniard in these estates consists in two things, the one is,
the strong situation of places, the other, the number and bounty of armies:
For as for scituations, the Portugals knowing that they could not for their
small number embrace any enterprises Francis of Almeyda with one and twenty
Alphonso of Albuquerque assailed Callicut with an army of thirty great ships,
he took Goa with one and twenty, recovered it with four and twenty, and
took Malacca with three and twenty ships; he entered into the red sea with
twenty, and recovered Ormuz with two and twenty. Nugno of Acugna went to the
enterprise of Diu with three hundred sail, where there were three thousand
Portugals, and five thousand Indians, besides servants that were armed, of
which they were accustomed to have great numbers. D. Constantine of Bragance
had at the enterprise of Onor one hundred and sixty sail, and as many at that
of Ionesapatan.

Besides the Princes which are friends and tributaries to the king of Spain,
he has Nizzamal^^ and the Idalcan (the Portugals do thus term two mighty
Princes of the realm of D^^an) and the kings of Callicut and Narsingue. But
the king of Persia and he of Narsingue have never attempted any thing against
the Portugals, for that they have had always Singa Pandar, and now he
maintains himself with the aid which the Portugals give him.



1 TWo notable difficulties which have hindered the Ancients to discover the New
world, and which of the two were greatest: and the reasons which made the
Ancients believe that there were but three pares of the world, Asia, Afric,
and Europe. II. The sea compass invented by a Neapolitan for the use of
Navigations, in the year 1300. III. Qualities and description of the burning
Zone. IIII. A comparison of the New World (taking as it was discovered) with
ours; and the difference of our Hemisphere

THe other part of the king of Spaines Estates consists in the New world, where
he has all that he list, for that there is not any one that will contradict
him. These Estates are divided into Islands and fume land. The Islands of the
North Sea, are so many, as they cannot that goes coasting along Florida, Noua
Hispania, Iucatan, and also that great Southern

Two reasons moved Aristotle and some others, to persuade themselves that there
were no other people in the world but the Inhabitants of Europe, Asia, and
Afric: the first was the vastness of the Atlanticke Sea, which made them
think that men could not pass such great waters, by any force or industries,
and this moved Saint Augustine to deny the Anti^odes: the other reason which
deceived the ancients was that they believed that the burning Zone was
inhabitable by reason of the excessive heat, as the Poles were for their
insupportable cold. But the first of these two reasons had much more force than
the second, for that they held this great passage at Sea to be impossible: but
on the other side, we must understand that the ancients had some knowledge of
the burning Zone, for that Hanno of Carthage, according unto Pliny, did coast
along Afric, Eudoxus on the other side, from the Red Sea to Gibraltar: so
as they were forced to pass twice under the Equinoctial, and to cross all
the burning Zone. Moreover the ancients had knowledge of Aethiopia, the
Indies, and the golden Chersonese, all which Provinces lie within the bounds of
the burning Zone. Pliny makes mention of Taprobana which is under the
Equinoctial: and the experience of our Zone might teach the Ancients that the
burning was habitable: for although that the sun does generally heat and dry
with the neerenesse of his beams, and the more when they are perpendicular; in
like manner as by his distance, and the obliquenes of his beams, he gives way
to cold and moisture, as the day and night, with Winter and Summer does show;
yet this general rule does many times fail by reason of Aristotle and some
others did believe. But the other difficulty seemed to the Ancients without
help, for that in their nauigations they had no other guides but the Sun and
Moon, the two bears, and other sta^s. When the heavens were covered with
clouds, which took from them the light of the Sun and Stars, then they
governed themselves by the quallitie of the winds, and by the conjectures of
the way which they had gone; wherein they were very skillful by reason of
their short nauigations, and their continual voyages. The Tapo^bases, for that
they saw Fla^io of Amalphi, in the Realm of Naples, the secrets which are in
the Adamant or Loadstone, and the property it has to cause iron which is
touched therewith to bend toward the North, and to point at it; yet there is
some difference,

Now that we have showed the difficulties in the discovery of the New world,
and have the world, with infinite others. Moreover, there are the lakes of
Tiquicaca (this is eighty

a half of the natural inhabitants; and partly by the cruelties and disorders
of the Spaniards Joseph Acost^ would infer, that America exceeds our country
in temperature, for that neither cold no^ heat are offensive in many places:
but this is common to those parts of our World which are under, or near the
Equinoctial, as Aethiopia, the Indies, and the golden

Adam and Eve, and then from those which were saved in the Arc, and that by
consequence the inhabitants of the New world are descended from us. It is a
hard matter to find out where they passed: wherein nothing can satisfy us
better, than the neighborhood of places: but this will not avail us, for the
little knowledge we have of the extremity of the earth. Vopelius says, Th^^
toward the North, Groenland ioynes with Estotiland, and is a firm land;
Christopher Colombus, for that they found not in all these countries any marks
of learning, or of any thing of Europe: besides, it is not above two hundred
years that the greatest part of the Islands which are betwixt our firm land
and the New world were inhabited, as the Acores, Madera, the Islands of Cape
Verd, Saint Thomas, and others of that sea. Let us then conclude that the New
world was first inhabited by people who continuing the habitation of Europe and
Asia (as for Afric, it seems it could not have any part in this) and
searching continually for more commodious

Division of the New world.
AFter that Colombus had discovered these New lands to them of Europe, they
have

As for the Northern, they give it sixteen thousand miles of circumference,
and four I^mes Cartier discovered it in the year 1535, unto the fiftieth
degree: Gasper Cortere^lis a Portugal unto sixty six, and Sebastian Gabo^ an
Italian to sixty seven, as some write, but he could pass no farther by reason
of the cold. Of late years Sir Martin Frobi^ber made three voyages for the
discovery of this North West passage to the Molucques, but he could not pass
on by reason of the abundance of ice, since his time this voyage has been
continued by others, and it is yet, with hope of good success. This Peninsula
is bounded on the other sides partly by the Northern sea, and partly by that of
the South. That part which turns toward the East contains three great
countries, that is to say, Estotiland, Labrador and Norombegue, which are in a
Colombus by certain Fishermen of Friesland, afterward found out again in the
year 1390 by Anthony Ze^o a Venetian, by the commandment of Zichim king of
Friesland: this country of E^^otiland ends at the river of Negeuse, which has
sixty degrees of elevation of the P^l^, and there begins the land of Labrador,
which extends it self to the river of Saint Ver^zan and others ^umber them to
be thirty and seven) which lie toward the East. This country is called the
^and of Baccalaos, of a fish which does so multiply there as it is incredible.
The neighborhood of the aforesaid Islands make the sea seem to be divided
into many arms and gulfes: and for this cause there are many good and safe
ports. As for the Southren Peninsula, which stretches to the Magellan Strait,
they hold that it has sixteen thousand miles in circuit, and four thousand
in length: the breadth

The Fort of Saint Helene, and the three of Florida.
Mele^des was one, who attempted it first, for that there were certain pieces
of China ships found in the North sea; and secondly, for that upon a flat which
does run three hundred leagues into the land, there came Whales at a certain
time of ^he year from the other sea. And some others have held, that master
Candish who to^ke a ship coming from the Philippines at the Cape of
Calinfornia in the year 1587 p^st that way. Stephen Gomes seeking this passage
went many miles upon the river of Saint A^thonie which is in Florida, and some
others have gone by that of Saint


THis Province abounds in many things, it has diverse fruits and many kinds of
beasts. There is great quantity of gold and silver, which the Inhabitants
gather together, cutting the rivers with little ditches. The land would carry
any kind of grain if it were sow^n, and it is also capable of all sorts of
fruits. There has been pearls, turquoises, and Emeralds found there. The
kine of this countr^e have hair like unto horses, and a bunch upon their
backs like to a cammell.


THe Inhabitants are of a color like brass, the reason is, for that they
anoint themselves with a certain ointment, and the heat of the sun,
notwithstanding that they are born more white. They are active and light, which
is by reason of their continual exercise in going a hunting, and their food,
which is for the most part of wild beasts. They have three kinds of stags,
from one of which they draw milk as we do from our kine. They do arm the
points of their arrows with fish bones, or flint stones. They use cockle shells
for coin, but they are handsomely trimmed after their manner: it is not
lawful for

The Riches.
THe Inhabitants having gathered up gold and silver in the water, as I have
formerly said, carry it to the sea side to sell, and this is the chief
traffic of that country.

Forces.
THe Spaniards hold the foresaid three places of saint James, saint Augustine,
and saint Francis Drake. Those which stan^ are reasonably strong, and have
sufficient garrisons and artillery.

The Religion.
THe Inhabitants of this country believe the immortallitie of the soul like
unto us, but otherwise they are Idolaters.

The Gulf of Mexico.
Cortez, has as it were two ports, the one by the which the tide enters with a
violent stream, and this is betwixt the farthest part of Iucatan, and the
Island of Cuba: the other by the which the tide goes forth, with the like
force; and this is betwixt the point of Florida and Cuba. It does water in a
manner ^wo thousand miles of Coast betwixt the said Florida and Iucatan, and
this is the coast of new Spain. This sea is very tempestuous, and has sew
ports that are safe, except that

New Spain.
Ferdinand Cortez in the year 1518. This Spain contains some famous regions,

The Quallitie of New Spain in general.
THe air (especially toward Mexico, which answers to that of the burning
Zone) is temperat there: in the months of August and September it raines every
day after noone. The soil is very fertile, and abounds in a manner with all
sorts of fruits, except wine and oil; and yet there is sufficient of wine, and
good store of olive trees: both which where they grow, do much increase the
king of Spaines revenues. They have in a manner all kind of beasts, as well
those of the country as of Europe. The Spaniards

Noua Gallicia.
Nugno de Guzman (who conquered it) caused the towns of Compostella, Saint
Esprit, Saint Francis Coronado came to Sibole by the commandment of Antonie
de Mendoza in the year 1579, but finding small profit, returned with his
soldiers to Mexico.

The Quallitie.
MInes of gold are abundant in this country, and it is fit to bear all sorts
of fruits. They take much fish in the sea that is near it, and they have many
wild beasts in their forests. But the country for the most part is rough and
stony.

The Manners.
THey that dwell upon the sea shore live only of fish, the rest are savage and
go continually a hunting: they are poor people which go naked, and lie down
in the forests whereas sleep or the night surpriseth them. They say that many
times they do


THis Province is some fifty leagues from Mexico, and has eighty in circuit:
in it

The Quality.
THis country is one of the best of New Spain, for that the Mahiz and diverse
other Francis of Torazas did reap six hundred quarts of grain, for four
which he had sown. There are also many Simples, among which one is famous, the
which they call Mechouacan of the name of the country. There is abundance of
cotton, cutchaneale, mulberrie trees, and silk. There is store of gold and
silver, but it is base. There is also much honey, wax, black amber, salt, and
fish: by reason whereof it is called Mechouacan, which signifies a place of
fishing.

The Manners.
THe Inhabitants are tall, strong, and active; they seem to have good wits,
the which does appear by their works which they make of birds feathers, or
that are cut in

Mexico.
THe province of Mexico is the most pleasing and fertile in all the New world,
yea, according Joseph Acosta, one of the best of all the world. It is so called
of the chief town, which is a hundred degrees from the Fortunat Islands. It
was taken by Fernando Cortez in the year 1521, the thirteenth of August. This
Spanish captain led to this enterprise two hundred thousand Indians, others
write but one hundred thousand, nine hundred Spaniards, eighty horse,
seventeen pieces of small ordnance, thirteen brigandins, and six thousand
Canoes, which are like Gondoles or Wherries. This town stands in a great
plain environed with high mountains, on which there lies snow con^inually,
and it may have about seventy leagues in compass: but there are three and
thirty of them in two lakes, whereof the one is of fresh water, and the other
of salt: The water which comes from the fresh lake enters into the salt and
becomes Cortez, and then built again, not in the water but upon the firm
land. It contains about six thousand houses of Spaniards, and sixty thousand
of Indians which dwell in the suburbs. They say that there are four
beautiful things at Mexico, tha^ is, the women, their apparel, their horses,
and the streets. Upon the banks of these lakes, there were near fifty good
towns, among the which, Tescuto did ye^ld little unto

The Quality of the Co^ntrie.
ALl this country is exceeding temperat, and bears great abundance of
fruits, and all commodities nece^^a^ie for the life of man: There are many
mulberrie ^rees with whose leaves they do feed great store of silk worms. In
the fresh lake of Mexico, there grows a very good heatbe which they cu^euerie
Moon; and as for the salt lake, they did in former times draw great store of
salt from thence, but now it fails; yet they draw forth much S^^^iter, and the
Indians do ^oyle earth with dung, wher^with they make a cer^aine kind of ^^lt,
w^^^h is not wor^h any thing. They do now feed many horses, asses, and

M^nners of the Ancie^ts.
THe inhabitants of this country, were in former times eaters of men, and
Idolaters, and had many wives. The king of M^xico did never succeed by right of
blood, but by the choice of Electors which were six in number. They made choice
of youngmen, which were active, lusty, and well disposed of their persons, and
fit for war, yea the Mexicans Tlacaellel, who was so valiant, as he conquered a
good part of the estate of Mexico, and was so generous, as he refused the
Realm, saying, That it was more convenient for the commonweal that another
should be king, and that he should execu^e that which was necessary for the
state, than to lay the whole burden vp^^ his back, and that without being
king he would not leave to labor for the public, a^^^ell as if he were. Their
kings lived with great majesty and state, as well in Mot^zuma (who was the
last king) instituted certain orders of knights, where of some were called
Princes, others Lions, some Eagles, and some Leopards: these were allowed to
wear gold and silver, to be clothed in cotton, to wear breeches, and to have
vessel painted and guilt, which none of the meaner sort might use.


THe Mexicains are witty and industrious: they are full of courage, and think
that the greatest glory of a man consists in valor. In their cumbates they use
arrows, and slings with the which they cast stones, and they can now use the
harquebuze since the Spanairds came among them. The people are very sober and
given to traffic, which is in great request in that country. Every man is
given to feed silkewormes, and the handycrafts men make a thousand pretty toys
both of wood and feathers. They have accustomed themselves for the most part to
the Spanish fashions, since they received baptism.


THe he^be which they draw every year out of the fresh lake, is not worth
less unto ^he Inhabitants of Mexico than twenty thousand crowns. Finally, if
Peru exceeds this country in abundance of gold and silver which is exceeding
fine, this may also vaunt that it is richer than Peru in fruits and cattle,
and that it exceeds it in arts. This may well seem incredible.
As for cattle, there is some one that has above forty thousand oxen and
kine of his own particular, and some other has above a hundred and fifty
thousand sheep. In the fleet which came in the year 1587 there were brought
sixty four thousand cow hides into Spain,

New Spain does also vent into Peru for a million of crowns, in woollen cloth,
silks, linen cloth, and tables. They have not yet found out the art to make
glasses nor paper, and it may be more through the error of the workmen
(especially in regard of Gl^sse) than of the matter. The paper is of an olive
color, and is good for any thing but to write on, and the glass is obscure
and gross. The Indians pay unto the king and to the feudataries twelve rialls
for every head, and nothing else.


FOr that I refer it to the end of my discourse to treat of the government of
America in general, and of the forces; I will only say, that the king gives
to them that con^^er, and to soldiers of note, not the government of the
Indians, but the vasselage and the right of the tax which should be due to him,
and this continues but for the life of the conqueror and his son, with a bond
to perform that which the king should: that is, to

Gastecan.
Aruaro de Naruaez in the year 1527 led six hundred Spaniards and one hundred
horse, who were in a manner all lost and could not find it, and some of them
were so pressed with famine as they did eat one another. Twenty miles beneath
this river is that of Panuco, whereas Francis Garai was ill entreated by cruel
and barberous people, who slew about four hundred of his men, and did
sacrifice and eat some of them, hanging their skins dried in the temples of
their Idols. This country was afterward subdued by the captains of Cortez:
They called it Gastecan, or the river of Panuco, and there is a place called
Zimatao, in whose territory there is to be seen at the foot of a mountain
two fountains, Anthony de Mendoza caused a goodly way to be made from this
place to Mexico, to make the commerce easy,

Iucatan.
Francis Hernandes de Cordoua in the year 1517, it lies opposite to the Island
of Cuba.

Quality.
MAny desert places are in this country, and it is poor in gold and silver,
but in many places rich in corn, fruits, honey, wax, geese, hens, capons,
hares and stags. And although there be no rivers that water it, yet the land
continues always fresh and in good estate, for that two or three foot under
the ground it is stony, from under the which there


THe natural inhabitants of Iucatan, are somewhat warlike and generous, and
they live longer than the rest of New Spain: They did sacrifice their enemies
taken in war, but they did not eat them, abhorring the Mexicanes for that
cause: They used bows and targets, they did arm their heads with wood, and had
corselets of cotton, and did paint their faces and bodies black: They seemed
at their first discovery to be more civil than the rest of the Indians, for
the Spaniards found a great town, where the houses

Guatimala.
IN this country which lies betwixt Iucatan and Nicaragua (besides the town
of Guatimala

The Quality.
THe air of this country is sweet and pleasant, and the soil fertile, having
both mountains and valleis which yield store of fruit. The chief town (which
bears the same name) is in a pleasing valley, the which is always full of
herbs, and pleasing fruits. Among other fruits it abounds in Cacao, the which
is like unto an Almond, but it is round, and this fruit serves the Indians for
meat, drink, and money, especially in many parts of New Spain; twenty
thousand Cacaos, which make a charge, are worth one hundred

The Government.
THe governor of the province makes his residence in the town of Guatimala,
or of Saint James, where his authority is very great, for he disposes of
Comandaries that are void to whom he pleases: the which neither the governor
of Mexico, nor he of

The Firm land.
Columbus after the Islands, and contains all that which is betwixt Paria and
Iucatan, that is to say, upon the North sea, Fondura, Beragua, part of Golden
Castille, Carthagena, and Vene^zole^ whereunto they have since added Nicaraga,
with the rest of golden Castille,

Ni^aragua.


The Quality.
SOme write that the province is so fertile, as the Spaniards called it
Mahomets Paradise, for the abundance of all things. It is not great, but is
sandy, and therefore in summer it is so burnt up with heat as no man can in a
manner travel by day, but by night. It is no less distempered and uneasy than
Pouilla, Arragon, or Estremadura. From May unto October, they have great and in
a manner continual showers, especially in the Afternoon, Nicanor could never
finish the channel which he had proiected from the Caspian to the Euxin sea:
nor the kings of Egypt (the undertakers of

The Manners.
THe Inhabitants of Nicaragua are of a good stature, their complexion inclines
more to white than to an olive color. Before they were converted to the
Christian faith,


I Will here begin the Southren Peninsula. This country extends from Nombre de
Dio^ and Panama, unto the gulfes of Vraba and saint Michael. The most famous
place^, and of greatest concourse are Nombre de Dios and Panama, where of the
one stands upon the North sea, and the other upon the South, with two notable
ports, for that all the traffic which is made betwixt Spain and Peru, must
of necessity pass there.

The Quality.
which is afterward carried by land to Panama: they travel from hence to Peru,
in Ianu^ri^,

The Riches.
ALl the merchandise which is transported from Peru into Spain, or from Spain
into

The New Realm of Granado.


The Quality and Riches.
THis new realm of Granado is for the most part full of pleasing valleis,
which bear Unions. The


THis Province was discovered by chance, by Peter Aluares Cabral in the year
1501, Aluares Cabral arrived there, when as driven by the winds he discovered
Brasil. Certain rocks which have the form of a wall, and against which the
waves do break, cover it. After which they discover the river of the Holy
Ghost, and Baya Her^osa, and Cape froid, or the cold Cape, which is in a manner
an Island, it has two hundred and eighty miles in circuit, and is in the two
and twentieth degree and a half. Afterward they come to Santos, and to
Paratininga, which lies within the country, and th^se ^^^es are reasonably
good. Betwixt S. Sebastian and S. Vincent stands Buenabrigo, Alexander the
sixth. But the last Colonie of Portugals in these parts, is it of S. Vincent,
and for that it is a remo^e place, they condemn such thither as have deserved
the galleys, or some such like pu^is^ment: This place was ruined by the
English, on S. Stephens day, in the year 1591, but since it has been repaired
and made better. In the eight and twentieth degree stands Cape de Patos, so
called of a great number of birds which are black and without feathers, having
the bill of a Raven.

The Quality of the Country.
bea^^ know, for finding themselves bitten with serpents, and other beasts,
they have recourse

The Manners.
ALthough the air ^e delica^, and the country pleasing, yet it cannot be
spoken how


OVt of Brasil they draw great riches at this day, which consist in cottons
which are very fine, and excellent sugars, and there is not any thing
transported into Europe that is more beneficial to the owners. There have
been some years whenas the sugar which was brought from Brasil to Portugal
has exceeded the quantity of a hundred and fifty thousand arobes. The
Portugals are much given to this traffic, and have built diverse places where
to boil and refine their sugars: and they entertain a great number of slaves
which are brought from Guinee and Congo.


Coming out of the Strait they coast Chile, which is so called of a principal
valley:

The Quality.
(...) ^^ince is held to be like unto the countries of Europe, for that it is
without (...) ^^^^ning Zone: it yields store of come and very good wines, and
they have all ^^y time run very swiftly, but in the night they are very still,
as if the cold and ice had

The Manners.
THe Inhabitants are very tall, active, and full of courage: for their arms
they use bows and arrows. They go attired in the cases of wild beasts, and in
Seals skins.

Peru.


The Quality.
IT is an admirable thing that in so small a distance as is found in the
breadth of Peru, which is not much above forty leagues, and seeing that there
is no difference of elevation, it does neither rain, snow, not thunder in the
plains: and in the mean time upon

The Manners.
ALl the people of Peru, are distinguished chiefly into three sorts of
persons, whereof every one contains many other people under them, which
differ in names: These people are different, and their languages are distinct.
They were accustomed to make war one against another, before that they came
under the power of Ginacaue: but when as by his victory all cause of
contention was taken away, the chief amongst them, in their Lakes, and that
they only had the true religion, and should teach it to others. Viracoca, that
is to say, the Universal Creator, and after him the Sun. The Ingua Pacacuti,
who invented the greatest part of their supersti^ions, having assigned rents
for the Temples of their gods, appointed none for Viracuca, saying, That he had
no need, for that he was the Creator of all things. Amongst other remarkable
things which they brought into those countries where they conquered, one was,
that they ^^u^ded the land into three parts: the one did belong to religion,
and their gods: the second was for the Ingua or King, who therewith did
entertain his person, court, ^insmen, barons, and garrisons, and this part was
the greatest: the third part was for the people: yet no man had any thing in
particular, but by special grace from the Lycurgus in the distribution of
lands, and the Romans in their law Agraria. And for that it never raines in
P^ru, the inhabitants care little for houses, and the Spaniards themselves
cover not their houses but with certain mats. Yet the king of Peru made

The Riches.
THey draw abundance of gold and silver out of Peru, besides other
merchandise: and of all the riches which comes from America into Europe, Peru
does commonly furnish two third parts, and New Spain the other: but New Spain
has richer merchandise, the which together with the Islands among other things
does yield great store of cochenille, cotton, sugar and pearls: but among the
treasures of Peru there are two very admirable;

and others.
FIrst of all appears Tarapata, with a port, in the one and twentieth degree;
then Arica, and the mouth of the river and port of Quilca: and within the
country the pleasing and delightful town of Arequipa, which being seated at
the foot of a mountain which does ^^^t forth fire, does always enjoy a
temperat and subtle air, and a soil which is fre^^ ^lorishing. The silver of
Plata and Potosi comes to this port, and there is shipped for (...): thither
comes much victuals and merchandise which goes to Cusco. There is

Passing on, they discover the port of Gaure, where there is great store of
salt, and that of Casnia abounding in wood and victuals: then Santa, and
Quanape, from whence they come to Trugillo, which is two good leagues from the
sea. This town is seated in the seventh degree and two third parts in the
valley of Chimo, upon the banks of a goodly river. Then follows the point of
Aguille in the sixth degree, and Payta, a town of great traffic: Tumbes in
the third degree, saint Hellene in the second, and the Cape of saint Laurence
in the first, and near unto it, is the old port, and S. James:

COLLAO, and others.
BV^ the riches and power of Peru, consists in provinces which are within the
land, (...) the first is Collao: seated whereas the two chains of Mountains
or Cordeli^rs ^^^^e named enlarge themselves one from another. The Southern
bound is a place called Caracol, and the Northern Ayauire. The chief town of
this province is i^ the lake of Taquicaca thirty leagues long, and fifteen
broad, having fourscore in

The Quality.
ALthou^^^ ai^^ ^e^o ^old there, asmaize does not willingly grow; yet it is one
of the (...) ^ountries, and b^st peopled in Peru: and thereby we may conjecture
how much

Chiarque.
THen follows the province of the Chiarques, rich for the treasures which are
found ^^^re, which are drawn out of the min^^ of ^^^co (which are in the
territory of Pla^^) and Potosi: the chief ^owne of ^h^s pro^i^ce i^ Chiarque.
Near unto Potosi, there (...) a little mountain called Guayna ^o^osi, that i^
(...) say, Little Potosi, at the foot whereof begin^ the town of tw^ l^agues
circuit, where there is the greatest concourse of people and traffic that is
in Peru: the Spaniards which inhabit there are about four thousand, an^ they of
the country m^ke fourscore thousand: I do not number them whom

The Quality and Riches.
WE may easily conceive the riches of this country, seeing that the President
Guasco assigned in his territory 100 thousand crowns of rent to Peter of
Hiniosa, besides lesser assignations, and there were some of fifty and
fourscore thousand. The mountai^e of Porco has mines of gold which cannot be
drawn dry; and there are many

Cus^^^
Francis Piz^rre. It has in it about fifty thousand inhabitants, and within
the compass of twelve leagues, there are two hundred thousand.


THe to^ne of Cusco has a territory full of pleasant and rich valleys as
those be of And^g^ay^a, Xaquisane, Bilcas, and Sucay: This last has so good
and temperat a^ ^^re, and (...) situation so pleasing, as it cannot be
worth^ly expressed: by reason where-of it is full of ^^^tely houses of Spaniards,
and great villages well peopled. Our fruits grow a^ well ^^^ereas in Spain. At
Cusco they eat ripe grapes all the year. There is al^o great sto^e of oxen,
sheep, and horses, which they entertain there, and they mul^^^ as w^ll as in
Europe.


THi^ place which is upon the East of Lima, is the chief of a Noble province,
and is ^^^ous for the rout and taking of Attabalipa, king of Peru, which
happened in the year^ (...), of whose ransom the vanquishers did enrich
themselves more than ever any so^l^iers did, and yet they had but a part of it:
for one hundred and fifty souldi^^^ had ^^o hundred fifty two thousand pound
weight of silver, and a million and (...) ^^^dred twenty six thousand crowns
in gold. The town of Cassimalca is at (...) L^m^ and Cul^o and (...) vall^y of
Xa^xa and the Andes. Quaila Alp^^nso of Nercadille, in (...) called Z^^i^)
(...) bank^ of the (...) of Ca^amayo^ (...) which (...) through (...)
^^^ri^o^ie, which make it pleasing^ (...) The f^elds and full of maize, and ^f
ou^ c^rne, ^he^r orchards (...) o^^^r fruits, and g^rdens soll of (...) with a^
(...) numbe^ of (...) ^eigh^our (...).

Qui^^.
IT is now ^iche ^o enter^^to the Province of Quiro, which is one ^undred miles

The Q^^^^^ie.
Summer begins there in April, and contin^es until November. The inhabitants

Saint Croix of the Mo^nt.




The Quality.
THe plain country is subject to the inundation of riue^^. The ants to the
end the waters do not spoil their harvest make (especially at Vapai) little
rampires about a cubit high, and twelve or fifteen foot in circuit, where they
preserve their grain, and of these they make many. Thither do the passengers
retire themselves whenas the waters surp^ise them. The river of Vapai does rise
and fall as the Nile, and runs with a slow course,

The Manners.
TH^^^ are diverse barbarous people in this country, and among others the
Cerigans, (...) the Viracans, who are at continual war, or else fight
against the Spaniards, whose passage they seek to hinder all they can. Don
Francis of Toledo drew together the forces of Peru to subdue them, but in
vain: they eat man's flesh as we do mutton. The To^es their neighbors carry
their enemies (whom they have taken in war) upon him that has slain any one
by some extraordinary blow: they encourage Paic^me, by reason whereof they
called the P^ic^me. Whenas the women are delivered of child the hu^band go^ to
bed, and does as we have written of them of Brasil. They cannot reckon but to
sour, and ^o signify ^i^e they show the hand, for ten, both hands, and for
twenty, t^^^ say my hands and my feet. When as the husband goes a^^oad for any
time, he (...) many sticks in the house as he means to stay days (...), and
^a^ries as man^ ^ith h^^, taking away one every day, and the woman (or he that
remai^es at home) anoth^^, and after this manner they reckon the days of
absence. B^yond S. Croix (...) the ^^st, are ^he people called Garays, that is
to say, warriers; who te^m^ all ot^e^^ Tap^^is^ that i^ to say, slaves: yet
they do much esteem the Spania^ds^ and say they are d^s^^^ded from them. They
never forget an injury. They eat

Tuc^^^.
John Perez reduced the Prince of this valley by f^i^n^^hip to the obedience of
the king of Spain, he making himself a Christian:but b^i^g ^fterwards
disconten^ed at the bad usage of Perez, he re^olted with the whole va^l^y, and
so continued seven and twenty years. In the end John Ramirez with one hun^red
Spanish foot, five hundred horse, and three hundred archers of Peru, made an
end of this enterprise. Steco is the chief of fifty places. Saint James
stands one hundred

The Quality.
THe cou^^^ie is generally plain, and the air more inclining to heat than
cold. It raines much, and the rivers do easily ouerflow the fields, and the
winds are so viole^^ as they turn up trees by the root, and force the
inhabitants to hide themselves vnde^g^udn^.

Paraga^is.
THE P^^aguais dwell upon the confines of Tucuma, along the river whereof they
Se^astian Gabot, and by diverse Spanish Captains: and then by the way of Peru,
by Diego Roias, and others. The chief town is Vraye Foy, o^ the True fait^:
moreover, there are the towns of the A^^umption, Saint Anne, Bouair, Saint
Esplo^, and Saint Savior.

Hispaniola.


The Quality.
THe air is v^^ie well te^^^^ed, being neither too hot nor too cold: yet upon
the ton of some ^^gh ^ockes^ the cold is v^rie sharp. The trees bear leaves
continually, for the old (...) but the ^ew bud for^h presently. All ^^ees,
fruits, and ^earbes which are broug^^ out (...) Spai^e grow there and increase
wonderfully, but they find by expe^ience that whe^^^omes better i^ hill^^
places. This country has many havens and rivers, bu^ tha^ which makes it more
delightful and commodious for the inhabitants, is the wate^ of four (...)
ri^ers, which coming from the tops of high mountains, which are

The Manners
THe In^ab^^^^^^ are n^^urally slothful and idle, they go all naked, and live
only of their fishing. Before that they had received our religion, they did
believe that there was a first mouer of all things; but otherwise they were
full of infinite errors. Since that they brought sugar canes thither, they have
made mills and built shops; so as the inhabitants at this day have great
traffic, and by that means grow rich.





About this Island they ^^nd many dangerous shelfes, for that toward the North
there (...) great turning of water, and upon the South part it is full of
little rocks. This

The M^nner^.


(...).
AT this day, this Island which they ^all Saint James is situated be^^ixt the
Pete^ M^^tir Ang^^^^ Milanois w^^ prelat. D^^^ue son to Colombu^ ^^bdued this
Island, and ^ade them ^^^^t^ie to the crown of Spain in the year 1509.

The Quality and Riches.
THe ai^e i^ good, and the country ^e^till, feeding great numbers of cattle,
by reason of (...) waters and pastures, having many goodly ^ountaines which
refresh them. They (...) are mines of gold. They do ^^so gather a great
quantity of cotton and ^^*

The Manners.
THe ^^^^le in their manner of living are like to them of Hisponiola and Cuba,
and yet some ^ay that they of Iamaica have been more cruel.

The Islands of the Cannibals o^ C^ribes.
AL^ thos^ which stretch out in a double rank from the East to the South of
Hispaniola

A DISCOVRSE IN GENERAL
The Forces.
Francis D^ake sacked the town of Saint Dominico in (...), and Ca^thagena upon
the firmeland. But this attempt of the English made the (...) to provide for
the safety of these Provinces, which seem to be (...) towa^^^he Nor^h by
na^u^e; first by a great number of Islands which serve as a (...) d^^en^e for
New Spain, and ^ortifie it with many shelfes which cause di^ers

The Ciuil^ Gouernmen^ of the New W^rld.
IN all the New World th^re are ^wo Vic^roi^s, the one of New Spain, who makes
his abode in ^he c^^^e of ^exico; and the other o^ Peru, who has his residence
at Lima.

I^stice is wh^^^y ^^^^ged by soue^aigne courts, whereof there be five in New
(...) Me^ico, Saint D^^^^ico, Gua^imala, Guadalajara; and Panama: Peru has
also (...) that is to say, at (...) I^periall of Chil^, at Plata, Quinto, and
at S. Foy in the N^w realm. The Spaniards and Indians have recourse equally to
these seats of Iusti^e, from ^he which no man may appeal. The Spaniards
(except the Marquis of Charles the fifth, and to Philip the second: but, for
that these kings did fear that those conquerors might eat the people to the
bone and oppress them, or else that these conquerors might o^e day revolt,
they would never give care unto this demand.

The Ecclesiastical government.
AT the New world there are four Archbishopricks, one at S. Dominico, another
at Mexico, the third at Lima, and the fourth at S. Foy in the New realm. The
first has

Of the knowledge which the people of the New world have of God.
Candi^e, of whom they tell diverse follies, they go with this name in their
mouths, through Precipices and forests, from wh^nce they can hardly retire
themselves; they tread upon burning coals, and snakes, and have no harm. They
have knowledge also of seven sorts of spiri^s, and do reverence them for fear
of being beaten or slain, and they are also much given to southsayings. They
carry their arrows to southsayers, and according to their judgments, they
either hold them for good and happy, and so keep them, or for bad and
unfortunate, and so cast them away: but coming to those people which are a
little more civil, they of Cusco, and the inhabitants of Peru, confessed a
Creator of the Universe, and a sovereign Prince, whom they called Viracoca,
and Pacacamac, that is to say, Creator of heaven and earth, and they did
worship him in lifting up their eyes to heaven. But they had no word answerable
to the name of God, and even at this day, they cannot say God, but in using the
Spanish word. These things

In the province of Cinaloa, which is beyond New Spain, they hold that there
is a Creato^ and Governor of the world, but they did not extend his government
and providence to man, least he should restrain his free will: they did burn
their dead men without any ceremony, or cast them into a pit which was six
hundred yards deep. They of M^chouacan had some knowledge of the beginning of
the world, of the framing of man of the slime of the earth, and of the deluge
(this last was common to them of Peru and Brasil) but with a thousand follies:
they did believe that the gods above made the celestial things, and they
below the terrestiall; and they appointed a mother to all the

Of the Indians Idolatries toward the deceased.
THey of Peru did carefully preserve the bodies of their deceased kings, which
were kept^^ Cusco, every one in his chapel, whereof some had remained above
two hundr^d wives and servants, or to bury them quick, to the end they should
not want people to John de la Tour a (captain to Gons^luo Pizarro) drew out of
a tomb the value of fifty thousand crowns in stuffes, which had been put
there to that end. In Mechouacan, for that they believed that men did live in
the other world as in this, dying they made provision not only of victuals and
apparel, but also of other things belonging to those exercises which they
were wont to use.

Of their Idolatry to Im^g^s.


The Me^icans (besides their Images) did also worship living Idols. They took
a prison^r (and sometimes more) whom they thought fit for the sacrifice; they
did attire him and trim him up like unto the Idol, to the which they would
sacrifice, and they gave him the same name: during the time of this
rep^esentation, which continued many

Of their G^uco^s, and Templ^s.


Of Priests, and religious persons.
THe priests at Mexico were divided into little, greater, and greatest of all,
and these

The Mexicans had also a kind of religious women, whose profession continued
but a year, ^^d they remained in the Cloister of the Temple, or in certain
houses, and they were called The d^^ghters of penance. They did not exceed the
age of thirteen years; they lived shut up with chastity; they swept the
Temple, and prepared the meat which was set before the Idol, the which his
ministers did eat. They did rise at midnight to pray, and for p^nance they did
cut the tops of their ears with certain little knives, and laid the temples
with blood, after which they did stick the instruments which they had
imploy^^^

Of Sacrifices.


But the Mexicans did not sacrifice any but such as they took in war; and to
the end they might have a great number, they did not care to subdue Tlascalla,
a great town near unto them. The man^^r how they in^rea^ed these wretches was
after this sort: First ^hey made them kneel^ in order before the door of the
Temple, then went the Priest rou^^ about them with the Idol in his hands, and
showing it to every one, he said, Behold thy god* afterward they were led to
the place where they should be sacrificed: ^hen there appeared six of (...)
Priests appointed for this ministry, with so strange a ^ehauiour as they
(...) rather Devils than men; two of them took the wreched sacri^ise by (...)
feet, and two others by the arms, and a (...) hold him by the throat; thus
they

How the Devil had counterfeited some Sacraments of the Church.
^lement Alexandri^u^ teach us, That the Devil to take from us the (...) of
the incarnation of Jesus Christ, saigned many years before, (...) by ^he (...)
of Po^ts, as for example, That Bacchus was twice (...) and another of Jupiter*
to blemish the divinity and humanity of Pallas a virgin: that Hercules went
(...) with such like iuentions, to the end that men should (...) of our Lady,
nor the descent of Christ into hell; (...) oth^^ di^i^e wor^e^



But that which the Mexicans did was more remarkable. Two days before the
feast of Vitzilpuitzli, the religious men of that Temple made an Idol of
roasted maize, and the seed of an herb which they call Blite, mingled with
honey, of the bigness of that of wood which was in the Temple: afterward they
set it upon a form, and carried it with great speed through the fields, all the
people following in procession, and then they returned to the Temple: after
which, the virgins came attired in white, with garlands of flowers and cer^aine
pieces of past like unto great bones, who delivered them to young men that laid
them at the Idols feet: they termed these pieces, the flesh and bones of
Vitzilpuitzli: This hathsome ^esemblance to the opinion of the Papists touching
the Eucharist.
afterward they performed the sacrifices of captives, and then they stripped the
Idol, doing with these pieces as with other consecrated pasts, distributing
them to the people, who received them with great reverence, saying that they
did eat the flesh and bones of their God.

The devil had also counterfeited Confession, which the Papists make a
sacrament: for that in Peru there were Priests appointed to hear confessions,
in form of great and less p^nitenciers, and in cases partly common and partly
reserved to superiors. They



The people of Saint Croix du Mont have some causes which hinder marriage, and
dis^^l^^ that which is contracted, and some wherein they cannot be separated
although i^ ^e unlawful.

Of the dispositions of the New World to receive the Gospel.
Augustus, so he ordained that the Gospel should (...) other world, when as
the Empires of the Ingua at Peru, and the Mexicans (...) we^e come unto their
height. And to show how much the large bounds of an Empire serves for the
advancement of the Gospel, I say first of all, that under a great

At the New World the Mexican tongue extended it self for the space of one
thousand leagues and that of Cusco had no less bounds: for the kings of
Mexico and Peru h^^ no less care to extend their language, than their Empires;
and although they used i^ these two re^lmes many languages, and much different
among themselves, yet that of Mexico is eloquent and rich, and common to all
New Spain, and that of Cusco to Pe^^ as among us the Latin, and among the
Turks, the Sclauonian in Europe, and the Arabian in Asia: so as it is
sufficient for them that preach the word of God to learn one language, to
pass through a country three thousand miles long, whereas otherwise they
should have need of fifteen or twenty languages. Besides the foresaid two
languages,

The third benefit which does grow thereby, is that the greatness of the
Empire draws into one place people that are far scattered and dispersed, for
you must understand that in New Spain and Peru, the people before they were
subdued by them of Mexico and Cusco, lived like beasts, without commander,
without law, and without community; every man planted himself where he
thought best, and lived there with his family: so they of Florida, some of the
Chichimeques, they of Brasil, and the Varays live at this

Finally, the greatness of an Estate and rule makes the people more civil,
and courts do quicken their wits, and ripen their judgments, and the
diversity of conversation makes a man more polliticke and wise. The people of
P^ru in the beginning lived in the mountains naked, rude, and brutish, eating
that which the earth brought forth, yea and man's flesh. Under the Empire of the
Ingua, they did learn diuer^ arts, with civility: they

Of some other dispositions.
THe foresaid reasons made easy the conversion of America, as it were
outwardly; but let us speak of more lively and important dispositions.

The first was the yoke of kings, and the insupportable burden of the people:
For the Ingua of Peru, and the king of Mexico did so charge their subjects, as
they seemed rather beasts than men; and these princes would not be honored
like men, but as Gods.

Guaynacapa died, he had a thousand person^ of his household slain and buried
with him, to serve him in the other world. The same ^ing having received some
displeasure of a certain people which inhabit betwixt Quito and Pasto, caused
twenty thousand to be slain, and to be thrown into a lake, which for this
cause was called Ajaquarcoca, that is to say, a sea of blood.

The reason which moved them of Peru to bury their families and riches with
them,

The yoke of the kings of New Spain was nothing more easy. Motezuma, who was

What shall we say now of the insupportable yoke of the Devil? We have
formerly discoursed of the religion of Mexico, and of the sacrifices which they
made of men, whom they flew with so great cruelty, as it seemed the Devil did
not so much seek the death of these poor wretches, as their torments in
death: but I will not bear to speak of one thing which is remarkable. The
Idol Priests when as they saw a fit occasion, went unto the king and princes,
telling them their gods died for hunger, and that they should remember them:
then the Princes sent Ambassadors one unto another, and gave advice of the
necessity wherein their gods were; inuiting them for this cause to make leuies
of men to go to battle, to the end they might have wherewithal to feed their
Idols. So they marched in order to the place appointed, and joined battle:
having no other dessigne Fernand Cortez, who had some few days before made
himself master of Mexico, entreating him to send them his Law, and masters
to expound it, for that they were resolved to quit their own, as insupportable
and wicked. Joseph Acosta reports, That the Spaniards on a

Of some dispositions proceeding from the malice of the Devil.
THe Devil, maugre himself, did in some sort dispose these In^idels to the
Faith, for that the wisdom of God is so high and profound, as it makes use of
evil for good, and turns unto his own glory; the means wherewith the
Devil seeks to darken his holy name. The greatest mysteries of the Christian
faith, are those of the Trinity, the


GOd meaning to dispose mankind for the coming of Jesus Christ, not only gave
Guarionex, who demanded of one of his Chemes (for so they called their Idols)
what should happen unto his people after his death; and the Cheme answered,
That within few years there should come into that Island men which should be
apparrelled, and wear long beards, who should destroy the Idols, with the
ancient religion of the country, and all their ceremonies.

In the country which confines with the river of Plata a little before the
coming of the Spaniards, there was one Oriquara, much esteemed among those
nations for his good life, who inspired (as it is likely) by the holy spirit,
ran up and down those countries, foretelling the coming of cer^aine men, who
should teach a new religion, exhorting every man to receive it, and to leave
the plurality of wives: and to the end that this his

In Acuzamilan Island ne^re unto Iucatan, they found a cross some two fadoms
high, to the which they of the country had recourse, as to a celestial and
divine thing, especially in the time of great drought, to obtain rain for
that which they had sown.

In Mechouacan there was a priest of great authority and reputation among
those people, who foretold them, that within a short time the Truth should be
revealed unto them: he lead a Christian life (as some reported that had known
him, and especially one that had served him) for he did celebrate the Nativity
of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, and to perform it with more devotion, he
withdrew himself some days before from all Fernand Cortez in New Spain, but
the king of Mechouacan went unto him with all the flower of his realm, and
made himself vassal to the Emperor: he required to be baptized, and obtained
from Cortez men to instruct his people in the Christian faith.

Moreover all the people of Peru and New Spain, did firmly believe the
immortallitie of the soul, and the pains of the wicked, and the reward of the
good. Some


THe Spaniards entered Peru and New Spain with good means to extend, both their
themselves, they entered into league with Fernand Cortez, who with the aid of
the Tlascallans Motezuma. In the town of Cholola they did worship a famous
Idol, which they called Quezalcoail: he told them plainly that there came
strangers to conquer and possess these realms. At Tescusco their gods
foretold, that many calamities did hang over the head of Motezama, and all the
Mexican Empire; the Magitians foretold the same: whereat Motezuma was in such a
rage, as he caused them to be put in prison; and for that they escaped easily
and fled away, he slew their wives and Motezuma commanded that they should
sacrifise where the stone had stayed: they say that at that time there came
forth a voice to this purpose; Have I not told you that you labored in vain?
and to the end you may be the better assured, I will suffer my self to be
drawn some little space, then will I stay again, and you shall not

There did also appear in the firmament a great flame like unto a Pyramide,
which they saw about midnight, then at the Sun rising, and at nooneday; and
this spectacle continued a year. They did see in the day time running from the
East unto the West, a Comet, like unto a very long tail of a beast with three
heads: the Temple burnt, and there was no light seen neither within nor
without, nor any thunder heard, nor any lightning seen in the air, and
although that multitudes of men ran to quench this fire, yet could they not do
it: the fire did seem to come out of the very walls, and it increased by
casting on water, until all was consumed. The lake began suddenly without any
apparent

This beast had upon the top of the head a certain crest like unto a looking
glass: which Motezuma beholding, he saw the firmament and stars at noone day,
whereat he was much astonished; then viewing it again, he saw armed men come
from the East, who fought furiously, and made a strange slaughter of those that
incountered them: Motezuma a peasant who was generally held to be an honest
true dealing man, who said unto him, that as he was sowing his field, an Eagle
of extraordinary greatness took him up suddenly and did him no harm, but
carried him into a cave, where he heard one say: Most mighty Lord I have
brought thee him, whom thou commaundedst me; then without sight of any man ^e
heard a voice which directed it self unto him with these words, Do thou
know that man which lies upon the ground? and then looking down he saw a man
in a sound sleep having royal habiliments, flowers, Motez^ma: Thou say
true (replied one) behold how soundly he sleeps, and yet there are strange
accidents and great miseries which hang over his head; it is now time that he
receive Motezumas nose, who had no feeling: Now, said the voice, for that thou
see how soundly he sleeps, go and awake him, and report to him all that has
past. And at the same instant, the Eagle took the peasant and raising him up
into the air, he carried him to the place where he first took him.

Besides these things, you must understand, the Mexicans had an opinion that in
former Topilchin, had abandoned them, and that he should return again to
comfort the^. The news of the coming of Cortez upon the Eastern coast of New
Spain, being come unto them, they did all believe that their great friend and
lord Topilchin was returned according to his promise: They therefore sent five
Ambassadors unto Cortez, who were men of quality, with many rich presents:
th^se men being come to the Spaniards, told them, That they knew well that
their lord Topilchin was returned with them, and that his servant Motezuma had
sent them to visit him, and to kiss his hands. Cortez making use of this good
occasion, fained himself to be Topilchin, and accepted the presents and
complement: He could not wish a fitter means and opportunity to bring the
Gospel and the name of Christ into this realm. Motezuma, opposed themselves
to so peaceable a manner of change in these estates: hence grew so many
reuolts, bloody battles, ruin of towns, and loss of men of either side.

The Spaniards in like manner entered Peru with as favorable an occasion.
Gu^ynacapa, Ingua of Peru, had two sons, Guacar, and Attahualpa (whom others
call Attabalipa) of which Guacar or Guascar was the lawful successor to his
father, and as such took possession of the realm: but his brother made war
against him, and took him: whereat his subjects being wonderfully discontent,
and having not power sufficient to deliver him, they Viracoca, beseeching him,
that seeing they were not able to free the Ingua their lord, he would send men
from heaven to set him at liberty. Living thus in great hope, they heard news,
That certain strangers being come by sea into Peru, had put Attabalipa to rout
at Cassimalca, and had taken him prisoner: so as imagining that these men (this
was Francis Pizarro and his companions) were come thither, by reason of the
great sacrifice which they had made to Viracoca, they called them Viracoques; a
name which remains unto the Spaniard to this day, as to men descended from
heaven, and sent by God. Wherefore, as God opened a passage for the Spaniards
at New Spain, by the discord of the king of Mexico, and the commonweal of
Tlascalla, and by so many prodigies, Motezuma: so he made them a way into Peru
by the discord which was betwixt the sons of Guaynacapa, and by the success
of their sacrifice; by reason whereof the Spaniards were held the children of
God, and men descended from heaven.

Of the Ordinance or Decree of Pope Alexander the sixth.
Alexander the sixth hearing of the discovery of so many new lands, and seeing
that the Spaniards made show to have a will to extend religion, as much as
their estate; he first of all bound the kings of Spain and Portugal, to have a
special care to the conversion Alexander had no more authority to dispose of
the New world, nor to give unto them the kingdoms which had

What made the conversion of the Indians easy.
Francis baptized in many years about fourteen hundred thousand in New
Spain: and some write, That there were ten millions christened in five or six
years, others say, but Fernand Cortez which conquered it, who commanded his
Captains and Lieutenants to ruin all the Idols and Temples: so as the Indians
not able to go where they had been accustomed to do evil, were easily drawn
to those places where they might do good.

Of hindrances in the conversion of the Indians.
Having showed the means whereby our Lord advanced the faith and preaching of
his word in America, it is fit to speak something of that which was opposite to
this Thomas of Ortis and some others) to all the rest, in the time of the
Emperor Charles the fifth in the year 1525, by reason whereof the insolent
soldiers (who naturally have no measure) seeing themselves favored by the
covetousness of their Superiors, and counseled therein by religious persons,
grew more Charles touching this subject, and others being come to court, did
treat with him and his council of the Indies.

The Emperor who was both iuditious and religious, hearing of these
inconveniences and disorders in his Estates, and how badly they entreated them
of the country, desiring to remedy it, and to discharge his conscience, he
propounded the matter in Pizarro was the head, in which the rebels flew Blasco
Nugnez de Vela, Viceroy of Peru: to pacify these disorders, the Emperor sent
the Licentiat Gasca to Peru, a man very circumspect and wise, who furmounted
force by his dexterity, and fury by policy; he defeated the rebels in
battle, and pacified all things by the taking and death of Pizarro: since
which time, matters of religion and government have been better managed.

Of the diversity of barbarous people, and of the manner of preaching the
Gospel.


The second degree of brutishness consists in feeding, and this is after two
sorts: some are ^rutish, for that they sow not, nor have any care of tillage,
but eat, like beasts, that which the earth does produce of it self. And for
that our complexion is according unto ou^ breeding, it follows of necessity,
that a savage breeding will have a savage nature and dispo^^^^on* Others are
brutish, for that they feed upon man's flesh, either indifferently or only of
their enemies taken in war, as they of Popayan and of Mexico: In the

The third degree of brutishness consists in nakedness, which is of many
kinds. For some having no feeling of honesty (which was the first reason which
moved Adam to cover himself) do not hide their privy parts; others cover them
in some sort, but for the ^est they go naked; others are clothed only from the
navel unto the knees. Some although they show their nakedness in all or in
part (for that they use not any garmenes) yet they paint their bodies of diverse
colors to make themselves fair or terrible, and they carry stones of little
or no value fastened to their lips, nose, and ears, as they of

The fourth sort consists in the habitation, which is diverse. The most
barbarous have no other dwelling but in caves or hollow trees, and in that
which defends them from the wind, cold, and rain, without any industry. They
pass the day whereas they find meat, and sleep whereas night surpriseth them.
They have a certain kind of policy; for having no certain abode touching
the place, yet have they it settled concerning the form; so live the Tartarians
upon their chariots covered with felt, and the Arabians in their Adiuares: the
first attain to the perfection of policy, who not only have certain (...)
them, or take them in their hunting: and if they found any cattle that were
scabbed

Hereby we may comprehend that barbarousnesse carries with it an incapacitie of
celestial things, for two reasons, that is to say, by reason of brutishness,
and stupiditie: The first reigned in Chichimeque, Brasil, and among the
Caribes; and the latter in the Islands of Barlouent and Solomon, in the valleis
of Peru and other places: wherefore religion is not to be governed after one
manner in all places. They must proceed with the Canniballs and others which
devour man's flesh indifferently, as with the enemies Aristotle says, That
such men should be taken as beasts, and tamed by force. The neighbors to these
people are those which abstain from man's flesh, but yet go naked without any
shame, for that there is not any thing that does more distinguish a man from a
beast than shamefastness, for the which Adam covered himself, first with fig
leaves, and then clothed himself with skins. Yet it is not lawful to use
violence and the sword to these men; but rather a restraint, neither must they
teach them Christian doctrine, before they learn bashfulnesse and honesty.
Others have no

Moses, and the miracles which God ^ad done by his means, nor Grecians who
esteemed not any thing but what was above their knowledge; being inhabited by
people that were either brutish or dull, there was not any need of miracles,
but of humane help, with the which these people might be Mahomet, which might
draw and flatter them: and on the other side they sought no miracles like the


WE must not think that the conversion of the New World past without many ^h^
c^^e and authority to prescribe an order for so many things, and in such
different Francis there was not any one but had baptized at the least one
hundred thousand persons in New Spain, and one of them baptized four hundred
thousand: how then could they instruct so great a multitude of m^n that were
rude and savage, in the doctrine of Jesus Christ, especially, they but yet
learning the Mexican tongue. But the worst of al is that in so small a number of
teachers, th^^e were and are yet many which have bin employed in so great a
ministry, which Peter or John* and at this day in New Spain, where there are
bishops and a great number of religious men, one Curat has under his charge
fifty, yea seventy villages, and forty miles in circuit or more. The people
therefore continued as much inclined to their ancient superstition and
idolatry as before, for that having no knowledge of divine things, they did
not eleuat their spirits more than ordinary, and lived with many wives or
concubines: the other defect which they found in the conversion of the Indians
was for that these first Fathers baptized these Indians not one by one, but by

Of the Remedies of the foresaid defects.
Cortez) was one, and Friar Martin of Valencia the Popes Vicar: there they made
clear the point of the Indians marriages, that is to say, with which wife they
should remain; and it was resolved, that for as much as the form of their
contract of ^arriage was not known, nor what style they followed in that case,
they should for that ^i^e retain which of them they would, and dismiss the
rest. But there was not any one whi^^ did more assist the zeal of the New
Christians in New Spain, than Vasco of Quiroga the first Bishop of Mechouacan,
who made very good ordinances, and put in practice profitable institutions,
both concerning the spiritual and temporal affairs of the Francis, S.
Dominicke, S. Augustine, and de la Merced, to whom they have since added the
Jesuits, and some Carmelites, the Cathedral and Collegiall Churches,
Universities, Seminaries, provincial Counsels, Catechismes printed, and
visitations made by the Bishop.


BEfore we enter into this discourse, it shall be fit to instruct the Reader
touching the money or coin wherewith the Spaniards make their accounts. You
must therefore understand that always in Spain they account by Marauedis, or
ducats, and not in any other kind of money, notwithstanding that they have
croisadoes, pistolls, and royalls both of eight and four, but their most
usual accounting is by Marauedis, which kind of coin being very small, does
easily amount to millions, and yet the sum is of

A treaty of all the rents, and revenues, which the king of Spain
Alcauala what it is.
THe king of Spain exacts the tenth penie of all goods, lands, houses,
merchandises, or whatsoever el^e, atsuch times as they are sold, and this tenth
is called Alcauala. In like manner artizans and workmen, and such as keep
shops and fell any thing oftheir handie work or industry, or else in those
places whereas

The salt, that is to say, the places from whence the king of Spain draws
salt, are ren^ed yearly for 93 (Quentos) or millions of marauedis. The tenths
of the sea, of merchandise which comes from foreign parts into Biscai, and the
provinces of Guipuscoa, and of the four Maritime valleis of the mountains,
pay for all the mercandise which is carried by land into Castille, unto the
houses appointed to 70 mill. of marau. The tenths of the sea which pass by the
realm of Leon, and by the ports of Sanabre, and Villa Franca yield yearly 1
mill. of marau. The tenths of the principality of Asturia, passing by the
Town of Ouiedo yield 375000 marau. The revenues of the government of the town
of Bilbao, for merchandise which come from foreign parts 490500 marau. The
city of Burgos, with the jurisdiction, paies yearly for the Alcauales,
thirds, and rents 17 mill. 129880 marau. The Bayliwicke of Burgos, which they
term Bureba, pays yearly 2 millions 646 marau. The mountains of Oca yield
yearly 34000 marau. The Bayliwicke of the province of Rioja 3 mill. 757000
marau. The Bayliwicke of Ebro pays 2 mill. 34000 marau. The jurisdiction on
the other side of Ebro yields 1 mill. 402000 marau. The city of Victoria pays
yearly unto the king 269000 marau. The province of Guipuscoa p^yes yearly for
the Alcauales and thirds 1 million 181000 marau. The mines o^ iron which are in
the said province yield 150000 marau. The seven Bayliwickes of the mountains
of old Castille 942000 marau. The valley of Mena in the same mountains of
Castille 228000 marau. The province of Logrono 7 millions 746000 marau. The
town of Ianquas, and the territory, pays 541000 marau. 4 mil. 812000 Marau.
The bailiwicke of the town of Diego 1 million, 545000 Marauedis. The
bailiwicke of Can de Munno paies 4 millions, 612000 Marau. The bailiwicke of
Castro Xeris 8 millions, 485000 Marauedis. The bailiwicke of Ceriato 1 million,
968000 Marauedis. The bailiwicke of Monson 2 millions, 276000 Marauedis. The
city of Palence, and the province of Campo paies yearly for the Alcauales and
thirds 16 millions, 940000 Marauedis. The town of Carrion paies 4 millions,
948000 Marauedis. 2 millions, 910000 Marauedis. The places of Peter Aluares of
Vega 655000 Marauedis. The town of Sahagun is rented for 2 millions, 125000
Marauedis. The bailiwicke of Pernia paies 178000 Marauedis. The bailiwicke of
Campo in the mountains 1 million, 730000 Marauedis. The valley of Miranda in
the mountains 557000 Marauedis. The four Towns called of the coast* that is
to say, S. Ander^, Laredo, Castro of Vrdi^ales, and S. Vincent, pay yearly 3
millions, and 345000 Marauedis. The principallitie of Asturia, and the town of
Ouiedo 12 mil. 345000 Mara. The city of Lugo in the realm of Gallicia, with
the Bishopric, paies yearly 4 mil. The city of Mondonedo in the realm of
Gallicia 1 million, and 132000 Marauedis. The city of Orense, and the
jurisdiction 6 millions, and 58000 Marauedis. The city of Saint James or
Compostella, with the Archbishops territory, paies 18 millions 212000
Marauedis. The city of Tuy, and the Bishops jurisdiction in Gallicia 5 mil.
827000 Marauedis. The town of Pontferado in Gallicia 1 million, 975000
Marauedis. The city of Leon with the jurisdiction and Bishopric 6 mil.
350000 Marau. The town of Sardagne 1 million, and 13000 Marau. The city of
Astorga and Bishopric in the realm of Leon pay 2 mil. 455000 Marau. 797000
Marau. The Barrios or parishes about Salas within the principallitie of Asturia
pay yearly 231000 Marauedis. The city of Zamora with the jurisdiction 15 mil.
525000 Marau. The city of Toro and the jurisdiction 11 mil. 112000 Marau. The
town of Vrena paies for the thirds, the tenths, or Alcauala belonging to the
duke of Osso^na 62000 Marau. The town of Garena paies yearly 2 mil. 335000
Marau. The town of Barasil de la Coma 250000 Marau. 24 mil. 345000 Marau. The
city of Rodrigo and the jurisdicton 14 mil. 345000 Marau. The jurisdicton of
Trigueros 417000 Marau. The town of Ol^illo 47000 Marau. The town of
Tordesillas and the territory 2 mil. and 600000 Marau. The town of Valladolid
and the jurisdiction 29 mil. 730000 Marau. The town of Tordehumos paies 827000
Marau. The town of Medina del Campo and the jurisdiction paies yearly 31
millions, and 149000 Marau. The town of Olmedo, and the territory 2 mil.
149000. Marau. 333000 Marauedis, for that the tenths belong unto Don Francis de
Fonseca. (...) town of Madrigal 682000. Marau. (...) ^^wne of Ariualo with her
jurisdiction 5 mil. 310000 Marau. (...) of Auila, and the jurisdiction 19 mil.
35000 Marau. The city of Segouia, and the jurisdiction 12 mil. 470000 marau.
The town of Aranda of Duero, with her jurisdiction 3 mil. 350000 marau. The
town of Roa paies yearly 1 mil. 515000 marau. The town of Gomiel of Yzan
(where the tenths belong unto the Duke of Ossouna) paies yearly for the
thirds* 154000 marau. The town of Sepulueda with the territory 3 millions,
54000 marau. The city of Soria with the jurisdiction 10 millions, 282000
marau. The city and Bishopric of Osma, with the jurisdiction 4 millions. The
town of Agreda and Caracena 2 millions, 83000 marau. The town of Molina and
the jurisdiction 5 millions, 792000 marauedis. The city of Ciguenca and the
jurisdiction 3 millions, 662000 marauedis. The town of Cuenca and her
jurisdiction paies 24 millions, 645000 marauedis. The town of Hue^e with the
territory 17 millions, 916000 marauedis. The town of Villarejo de F^entes 2
millions, 517000 marauedis. The province called the Marquisat of Villena, that
is to say, the towns of Timihillha, Abasette, Roda, Saint Clement, and the
town of Villena, with the jurisdiction paies yearly 31 millions, 503000
marauedis. The town of Beaumont, whose Al^auales belong unto the Marquis of
Villena paies only for the thirds 476000 marauedis. The city of Murcia and
the jurisdiction 14 mil. 820000 marau. The town of Lorca, and her jurisdiction
5 millions. The city of Carthagena and her jurisdiction 2 millions. The town
of Alcarras, with the jurisdiction 16 millions, 984000 marauedis. The town of
Segura de la Sierra with the mountains thereabout, and territory belonging to
the master of Saint James 11 millions, 91000 marauedis. Villa Noua de los
Infantes, with her province called el Campo de Moryel, belonging to the knights
of Saint James 8 millions, 664000 marauedis. Ocagna and the province called
Castille, belonging also to the knights of Saint James paies 23 millions. The
city of Guadalajara with the jurisdiction paies 11 millions, 64000 marau. The
town of Prox and Poso pay yearly 160000 marauedis. The town of Almonacid,
and the province of Sorite, which belong to the knights of Saint James 1
million, 188000 marauedis. The towns of Vzeda, Talamanca, and Tardelaguna, with
the territory which belongs to the Archbishop ^f Tolledo 18 millions 250000
marauedis. The town of Yepas 423000 marauedis. Alcala of Henarez and the
jurisdiction, with the town of Briuega, which are the Archbishops of Tolledo,
pay 16 millions, 250000 marauedis. The town of Madrid, with her territory 23
milions, 250000 marauedis. The county of Puno in Rostro, yields 1 million,
262000 marauedis. The towns of Cubas, and Grinon, where the Alcauales belong
to the house of Mendoza, pay unto the king for the thirds 117000 marauedis. The
town of Gualapagar, where the tenths belong unto the Duke of Infantasgo, pay
for the thirds 160000 marauedis. The town of Illescas, and the territory,
paies 2 milllions, 297000 marauedis. The city of Tolledo with the members,
pay yearly 37 millions. The revenues of the mountai^^, which are paid by the
masters of the flocks of sheep, which go to feed in Estremadura, yield 19
millions, 503000 marauedis. The villages of the Priories of Saint John 7
millions, 55000 marauedis. The town of Almagro, with the province which is
called el Campo de Calatraua 7 millions, 120000 marauedis. Moreover the
Alcauales for green corn which is sold there for horse meat, yield unto the
king 3 millions, 438000 marauedis. The town of Ciudad Real paies yearly 4
millions, 150000 marauedis. 14 millions, 326000 marau. The city of Plaisance,
and the villages which belong to the Archdeacon, pay yearly 18 millions,
475000 marau. The tow^e of Truxillo, and the territory, yields 12 millions,
224000 marau. The town of Carceres, with the jurisdiction, pays 7 millions,
850000 marau. The city of Badajos, with the jurisdiction and province, pays 9
mill. 972000 marau. The town of Alcantara, with her territory, which belong
unto the knights of Alcantara, pays yearly 9 millions, 403000 marau. 3
millions, 481000 marau. The province of Serne, or Serene, belonging to the
knights of Alcantara 7. mill. 570000 marau. The city of Merida, with the
territory, in the province of Leon 21 millions, 234000 marau. The town of
Fuente el Maestro in the same province 6 mill. 973000 marau. All these belong
to the knights of S. James.
The town of Guadancanal, with her territory, pays yearly 3 mill. 305000
marau. The town of Xeres of Badajos, with the territory, yields 7 mill.
100000 marau. The city of Seuille, with the lands, and jurisdiction, yields
182 mill. 387000 marau. 2* millions. The towns of Palma and Gelues, under
their Earls, pay 235000 marau. The towns of Teuar and Ardales, where the
tenths belong to the Marquis of Ardales, pay yearly for the thirds 23^000
marau. The town of Lerena, and the territory, and the province of Leon, under
the knights of S. James, yields 3 millions, 325000 marau. The revenues of
Cadiz, which they call Almadraues, that is to say, the fishing of Tonnie
amounts to 3 millions, 35000 marau. The city of Cadiz pays yearly 8
millions, 452000 marau. The town of Gibraltar pays only thirds, and is
exempted from all the rest, and these 1 million, 500000 marau. The town of
Xerez de la Frontera, with the jurisdiction, pays yearly 21 millions, 50000
marau. The town of Carmona yields unto the king 9 millions, 450000 marau. The
towns of Lora and Setafilla pay 680000 marau. The town of Ecija, with the
suburbs, 15 millions, 500000 marau. The city of Cordoua, with the territory,
yields yearly 48 mill. 995000 marau. The places called Realengos of Cordoua 17
millions, 316000 marau. The town of Anduxar, and the territory, 4 millions,
800000 marau. The city of Vbeda, and her jurisdiction, 11 millions, 346000
marau. 17 millions, 316000 marau. The town of Quexado yields unto the king 1
million, 415000 marau. The Ad^lantad or Lieutenant ship of Cacorla yields
yearly 6 mill. 885000 marau. The county of S. Stephen pays unto the king 1
million, 340000 marau. The town of Martos, and the territory which belongs to
the knights of Calatraua, of the members of Andaluzia, yields yearly 11
millions, 436000 marau. The city of Iuen, with the territory, pays 15
millions, 909000 marau. The city of Granado, with the territory, yields 42
millions, 910000 marau. The silk of the realm of Granado, before the
expulsion of the Moors, was wor^h, 42 millions but now it yields unto the king
but 22 millions. 2 millions, 750000 marau. The ^ow^es of Loxa, and Alhama, in
the realm of Granado, pay 3 millions, 650000 marau. The ^^^ne of Baca, in
Granado, yields yearly 10 milllions, 626000 marau. The city of Guadix, in the
realm of Granado, and the mountains thereabout, pay by 6 millions, 395000
marau. The city of Almerie, in the realm of Granado yields 3 millions, 80000
marau. The towns of Almunecar, Mutril, and Salobrena, pay yearly 2 mill.
643000 marau. The city of Malaga yields unto the king 16 millions, 269000
marau. Velez Malaga, in the realm of Granado, pays yearly 16 millions,
519000 marau. The town of Pulchena pays unto the king 410000 marau. The city
of Ronda, with the jurisdiction, yields 5 millions, 334000 marau. The Island of
Canarie yields yearly 4 millions, 850000 marau. The Island of Teneriffe yields
yearly 3 millions. The Island of Palma yields yearly 2 millions. The tax
which is yearly due throughout the realms of Spain is worth 104 millions,
305000 marauedis: And this tax is divided among the people throughout all the
provinces and towns, for that the noblemen which are Feudataries and knights
are exempt: they are seized according to their estates. The tols or customs by
land of the realms of Valencia, Arragon, and Navarre, which are to be paid
for all things that are carried by land in the said realms, as well for the
entry, as for the going forth, yield unto the king of Spain 49 mill. 35000
marau. The dry ports or passages within the country, as well at the coming
in, as going forth, which pass betwixt the realms of Portugal and Castille,
pay yearly for the tenths of 34 millions, 155000 marau. The woolls which are
transported yearly out of Spain into other countries, yield for every sack
(which does commonly weigh 10 Arobes, and the Arobe weighs 25 pound) 2 duckat^,
so as it be of the country wool, for strangers pay 4 ducats: and in all it
yields yearly to the king of Spain 53 millions, 586000 marau. The Almoxarif,
or great custom of Seuille, which the city does farm of the king of Spain,
yields yearly in rent 154 millions, 309000 marauedis: They do so call the
tenths of all the merchandise which comes from the Low Countries, France,
England, Portugal, Italy, and other pla^^^* The Almoxarif, or custom of the
Spanish or West Indies, which the city of Seuille 67 millions. The revenues
which the king of Spain draws from the money of Spain, that is to say, from
every mark of silver, or six ducats of silver (whereas they coin money) a
Royal* and this is called El S^ndreaxo de l^ Aloneda, or the right of the
mint; and the mint at Seuille yields as much as all the rest: the which yields
unto the king of Spain yearly 22 millions. The king of Spain dot^ farm out
to the Foukers of Ausbourg, and to other Banquers, the maisterships of S^i^t
James, Calatraua, and Alcantara; which are only the customs 98 millions. The
power of these masters (...) ^ont to be great, and extended into many
provinces, but now this charge is of less esteem, since that the kings of
Spain have taken upon them the maisterships* who by little and little draw
away all the revenues. Moreover, ^he king of Spain le^^ ^o f^rme the feedi^g^
and p^s^ures of the said maisteries and command^ri^s, and it does yield hi^
y^are^y 37 millions. T^^ ^ing of Spain does rent out the mines of quicksiluer,
of Almedan, of Sierra Morena, in the field of Calatraua, and ^^ceiues for^ 73
millions. The Croisado, or Popes Bulls, all charges deducted, yield unto the
king of Spain yearly 200 millions. That which they call subsidy, which the
Clergy gives out of their revenues taxed upon their benefices, to make war
against Inf^dells and others, yields yearly 65 millions. one hundred and one
millions. This revenue is called El Excus^do, and is wont to be granted to the
king of Spain by the Popes Bull, whereby it is lawful for him to take the
tenths of the wheat, millet, wine, oil, and other fruits belonging to the
Clergy and Churches; and the Clergy gives this sum unto the king, all
charges deducted. The mines of Guadalcanal in Estremadura upon Sierra Morena
did sometimes yield 187 millions of marauedis: but being at this day much
decayed, it cannot be taxed. All the lands of Spain pay yearly unto the king
a certain imposition which they call, 7 mil. 750000 mara. The revenue called
Moneda Forera, for the which eue^y fire whatsoever it be, is constrained to pay
7 marauedis yearly unto the king of Spain, and this does make by the year 6
mill. and 656000 marauedis. That which comes unto the king yearly from the
West Indies, amounts unto the sum of 300 millions. The realm of Navarre
yields yearly unto the king 35 mil. 500000 marauedis. The realm of Valencia,
Arragon, and Cartalognia give unto the king, besides other tributes 75 millions
of marauedis. The Islands of Sardinia, Maiorca, and Minorca, yield no profit
unto the king of The realm of Sicile brings yearly unto the king of Spain
375 millions* The realm of Naples, with the countries of Pouillia and Calabria
yield yearly unto the king 450 millions of marauedis. The Duchy of Milan
yealds 300 millions of marauedis. Bourgondie and Flanders were wont to yield
unto the king of Spain 700 millions, but now they are no more his, being given
in dowry to the Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia, whenas she martried with
Albertus who was before a Cardinal. The farm or revenue of playing-cardes
which are sold in Spain, and pay unto 20 millions. The Serges or Rash of
Florence which is brought into Spain, and pay unto the king for every piece six
ducats, yields yearly 10 millions.
Such was the revenue of the king of Spain in the year 1578 before that he was
king of Portugal: The total sum of the king of Spaines revenues.
by reason whereof we will set the revenues of the crown of Portugal apart.
All these revenues and sums of marauedis being reduced into ducats of Spain,
amount unto the sum of 13 millions, and 48000 ducats, every duckat being
worth eleven roialls of Spain, and five shillings six pence of our English
money.

The realms comprehended under the name of Spain, but more properly of
Castille, are these which follow, Leon, Arragon, Castille, Navarre, Granado,
Tolledo, Valencia,

The realms, provinces, and cities which assemble at the Eastes of Spain are,
the realms of Leon, Seuille, Tolledo, Granado, Cordoua, Murcia, and Iaen: the
cities of Burgos, Salamanca, Segouia, Soria, Auila, Cuenca, Toro, Zamora, and
Guadalajara, all which are Bishoprics. Of those which have no Bishops, or are
not walled in, there are but two admitted to the Estates, and which have
voices, that is to say, Madrid and Valladolid. The other realms, as Arragon,
Navarre, Valencia, and Cattalognia have their Viceroies and Governors apart,
which command with the kings council like to the Viceroy of Scicile and
Naples, and the Governor of Milan.

is great difference betwixt a city and a town, as well in authority as in
other freedoms

In cities, there are commonly governors, whom the Romans called Pretors, or
governors of cities or provinces: and so one city has many towns and
villages which are subject unto it, so as the towns are members to cities, for
that the towns are subject unto cities, and villages unto towns; seeing that
in Spain whenas there falls out any mutiny or revolt in a province, the
towns, and country people submit themselves to the defense of cities, in all
accidents that may happen.

To make a town a city, they must have more regard unto the antiquity, than
to the greatness, for that there are many small cities, and very great towns,
such are, Medina del

The Revenues of the crown of Portugal.
THe ordinary revenues of the crown of Portugal do every year pass a
million and 100000 ducats: the revenues of the knights of Portugal, whereof
the king is at

The wages and pensions of the officers, gentlemen, and other servants of
THe great master of the household, or lord Steward, has for his yearly fee
3000 ducats. Four other masters of the household, either of which has 1500
ducats a year. One and thirty gentlemen servants, the which have eight
roialls a day a piece for their expenses. Every royal is six pe^ce sta^lin^*
Four and twenty gentlemen of the kings house, either of which have six
roialls a day. Ten gentlemen of the chamber, and to every one twelve roialls a
day. Ten assistants or goomes of the chamber, and to every one six roialls a
day. Three keepers of the wardrope, who have charge of the apparel and other
moueables, to either of them six roialls a day. Four keepers of the jewels,
to the first, eleven roialls a day, and to the rest four. Five pantlers, and
to either four roialls a day. Four butlers, to the first, four roialls a
day, and to the rest two. Four officers of the kitchen who have the charge of
salt meats, and to the two first, four roialls a day a piece, and to the
others two roialls. Three officers of the larder, to the first, four roialls,
and to the others two. To the master cook, and his first assistant, four
roialls a day a piece, and to another two. To the two boys of the kitchen a
royal a day a piece. To the cook of the first master of the household, three
roialls a day. To the porter of the kitchen and his assistant, two roialls a
day a piece. To the kings chief tapestrie-man, four royalls a day, and to
five assistants of the tapestrie, two royall^ a day a piece. To the master
locksmith, three royals a day, and to either of his two servants, two royals.
To two physicians of the kings chamber, and to the physician for the household,
three hundred ducats a year a piece. To the chi^urgion, and to two barbers of
the body, four royals a day a piece, and to the assistant to the barbers,
three royals a day. To the tailor, hosier, shoemaker, imbroidere^, and skinner,
fifty ducats a year a piece. To the goldsmith, seampster, and landerer,
forty ducats a year a peec^. To two porters of the palace, four royals a
day a piece. To two vshers of the chamber, four royals a day a piece. To seven
porters of the hall and chamber, three royals a day a piece. There are
threescore and seven grooms of the ch^mber, Every five soul^ is s^^ penc^.
every one of which has twenty thousand marauedis yearly for his wages, the
which makes fifty three ducats, twenty soulz, and four deniers. There are
also ^w^lue por^ers, which are called of the Cadenas, who are always at the
palace gate, who have four and twenty ^ho^^and marauedis for their yearly
wages; which makes threescore and nine ducats, nine soulz.
Offices.
TO the lieutenant of the master of the household is given one hundred thousand
mara^^di^ ^ year for his wages, which are two hundred sixty seven ducats,
four royals, and twelve marauedis. (...) him (...) ke^pe^ the accounts, and
prouides for the charges of huntsmen, and to the ^ead clarke, the lik^ year^ly
wages. To him tha^ ^a^ri^s the kings crosbow, twenty thousand marauedis a
year, which are fifty thr^^ ^uckats, six and twenty marauedis. To the
chi^u^gion of the household, twenty five thousand marauedis, which make
th^ees^or^ (...) ducka^s, forty six soulz and a half. To the drawer of gold,
fifteen thousand marauedis, which are forty ducats, one soulz, and a half.
To the glouer, twelve thousand marauedis, which are thirty two ducats, four
soulz, ^^d a half^. To the te^^i^ court keeper, eleven thousand mara^edis,
which comes to twenty nine ducats, twelve soulz. To ^^e fou^busher and
crosbowmaker, six thousand marauedis a piece. To the muletors or moyle keepers
of the kings house, that is, to the master and his six assistants, three
hundred thousand marauedis a year, which make eight hundred and (...)* seven
soulz, and six deniers. To the chi^^^^^eep^r, and his eight assistants, five
hundred thirty four ducats, forty one soulz, and a half.
Guards of the kings body in his palace. The Bourgondian guard.
TO the captain of the archers of the kings guard, a thousand ducats a year.
T^ the (...) bearer, four hundred ducats a year. (...) ar^hers all gentlemen
Bourgo^^^ (...) by nation, four royals a day a piece. (...) tr^^peter as much.
To (...) chaplain three royals a day.
Guard of the Germans.
TO the captain of the German guard, a thousand ducats a year. To the
lieutenant, three hundred ducats. To the sergeant of the guard, two hundred
ducats. To the phife, threescore ducats a year. To two drums a ^^ndred and
thirty ducats a year a piece. To a hundred Germans of the footguard, two
royals a day a piece. To the chaplain two royals a day. To the chiru^gion ten
thousand marauedis a year.
Guard of the Spaniards.
T^ the captain of the footguard, a thousand ducats a year. To the the
lieutenant, five hundred ducats a year. To the sarge^nt, two hundred ducats.
To two drums, a hundred and thirty ducats a piece. To the phife, threescore
ducats. To four captains or corporals of squadrons, three royals a day a
piece. To a hundred Spaniards, two royals a day a piece. To a chaplain two
royals a day. To a surgeon, one royal a day. To a physician four royals a
day.
Guard on horseback^.
To three score Spaniards of the guard on horseback, three royals a day a
piece. To two trumpeters, three royals a day a piece. Ten harbingers every one
of which has fifty thousand mar^uedis a year wages, the which is paid
wheresoever the king keeps his court, be it at Mad^i^, or elsewhere, and this
amounts to a hundred thirty three ducats, thirty so^en m^rauedis. Forty
harbingers of ways, to every one thirty thousand marauedis a year. Three
hundred gentlemen in ordinary of the kings house ^uerie one of which has
forty thousand marauedis a year wages: for they that serve by quarter have
but four. score ducats.
Gentlemen of the chamber:
TO the captain of the gentlemen that are in ordinary, three hundred thousand
marauedis a year, which make eight hundred and three ducats and half a
royal. To his lieutenant, one hundred and fifty thousand marauedis. To the
ensign bearer, a hundred thousand marauedis, which make two hundred sixty To
two trumpe^ers of the said company, four royals a day a piece. To a hundred
gentlemen at arms of the guard, six royals a day a piece, and twelve when as
his majesty does ma^ch to the wars, or goes to any public feast or sport. To
the chaplain of the company, two royals a day. To the paymaister, four
royals a day.
Ha^tsmen.
THese are very famous in Spain, being all gentlemen and knights; they are
fifty Monteros de Garda: they come all ^ut of the mountains of Bourgos, and
every one has eighty ducats a year wages To the governors assistant or
deputy, one hundred ducats. To a chaplain, fourscore ducats. To the pages
scholemaister, two hundred ducats. To their cook, threescore ducats. To the
musicians which teach the pages to dance and play, eighty ducats a year. To
the master that teaches them to vault, forty ducats. To him that teaches
them their weapons, fifty ducats.

TO the deane of the chapel, two thousand ducats a year. To the head
Almoner, one thousand ducats a year. To the clarke of the closet, four
roialls a day. To four chaplains of the habit of saint James, one hundred and
thirty thousan^ marauedis a year to either of them, which makes 347 ducats
six roialls and 18 mara. To two chaplains of the order of Alcantara, and to
two other chaplains of the order of Calatraua, the like pay. To four and
twenty chaplains which serve in the chapel, fifty thousand marauedis To
the chief keeper of the vestrie, 150000 marauedis, which make four hundred
ducats, fifty eight soulz, nine deniers. To four assistants to the keeper of
the vesterie, and to two others which serve in the said chapel, three roialls
a day a piece. To the Subalmoner, fifteen thousand marauedis, which are forty
ducats, one soulz, nine deniers.
Musicians.
TO the master of the music, 267 ducats, four roialls, and five marauedis.
To twelve quiristers, one hundred and fifty thousand marauedis, which makes
one hundred thirty three ducats, eight soulz, and it is paid unto the
master of the said children of the chapel. To five and forty singing men of
the chapel, four roialls a day a piece. To a musician that sings the base,
the like sum. To him that teaches the children latin, to the organiste, and
to him that marks the notes, four roialls a day a piece. To the harbinger,
forty thousand maraued. which makes 106 ducats, 50 soulz, 2 deniers. To the
keeper of the vestrie, and to the keeper of the chapel, thirty thousand
marauedis To him that tunes the organes and other instruments, fifty thousand
marauedis, which are worth one hundred thirty and three crowns, thirty and
eight soulz. To two blowers of the organs, fifteen thousand marauedis. To six
violons and two cornets, sour roialls a day a piece. To fo^^ie chaplains
which serve not in court, forty thousand marauedis a piece, which make one
hundred and six ducats, fifty soulz, nine deniers.
The kings Quirrie or Stable.
To other five quirries, one hundred thousand marauedis a year a piece. To
four riders, the same pay, that is 267 ducats, four roialls, five de^iers.
^^ ^oure mace bears, or sergeants at arms, one hundred thousand marauedis a
piece. (...) the kings at arms, fifty thousand marauedis a piece. (...)
^^rbinger of the stable, fifty ^ho^^and marauedis. (...) three assistants,
thirty thousan^ ^^^auedis. (...) six messengers of the stable, twenty
thousand marauedis a piece. (...) the fourbusher of the stable and his
assistant, sixty thousand marauedis a piece. To the chief groom of the
stable, fifty thousand marauedis. To four (...) ^housand marauedis a piece.
To four (...) the horses, fifteen thousand marauedis a piece. To him (...)
the Quirrie, fifty thousand marauedis. To th^ee (...) twenty thousand
marauedis a piece. To (...) the charge of sadles and bridles, and to his
assistant, twenty thousand To the coachmaker, and him (...) furnish them,
twenty thousand marauedis a piece To the (...) ^eathermake^, and (...),
fifteen thousand marauedis a piece. (...) thousand marauedis. (...) thousand
marauedis a piece. (...) one thousand marauedis. (...) and his assistant,
thirty thousand marauedis a piece. To the master of the caroches, and to his
deputy that keeps account of them, twenty (...) thousand marauedis a piece.
To him that has the charge to carry the kings harquebuze and to his
assistant, forty and five thousand marauedis. To fourscore grooms of the
stable, two roialls and a half a piece. The king has twenty and four
caroches, and every coachman has four roialls a day. Six litters, and in
every one two moiles, and two servants, which have three roials a day. ^he^^
are ^ix wagons for the (...) of the s^^ble, to either of which belong two
boys, (...) have three roialls a day for their charges. (...) master of the
moiles has (...) ducats a year, and his deputy has one hundred ducats.
There (...) fifty (...) boy, who has three roials a day to spend. The maker
of the (...) thousand marauedis a year. (...) has (...) who besides their
apparel and shoes, have three (...) day to (...) They that march (...) after
his majesty's train, have the same entertainment. To eighteen (...) a day a
piece. To twelve trump^^^^, the same pay. (...) marauedis a year a piece. The
kings cons^^^^ has for his yearly fee, three hundred thousand marauedis,
which are (...).
Huntsmen and Faulconers.
TO the (...) o^ chief hun^s^an, for him and for his under officers, two
hundred and (...) marauedis a year. To his lieutenant for himself and other
two hun^smen, 110 thousand marauedis. (...) one hundred and ten thousand marau.
(...) other assistant and (...), ^ightie thousand marauedis. (...) ^^ther
assistants, and three other huntsmen, sixty and six thousand marauedis. T^
(...) in the (...) a piece. To (...) the carpenters (...), twenty thousand
marauedis. To (...), one (...). To his (...) gray^^^^nds that are under his
charge, sixty (...) (...), 50000 thousand marau. (...) which (...) thirty
thousand marau. a piece. To (...) that feed the grayhounds and bloudhounds,
twenty thousand marau. a piece. To (...) keepers, twenty four thousand
marauedis a piece.
The Estate of the Duke of Lorraine
DISCOVRSE OF THE ESTATE OF THE DVKE OF LORRAINE
The Contents.
1 Or^aine sometimes called Austrasia: the beginning of the word Lorraine, the
li^^ts, and the chief rivers which run through the country. 2. The chief
towns (...) Lorraine. 3. The Earledomes. 4. The Seigneuries. 5. The
fertillitie, and abundance in wine, bathes, saltpits, diverse metals,
azur-stone, fish, carpes of three (...) cassidonies of admirable greatness,
looking glasses, and other works of glass. (...) and d^sposition of them of
Lorraine, participating of the French and Germans. (...) the inhabitants
consisting in the traffic of azur-stones, pearls, looking glasses, and
(...), linen cloth, mines of silver, and salt. 8. Revenue of the Duke of
Lorraine, (...), and whereunto it amounts yearly. 9. The forts of Lorraine,
the neighbors ^0. A Catalogue of the Dukes which have commanded in Lorraine.
11. Genea^^^^^ of the house of Lorraine.

Ewis the Gentle had four sons, who having made war against their father,
shared his estates and principalities betwixt them; so as Lothaire his eldest
son had for his part the Empire, Italy, Gaul Narbonnoise, and all the
countries which were afterward comprehended under the name of Lorraine: Lewis
had Germany: Charles had France from the river of Meuse unto the Ocean Sea:
and Pepin had Aquitaine. Lothaire (besides his son Lewis, who succeeded
Lothaire, who remained king of Lorraine. This country (...) man's called
Lotar-Rijck, or Lot reych, or Lotharij regnum, in Latin, was Lotharingi^, by
corruption, and they of the country call it (...) make it more short. They
hold that the bounds of Lorraine were in former (...) and that it was called
Austrasia, and divided into the higher and lower, and (...) betwixt the rivers
of Rhein, Eschaut, and Meuse; and by this means the (...) diverse names at this
day, and is subject to diverse princes; and the higher (...) of Lorraine.

(...) for bounds upon the East Alsati^, and that which is called by a
particular (...), upon the South Bourgondie, toward the West Champagne, and
(...) the Forest of Ardenne, and presently after, it meets with (...) of
Luxembourg, Treues, and others which, in former times were (...) This country
is watered by the rivers of Meuse, Moselle, Sare, Voloy, (...), S^ll^y Hide, and
others. Moselle, and Sare, pass away for the most (...) it wholly. Moselle
has his spring in the mountain of Vogese, near (...) spring of the river of
Saon^, a little above the borough which they call Buffan; L^cius Verus had a
dessigne, in the time of the Emperor Nero to join the ^iuers of Moselle and
Saone together by a channel, to the end (...) out of Italy by sea, then being
carried by the Rhosne; (...) the Moselle, then into the Rhein, and (...) of
passage being taken away, they might pass (...) the North, as ^Cor^^lius
T^ci^us says. The river of Meurte, (...) other (...) draws by little and
little near unto Moselle in a plain

Charles the Hardy, Duke of Bourgondie, slain in battle by the Suiffes and
Lorrainers, in the year 1477: There are in the same Church of S. George
certain tombs of Dukes of Lorraine without any inscription: there are of the
like manner in other Churches; for they have Rene, who vanquished Charles of
Bourgondie; and there are also intened Duke An^^onie, and Francis his son,
and Cl^^de of Valois, wife to Charles, and daughter to king (...) the second.
The (...) of M^^ite passed by the walls of Nancy, near unto the (...) the
place whereas the (...) our gondie died, by a little river which he (...) past,
for a (...) there was a cross of stone set up, with an (...) in French upon a
plate of (...). A little above it; at the place whereas they say (...) battle
was (...) which they call the Bourgondians, with a (...)yard, (...) there are
French verses g^^^en in memory of

Next unto Nancy they place Saint Nicholas, the which is very well peopled for
the (...) the relickes of Saint Ni^ho^^^, (...) this place is so augmented
(...) as it may well be termed one of the best towns of Lorraine, if it were
(...) well (...), and the streets so (...) and it is so well peopled (...) and
work (...) of all sorts.

A (...), three leagues off (...) little farther off Bayon (...) from thence is
Po^t a (...) on, famous for the (...) then Ch^^mes, Cha^^enoy, M^^anges, and
Vauconleur, whereas (...) under Bres^e, Dompaire,





The Quality.
(...) that Lorraine ioines close, and is intermixed with mountains and
forests,

The Manners.
(...) it may seem that I have comprehended the manners of them of Lorraine,

The (...).


(...) of his country five hundred thousand crowns

The Forces.


(...) with him, nor any subject (...), he has also the States of (...), but
they waver, and stand (...) with his neighbors,


LOrraine in former times had kings, who commanded a far greater country
Charles, and the second was Otho, those time Lorraine was separated from
Alsacia, and Alsacia was made a Langrafat:

(...) Otho died about the year 1020, he had for his successor.

^odfrie his son, who died in the year 1070, his successor was

^odfrie the Crookeba^ke, who was slain in the year 1076.

Then the Emperor Henry the fourth gave this duchy to his son Conrade, but
it (...) afterward restored to the house of Godfrie, that is, to his nephew by
his sister, which (...) Godfrie of Billon, king of Jerusalem.

Baldwin his brother succeeded in the realm and duchy, and after him the
third brother called Eustache; yet some say that after Baldwin, Henry of
Limbourg held the duchy by force, and was the seventh duke in the year 1106.

After that the Emperor Henry the fifth gave that duchy to William Earl of
Louain, who had for successor

Theodori^ke his son.

Thiba^d son to Theodoricke, to whom succeeded

Fred^ri^ke, under whom the country of Brabant was divided from Lorraine.

After Frederi^ke, one Matthew was duke, who left after him his son called
Simon, and ^^oth^^ (...) named Frederick, who died in the year of Grace 1239,
this had for his (...).

M^thew his son, then

Frederick son to Matthew, and after Frederick,

Thiba^d his son, who died in the year 1311.

Frederick, son to Thibaud.

Rao^l, son to Frederick, who died in the year 1346.

John, son to Raoul, who married Sophia, daughter to Ebernard earl of
Wertemberg, and died in the year 1382, he was buried at Nancy, and left for
his successor

Charles his son, who had one only daughter married to Rene king of Sicile,
son to Lewis duke of Anjou: this was duke of Lorraine in the right of his
wife: He left one John, and a daughter whose name was Yoland, who was wife unto
Frederick of Vaudemont.

John succeeded Rene his father, and left after him

Nicholas his son, who died without heirs in the year 1464.

Then Lorraine came into the hands of Frederick son to Anthony earl of
Vaudemont, (...) reason of his wife Yoland, daughter to Rene king of Sicile:
^his man restored (...) duchy to the power of them of the house of Billon, and
from him are descended all ^^^m which have the domination of the house of
Lorraine, whereof I will seek to set down the Genealogy.

^^edericke of Vaudemont had for successor

(...) duke of Lorraine, and earl of Vaudemont, who having been expelled his
estate, ^^^les duke of Bourgondie, recovered it again with the help and
assistance of the (...) killing his enemy in a battle which was given near
unto Nancy. This prince (...) away his first wife, who was daughter to the
earl of Tancaruille, being barren, Philip daughter to Ad^lfo of (...)* duke of
Gueldres; he died in the year (...), and left

Anthony duke of Calab^^^, Lorraine, and Bar, Marqui^ of Po^^ (...) Moun^^on,
earl of Vande^^^ and Aspremont, who died in the year (...) (...) duke of
Calabria (...), he died in the (...) 1^46; haui(...) Christian (...). Charles
duke of Calabria, Lorraine, and Bar, (...) who married Cl^ude of Valois,
daughter to Henry the second, the French king, who left (...) duke of
Calabria, Lor^aine, Bar, etc. Charles Cardi^^^ of Lorraine, (...) of Mets, and
the (...) of Vaudemont.

Ni^hol. of Lor(...), duke of Me^cu^t, who among other children had Loysa wife
to king Henry the third, a fair and virtuous princess.
Claude of Lorraine, duke of Guise and Aumale, the most famous prince of his
time for war, who married Antoni^^to of Bourbon, daughter to Frauncis duke of
Vendosme. Francis duke of Guise, who was slain before Orleans by Foltrot in
the year 1563, his wife was Anne, daughte^ to Hercules of Est, duke of Ferrara.
Henry duke of Guise, father to him that now lives Lewis Cardinal of Guise
Charles Duke of Mayenne.
Marie married first to the Duke of Longueuille, and afterward to James the
fifth king of Scotland. Claude duke of Aumale, the Marquis of Elbeuf, the
Cardinals of Lorrain, and Guise, and the great prior of

The Estate of the Low Countries.

The Contents.
1. WHy the Low Countries were so called. 2. The situation and limits, circuit
and greatness. 3. The most famous rivers of the Low Countries, their springs
and courses. 4. Division of the country into seventeen Provinces, and how
many towns and villages are in every Province. 5. How they have been united
under one Lord, and reduced under the dominion of Spain. 6. Donaation of the
Netherlands, made by Philip the second, King of Spain, to the Infanta his
daughter in favor of her marriage with the Archduke Albert. 7. How the
Archduke* ^arke ^^ssession of the Low Countries by virtue of a procuration from
his future spouse the Infants of ^^aine. 8. The countries which are at this day
under the Archdukes, and the descripti^^ of (...) towns, beginning with
Flaunders. 9. Description of the country of Artois, and 10. Of Cambresis and
the limits. 11. Of Haynault. 12. Of Nama^. 13. Of Luxembourg. 14. Of Brabant.
15. The Low countries fit to breed cattle. 16. The sea of the Low countries,
with their commodities, and discommodities. 17. The forests (...) namely of
the forest of Ardenne. 18. Disposition of the inhabitants of the Low
count^^es: (...) how they love liberty. 19. Excellent painters in the Low
countries: and who was the first that mingled colors with oil. 20. The
princes reu^nues, whereunto they may (...). 21. His forces consisting in forts,
and an army entertained in his garrisons. 22. The form of government of the
Low countries: of the princes three counsels, and by what lowes the said
counsels govern themselves: of the commissioners sent into Provinces, and how
(...) assemble the Estates. 23. Of the religion of the Low countries, and of
the united 24. Archbishops and Bishops in the Low countries. 25. A catalogue of
the Lords (...) of Fla^nders, their reign and death. 26. Articles of the truce
made in the year (...) betwixt the Archdukes and the Estates of the united
Provinces.

ALthough that the affairs of this Estate have been heretofore many times very
intricat and much confused, by reason of the diverse posses: sors which have
enjoyed these Provinces, sometimes distinctly and sometimes altogether: yet I
hope to make all plain, and to write it orderly and without obscurity. For
having first set down in general the limits, and circuit of all these
countries, how they were divided into seventeen Provinces, how, and by whom
they were (...) one Lord, and when, and by what means they came unto the house
of (...) will afterward come to set down in particular, that which is at this
present (...) the command of the most famous princes the Archdukes Albert of
Austria, and ^^^bella Clara Eugenia sister to Philip the third, now king of
Spain, and by what means (...) came to the possession of the said countries:
and on the other side I will represent that which the Estates of the united
provinces do now hold. If I shall not herein content the most curious as the
lea^t, I may oppose the difficulty of the enterprise, and the pain I (...)
them; relating that which I have seen my self, being in the (...) by the
discourse of others



Guicchar din, a thousand Italian miles, or three hundred and for^ie leagues of
Flaunders; and it contains seven degrees and a half of longitude, that is to
say, from the two and twentieth degree and a half unto the thirtieth: But as
for the latitude, it comprehends five degrees, that is to say, from the eight
and fortieth (...) and a half, unto the three and fiftieth and a half: by
reason whereof, the Low Country is set betwixt the midst of the seventh
Climat, and the beginning of the (...); and in this space the difference of the
longest day in Summer is three quarters of (...) hou^e: for in the midst of
the seventh climat the longest day is but sixteen ^oures, and ^n the beginning
of the (...) is sixteen hours and three quarters. And this country contains
all the paralells, which are betwixt the sixteenth and the one and



As (...) it comes out of Ve^^^^^dois near unto the Abbey of Saint Mar^^^,
then (...) betwixt Ca^elet and Beaureuoi^, it goes to Cambray: running (...) by
Scarape, it runs by Saint Amand, and from thence turning toward (...) it
passes by Tournay, Audenard, and Gand, where it receives the rivers of (...)
some other waters: from thence it turns serpent-wise to Denremonde, (...) the
river of Denre, it passes to Rupelmonde, and there receives the river (...),
and soon after Dele: being thus grown great, it goes and washes the (...),
and makes a good and safeport for shipping; then running on and (...) self
into two branches, it diuides Brabant and Flanders from Zeland, for that (...)
on the left hand toward the South, it follows the banks of Flanders, and
taking (...) name, is called the Hont, and from thence runs into the Western
sea by (...), and Walachrie; and on the right hand, having left the confines of
Brabant, (...) her course, and keeping the old channel, she falls into the
Ocean by the banks (...) the Island of Escaud. To conclude, this river flows
up as far as Gand, which is (...) thirty miles, accounting the crooked
turnings. As for the rest, I refer the (...) to the reading of Geographers,
with whom (in my opinion) I have been too (...).

The Low-countaies contrines seuenteen Provinces, that is to say, four
duchies, Every Florin is two shillings
(...) and Grouningue, were not taxed for this imposition, being frontier
countries, (...) ^^pouerished; so as there were none but these thirteen
provinces and towns (...) ^^^^^ibute, that is to say, Brabant, Flanders,
Artois, Haynault, Valenciennes, (...) ^^chies, Holland, Zeland, Namur, Tournay,
Tournesis, Macklin, and Vtrecht; yet (...) that the others are not excluded in
their conuocations and general (...).

They (...) ^umbred in this country of the Netherlands, above two hundred
walled (...) and one hundred and fifty places which had the jurisdiction and
privilege of a (...) above six thousand villages: but during their late long
wars, they have been (...). Yet to content the curious reader, I will set
down the number in general, (...) ^ay see how many towns and villages are in
every province.

How many Towns and Villages are in every Province of the Low Countries.
(...) B^A^ANY Towns. 26. Villages. 700. LYXEMBOVRG 23. 1169. L^MBOVRG 5. 123.
G^^LDRE 24. 300. In the eight Earledomes HOLEAND, Towns. 23. Villages. 400.
ZELAND, 10. 101. FLANDERS, 35. 1178. ARTOIS, 12. 754. HAYNAVLT, 24. 950. NAMVR,
4. 184. ZVTPHEN. THE MARQVISAT. In the fi^e Lo^ (...) VTRECHT, Towns. 5.
Villages. 70. FRIS^LAND, 11. 345. OVERYSSEL, 11. 101. GROVNINGVE, 1. 145.
MACKLIN, 1. 9.

(...) the birth of Christ, the Romans and Julius Caesar comprehended this
coun^rie under Gaul Belgike, so called, for that the inhabitants being
haughty and hardy ^ould not endure the loss of their liberty, customs, and
privileges: so as by the report of Caesar, they were the most valiant people
of all Gaul: They had then diverse names, and they were called Germans,
Bataues, Frisons, Aduatices, Menapiens, Atrebates, Neruins, Morins, etc. The
Germans are at this day the Allemans. The Bataues are the Hollanders,

The country being divided into provinces, they have received certain lords
as (...), but with certain conditions, having a care they should not grow too
mighty, ^east they should be brought into subjection: and therefore they loved
them best when ^hey were but young. These provinces living thus in peace with
their lords, and banding together in (...) of necessity, they did many times
perform great deeds of arms, as well against the Romans as other nations, yea
against the Turks and Sarrasins, whereof they made good proof under the
conduct of Godfrey of Bouillon, and other kings of Bal^win earl of Flanders,
who won the empire of Constantinople: and in many such like enterprises, as
may be seen in their Chronicles and Histories, so as they have bin always
much esteemed and feared. Finally, it is a nation of whom that famous
Historiographer Cor^^tius Tacitus has written as follows, The Gauls did
fight for their liberty, the Germans for booty, but the Hollanders for glory
and honor. And therefore the Roman Emperors made choice of them for their
guards, holding them to be faithful and ^ore valiant tha^ all the people of
the world.

Although that all these provinces of the Low Countries have been herertofore
diverse soueraignties under different princes; yet in the end, they have been
reduced under four dukes of Bourgo^die, then under the Archdukes of Austria,
and in the end, under Charles the fifth, and his son Philip king of Spain: it
will be fit to make a brief repetition, how, when, and by what manner they
have been reduced under these last, and that it may remain for a perpetual
memory, that the Spaniards are come to the government of these Low Countries,
not to govern them as their own subjects, that is to say, as being subject to
their laws, but as a free people, observing their own laws and privileges.

(...) being in his fathers right earl of Flanders, Neuers, Rethel, Salines,
Antuerpe (...) Macklin; and by his mother, earl of Bourgondie and Artois; had
one only daughter, called Marguerite, whom he had by his wife Marguerite
daughter to John 3 duke of Brabant: the daughter was married at Gand, in the
year 1369, to Philip of Valois, ^^hn the French king: of them was borne John,
called, Without fear, earl of Flanders, Bourgondie, Artois etc. This John of
Vallois in the year 1415 married with Marguerite Philip the Good, succeeded in
his place at the age of three and twenty years, being duke of Bourgondie,
Earl of Flaunders, Artois and Bourgondie, Palatine, Marquis of the sacred
Empire, and Lord of Salines and Macklin. Moreover in the year 1429, by the
death of Dideric Earl of Namur, he succeeded in the said Earldom of Namur,
having first bought it; and by the death of Philip duke of Brabant, who died
without children, he had in the year 1430 the Duchies of Lorraine, Brabant, and
Limbourg; and also Iacoba or Iaqueline countess of Holland etc. his niece, he
had in the year 1436, the Earledomes of Haynault, Holland, Zeland, and
Frieseland; in the year 1443 his aunt gave him the Duchy of Luxembourg, first
as tutor, and then as lord. He was the first of the house of Bourgondie that
did institut the order of the Golden Fleece a^ Bruges in Flaunders, whenas he
married Isabell of Portugal: he died at Bruges in the year 1467, being twenty
and seven years old, having reigned eight and forty years. He left for heir
to all these countries one only son, whose name was Charles of Vallois or the
Warrier, who succeeded his father in the government, being 34 years old: he
bought the duchy of Gueldres and the county of Zu^phen of Arnold of Egmond
for nine and twenty thousand crowns, and a yearly pension, who dying
confirmed the same sale by Charles his heir, and disinberiting his sonn^
Adolph, for that he had rebelled against him, and detained him long in cruel
captivity: this duke took possession of the country of Gueldres, in the
year 1473, he sought to unite all the provinces of the Netherlands into a
realm, promising to that end to give his only daughter in marriage to
Maximillian son to the Emperor Frederick the third, the which he would have
called the realm of Bourgondie, for that Bourgondie had been a realm in
former times: but for that every province was sovereign, and had distinct
privileges, rights, and revenues, yea different waights and measures, they
would never yield teherto unless their princes power had been limited; so as
this desseigne took no success. This brave warrier was slain before Nancy,
in the year 1477 the fifth of January, being betrayed Campobasso, who served
him, at the instigation of Lewis the eleventh, having first lost three
battles to the Swiffes, and Lorrainers: he was 44 years old, and left one
only daughter called Mary of Vallois, being eighteen years old, who married
with Maximillian of Austria; who recovered that from the French king, which he
had taken from his wife: he restored the order of the Golden Fleece, which had
been much neglected: they had two children, one son called Philip, and
Marguerite their daughter. Marie of Bourgondie, the fifth year of her marriage,
fell from a horse and dyed with that fall. Maximillian governed these countries
for a time in favor of his son Philip, but with no good intent; for he sought
to alienat and seperat from the Low Countries, the provinces of Brabant,
Haynault, Holland, and Friseland, to give them to his father Fredricke the
Emperor, doing many things in prejudice of those countries. In the year 1492,
his son Philip was acknowledged for prince throughout all the Neitherlands,
and was confirmed hereditarie lord thereof. In the year 1496 he married the
lady Ioane of Spain in the town of Lier in Brabant; so as the Low Countries
being before united together by many marriages, are in the end come by this
marriage to the house of Spain: and although they seem to have attained
thereby a perfect prosperity, yet by this means they are fallen into a long
and tedious war, yea into civil wars and combustions, to the great ruin and
prejudice of the said countries. So by this means the seuenteen provinces were
made subject to the government of the king of Spain.

Philip the second, king of Spain, finding his strength to decay, and his
health to imp^ire, desirous to make a final conclusion of the resolution which
he had taken to give his eldest daughter Donna Isabella in marriage to the
Archduke Albert his nephew (notwithstanding that he enjoyed great
ecclesiastical dignities, and especially that rich Archbishopricke of Toledo)
caused prince Philip his only son, being about twenty years (...) come
into his presence in the town of Madrid the sixth of May, being accompanied by
Don Gomes of Auila, marquis of Vellada, governor and chief steward to the
Philip; Don Christopher de Mora earl of Castel-Rodrigo, great commander (...)
Alcantara; Don John of Idiaques, great commander of Leon, all three
counselors of State; and master Nicholas Damant knight, councellor president
and chancellor of Brabant; with Lalo secretary for the Low Countries, and no
more. Whereas the conclusion of the cession and transaction of the Low
Countries made by the king unto his said daughter was read, signed, past, and
sealed, being in the French tongue as follows.

Philip by the grace of God etc. To all present, or to come, that shall see or
read these Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia: and the more inclining Albert,
governor and captain general for us in our Low Countries and Bourgondie,
having taken notice of his person, and choosing him for future husband to our
eldest daughter; as well with the consent of our holy father the Pope, who has
thereupon granted his dispensation, as also having imparted it to the most
high, most excellent, and most mighty prince our dear and well-beloved brother,
cousin, and nephew Rodolph, the second of that name, Emperor of the Romans,
and also to our most dear and well-beloved good sister the Emperesse his mother.
Which considered, and to the end that our said daughter may (as it is fit) have
means according to Philip, according to the aduertisements which have been
given by us, and our said son, unto the chief lords and knights of our
Order, Consuls, and Estates of our said Low Countries, being under our
obedience, and also to them of our country and county of Bourgondie: who have
testified and made known by their answer, the joy and content which they had
of Infanta according to her merits, and the greatness of her birth:
transferring them unto her in particular, for that after our said son the
prince (whom God preserve many years, making him to prosper in his service)
our said eldest daughter is the first and next of blood: and that with the

Infanta, in advancement of the said marriage, all our said Low Countries, and
Bourgondie, in manner and form, and with the conditions hereafter mentioned.

1 The first condition is, and not otherwise, That the said Infanta our
daughter shall join in marriage with the Archduke Albert, considering the
dispensation which has been granted by our holy father the Pope to that
end: and that by way of donation,

2 Item, upon condition, and not otherwise, That the children and successors of
the same marriage, be they males or females lawfully begotten, and not
unlawful, although (...) were by a subsequent marriage, the elder praeceding
the younger, and the male the female; shall from hand to hand be heirs in the
same degree of all the said provinces jointly, without any division, or
distraction, or dismembring thereof: declaring that

3 Item, upon condition, and not otherwise, That in case (which God forbid)
there be neither son nor daughter of this marriage; or that they die after
the death of the Archduke Albert, or of our daughter the Infanta, the said
donation, cession, and transport, shall be void and of no force: In which case
if our said daughter the Infanta shall remain a widow, her lawful portion by
the father-side, and the donation by the mother-side, such as may be fitting
and belonging to her, shall follow; besides that which we, or our son the
prince, for the love we bear unto her, shall give her. And if the said
Archduke Albert (our good cousin) shall survive the said Infanta, he shall
remain governor of the

4 Item, upon condition, and not otherwise, That all the descendants of this
marriage, males and females failing, so as not any one should remain of them
that are called to these estates, in that case they shall all return unto the
king of Spain, which shall be descended from us; and according to this donation
and cession, in that case we make him presently donatorie, as being given unto
him.

5 Item, upon condition, and not otherwise, That our said daughter the Infanta,
nor any other called to the said succession, shall not for any cause whatsoever
divide, or dismember the said countries, neither give, not exchange, without
our consent, and of those

6 Item, upon condition, and not otherwise, That whosoever shall be princess or
lady of the said Low Countries, shall marry with the king of Spain, or with
the prince his son, who shall be then living, with a former dispensation, if
need shall require: and if then they shall have no will nor power to consumat
the said marriage, in that case the said lady shall not take any other
husband, nor meddle with any donation, without our advice and consent, and of
our heirs and successors in our said realms of Spain, which shall be ^^^ed
from us: and in case of contrauention, all that has been given and granted
shall return, as if this donation, cession, and transport, had never been
made.

7 Item, upon condition, and not otherwise, That all and every prince and lord
of the

8 Item, upon condition, and not otherwise, That neither our said daughter the
Inf^^^^ nor her husband, nor any of their successors, to whom the said
countries shall fall, (...) any sort negotiat or traffic to the East or West
Indies, nor send any ships upon any color or pretext whatsoever, upon pain of
forfeiture of the said countries, in case

9 Item, upon condition, and not otherwise, That if the said Archduke Albert
(our good cousin) shall survive our daughter the Infanta, leaving either sons
or daughters, he shall have the government of that son or daughter, with the
government of their estates, as if our said daughter the Infanta were yet
living. And moreover, our said cousin the Archduke shall enjoy all the said
countries during his life, entertaining the said children according to their
qualities, giving unto the eldest son, or daughter, the duchy Albert,
without drawing it into consequence, to the end that none of his successors may
urge any example, nor pretend any right in the like case.

10 Item, upon condition, and not otherwise, as being the principal and
greatest bond of all others, That all the children and descendants of the said
marriage, shall follow the holy religion which does now shine in them, and
shall live and die in our holy Catholic faith, as the holy Church of Rome
does teach; and that before they take possession

Ego ^uro ad Sancta Dei Euangeliaquod semper ad extremum vitae meae spiritum
sacrosancta^ fidem Catholicam, quam tenet, docet, and praedicat, Sancta
Catholica, and Apostolica Ecclesia Romana (Communium Ecclesiarum matter and
magistra) constanter profitebor, and fideliter firmiterque credam, and
veraciter tencho: atque eam a meis subditis teneri, doceri, and praedicari
(quantum in meerit) curabo. Sic me Deus adiuuet, and haec Sancta Dei Euangelia.

11 Item, upon condition, and for the greater assurance and confirmation of the
peace, love, and corespondencie, which should be betwixt the king and his
realms, Our descendants and successors, and the princes and lords of those
countries, our successors also and descendants, every one of them that in
future times shall come unto the possession and command of the said Low
Countries, and Bourgondie, shall approve and ratify, whatsoever is contained
in this Article.

12 And for that our intention and will is, that the said conditions shall take
full effect, We do give, grant, quit, transport, and renounce, in the best
manner and form that Infanta, Isabella Clara Eugenia, our most dear and and
well-beloved eldest daughter, all our Low Countries, and every province thereof,
with the countries and county of Bourgondie, comprehending therein that of
Caralois, the duchies, principalities, marquisats, and forts, which are in our
Low Countries, and Bourgondie, together with all the regaliites, fees, homages,
rights of patronage, re^^s, revenues, demeanes, confiscations, and fines, with
all sorts of jurisdictions, rights, and actions, which we might pretend by
reason of our Low Countries and Bourgondie; as also all pr^heminences,
prerogatives, privileges, exemptions, guards, protections, liberties,
appeals, and all other kind of sovereignty whatsoever, or howsoever they may

13 And it is our intention, as we do hereby declare and expressly ordain, That
in regard of this donation, cession, and transport, our said daughter the
Infanta, and her future husband the Archduke Albert, shall be bound to pay and
discharge all debts, obligations, and contracts made by us, or in our name, or
by his deceased imperial majesty, upon the patrimony and demeanes of the
said Low Countries, and the county of Bourgondie: and they shall be in like
manner bound to discharge all rents, pensions for life, and all

And so we do make, create, and name by these presents our said daughter the
Infanta, princess and lady of the said Low Countries, and county of
Bourgondie and Charalois.

Moreover we do grant unto our said daughter, That besides the particular
titles of every of the said provinces of the Low Countries, and the county of
Bourgondie, she may write and entitle herself Duchess of Bourgondie,
notwithstanding that we have reser^^rued (so long as we shall please) for us,
and for the prince our son, the said title of Duke of Bourgondie, with all
the rights that may belong thereunto, together with the sovereignty of our
order of the Golden Fleece, whereof we retain a power to dispose Infanta, of
our own private authority, without any further request or consent, either by
her self, or by her deputies sent to her future husband, to take full and
absolute possession, of all the said Low Countries, county of Bourgondie and
Charalois: and to this end, to assemble the general Estates of the said
countries, or the particular Estates of every province, or observe any other
course that shall be thought fit for this donation, cession, and transport: to
signify it, and to take the oath due to the Estates and subjects of the said
countries, and to require the inuestiture of every piece and seigneurie where
it shall be needful: as also to receive an oath from them, to bind them to all
that, whereunto they were reciprocally bound by

In witness whereof, We will and ordain that the said Letters Patents shall
be delivered unto her: consenting and giving full power to our daughter the
Infanta, to retain, admit, and place in the said Low Countries and Bourgondie,
Governors, Judges, and Justices, as well for the preservation and defense
thereof, as for the administration of justice and policy, and for the receipt
of the revenues, or otherwise: and also to do every thing that a true princess
and lady of the propriety of the said countries, may by law, Infanta our
daughter for their true princess and lady; and (...) the oath of fealty,
homage, promise, and bond, according to the accustomed man(...) the nature of
the countries, places, fees, and seigneuries: and moreover, that th^^ ^^all do
unto her and her future husband, all honor, reverence, affection, obedience,
fidelity, and service, as good and loiall subjects are bound to their lawful
prince and Philip. And underneath, By the king. A Laloo.

This resignation of the Low Countries, was ratified also by the letters
patents of prince Philip the third of that name, now king of Spain, as
follows.

Philip by the grace of God, prince, son and only heir of the realms,
countries, and seigneuries of king Philip the second of that name, my lord and
father: to all present and ^o come, greeting. Whereas my said lord and father
has taken a resolution to marry the lady Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia our
most dear and well-beloved good sister, to the Archduke Albert our good uncle
and cousin; and that thereupon his Catholic majesty

We make it known, That having particularly understood every point thereof,
considering the public good which may thereby redound to Christendom, and
for the singular love which we owe unto our good sister the Infanta, in regard
of her graces and Infanta, as my said lord and father has done. And to the end
it may subsist the better, for the greater assurance, and strengthening of that
which his majesty has decreed in favor, and for the advancement of our good
sister; We dispose and ordain, as f^r ^s it is needful by these presents, in
her favor, and in the same form and manner, of our own free will, without
any force, constraint, falsehood, deceit, or any other respect, nor fatherly
reverence, fear, error, nor any persuasion, our will and intention Infanta
Isabella Clara Eugenia, and to her successors, acording to the disposition of
the king my lord and father: and to the end it may take full effect, and
remain for ever firm and stable, We have, and do renounce by these presents,
in favor of our said sister, for us and our successors, all benefits, which
we or they may by law pretend to contradict, or frustrate these presents: (...)
it by the law, De restitutione in integrum; to the which we have, and do hereby
re(...). For our resolute, and determinat will is, that nothing whatsoever
shall be of (...) this donation, cession, and transport which has been made
of the said Low Countries.

Whereupon^ We have given our faith, and sworn upon the holy Euangell, which
We D. Gomes de Auila, Marquis of Velada, our governor and high steward of our
household: D. Christopher de Mora, earl of Castle Rodrigo, great commander of
Alcantara, gentleman of his majesty's chamber, and butler to our person: D.
John of Idiaques, great commander of Leon, Nicholas Amant knight also, and
Councellor of State, keeper of his majesty's seals for the affairs of the Low
Countries, and Bourgondie, and Chauncellor of the duchy of Brabant. Given in
the town of Mad^id, in the realm of Castille, the sixth of May 1598. Signed
Philip. And underneath, By commandment from my Lord the prince. A Laloo.

These two letters patents of Resignation from the king, and agreation from the
prince, were both sealed with one seal in red wax, and laces of gold.

These instruments being thus read, signed, and sealed, autentically, the
prince of Spain arose, and went and kissed his fathers hands, thanking him for
the love he bare unto his sister: then addressing himself unto his said
sister, he did congratulat the good which

Two days after, which was the eighth of May, the Empress (who was the kings
sister, and mother to the Archduke Albert) came to court, being accompanied by
the Ambassador of the Emperor her son, by the Marquis of Velada, D.
Christopher de Mora, D. John Idiaques, and others, whereas the marriage treated
of, was confirmed: the Infanta binding her self by oath, in the hands of the
said Empress, to marry the Archduke Albert of Austria, according to his
majesty's good pleasure: Whereupon, the said lady Empress bound her self
reciprocally, that the said Archduke her son should take her to wife, by
virtue of a special procuration which he had sent her. Then the Infanta
advanced to kiss the Empress hand, who was her aunt (and future mother in
law) but she would not suffer her, embracing her very kindly. In the end,
after many courtesies, and amiable complements, the Empress beginning to
retire her self, the Infanta kneeled down, and would have kissed her hand
again, but she drew it back, and raising her up, kissed her cheek, and so
they parted.

All this being thus past, the Infanta sent a procuration in quality of
princess of the Low Countries, to the Archduke her future husband, as
follows.

Isabella Clara Eugenia by the grace of God Infanta of all the realms of
Spain, duchess of Bourgondie, Lothier, Brabant, Limbourg, and Luxembourg,
Countess of Flanders, Artois, Bourgondie, Palatine, and of Hainault, Holland,
Zeland, Namur, and Zurphin, Marquess of the sacred Empire, lady of Friseland,
Salins, and Macklin, of the country and city of Vtrecht, of Oueryssel, and
Grouningue: To all to whom these presents shall come greeting. Whereas, as well
for the general good of Christendom, as for the Low Countries in particular,
and for other good considerations, it has pleased the king my lord and father
for the advancement of our future marriage, by a dispensation from our holy
father the Pope, with our most dear and well-beloved cousin the Archduke A^^ert,
with the liking, consent, and assistance of the high and mighty prince our
most and successors in manner and form, and according to the conditions
comprehended in Albert, the full and absolute possession of all the Low
Countries, and county of Bourgondie and Charolois: Wherefore, according to the
tenor of the said letters patents, We make it known, that for the former
reasons, and to follow his majesty's will and pleasure from point to point, yea
to advance that which may be requisite before our departure toward the said
Countries.

We have upon our own knowledge and absolute power, given full authority, and
Albert, in our name and behalf, by himself or other his substitutes,
wheresoever he shall think it requisite by virtue hereof, at once, or at diverse
times, to do all things, as well in our name and behalf, as in the behalf of
the Low Countries, and county of Bourgondie and Charolois in general, or by
the Estates in every particular Province, which shall be held necessarieto be
done: To take, accept, or retain in our name, the full and real possession of
all the said Countries, and every Province thereof, and of all that depends:
The same to enjoy fully and peaceably, without any contradiction, let, or
molestation.

To those ends causing the Estates of the said Countries to assemble, be it in
general, or particular, and to take the accustomed oaths in our name: And
moreover, to have Albert, which We our selves being in person might do,
notwithstanding there be something which might require a special warrant, the
which is not expressed in the said letters: promising in the word of a
princess, and upon our honor, to have for agreeable, firm, and stable for
ever, and to observe, and cause to be observed and inuiolably kept, whatsoever
has been done by the said Archduke Albert our future husband, or by his
substitutes, by virtue of the said letters, and in regard of the real and full
possession of the said Low Countries and Bourgondie, after that manner and
form that is mentioned in the said letters patents of donation, cession, and
transport: whereunto We refer our selves, not doing no^ suffering any thing
to be done to the contrary, directly nor indirectly in any sort whatsoever:
for such is Isabella. And upon the fould, By commandment from my lady the
Infanta. A. Lalo^.

Infanta his daughter, in favor of her marriage with the Archduke Albert of
Austria, who was yet a Cardinal, being come to Brussels; The said Cardinal
caused them to be published by coppies, together with the agreation of the
prince of Spain, Infanta, and letters sealed up from the king, and the prince
his son, the which were sent unto the governors, and Consulls of all the
Provinces which were yet under the government and house of Spain, commanding
them to send their deputies to the town of Brussells, where the Estates being
assembled, the said Cardinal Archduke, in the name of the said lady, and by
virtue of his procuration, was accepted, and an oath taken upon certain
conditions: the contents whereof follow.

The first article contained the agreation or the approbation of the transport
and donation of the countries, and of the princess marriage which the said
Cardinal. 2. The second, after what manner she should be received, and the
oath taken. 3. That his highness should make the consummation of their
marriage appear within three months. In^^^ta to take the accustomed oath in
all the Provinces. 16. That all governors, captains, and men of war should not
attempt any new thing, during his highness absence. 17. That

Matters being thus past, and the said Cardinal Archduke sufficiently
acknowledged, and accepted for their future prince, according to the promises
of marriage betwixt him and the Infanta, meaning to vncardinall himself, and
to enter into the consummation of the said marriage, according to the Popes
grant; he went to Hault (a little town of Brabant, three leagues from
Bruxells, commonly called our Lady of Hault) where he laid his Hat and
Cardinals habit upon the great altar, the which he offered to our Lady. This
done, he began to prepare for his voyage, and for the government of the
country: whereunto during his absence he named his cousin, a Cardinal also,
Andrew Ferdinand, who was brother to the Emperor Maximillian, and therefore
cousin germane to Albert, ioining with him the council of State, appointing
Francisco de Mendoza, Admiral of Arragon to be General, and Count Herman
Vanden Bergh Marshall of the army, with other commanders and officers, to put
in execution during his absence, the resolution which had been taken at
Bruxells, touching the Frontires of Germany.

To keep him company, and for the accomplish men: of the articles, there were
deputed Philip of Nassau prince of Orange etc. (to whom his sister the
Countess of Hohenloe sent a good sum of money to perform his voyage, of the
revenues of his demeanes in Holland and Zeland) the earl of Barlaimont, and
the earl of Sores, noblemen Infanta.

The said Archduke before his departure had written to the general Estates of
the united provinces of Holland etc. containing in substance, That he went to
martie with the Infanta, with whom he should have the Low Countries in dowry:
That the greatest part of the provinces had received him, and acknowledged him
for their lord and Maurice his brother; from the duke of Arschot, and from the
marquis of Haurell, exhorting them to peace: To all which letters, there was
not any answer made, neither by the Estates, nor by prince Maurice: but there
being John Van Duyuenuoorde knight, seignior of Vuarmont and Vuoude, etc. John
Van Oldembarneuelt, seignior of Tempel, first Councellor and Aduocat of the
Estates, keeper of the seal of Holland, and West-Friseland: John Vanden
Vuerke, Councellor and Pentioner of the town of Middelbourg: John Van Hottinga
Esquire, Councellor and deputy in the general estates: and Andrew Hessels,
first Councellor of the Council of Brabant, remaining at the Hague, for that
which depends upon the united Provinces: Who being come into England, having
had audience of her majesty, were sent to treat with the lords of her Council
of all matters whereof she had summoned them, and for the which they had been
moved to come unto her in the name of the Estates: so as in the end having
Albert; her majesty resolved also for her part to continue the war: the which
could not be so hurtful to her, as to the Spaniard, for many reasons which
would be tedious to relate. At the same time, a peace being concluded betwixt
the French king and the Spaniard, the seignior of Buzenual, ambassador for the
French king with the general Estates of the united provinces, was sent back
into Holland by the king his master to continue his charge, who propounded
unto the Estates many excuses and reasons, which had moved the king to make a
peace with the Spaniard, assuring them that he would be no enemy, nor
contrary to their government,

Thus the Estates of the united provinces, and prince Maurice, being assured of
these two mighty allies, the French, and the English, prepared for war against
the Archduke, the which war they continued with variable success of either
part, until in the end they came unto a truce, in the year 1609: the which we
will set down truly, for the readers content, in the end of the discourse
which we will make of the general Estates of the united provinces of the Low
Countries.

Having treated of all the Low Countries in general, and summarily how all
these

Flanders at this day has for her limits, upon the South side Artois, with
Haynault, and a part of Picardie; upon the East Haynault and Brabant; upon the
North Brabant with the Hont, or the mouth of the river Escaut, which diuides
Flaunders from Zeland; Philip the second, king of Spain, deceased, they thought
that Flanders was but one town. But during the wars for these forty years,
Flanders has had more cause to complain than any other, having bin spoiled by
a seditious multitude, and all their towns besieged, taken, and sacked, except
Grauelin, and some other small things not worth the mentioning. Many towns

The first town of Flanders is Gand, the which is four miles from the sea,
and is watered by the rivers of Escaut, Lise, Live, and Moere. Moreover, there
is a channel made by hand, which is also capable of great vessels, and it is
incredible what wealth this town receives Charles the fifth was born. Bruges is
seated in a plain, three miles from the sea: It has four miles and a half
circuit within the walls, and is the most pleasing town of Flanders: There are
sixty Churches, whereof the chief is that of S. Douatian, the which was
sometimes dedicated to our Lady, and was built by Lideric the first earl of
Flanders, in the year 1121. This town has been so rich, as queen Ioane
(wife to Philip the Fair) being there, in the year 1301, and having seen the
pomp of the women, she was first amazed, and then complained that

The country of Artois is near unto Picardie, with the which it confines. The
bounds Ierosme, as he himself writes in his Epistles) and a candle, which they
say they had in old time from heaven. The town is great, and has goodly

Henry the fifth gave it in protection to Robert of Jerusalem, earl of
Flaunders, to whose successors it was confirmed by the emperor Frederick, in
the year 1164. In the end it put it self under the protection of Maximillian
of Austria, king of the Romans, by whom it was left at liberty: it remained a
long time neuter, during the wars which were betwixt the houses of France and
Bourgondie, until that Charles the fifth built Henry the third, made himself
master of it: but it was afterward yielded to the Spaniards, the inhabitants
giving up the town for want of victuals. The town is fair, great, and
stately, as well for the public as private buildings, and for the great number
of people that inhabit there.

Valdrude duchess of Lorrain, who gave them good rents: These religious women
(which should be daughters of noblemen, and gentlemen of note) remain near
unto the Church, and attend the service thereof: In the morning they go attired
like Nuns, and in the afternoon like secular women, and may marry at their
pleasures: they have an Abbess which gouernes them. There is a Chapter of the
like order, but richer, at Ni^elle, and another at Mabeuil. Valencienne was (as
they say) built by the emperor Valentinian; it stands in a pleasant valley:
The river of Escaut, and the little river of Ronelle enter into it, and make
diverse small Islands, and a current which





Brabant has for bounds upon the North, the Ocean sea, upon the East the river
of Meuse on the South the Bishopric of Liege, and the country of Namur, and
upon Caesar did lodge the Aduatices and Ambiuarites: it is two and twenty
leagues long, and twenty broad, and fourscore in circuit: it contains six
and twenty walled towns, eighteen that have privileges; and seven hundred
villages. There are four principal towns, that is to say, Louuain, Bruxells,
Antuerp, and Bosleduc. Louuain is in a fair situation, and has four miles
in circuit about the walls; but it contains meadows, vines, and John duke of
Brabant in the year 1426, but it has been much inricht with pensions for
public readers, by Philip the second king of Spain. Bruxells (whose circuit
is not much less than that of Louuain) is seated partly upon a plain, and
partly upon the descent of a hill; it is the ordinary abode of the Archduke:
the town is full of fair palaces, and goodly houses, amongst the which, is
the palace royal, with a park that is very delightful. Antuerpe is so fair
a town, as there are few in Europe that can equal it: it is seated upon the
river of Escaut, which brings ships with all kinds of merchandise from the sea,
which is seventeen leagues off: there are many goodly buildings, but the
chief are our ladies Church,

The Quality.
TO speak in general of the quality of the Low Countries, the air is very
moist, and yet very wholesome for the inhabitants of the country: Summer is
very pleasing with a temperat heat: they are not scorcht as in many other
countries, flies and dorres do not annoy them with their buzzing and stinging:
it is not subject to Earthquakes; but the Winter is long and windy: any wind
that comes from the East causes frost. The country is in many places sandy:
it abounds in wheat, barley, rye, flax, and hemp: it does also bring forth all
kinds of fruit in great abundance, as apples, pears, plums, cherries,
mulberries, peaches, nuts, medlers, and in some places chestnuts: there are not
Caesar says that Cati^ulcus died. There is also another kind of tree, which
the inhabitants call Abeelen, and it is like unto a white Poplar tree. There
are great store of them in Brabant, and they Guicchardin writes of an ox which
was given to the earl of Hocstrat at Macklin, waying one thousand five hundred
twenty and eight pounds, and therefore he caused this beast to be drawn in
his palace. As for cowes, they have always their dugs so great and so full, as
it is almost incredible what

There is store of fallow dear, stags, goats, wild boares, conies, hares, and
great numbers of herons, partriges, phesants, turtledoues, quails, thrushes,
storkes, geese, and mallards: there is also abundance of tame foul, and store
of salmons, lampreyes, aloses, mullets, and much other good fish which comes
from the sea, into the river of Meuse, drawn thither by the sweetness of the
water: and it is a thing worthy admiration, that these fishes being taken in
the sea, are little esteemed, but within the fresh water they are very fat, and
of a good taste: the same river does also bear trouts and lampreyes, whereof
some are great and excellent, others less and delicat.

Moreover the se^ (with her flowing into the river of Escaut) brings sturgeons,
salmons, great lampre^^^* mullets, soles, crafishes, and many other sorts of
delicate fish, where they live and breed, for that the water is fit for them.
In two or three months, in the spring time, they take such abundance of small
fish, besides the great, as many people live of them. Moreover this river
without any help of the sea, does continually breed many kinds of fish,
whereof the chief are pike, barbles, tenches, and carpes which many times
weigh twenty pound: there are also some oisters found in the mouth of this
river, but they come from the sea. The pesants joining many waters together
with the help of these rivers, make channells with great industry, which run
certain leagues,

Cornelius Tacitus) the sea does swell wonderfully. There are two effects of
the flowing of the sea, the one is commodious, the other troublesome: the one
keeps the sea from corrupting, and makes way for them that sail; the other is
discommodious by reason of the innundation and violence. But having spoken of
the discommodities which the sea brings to these countries, it is fit to say
something of the commodities which it gives them when it is quiet. Without the
sea it were impossible they should feed half

Finally, the Low Country is plain and even, and there are few mountains,
unless it Caesar, was the greatest of Gaul, and passing through the midst
of the country of Treues, it extended it self from the

The Quality.
AS for Artois it is rich in wheat, whereof they send great store into Flanders
and Brabant, where there commonly grows none, so as for the most part, the
inhabitants eat Rye bread. There grows no wine, yet some hold that the country
is fit to bear it, and that the negligence of them that dwell there, is rather
the cause of this defect, than the situation. The air is good, wholesome, and
clear.

The country of Haynault enioyes a sweet and temperat air, and the soil is
fertile, and bears great store of wheat. There are many meadows, pastures,
orchards, and other

The county of Namur is hilly, but pleasing, and of a wholesome and temperat
air. The soil yields all things necessary for man. There are also mines of
iron and lead, and quarries whereas they cut stones of all sorts, especially of
marble inclining to black, much like unto Jasper. And it is not long since they
began to dig that kind of flint stone, which they burn. There are rivers which
abound in fish, and goodly springs and fountains, as also forests where there
is great store of wild beasts of all sorts.



Brabant is in a very good air, and ha^h a fertile plain which bears good
store of Die Kempen, or the Champian, is somewhat barren by reason of the sand,
and yet it yields some fruits, and is not altogether unprofitable.

Flanders has a wonderful temperat air. The soil is fertile, especially
toward the sea, and France: There are goodly pastures, the which we may easily
guess for that the neighbor countries are accustomed to send many colts
thither to feed. Moreover, they breed up many tame cattle whose taste is
exceeding pleasant, and they have an infinite number of Dear and wild beasts.
They want no herons, fesants, partridges, peacockes, and storckes.

The Manners of the Ancient.
CAesar tells us, that the Belges, which be those of the Low Countries (among
whom he also comprehended the Picards) were wonderful valiant and resolute,
for that they were far from the civility and courtesy of other Provinces,
and that merchants did not much frequent amongst them, nor bring those things
which makes men's courages effeminat: and also, for that they were near unto
the Germans who dwelt beyond the river of Rhein, with whom they were in
continual war. We may judge of their valor, and the great desire they had
to defend their liberty, in that they sought to retire themselves from the
rule and obedience of the Romans, yea in Caesar's time. The Neruiens, which are
they of Tournay, would never suffer any merchants to bring them wine

The Manners at this day.
Caesar does attribute chiefly to the liberty of their lives, and their
custom not to do any thing against their wills. They are fair, quiet, not
choleric, nor ambitious, open, ready to all things, industrious, painful,
and faithful, capable of all arts and sciences, and rather given to wine than
to women. They are reasonable civil, according to the country, and so
pleasant as they are sometimes insupportable. They are light of belief, by
reason whereof they are easily deceived. There is not any nation more
suspicious, nor more obstinat. They are great talkers, and do soon forget the
courtesies and favors which they have received, and in like manner the wrongs
which have been done them. They do not much love other nations, and they
daily invent some new thing. As for music, they have made it perfect, for
that there is not

The women are fair, but there are no great numbers of such, and besides, for
the most part this beauty fades before they are thirty years old, and then
they grow wrinckled

The princes, lords, and all others of what condition soever, give unto the
eldest of the house, the name of his father, although he be living, and in the
flower of his age: and gentlemen do always prefer their eldest daughter before
the rest, although that all have the like dowry; so as they give the younger
to men to whom they would refuse the elder, whom they reserve for a better
fortune: and they have this particularitie, that they do easily contract
marriage with a stranger, if occasion be offered: they hold it base and
unseemly that young men should marry old women, and old men young maids, a
base or mean man a gentlewoman, the master his maid, and the mistress her man.
There John Eikius (who was of this country)

The Riches.
THe Flemings are rich by means of the sea, and the ordinary traffic which
they use. The trades whereunto they apply themselves bring them a thousand
commodities, and the sale of their silks, sarges, and tapistrie work, which
are so much desired,

It is in a manner incredible what profit they make of porpeses and salmons,
which they do salt and barrel up, and what abundance of herring and barrelled
cod they send forth yearly, for the which they return great sums of money
from the Germans, English, French, Spaniards, and Italians.

The ordinary revenues which the prince drew from the Low Countries (whenas
they were all under one lord) did amount to above three millions of gold
yearly, besides

The Forces.
THe Archduke may boldly say that he has good towns, not only able to make a

(...) the country of Artois, there is the town of Arras, the which is strong
and able (...) a gre^^ res^stance. Terouanne might be well defended and endure
a long siege: Hedin is of no less importance, yea it is better fortified, and
is upon the frontires of

The Government.


The prince has three counsels, whereof the first is called the council of
State; the

In the Privy council there are twelve doctors chosen by the prince, and there
is a president, whereas they treat of all questions in law, for that it has a
pre-eminence over all the other counsels, and this consents to privileges,
gives pardons, and remissions, and makes laws, statutes, and edicts; and to it
also does belong the knowledge of judgment, of controversies, and questions
for the limits of countries, and for the chief of

In the council of the Finances, there are three chief men of the country,
who are called heads and overseers of the exchequer, there is a treasurer, a
receiver, and other inferior officers. This council does manage all the
princes revenues, and the taxes which are paid him: there they make the
impositions and paiments in all occurrents both of peace and war.

There is a Chamber of accounts, which is as it were a member of the council
of the finances, and seven masters of accounts, with other inferior officers:
there they go to make their accounts, and to receive their acquittances (at the
end of the term) that do

Besides the said magistrates, there is in most of the said Estates a particular
governor, to whom (as to a lieutenant) matters are referred, especially for
the war.

The prince has also in the greatest part of his Estates a council in his
name, the which in Brabant is called the Chancerie, and at Macklin; in other
places it is called the Parliament. In this council there are sometimes
twelve, sometimes sixteen, and sometimes



In all the towns, counties, and principal places by ancient pre-eminence,
they know who should go to the assembly, and how many they are, who in deed
are many: in this assembly there are three orders of persons.

The first order is the Clergy, the second the Nobility, and the third the
chief towns of the estate. Every one of these has power to bind his
comminaltie, but never to conclude

Notwithstanding that the principal government, and all the most substantial
preheminences

These laws, customs, and privileges have a great difference, for that the
said countries have been enjoyed for many ages by diverse princes, and they
have often been in quarrel with mortal and deadly hatred; yea they differ in
weights, measures, and manners, and (which is of very great importance) they
differ in language, which is so incompatible a thing, as the Emperor Charles
the fifth, having often propounded by what means he might draw these estates
into one body, and give them the name and form of a realm, he could never
find the way: but with all this diversity, they do all agree in

The private government of every great town consists of four members: we
will call the first the new seigneurie, and this comprehends all the great and
lesser magistrates which are in charge: the second is the old seigneurie, which
comprehends all those that have had any charge of importance: the third is
called the Bourgesie, which consists of as many captains as there are streets
in the town. Antuerpe has six and twenty: the fourth member embraces all
the heads of Trades, called Deans, which are also diverse

The manner to frame the particular government in the town of Antuerpe is
thus, The seigneurie presents nine gentlemen, and nine others are named by the
captains of

The same sovereign magistrate does choose without any interuention of the
prince, or his commissioners, certain inferior magistrates, and among others
two Treasurers, which be gentlemen of the peoples nomination; and one Receiver,
of the people, named by the

These Plebeian Counselors go unto the Council as well as the gentlemen, they
hear suitors petitions, and give their advice, sometimes seditiously, when as
they treat of disbursing any money which should come into the hands of the
gentlemen; for that Lewis of Ha^lembec, the first earl of Flanders, all have
felt some rebellion, except three only.

Of these good towns there are some which have good store of public revenues,
and among the rest, Antuerpe has two hundred and fifty thousand crowns
yearly rent: but both this and others were much indebted in the year 1556, and
we must believe that

The authority of lords which have castles, lands, and other jurisdictions is
very much limited, for that they cannot oppress their vassals in any sort,
nor accept voluntary presents from them without the express consent of the
prince: but these lords leaving unto the people the government according unto
their laws and customs, enjoy the titles and reuenews with all modesty. It
is true there are some lords which have certain particular jurisdictions, in
such sort absolute, as they do not acknowledge any other

The Clergy is very mighty and rich throughout all the whole country, so as
to stay their increase of wealth, least they should grow more powerful, Charles
the fifth made a law prohibiting all Clergy men to buy any land without license
expressly granted from the Maximilian of the Emperor Frederick his father, as
well for himself as his successors.

The Religion.
THroughout all the Archdukes Estates in general, they have no other exercise
but of

Archbishops and Bishops in the Low Countries.
AS for the Estate of the Clergy throughout all the Low Countries in general,
it

The Archbishoprike of Macklin has under it the Bishops of Antuerpe, Gand,
Bruges, Bosleduc, Ipre, and Ruremonde.

The Archbishop of Vtrecht has under him the Bishops of Harlem in Holland,
Deuenter

The Archbishopricke of Cambray was erected by Pope Paul the fourth, in the
year^ 1562, for before it was but a Bishopric, and the first Bishop was
called Saint Diogene, a Grecian borne, he was consecrated Bishop at Arras, by
the Archbishop of Reims, in the year 390, and ever since the two Bishoprics
were united under one Bishop until the year 1094, in which year they were
divided: and the Bishopric of Cambray comprehends under her jurisdiction the
towns of Cambray, Mons, Condee, At the, Quesnoy, Landrecy, Auesnes, Bins,
Beaumont, Brenne, Soignes, Maubege, Chimay, and in a manner all the country of
Henault, Cambresis, and some small part of Artois, a part of

The Clergy of Arras (after they had long pursued this separation) in the end
obtained of Pop^ Urban the eleventh, a particular Bishop, in the year 1094.
The Bishop has under his ^urisdiction the towns of Arras, Douay, Bethune,
Bapaulme, Lens, Armentieres, Bouchain, la Bassee, a part of Valenciennes, with
many borroughes and villages.

The Bishopric of Tournay was erected in the year 480, and some time after
it was joined to the Bishopric of Noyon, and continued six hundred years
united under one Bishop ^^as in the year 1123, the separation was granted by
the Bishop of Noyon, who (...) the Bishopric of Tournay. Saint Barnard was an
earnest suitor unto the Pope

The Bishopric of Saint Omer was erected, for that the town of Terouenne
being razed by the Emperor Charles the fifth, in the year 1553: the revenues
of the Bisho(...) of Terouenne were divided into three, one part went to the
Bishopric of Boul(...) France, another part to the Bishopric of Saint Omer
for Artois, and the third to the Bishopric of Ipre for Flaunders: wherefore
the Collegiall Church of S. Omer was erected into a Cathedral in the year
1559, having under it ten towns, that is, Saint

In the year 1559 the Collegiall Church of Saint Rombaut at Macklin was made a
Metropolitan; besides the Bishoprics that are under it, there were assigned
seuenteen towns, Macklin, Lou^ain, Bruxells, Tillemont, Land, Did, Arscot,
etc. with many villages.

The Collegiall Church of our Lady at Antuerpe was erected to a Cathedral in
the year 1559, with episcopal jurisdiction over seven towns, that is to say,
Antuerpe, Liere, Berghes, etc. and many villages.

The Collegiall Church of Saint John in the town of Gand was made a
Bishopric, in the year 1559, and it has under it four towns, Gand,
Andeuarde, etc. with many

The Collegiall Church of Saint John the Evangelist at Boisleduc was changed to
a Cathedral in the year 1559, having under it ten towns, Boisleduc, Helmont,
Bomel,

The Collegiall Church of Saint Donat at Bruges in the year 1559, was made a
Cathedral, comprehending under it nine towns, Bruges, Scluse, Ardembourg,
etc. with many villages.

The Monastery of the regular Chanoins in the church of Saint Martin at Ipte
was in the year 1559, made a Cathedral Church of the secular Chanoins,
containing under that episcopal jurisdiction ten towns, Ipre, Dunkerke,
Bergue, Furnes, etc. with

The Collegiall Church built in honor of the holy Ghost at Ruremonde was in
the year 1559 changed to a Cathedral, with episcopal jurisdiction, having
under it ten towns, Ruremonde, Nimeguen, Zutphen, Vennelo, etc. and many
villages.

The Bishopric of Vtrecht was erected by Pope Sergius in the year 690, and it
was made a Metropolitan in the year 156^, it has under it the five Bishoprics
above mentioned: as for the particular limits of the Bishopric of Vtrecht, it
contains all the territory of Vtrecht, and a part of Holland and Guelderland,
with the seigneuries of Buren, Culembourg, Vianen, etc. in the which are
comprehended thirty towns, with many villages.

The Parochial Church of Saint Bauon in Harlem, was made a Cathedral in the
year

The Collegiall Church of S. Lebuin at Deuenter, was made a Cathedral in the
year 1559, having under it five and twenty towns, and many villages.

The Co^legiall Church of S Peter at Middlebourough, was in the year 1559
changed to a Cathedral, under whose jurisdiction are ten towns, with many
villages.

The Parochial Church of S. Vit at Leuuarden; was made a Cathedral in the
year 1559, having under it ten towns and many villages.

The Parochial Church of S. Martin at Groningue, was in the year 1559
changed to a Cathedral, containing under the jurisdiction all the territory
of the town which is very great, and the Islands of Rollinghe and Borehin.

At this day that the Estates of the united Provinces hold the Bishopric of
Vtrecht, and other churches, they have with the change of religion confounded
the order which the church of Rome had established there.

The Lords and Earls of ^launders.
L^^eritke called the Bucke, was made the first Forrester of the country of
Flaunders, in the year of Christ 621, by Dagobert king of France, for him and
his successors: he governed the country two and fifty years, and died
ninety and two years old, in the year 692.

Anthonse second son to Lydericke, succeeded his father to the government of
Flanders in the year 692. At that time the Goths, Vandales, Huns, and such
other barbaro^s nations, spoiled the Champian country without any resistance,
of the said Forester, who ^^tired himself into France with his people.

Bouchart, the third son to Lyderic, called the Bucke, by the death of
Anthony his brother, was deprived of the estate of Forrester of Flanders, by
Theodoric king of France, yet he granted him the seigneurie of Halibeck. The
country of Flanders was again ruined by the Huns, Goths, Vandales, and other
nations, so as the greatest part of Flanders remained desolate and not
inhabited, about a hundred years.

Estorede or Estoreist, son to Bouchart, was by the decease of his father and
mother prince of Louuayn, lord of Halebeck, and Forrester of Flanders, he died
in the year of our Lord 792.

Lyderick, prince of Bucke, son to Estorede, having married a noble lady of
Germany Flandrina, of whom the country took the name, was made great
Forrester by Charles the Great, to cleanse the ways and country from thieves
and robbers; wherein he behaved himself valiantly, for the which he was
invested the first earl of Halebecke: he governed this country as a virtuous
prince four and forty years, under Charlemagne and Lewis the Gentle, his
son, kings of France, and died in the year 836: he was a good Christian, and
drew unto him many Bishops, Pastors, Preachers, and learned men to convert the
Pagans, which remained there in great numbers.

Inguelran or Inguerrant, son to Lyderick the second, succeeded his father in
the government of Flanders, and the county of Halibeck, in the year 836; he
lived under Lewis the Gentle, and Charles the Bald, kings of France, to whom he
did homage for his

Odoacre or Audacre, son to Inguerrant, succeeded his father in the
government of Flanders, in the year 852, and ruled eleven years; he also
caused many towns to be repaired, and did wall about Gand, he died in the
year 863.

Bandouin, surnamed Arm of iron, son to the said Odoacre, so called by
reason of his valor and worthy exploits: He carried away by force the fair
Judith, widow to Edward king of England, and daughter to Charles the Bald,
emperor and king of France, so as for a time he could not come into grace with
the emperor, who in the end was pacified, and made him the first earl of
Flanders, giving him in dower all the country of Flanders;

Baudouin, the Bald, son to the other Baudouin, was second earl of Flanders,
he obtained many victories against the Danes and Normans, he died in the year
919, and lies at Saint Peter's near Gand.

Arnould the old, surnamed the Great, eldest son to Baudouin the Bald, was
third earl of Flanders, in the year 919; he had great wars against the
house of Normandy, having caused duke William, called Long sword, to be
slain: being ninety two years old, he died in the year 964, and is interred
at S. Peter's by Gand.

Baudouin the young, third of that name, and fourth earl of Flanders, became
by a voluntary transport of his father (being his only son) earl of
Flanders: having governed three years, he died in the year 967, and lies at
S. Bertin.

Arnold the Young, second of that name, the only son to Baudouin the Young,
fifth ealre of Flanders, took the government in the year 968, who died of a
burning fever at Gand, the thirteenth of March 988, and lies at S. Peter's
near Gand.

Baudouin, with the fair Beard, fourth of that name, sixth earl of Flanders,
eldest son to Arnold the Young: in the beginning of his government he had
war against the emperor Henry the second; he was valiant, and therefore the
emperor loved him, and

B^^douin, fifth of that name, called the Gentle, or of I'Isle, only son to
Baudouin with the fair Beard, was the seventh Earl of Flanders: he had in his
time war against the emperor Henry the third, and having governed the
country three and thirty years, he

Baudouin, sixth of that name, called of Mons, surnamed also the Peaceable, the
eight earl of Flanders, was son to Baudouin the fifth; he never wore arms
nor sword, his government was very peaceable, and died in the year 1070.

Arnold the Simple, third of that name, ninth earl of Flanders, eldest son
to Baudouin of Mons; he was much troubled by his uncle Robert the Frison, who
under color to be Tutor to his nephews, deprived them of their succession. He
did hazard two battles against his uncle, and was slain in the last, in the
year 1072.

Robert, first of that name, surnamed the Frison, tenth earl of Flanders,
younger son Baudouin the fifth. After the death of Arnold the Simple, slain in
battle, and his brother Baudouin, with his mother Rithilde, being fled into
Haynault, he took the said earldom without any resistance; he died in the
year 1077.

Robert the young Frison, surnamed of Jerusalem, eleventh earl of Flanders,
son to Robert the first, succeeded in the year 1077; he crossed himself to go
against the Infidells: going into France to the Coronation of king Lewis,
passing the bridge of Neele near unto Meaux, his horse stumbling fell upon
him, so as the third day after, he died in the year 1111, and is buried at S.
Vast by Arras.

Baudouin, seventh of that name, twelfth earl of Flanders, succeeded in the
year 1111; he was a good Iusticer, and died in the year 1119, having before
his death and by his Charles of Denmark, his cousin, son to Canutus king of
Denmark; he lies at S. Bertin.

Charles, first of that name, surnamed the Good, thirteenth earl of Flanders,
was, before the death of his cousin Baudouin, instituted his heir, and took
the government in the year 1119; he deserved the name of Good, for his
virtues and holy life: he banished the Jews out of Flanders, and died without
heirs, in the year 1127; he lies buried at S. Christophers at Bruges.

William of Normandy, fourteenth earl of Flanders, sole heir of Normandy,
but deprived of the duchy by his uncle Henry king of England, was instituted
in the said earldom by Lewis the Gross, king of France, in the year 1128.
At his entrance he carried himself modestly: but thinking himself assured, he
became cruel and a tyrant, which Thierry earl of Elsaoe, son to Thierry of
Elsace and Gertrude of Flanders, daughter to Robert the first; the which he
seeking to hinder by arms, was slain at the siege of Alost, in the year
1129, he lies at S. Bertin.

Thierry of Elsace, fifteenth earl of Flaunders, was, by the Prelates, Nobles,
and People, received to the earldom: He was a very politic prince,
valiant, and discreet: He made four voyages to the Holie-land, and before the
fourth, he invested his eldest son Philip in the country of Flaunders, and
being returned, he left him the government, and retired himself into the
monastery of Watene, which he had

Philip of Elsace, eldest son to Thierry, surnamed the Great, by the cession
of his father was sixteenth earl of Flanders, and was a prudent prince: He
made two voyages into Syria, to succor the king of Jerusalem his cousin: and
died in his last voyage before Air, and was by the commandment of his wife
buried at Cleruault: he died without heirs, having governed Flanders about two
and twenty years.

B^udouin, eighth of that name, earl of Haynault and Namur, seventeenth earl
of Flanders, by his wife Marguerite of Elsace, sister to Philip of Elsace.
succeeded by the death of his brother in law, in the year of our Lord God
1192: He was descended Baudouin, second son to Baudouin of Mons, expelled by
Robert the Frison his uncle. He had war against Thierry of Beures, earl of
Alost, against ^enrie earl of Namur, and against the earl of Neuers; he died
in year 1195, and lies at Mons in Haynault, in the Church of S. Vaudru.

Baudouin called of Constantinople the ninth of that name, eighteenth Earl of
Flanders, succeeded in this county in the year 1194, and in the Earldom of
Haynault; and so the said county of Flanders returned to the right and lawful
heir, which had been unjustly detained from them by Robert the Frison and his
successors, since the year 1072, that the said Robert (at the battle of
Cassell) defeated Arnold the right heir, and Earl of Flanders, and chased
away Baudouin afterward Earl of Haynault, brother to the said Arnold, until
this year 1194: he was chosen Emperor of Constantinople, and in the year 1205
he was taken by the king of Bulgaria and sent into Turkey. He lies in Greece.

Ferdinand of Portugal, son to Sancho king of Portugal, the nineteenth Earl
of Ione countess and heir of the said country, eldest daughter to Count
Baudouin the ninth of that name: he had sharp war against Philip Augustus the
French king, and was taken at the battle of Bouines, and carried prisoner to
the Louure in Paris, where he remained twelve years: finally being set at
liberty he dyed soon after, in the year 1232. He lies at Margiettes.

Thomas, youngest son to Thomas Earl of Sauoy, was also in the right of his
wise Ione, the twentieth Earl of Flanders for a time, and died without heirs.

Ione Countess of Flanders and Haynault (eldest daughter to Baudouin of
Constantinople) succeeded in the government of the said counties in the year
1195 (being then but seven years old) under the government of her uncle
Philip Earl of Namur, until that Ferdinand of Portugal: she died in the year
1243, and lies at Margiettes by her first husband.

Marguerite, second daughter to Baudouin the ninth, succeeded, by the death of
the Lady Ione her sister, in the countries of Flanders and Haynault, being
widow to her second and last husband. Being under the gardainship of Buchard or
Boschard of Auennes, son to James of Auennes, issued from a noble and
ancient house in Haynault, Pronost, and Chanoine of Saint Peter's at Lisse, her
kinsman; he blinded with the beauty of his pupil, suborned her (being young)
and won her to yield unto his lust, by whom he had two sons: after which she
married William of Bourbon, Lord of Dampier^e, and of S. Desire, brother to
Archambault Lord of Bourbon, by whom also she had three sons and

William of Dampierre, eldest son to William of Dampierre, and the Lady
Marguerite Countess of Flanders, by an accord of transaction made with John of
Auesnes Earl of Haynaut his base brother, obtained the title of Earl of
Flanders, and was the one and twentieth Earl. He crossed himself and went into
the East with king Lewis; in his lost voyage he was taken prisoner by the
Turks or Sarrafins, for the which he paid a great ransom: being returned, he
died soon after in the year 1251: he lies at Flines, having

Guy of Dampierre, second son to William of Bourbon Lord of Dampierre, and of
Ma^guerite Countess of Flanders, was the two and twentieth Earl of Flanders.
He was a wife and virtuous prince, but he trusted his friends too much, for the
which he smarted. He died a prisoner at Compiegne (being above eighty years
old) in the year 1304, he was buried at Flines, having governed four and
fifty years.

Robert the third of that name, surnamed of Bethunes, for that before he was
Earl, he was Lord of Bethunes: he was the three and twentieth earl of
Flanders, a virtuous and hardy prince: he resigned to the French king the
towns of Lisle and Douay: he went into Charles king of Scicile, and duke of
Anjou his father in law, against the bastard Manfroy, whom he flew with his
own hand: he killed Iolente of Bourgondie his second wife, with the bridle of
his horse, for that she had poisoned Charles his son by his first wife: he
died in the year 1322, in the town of Ipre, being four score and two years
old, and lies in Saint Martins at Ipre.

Lewis of Neuers called of Cressy, for that he was slain at the Battle of
Cressy, the only son to Lewis earl of Neuers and of the countess of
Rethel, succeeded his Robert of Bethunes his grandfather by the fathers side,
in the year 1322, notwithstanding that Robert called of Cassel, his uncle,
would have seized upon the county of Flanders: he died in the year 1346.

Lewis called Malain or of Male, for that he was borne at Male in the county
of Flanders, the only son to Lewis of Neuers, called of Cressy, succeeded in
the year 1346 in the counties of Flanders, Rethel, and Neuers, and by the
decease of his great grandmother by the mothers side, in the earledomes of
Arras and Bourgondie: a valiant and warlike prince, but too full of revenge:
having ruled eight and thirty years, he was slain by the duke of Berry upon
some controversy that grew betwixt them for

Philip of France surnamed the hardy was fourth son to John of Valois the
French king, and brother to Charles the fifth, by whose gift he was duke of
Bourgondie, and afterward by the marriage of Marguerite (the only daughter
and heir general to Count Lewis Malain) was the six and twentieth earl of
Flanders, duke of Brabant, earl of Artois and Bourgondie, and lord of Salines
and Macklin: he had great authority in France, for that he was a very wise
prince, and died at Hault in the year 1404, he lies at Dijon in Bourgondie.

John duke of Bourgondie eldest son to Philip duke of Bourgondie and of
Marguerite heir and countess of Flanders, etc. succeeded in the duchy of
Bourgondie, counties

Philip called the Good, for his admirable virtues, was the only son to John
duke of Bourgondie, and the eight and twentieth earl of Flanders, of Artois,
Bourgondie, Palatin, lord of Salines, and Macklin. He made a league with the
English, the better to be revenged of his fathers death, the which caused great
wars in France: he punished the

Charles called in his youth earl of Charolois, the only lawful son to
duke Philip the Good, succeeded his father in the earldom of Flanders, and
was the nine and twentieth earl, and heir general of the house of
Bourgondie: a very hardy and warlike prince, who in his fathers life time led
a great army before Paris. He punished the

Maximilian surnamed Heart of Steel, Archduke of Austria, son to the Emperor
Frederick the third, married (without the priuitie of king Lewis the eleventh)
the lady Mary, the only daughter and heir of the house of Bourgondie: he was
taken prisoner at Bruges by the Flemmings, and detained by the space of nine
months, but they released him, fearing his father who marched with a great
power to relieve him: he died in the year 1519, and lies at Neustat in
Germany.

Philip eldest son to the Archduke Maximilian who was Emperor of Germany,
succeeded in all the duchies, earledomes, and other seigneuries left by the
death of his mother, in the year 1482, being then very young, under the
government of his father: ^uring which time the county of Flanders suffered
much. This prince being but young,

Charles the fifth, emperor of Germany, king of Spain, eldest son to Philip
Archduke of Austria, duke of Bourgondie, and earl of Flanders, etc. succeeded
his father in the year 1505, in all the lands and seigneuries left by the
death of his said father: a prince worthy of memory: he performed many
memorable acts too long to recite; and died in Spain in the year 1558. He
lies at Granado.

Philip, only son to the emperor Charles the fifth, was borne the one and
twentieth Isabella Clara Eugenia in marriage to the Archduke Albert of Austria
his nephew, and in favor of the marriage he gave them all the Low Countries in
general, with the county of Bourgondie, and died the

Albert Archduke of Austria and Isabella Clara Eugenia, according to the
donation, took possession of the Low Countries, which remained under the
obedience of Philip the second, father to the said Isabella, and with the
consent of Philip the third, king of Spain etc. They sought by mildness to
unite all the provinces of the Low Countries under their obedience, but not
able to effect it, they used force: but after nine years war,

OF THE GENERAL ESTATES
The Contents.
1 A Catalogue and description of the lands and countries which the united
Estates of the Low Countries hold. 2. Situation of the Island of Zeland, and
others that lie near unto it: their confines and circuit. 3. Description:of
Holland, and the chief towns, among others of Amsterdam. 4. Of the duchy of
Gueldres, and her towns. 5. Of the country of Oueryssel. 6. Vtrecht. 7. East
and West Eriseland. 8. Groningue. 9. Quality of the air of the Island of
Holland, Zeland, etc. their good pastures, and the often ^^^^hquakes in the
Island of Holland: Of the humor and disposition of the people of those Islands,
(...) of Vtrecht, Friseland, and other provinces: and of the tall stature of
the Hollanders. 10. ^iches of the united Estates of the Low Countries, growing
by traffic at Sea, pastures, and ^^hing in Holland, pastures and wheat in
Zeland and horses in Friseland. 11. The forts and 12. The government and
policy of this Common weal both at land and sea: their manner of assembling
the Estates: How matters are propounded and resolved by the seven Provinces: Of
the Council of State of the said Provinces: Of how many persons, and what
gentlemen it did consist in the year 1600. 13. Of the Estates of the Province
of Holland, their manner of assembling, and what towns of the Province are
called unto it: and the chief points for the which they are commonly called.
Of the great Council and Chambers of accounts, and money of the said province.
14. Of the Estates of the county of Zeland, and of what towns it does
consist. 15. Of the principality and estate of Vtrecht, with the members. 16.
Of the estate and seigneurie of Friseland, divided into three quarters: Of the
17. Of the estate of Oueryssel, consisting of three jurisdictions. 18. Of the
estate and government of the town of Grouingue, and the Ommelands, or
country jurisdictions, divided into three parts. 19. Of the religion of the
united Pro^^^es, and what sects are crept in amongst them. 20. Articles of
truce concluded in the year 1609, betwixt the Archdukes, and the general
Estates of the united Provinces. 21. Genealogy of the Earls of Holland,
Zeland, and Lords of Friseland.

FOr as much as that part which they commonly call at this day the general
Estates of the united Provinces of the Low Countries, is a kind of
Commonweal, and that the king of Spain and Archdukes

Siri^gue: It has been long in great esteem by reason of the Port, and the
great concourse of Merchants, but since that the haven has been choakt up
with sand, it is neither so rich nor so much esteemed. Brouuershaue has scarce
any inhabitants but fishermen, which live by the sea. Duuelande has four
miles in circuit; there are none but villages in it: In the year 1530, it was
overflowed by the sea, but being well fortified with banks, and laid dry,
this loss was soon recovered. Tolen lies next unto B^aba^^, and is divided
from it by a little strait. There is the little town of Tolen, and not far
from it, the pleasant place of S. Martins Dijck. On this side of the Escaut
toward the East the chief Island is Walkeren, which lies on the East toward
Brabant, on the Elizabeth queen of England deceased, and likewise Briele, for
certain sums of money which she lent them: in the which the king of England
has an English governor and a garrison entertained

Zuydbeuelande is of a good bigness, it looks toward the banks of Brabant
and Flanders, but of late years it has been so overflowed, as it is less by
the half: The town of Romersualle seems to be torn from it, the which is
environed with the sea, and does not subsist but by the trade of salt: there
the earls of Zeland were accustomed to take the oath. On the West part of this
Island is the town of Goese upon a mouth of the Escaut, which they call
Scenge: this town is more pleasant than great, and it is alone

Nortbeuelande (with the town of Cortchene, and many villages) was drowned
with an innundation which happened in the year 1532, but they recovered it by
little and little. Vuolferdijcke is a little Island, in the which there are but
two villages. And to take all Zeland together, it has ten towns, and one
hundred villages, or some few more. This province having endured much, all her
towns having been either forced by famine or siege, the banks of the
country broken, so as they past with boats into the land; they have in the end
freed themselves from those miseries, and flourish again in traffic, people,
and shipping, acording to their devise, Luctor and emer go.

Holland has for bounds upon the West, the British sea; upon the North, the

The towns are Dordrect, otherwise Dort, Delst, Leyden, Harlem, Amsterdam,
Goude, Naerden, Mude, Wesop, Edam, Parmerende, Alcmen, Enkuysen, Horn,
Rotterdam, etc. Dort is the chief town of all Holland; it is rather long than
broad, and has 2 very long streets, besides many little ones, which are
exceeding ^aire: there is a very fair church the which is converted to a
temple, whereas the Protestants do preach, and there Ptolomee and Pli^ie call
the midst of the mouth of Rhin. Amsterdam is at this day one of the best
towns of Europe, and built upon piles like unto Venice: about two hundred and
eighty years since, Giselbert of Amstell fortified it, and made good rampires,
gates, and towns; but all being burnt through the envy of her neighbors, she
began to be walled about in the year 1482: it is now inhabited by all sorts of
Nations, and has gotten all the traffic and reputation from Antuerpe: you
shall not only see dwelling there Italians, Spaniards, than any other: her
towns have been besieged, taken, burnt, etc. but in the end,

Tacitus makes mention, but at this day there is no memory thereof. Munster
holds, that the first lords of this country (who then and long after carried
no greater title than that of Aduocats) were two brethren issued from the
French, Winchard and Leopold du Pont, who built a castle called Pont Gelder,
which castle has long retained the name of Pont, and is joined to the town
of Geldre, which has given name to the whole province. It has for limits upon
the North, the country of Friseland; upon the NorthWest, a gulf of the
Germane sea, commonly called the Zuyderzee; upon the South, the river of Meuse
diuides it from Brabant; to the South-East is the duchy of Iuliers; upon the
East, it is divided from the duchy of Cleues by the river of Wahal at the
Island of Sgrauenweerdt, whereas collonell Schenck built his sconse; and
toward the West, is

The duchy of Geldres and county of Zurphen contains the towns of Arnhem,
Zurphen, Nymegen, and Ruremond, which are the four chief of the whole
country, and make the four quarters of these two provinces, and are seated
upon four diverse rivers, and subject to four several Bishops. There are in
this province Venlo upon the Meuse, Geldre, Stralen, Erckelens, and
Wachkendoncke, in the Champian country, Hatten upon Issel, Elbruch and
Harderwicke upon the Zuyderzee, Wageningen upon the Rhin, Tyel and Bomel upon
the Wahal: there are many other towns which in old time have been walled, but
they had been spoiled, and in these last wars vtte^ly ruined, the which be
Keppell, Burch, Ghendt, Battemburch, Montfort, Each, and others, the which

Arnhem was in old time called Arnacum, it is a good town and spacious, seated
upon the right bank of the river of Rhin, half a league from the which is
Fossa Drusiana, now called Yssell Dort; whereas Drusus to keep his soldiers
from idleness, caused them to dig a channel, which drew the water out of the
Rhin into the river of Yssell. This town of Arnhem is the chief of the
valley, which is one of the four quarters of the duchy of Gelders; under
which town are the towns of Hattem, Harderwijck, Elbruch, and Wageningen,
with many villages and castells, with their jurisdictions, subject to the
justice of the Drossart of that quarter, the which is environed by the
Zuyderzee, the rivers of Rhin and Yssel. Touching the spirituality, the town
of Ar^hem before the

Nymeg^n is a free town and a fee of the Empire: some write that it was built
by Magus king of Gaul, and was called Nouiomagum; it stands upon the river of
Wahal. Hessell the son of the king of the Cattlres ^auoured this town, being
borne there, and did enlarge it, so as the lower part of the town is yet
called Hesselmarckt: the castle is very ancient, and stands yet upon the
top of a little hill ouerlooking the town, the which some say was built by
Caesar, to command the country thereabouts. This town makes a quarter, and
under it are comprehended the towns of Bomel and Tiel, which are walled, and
Ghendt which lies open, yet has it the privileges of a town. William king of
the Romans, earl of Holland etc. to the earl of Geldres, for one and twenty
thousand marks of silver, upon condition that he should redeem it at a
certain time, or else he should enjoy the town with the jurisdiction as his
own inheritance; the which the Emperor Rodulphus did afterward confirm,

Ru^^^ond is a good town, strong, and pleasing, seated upon the river of
Meuse, joining to the mouth of that of Ruoer: It is the chief town of one of
the four quarters of G^e^^es, under whose jurisdiction are comprehended the
towns of Venlo, Guelder, Str^^^^, Wachtendonck, and Erckelans, all walled and
strong.

Z^^phen is a county of it self, and numbered for one of the seuenteen
Provinces. This townestands upon the right bank of the river of Issell: It was
united by marriage unto the duchy of Gueldres, and makes one of the four
quarter. The towns and jurisdictions

The county or country of Oueryssel was in former times under the
principality of Charles 5 having obtained the temporaltie of both diocesses
from the bishop, he made two provinces, the (...) of Vtrecht, and the other of
Oueryssel, the which are numbered among the 17 pro^^nces, and are now subject to
the united Estates. This country is so called, for that it li^s beyond the
river of Issell. It has upon the North side Friseland, and a part of the
country of Groningue; upon the South the county of Zutphen; to the East
Westphalia;

Wildeb^ord the first Bishop, who was an Englishman: and this estate did
consist of two diocesses, the one called the lower, which is the pro^^^ce of
Vtrecht; and the other the high diocese, which is the country of Ouerys^el,
as I have said: But He^rie of Bauaria, Bishop of Vtrecht, being expelled out of
the town by ^is own ^ubiects, and oppressed by the duke of Gueldres, about the
year 1527, res^gned all his right and in^^rest to the temporal jurisdictions
of the countries of V^^^^t and Oueryssell, to the emperor Charles the fifth,
who restored him to the posses^ion of his spiritual dignity. This country of
Vtrecht has for bounds toward the Er^so, who came and planted himself there,
Alexander in his conquests of Asia, after whose death they came with certain
ships into those parts, and there



The united Provinces of the Low Countries are all at this day in better estate
than the other Provinces, for that they have the sea free and open, great store
of shipping, the Ocean toward the North, and some rivers at commandment,
people in great abundance, which have come thither from other provinces, upon
hope of traffic and gain, and to have liberty of religion without
molestation, yea for navigations, for the which the country is very
commodious, and is much increased by the war (a paradox which seems strange,
and contrary both to nature and reason) and wonderfully flourishing, as

The Quali^^^.


As for Holland, the ground does sometimes shake under their wagons and horses;
and there happened an accident which made it appear that the ground is hollow,
for that a cow, being fallen into a hole, was found dead in the sea three days
after: Moreover, a part of Holland is called Waterland, that is, a country of
Waters. It is divided by many pooles and marshes, and by many channels
artificially drawn from these rivers and from the sea. And although it were in
former times full of woods and forests, yet at this day there are few trees,
by reason of the great humiditie. The air is sweet and whole

The country of Oueryssell is for the most part plain and fertile, among
other things it bears good wheat. The country of Gueldres abounds chiefly in
corn, and it has very good pastures; so as they send very lean cattle out
of Denmark to be fatted there.



Friseland is a flat country and morish: there are many meadows whereas they
feed great store of cattle: they have a kind of soil whereon they make
turses, which burn like coal, but they are graie, and keep fire well with a
little wood. They sow little corn, for that the country is so low, especially
toward the sea, the which from the beginning of Autumn until the spring is
in a manner all covered with water, so as the towns and villages in places
which stand high, are environed with good banks and defenses; but by their
pastures and turfes, the inhabitants have corn, wine, and wood, from other



The Manners.
THe inhabitants of Zeland have good wits, they are forecasting and subtle, of
a mean stature, notwithstanding that the Annals report that William the Good
Earl of Holland did carry with him unto the marriage of Charles the Fair, a
Zelander of huge stature, in regard of whom many tall men seemed but dwarfes,
and so strong as he could list up with either hand a hogshed of beer, and they
write that he could carry

The people of Holland exceed all the other Nations of Europe in stature, and
as for the women they are commonly fair, but their beauty does not last,
neither is it so

As for the inhabitants of Guelderland and Zu^phen, they were the last which in
Caesar's time came under the power of the Romans, and the first which freed
themselves in the declining of the Empire.

In Vtrecht you have a great number of civil gentlemen. The gentle women go
all attired after the French fashion, unless they carry a huque, which is a
black vale which

As for the Frisons, they are many in number, and some hold them to be very
valiant, but I find no reason to settle this impression, they go on like other
men when they are commanded; but they show no such heat of courage: they are
so proud, as they are altogether insupportable: most of them are given to
merchandise. They hate adultery much, and love liberty.

The Riches.
After the French account it is 300 thousand pounds starling.
as they hold that the butter and cheese of Holland is yearly worth above a
million of gold, whereof besides their own provision, they do yearly send
great store into England, German, France, and Spain. They do also make great
commodity of red Madder, which they call Meedecrappe, the which they use to
keep cloth from staining. They make great revenues of their fishing, but
especially of their voiages they

Zeland has also store of Meedecrap, which they send into all Europe, and
return great profit, as also of Coriander seed. Their pastures are also very
profitable, feeding great store of cattle, whereby their owners grow rich:
these cattle are not only greater than any other, but of a most delicat taste,
by reason of the grass that has a property to feed


IT is scarce credible without sight, what the strength is of those countries
which the

In Guelderland there is Nimeguen, a town that is strong both by art and
situation. Arnham is one of their best places. Zurphen is of good importance,
but not so desensible

I should never make an end if I should set down in particular all the strong
places which are in this country, as the Tolus, or Skinks Sconce, which is
almost impregnable, built betwixt the wall and the Yssel; and in like manner S.
Andrews fort, Tiel, and Briele, which are able to withstand the greatest
armies. It shall suffice to say, that this country is so well fortified on all
sides, as an army that would win it foot by foot, were it very strong, and
always in field, should advance very little in a long time. We must also
consider, that the Estates have means to drown the whole country (if they
see themselves

The Government.


The particular Estates of every province do yearly choose and depute so many
persons respectively, and not by voices. So as at this day the resolutions are
taken in

In the Council of State of the said united Provinces, they give every man his
opinion, Henry Frederic of Nassau, master George Gilpin Agent for the king of
great Brittanie. For the duchy of Gueldres the seigneuries of Oyen and
Bryenem. The seigneur of Matenesse for the Nobility, Buren of Dordrect and
Boulens of Amsterdam for Holland and West-Friseland, Fernand Alleman for
Zeland, Foocke for Vtrecht, Kaminga and Frans Iansen for Friseland, Itterson
for Oueryssel, and Rengers for Groningue and the Ommelandes, with their
secretaries Christian Hu^gens, and Zuylen.

The Estates of every province hold their rights, privileges, and customs,
which they



The convocation of the said noblemen, gentlemen, and towns of Holland, and the
principal points for the which it is made, is managed by the Aduocat of the
country, and by the Counselors appointed in the said estates: which Aduocat
makes the proposition, and the opinions of the said noblemen and gentlemen
being put into form, he delivers them with pregnant reason. Which done, he
demands in order the opinions of the towns, and in case there be varitie and
diversity of opinions, he labors to reconcile them, concluding according unto
the plurality of voices, according unto the which the

The chief points why they hold the said assembly, are touching war, by sea
and land, for the contributions of money for the reformation of all abuses that
may happen, for the quiet and tranquillity of the country, to ^ntertaine an
union and concord throughout all

The said deputed counselors have not only the charge for the entertaining of
re

In matters of ordinary justice as well betwixt the inhabitants of the
country as strangers, the presidents and they of the great council have
supreme authority in the said countries, who judge soueraignely and by decree;
from whose sentences there is no

The governor, president, and counselors of the provincial court of the said
provinces, have the knowledge and mannaging of many matters concerning the
government of the country, in cases of civil and criminal justice, as also
of causes which come by appeal from inferior towns and villages. They make
their acts and commissions in the name of the said governor, president, and
council: but they do justice in the right of the sovereignty of the said
province. For the administration of the revenues there is a chamber of the
masters, auditors, and registers of accounts.

Maurice of Nassau etc. as also the general Estates of the united Provinces
hold their assemblies there; and the Estates of Holland, and their deputies,
the ordinary counselors, the presidents, and they of the great council, they
of the provincial council, with the Chamber of accounts.

Besides all these counsels, there is also a council of Brabant for the
towns and villages

In the government of the towns and the united provinces, and namely in the
province of Holland, and West-Friseland, they observe their ancient rights,
privileges, statutes, and customs, where for the most part there is a Baili^e
of Escoue^, who is chosen by the greatest part of the said Estates, as their
officer. There also are Bourgmaisters,

The bourgmaisters and sherifes are yearly renewed, according to the
denomination of double the number made by the vuoetschapen, and chosen by the
governor of the province, or (in his absence) by the president and them of the
provincial council, although though that in some towns the election of
bourgmaisters is absolute, and in some the

The sherifes in most towns are seven in number, who have the knowledge and
determining of all matters both civil and criminal. The treasurers, masters
of works, and masters of orphans are in most towns yearly created by the
bourgmaister: the treasurers have the receipt of the towns revenue, whereof
they give an account: the masters of the works have the oversight of the
public buildings: the masters of the orphans have the superintendencie and
care of pupills goods, to the end they may be governed

In regard of money that is coined throughout all the united provinces of the
Low Countries, there are three generals, who being called by the said general
Estates, come whether soever they be sent for to advise, touching matters of
mint.

The said county of Holland and West Friseland have two mints, the one is
ancient and more privileged, for Holland, in the town of Dort; the other for
West-Friseland,



The said county of Zeland has drawn unto it self, the Chamber of accounts
touching the revenues, and generally of al receipts belonging to that Estate,
the which in former



The principallity and Estate of Vtrecht consists at this day of three members,
that is



The estate of Oueryssel, carries that name for that it lies beyond the river
of Yssel. All the town of Oldenzeel, Otmarsum, and others. Voolenhouen has a
town and (...) Charles the fist, and to Phi^^^ his son, upon condition that
they should maintain them in their privileges; they have upon breach thereof
withdrawn themselves with the other united provinces, from the obedience of
the said king Philip. The said province has never acknowledged but two members
in her government, that is to say, the Nobillitie, out of which the governors
are chosen, and the three Imperial towns, Deuenter, Campen, and Zuuo^^ by



The Ommelands are divided into three quarters, that is to say, Fiuelingo,
Hunsingo,


IN all the countries which the Estates hold they suffer no exercise of the
Romish

Martin Luther first began to preach against the Pope and his doctrine, the
Emperor Charles the fifth did for the advancement of the Romish religion, and
to root Luthers doctrine out of the Netherlands (where it did much increase,
and had taken good footing) send forth rigorous proclamations generally against
all sects and kinds of religion, yet they were grounded upon a pretense of
punishing the wicked practices and actions of sectaries and heretics, as
against men living without all rule, order, or law, as they inferred. By virtue
of these proclamations, during the Emperors time, many were put to death for
small causes; and to keep them from multiplying, the Emperor thought it Marie
Queen of Hongarie then Regent, to go in person to the Emperor her brother, in
the year 1550, being at an assembly of the princes of Germany at Ausbourg;
where she acquainted him with the estate of the country, and procured a kind
of moderation of the edicts touching religion, and that the Inquisition should
not proceed. After his death, king Philip his son finding that the number of
them that made profession of the Protestants religion increased daily in the
Netherlands, notwithstanding all the rigorous edicts, whereby he sought to
ruin them: he commanded, there Paul the fourth to erect fourteen new
Bishoprics in the Low Countries.

The Provinces fearing that this new erection of Bishops was but a device to
bring in the Inquisition, opposed themselves, and sent their deputies into
Spain to have them disannulled, the which the Clergy did in like manner, but
they could by no suit be freed from the fear of these new Bishops (which were
so many Inquisitors) so as the people

In the year 1565 the king of Spain made his pleasure then known plainly by
his letters to the duchess of Parma gouernesse of the Netherlands, and what he
would have observed touching religion: first, That the edicts made by the
Emperor and himself should be put in execution: secondly, That the Inquisitors
should be favored in the exercise of their charge, for the good of religion,
and that the Inquisition should be put in practice:thirdly, That she should
assist the new Bishops, and cause the decrees of the council of Treat to be
observed: with which she acquainted the provincial Councels and but all their
suit having no success, being fed with many delays, the baser sort fell

In the year 1566, Marguerite of Austria, duchess of Parma, the Gouernesse,
having dissolved the union of the noblemen (who we^e dispersed and retired to
their houses upon her letters of assurance) began to arm, making dilligent
search, and punishing all such as had assisted at the breaking down of images:
she also made an edict forbidding expressly the preaching, and all exercises of
religion, as well public as private; commanding generally, that the edicts
concerning it, and the Inquisition should be put in

The baron of Brederode, and other of the chief confederats, seeing that all
tended to the ruin of their country, and the rooting out of the Nobility,
sent unto the Regent to crave leave to come to court, and to acquaint her with
the wrong which was done them, contrary to the assurance which she had given
them; but she would not allow of their coming: whereupon they sent petitions
unto her, the which contained, That for as much

After all these complaints and answers, the Gouernesse propounded a new oath
to all governors of provinces, knights of the order, and other noblemen, and
counselors of State; by the which among other things, they did swear to be
faithful to the king, and with all their means to maintain and defend the
Romish religion, to root out all new religion, and doctrine, and to punish all
breakers of images, and robbers of churches, Hcoch straten, refused it, saying,
That the oath of their order, and of their governments was s^fficient, finding
themselves much grieved that the duchess should doubt of their loyalties. The
like answer was made by the lord of Brederode. After this oath, the duchess
caused all them that had carried arms, broken images, or spoiled churches, to
be apprehended and excuted. They expelled the ministers out of Antuerpe, and
their places of preaching were beaten down, so as the Protestants generally,
throughout all the Netherlands, were pursued with all rigor, apprehended, and
executed, if they were but of the Consistory, or had borne any charge in the
reformed Church.

In the mean time the duke of Alba arrived with an army to be Governor of
the Lewis having been defeated in Friseland. It seemed that all had been
reduced to a good estate by the means of this victory, when as the duke by
the death of the earls of Egmont, and Horn, and of some other noblemen, had
lost the love of the nobility: and seeking also, in the year of our Lewis of
Requesens was sent to succeed the duke in his government, who sought to
relieve Middlebourg with a fleet by sea: but they were defeated, and the town
yielded by composition. After which, the Commander besieged Zirixee, which
yielded in the year 1577: the loss of which place was very prejudicial to
the prince of Orange, having in a manner nothing left but the Island of
Walcheren, wherein stand Flushing and Middlebourg. But for that there was
thirty months pay or more due unto the Spaniards, they past unto the firm
land, where mutining, they Ernest of Mansfield, and the lord of Barlemont, with
some other of the Council, in prison, for that they seemed to adhere unto the
Spaniard, and were suspected unto them of the country. The castles of Gand and
Vtrecht were besieged, and both taken. The prince of Orange was called ba^ke,
and there was a league made betwixt the Catholics and Protestants. They drew
together fifty three thousand foot, and sixteen thousand horse, and in the
same army they said Mass, and preached after the Protestants manner. By this
mean, the Protestants returned to Antuerpe, and recovered some Churches: but

At the same time, D. John of Austria came out of Spain to be governor of the
Low Countries, and applying himself to the nec^ssitie of the time, he first
made a suspension of arms, and afterward (being unfurnished of me^ and money,
and the States furnished of all things at commandment) he concluded a peace,
with the Estates of the Low Countries, called by the name a perpetual Decree,
and the Spaniards left the country. But yet D. John gave them new causes of
jealousy and distrust, filling his court with strangers, enemies to the
country, and the public quiet, most part Spaniards and resolved to hold the
pacification made at Gand, would refer the decision of all D. John of
Austria, proclaiming him and his adherents to be enemies to the king, and all
his Netherlands.

The year after, one party camped before Denremonde, and the other before
Namur, whereas D. John had assembled his troops. But the States being forced
to raise the Mathias of Austria, with the vain title of a Governor, and after
him the duke of Alencon out of of France, and duke Casimir out of Germany,
with hope of some great conquest. The Monckes and Jesuits, which refused to
hold D. John for an enemy to the State, were expelled Antuerpe, and certain
other towns. They of S. Omer and Grauelin maintained themselves in the
obedience of the king of Spain.

The Archduke Mathias, the prince of Orange, the Council of Estate, and the
general Estates, devised a religious peace (as they called it) in Antuerp, for
all towns and provinces Casimir was called by the Gantois to their aid, from
whom he received one hundred and fifty thousand florins. They refused to admit
of the Romish religion, within their town and territory: whereupon the prince
of Orange coming thither in person, in the end persuaded them to admit of the
exercise thereof, upon certain conditions and articles, so as all things were
reconciled at Gand: but afterward finding the malcontents intractable to any
agreement, they did stir up the Commons again, against the Clergy, where they
committed great insolences.

The Provinces of Artois and Haynault, with the towns of Douay, Lisle,
Orchies, D. John of Austria, was governor in the Low Countries. In Friseland
the earl of Renemberg, seized upon Groningue, and admits of the Protestants
religion. They of Vtrecht, being united with them of Holland and Zeland,
abolished the exercise of the Romish religion in their town and territory. In
the mean time, the duke of Parma had taken the town of Mastrich by force, and
the earl of Renembourg changing his opinion, reduced Groningue under the
obedience of the king of Spain. King Philip sent forth an Edict of
prosctiption against the prince of Orange, promising great rewards to him that
could kill him, whereunto the prince made an Apollogie.

The general Estates of the united Provinces of Gelderland, Holland, Zeland,
Zutphen, Friseland, Ouerissell, and Groningue, having declared prince Philip of
Austria, the second of that name king of Spain, fallen from the seigneurie of
the said Provinces, by mason of his extraordinary and violent government,
contrary to their privileges and freedoms; by him solemnly sworn: they
took upon them all the government of the polliticke Estate, and of the
religion of the said Provinces, in the year 1581, and by an edict they
absolved the subjects from their oaths, and made them take a new oath for the
preservation of their country, and obedience to the said Estates. And the
better to maintain them, they called back the duke of Anjou, brother to the
French king (who was then returned into France) at his entrance they created
him duke of Brabant, and received Baltazar Gerard, borne at Ville-Franch, in
the Franch county of Bourgondie. The duke of Parma remaining master of the
field, recovered partly by force, and partly by ^iege or treaty, the towns of
Audenarde, Ipre, Denremonde, Viluorde, Gand, Bruges, Nimeguen, Macklin, and
Bruxells, and by a long and painful siege, in the end he forced Antuerpe to
present him her keys, and Sluice in like manner.



The general Estates having thus recovered their first sovereign authority,
did in like manner settle prince Maurice of Nassau in the governments of
Holland, Zeland, and Vtrecht, and in the Admiraltie and office of captain
general of all their forces; to which offices they have since added the
government of the duchy of Guelderland, county of Zurphen, and country of
Oueryssell, the which he has held unto this day, and under whom (since the
year 1588) they have had diverse and variable success, as well for the taking
of towns, as fighting of battles (the which are too long here to relate) as
well against the prince of Parma, as the Archdukes of Austria. To conclude,
these countries Maurice of Nassau, by the seignior of Vander Ho^st and by the
m^^rend father John Ney, general of the Order of Saint Francis, and other
deputies, what propositions and reasons they used, as well unto the general
Estates and his Excellency, as to other persons, to move and persuade them
thereunto, with the answers of the general Estates, and then what past on
either part, the articles which were delivered of both sides, with the reasons
and difficulties which followed, and all that depends

The most excellent princes, the Archduke Albert and Isabella Clara Eugenia,
having caused a truce and cessation of arms to be made the sour and twentieth
day of April, in the year 1607, for eight months, with the honorable Lords,
the general Estates of the (...) Provinces of the Low countries, in quality
and holding them as Estates, Proui^^^ and free countries, over whom they had no
pretense: which truce must of necessi^ie be ratified with the like declaration
made by the Catholic king, for as much as might concern him, and that the
said ratification and declaration should be delivered good peace, or a truce
for many years. According to this procuration, the Archdukes by their letters
of commission of the seven and twentieth of the said month, had named Ambrose
Spinola, marquis of Benaffro, knight of the order of the Golden Fleece, of the
Council of Estate and war, to his Catholic majesty, Master of the Camp,
and General of his armies, etc. John Richardot knight, seignior of Barli, of
the Council of Estate, and first President of the privy council to their
highnesses etc. John de M^ncicidor of the council of war, and Secretary to
his Catholic majesty; the John Ney, general of the order of Saint Francis;
and Lewis Verreyken knight, Audiencier and first Secretary unto their
highnesses: by virtue of letters of procuration from the said Archdukes of the
one part, to treat (as well in their name, as in the name of the said
Catholic king) with William Lewis earl of Nassau, Catzenellenboge, Vianden,
Dietz, and seigniour of Bi^^ten, Governor and Captain general of Friseland,
of the town of Groningue, and of the Ommelandes and Drenthe, etc. the seignior
of Walrauen, lord of Brederode and Vianen, Castellan of Vtrecht, seignior of
Ameyde, Cloetingue etc. Cornelius of Gent, Seignior of Loenen, and
Meynersuuycke, Castellan and Justice of the Empire, and of the town of
Nimiguen: John of Oldenbarneuelt, Knight, Seignior of Tempel, Rondenris, etc.
Aduocat and Keeper of the great James of Maldere, Knight, Seignior of Heyes
etc. the first, and representing the Nobles in the assembly of the Estates,
and in the council of the county of Zeland: Gerard of Reuesse, Seignior of
Vander Aa, Stref-kerke, Nieuleckerlandt, etc. Gellius Hillama Doctor of the
laws, and Councellor in the Council of Friseland: John Sloeth Seignior of
Sallicke, Drossart of the country of Vollenho, and Castellan of the Seigneurie
of Cuinder: and Abel Coenders of Helpen, Seignior of Faen and Cantes, in the
names of the Estates of the united Provinces, also by virtue of their letters
of procuration, and commission on the other part, who by the mediation and
advice of Peter Ieannin Knight, Baron of Chagny and Elie of La Place, Knight,
Seignior of Russy, Castellan of Machaut, Councellor in the said Council of
Estate, and Gentleman in ordinary of the kings Chamber, Baylife and Captain
of Vitry le Francois, and his Ambassador Leeger, with the general Estates of
the Low Countries; Sir Richard Spencer Knight, Gentleman in ordinary of the
Priuie-Chamber to the king of great Britain, and his Ambassador
extraordinary, with the general Estates of the Low Countries; and Sir Ralphe
Win^oud Knight, Ambassador in ordinary, and Councello^ of State in the said
united Provinces. All which agreed after the manner and form that follows.



2 That the said truce shall be good, firm, loyal, and inviolable for the
term of twelve years, during the which, there shall be a cessation of all
acts of host^^^tie, in what sort soever, betwixt the said Lords, the King,
Archdukes, and general Estates, as well by sea, and other waters, as by land,
in all their realms, countries, lands, and seigneuries, and for all their
subjects and inhabitants, of what quality and condition soever they be,
without a^y exception of place or person.

3 Every one shall hold and enjoy effectually, the countries, towns, places,
lands, and

4 The subjects and inhabitants of the countries of the said Lords, the King,
Archdukes, and Estates, shall have all good correspondencie, and friendship
together, during the said truce, without any feeling or revenge of the wrongs
and losses which they have received heretofore: and they may also frequent, and
remain in the countries of the one and the other, and there use their
traffic and commerce with all assurance, as well by sea and other waters, as
by land; the which notwithstanding the said king means should be restrained,
and limited to the realms, countries, lands, and seigneuries, which he holds



6 The subjects and inhabitants of the countries of the said King, Archdukes,
and Estates, trafficking in the countries one of another, shall not be bound to
pay greater customs and impositions than their own subjects, and those of
their friends and allies, which shall be least charged.



8 In like manner the merchandise, masters of ships, pilots, mariners, their
ships, goods, wares, and other commodities belonging unto them, shall not be
arrested, nor seazed^^, by virtue of any general, or particular warrant, or
commission, nor for any cause what soever, of war or otherwise, neither yet
under pretext, that they will employ them for the preservation or defense of
the country. Yet they mean not to

^ And in regard of the commerce of the Low Countries, and of the customs and
impo^^^s, which shall be raised of their commodities: if it be hereafter sound
that they exceed, and are prejudicial; upon the first requisition, that shall
be made of either part,

10 I^ any sentences or judgments have been given, betwixt persons of diverse
parties not defended, be it either in civil or criminal causes, they shall
not be put in execution against the parties so condemned, nor against their
goods during the said truce.

11 There shall be no letters of Mark, or Reprisals, granted during the said
time, unless it be with knowledge of the cause, and in cases allowable by the
imperial laws and constitutions, and according unto the order established by
them.

12 They shall not approach, enter, nor stay in the ports, havens, and roades,
of one another country, with any such number of ships and soldiers as may
give cause of

13 They whose goods have been seized on, and forf^ited, by reason of the
wars, or their heirs, having just cause, shall enjoy the said goods, during
the said truce, and shall take possession of their own private authority, by
virtue of this present treaty, and not be forced to have recourse unto
justice: notwithstanding all incorporations to the treasure, engagement, gifts,
treaties, accords, and transactions, or any renuntiations which have been made
in the said transactions, to exclude them, to whom the said goods shall belong,
yet with this charge, that they shall not dipose of them, neither yet change,
nor

14 The which also shall take place, to the benefit of the heirs of the
deceased Lord the Prince of Orange, namely to the rights which they have to the
saltpits in the county of Bourgondie, which shall be restored unto them, with
the woods which depend thereon. And as for the suit of Chastel-belin, begun
during the life of the deceased prince of Orange, in the court at Macklin,
against the Catholic kings proctor general, the said Archdukes promise
faithfully, That they shall have justice done them within one year, after that
they have begun their pursuit, without any delay, and with all justice and

15 If the Fisq or Treasurer, has caused any goods confiscated to be sold of
either part, they to whom they shall belong, by virtue of this present treaty,
shall be bound to content themselves with the interest of the price, by reason
of the sixteenth penie, to be paid yearly during the truce, by the care of
such as enjoy the said goods, otherwise it shall be lawful for them to go unto
the land and inheritance that is sold.

16 But if the said sales had been made by the course of justice, for the good
and lawful debts of those, to whom the said goods were wont to belong, it
shall be lawful for them, or their heirs, having just cause, to redeem them,
paying the price within one year, to be reckoned from the day of this present
treaty, after which they shall be no more

17 It is not meant notwithstanding, that this redeeming shall be allowed for
houses situated in towns, sold upon this occasion, for the great prejudice
and notable loss which the pourchaser should receive, by reason of the
reparations, and alterations, which they may have made in the said houses, the
clearing whereof would be long and difficult.

18 And as for reparations, and betterings made in other houses, and places
which are sold, where this redeeming is allowed, if they be pretended, the
ordinary Judges shall do right, upon knowledge of the cause, the land
remaining liable for the sum whereunto the reparation shall amount: yet shall
it not be lawful for the said buyers, to use any

19 If any fortifications, and public works have been made of either part,
with permission and authority of the superiors, in places subject to
restitution by this present treaty, the proprietaries thereof shall be bound
to content themselves with the estimation

20 As for the lands of churches, colleges, and other religious places lying
within the united Provinces, the which were members depending upon churches,
benefices, and colleges which are under the Archdukes obedience; that which
has been sold since the first day of January 1607 shall be restored unto
them, and they shall enter into it by their own private authority, without any
minister of justice, to enjoy it during the truce, and not to dispose thereof,
as has been formerly said: but as for those which have been sold before the
said time, or given in payment by the Estates of any of the

21 They to whom any lands confiscated, are to be restored, shall not be bound
to pay the arrerages of rents, charges, and duties, especially affected and
assigned upon the said lands, for the time which they have not enjoyed them,
and if they be molested of either part, they shall be sent away quit, and
absolved.

22 They shall not pretend also for any lands sold or granted, any thing but
the remainders, or arrerages whereunto they are bound that are in possession,
by the treaties

23 Judgments given for lands, and rights confiscated, with parties that have
acknowledged the Judges, and have been lawfully defended, shall hold, and the
parties condemned shall not be allowed to contradict them, unless it be by
ordinary courses.

24 The said Archdukes shall every one for their parts appoint Officers and
Magistrates for the administration of justice and policy, in towns and
places of strength, the which by this present treaty must be restored unto the
proprietaries, to enjoy them during the truce.

25 Moueables forfeited, and fruits which are fallen before the conclusion of
this

26 Moving actions which have been referred by the said Archdukes or Estates
to the benefit of private debtors, before the first day of January 1607 shall
be extinct of either part.

27 The time which has run during the war, beginning from the year 1567 unto
this present, shall not be reckoned to induce prescription betwixt those that
were of contrary parties.

28 They which have retired themselves into a neuter country during the war,
shall also enjoy the benefit of this truce, and may remain where they please,
or return to their ancient houses, there to dwell with all assurance,
observing the laws of the coun

29 There shall not any new forts be built, during the said truce, within the
Low Countries, of eitherpart.

30 The Lords of the house of Nassau, shall not be pursued, nor molested
(during the said truce) in their persons or goods, either for the debts
contracted by the deceased prince of Orange, from the year 1567 unto his death,
or for the arrerages due since the feisure of the lands that were charged.

31 If there be any contrauention made of the truce by any private persons,
without it shall be lawful for them to relieve themselves according to
custom, either by

32 All exheredations, and dispositions made in hatred of the war, are declared
void, and as if they had notbeene.

33 The subjects and inhabitants of the said Archdukes and Estates, of what
quality and condition soever, are declared capable to succeed one an other, as
well by testament, as ab intestato, according to the custom of the place; and
if any successions did heretofore fall unto any of them, they shall be
maintained and enjoy them.

34 All prisoners taken in wa^ shall be de delivered on either side, without
paying any ransom.

35 And to the end that this present treaty may be the better observed, the
said King,

36 They promise moreover, not to do any thing in prejudice of this present
treaty, nor suffer to be done directly, or indirectly, and if it were done, to
cause it to be repaired without any difficulty or delay: and for the
observation of all abouementioned, the said King, and Archdukes bind themselves
and their successors respectiuelie, and for the validity of the said bond
renounce all laws, customs, or any thing whatsoever to the

37 This present treaty shall be ratified and confirmed by the said King,
Archdukes, and Estates, and delivered from the one unto the other in good and
due form, within four days: and as for the ratification of the said king,
the said Archdukes have promised, and shall be bound to deliver it within three
months in good and due form, to the end that the said Lords the Estates,
their subjects and inhabitants may effectually enjoy the fruits of this present
treaty, with all security.

38 The said treaty shall be proclaimed where it does belong, presently after
the ratification made by the said Lords, Archdukes, and Estates, all acts of
hostility ceasing.

Thus it was made and concluded, in the town and city of Antuerpe, the ninth
of

P. Ieannin, Elie de la Place, Ric, Spencer, Ralfe Windewood, Ambrose Spinola,
Fr. John Ney, le Pres. Richardot, Io. de Mancicidor, L. Verreycken, William
Lewis Earl of Nassau, W. Brederoda, Cornelius de Gent, John de Oldenbarneuelt,
I. de Malder^, G. de Renesse, G. Hillama, I. Sloeth, A^. Coenders.

And for that they found afterward some difficulty and obscurity in the
praecedent articles, the deputies of the Archdukes, and of the united Provinces
of the Low Countries, made this declaration, and augmentation following,
whereof the tenor was as it is The general Estates of the united Provinces of
the Low Countries, To all those to whom these presents shall come, Greeting. We
make it known, that having viewed and examined the points and articles which
have been concluded the seventh of this present month of January here at the
Hage, betwixt the deputies of the most excellent Archdukes Albert of Austria,
and Isabella Clara Eugenia, and Ours, by virtue of the procurations given
respectively to the said deputies, touching some difficulties and ambiguities
proceeding from the treaty of truce, have agreed the ninth of April 1609 in
the town of Antuerpe, betwixt the said Archdukes and Us of the one part, and
propounded on the other part by the officers and subjects respectively, and
taken to be duly Balthazar of Robiano, Treasurer general of the revenues and
finances of the said Lords the Archdukes, Lewis Verreycken Knight, Seigneur of
Hamme, Councellor of the Council of war, Audiencer and first Secretary to
their Highnesses, and John Baptista Maes, Councellor and Aduocat Fiscall of the
Council of Brabant for the Archdukes, Henry of Brienen the elder, Seigneur of
Synderen, John Oldenbarneuels Knight, Seigneur of Tempel, Ronderys, etc.
Aduocat, and Keeper of the great Seal of the Charters and Registers of Holland
and East-Friseland, James of Maldere, Knight, ^^igneur of Hayes, etc. the
first, and representing the Nobility at the Estates, and in the Council of
the Country of Zeland, Iustus of Rysembourg, Seigneur of Rysembourg, first
Bourgmaister of the town of Vtrecht, Tinco of Ornama, Justice of Scooterland,
Ernest of Itterson, Drossart of Tuuent, and Abel Coendres of Helpen, Seigneur
of Faen and Cantes, on the behalf of the general Estates of the united
Provinces.

1 First, That the Inhabitants of the united Provinces of the Low Countries,
coming into the Countries and Provinces under the Archdukes obedience, shall
have, and enjoy (governing themselves according to the said treaty) the same
liberty that the subjects of the king of great Britain have: and to the end
that Articles which concern it shall be sent unto all governors, magistrates,
and officers, and they of the united Provinces of the Low Countries may,
throughout all their Highnesses obedience, employ such Aduocats, Proctors,
Notaries, Sollicitors, and Executours, as they shall think good, who (being
required) shall be appointed by the ordinary Judges.



3 The said Lords the Archdukes, and the Estates may not receive, without their
limits of ^ither part, goods, passing either by water or by land, entering or
going forth.

4 The subjects of the said Archdukes, and Estates, shall reciprocally enjoy in
the countries one of another, their ancient freedoms and rights of customs,
the which they did quietly enjoy before the war.

5 The frequentation, conversation, and commerce betwixt the subjects
respectively shall not be hindered, and all lets shall be taken away.



7 All lands concealed, or rights, moueables or immoueables, rents, actions,
debts, or any other thing which has not been seized by the Treasurer upon
good certificat, before the ninth of April, in the year 1609, the
Proprietaries and their heirs, or they

8 The trees which have bin cut since the last day of January, in the yea^e
1609, and at

9 The fruits, hire of houses, farms, and revenues of seigneuries, lands,
tenths, fishing, rents, and other revenues of lands, which (according to the
treaty) have been restored, or ought to be, falling due after the ninth of
April, in the year 1609, shall be paid for the whole year unto the
Proprietaries, their heirs, or to them that pretend any action.

10 For lands sold, or rents discharged, or the chief stock levied by the
Treasurer of either part, they shall give letters to the Proprietaries, their
heirs, or to them that

11 The hire of lands confiscated (although they have been set for many
years) shall expire with the year 1609, according to the custom of those
places where the lands and goods lie, and the said hire or rent falling due
after the ninth of April (as has been said) shall be paid unto the
Proprietaries: but withal, it is agreed, That if he which enioyes the said
land has bestowed any cost for matters concerning Harvest which does

12 The sales made of lands confiscated, or registered, since the conclusion of
the said treaty, shall be held void, and in like manner those which had been
made before, against the Accord made with certain towns in particular.

13 Satisfaction shall be made unto the Proprietarie, for lands or goods
employed in fortifications, public works, or Hospitals, according to the
nineteenth Article of the treaty.

14 The houses of private men which have been restored, or ought to be,
according to

15 If they make difficulty in any place to restore the lands and rights which
are to be restored, the Judge of the said place shall take order that
restitution may presently be made, and shall therein use the shortest course,
without any pretext that the tax has not been, paid, or otherwise, contrary
to the contents of the thirteenth Article of the treaty, whereby the
restitution may be delayed.

16 And where it shall be found that all the lands of any one of either party
have been confiscated, or registered in such sort, as he had not any means left
whereby to pay the rents and interests of his debts, made during the
confiscation or annotation, he shall not

17 It is meant, that under exheredation made in hatred of war, are also
comprehended exheredations made by reason of any thing proceeding from war,
or that depends of it.

18 No man of either party, may be hindered, directly or indirectly, changing
the place of his abode, if he pay the rights which he ought to pay, and all
lets and hindrances since the conclusion of the treaty shall be really taken
away.

19 Under the restitution of lands and rights granted by the treaty, is also
understood the lands and rights lying in the Countries of Bourgondie and
Charolois, and that

20 The said Lords the Archdukes, and the Estates, promise to accomplish, and
cause

21 Finally, it has been agreed that all and every of the points and articles
of the treaty of the ninth of April last past, whereof there has not been
any alteration expressly made, nor a more ample declaration, shall remain in
force, without any prejudice, or interest, and that whatsoever has been
herein treated, or propounded, either by word or writing, or urged of either
part, shall not tend, or be interpreted to help or hinder any one, directly or
indirectly: but as well the said Archdukes, and the general and particular

Thus agreed and concluded at the Hage in Holland, the day, month, and year
above named. In witness whereof these presents were confirmed and signed by
the deputies of either part, B. de Robiano. Verreycken. I.B. Masius. Hen. Van
Brienen de Alst, I. de Oldenbarneuelt. I. de Maldere. Iustus de Rysenbourg.
T.O. Oennama. Ernest de Ittersum. Ab. Coenders. After I. Masius Vt.

And lower, By the commandment of my said Lords the general Estates, signed,
C. Aerssen.

Philip the first of that name, they began to be united to the other Provinces
of the

The Earls of Holland, Zeland, and Lords of Friseland.
THe country of Holland was erected to an Earldom in the year of Christ
863. Charles the Bald, king of France, for the commendable verrues of Th^erry
of Aquitaine, gave him all the country of Holland with a portion of Friseland:
and afterward in the year 868 on the thirteenth of April, Zeland was given
him by Lewis king of Germany, at the request of Emme wife to king Lewis.

Thierry the second by the death of his father Count Thierry of Aquitaine, was
second

Arnold in the year 988 after the death of Count Thierry the second his
father, succeeded in the countries of Holland, Zeland, and Friseland. This
Arnold obtained of the E^peror Otho the third, to hold his counties of Holland
and Zeland, and the Estates of Fr^^^land, barely in fee of the Empire, and no
more of the crown of France, as he had done unto that day. The said earl
Arnold was slain in a battle against the Frisons the

Thierry the third of that name, after the death of his father Arnold, was the
fourth Earl of Holland and Zeland, and Lord of Friseland.

Thierry the fourth of that name, after the death of Thierry his father, was
the fifth Earl of Holland and Zeland, and Lord of Friseland: he was never
married, and died the fifteenth of May 1108, having governed his countries nine
years.

Floris the first of that name, was before Earl of East-Friseland, who after
the death of his brother Thierry the fourth, who was the fi^t Earl, was made
Earl of Holland, Zeland, etc. who having governed his countries fourteen
years, was put to rout in battle

Gertrude widow, mother and Gouernesse to young Count Thierry, son to Floris,
governed the country one year.

Robert called the Frison, married Gertrude, widow to Count Floris, with the
consent of all the Nobility, and the Estates of Holland and Zeland, who also
made him Curator of young Count Thierry son to Floris.

Godfrey the Crooked, Duke of Lorraine, was ninth Earl of Holland, and Zeland,
and Lord of Friseland, by usurpation.

Thierry the fifth of that name, tenth Earl of Holland, and Friseland, son to
Count Floris, after the death of Godfrey the Crooked, recovered his
patrimoniall rights, and entered into Holland, from the which he had been so
long expelled, and there was generally received with great joy and
magnificence, and acknowledged for their Earl and natural Lord; so as falling
sick, he died in the year 1092, the fifteenth Calends of Iulie, after that
his mother Gertrude, from the decease of her husband, had governed two years,
Robert the Frison his fatherin law eight years, Godfrey the Crooked four
years, William Bishop of Vtrecht one year, and he himself fifteen years,
making in all thirty years from the death of his father.

Floris called the Fat, the second of that name, and the eleventh Earl of
Holland, and Zeland, and Lord of Friseland, son to Count Thierry the fifth,
who having governed

Thierry the sixth of that name, son to Floris, was the twelfth Earl of
Holland, and Zeland, and Lord of Friseland, having governed his country forty
years, he died in the year 1163. He had great wars against the Frisons, and
his other neighbors.

Floris the third of that name, after the death of Thierry his father, was the
thirteenth Earl of Holland, and Zeland, and Lord of Friseland. He had much
trouble in his time, and died in the voyage of Palestina, having governed his
provinces twenty and seven years.

Thierry seventh of that name, after the death of Count Floris his father, was

Ade, the only daughter of Thierry the seventh, succeeded her father, and was
Countess the fifteenth, but she ruled but one year, and died without children.

William, the first of that name, the sixteenth Earl of Holland, and Zeland,
and Lord of Friseland, being before Earl of East-Friseland, brother to Thierry
seventh of that name, hau^^^ been expelled by the Nobility of Holland, he
made all Holland and Zeland subject, and died after he had governed the said
countries nine years, in the year 1223.

Floris the fourth of that name, by the dea^ of Count William his father, was
seventeenth Earl of Holland, and Zeland, and Lord of Friseland, who after he
had governed William being only six years old.

William the second that name, after the death of his father, was the
eighteenth Earl of Holland, and Zeland, being six years old, he was governed
by his uncle Otto Bishop Frederic, he was chosen king of Romans, and was
proclaimed Emperor by Pope Innocent, in the town of Lion, four years after
his election, who died in the year 1255, after that he had governed his
countries of Holla^^ and Zeland one and twenty years, and the Empire seven
years.

(...) fifth of that name, after the death of William his father, being only
half a year old, was nineteenth earl of Holland and Zeland, and lord of
Friseland, who died after (...) had governed his countries, by himself, and
his tutors, 42 years.

John, first of that name, twentieth earl of Holland and Zeland, etc.
succeeded his father, and died without children, the fourth of the Calends of
November, in the year Thierry the first had continued four hundred thirty
and seven years: and by his death these countries fell to the earl of
Haynault, who descended by the mother-side from the Earls of Holland.

John, earl of Haynault, second of that name, was one and twentieth earl of
Holland, and Zeland, and lord of West-Friseland: He was son to John of
Auesnes and to (...) lady Alix, sister to king William earl of Holland, etc.
and so son to the great aunt (...) ^his last earl John the first.

William, third of that name, before earl of Oosternant, by the death of his
father, was the two and twentieth earl of Holland and Zeland, and lord of
Friseland, added to his

William, fourth of that name, and three and twentieth earl of Holland and
Zeland, and lord of Friseland, and earl of Haynault, after the death of his
father William, called the Good; he was slain in an encounter against the
Frisons, and died without children, the four and twentieth of September 1346.

M^^gaerite the empress, wife to the emperor Lewis of Bauaria, the four and
twentieth, ruling in Holland and Zeland, etc. sister to Count William the
fourth, was in the same year 1346 honorably received, and acknowledged Lady
and Princess of the said

William of Bauaria, fifth of that name, eldest son to the Emperor Lewis of
Bauaria and to the Lady Marguerite, was the five and twentieth earl of
Holland and Zeland, lord of Friseland, and earl of Haynault.

Alb^rt of Bauaria, brother to William of Bauaria, first of that name, was six
and twentieth ^arle of Holland and Zeland, lord of Friseland, and earl of
Haynault.

William of Bauaria, sixth of that name, after the death of his father Albert of
Bauaria, was seven and twentieth earl of Holland and Zeland, lord of
Friseland, and also earl of Haynault.

^^queline of Bauaria, only daughter and heir to William of Bauaria, sixth of
that name, succeeded after the death of her father, in all his ^eigneuries and
earledomes, being about seue^teene years old: and in the same year 1417 she was
received, and took possession of hi^ hereditarie countries, of Holland,
Zeland, and Friseland, as she had done before in Ha^nault. And yet to the
prejudice of the said Iacqueline, John of Bauaria tearming him^^^fe Tutor of
Holland, obtained also from the Emperor Sigismond, uncle to his wi^e^^^
counties of Holland and Zeland, and seigneurie of Friseland, in fealty and
hom^ge* (...) being fallen to the Empire by the death of Count William of
Bauaria, his brot^e^* father to the Lady Iacqueline, being dead without heir
male. He died at the Hague (...) Holland, on Twelfth day, in the year of our
Lord 1429, having governed the coun Iacqueline of Bauaria, (...) the death of
her uncle John, enjoyed all her seigneuries. She was married four (...) was
forced (to recover her last husband, who was a prisoner in the hands of P^ilip
duke of Bourgondie, at that time Governor of Holland etc.) to transport all
her

Philip, first of that name, earl of Holland and Zeland, and lord of
Friseland, son to John duke of Bourgondie, by resignation of the lady
Iacqueline, the last Countess of Holland, of the house of Bauaria, who died
without heirs. He being heir, as well by the father side, as the mother side,
succeeded in the said countries. Thus he was duke of Peter's day, in the year
of our Lord 1359; his mother was the lady Marguerite of Bauaria, sister to
Count William, father to the Countess Iacqueline, and the lady Marguerite of
Bourgondie, mother to the said Countess, was sister to John duke of
Bourgondie, and therefore aunt by the father-side to the said duke Philip: so
as by the fatherside, and the mother-side, the said countries fell unto him
without any difficulty. He was a valiant and courageous prince, and feared of
his enemies. He was of a tall stature, fair Iacqueline Countess of Haynault.
He died the fifth of June, in the year of our Lord God 1467, being seventy
three years old, having governed the countries of Holland, Zeland, Hay^ault,
Friseland, and others, as well in quality of Earl and Lord, as of Curator,
about forty years.

Charles, called the Warlike, the only son of the good duke Philip, borne at
Dijon, in the year 1434, by the death of his father, succeeded in the duchy
of Bourgondie, Brabant, Limbourg, and Luxembourg, in the counties of
Bourgondie, Artois, Flanders, Haynault, Holland, Zeland, and Namur, the
seigneuries of Friseland, Salins, and Sigismond of Austria, the county of
Ferretta, in the country of Alsatia, near unto Basil in Suisserland. He
required the emperor Frederick to make Bourgondie a Realm, the which he
refused. He was slain at the battle of Nancy, in the year of our Lord God
1476.

Marie, daughter and only heir to Charles called the Warlike, was duchess of
Bourgondie, etc. and succeeded in all the said Provinces, after the death of
her father, being but eighteen years old, and under the guard and government
of the duke of Cleues, and the lord of Rauesteyn his brother.

Maximillian, Archduke of Austria, son to the Emperor Frederic, being about
the Marie, duchess of Bourgondie, etc. and was, in the right of his wife, duke
of Bourgondie, etc. and earl of Holland, Zeland, etc. which countries he
governed twelve years, or thereabouts. He died in the year of our Lord 1519,
and lies at Nieustad in Germany.

Philip, ^^ond of that name, earl of Holland and Zeland, and lord of
Friseland, only son to the Archduke Maximillian of Austria, afterward
Emperor, and of Mar^e duc^esse of Bourgondie, etc. daughter to duke Charles
the Warlike, was borne at Burges the twentieth day of June, in the year of our
Redemption 1478. He was about four years old when his mother died: After
whose death, the Archduke, king of Romans, his father, governed his countries
in quality of Regent, or Curator, with great Maximillian, king of the Romans,
by death of h^s father, was crowned Emperor.

Prince Philip his son, being then sixteen years old, was called Archduke
of Austria, duke of Bourgondie, Lothier, Brabant, Styer, Carinthia, Limbourg,
Luxembourg, and Guelders, earl of Hasbourg, Flanders, Artois, Bourgondie,
Ferrette, Kyburch, palatine of Haynault, Holland, Zeland, Namur, Zutphen,
marquis of the sacred Empire, and of B^rou, La^dtgraue of Elsathen, lord of
Windsmark, of Portenau, of Salins, and Mackli^. He died in Spain being young,
his father yet living, in the year 1505, and lie^ at Granado.

Charles, second of that name, five and thirtieth earl of Holland and Zeland,
and lord of Friseland, eldest son to Philip of Austria, was borne at Gand,
the four and twentieth of February, in the year 1500. After the death of his
father, he did succeed in all his Philip, and died in Spain in the year 1558.
He lies at Granado.

Philip of Austria, the six and thirtieth Earl of Holland, Zeland, etc. only
son to the Emperor Charles, who in his life time caused him to come out of
Spain into the Low Countries, to make him (if he could) succeed as well in the
Empire, as in his other realms of Spain, Naples, and Sicile, as of the
Netherlands, and other Provinces, whereof the Emperor dispossessed himself in
his life time, and his son took possession of the Low countries, and
received the oath of sidelitie of the Noblemen, and of all the deputies of
Provinces and chief towns. The Lady Marguerite of Austria, base daughter to
the Charles the fifth, wife to Octauia Far^eze Duke of Parma and Plaisance,
having been preferred (by the advice of the Cardinal of Granuelle) before all
the Princes of Austria, the Prince of Orange, and the Earl of Egmont, to
govern the Low Countries in the kings absence; being come to Bruxells, whereas
the king had called an assembly of the Estates of the Low Countries, he
appointed her Gouernesse general of all the seuenteen Provinces, in the year
1559, to the end that she might have the chief mannaging of all the government
of the said countries: the which caused great division bewixt the Noblemen, and
others of the Council of State of the Low Countries, under whom also there
were great combustions for religion in the said Countries; which divisions and
troubles, were the cause that in the year 1581, the provinces of Holland
Zeland,

The Commonweal of Geneva
THE COMMONWEAL
The Contents.
1 Antiquity of the town of Geneua, and the situation. 2. Wherein the soil
abounds, the fruits which grow in the country, and the goodness of the air.
3. The Geneuois gross by nature, and not very courteous to strangers. 4.
Wherein the little ^ealth of this Commonweal consists. 5. Geneu^ a strong
town, and well guarded: of the Ar^e^all, and of the sorts which are in that
country. 6. Forts of Saint Catherine, and others, ^ased by Henry the Great,
the French king. 7. Of the Earls of Geneua. Why the Dukes of Sa^^y pretend
that Geneua does belong unto them. When and how they came to hold the
iurisdicti(...) the said Earldom. 8. A sovereign court of Geneua consisting
of five and twenty Sena(...) and what be the laws and statutes of this
Commonweal. 9. How the Cal^anistes pro(...) was brought in, and settled in the
town of Geneua.

Casar himself makes mention thereof in the first book of the Gauls wars,
assuring that there was a bridge passing over the Rhosne, the which in his time
was under the power of the Suisses. The situation of this town is pleasant,
and of that side whereas the Rhosne comes out of that great Lake, which in old
time they called Lake Leman, it is low, but since it has been raised upon a
little hill. There is at Geneua as it were two towns, through the which the
river of Rhosne does pass, whereon there is a bridge which ioines them
together: the great

The Qalitie.


The Manners.


The Riches.


The Force.
Henry the fourth, in the year of our Lord God 1600, and rased: The other,
(...) had been built right against it by them of Geneua, was also bea^en down
and ^^^i^ie all matters* The third, called Ripaille, came into the power of
them of

The Bishops of Geneua were most commonly in quarrel with the Earls for the
Humbert, his successor went unto the Emperor Frederick the first, and
obtained of him that he should be sole Prince of Geneua, and not subject to any
one in temporal things, but to the Emperor, and withal, that he should
remain free from all tribu^es. But after the Bishops return to Geneua, he was
still disquieted in his government, vn^^^ that the Earl, called William, did
incur an imperial proscription or banish^^^^, by reason of his rebellion,
and was deprived of the sea which he held of the Bishop. The war having
continued long, and the forces both of the Town and Bishop being ^uth
decreast, the Geneuois called in an Earl of Morie^me, who was afterward ^arle
of Sauoy. But there was also much where betwixt them, so as this Earl held
many small Towns, Villages, and Castles, which did belong to them of Geneua,
Ame prince of Sauoy being discontented to see himself under a Bishop, obtained
from the Emperor Charles the fourth to be Vicar of the Empire in all his
Country; meaning, that by this title, the Bishop of Geneua, with his
jurisdi(...) should be subject unto him. But the Bishop opposed himself
courageously against the (...), whereby he preserved his authority, and the
peoples liberty, until the time of (...) the eighth, nephew to the first Ame,
who was the first duke of Sauoy, and afterward Pope, called Felix. He obtained
from Pope Martin the temporal jurisdiction of

The Government.


The Religion.
Calvin, and other good Ministers, the which it is not now possible to alter,
but by the ruin of the whole town. The Ministers have a Consistory, unto the
which they may call public offenders, and such as give cause of scandal, and
there reprove them: If the crime be great, and the pa^tie obstinat, they forbid
him the Communion; if notwithstanding he persist, they may excommunicat him.
But the Ministers cannot call any before them into their Consistory, but by
the authority of a Sindicke, who must assist

The Commonweal of the Suisse.

The Contents.
1THe description of S^isserland. 2. Of the Grisons country, and the limits.
3. Of the Valaisiens. 4. Division of the Suisses into thirteen Cantons. 5. Of
the Canton of the Vry, called Toreau in Caesar's time, from whence it took the
name. 6. Vry, a village divided into ten communalties, and first of Suitz. 7.
Of 8. Of Lucerne, and what places are under the jurisdiction of this Canton. 9.
Of Zurich. 10. Of Zugh. 11. Of the country of Glaris. 12. Of Bearne, when it
was built: of the towns and dependances. 13. Of the Canton of Fribourg. 14. Of
the country of Schasuse, and whence it took the name. 15. Of the country of
Appenzel, why it was so called and divided into twelve communalties. 16. Of the
Valaisiens divided into high and low, into free, and subject, and of their
communalties. 17. Of the Canton of the Grisons divided into three leagues. 18.
Of the fertility of Suisserland, and wherein it abounds, and what the country
of Zurich and other Cantons do bring forth. 19. Of the nature and manners of
the ancient Suisses, and of their valor in war in Casars time. 20. Of the
disposition of the Suisses at this day, and of their inclination to arms and
wine. 21. Barrenesse of Suisserland 22. Situation of the countries of Suisser
land naturally strong, by reason of the Alps which serve as rampires and
desences. 23. Commonweal of Suisses consisting of three parts: and how many
Cantons every part contains. 24. When and how the Suisses cantoned themselves,
and framed their Commonweal. 25. Of the league of three Cantons made at Bare^
in the year 1325, and what it contained. 26. Of an other league of four
Cantons of L^cer^^ Vry, etc. and the articles. 27. An assembly made at Saint
Gal betwixt the foresaid Cantons having the force of a law and league. 28. The
league of Zurich, with the four Cantons, and the articles. 29. The league of
Zugh with the five Cantons. 30. The league of Gl^^is. 31. The league of Berne
with the three Cantons. 32. The hereditarie league made betwixt the Emperor
Maximilian, Charles duke of Austria, and the Suisses. 33. The union 34.
Conclusion and articles of the common right with the Lords and countries of the
Valaisiens. 35. League of Saint Gal and the form. 36. The last peace made with
them of Zurich, on Saint Octauians day in the year 1531. 37. Peace of Berne in
the year 1537, and the articles. 38. The means which the most famous
Commonweals, both ancient and modern have held, to enlarge their Estates.
39. Of two (...) counsels, established in the towns of Zurich and Basil, and
of how many persons they consist. 40. Of the general diet and assemblies of
the Suisses. 41. Of the diversity of their religion.

WE are now to treat of many Estates, which are as it were united into







Julius Caesar, and that the name came from thence, for that they of Sibental
do at this day call Bulls, Vry; and this country has for arms a Bulls head in
a field Sinople. The inhabitants say that they are descended from a race of
Pagans called Gots and Vres, who were afterward made Christians. Having often
changed their Lords, this part falling in the end from the Germans, returned
to Zurich, at such time as the Empire was transported into Germany, and that
all the countries which had been sometimes under the Roman Empire, recovered
their liberty, Rodolfe of Ausbourg king of Romans, and by other Emperors, and
they were never subject (as some will have it) to the house of Austria, for
that the Empire being in this house, they obaied the Emperor newly elected, but
not the successors

As for Zuitz, it is a town seated upon the banks of the Lake of Lucerne,
upon the right hand coming from Artolf to Lucerne, and this town does impart
her name to the whole country of the Suisses. This town was built by some
which came out of the

Vnderuald lies beneath it upon the East, and is divided into the higher and
lower:

Lucerne takes the name of the place where it is situated, the which in old
time was Vincard, in the year of our Lord 840. It has bin built near unto
the Monastery, and partly by reason thereof.

The town of Zurich is ancient, and seated in a pleasant place, at the end of
the great

Zugh is a town whereof a small country takes his name. This country
confines upon

As for the country of Glaris, it is a valley near to the river of Lindmar.
It is not very

Be^^e was built by Bertold, fourth duke of Zeringen, and earl of Verlande,
who gave

(...) i^ seated upon a mountain supported with steep rocks, and on the
other upon the East part there are no buildings except Towers and Forts.
Wheresoever they

Soleurre, which in old time was but a castle, is at this day grown to be a
town of good command, and has under it both land and men. It is seated in a
plain, and is the place whereas Saint Vrse of the Legion of Thebains suffered
Martyredome, with sixty six of his companions.







Maximilian Sforce, duke of Milan, made an alliance with the Suisses, and gave
unto the Cantons,


SWiss^^land contains many mountains and valleis, whereof the last are
somewhat

But to the end we may come to every Canton in particular, the country about
Zurich is very fruitful, and yields great store of wine and wheat: yet the
wine is most commonly

The soil about Basil is good, and yields abundance of good wine and wheat;
so as the inhabitants relieve their neighbors with their commodities in the
time of dearth and necessity: there are also in this country goodly pastures.
The country of Berne bears wine and wheat sufficient: and as for that of
Fribourg it does produce all things necessary, except wine, which they setch
from other places.

As for the country which lies along the Lake Leman, the inhabitants
complaint of the heat of Summer, and the sharpness of Winter; and yet the
Lake, and the river of

They of Lucerne have in a manner more commodity from the Lake which is near
them than from the land, and yet there are goodly meadows and pastures fit for
the b^eeding of cattle: this country is not so hilly and rough as the rest.
As for the countries of Vry, Suitz, and Vnderuald, they yield sufficient
wherewith to feed the inhabitants



(...) the country of Valais, the tops of the mountains are always white,
but bene^^^ in the valle is they are green and pleasant; so as this country
does bring forth ple^^^^lly (if they will take any pains to plant them)
pomegranets, figs, and oranges, and it ^bounds in corn, wine, saffron, butter,
and cheese. There breed diverse beasts in the (...), and amongst others a wild
bucke, which is like unto a stag in bigness, and crystal: and in some places
it is so deep, as it sometimes makes admirable ^reaches and

A^^^^^ the country of the Grisons although it be hilly for the most part, yet
there are (...) valleis which bring forth sufficient of all things that are
necessary for the (...) man.

The Manners of the Ancients.
Caesar, who fearing them whenas they demanded passage to^^crosse the Roman
Province, and to go into Xaintonge, there to settle their abode, he caused a
wall to be made to hinder the execution of their disseigne, rememb^ing that
this people had vanquished the Consul L. Cassius, and defeated the Roman
army. They did not care much to manure their ground, so as they found not
sufficient in their country to maint^ine them, for want of husbandry, not
through any defect of the Caesar's time they were divided into Cantons, as they
are at this day, but they had but four, whereof the chief was that of Zurich.
They were the Suisses that first defeated the Romans, and they were also the
first that repented it. We may judge of their resolution and the confidence
they had in their forces, for that they burnt (...) houses and left all things
desolate whenas they resolved to seek a new dwelling: but this was an act full
of inconsideration and barbarism. As for their quickness of wit ^^ was not
great, yet in Caesar's time they found letters written in Greek in their camp,
and tables which contained the number of them which came out of their houses,
and who were to bear arms, neither had they forgotten the number of their
women and

We must not doubt but that these people for the most part have followed the
manners of the Gauls, of whose number they were for a long time held: but
afterward it was filled with multitudes of Cimbrians, who being forced to
abandon the country by an inaundation of the sea, ouerran Germany, and held a
part of Gaul Belgic: but this country not being able to maintain them, they
came unto the river of Rhosne, and demanded lands of the Romans, who having
refused them, one part past into Italy, where they were defeated by the Roman
army: and the other which stayed on this side the mountains, remained in
Suisserland in the countries of Suitz and Vry.

Some others write that, in the time of Sigishert king of Sueden, these
Northern people did so abound, as part of them were constrained to seek new
countries. These having

The Manners at this day.


They are much given to drinking, wherein they spend whole days and nights,
and they are grown to that excess, as before they will dispatch any
business, or contract any friendship, they will drink extremely: and they
that drink most, or are drunk, are held freer and honester men than they that
refuse it; yea they will quarrel if any refuse to drink with them. Yet we
must confess that they are witty, and well advised, seeing they have been
able to maintain themselves so long in liberty, and to live peaceably among
themselves, notwithstanding that they differ in religion. Moreover, they carry

Inregard of learning, notwithstanding that they have good Universities, yet
are they ^^so much given to study as in other Countries, but their chief
profession is arms. T^^ have had learned men, and have at this day, but the
number is very small, and I ^peake only of that which is generally practiced
in the country. Also, to speak the Pius (called before Eneas Syl^ius) erected
an university at Basil, from whence have come many learned men, as their
writings do

The Riches.


The Forces.


All these people observe this custom, in giving their footmen to him that
demands

First the thirteen Cantons of Suisses, the Grisons, Valaisiens, and Abbot of
Saint Gal, have altogether one standard general, the which may not be
advanced, if in the army which is raised, there be not soldiers and captains
chosen throughoutall the cou^^^^unalties if they be not chosen by their
communalties, and have their standards delivered unto Iulio for the succors he
received from the Suisses against the French, gave them the title of Defendors
of the Church: he enricht their standards with certain images, and publickely
gave to the whole nation of the Suisses two great standards, which they call
Paner, and also a sword and a cap for marks of liberty. As for their
inrolling of soldiers, if they make war within the country, all that are
able to bear arms, furnish themselves, and run to succor it, as to a
general fire which all must quench: and in time of peace, every Canton has
certain captains, ensigns, and men chosen, which must be ready for all
events. They are forbidden upon pain of death to abandon their ranks or
troops, until that the enemy be in rout: and then whenas their

The Government.
WE are now come to the principal piece of the Suisses Estate, which is their

These in effect manage all the affairs of the Communaltie: they are
confirmed from year to year by the people, and yet they continue in their
offices three years, as the Aman does. They appoint captains and governors of
places, and for the deciding of petty matters they allow of ten persons chosen
out of the meaner sort; but the parties contending may appeal to these
fifteen, above whom there is no other Judge nor appeal. The party condemned
is severely punished, neither will they suffer any of their subjects to appeal
out of the country, but to the great council, which is a great offense and

In matters of importance which concern the general estate of all the
Cantons, they appoint a general Diet, which is to be held in one of the cities
which they think most convenient, whereunto every Canton sends two or three
ambassadors or deputies, whereas they consult and treat of all ma^ters touching
peace and war, or any thing that concerns the general good of their whole
Estates, and they give audience and answers to ambassadors of foreign princes:
where all things being debated at large, they conclude according to the
plurality of voices. For these many years their general Diet has been George
earl of Vuerdenb^^g to the seven first Cantons; The free Provinces taken in
the year 1415, acknowledging the authority of the seven first Cantons. Lugan,
Locarne, Mendre^e, and the valley of Madia, are come under the Suisses
jurisdiction by the liberality of Maximilian Francis Sforce duke of Milan, who
gave these unto them in the year: 1513 These places o^ey all the Cantons,
except Appenzel. Bilitone and Bellinzone obey the three first Cantons.

But to understand after what manner the Suisses have thus cantoned themselves,
and Rodolphe of Ausbourg, king of Romans, who reigned in the year 1201, and by
other Emperors his successors: neither were these people ever subject, as
some affirm, to the house of Austria, but the Empire being in this house, they
only obeyed the Emperor being chosen, and not his successors of the house of
Austria.

These valleis being then in liberty, the Emperor sent them German
governors, who not meddling with the government of the Commonweal, should
do justice to the people: whereof some of these governors were expelled, and
others slain for their insolences; for that many times they used many strange
outrages against the people, as

The^e happened another in the said valley, whereas the governor pressing a
woman in the ^^^ence of her husband, to prepare him a hot bath, and to enter
into it with him; thi^ ^^^an having delaied the time until her husbands
return, the governor being ful^ (...); slew her with a hatcher.

^oreouer, the governor of Suitz and Vry, pust up with vanity and pride,
planted a ^^affe (...) the which he set his hat, commanding, That all which
past by, should do honor William Zen, who refused to do it; whereupon he
called him be^^^^ him, and commanded him to take an apple from off his sons
head with his Cross^ bow: the father refused to do it for many days, but in
the end (not being able (...) he obeyed, and (by the help of God) stroke the
apple from his sons head, (...) hurting him^ and for that he had brought two
arrows, the governor demande^^^ (...) to what end ^e had brought the other:
to whom Zen answered, That in case ^e (...) his son with the first, he was
resolved to shoot the second at himself: the (...) having heard these words,
caused him to be taken, and having put him into a (...) carry him unto a
Palace of his, betwixt Vry and Bruch, he escaped, and flying

(...) growing a division in the Empire, in the year of our Lord 1314, for
that some (...) ^ectors had chosen Lewis duke of Bauaria for Emperor, and the
rest, Frederick Archduke of Austria, they contended for the Empire: These
valleis refusing to Frederic for Emperor, for that he had sewest voices, he
made war against them, and sent Leopold his son to invade the country of
Suitz, assuring himself that Lewis should not be able to relieve them. Leopold
entering with a good army into the country of Suitz, which is environed of all
sides with water and mountains, and being come to Marguten, he was defeated by
the men of the three valleis of Suitz, Vry, and Vnderuald: whereof the
narrowness of the country was partly the cause, and the season also, for that
there was much ice in the ways, so as the horses could do no service in this
battle, and the Suisses casting stones only from the mountains did so amaze
them, as they did willingly leap into the lake.

At the same time (by the commandment of Frederic) they were invaded by the

The league of the three Cantons of Vry, Suitz, and Vnderuald.
IN the name of God, etc. For as much as the memory of man is weak, and does
soon

For this cause, we the countriemen of Vry, Suitz, and Vnderuald, make it
known to all that shall read or hear these presents, that to provide for and
prevent the difficulties and inconveniences of times, and the better to remain
in peace and concord amongst our selves, and to the end we may the better
defend our selves, and maintain our bodies and goods, we have tied our selves
by a perpetual and firm oath one unto another, and by this oath we do
promise to counsel and assist one another with our persons and

Secondly, we have ordained amongst us of this league, That not any of our
countries or Cantons, and much less any private man, shall make himself lord,
nor receive any lord, without the consent and counsel of the rest; but every
one both male and female shall be obedient to his true lord or seigneurie, in all
due and honest services: but not to any lords that shall seek to take any of
our countries by arms, and force us to any unjust thing, in which case they
shall not do any service whilst they are in discord with us.

We have also agreed, That not any of our Cantons, nor allies, shall aid any
stranger without the advice of the other Cantons and allies.

None of the confederats shall treat with the said strangers without the
knowledge and consent of the rest, whilst that the Cantons are not subject. If
it happen that any one betray one of the Cantons, and deliver it into the hands
of another, or shall not observe whatsoever here is written, he shall be held
for a traitor, and a man without faith, and his person shall be delivered into
the hands of the Cantons, and his goods shall be confiscat.

Moreover, we have agreed, That not any of us shall support or receive any
Judge which buys his office for money or any other thing, but he shall be of
the country.

If there grow any quarrel or war betwixt the con^ederats, the best and
wisest shall

If it also happen that any one of the allies shall set fire of another house,
he shall be for ever banished, and he that shall lodge him or assist him shall
be bound to pay the damages of the party interessed and complaining.

No man shall distraine another but for assurance, the which he cannot do
without the permission of his Judge: and every man shall be obedient to his
Judge, and shall present himself before him when it is needful. If any
opposes himself against his Judge, and

Wherefore, to the end that this present league and capitulation, and all the
causes therein contained may remain firm, and in force forever: We the
countrymen of Vry, Suitz, and Vnderuald have set our seals to this present,
made at Baren, in the year 1325 the first Tuesday after S. Nicholas Feast. In
the same year all their privileges were confirmed by the foresaid Emperor
Lewis.

The discentions of the Empire being pacified, some other countries moved by
the bad usage of their governors, and drawn by the sweetness of liberty,
entered into league with the said three Cantons: Lucerne entered first in the
year 1332, then Zurich

The League of the four Cantons of Lucerne, Vry, Suitz, and Vnderuald.
WE the Senate, Counselors, and Citizens of the town of Lucerne, and we the

We the said do also reserve in our selves a particularitie in our bounds and
limits according to our statutes and good customs, as our predecessors have
formerly done: and we the citizens of Lucerne shall content our selves with
such rights, toward the three Cantons, as has been formerly said.

We the said citizens of Vry, Suitz, and Vnderuald shall rest satisfied of the
citizens of Lucerne, as before: but if it shall happen (which God forbid) that
any one of us, either

We the citizens shall at our own charge aid the said Cantons: and contrary
wise, we the said Cantons shall at our own change assist the citizens of
Lucerne, all which shall be done faithfully and without contradiction.

If by chance there shall grow any controversy among us, in that case they
shall choose the most discreet and best advised, who shall friendly reconcile
all our controversies, and in case that the one party shall contradict this
accord, the other allies shall assist the other

If there shall happen any disorders betwixt the three Cantons, and that the
two were agreed, in that case we the said citizens of Lucerne shall help to
reconcile the third unto the other two, if we the said citizens of Lucerne do
know and find any thing which shall seem better unto us for the two Cantons.

We have also agreed that we the said citizens, and for the abouenamed
countrymen

None of the allies shall distraine another but for rent, the which shall not
be done but after sentence given.

Whosoever of the allies shall contest against a sentence given, or shall
disobay, if this disobedience be prejudicial to any of the allies, he shall be
forced to make reparation of the damage.

If any of the allies shall commit an offense for the which he shall be
banished out of

And moreover we have jointly resolved that if any one of the allies shall not
observe all the articles abouementioned, and every one of them, he shall be
held for a man which has broken his faith and word: and to the end these
things may be inuiolably observed by all and every one of us, as it has been
concluded, we the said senate, council, and citisens of Lucerne, have with our
common seal, and of every particular Canton, caused

An Assembly made at Saint Gal, betwixt the four Cantons, which has the
force of a law and league.


And if such disorders or controversies should grow betwixt us of Lucerne, and
any one of the Cantons, they shall be ended with equal aid as before. And to
the end the said things may last perpetually, we have confirmed them by an
oath, and have bound as well our selves as our successors to observe them
inuiolably, and to that end we have sealed them with the seal of Lucerne, and
of the three Cantons of our countries, and have caused four to be dispatched
with the same words and the same seal, one for us,


WE the Bourgmaisters, Counselors, and common Citisens of the towns of Vry,

And for that things that are inconstant, are subject to forgetfulness, and
all things in this world change; for this cause, we the said Towns and
Communalties, give this perpetual faith and testimony one unto another, by
letters and writings; so as we will be ready to succor one another without
any contradiction, as well with our goods as persons, against any one that
shall seek to wrong any one that is comprehended in this league, in his
person, goods, or honor, be it present, or to come, within the limits above
written.

First of all, whereas Are does rise, which is called Grialel, and from thence
downward,

But if within these bounds there were any one comprehended in this league,
that were damnified in any sort, either in his goods or person, then the
Council and Communaltie of the town or country where he has received wrong,
shall take knowledge thereof: And when as this Council or Communaltie, or the
greatest part of the town or country which has received the wrong, has
considered what succor shall be needful for this business, they shall
advertise the other towns and countries comprehended in

And when this advertisement shall be made, they must advertise by a Post, or
by letters from the Council, or the Communaltie of this town or country, the
Counsels of the three Cantons, without any intermission, to the end they may
give advice unto the towns of that whereof they have been faithfully
advertised: And they shall suddenly prepare themselves withal that shall be
needful to assist them that have been damnified: And no one of us of the said
Cantons shall treat in any sort with any of this present league, nor do any
thing in word or deed, whereby these succors may be stayed or hindered: And
every town or country shall make ready these succors at their own charge
without any question.



But if the matter were of such importance as it should require an assembly of
a Diet, and that in the mean time if one of the towns comprehended in this
league should need succors, they must suddenly go unto the Diet, at the house
of God, in the Abbey of S. Marie, and advise what shall be most fit to relieve
them speedily that have sent unto them.

If any one were besieged, they should entertain them that did aid them, or
that they have received for their succors, and these charges shall be in
regard of raising the siege.

If any one without just cause should do wrong unto another comprehended in
this

If it should happen that we the above named of Zurich, should have any
controversy

But if it did happen that these four which should be chosen to such a
business were

None of those that are comprehended in this league shall be arrested or
sequestered one for another, unless the surety which the creditor has
accepted be not allowed: having also agreed that no confederat comprehended in
this league shall be distrained for

If any person comprehended in this league should for any offense be banished
out of this jurisdiction, and that notice were given thereof by the seal of
such a country to another jurisdiction, he shall be also banished out of the
same Communaltie: and he that shall then lodge him, or give him meat, if it be
known, shall incur the like punishment, but he shall not be in danger of
his life.

We have also reserved for our selves together, or for any one of our towns or
countries in particular, that would allie themselves with any Lords or
Citizens, that they cannot conveniently do it, but this league of the one with
the other shall be perpetual, firm, and stable, and they shall keep all the
things declared in this present writing.

We have also concluded and declared, That if any one would molest the Seigneur
Ralfe Bruiren Knight, who is at this present Bourgmaister, and the Counselors
of this town in their judgments, and the laws which they have made, being
comprehended in this league: When as we the abouenamed of Lucerne, Vry, Suitz,
and Vnderuald, shall be only advertised by a Bourgmaister, or a Councellor of
Zurich, then upon our own faith we shall be ready to aid them, in such sort
as the Bourgmaister, Counselors, and Tribunes shall enjoy their power, laws,
and judgments.

We the said of Zurich, Lucerne, Vry, Suitz, and Vnderuald, have reserved unto
our selves in this league our Lord the King, and the sacred Empire, and that
whereunto we are bound by all antiquity and good custom.

And moreover, we of Zurich have reserved our confederations, leagues, and
approabbations which we have made before this league.

And we of Lucerne, Vry, Suitz, and Vnderuald, have reserved the leagues and
unions which we have together, the which shall go before this.

After this, they must understand that we have plainly concluded in regard of
those which are of this league, that they remain in their full liberties,
rights, and customs, as they have done unto this day, in such sort
notwithstanding, as no man shall molest or hinder another.

It is also particularly concluded, to the end that this league may be always
firm, that ten years hence, about the month of May, before or after, without
any delay, as the



In like manner with good and mature consideration we have reserved, that if
for our good by a common consent, either now, or hereafter we shall do or say
otherwise than we have done or written in this league, we may do all this one
with another, for that we who are comprehended in this league will always take
council together, and resolve upon that which shall be held most profitable.



Zugh entered into league with the said Cantons in the year 1352, as follows.

The League of Zugh, with the five Cantons.
WE the Bourgmaisters, Counselors, Citisens, and Communaltie of the town of
Zurich, Counselors, Citisens, and Counselors of Lucerne, the Amans,

The articles contained all that was concluded betwixt Zurich, and the four
Cantons, giving the same confines; and this league was all one with the other,
there was only Zugh added. It was concluded at Lucerne in the year 1352, the
first Wednesday after Saint John Baptist.

Glaris allied it self with the other confederates in the year 1357, as
follows.

The League of Glaris.


And we the said of Zurich, Vry, Suitz, and Vnderuald in regard of a good and
particular friendship, do give leave unto them of Glaris to allie themselves at
their pleasure with our confederats of Berne, Lucerne, and Zugh, or with any
one of them in particular; upon condition notwithstanding, that this league
shall precede the other, and shall be perpetual: and we the said of Glaris
shall not allie our selves with any, be he Lord or other, without the consent
and leave of our said confederates, of Zurich, Vry, Suitz, and

The League of Berne, with the three Cantons.
WE the Senate, Councillors, and the two hundred Citizens, Commons of the

We the said of Berne may advertise the said three Cantons against them that
would that our men shall leave their service at Vndersuuen: And if we of Berne
shall send our

And if there should fall out any war which should concern all, and that we
the said of Berne, or the three Cantons should go against the enemies and annoy
them in any place, for all this, none that shall be comprehended in the league
shall reckon any charges to the other.

If we of Berne do invade our neighbors country above, then the three
Cantons shall be bound to assail the enemy, and for this faction we shall not
reckon any charges

We the said of Berne have bound our selves, that if they of Zurich, and
Lucerne have need of aid, and require it of the said three Cantons their
allies, whenas we shall be advertised by the three Cantons, we are bound to
send our succors speedily at our own charge, who shall go as far as the rest.

And if they of Lucerne and Zurich should not send succors, together with them
of the three Cantons, to assist us of Berne, we shall not pay any thing to them
of Zurich and Lucerne: and if it should at any time happen that we of Berne,
and we the said three Cantons should send our men to succor one another, we
have concluded, that if one

If any one comprehended in this league shall have any complaint, or demand
against another, he shall go unto the Diet as before: and the Elector shall
choose a man out of his country or town, who shall be indifferent, and they of
his party shall entreat him to embrace this business faithfully, and then the
parties contending, shall either of them ch^se two for his part, and these five
shall speedily dispatch the business, either by Accord or Justice, without any
contradiction. The rest is as in the other articles.

If any one comprehended in this league be in possession of any thing, no man
shall take it from him without reason, but every one shall aid and defend him
in the country.

After all these leagues and alliances, the Suisses had great wars by reason of
the great Lewis the twelfth(who desired to recover the duchy of Millan, which
he pretended to be his right) sought the friendship and alliance of the
Suisses, who have always fought so valiantly for their liberty, as they have
forced their enemies to come to composition, and to seek a peace upon
condition, that they should enjoy their full liberty, and should be confirmed
in all the places which they had formerly taken from them of Austria, and that
the jurisdiction of Turgow in criminal causes, which they of Constance had
enioied, should be given them: they had war with the Grisons against John
Iagues of Medicis, lord of Muse, to maintain the liberty of the Vlrich duke
of Wittemberg made a league for twelve years with the Commonweal of the
Suisses: and the Emperor Maximilian renewed the hereditarie alliance made
before with duke Sigismond, wherein the house of Bourgondie was included in the
year 1517, as follows.

An Hereditarie League made betwixt the Emperor Maximilian, and Charles
Archduke of Austria, and the Suisses.
WE Maximilian by the grace of God, Emperor of Romans, always August^s,
Charles, Archduke of Austria, and duke of Bourgondie and Brabant, Prince of
Spain, earl of Flanders and Tiroi, etc. Maximilian, elect Emperor of Romans,
upon our bounty and special grace, and by duty, are ready (as it is fit)
to govern all our subjects, and those that be of the sacred Empire, in peace,
tranquillity, and concord, especially out hereditarie and faithful subjects,
of what degree or condition soever they be, to increase their goods, and to
fore*see that hereafter they receive no harm; having Sigismond of Austria, as
having had a perpetual union by our dear brother Lewis the French king, for
himself and the said Suisses, the said letters were given at Macklin the tenth
of June, in the year 1474, and in sorme of an hereditarie union.

Of that which was made at Zurich the Monday before Saint Gal in the year of
our Lord God 1477, with accord, That the Suisses should be subject, and show
themselves faithful, and full of love, and be good neighbors to the said
Emperor of Romans, as it is fitting, and to the said houses of Austria and
Bourgondie, and that for the honor of

We Emperor Maximilian, as Archduke of Austria, by reason of the countries
which are come unto us by the death of our said uncle Sigismond, and for the
appurtenances thereof, as Protector of our dear and well-beloved Charles Prince
of Spain, by reason of his county of Bourgondie, with good and mature
counsel, true knowledge, and full deliberation have ordained the perpetual
union of king Lewis, and the following hereditarie unions one with another, as
follows.

First, we the said parties, and in like manner all our heirs and successors,
subjects, and countriemen, and all they that shall descend of us, may and ought
for ever hereafter have part in the said union, with true defenses and
promises, and all other things that may

In like manner, we the said Emperor, and Charles, ordain, That none of our
successors or subjects shall do any thing in general or particular against
the general league, nor shall do wrong to any of the consederats, whereby any
war may grow.

Also we of the common league of the Suisses ordain, That we, and our
successors, as well those that are ours at this present, or shall hereafter any
way belong unto us, both Charles, their heirs, successors, and subjects,
comprehended in this league, or others that shall be their adherents in
general or particular.

And to the end that this commendable conclusion and union betwixt us the said
parties, and our successors, and subjects, may continue with greater
intelligence, we have declared, That if it should happen within any short time,
that We the Emperor in our countries comprehended in this union, and We
Charles Archduke in our county of Bourgondie, should be assaulted, or our
heirs and successors, That we the said Suisses shall have a faithful regard
unto the Emperor and to his, to the end they may not be

And for a better peace and tranquillity, we the said parties have specially
consented That We the Emperor Maximilian, and Charles the Archduke, with our
countries and subjects comprehended in this perpetual union, with all those
that hereafter shall be united and belong unto them, shall not do any thing
that may breed war, and we the

They that in general or particular, at this present or hereafter, shall have
need of protection and defense, and which are, or shall be hereafter united,
and belong unto us the Archduke of Austria, and to our principalities, towns,
and jurisdictions comprehended in this league; or those which in the same
form, at this present, or hereafter, in general or particular, are, or shall
be, united, or belong to us Suisses, and which shall have any complaint, suit,
action, or pretention, if the parties may with reason be reconciled, the
plaintise may require his adverse party to come unto reason, and to that end
the defendant shall present himself without any delay before the Bishops of
Constance and

The controversies for hereditarie fees, immovable goods, violences, small
debts, and such like, shall be pleaded after the form following: these fees
shall be pleaded before the lord of the fee, and according to the right of
inheritance: and other causes shall be tried in those places where the goods
are, and where the violence has been done, unless that he which had done the
violence had retired himself out of the said jurisdiction, and

And to the end that hereafter every man may be preserved from violence, it
has been concluded, That before they enter into law, according to the
ordinance, that either party shall give security, that (loosing his cause) he
shall make satisfaction of the damage.

The parties which shall plead, shall bind themselves by writing unto the
Judges which shall be chosen to end the suit, not to conceive any bad opinion:
as it was concluded by the Lewis, in the perpetual Intelligence, and in the
Hereditarie union made by our uncle the Archduke Sigismond, where the eight
Cantons of Zurich, Berne, Lucerne, Vry, Suitz, Vnderuald, Zugh, and Glaris, are
comprehended.

But we the said towns of Basil, Fribourg, Schaffeusen, with the said eight
Cantons of the said league, and also we the Abbot, with the Abbey and Town of
Saint Gal, and the Country of Appentzel, with other Towns, Castles,
Countries, and places are of late come with the said twelve Cantons, and the
countries adjoining, etc. as before.

And We the Emperor Maximilian, and Charles the Archduke etc. do accept into
this perpetual union, as before, the said Cantons of Basil, Fribourg,
Soleurre, and Schaffeusen,

And to the end that in the said place all discord may be taken away, it has
been concluded, That of all sides, all dishonest words and deeds shall cease,
and whosoever shall infringe it, shall be condemned according to the manner of
his speech, without any favor.

In like manner, every ten year, either of the parties shall cause this
present union to be read, the better to understand what must be observed.

And also we the said parties have reserved in this union the holy See, and
the sacred Empire, with all others to whom we are bound. We have also reserved,
That the league, union, and intelligence, civil law, and right of parties, and
this our hereditarie

Charles the Archduke, for the increase of love, to give yearly unto every one
of the said Cantons of Suisses two hundred florins of the Rhin, to be paid in
the town of Zurich on the day of the holy cross in May; and to the Abbot of
S. Gal, and to the country of Appentzel, one hundred florins every year to
either of them, until that the said Archduke Charles shall enter into
possession of his hereditarie Estates.

And We the Emperor will, that the said Charles being come to the age of
maturitie, shall confirm^ this present union with an oath, etc.

In witness of these presents, sealed with the seal of us the Emperor and
the Archduke Charles, and the heirs and successors of us two, we bind our
selves inuiolably to observe all the articles and points of the league, and to
that end we have set our seals and sworn, etc.

Given at Buda in Hongarie the seventh of February 1517, of our Empire the
fifteenth, and of our reign of Hongarie the one and twentieth.

The three Cantons of the Grisons entered into league first with the seven
Cantons of

The Grisons were in former time called Rhetiens and Canines: for Bello Nesus
having past into Italy, with a great number of Gauls, about one hundred
eighty seven years before the coming of Christ, he ceased upon a great part
of Tuscanie and expelled the inhabitants, who under the conduct of Rhetus came
to dwell in the steep and craggie mountains of the Alps, where are the two
springs of Rhin and Tesin, building certain castles for their abode in the
mountains and valleis, and called the country by the name of their Leader. In
time they multiplied, and extended their limits unto the Lake of Constance; and
in Italy, they enioied Como, Verona, and Trent.

Constantine before he would make war against the Germans, led his army into
Rhetia, and stayed in the plain at the entering of the mountains about a mile
from the Rhin; and this part took the name of Curia, of that stay: and the
army being parted, they began to build a town, called in their language Chur,
and by the Italians Coira. The Bishop of this town with his college, united
themselves and made the first league for their defense against strangers, and
this was in the year 1419: by their example the Abbot of Zizatis, the Earl of
Mauan, and the Baron of Bezuns, made also league, and it is called Grise: and
in the end all they that dwell in the valley of Segouia allied themselves, and
were called the ten jurisdictions, but afterward they were all three united,
and made one body.

Charlemaine, and confirmed by other Emperors unto this day: and this bishop is
chosen by the Chanoins of Sion, and by certain deputies of the seven
Communalties, to whom they do afterward give a Judge for civil causes, who is
called Captain; and every two year at Christmas, the Bishops deputies and the
communalties choose a new captain. In the year 1528 the league was renewed by
the Bishop, the Chapt^r, and the seven communalties of Vallois, with Vry,
Suitz, Vnderuald, Lucerne, Zurich, Fribourg, and Soleurre: and in the year 1475
they had allied themselves with Berne.

valley: the Abbots of that place obtained many great privileges from
Emperors and

Mulheuson is a country in Sauoy near unto the river, not far from Basil, and
it belongs unto the Empire, the which made a perpetual league with all the
Cantons of the Suisses in the year 1515.

Rotuuil is seated upon the river of Necar in Suabe, it is a town well
fortified, the Edward duke of Vittenbergh, was forced to make a league with the
Suisses, the which was afterward confirmed and sworn in the year 1519.

Bade stands upon the river of Limante in Ergouia, upon a plain in the which
there are an infinite number of hot bathes, both public and private. There the
confederat allies do celebrat their Diets: it was sometimes an Earldom, and
came under the power of the Suisses, in the time of the Emperor Sigismond, and
they ruined the castle.

There has been in our times certain wars betwixt these two confederats, by
reason of religion: but they were afterward reconciled, as may be seen by
these accords under

The last peace made with them of Zurich, on Saint Octauians day, in the year
1531.


First that the five Cantons shall remain in the Romish religion, with their
adherents,

That they of Zurich etc. shall continue Protestants.

That they shall not contemn one another, by reason of their belief.

That it shall be in force as the other leagues.

That they shall set at liberty all prisoners taken in this present war,
paying reasonably.

That all controversies, growing betwixt us during this present war and before,
shall be made void.

The peace of Berne in the year 1537.


Brengard, Maligier, and Frimon, and either of them reserues his friends and
adherents.

They shall not contemn one another by reason of their bele^fe.

Both parties shall return under the form of the sworn leagues.

They of Berne shall pay unto the five Cantons five thousand crowns of the
Sun, for the damages done to many churches.

The prisoners shall first pay their charges.

In regard of this present peace, all controversies growing before shall be
abolished, and never more called in question.

These are the treaties that were made among the people, where by the reader
may be

This people are divided into nineteen members, whereof there is one entire
body made, and these members are the thirteen Cantons, the Grisons, the
Valaisiens, S. Gal, Mulhuson, and Rotuuil. Whereupon we must observe, that all
Commonweals whereof there is any memory, have held three courses to enlarge
their estates.

The first was that which the Spartains and Atheniens did observe, who after
they had conquered any cities, made them presently subject, but being not able
to undergo so great



The third course was held by the Romans, who did associat unto them many
Commonweals, which did live under the same law, yet the Romans reserved unto
themselves the sole authority of command. This manner was held the best, as
does appear by the effects. After this, we may put that of the Tuscans with
the which they held the Empire of Tuscaine, and a great part of Lumbardie, and
did continue long free, and in

Their manner is observed at this day by the Suisses, and their confederats,
who make all one Commonweal divided into many, amongst the which there is no
distinction of degrees, having expelled all their lords who had any
jurisdiction in their estate, and there is not amongst them any other
superiors, but such as are magistrates; all the rest are equal, notwithstanding
that there are some which are much esteemed among the rest for their wisdom
and judgment, and among them, they do also much esteem gent^ie, as they do at
Argentine, whereas no man may be admitted to be a magistrate, or to have any
dignity in the town, if he do not prove himself a gentleman by fource
descents.

But to speak something more than has been said of their government, you
shall

There are two public Councels in the town of Zurich, and Basil, which are of
great

They call them the old Senate, which have left their office for the space of
half a year: notwithstanding that these assemble when as they hold a Council,
yet are they not always called, and there are some things done only by the
new Senate. At Basil, the three at Zurich, and two at Basil. And thus much
touching the government of these



This Commonweal of the Suisses, has no common Magistrates, unless we shall
put in this number, the Bailises and Governors which are sent forth here and
there, not by the Council of the Commonweal, but by every Canton in
particular. Their general Assembly or Council is not always equal in
number, for that sometimes besides the Cantons, their other allies and
confederates, especially the Ambassadors of Saint Gal and Mulhouse, of the
Grisons, and Valaisiens assemble; and then it is called the greatest Council,
the which is not often held, but when as they treat of peace or war, or of
other affairs which belong equally to all the confederates. And most commonly
there are none but the Ambassadors of the thirteen Cantons which meet for the
affairs of the Common weal (as has bin said) every one having a deliberatiue
voice: and two or

The day before that a Council or Parliament is appointed to be held, the
Ambassador them to say. All the Ambassadors having delivered their Commissions,
and

They observe the like order in private causes, but they that have any causes to
plead at such Diets, first demand audience of the Ambassador of Zurich, who
appoints them

Moreover there are Judges of public suits, which are controversies which
happen betwixt two or many Cantons, or of certain private men against one
Canton, wherein the confederats are of the same condition with the Cantons: for
the decision of which controversies, either of the parties does choose two
Judges, who absolved of the oath which they owe unto their Canton, promise to
judge according unto right and equity. Ein Obmann; this Judge gives no
sentence, but does only approve one of those which the Arbritrators have
pronounced.

To speak something more particularly of the Commonweals of the thirteen
Cantons, they may be referred unto three forms; for as there are three names
of sovereign Magistrates among the Cantons, they have also so many forms of
Commonweals, not only differing in name, but also in matter and substance.
In some of the Cantons the chief of the Council are called Amans, as at Vry,
Suitz, Vnderuald, Zugh, Glaris, and Appentzel, whereas the sovereignty belongs
to the people. The Commonweals of Berne Schulthesz, who is the chief of the
Council; the other towns of the Cantons are divided by certain companies, out
of which, by their own election, are chosen the Lords of the Council, and the
soueraign^ Magistrate and head of this Council is by them called Bourgmaister;
and after this manner the Commonweals of Zurich, Basil, and Schaffouse are
governed, whereas they have (as I have said before) two public Counsels,
which have the principal authority, and in every one of these towns there
are two Consulls or Bourgmaisters who be the heads and Presidents of these
Counsels.

But omitting the manner of the election of these Counselors and Consulls, for
brouities sake, and of many other inferior offices, and courts of justice in
the said towns: you shall understand, That in these Commonweals, bastards
are deprived of all honors and dignities, neither is it lawful for them to
come to Council, nor unto their Courts of justice. He that has not been a
dweller ten years within the town of Zurich, cannot be chosen of the public
Council. They that are borne out of Suisserland, cannot be of the petty
Council at Schaffouse: but if they have been Bourgeffes twenty year, they
may be admitted into the Great Council, and into the number of the Judges.
Their public estates and offices are of diverse sorts, in these Commonweals,
and more in number according as the towns are peopled. The highest degree next
unto the

The other Cantons, and Commonweals, are governed in like manner, by two
several Counsels, but their electors are diverse, and the heads of their
Counsels have diverse

The Abbot, and Abbey of S. Gal, holds the first place among the consederats of
the thirteen Cantons: The Abbots of S. Gal, have great reu^nues, and are
princes of the empire: They are lords of the country of Turgouu, and Wile,
where they have a great territory well peopled, the which is divided into
certain Chastelenies, and Prouostships, whither the Abbot does send his
Provost: He has also his Ammans, and other officers, with two several
Counsels, so as the form of government of Saint Gal differs little from that
of the Cantons.

As for the Grisons, they govern themselves popularly in their several
leagues, which

The Council of the leagues, is called the assemblies of the Ambassadors of
every Communaltie of the Grisons; whither some Communalties send two
Ambassadors, and others but one. If the Council be ordinary, the Grise league
sends eight and twenty Ambassadors or Counselors; that of Cade three and
twenty; and that of the jurisdictions fourteen. The Council general of the
whole nation does sometimes assemble, but it is seldom. The Council of the
Grisons is almost like unto that of the Suisses.

The country of Valais is divided into high and low: High Valais has seven
Jurisdictions or Communalties, which have thirty parishes: Base Valais has
six Communalties, and four and twenty Parishes: The higher commands the
lower, and sends them



The Religion.
Julius the second: Whereunto they were incited by Zuinglius, so as in the
year of our Lord 1526, they did abolish the Mass throughout all the country,
and did bring in the Communion. And this profession of the Gospel extended it
self to the Cantons of Fribourg and Basil, so as on the six and twentieth of
January, in the year of our Redemption 1528 at Berne, after a long
disputation before the Senate, they overthrew their Images, and rooted out the
Mass.

As for the Grisons, they of the league called Grise, are for the most part
Catholics, Zuinglius doctrine: yet they say the Romish service at Chur, and
at Fustemberg, whereas the Bishop is bound to remain half the year, and at
Roffun, a fee belonging to the Archdukes of Austria. In the valley of Agnadine,
and in the Pregalia, which belongs unto the league of the House of God, and in
many places of the eight countries, there are villages wherea^ there has not
been any Mass said for many years. Posclaue, a place of the league of the
House of God, is divided into Protestants and Papists; but the one have a
minister continually, whereas the Papist have had no Priest for some years. It
is lawful for every one among the Grisons to live as he shall think good,
and to follow what religion he please, yet

The Estates of the Duke of Savoy.

The Contents.
1 COnfines and limits of the Duke of Sauoies country, divided into two
Estates, Piedmont and Sauoy. 2. Description of the duchy of Sauoy in
particular, with the Earledomes and Baronies. 3. Description of Piedmont, and
the chief towns. 4. Of Turin, the chief town of Piedmont, famous for the
abode of the Dukes of Sauoy, the university for all sciencies, and a stately
park newly made. 5. Of the Marquisat 6. Of the chief places of Piedmont which
are walled in, besides Episcopal towns. 7. Of the Marquisat of Cheue. 8. Of
the county of Nizze, divided into four vicarships, or vicegerents, with the
towns and places. 9. Fertility of the towns of Sauoy and Piedmont, with
their lakes and chief rivers. 10. Quarries of marble newly discovered. 11. The
humor and disposition of the Sauoyards and Piedmontois. 12. Riches of Piedmont
in mines of gold and silver, in traffic of iron, cattle and cloth of
Pignerolle. 13. A computation of the revenues of the Duke of Sauoy. 14. Of the
Duke of Sauotes forces, his forts and places of defense, his alliances and
confederations. 15. The pretensions of the Duke of Sauoy to other Estates. 16.
The government of the duchy of Sauoy: of the Senate of Sauoy, and of that of
Piedmont. 17. A catalogue of the Dukes of Sauoy, which have ruled

ALl the countries which are under the power of the Duke of Sauoy,

The duchy of Sauoy has for bounds upon the West, the two rivers of Rhin and

They do account the Earldom and country of Maurienne, with the Marquisat of
Suse, for parts of Sauoie. The county of Maurienne extends unto the river of
Arche, Humbert the first, who received the county of Maurienne, and the duchy
of Sauoy, from the Emperor Henry the third. The country of Tarantaise lies
environed by the Alps, and the rivers of Arche and Are, which mingles it self
with Arche near unto Chamois: the chief town ^f this country is Moustier in
Tarantaise, where lies buried Humbert the second Earl of Maurienne, who added
Tarantaise to his lands. There is moreour the seigneurie of ^ossigny Amedee the
eight, the first duke of Sauoy, having given over his Estates, made profession
of a Monasticke life, and being there, was chosen Pope by the Clergy, being
assembled at the Council of Basil, in the year 1440. There is also the duchy
of Chablais, and the baronies of Raud and Gaz. The chief town of Sauoy is
Chambary, which stands among the mountains, and is reasonably well built: the
others are Nizze, Saint John of Maurienne, Moustier, Tonon, Montmelian, and
some others.

Leo the ninth did celibrat a general Council against Berengarius. Iuree
(which writers at this day call Lamporeggio, and which the Ancients have named
Eporedia) is the chief town of the Salassiens, at this day called Canauois:
it is at the entry of the valley of Ost, upon the river of Doria, in so
commodious a situation, as Berengarius, and after him Ardouin, who were
Marquises, had the courage to aspire to make themselves kings of Italy. Oste
(built by Augustus) is at the mouth of the Alps which were called Greek, and
Penine, and at this day the great and lesser Mont Saint Bernard: by the
greater, they pass into the country of Valais, and by the lesser into
Tarantaise: this town is the chief of a valley which has taken her name of
it. There are at this day many goodly antiquities to be seen, and amongst
others a very fair Bow.

Augustus did honor it with the Gate, which they call at this day, the Gate of
the Palace: and the Lombards did establish the seat of one of their four
dukes there. The duke of Sauoy has caused a park to be made there, the which
is five or six miles in circuit, and it is in one of the most pleasing
scituations in Europe. This park is environed by the rivers of Po, Doria, and
Sture: it is full of woods, little lakes, fountains, and all sorts of game,
which the duke has drawn thither: and Conrad) is seated upon a little hill,
with great subu^bes round about it: but the greatest are at the foot of the
said hill upon the river of Elle, the which (two miles off) falls into that of
Tanare: it is better peopled than any other town of Piedmont. Among the rest
of the subu^bes, there is that of Viq, from whence a new devotion which they
have to our Lady has taken the name, to the which the duke of Sauoy has built
a Church, and in it a Chapel, whereas he has ordained that the dukes of
Sauoy shall be interred. Fossan is seated upon a little hill upon the river of
Sture, in the midst of a field: among the other buildings there is a castle
reasonably pleasant.



But in Piedmont, besides the Cities or Episcopal towns, there are about two
hundred Frederic Barbarousse with the title of Great Town: and so it is in
deed, for the goodly Churches, fair Conuents, and Houses, and for many noble
Families, and rich Merchants which remain there. Cuni is situated betwixt the
rivers of Sture and Guess. Suse was in former times a big town, and of great
importance; but since that it was Frederic Barbarousse, it could never come to
that greatness: yet it stands in a very important situation, for that there
are two ways which part, and go by the Alps, the one tends by Essilles to
Bria^con, and the other by Mont Senis to Lion. Auiglane is a good town, rich,
and of tr^fficke; it has a castle seated high upon a little mountain, where
there is a spring of running water. Riuolee vaunts of the birth of the duke of
Sauoy that now lives, who makes a stately building there. Moncalier is a
reasonable big town; and Carignan is famous for the castle, and for the long
siege which they did once endure: There are many noble families in it, who,
among other things, have founded a Monastery of Nuns, the which must be all
gentlewomen. Queyras is pleasing for the streets, which are both straight and
large: and Been is strong Charles the fist, passing that way in his voyage to
Prouence, said, That he had never seen any country more ^it to entertain an
army: And duke Philibert Emanuel found this place so much to his liking, as he
had a desire to settle his abode there, and to make Sauillan the head town of
the province.

Cheue is the chief town of a goodly Marquisat, which contains six and
twenty little valley, and lower is the pleasant country of Chirie. Afterward
they enter into the Frederic, and the Popes, these Lords retired themselves
from the subjection of the Empire, and lived after that manner, till (fearing
the ambition and power of the dukes of Milan) they cast themselves into the
arms of Ame the first, duke of Sauoy. Beyond the river of Po, they discover
Bra, in the which are above seven hundred Families, Caramagne, Someriue,
Cerisoles, famous for the defeat of the Marquis of Guast by the duke of
Anguien. Then may you see Villastellon, Poerin, Villeneufue, a strong place,
Canuelle, and Cortemille, divided into two parts by the river of Bormie. After
which there are to be seen an infinite number of castles belonging to the
county of Ast; and above it Coconas a county, which has of late years been
made subject to the house of Sauoy, by the means of duke Charles.

Pertinax was borne, and where are yet to be seen the Trophies of the
Augustus. The other places most remarkable of this county, are Contes, Peille,
Saourge, which has a strong castle, Brique, which contains about four or
five hundred Families, Lantusque, a reasonable good place, and the chief of a
valley, as S. Dalmace is of the plain; Boglie, the chief Town of a rich
County: Poget confines with Prouence: Barcelonette the country of Cardinal
Hugues, the chief of a valley, and a place of good traffic: Sospelle is a
goodly place, well built, where, among other things, there is a fountain of
delicat water, which they have brought from the neighbor mountains. But to
speak something in particular of Nizze, it is a fair town, strong, and well
peopled; the houses are five and six stories high, and the streets very
straight, especially that which goes from the foot of the mountain, unto the
Ports of S.

The Quality.


As for Piedmont, it is watered by the rivers of Po, Tanare, Stoure, Door, and
about 28 other rivers great and small, and with diverse channells, whereof there
are 8 in the territory of Cune. They hold that there is no part of Italy more
pleasing, more abounding in corn, wine, fruits, venison, cattle, cheese,
chestnuts, hemp, flax, and minerals. The country about Ast is watered by
rivers, shadowed by woods, raised by pleasing hills: it has goodly Pliny
makes mention of some mines of gold in the country about Vercel, whereof there
are some marks yet to be seen toward Ponderan. Near to Lamporeggio is great
store of hemp. The vallie of Ost is of two days journey, on the left hand it
is full of corn, and on the right planted with excellent vines, whereof the best
are those of Calogne. A quarter of a mile from Turin on the banks of Po is a
mountain which does rise and fall, advance and retire in diverse places so fitly,
as it has water in all places: it bears hay, fruits of all sorts, and very
good wine. The territory about Mondeui is of a great circuit: there grows
excellent wine on the side of the hill, great store of grain in the plain, and
an infinite

They have discovered goodly quarries of marble, and among others one of white
marble,

In regard of the county of Nizze, although the country be for the ^ost part
rough and full of mountains, yet it is so well manured, as they have not any
need of their neighbors, except Nizze which wants wheat: there run through the
mountains of this country about twelve rivers, which abound with trouts. The
country near unto Contes yields great store of oil, and abundance of
chestnuts: and that about Peille abounds in wine, corn, and oil, the which is
much esteemed for the bounty. Saourge, has the and chestnuts. But Nizze which
abounds in other things, has neither come nor flesh for

The Manners.


The Piedmontois are good soldiers, and apt to learning, open, round, and
free, civil enough, and courteous to strangers. They of Vercel make profession
of nobility and greatness, and desire to be esteemed of their neighbors. The
inhabitants of Turin have few words, they are high minded, soden, and make
prosession of nobility: there reigns yet amongst them the factions of the
Guelses and Gibellins, which are extinct in all the rest of the province. They
of Biele are subtle headed, active, and careful in their affairs, neither
will they be easily deceived in their contracts. The inhabitants of Quiers and
Cune are very industrious and valiant, whereof they have made proose in three
great sieges. Been has inhabitants fit for arms and learning. Barge is famous
for the great number of milles and shops whereas they make great store of
arms, the which the inhabitants

The Riches.
Lesdeguieres drew the war into Piedmont) eleven millions of crowns
extraordinary, in few years, besides the lodging of soldiers. They send
forth corn, cattle, much hemp, store of rice, cheese, wine, paper, fustian,
and raw silks. It contains about fifty Earledomes, and fifteen Marquisats,
with a great number of other Lordships which do not yield to the best, besides
twenty rich Abbeys, with many good Benefices. There is not any exceedingly
rich, for that the wealth is distributed

The custom of salt, fifty thousand crowns yearly.

The toll of Suse, twenty four thousand crowns by the year.

The foreign Imposition, eighteen thousand crowns yearly.

The other customs comprehending the toll of Villefranche, five and twenty
thousand

The ancient Ordinary, with the Bayliwicke, seventy thousand crowns yearly.



Consiscations of goods, condemnations, increase of tolls, composition of
Mortmains, which are men that cannot dispose of their estates, unless they
compound with the Prince; the tribute of Jews and such like, fifty thousand
crowns. So as they have made the Duke of Sauoys reuenews to be but five
hundred thousand crowns a year. But it appears plainly by the eleven
millions of extraordinary, which he has drawn in few years out of his
Country of Piedmont, and by the sums which he

The Forces.
Henry the Great, the French king, took it. It was somewhat commanded, so as
they might easily discover them that were within the place: And the Governor
was much amazed, hearing himself to be saluted early in the morning with the
cannon, from that place whither they had carried it with great diligence. Some
say that the duke of Sauoy has caused that place of command to be cut away,
and that this castle is not now subject to any

As for Piedmont, there is a Citadel which has five Bastions, it is so fair
and great as you shall hardly find any one to equal it. And omitting the great
number of instruments of war that are in it, it shall be fit to speak
something of an admirable well or pit which is in the midst of it, whereas
five hundred horses, yea a thousand or more may go and drink together, without
any hinderance one unto another, either in going down or coming up. The duke
does commonly entertain for the guard of this Cittadell Charles, endured a
long battery. Briquiras stands in one of the best scituations that can be
seen, but it is not fortified, as it were fit. Centalis reasonably well
fortified: and Ciuas is a place which they hold among the best. There are
garrisons also at Baid and at Monquiet, two places which are reasonably strong
and good.

As for the County of Nizze, the roughness of the Country is the cause that
there are many places exceeding strong, and many passages so narrow as ten men
may make head against ten thousand, as is that which they call the Pace of the
Virgin. They Charles of Bourbon passing out of Italy into Spain, and having
well observed this place, Charles; who having more carefully considered of the
situation, ordained, that it should be for^^fied, and made it so defensible in
few years as it endured the assaults of Barbarousse, in the year 1543, who
presented himself before it with near two hundred sail, and battered it
furiously. If this fort could not then be taken, being unfinished, what shall
it be at this present being so fortified, that having well balanced the
natural situation, and that which has been added by art, together with the
country wherein it is situated, betwixt Italy and France, one hundred and
Muce of Iustinopolis, who remained sometime at Nizze, had been accustomed to
number among the miracles of the world, the which they made after this manner.
They imagining that there would want nothing for a fort of so great importance,
but a spring which might never fail, a Germane Enginer promised duke Charles
to find one; who having seen water to come forth in many places at the foot of
the mountain, and especially a fountain which ran down into the sea, he thought
that in digging deep into the rock, he might come unto these springs: and
settling himself to work with this imagination, he labored for certain
months, but Charles understanding, he called him back to Nizze, and
encouraged him to continue his desseigne, the which was accomplished with a
happy success.

On the highest part of the fort stands the dungeon, divided from the rest by a
wall; and throughout all the place there are little risings which may be so
sortified, as the whole place may be defended by degrees. To the fortification
of duke Charles, duke Philibert Emanuell added that which they call the
Citadel, with the which he embraced the place, whereas the Turks being
camped, had planted their battery. The duke of Sauoy does commonly entertain
in this place a garrison of four hundred soldiers, and a sufficient

Betwixt Nizze and Ville franche is the fort of S. Alban, the which is in a
manner equally distant from the one and the other of these two towns. And for
that places serve for no purpose in a country, if they be not furnished with
good men, the duke of Sauoy does commonly entertain good garrisons of
soldiers in Sauoy and Piedmont, and he has the inhabitants of Piedmont, which
are for the most given to arms.

It shall be convenient to speak something touching that which he may fear,
and whereon he may be assured. First according to the outward appearance, he
has no cause of fear toward Milan, by reason of the strict alliance which is
betwixt him and the king of Spain. And notwithstanding that this king does see
plainly that his highness does not Ifanta of Spain, which was, to deliver
into his hands the duchy of Milan: and that which will always keep back the
king of Spain, will be the consideration of the passage for his soldiers, in
case that wars should be revived again with the united provinces of the Low
Countries; for that if he were in bad terms with the Duke, it were impossible
for him to find a passage. He is tied in be a great support unto the duke, as
we may judge by things past: for whiles that Charles Francis he suddenly lost
his Estate of Sauoy, the which was not only not defended by them, but was for
the most part taken by them, saying, That they would pay themselves for their
old debts.

He might fear the allies of them of Geneua, whose open and sworn enemy he
is: but they will not put themselves to field so lightly against this duke, as
we may see by the attempts which he has made against Geneua: and as for this
town, it is too weak to make any enterprise, and it will be sufficient, if it
shall be able to keep and defend it self

As for the duke of Mantoua, the marriage of the children of these two dukes,
will keep them hereafter (as we may judge) in good terms, and league,
notwithstanding the ancient quarrel for the Marquisat of Montferrat which
has ceased by this marriage: but the late death of the young prince of
Montoua, has revived this quarrel, whereupon both these dukes are fallen to
arms, he of Sauoy having seized upon some places in the Marquisat.

As for the French king, since the exchange of the Marquisat of Salusses with
Bresse, and other lands adioining, they speak of nothing but friendship
betwixt the king and his highness, and especially since the duke was distasted
of the Spaniards: yea they

The pretensions of the duke of Sauoy.


First he has pretensions to Geneua by many good reasons, since that the
Geneuois retired themselves from the obedience of this duke, in the year 1535,
as every man knows.

The first reason is, that they find declarations of Emperors, wherein it is
specified,

Moreover they did always observe until that time, that the dukes of Sauoy
might pardon any crime whatsoever at their pleasures: and neither the Bishop
nor communaltie might in cases which came to their knowledge pronounce
sentence, and execute it, before they had first acquainted the dukes magistrates
therewith, to the end they might see if it were just, and needful to be
published, or else pardon him that was accused of any

They of Geneua had in the year 1519 made a league with them of Fribourg, and
the duke contradicting it, they had arbitrarie Judges, who gave sentence in his
favor; by the which it was said that the league was void without his consent*
and all the other Cantons made their declarations against Fribourg, who would
have maintained this league, the which was dissolved by this means.

But to omit many others, it shall suffice for the clearing of this title, to
say that duke Charles, grandfather to this man, went often to Geneua with the
lady Beatrix his wife, at which time they presented the keys of the town unto
him, and made many other demonstrations unto him which are acustomed to be done
to sovereign princes.

He pretends the Marquisat of Montferrat for three reasons: the first for that
it was promised in dowry to a duke of Sauoy, in case that the masculine line
of the Pal^ologues (whose house is extinct) should fail: the second, for that
they promised him for this dowry one hundred thousand crowns, the which were
never paid, and the condition Charles the fifth, he broke (...) condition,
which was, That the issue male of the house of Paleologues failing, the
Marquisat should come unto the house of Sauoy; neither had he any regard unto
the other two causes of pretention, for that the duchess of Montoua was
daughter unto the

He has also a pretention to Achaia, for that Philip of Sauoy, son to Thomas
the third, married a daughter to the Prince of Achaia, called Iambe; and by the
means of ^his marriage, he made war against the Despot of Greece and his
subjects, who being ^^^quished, left him absolute Master of his Country: He
had one son called Iambe, (...) was Prince of Achaia, and he had Amedee for
his son, who succeeded in the third (...) and dying without issue male, had
for successor Lewis his brother, who had no (...): And a Queen of Sicile,
pretending that the fee was fallen unto her, yielded ^^^ghts to the great
Master of Rhodes, after which the Turk seized thereon.


THere is a Governor in Sauoy, who makes his ordinary residence at Chambery.

These is also in Piedmont another Senate, like unto that of Sauoy, the which
does judge of all civil and criminal causes, and is continually much busied,
for that every place or

The head and president of this Senate, and of that of Sauoy is the high
Chancellor, who serves for both Provinces, and upon him does the greatest part
of the government dep^^d: yea if he were more active he might be termed a
second duke. But for that he (...) embrace so many businesses, the duke
imployes many others, that is to say, Counselors, Masters of requests, and
Martial men.


THey are descended from the house of Saxony, and especially from the stem
of Otho the second: and this race continued under the title of Earls, near
four hundred years, until that Ame was created duke by the Emperor
Sigismond, at the Council of Constance. But to the end that we may take this
House from the first begi^^^ng, you must understand, that when as Raoul, and
Boson, reigned in Bourgondie, and (...) the third held the Empire, Berold or
Berauld issued from the house of Saxony, and by consequence a near kinsman to
the Emperor, being without land, or at the le^^^ having not so much as he
desired, was invested by the Emperor in the lands of Sauoy, Boson and Raoul,
kings of Bourgondie, consented to this imperial donation; so as it was not by
the sword that Berold made himself earl of Sauoy, as some would affirm.

This Berold had for his successor Humbert, surnamed White Hands, who held the
(...) of Sauoy in the year of Christ 1000, and was the first earl of
Maurienne. He married Adheleide the only daughter of the Marquis of Suse,
whereby this Marquisat

Of this Humbert came Ame, the first of that name, earl of Maurienne, who was
also the first earl of Sauoy, yet others attribute this to Ame the second. He
married Ioane of Bourgondie, by whom he had two sons, that is to say, Humbert
and Ame. In his time Berenger, Archdeacon of Angiers, spread his opinion.

Humbert the second was successor to Ame the first. He married Laurence,
daughter to the earl of Venice, and he conquered the country of Tarantaise,
then he went the voyage of the Holy Land with the other Christian Princes who
crossed themselves for this conquest. Adheleide, daughter to this earl, was
married to Lewis the Gross, king of Lewis the Young. And at this time began
the order of the Carthusian Monks.

Ame the second succeeded Humbert the second, who having assisted the Emperor
Henry the fourth, when as he went to receive the Crown at Rome, was in
recompense thereof invested in the county of Sauoy, and his country made a
fee of the Empire. Ame had war against the earl of Geneua, for that he had
promised to marry his daughter, and did not perform it, but took to wife
Guigonne, daughter to the earl of Albon. Ame went also to the Holy Land, and
died in the realm of Cypres, in the year of our Lord God 1154, in the time of
the Emperor Frederick Barbarousse, and of Lewis the Young, king of France.

Humbert, the third of that name, his son, and second earl of Sauoy,
succeeded him: he married Mahaut, daughter to Tierry earl of Flanders; and
afterward Anne, daughter to a German earl; and to his third wife he took
Parnelle, daughter to the earl of Bourgondie, and widow to the duke of
Austria, by whom he had one son called Thomas. Then he made the voyage to
Jerusalem, with Philip Augustus king of France, in the year of our Redemption
1188.

Thomas remained very young, and was brought up by the earl of Bourgondie,
his uncle by the mother-side: He married Beatrix, daughter to Guy earl of
Geneua, in despite of her father, and forced him in the end to take the oath
of fealty, and to hold his earldom of Geneua in homage of the house of
Sauoy. This Earl Thomas made Thomas came many children, whose names I will set
down, to give knowledge of the Genealogies.

First he had of the said Beatrix, Ame the third of that name, who first of all
married the daughter of the Dauphine of Viennois; but she dying without
children, he took to wife Cecile, daughter to Raymond earl of Saint Gilles.
The second son of the said Thomas was Humbert, who died in the war which
the great master of Prusse had against the Infidells, in the year of our Lord
1235. Thomas was the third son of earl Thomas, who married Ioane Countess
of Flanders, daughter to Baldwin Emperor of Constantinople, as the Annalles of
Sauoy say: But the Cronicles of Flanders and France speak little of Thomas,
nor of his marriage with the daughter of Flanders: but after the death of
Ferrand of Portugal, and of this Thomas there came no issue by his first wife.
But having taken to his second wife a Lady of the house of Ficsco of Genoa, he
had Ame who was afterward earl of Sauoy. William of Sauoy, was the fourth
son of Thomas Earl of Sauoy; he became a Churchman, and followed Pope
Innocent the fourth, who made him Bishop of Valencia. The fifth son was called
Ame, who being a Leper, retired himself to Solitariness. Peter of Sauoy was
the sixth, who afterward commanded over the country of Sauoy. Boniface was
the seventh, who following the Church, the Pope gave him the Archbishopric of
Canturburie in England. The eight was Philip, a valiant man, who also was earl
of Sauoy. The daughters were Beatrix, wife to Raymond earl of Pro- Charles,
brother to Saint Lewis, who was afterward king of Naples and Sicile: and the
other was Marguerite, married into Germany.

Boniface succeeded Ame the third, who being more hardy than wise, and giving
battle Peter brother to the deceased Boniface succeeded in the State,
notwithstanding that Ame the third had left a daug^ter, called Constance: but
in Sauoy the daughters are excluded from the inherita^^^* This Earl conquered
the countries of Val d' Ost, and Chablais.

^^^er being dead without children, Philip of Sauoy his brother came unto the
succes^^^^* He was before of the Church, and had great spiritual livings: but
leaving it all he married Alix Countess Palatine of Bourgondie, and was
afterward possessor of his brothers Estates, the which he did not long enjoy,
for he died of a dropsy, having no

Ame the fourth his nephew succeeded him, being son to Thomas, he had married
a niece to Pope Innocent the fourth: this man was surnamed the Great, by reason
of his valor, and goodly stature. He married Sybille countess of Basge, and
lady of Bresse, and (...) marriage, these two pieces were united to the house
of Sauoy. He had war against t^^ ^auphine of Viennois, and the earl of Geneua
his ancient enemy, and was chosen (...) of the Empire, by the Emperor Henry of
Luxembourg: after which he died in the year of Grace 1323, going to Auignon to
visit the Pope.

^^^ard eldest son to Count Ame succeeded his father, and was more bountiful
than wa^ (...), whereby he did wonderfully oppress his subjects. He married
the duke of Bourgondies Marguerite, whom he married to John of Brittane, son
to Arthur earl of Richmond, and died without issue male.

Ame his brother the fifth of that name succeeded him, depriving his niece of
the inheritance, according to the ancient law and custom of Sauoy. He married
Yoland daughter to the marquis of Montferrat, issued from the race of
Paleologues, and had one son called Ame, as himself, and one daughter
married to Galeas earl of Vertuz, and afterward duke of Milan: he had also
another son, but he died young.

(...) the sixth his son succeeded him, and by reason of his infancy, he was
pupil to Willi^^ of Baume. This earl having gotten the prise at a tournee
which was made the first day of May, was called the green Knight. Ame married
the lady Bonne sister to Lewis Alexis. Before his death he married his son to
the duke of Berryes daughter, then he made a voyage to Naples with the duke of
Anjou, and there died old, being famous for his virtues and valor, in the
year 1383.

Ame the seventh succeeded his father, and to him

Ame the eight, who was created duke of Sauoy by the Emperor Sigismond at the
council of Constance, then he resigned his Estates unto his son, and was
afterward made Pope besides his son Lewis, he had a daughter called Mary,
who was married to the Ame his father.

Ame the ninth of that name who was troubled with the falling sickness, and
endured it with much patience: he was brother to the abouenamed duke Lewis, and
married Charl^tte the only daughter of John king of Cipres; but he could not
enjoy the realm, by reason of the opposition of John the bastard, who was
supported by the Sultan of Aegipt. In the end Ame married Yoland daughter to
Charles the seventh, the French king, by whom he had four sons, and as many
daughters.

Philibert son to Ame the ninth succeeded him.

Charles his brother came to succeed him in his Estates, and married Blanch
marquise of Mo^t^errat, by whom he had John Charles, who was also called Ame,
he died young, and left for successor.

Philibert his uncle, who married Marguerit daughter to the duke of Bourbon.

Philibert the second succeeded him: he was son in law to the Emperor
Maximilian,

Charles his brother, who married the daughter of Emanuell king of Portugal,
and sister to the wife of the Emperor Charles the fifth, and of this marriage
came Charles who died very young in Spain, and Philibert in his fathers life
time was received prince of Piedmont.

Philibert Emanuell succeeded Charles the third, he was expelled his Estates by
king Francis the first, and then restored by the means of a marriage which was
made betwixt him and Marguerite, daughter to the said king Francis.

He had for his successor Charles Emanuel duke of Sauoy, who lives at this
present, and Catherine daughter to Philip the second, king of Spain.

The Estate of the Church of Rome.
OF THE ESTATE OF THE CHVRCH OF ROME.
The Contents.
1. THe limits and bounds of the Popes Estate: his countries and chief towns.
And of the absolute power which he pretends over many realms. 2. Description
of the city of Rome, the ordinary seat of the Popes, and of the Antiquities,
and first of the bridge of Saint Ange. 3. Of the Island Tiberine. Of the
Pyramides, Colombes of admirable height, Thermes and Stoues, Antoniennes and
others, Sepultures of Emperors, Theaters, Arches, Temples, and Porches. 4. The
circuit of old Rome fifty miles,

THis Estate (not comprehending Beneuent nor Auignon) is at this

To satisfy this desire, I will begin by the bridge of Saint Angelo, which the
Ancients called Pons Elius. When you are upon the bridge, look down, and you
shall see within the river of Tybre some remainders of the triumphall bridge,
by the which all the triumphs did in old time pass, going to the Capital.
Turning upon the right hand you Adrian, upon the top whereof, there was a
vessel or bowl of brass guilt of an admirable greatness, the which stands at
this day uncovered in the midst of Saint Peter's Court. But before you part
from Saint Peter, you may see Belueder, where there are many goodly Statues in
the privy Garden, and especially that renowned Laocoon, after the Modelle
whereof, that which is in the Gardens at Fontainebleau was made. And in Saint
Peter's place, is Sixtus the fifth.

After this you must come behind to the Port of the holy Ghost, and being
without it, you shall see on high, upon the right hand, a certain little
Church called S. Onofrie, from which place unto S. Peter Monitorio, you see the
little Hill which the Ancients called Ianiculum, one of the seven Mountains
of Rome, and the little Hill which is before S. Peter called Vatican, is also
one of the seven Mountains. Looking from Saint Onofrie, unto Saint Peter
Monitorio downward, you shall descouer the place where was the Circus or place
for games of Julius Caesar, the which was very long and broad,

Going thus straight on by the street which bends toward Ripa, you come unto
Saint Marie in Trasteuere, or beyond the river of Tybre, where there is at this
day the Church to be seen which the Ancients called Tiberna meritoria, for
that when as the soldiers came maimed from the wars, they were entertained
there all the rest of their lives. And before the great Altar the place is to
be seen, where (as they say) did spring a fountain of oil at the birth of
our Savior, and did run abundantly a whole day.

Going still toward Ripa, whereas they sell wine, there are many goodly
Gardens, Houses, and Churches to be seen, in the same place whereas in old
time the Romans Arcenall or Storehouse for arms did stand, the greatness
whereof may well be conceived Fat benfratelli. There were two Temples in this
Island, the one of Jupiter Licaonia, the other of Esculapius, whose figure was
brought thither in form of a Serpent. This Island has the form of a Ship,
wide in the midst, and some quarter of a mile long, and narrow at either end.
There are two bridges to come into it, the one was called Pons Fabricius by the
Ancients, for that Lucius Fabricius caused it to be made, and it is now called
the bridge of the four Heads. The other bridge which ioynes the Island to the
river of Trasteuere is called Saint Bartholomews, of the Church which stands in
the Island dedicated to that Apostle. It was in old time called

After this, passing from the other side of the said Island, you go always
toward Trasteuere, by a street which they find at the foot of the bridge of
the said Island, and going on straight, you come unto a new bridge, the which
is called at this day Saint Marie Egiptiaca, of a Church thereby dedicated to
that Saint, and the Ancients called it Pons Senatorius At the foot of this
bridge, you find a ruined Palace, the which according to the common opinion,
was Pilats Palace. But the judicious say, That this was the Palace of Nicholas
Renze, or of the Vrsins, as does appear at this day upon one of the gates in
two verses. Right against it is to be seen an ancient Temple of the Moon,
and of the other side, that which was dedicated to the Sun. Having past them,
you discover a Augustine did read. After that, you come to the foot of Mont
Auentin, near unto which are to be seen the ruins of a bridge in the river
the which in old time was called Sublicius, the which Horatius C^cles defended
against all the power of the Tuscans, who had defeated the Romans, and pursued
them to enter the City, but he stayed them by his valor, until the bridge
was broken down behind them, and then he leapt into the river, and saved
himself by his skill in swimming.

Going under the said Mountain near the river of Tybre toward S. Paul, you
may Iulio Caesarin. Having past this, you go still toward S. Paul, and find a
very goodly meadow, where as the Romans made their Olympicke

Looking toward the gate of Saint Paul, you shall see a very ancient Pyramede
shut (...) wall, the which they say was the sepulture of Sextius: and taking
the way upon the ^^ft hand of Saint Paul's gate it leads you to S. Gregory,
where passing Mont Auen^^^ ^ou see great ruins of buildings, and in this way
there is a little river whereas the ^^^en do commotly, wash beneath Saint
Gregory; and here you must observe it well, for that you are in that great
Circus whereas they were wont to run with their coaches, Septizonium Seueri, or
the seven (...) or girdles of Seuerus.

A little above it, are the Thermes or Stoues of Anthony, the which are
wonderful to behold: and on the other side, near to Saint Balbina is to be
seen the Churchyard of (...) and of Basil; but all is ruined. Going afterward
to the Church of Saint Sixtus (...) straight way which goes to Saint Sebastian,
you enter on the left hand into a little (...) which leads to Saint Stephen the
Round, or Rotundo, the which was in old time the ^^mple of Faunus: and
afterward you shall see certain high walls the which they say (...) been part
of the Aqueducts which went to the Capitol, and in this place is Mont John de
Lateran, where you shall see the ancient building beautified by the New, which
was made by Sixtus the fifth. Then you take your way to the holy Cross in
Jerusalem, where before the Church door, you find a place in which was Venus
Temple, whereas the curtizans of that time were wont yearly to celebrat their
Feast on the twentieth of August: and some say that the Theater which is in the
Church of the holy Cross, was that of Statilius Taurns, the which was great
and fair as may be easily coniectured.

After this you must return toward old Rome, and take the way of Port Mayor,
which go^^ to Saint Marie Mayor, so passing straight on, you shall find the
Trophies of Marius, which are exceeding fair.

Galiens Arch, the which is now called the Arch of S. Vite, and it is yet
entire, where were tied the keys of Tiuoli underneath near unto the Inn. And
thus you have viewed one quarter of the city.

To observe the other part of Rome, you must begin whereas you see behind the
Church a great part of Augustus Sepulture, the which with the wood did extend
unto the Church of S. Marie del Popolo, and the Spire which lay in that street
has bin transported to S. Marie Mayor to be set up there.

The port which they now call del Popolo, or of the People, and which was
called by the Ancients Flaminia, or Flumentana, is joined to the Church del
Popolo: this has been enlarged and beautified much by Pope Pius the fourth,
who has also repaired the Iulio the third. Now you must return back toward
the Trinity, under the which was that great Circus of Augustus: and in the
place whereas stands the Trinity Church, going unto Mont Cauallo, were (as
they say) the goodly gardens of Salust. Going afterward toward Mont
Quirinall, which at this day they call Mont Cauallo, under the Cardinal of
Ferrares vineyard, are to be seen c^rtaine ancient grots or caves, near unto
the which the Romans made their Florall games; and many curtizans and loose
women lived in those caves; and upon the place which may yet be seen, in the
said Cardinals vienyard there was an altar dedicated to Apollo.

Nero, whose palace is near unto it: and on the other side is the Church
which they say was sometimes the temple of the Sun; but it is not true, for
that it appears unto this day, that there was a secret way made upon very
goodly pillars, which came from his palace, unto a place called Oratorium
Neronis or Neros Oratorie, where there is a great part of the Church yet
standing. Afterward you must take the right hand way to the Bathes of
Dioclesian, and Constantine which did reach unto Saint Susanna: and on the
other side of these Stoues was the Senate of Matrons poor Widows and Orphans,
where before the Romans did enter, they did visit the Altar of Apollo, which
was right against this place.

Then they come to the Stoues of Dioclesian, the which are such, as it seems
the like cannot be built, and some say there are caves under them, whereof the
one goes to the Capitole, the other to S. Sebastian, and the third under Tiber
to the Vatican.

After which, you shall see the street called Pia, the which was made so
straight, long, Pius the fourth whose name it carries: there may you also see
that admirable and pleasant vineyard of the Cardinal of Ferrara, as also that
of Pope Sixtus the fifth, with goodly buildings: and near unto it is the
vineyard of the Cardinal of Carpy, full of anticke and modern things, which
are very rare: and upon the same way are many others which are fair, but not
to be compared to the three former. At the end of this goodly street, there is
a port answerable unto it, the which was made by Pius the fourth, whose name
also it carries.

From thence you may go unto Saint Agnes, by the way called Nomentana, where
you shall see a little ancient Temple very fair, the which they say had been
dedicated unto Bacchus, and in like manner there is a tomb of Porphirie the
greatest and fairest that Dioclesians Stoues, which were dedicated by Pope Pius
the fourth, to the honor of the Virgin Mary; you must take the way which goes
to saint Mary Mayor, and you shall find under that Church in the valley, a
Church which they call Saint Potentienna, the which in old time was the Stoue
called Nouatien: and upon the top of the mountain whereas now stands the
Monastery of Saint Laurence in Valisperne, were the Olimpicke Stoues, which
did reach from one side unto the other: and whereas the Church of Saint Mary
Mayor stands, the same was in old time the Temple of Isis, which the Romans
had in great veneration; and whereas the Chapel of S. Luke was (near unto
Saint Mary's Church down to the bottom) they did behold the wood conscrated
to Juno the great goddess of the Romans, the which is at this day
incorporated Sixtus.

Above it in the vineyard of S. Anthony was that rich and admirable temple of
Diana, whereas the Romans made their sacrifices with great charge: on the
other side whereas now stands the Church of S. Martin, was in old time the
Temple of Mars, whom they held for the god of war. Having past the said Church,
you come unto a street which does lead directly to S. Peter in Vincula, or in
bonds: but leaving this street, and taking the first lane you shall find, you
shall see an admirable house which the Emperor Titus made for his high priest.

Having seen this, you must descend by the first street, among the vines which
leads to S. Clement, a convent of religious men: then coming to that admirable
TheatreVespasian

Having past unto the other side you shall see Constantins Arch, which is yet
worth the viewing: and near unto it in the garden of the Monks of Saint Mary
the New, you shall see some remainders of the Temple of the god Serapis. And
going on you shall pass Vespasians Arch, which they did erect for him whenas
he returned in triumph from Jerusalem. Farther on, you shall see the Temple of
Peace in a manner ruined: and right against it Mont Palatin, which they call at
this day the great Palace, where there is a goodly vine of the Farneses.

Near unto this place was the Temple of Romulus, the which is converted into
the Cosmo and Damian; and ioining unto it is the Temple of Marcus Aurelius, and
of Faustina his wife, daughter to Antonius Pius, whose Palace is behind the
said Temple. Right against it, there was a goodly Temple dedicated to the
godddesse Venus, the which is now converted into a Church called Saint Maria
Laberatrice dalle pene ^wordS; Inferno, Curtius was in this place.

In the Church whereas you see a brazen door near to the Arch of Septimius,
was (as they affirm) the Temple of Saturn, in the which the treasure of the
people of Rome was kept; but it is now called S. Adrian.

The Arch whereof I spoke, was made by Lucius Septimius Seuerus, and is very
fair. In a corner of the street you shall see a statue leaning, which they call
Marforio. On the other side of the Arch, where there are three pillars to be
seen, was the Temple of Concord: Jupiter, the which was never reedified since
the Capitole was burnt. There was also near unto this Temple, that of Ceres,
and upon this place is to be seen at this day a Brazen man on horseback, the
which is the Emperor Marcus Aurelius. From this place you may view the
greatest part of all Rome, in a goodly prospectiue. But from thence you
mustturne a little backward, to the foot of the backside of the Capitole, where
you shall find certain deep Cesternes made by the Romans to keep their salt
and corn, and these places were in old time called Horrea or Storehouses.

From thence you pass near to S. Marie of Consolation, and not far from
thence you see the Arch of Beeues: and you may also see the Theater of
Marcellus, which is Octauia, sister to Augustus, but there are scarce any
marks now remaining. And at the entry of S. Ange, are the Porches of
Septimius Seuerus. Going afterward unto Campo di Fior, or the field of
Flowers, you find the Palace of Vrsins, the which was in old time the Theater
of Pompey, whose porch was behind. Near unto it is the good^y palace of Capi
di Ferro, or Heads of iron, and beyond it is that of the Farneses, made with
admi^able Architecture, and full of goodly Antiquities.

But to finish this Suruay of Rome, we must begin the third time at the field
of Mars, or to speak better, at the place called Colonne, where you shall see
the Pillar of Antonius Pius one hundred seventy seven foot high, with a Staire
case within it, made like a Snaile, where there are one hundred and forty
steps, and six and fifty windows. Having seen this, you must go to the place
called Charre, and turn upon the right hand being at the Spicerie, the which
descends unto the Vestall Virgins, a Temple in old time much esteemed by the
Romans, and now full of Orphants. Then must you return by the same street, and
go always right on toward S. Mark, until you come unto a place called
Macello de Corui, where you shall see Traians Pillar, the which is one hundred
twenty and three foot high, and has a staire within it of 155 steps, and five
and forty windows.

Then returning back, you see the Church of Minerua, which in old time carried
the same name, but it was afterward ruined, with another goodly building. But
I had forgotten, Ierosme Garimbert, where you may see many rare things.

Not far from thence on the other side, is the Pantheon, at this day called
Rotundo, a goodly ancient place built by Marcus Agrippa, and behind it whereas
they sell Tables of wood, were sometimes the stoues of Agrippa. Behind S.
Eustache were the stoues of Nero, which are partly in our Ladies palace: you
shall see goodly remainders thereabouts. There is now a palace built by the
Abbot Vento.

Having past our Ladies place, you enter into that of Nauone, whereas every
Wednesday

At the foot of this place, under the great palace of the Vrsins, is the Image
of Pasquin: And these be all the Antiquities which are to be seen in Rome, the
which I have described unto you as well as I could: but before I leave it I
will add something more.

Rome contained in Romulus time Mont Capitolin and the Palatin, with the
valleys which are in the midst, and with three ports; the first was called
Trigonia, for the triangle it made near to the foot of Mont Palantin; the
second Pandana, for that it was continually Carmenta, mother to Euander, who
dwelt there, and it was called Scelerata, or Wretched, for the death of the 300
Fabiens which went out at that gate, and were all slain in one day near unto
the river of Aron. But by the ruin of the town of Alba, and the peace betwixt
the Sabins and the Romans, they began to augment the circuit of their town,
compassing in seven Mountains, as we find it at this day: so as in the time of
the Emperor Claudius there were six hundred and thirty towers, and 22000
porches. And as for the circuit of the walls, some Authors write, That it was
of fifty miles, others of two and thirty, some of eight and twenty: but at
this day, with the Trasteuere, and

As for the Ports, there is a difference among Authors, as well in regard of
the number, as the names: for some say thirty, and others 24: but at this day
there are but 18 open, which shut up the seven hills: and the whole City is
divided into seven Regions.

del Popolo, called in old time Flumentana, for that it was near unto the
river of Tyber: it was also called Flaminia, because that via Flaminia past by
it.

Pinciana, so called of Pinciano the Senator; it was also in old time called
Collatina, of Collatia, a castle not far from Rome.

The port Salaria, so called of the Salt which was brought from the Sabins to
Rome: It had also the name of Quirinale, being near unto that Hill, and also
Agonale: the Gauls entered by this port when they sacked Rome.

The port of S. Agnes, it was called in old time Viminalis, as some hold of the
Temple of Jupiter Vimineo: it was also called Figulense, for that the Potters
dwelt without the gate; and Numentana.

The port of S. Laurence, sometimes called Tyburtina, and also Taurina, by
reason of a Bulls head which is yet to be seen upon the forefront toward the
East.

The port of Major, called by the Ancients Labicana, Prenestina, and Neuia, of
a wood of that name near unto it.

The port of S. John, called Celimontana of Mont Celio, Septimia, and Asinaria.

Port Latina, so called for that it was the way to Latium, and does still
retain the name; it was sometimes called Florentina.

The port of S. Sebastian, it is so called for that they go that way to S.
Sebastians Church without the City: it was also called Appia, of Appius the
Censor, who made the way Appia out at this gate; Fontinale, of the abundance
of fountains; and Capena, of a town of that name, whereunto they went by this
gate. The Horatij being conquerors entered by this gate.

The Port of S. Paul, it is the last of this side the river of Tyber, it was in
old time called Tergemina. By this gate the Horatij went forth to fight with
the Curiatij, whom

Beyond the river of Tyber is the Port de Ripa, called by the Ancients
Portuense, for that by it they went to the Roman Port, built by Claudius.

The port of S. Pancratia, called in old time Aurelia, of the Emperor
Aurelius, or as some say, of the way Aurelia.

Septimiana, so called of Septimius the Emperor, and repaired by Pope
Alexander the sixth, and it was also called Fontinale.

Port Torrione, built by Pope Nicholas the fifth, it was otherwise called
Posterula.

The port of Pertusa, that of the holy Ghost, that of Belueder, and that of
Cenello, sometimes called Anea.

Appius Claudius the Censor caused to be paued from S. Sebastians gate to
Capoua: Traian continued it to Brindes, and it was called the Queen of Ways,
for that in a manner all the triumphs passed that way.

The Flaminian way which Ca^us Flaminius (being Consul) caused to be paued from
(...) del Popolo unto Rimini, and it was also called the Broad way, for that it
went into the Capitole.

(...) was paued by Lepidus and Flaminius (Consuls) unto Bolognia. (...) began
above the Collisee, and went to the Church of S. Luce in Orfee. (...) ^^cred
way, began near unto the Arch of Constantine, and went unto that of Titus,
(...) place of Rome, called Forum, unto the Capitol.

(...) New way, went by the great Palace unto the Septizone, and so unto
Antonies (...).

(...) Triumphall way went from the Vatican unto the Capitole, Vespasian
repaired it, (...) may see by an inscription of marble which is in the
Capitole, before the Palace of (...) Conseruators.

(...) Vitellian way, went from Mount Ianiculum unto the sea. (...) Straight
way, was to the field of Mars.

(...) was built upon seven hills, the first and most famous was Mont,
Capitoli^, or ^^^ian, and Saturnien, at this day called Campidoglio, or
Capitole, upon the which (...) were sixty Temples, Chappells, or houses
consecrated to the gods; and the most (...) of these Temples was that of
Jupiter, into the which they that came in triumph (...) when it was ended, to
give thanks for the victory which they had gotten. Mont (...), at this day
called Palace Mayor, or the great Palace: it is disinhabited and full of (...)
and has a mile in circuit. Romulus began the town there, for that he was bred
up (...) place: and Heliogabalus caused it to be paued with Porphirie.

(...) Auentin, or Querquetulan which has above two miles in circuit, is that
whereon (...) ^^rch of saint Sabina stands.

(...) Celio is that whereon are the Churches of saint John and saint Paul,
unto saint (...) Latran.

(...) Esquilin, or Cespien, where are the Churches of saint Mary Mayor, and
saint (...) Vincula.

(...) Viminal, whereon stand the Churches of saint Laurence, and saint
Potentienne. (...) Quirinal or Agonia, called at this day Mont Cauallo: these
are the seven hills (...) Rome stands on this side Tyber. Beyond the river or
in Trasteuere is

(...) Ianiculum, whereon saint Peter Montorio stands, and that of Pincia, on
which is the Trinity Church.

There are also other small hills, as the Vatican, whereon stands saint Peter's
Church (...) Popes Palace, the Citorie sometimes called the Citatorie, for
that they did cite (...) the ^^bes thither when they did assemble to make new
Magistrates. That of the Hortule^ ^^^ule Gardens, whereas Mont Pincia begins at
the port Salaria, and goes unto that (...) Popolo, and it was from this hill,
that they which did affect and labor for any of^^es, descended into the field
of Mars to demand them of the people.



This town has been seven times taken by diverse nations: three hundred
sixty and (...) years after it was built, it was taken by the Gauls
Se^onois, under their captain Totila made himself Ma^^^er thereof: and last
of all in the year 1527, on the sixth of May, it was taken by the (...) of the
Emperor Charles the fifth, being led by the duke of Bourbon. But notwith^^^^^ng
that it has been so often ruined, and that they have torn in pieces those
rare antiquities with all those proud buildings, yet if you look unto the
statlinesse of Palaces, Churches, and other buildings, the beauty of the
streets, and the greatness of the

Let us now see the rest of the state of the Church, seeing that we have taken
a suruay of the chief city.



Peter lest unto the Church of Rome, by the countess Mathilda in the time of
Pope Pescal in the year 1100, stretches from the river of Pesche which falls
into the sea, on this side Mont Argent^rius, and from Saint Quirice unto
Cepetan. Betwixt the rivers of Quiane and Tyber is the lake of Trasymenum, and
beyond



Sabina is a country compast in on either side by the Apennin: it is narrow,
and long from Tyber unto Lamentana. Others bound it betwixt the river of Negro
and the Appennin, and betwixt Tyber and Teueron which parts the Sabins from the
Equicoles. The chief places are Riete, Narni, Otricoli, Magliane, Farse, and
Palumbare.



Narses, Captain to Justinian and Justin Emperors, had expelled the Goths
out of Italy: and the first Exarque (which is as much to say as a Sovereign
Magistrate) was ^^^gon, who making his abode at Rauenna, as the kings of Goths
had done, changed (...) manner of government throughout the Provinces, putting
a Captain into eue^^^^ (...) of importance; the like did he at Rome,
displacing the Senate and Consulls. The (...) was then of great power, but the
Empire being a^terwards much ruined by the (...), it was extinct. The Exarcat
contained Rauenna, Sarcina, Class, Forli, and (...) ^^^opoli, which towns
made one Estate, and they called it Pentapoli: and with^^^ Esta^e, it contained
Bolonia, Reggium, Modena, Parma, Plaisance, with other (...) betwixt the
Appennin Hills and the Po. It ended in the year 751, whenas (...) of the
Lombards, took Rauenna; so as it continued one hundred eighty (...). And it
is a thing worthy of consideration, that the Roman Emperors, espe^^^^
^^^orius, then the Exarques, and last of all the kings of the Goths, held
Rauenna (...) all the towns of Italy, worthy of their abode.

(...) insolency of the Exarques toward the Pope, was the cause that the
Archbishop (...) revolted also against the Pope, in the time of Emerald: this
rebellion conti^^^ (...) the time of Pope Done, as others say of Agaton,
whenas the Archbishop Theo^^^ ^^^ting himself ill entreated by his Clergy,
submitted his Church unto the Pope. (...) ^rouince (whereof we now treat) was
first called Flaminia, but Charles the Great, (...) guish the name of the
Exarcat, and to make the people more affectionat to the (...) Rome, called it
Romagnia.

(...) estate of Ferrara is great and commodious, for that comprehending
Modena, Charles the fifth to duke Alphonso, for that part which was fallen (...)
Empire by the rebellion of Marck Pij the Lord thereof, and this duke obtained
(...) Marck, giving him the seigneurie of Saxole in exchange: but Lionel de Pij
(...) yield his part for any reasonable price or exchange, was expelled out of
that (...) held by this duke, with the Emperors permission, who then did lay in
deposito (...) ^^ice thereof one hundred thousand crowns into the Banque of
Venice, the (...) ^^^^el would never accept. The town of Ferrara has in
circuit six or seven miles, (...) goodly streets, honorable palaces, and a
good number of Churches and Mona^^^ (...) with a castle where the dukes did
usually abide. There is also an University, for the (...) of students in all
arts and sciences.

(...) county of Venisse belongs unto the Pope, and they do number in it
four (...) Clement the sixth, of Queen Ioane, daughter to Robert (...), in the
year of our Redemption 1352, but the county of Venisse was consis^^^ (...)
say) by the Apostacy of Count Raymond of Tolosa. The said town of Auig^^^
(...) those beginning there is no certainty, has in a manner all this of the
number of Clement (...) unto Gregory the eleventh.

The Quality.


Cornelius Tacitus commends the fertility of Italy, in the fields of Rieti,
and Terni. Pl^nie writes, That the meadows of the territory of Terni (which
they may ouerflow) weremowed four times a year, and those which could not be
watered, thrice. But the bounty of this country may well be known by the
greatness of their Turnups, and Cabadges. Pliny writes of the territory of
Rieti, That grass being cut in the day, it grows so fast in the night, as the
morning following a pole lying upon the ground will be all covered. The plain
which stretches from Spella unto Spolerum, and is eighteen^ miles long, and
four broad, is full of come and fruit; and that which extends from Peruse

But the territories of Rimini, of Fano, of Ascoli (especially from the mouth
of Tronto, unto that of Asone) of Fermo, Peruse, and of Cornet, are exceeding
delicat. They abound generally in come, wine, and oil, and send forth great
store, especially of wine and oil. There are many Lakes, amongst which is that
of Peruse, fuller of fish than any of the Lakes of Italy; that of Bolsene,
Brassian of Vic, of Piediluco, of Subiago, of Foglian, and



I will not dilate much upon the wines, but it shall suffice to say, That all
Romagnia, Vmbria, the Patrimony, Sabina, and the Campagnia of Rome, bear as
good wines as can be drunk: and it were superfluous to make mention here of
the wines of Cesene, Fayence, Rimini, Oruiete, Todi, Montesiascon, Abban, and
of many others. Neither will I speak of the Grapes of Amelia, S. Gemini, and
Narny.



The Campagnia of Rome has races of horses, which yield little to them of the
realm of Naples. They want no Forests also, where there is great store of
Acornes, and much good wood for building, and for many other necessary uses.

In many places they have quarries of good stone for buildings, among which
those of (...) (which they dig out and cut with great facility) carry the
price: and they do (...) resist the weather, but they grow better and more
firm with age.

(...) Marquisat of Ancona has plains and valleys which are rich in oil,
corn, and (...) county of Venisse is also very pleasing, and yields much unto
the owners, (...) of wines, the which are nothing inferior in strength and
abundance of fruits, (...) as good as can be found in any other place; the
which may be seen in Auig^^^ (...) ^her fruits come from all parts, which are
exceeding fair and good.

(...) ^eeing we have sufficiently made known the good qualities of the Estate
of the

(...) or the air, we must confess that the Estate of the Church is somewhat
incom^^^^ and annoied; for that the part toward the sea, all the country of
Cornet, and (...) Campagnia of Rome, has a troublesome and an unwholesome
air; the which (...) from the forests, which cover the greatest part of the
country along the sea (...) the marshes: the which cannot be prevented but by
cutting down the woods (...) the land fit for tillage, and drying up the
marrishes, but especially in making (...) ^^^dings for habitation. For the
territory of Rome and Campagnia, are in a man^^^ (...) any inhabitants, the
Pesants growing sick, not only by reason of the bad (...) of the ground,
whereon they sleep: and in like manner for the heat of the (...) the coldness
of the Moon; against which inconveniences they have no o^^^ (...), nor
remedy, but by their buildings, which may defend themform the bad (...) of the
air, and the Southernlie winds. And although that it be a difficult (...) it
more easy than it seems, if princes were as willingly drawn to make en^^^
(...) the good of posterity, as they are to those whereas they hope to reap a
pre^^^ (...). For why should not Anze, Ardea, Citta-Launia, and Asture, be
healthful at (...) seeing the air was not unwholesome in former times?

(...) ^^^^ish of Pontin (where in old time there were four and twenty
towns) was (...) for the most part and made labourable by Cethegus, and then
by Theodoric king of (...), but afterward the fields were overflowed again.
Sixtus the fifth had the same (...) a little before his death, employing not his
treasure, but his authority, and by (...) the territory of Sezza and Piperne
were much enlarged; and the air of Ter^^^^ much bettred, and in many places
they have made many goodly ponds. There (...) other thing for this effect, but
a continuation of labor and charge, with the (...) may keep clean the
channel of the river of Aufente, and the other (...)

(...) country of Ferrara has need of the like help: for in like manner they
must (...) passage to the waters of Aufente, to the end they do not drown the
terri^^^ (...) Terracina, and those that are near: also it is necessary to
make deeper the chan^^^ ^rince without disbursing any thing of his own, might
bring this enterprise to a good

I say the like of the spacious fields of the territory of Rauenna, of
Bagnacauallo, of Lugo, and of Bolognia, the which are drowned by the river of
Paduse. Hercules the first Duke of Ferrera dried up Samartina, Hippolytus,
Piatois, the Rauode, and the Lamberts Pogge.

Alpho^so the second, duke of Ferrara leaving the profitable, for the pleasing,
employed at Mesola, the time and labor, which the communalties were bound to
give for the containing of the river of Po within her bed, and to assure the
fields from the inundations of this flood; he caused them to toil in the
making of causies, digging of ditches, planting Alphonso had employed that
diligence about the river of Po, which he used at Mesola. It may be that
Alphonso being out of hope, that the duchy of Ferrara should remain in the
house of Est, cared not to leave it annoied, and damnified in so many places:
yet I wonder that foreseeing

But as for running waters, whereon tillage, and the fertility of the land does
partly depend, although the Estate of the Church has no want of rivers nor
lakes, yet the territory of Rome might be much bettered, bringing the river of
Teueron into the town, the which Sixtus the fifth had proiected. And it is said
of Claudius the Emperor, that he brought the little river of Anien to Rome,
with a new channel of stone, and divided it into many goodly lakes: and by the
means of this river, besides the good which this water would do unto the land,
and the commodities it would bring to the inhabitants, besides the facility it
would add to the conduct of victuals and other things, and besides

After all this, the commodity of wa^er; and places should inuit men to build
palaces, mills, storehouses, and such like, and to plant ochards and woods
upon the banks of the river; and all this would serve to make the air more
wholesome, or less offensive,

We have no cause to fear that drawing Teueron under S. Paul, the water of
Tyber would loose her bounty, the which proceeds from the Sulphurous waters
which are brought into it, by Teueron, from the fields of Tiuoli; for as
physic cannot help the indisposition of one member, but it shall hurt
another: in like manner in civil affairs, (...) of Noire, or Nere; besides,
her waters whose color does plainly show how (...) they are, bring many other
waters of diverse virtues, the which we see spring (...) Na^^y in many places.

(...) ^^clude this discourse, I say that the country about Rome, within
thirty miles (...) is very fertile, and does yield abundance of corn and
cattle, as it would (...), if the inhabitants, especially strangers, for their
health, or rather for dain^^^ (...) not more pleased with the wines which come
from Corsegue, from the river (...) and from France. But this country which is
so fertile, is in a manner desolat, (...) inhabitants, and for this cause,
there goes yearly from diverse places, espe^^^ (...) of Lombardie, at the least
forty thousand laborers, to manure their grounds, (...) in their harvest, and
when all is done, they that are living, return to their (...) some corn; for
that the greatest part of them do commonly die, by reason (...) ^olent heat of
the Sun, or of the winds which come from the Sea, the which are (...)
pestilent, for that they bring with them abundance of vapors from the (...)
by which they pass, not being hindered at this day by the woods, all which
(...) offensive: but much less in the city of Rome than in other places. So
as (...) ^^ntrie which did contain an infinite number of persons, remains now
empty and (...) and the plain which they call Romagnia, from Port Hercules
beyond Terracina, (...) out one hundred and fifty miles long, has not above
eight thousand inhabi^^^ (...).

The Manners of the Ancients.
(...) ^ans were borne to war, and did much affect it, making little account
(in Valerius Publicola, whom they were forced to bury at the pub^^^ (...):
Others busied themselves to sees Turnups in their little cottages, having
(...) ^^^^ded armies: another held the plough when they came to tell him that
he was (...) ^^^ator: and another, after he had been General of an army,
demanded leave (...) to take order for the tillage of two or three acres of
land, and for other pet^^^ (...) of his house. But having had the spoils of
many provinces, and having tasted (...) of strangers, they did so savor it, as
excess, and dissoluteness, crept in (...) in such sort, as they did exceed
all the nations of the world. Moreover, aua^^^ (...) desire to get at what rate
soever, did so possess them, as they made no difficul^^^ (...) thousand
exactions in their provinces, and to lend at unreasonable interest; (...) end,
to banish and murder their fellow citizens, that they might enjoy their (...)
^hey that had the greatest reputation to be wisest, were most covetous, as we
(...) Seneca, who had four or five hundred thousand crowns in England alone,
for (...) he got great interests. In the beginning they had no care but of the
greatness (...) Commonweal, but afterward they were carried away with desire
of their private (...) which, all things declined, and the ambition of the
citizens of Rome ouer^^^ (...) Commonweal, and reduced it under the command
of one alone. They took (...) to see blood spilt in those places which were
appointed to that end, where^^ (...), Thracians or Myrmillons, and the Retiares
did fight with all violence to (...) ^^^entment to the people. Lions and other
wild beasts were not spared to please (...) ^^^ple, who were so accustomed, and
did so affect these spectacles, as he that would (...) loves, had need of no
other thing but to make a great preparation of sword-players, beasts,
commedians, tumblers, and such like: and whosoever had most, was best Repudium,
whence comes our word to Repudiat; and they used this manner whenas the man
left his wife without her consent, and the first that used it was Car^illius, a
hundred years after that Rome was built, for that his C. Sulpitius repudiated
his wife, for that she had been out of the house in her hair, and had no
veil upon her head. Q. Antistius left his wife, for that he had seen her
talk secretly with a woman that was a libertine. P. Sempronius did the like,
for that his wife had gone to the public shows without his priuitie: and
Caesar put away his wife for the jealousy he had of Clodius, who was found
attired like a woman at the feast which Pompey had celebrated to the honor of
the good Goddess. The second manner was called Divorce, and this kind of
separation was by the consent of both parties. The third was called Separation,
and it was done at the Princes pleasure.

Silla. Numa Pompilius was the inuenter of obsequies, and he instituted a high
Priest who had the charge. The first honor they did to famous men at their
funerals, was to praise them with an oration, as Caesar, being but twelve
years old, commended his grandfather; and Tiberius, at the age of nine years,
praised his father. The second was to make Sword-players to fight: Marcus, and
Decius, sons to Iunius Brutus, were the first that did practice this, in
honor of their father. The third was to make a stately feast. The fourth to
give meat to all the people: the first which did di^^ribute, were those which
had the charge of the funeral of P. Licinius, a citizen of Rome, who was held
to be very rich. They did also strew certain flowers and perfumes Scipio.
They did also s^t up in their Temples and public places certain ornaments,
as Scutcheons, Crowns, ^^d such like: and they that could not be interred with
all this pomp, for that the charge (...) very great, were buried in the
evening by certain men who had that charge, being ^espilons, and they sent him
that was dead to burying attired in white: his nearest (...) did close his
eyes, and soon after they did open the chamber to let all the fami^^ (...)
with the neighbors, and three or four of them did call him thrice by his name
(...) voice, after which they did wash him with hot water: the heir did sweep
(...) house with a certain brom appointed to that use, and they did set
branches (...) over the door. If he that was dead were a man of any
authority, the citizens (...) to the funeral, by a man that had that charge.
Whenas a widow died ha^^^ (...) but one husband, they carried her to her grave
with a crown of Chastity vp^^^ (...).

(...) were accustomed to give crowns unto soldiers in recompense of their
valor: Sicinius Dentatus: the Ciuique was of oak, which they gave (...) that
had delivered a citizen from danger. The Murall was given by the Gene^^^^ to
the soldier that had first scaled the enemies town wall: they gave one called
(...), to him that did first ^nter the enemies camp, or his trenches: the
Nauall was (...) that first entered the enemies ship, and all these three crowns
were of gold: the (...) was made like unto the battlements of a town: the
Castrensis like unto a Pali^^^ ^^d the Nauall like unto a spur of a galley.
The Ouall was of myrtle, and they (...) to him that had vanquished the enemy
without loss: and the first was made of (...) corn and given to Romulus. The
Armilles were certain little circles or plates (...) silver, which the
soldiers did wear upon the left arm near unto the shoul^^^ ^^^^ament. They
did grant triumphs to Dictators, Consuls, and Pretors, which (...) above five
thousand enemies, and which did subdue towns and prouin^^^ (...) Roman
Empire. The Ouation was a kind of triumph, which they did grant (...) ^^nerall
of an army who had vanquished the enemy without loss, and he en^^^^ (...) on
foot, having the Senate after him, but he was not followed by his army: (...)
triumphed after this manner, was Posthumus Tubertus the Consul, who tri^^^
(...) the Sabins: the first which did triumph, was Romulus, and they do number
(...) ^^^dred and twenty men which have entered Rome in triumph: the first
which (...) the enemy subdued to Rome, was Cincin^atus. They which did triumph
were (...) ^^ariot with two wheels, drawn by horses or other beasts, being
followed by (...) crowned with baies, who being come unto the Capitole and
alighted, they (...) Jupiters Temple, to give him thanks for their victory,
and having sacrifised a (...), they returned to their houses.

(...) ^^cient Romans did in honor of Ianus celebrat the Agonales the ninth of
(...) Flora a courtizan (...) ^^^oued of Pompey, who made the people of Rome
heir of all her goods, and her (...) that place, which they now call Campo di
Fior, or the field of Flowers. These (...) in old time performed under the
vineyard of Cardinal Ferrara, at the foot of (...) in all, now called Mont
Cauallo. The sixth of the same month, in memory of (...) obtained against the
Latins, the Knights went stately attired, carrying olive (...) in their right
hands, from the Temple of Mars (which was upon the Appian (...) miles from
Rome) unto that of Castor and Pollux. The nine and twentieth (...) they did
celebrat the Lustres, at what time they did show forth their Trumpets, (...)
and other Ensigns, and Instruments of war: they were also accustomed to have
(...) which they called Trajans, Sceniques, Capitolins, Apollinaires,
Seculiers, Ro^^^ (...) ^^ebeiens, Circenses, and others.

(...) infinite if I should undertake to discourse at large of all that may be
spoken of (...): it shall suffice to have said this little, sending the curious
to them that have (...) books expressly of this matter. Let us therefore
leave these ancient manners, (...) unto the modern.

The Manners of this time.


The Riches.
(...) ^hereof Tuscanie, Genoa, Venice, and Sclauonia are witnesses. Wherefore
death (...) by their transportations, the which it is hard to prevent, for that
they wholly (...) on the disposition of the prince. But there may be abundance
in some one (...) yet they shall have no means to enjoy it, by reason of the
multitudes of Ban^^^ished men, who commita thousand villainies, with an infinite
number of spoils ^^hers: to which inconvenience it seems that the estate of
the Church is partisubiect. And in truth many places of this estate lie wast,
many fields are not ma^^nd many people are in miserable estate, by reason of
the infinite spoils which ^^^eues commit. This might be remedied by being in
good accord with the (...) taking away the commodities of the woods and
retreats of such people, and by (...) the ways broader: By this means
Augustus thought to prevent the murders ^^^efs which were committed throughout
all Italy. If they seek to hold the field, (...) first needful to keep them
from joining together, and if they make a head, to ^ome means to make them
jealous and distrustful one of another; and for conclu^^^ follow the course
and proceeding of Sixtus the fifth, and of Clement the eight, who (...) a manner
rooted out the whole race.

^^^nagnia makes salt which they carry into other Countries. A Sestier of
wheat weighs 240 pounds: Some write it is twelve bushels.
The Marquisat does ^^eares vent one hundred thousand Sestiers of wheat, unto
the Venetians, and great ^^^oyle. The Patrimony and the Campagnia of Rome have
many times assisted (...) with corn, and sometimes the realm of Naples.

(...) the city of Rome there are some Princes and Barons which have fifty,
and a ^^thousand crowns a year rent, and some more; but they are generally
rather (...) rich, the which must of necessity follow, where there is not any
proper art (...) which the people may entertain themselves, for that in a manner
all things which (...) brought from other countries, and especially their
woolen cloth, and silks (...), Lucca, Florence, Genoa, and Naples. It is also
very remarkable to observe (...) which is brought to Rome, from all parts of
Christendom, partly for the (...) strangers which remain there, and partly
also for the expeditions which are (...) and particularly for the bulls of
benefices, and partly also for the inuestiture of ^^^lands, or for profit, or
ambition.

(...) traffic, we cannot deny but the Estate of the Church sails in this
respect, (...) the reuenews of the Princes lands are not proportionable to the
greatness of (...). But to make it of greater traffic, there are two things
required. The one is to (...) arts, especially that of silk and wool, which
are of so great importance as (...) most part) depends the greatness of
Venice, Milan, Naples, and Genoa, (...) people entertain themselves, and for
the most part grow rich.

(...) easy thing to plant Mulberrie trees about Rome, and other towns of the
(...) they have done in the territories of Verona, Vincentia, and Milan. The
soil (...) and as fertile as any other. If the order of the Humbled, in the
beginning of ^^^igion, were able to bring in the art of Woll to Florence, and
into other places, (...) it be difficult for the Popes authority, and for a
people that would employ (...) or why might not these arts which flourish so in
other towns, be transpor^^ome, Ancona, Ascoli, and Rauenna? The other thing
is, the commodity of (...) for the which it is necessary to cleanse and
accommodat the ports of (...), and Ancona, to draw the traffic of the West
unto the first, and that of the East (...) last, and they must also draw
Merchants thither by goodly privileges and (...) and entertain them kindly:
wherein they must not be sparing, for that the (...) of estates, and the riches
of princes consists for the most part in the great access ^^urse of Merchants.

(...) the Popes reuenews, they consist in the custom of Rome, and other tolls
upon (...) and ^o^ses, in the imposition of meal and salt at Rome, in the
custom of oil and (...) the estate of the Church, and in the custom of
cattle in the Patrimony, in the (...) of the Tolfe, the Controller general of
the Posts, crimes at Rome, in the three (...) paid by the Clergy, imposed by
Paul the third for once, but afterward made perpetual; in the three years
aid paid by the religious of Italy, which are not of the Peter paid by the
realm of Naples, and the duchies of Vrbin, Parma, Placentia, and others; in
the Datarie, which is the Dispatcher of the Popes Bulls: and mo^eouer, in the
ordinary reuenews of the (...) of Rome, of the Marquisat, the Patrimony,
Campagnia, Vmbria, Ferrara, Cameri^, Peruse, Bolognia, Beneuent, and of many
villages, and other small reuenew^.

I do not put into this account the profit of legations, and gouernements
retained (as I have sai^) by the Pope: For that it may be equalled with the
pensions which he given ^n^o diners Cardinals that be poor. I do not also
reckon the Annates, and first

These Alienations have been made under diverse names, either of Offices, or of
Monts. The offices are in a manner all the Ordinaries of the Court, and many
other Ordinaries are added, the which have this condition, That they are void
by death, or that when as he that holds them is made a Cardinal, and then the
Chamber sells them again: and they make account that this profit does yield
500000 crowns.

The Monts are of two natures, either void by death, and these yield twelve in
the

Besides this, there are many charges upon the reuenews, as the government of
Rome, and the Provinces, and that which is given to the officers of the people
of Rome. Moreover, the expenses of the household, of the guard of Suisses, and
light horse, of the guard of the Castle S. Ange, Ostia, Ciui^^-Vecchia,
Ter^acina, and Oruiete, of the Singingmen, and many other expenses of the
Chapel, of Trumpets, pensions of di^^^s Officers, Noncios, Po^^^, Alms, and
gifts. But notwithstanding all these things, ^od the gre^^ ^^easure which Pope
Pi^^ the fifth employed in many buildings, yet he managed his estate so
thriuingly, as in five years that he was Pope he laid up four millions
Sixtus the fourth said, That he would never want sil^er whilst he had a hand
and a pen: And in truth, Pius the fourth did draw from the orders of religions
men only four hundred thousand crowns, and might have had a million, if he
would (as some advised him) have admitted of the Resignations of Benefices,
with this clause. That if he to whom it was resigned, died, it should return
to the Resignor: Paul the third entered into league with the Venetians and the
Emperor against the Turk, for the sixth part of the charge; and he sent to
succor Charles the fifth, twelve thousand foot and five hundred horse
entertained, and yet he advanced his house to that greatness wherein we now
see it. Pius the fifth sent four thousand foot, and one thousand horse, to
Charles the ninth the French (...).

(...) ^o let the Reader see more plainly the Popes reuenews, and expenses, I
have though^ it (...) to set down a particular estate, such as I could collect.

(...) custom of salt in Rome let out commonly for seven years to him that
will give (...) and deducting all regalities, and charges, there remains
yearly for the (...) 8960 crowns. ^^mposition of two carlins for the grinding
of corn in Rome, was erected by (...) the third, and afterward it was
augmented unto the sum of 21333 crowns, (...) rate of seven and a half for
the hundred, and afterward they were reduced to (...) Pius the fifth, and
assigned to the Masters of the building, and the whole revenue (...) of the
mannaging is given to the people of Rome, with the oversight of one of (...) of
the Chamber) amounts to 16000 crowns. (...) do let out the custom of the
Quatrin upon flesh at Rome, after the rate of (...) in the hundred 20000
crowns. ^^mposition of four Iulios upon the tun granted to the people of Rome
3000 crow. ^^impost of a Quatrin upon every pound of flesh in the Estate of the
Church, (...) Rome, Bolognia, Camerin, and Beneuent, is let out commonly for
60000 crowns (...): but by reason of the expenses and regalities there remains
not yearly unto the ^^^ber above 5000 crowns. (...) maistership of the posts
at Rome, and throughout all the Estate of the Church, ^^ed for 5000 crowns,
but deducting all charges and recompenses, there remains (...) Chamber 2000
crowns. (...) lights of Tolfe were sometimes let for 64500 crowns a year,
whereof they ^^00 crowns to the makers of alum, and the rest to diverse others,
with the rights ^^^aister of the Chamber, so as there remains nothing for the
Chamber. ^^^^osition of candles is let yearly at 3000 crowns. (...) of S.
Peter comes yearly to 31000 crowns, and they demand it every year (...)
Peter's day 31000 crowns. (...) Clergy compounding for their spoils, pay
yearly to St. Peter 2160 crowns. ^^^quarter of religious Monks, amounts
yearly to 30662 crowns, whereof they (...) crowns to Mont Nauinall of the
Monks, the which they extinguish, and the (...) 15702 to Mont Pie, so as there
remains nothing for the Chamber. (...) Triennall subsidy of the Marquisat,
amounts to 60000 crowns of gold, after ^^^ulios to the crown; whereof they
leave 400 crowns for the building of (...) crowns for the walls of Fane, and
1160 crowns for the walls of Ciuita (...) to Mont Cosere, sold unto the
Seigneur John George Cesarin, and 25 crowns for ^^easurers wages, and they pay
yearly 4000 crowns unto the Depositarie; so as in (...) of the year there
remains unto the Chamber 4958 crowns. ^^Triennall subsidy of Rome amounts to
40304 crowns, whereof they deduct (...) privileges, and 223 crowns are left
to the Treasurer of the Province for the ^^^guard, whereof he makes account,
and other 5400 crowns to the College of (...) of the Chamber for the three
which be added, and 203 crowns to the Tresurer ^^^llects this subsidy, for
his wages, and the carrying of money to Rome; so as there (...) clear unto the
Chamber 29758 crowns. Triennal subsidy of Vmbria and Peruse 39701 crowns
after 11 Iulios to the crown, (...) of they deduct for lands that are
privileged 741 crowns, and they pay yearly to ^^easurer of Peruse 9485
crowns, to supply the payments of the Treasury: but (...) ^^all have
hereafter, and they have at this day the greatest part: and 290 crowns (...),
and the carrying of money, and they have been accustomed to leave 200 (...) a
year more for wages; so as there remains to the Chamber 29076 crowns. (...)
Triennal subsidy of the Campagnia of Rome, with the maritime places, comes
(...) 1565 crowns: the lands being taxed at 2048 crowns. (...) which were set
in the year 1551 by the Pope at 1755 crowns of gold, and in the (...) 1571, by
Pope Pius, at 15553 crowns, and deducting 770 crowns which they did (...) for
the impossibility of the exemptions, and 120 crowns for the Collectors (...)
transportation of money, there remains 14643 crowns of gold, whereof there
(...) ^n money unto the Chamber about 13632 crowns. The tax of horses in the
Marquisat amounts to 77221 crowns, and they are assigned The tax of horses of
the Patrimony comes to 978 crowns, and was given in assignation to the farmer
of the customs of the Patrimony, and they collect 978 crowns. The tax of the
horses of Romagnia amounts to 5027 crowns, where of some part is paid for the
recompense of the mills of Rauenna, and part to the College of Mont Pa, not
void; so as there comes yearly unto the Chamber, which they draw out of the
Treasury of Rauenna, but 800 crowns. Tyuoli pa^es for yearly rent 200
crowns, the which was sometimes given to the deceased The augmentation of the
triennall subsidy of the Marquisat, amounts to 10134 c^^^nes, after twelve
Iulios to the crown: they deduct 202 crowns for the charges, and twenty for
the Collector, and for the carrying of money; so as there remains for the
Chamber 9912 crowns. The augmentation of the province of Romagnia comes to
6512 crowns of gold, (...) deduct 114 crowns for the lands which pay less
for the subsidy of three years, and 70 crowns for the Collectors wages, and
the carrying of money, there remains for the Chamber 6325 crowns. The
augmentation of the province of the Patrimony is 2423 crowns: they deduct The
Treasurorship of the Marquisat, with the tax of horses of this province is
commonly rented at 6215 crowns. The Treasutorship of Romagnia is let at 3597
crowns, at ten Iulios to the crown, and for the government of that province,
and the Prerogatives of the Seigneurs of the Apostolic Chamber, and to the
Popes Depositarie 1270 crowns. The Treasurer of Romagnia receives for the
Triennall subsidy 2720 crowns, and 2000 crowns for the Legates Estate, and
3360 crowns for the guard, and 2220 crowns for the Bol; whereof they deduct
1700 crowns for the Vice-Legats entertainment, The Custom and Treasurorship
of the Patrimony is let for 66377 crowns: but for that there are many
prerogatives and disbursments, there remains little for the Chamber. The
Treasurorship of Camerin is rented at 24500 crowns for nine year: but by
reason of many payments there remains little for the Chamber. The
Treasurorship of Peruse and Vmbria, with the taxes of horses of the said
province, is commonly let for 20300 crowns, but by reason of the great
regalities and payments there remains little for the Chamber. The
Treasurorship of Ascoli is rented for five years at 6354 crowns, but by
reason The Treasurorship of Campagnia yields 10000 crowns, but by reason of
diverse paiments, there remains nothing. The Treasurorship of Norcia held by
Nicholas Spinelli, having advanced money to the Chamber, and to keep the
account of the revenues of the communaltie, yields no account unto the Chamber.
The Treasurorship of Cascia was sold in April 1572 to Joseph Ieronim^ of
Foligni, who g^ue 500 crowns of gold unto the Chamber, and he yields no
account. The Treasurorship of Beneuent paies 454 crowns to them of the
Chamber, 728 crowns for wages and diverse charges, 768 crowns to the Governor,
and 50 crowns to The impost of Spoletum has been let for 4260 crowns
yearly, whereof they pay (...) crowns to the Treasuror of Peruse, and 1260 to
the Governor of Spol^tum; so as (...) remains for the Chamber 2219 crowns.
The custom of Ancona is farmed to the College of Mont Pie for 3500 crowns a
(...) ^ssigned to the College: And moreover, the transportation of 1000
Charges (...), which not being levied, pays unto the Chamber 1000 crowns a
year, and I ^^wnes for the Prerogatives of the Master of the Chamber, 3500
crowns. (...) ^ustome of Amaragi, of Ciuita Noua, is let yearly for 13000
crowns, whereof (...) to the Apostolic Secretaries 117, and to the Nuns of
Viterbe 173 crowns: (...) remains for the Chamber 12710 crowns. (...)a^me of
Biede is 1030 crowns, the which they pay unto the Depositarie. (...) Casal of
Magrotte did yield yearly to the Chamber 9240 crowns, and was sold (...) Paul
the fourth to the Hospital of the Holy Ghost. (...) custom of the Quatrin
upon every pound of flesh, at Bolognia, amounts yearly (...)8 crowns,
assigned to the Mount of Augmentation at Bolognia 6038 crowns. (...) Triennall
Subsidy at Bolognia for 9900 crowns, was assigned to the Mount of
^^^^^entation. Some hold that it does amount to 50000 crowns yearly, all the
offi^^^ their assignements there. ^^^rent of Riete was sometimes engaged to
John Baptista of Serene, for 400 crowns, (...), the son of Peter Paul
Mignanel did enjoy it. It yields yearly the sum (...) 816 crowns. (...)
last passages were accustomed to be let yearly for 250 crowns, but they were
(...) to Francis Fontaine, and afterward held by Ierosme Ceoli. (...) Minutes
of the Chancerie yield yearly 10000 crowns, and are in a manner all (...) his
Holiness officers, and household servants. (...)fit of the Mount of the
Religion brings unto the Chamber 16338 crowns. (...)let times the toll of wine
was rented at Bolognia at 600 crowns. ^^^onsignation of Fane for crimes was
assigned to the Treasurer of the Marquisat, (...) remained nothing but the
transportations, the which does amount yearly (...) 100 crowns. (...) of
Seiches, did in former times pay yearly 140 crowns. (...) of making of Alume
does come yearly to 200 crowns. (...) of Salt of Sclauonia yields yearly 750
crowns. (...) profits of Mont Pie, which should be extinguished, they draw by
the year (...) of 2350 crowns. (...) rest of the Mont of Auignon, they make
yearly 616 crowns.
The Reuenews of the Sea which are uncertain.
(...) two first years of Pope Sixtus did yield 13000 crowns. (...) say that
the collection of Spain, one year with another, amounts unto the (...) of
44000 crowns. That of Portugal amounts one year with another to 22000
crowns. (...) of Italy, one year with another 12000 crowns. (...)
^^^^sportation of corn, out of Patrimony, the Marquisat, and Romagnia, (...)
one year with another, come to 30000 crowns. (...)restes of the Mont vacable
have yielded one year with another 1000 crowns. (...) profits of Monts which
are vacable comes yearly to about 7500 crowns. ^^l^rging of Ecclesiastical
livings comes yearly to 3500 crowns. (...) Depositarie or Consignation of
Bolognia, yeeds yearly about 4000 crowns: (...) remains within the town.
(...) Dat^rie, or Dispatcher of the Popes Bulls, yields yearly. 68250 crowns.
What the Pope gives to Cardinals, and what he spends in other things.
(...) yearly in pensions and fees to Cardinals, to some more, to some less,
the 1310 crowns. There is commonly given to his Holiness high Steward for his
yearly expense, the 6000 crowns. More to him for aid of Court, 12000 crowns.
For the renewing of the Cupboard twice a year, 200 crowns. For the apparel
of the household at Christmas, 1720 crowns. For the apparel of the Gromes of
the stable twice a year, at S. John Baptista, and at Christmas, 1350 crowns.
For the charges of his Holiness office of Secretary yearly, 332 crowns. To
a Clarke under the Secretary yearly, 180 crowns. All the Singingmen of his
Holiness Chapel, have for their yearly wages the 4656 crowns. To the
Apothecarie for the wax of the Chapel, which he does furnish for the Popes
^se, 1500 crowns. For the wax at Candlemas, 1500 crowns. For the Green
Cloth, 240 crowns. For the charges on Thursday before Easter, 250 crowns. For
the Olive branches, 270 crowns. For the rose of gold which he gives, 240
crowns. For the Sword, Girdle, and Hat, imbroydered with pearl, 380 crowns.
For a Canopie of cloth of gold, for Christ, and the Virgin Marie, with the
fashion, 3000 crowns. For the tents on Corpus Christi day, with all the
preparation, 250 crowns. Wages of Esquiers and Grooms of the Chamber by the
month, 20 crowns. To them that keep the Records monthly, 25 crowns.
What he gives to his Noncios.
230 crowns. To the Noncio that is in France monthly, 145 crowns. To his
Noncio which is at Venice monthly, 230 crowns. To his Noncio in Sauoy by the
month, 115 crowns. To his Noncio with the duke of Tuscanie, 57 crowns. To
his Noncio in Germany by the month, 115 crowns. To his Noncio in Poland by
the month, 230 crowns. To his Noncio with the Princes of Germany, 130
crowns. To his Noncio at Naples. To his Noncio in Spain.
The Popes Guards.
2400 crowns. To his Lieutenant by the year, 639 crowns. To his guard of men
at arms, and light horse, 10077 crowns. To the Suisses by the year, 10932
crowns. To the Suisses for their apparel, 2600 crowns. More to them for
their caps and feathers, 200 crowns. (...) their lesser and greater ensigns,
1000 crowns. In horses to give at Christmas, and other times, 2000 crowns.
For the hire of horses for the Suisses, when his Holiness goes out of Rome,
the sum of 250 crowns.
The Forces.
(...) twenty and five thousand men fit to bear arms, and it may be the
(...) Campagnia as many. And without doubt, there is no question but a Pope
^^ccompanied with some others, may with his means and forces, do good and
(...) he pleases, especially in Italy, where he has so great a share,
whereof we (...) ^ant of examples, which teach us that Popes with less forces
than they have (...) maintained their authority against the mightiest princes;
that they deposed (...) and Kings, and changed Estates at their pleasures: yea
we know what Pope (...) could do in the time of our fathers, who drew the
French king to pass the (...) to put all Italy into combustion.

(...) tenth, and Clement the seventh settled the greatness of their houses by
many (...) they made alone, and accompanied with others; and Clement after that
he had (...) some crosses and misfortunes grew greater than he was before. Paul
the third (...) the dignity of the Church, and the quiet of Italy, betwixt
two mighty (...) more by his authority, than by arms: he made war against
the Turk, and left his (...) in that greatness we now see it. Iulio the third
taking arms in Italy, brought all ^^^^^usion: and Paul the fourth spent many
millions of gold, and left a remarkable ex^^^^^hich may grow by the ill
governed desseignes of a Pope. Wherefore as the (...) accustomed to sacrifice
to some gods for the obtaining of good, and to others ^^harme; so it has been
held wisdom to be always in good terms with Popes, (...) ^ood or otherwise:
for as the favors which well affected Popes may do, are (...) in war and
peace; so the harms which we may receive from ill disposed ^^^nemies, are very
dangerous, and he that has a will to trouble others shall ^^^men to thrust
them on.

(...) reason, all the princes of Christendom both great and small, either
moved (...) or with some other considerations, have humbled themselves unto the
Popes, ^^^nerall, were they never so great, have sought to make them their
friends, or (...) not to be opposite unto them. But to return to the people
which are under the (...), having showed what numbers may be drawn out of two
or three (...) war, we must consider the quality of these men.

(...) is full of warlike men, and for this cause fit to keep an enemy from
(...) to make him repent it, if he shall land.

(...) are the Latins and Romans, the subduers of the world, and they of (...)
of whose valor, we will say no other thing, but that by their means Italy
was (...) the barbarous nations which did tyrannise it, and recovered her first
glory. (...) earl of Cuni, having gathered together twelve thousand fighting
men, (...) called the company of S. George, he pursued in such sort the
foreign nations (...) ^^ged Italy, as he expelled them all, and restored the
discipline of war in such sort, (...) before was ill understood by the
Italians, as they did not hold him a captain (...) not marched and fought
under his command.

(...) of the Marquisat were the first which began the Sociall war, the which
the (...) held to be one of the most dangerous they ever had. There you see the
Vmbrians, (...) ^^istance Hannibal felt, after that he had vanquished the
Romans at the Lake of (...), not being able to make himself master of
Spoletum; whereby he found (...) it would be to subdue Rome, seeing that after
so great a victory, he had (...) town in vain.

(...) excellency of captains is no less, than the valor of soldiers, in
the Estate of (...): for there are many families able to furnish all the
princes and (...) Europe with captains: so as it is no wonder if in the war of
Ferrara, happily (...) short time, there were near twenty thousand foot, and
two thousand horse (...) arms, all out of this Estate, almost in one month,
the which few other (...) ^^ope could have done.

(...) the situation, this Estate lies betwixt the Adriatike and the Tyrrhene
sea, and is (...) the midst of Italy; wherefore as it is secured from the
spoils of the (...) it lies (...) to trouble Italy, or to keep it in peace.

There is not any port capable of a great fleet, and the Roman coast is much
subject to

Moreover the Marquisat and Romagnia have for a rampire and bastion, on this
side Sclauonia, and on the other the two Siciles: the which does sufficiently
appear, for that the Turke^ never durst approach it, notwithstanding that they
have much desired it: and by land there are not any confines which he should
fear, for he exceeds Tuscanie in forces, and does not yield to the realm of
Naples: for notwithstanding that this realm be

First, being long and narrow there is much more difficulty to unite her
forces: besides it ^^ a country of conquest, so as the prince cannot use the
service of those people with the ^like assurance, as if they were his natural
subjects, for that he is forced to maintain great ^^risons, wherein the king of
Spain does in a manner spend all the revenues. But the Pope is natural Lord of
this Estate, for the preservation whereof he shall not be enforced (in regard of
his subjects) to spend any thing: I leave the authority which religion gives
unto ^he Pope, and the interest which other princes have in the preservation of
the Churches estate, whose fall would be their loss; and I also forbear to
show with what readiness Gregory the seventh, and Alexander the third, make
head against princes which had the forces of the Empire (being then more
powerful than they are at this day)united to the two Siciles.

What shall I say of the sorts of Oruiette, Citecastellana, Castro, Palliano,
of the castle of Spoletum, Peruse, Ancona, Forli, Bertinor, the town and
citadell of Ferrara: and in like manner we may say that Vmbria by reason of the
straight passages, and the ^^ughnesse of the situation, is nothing but a fort.

This Estate might be fully assured, either by fortifying it with places of
strength, as ^he Venetians do^, or with soldiers as the Turk, or with the one
and the other, as the

As for forts (I speak in hereditarie Estates, and not of conquest, and gotten
by force and violence) it is questionable, Whether it be better to fortify the
frontires, or the heart of an Estate or both together? Whereupon I say, that of
chief towns, some are like unto the heart, as well for their situation, as
for their office: for that they are in the midst of Estates, as Lisbone,
Prague, London, Florence, Paris, and Madrid, by reason of the office, for that
with their riches they give strength to the other members: some are like unto
the heart touching the office, and to the head in regard of the situation, for
that they are not in the midst of the Estate, but upon some extremity, as
Naples, Palermo, Messina, or Genoua, which is seated in the midst of the
river or province, in regard of

Chief capital towns which are in the midst of Estates, should rather be
safe than strong, and the safety consists to be far from danger: this is
obtained by the fortification of frontires and passages. For the fortification
of a chief town seated in the heart of an Estate, does first of all make them
faint hearted that dwell in the rest of the country, and does also blemish the
princes authority and reputation, as if distrusting to be able to (...) land
de^end the rest, he should seek to save himself in the heart of his Estate:
for the (...) as the natural heat retires it self from the feet, legs, and
other remoat parts unto the (...), there is little hope of the patients health^
so whenas a prince does fortify the town of his abode, and the midst of his
Estate, it seems that he is without courage, (...), that which should be fit
for the extremities, that is to say, victuals, artillery, (...) ^^^es, and
soldiers. And for that the chief cities are commonly great, they (...) great
expense and provision, as there will be no means remaining to fortify (...)
for the frontiers. This has been tried by the duke of Mantoua in the (...)
Casal. And by this means (in my opinion) I have answered that which (...) that
we may fortify the extremities and the midst altogether.

^^^^lude, the end of all frontiers and extremities is to keep the enemy out
of the (...) the middle part must have a special care to furnish the
extremities; as we see (...) that has life and soul, the office of the hands
is to keep it from dangers, and (...) heart to furnish vigor and force to the
hands. Besides, a chief City shall ^^^^aue better means to succor the
extremities not being fortified; but also will (...) care, being forced to
lodge all her hope in the safety and defense of the (...) therefore I
conclude, that such a town is fitter to keep the enemies far off, (...)
^^^mish the frontier with all her forces, not being fortified, than with part
of the (...), being put in defense. All which is spoken of Estates that are
somewhat great: (...) small ones, whose extremities are in a manner joined to
the heart, the (...) midst is very necessary.

^he chief cities being seated otherwise, and which are more like unto the
head (...) heart, not being safe, for that they are near unto some extremity,
^^^^^fied. Wherefore, as nature does assure the heads of some beasts, not only
with (...) but also with homes; so the reason of State and war does not only
enuiron (...) with walls, but does also fortify them with cittadels.

(...) say, That towns seated in the center of an Estate, do as much resemble
the (...) heart, for they do impart to places which are about them, not only
spirit, (...)caper to the heart, but also judgment and conduct, which belongs
unto the (...) fore, in fortifying the one, it cannot be denied in the other.
It is not hard (...) difficulty: For first of all, the head in beasts serves
both for head and (...) head, for that it contains the brains; and for hands,
for that this beast uses (...)* And there are some beasts which do it with
the mouth, and to this effect (...) long and great, as the Dog, the Wolf,
the Lion, Fish, and Foul: some (...) their horns, as the Bull, the Stagge,
and the Bugle: others offend with (...) which are extraordinarily long, as the
Boar, and the Elephant, who has (...) or snowt, for that the office of the
head is not to fight, but to foresee (...) ^^^^ment wherewith it is endowed,
and it is the hand which must repulse all (...) blows, and prevent dangers.
Wherefore the head of beasts is not (...) head, but as the hand. Moreover, the
government of the State, does not (...) ^he place, but of the Prince and
Magistrate, who remains sometimes in one (...) ^^^etimes in another.

(...) caused the Pope to remain sometimes at Viterbe, sometimes at Oruiette,
at (...) Anagnia, at Rieti, in Auignon, and Ferrara. But as for the giving
vigor to (...), it depends upon the heart of the Estate; by the greatness of
the reuenews, (...) of munition and victuals, multitude of men, and commodity
of situation: (...) cannot be transported from one place unto another.

^ome is not in the midst of the Estate of the Church, for that it is far
from (...) and Ferrara, and near unto the frontier of Abruzzo, and yet it is
not upon (...), or near unto an enemy: and therefore it is not fit that it
should be (...) ^^^^^fied, nor altogether weak and neglected, but as we see it,
with the borough, (...) ^^^^^^^ed, and the rest rather walled than well
rampired: for if it were (...), it would cause the disorders and inconveniences
whereof we have spoken; (...) the Estate, consume the enemy, and give time to
succor, it shall suffice, the (...) hand Castle be fortified.

(...) speak something of that which they have done at diverse times, touching
the Belli^^^^^^ repaired the ruined walls, but with a far lesser circuit.
^^^lls being afterward overthrown, Ad^tan the first reedified them, and (...)
^^^rth, to keep the Sarrazins from entering into Rome, coming up the river, he
built Le^nina. Nicholas the third did wall in Belueder. Paul the third began
to wall in the Boro^gh, with a dessigne, That Rome being very solitary
toward the East, and the wall far from the places inhabited, and for that
cause not to be well fortified o^ that side, not to be defended with few men,
the people might have there at the le^^^ some refuge for a time. Pius the
fourth did finish this fortification, and (...) Castle. There remains then to
have the frontiers fortified.

The Church confines with the realm of Naples in all places crossing Italy
from one Charles in the war of Saxo^ie, for that all these have been
relieved with men and money from Popes. I do not speak of the Emperor
Ferdinand, or of Maximilian, or of Rodolfe which last reigned, Clement the
seventh, Paul the third, Pius the third, Pius the fifth, and Clement the eight.
Wherefore (in my opinion) it does more import the Pope to maintain himself in
the reputation of a common father, and not to break with any one, than to
fortify his places: for that as by this means he does assure all the
neighbor Princes to his Estate; so they will all secure him, and strive to
serve and succor him. But if he shall fortify any place, let it be in the
remotest parts, which are those of Ferrara and Bolognia. As for Ferrara, it is
so strong, as the Church cannot receive any loss on that side. The country of
Bolognia is weak, for that the City is not strong, not well fortified, by
reason of some places which command it. So as to as^ure Pius the fifth began
the fortification of Castelfranco, but he gave it over at the first, by reason
of the bruit of the war of Cypres. With these two keys of Ferrara, and
Castelfranco, the Estate of the Church should be secured from all storms which
may happen on the other side of the Alps and Lombardie. Toward the realm of
Naples, the length of the frontier would require many sort^. Wherefore, toward
the Marquisat, they may fortify Transone, Osside, and Ascoli; but Ascoli being
a good town, strong of situation, and of Charles the eight, the French king,
and to Charles duke of Bourbon, it shall be sit (...) the Pope shall always
endeavor to have the duke of Tuscanie for friend, so as he (...) be a defense
for him against strangers. (...) must now speak of the Tuscane sea: and
doubtless it is fit that the Pope have Cosmo does show it, the manner whereof
would be tedious to (...) were fit that the chief of the order should remain
at Ponze with the galleys; (...) that the galley-slaues and the other people,
whom the bad air consumes at (...) would be more healthful there, and more
lusty; and also that by their aid (...) which is eighteen miles in circuit,
and has near unto it Palmaiuole which has (...) and Ianuco six, with three
other smaller Islands, all fertile (the which in Strahos (...) full of
inhabitants) should be secured from pirates, and manured. And they (...) also
draw some profit from this sea, which abounds in fish, and especially
pilchards. (...) the galleys should be in a fit place to discover the sea, and
more commodious (...) pirates, which should go toward the land to get some
booty, or in their return. (...) is not any thing whereof they should have
more care, than to preserve and (...) the inhabitants of the State, for thereon
does the greatness of all (...).

^^^upon I think it fit to discourse of the reason why in many parts of Italy
the Pli^ie says, That it was without inhabitants, for the (...) few men's
wealth.

The Government of the ancient Romans.
(...) the Romans government has been so good, as in a manner all their
(...) succeeded happily, I thought I should give content unto the Reader, if I
did (...) a brief description of the ancient government of those who made
thems^lues

Romulus, who considering that his town was fortified with able and active
young men, and that it was of nolesse importance to strengthen it with
council, he made choice of a hundred of the chief citizens at that time, whom
he called Fathers by honor, and Senators in regard of their age; and they that
were afterward borne of these fathers, were called Pat^ieij. Tullus Hostilius
made this order more perfect after that he had ruined Alba, and carried the
inhabitants to Rome: for Tullij, the Seruily, the Quintij, the Gregantij, and
the Clodij: but when the kings were expelled, Brutus the Consul seeing the
Senate ^^stitute of good men, would have the chief of the Order of Knights made
Senators, and called them Patres Cons^ripti, that is to say, joined with the
fathers. These Senators ^ooke upon them so great authority, as they governed
all the affairs of the commonweal; so as neither the Kings, Consulls, nor
Dictators, nor any other Magistrate, did any thing, but what was first resolved
in the Senate; and Tarquin the Proud having done many things without the
authority of the Senate, was called Tirant, and in the end lost his Estate. I
find there were three orders of Senators; for that some were called Patricij,
others Pedarij, and the third Conscripti: we have spoken of the Patricij, and
Conscripti; but as for Pedarij they were so called for many reasons: some say
that they might not speak their opinions in the Senate, but did consent to
others, or, Pedibus ire in sententiam aliorum: others affirm, that many
Senators being in office, they went to the Senate in Litters or Coaches, and
that the rest who were no Magistrates went on foot, and for this cause were
called Pedarij. Varro says that there were certain knights who having
executed the greatest offices of magistracy, being not yet comprehended in the
Senate by the Censors, could not deliver their opinions in the Senate, but only
assist there, and assent with the opinions of others. But to set down the
order of giving their opinions in the Senate, I f^sd th^^ in the beginning they
were accustomed to suffer him to give his opinion first, who had been
appointed head of the Senate by the Censors. Sometimes also they that Tully in
his discourse de Senectute says, that in old time they gave this pre-eminence
to the most ancient: yet they say that he which was entreated by the Consul,
should speak his opinion first, according to a custom which had bin brought
in, bo^^^ might not entreat any one that was not of the Consular order. Aulus
Oc^^ius faith, that Varto writes of those that might assemble the Senate, and
name a Dictator, a Cons^ll, a Praetor, a Tribune of the people, and the Prefect
of the town: he adds the Tribunes of the war, who had been Proconsulls, the
Dec^mvi^i or ten men, who had then (...) power and the two men created to order
the Commonweal: he says (...) he does not remember whether the Prefect of
the city of the Latins had this authority, for that he was no Senator, no^
gave his opinion in the Senate. Varro says, that Atinius, although he were no
Senator: but they hold that in regard of the place whereas they mig^^ assemble
the Senate, it could not be but where the Augu^es di^ appoint^, which was by
them called Temple. And the Senate being assembled in the court of ^^stilia, of
Pomp^y, and afterward in that of Iulia, which were ^^^phane places, the
Augu^es ordained that they should be made Temples, that accor^^^^ to the
custom of the^^ predecessors, the deliberations might pass. As for the time
(...) ^^^emblie, the same author says that it was of no force if it were made
before the Sun rising, or after the setting; and moreover, that the Censor
should appoint the time to deliberat. As for the age of Senators, since that
which happened to Papirius Pretext^tus, Plutarche in the life of Pompey. Varro
faith also that he that (...) enter into the Sen^^, should first sacrifice; and
that their resolutions were after (...), either by dispu^^, or if the ^^tter
were doubtful, by every man's opinion, ^h^y set a fine upon every one that
came not unto the Senate whenas it assembled. (...) ^osthumes that were borne
after their fathers death, were notwithstanding called (...) the Senate. But
they that were conceived and borne after that their fathers had (...) put out
of the Senate, were not held for Senators children: and contrariwise, if (...)
^ere conceived before this accident. But if the children conceived of a father
which (...) put out of the Senate, he dying, they came after his death into the
power of (...) ^^andfather a Senator, they were of the Senate.

(...) the Tribunes of the light horse, Romulus did first institute them whenas
he (...) hundred Knights, the which he employed in all the necessities of the
(...) and called them Ramnesiens, Tatiens, and Luceres.

(...) creation of Questors is most ancient, for they were ordained in a
manner before (...) Magistrates; for it is certain that Tullus Hostilius
created them: and whereas (...) that Romulus had two Questors, it is not
certain. They say they were called (...) for that they were to exact the
public money, and had the charge of the (...), and that one part of these
officers went throughout the Provinces to (...) money due for customs; and the
other part had the charge to read in the Senate (...) which came from all parts.
We read, the Questors did sometimes examine (...); and Varro affirms, that
they were called Questors of the question or torture (...) ^hey ordained should
be given to malefactors. Their manner was to choose (...) well from among the
people, as out of the Patricij. And for that the Consulls (...) ^ot condemn a
citizen of Rome to death without commission from the people, (...), That the
Questors should have the charge of capital causes: and these (...) Questors of
murders.

(...) now look into the beginning of the Duumviri, or two men, we must bring
(...) the time of king Tullus Hostilius who ordained them, whenas Horatius
(...) of the Curiatij, had slain his sister. This king seeing that every man
(...) ^im to die, he appointed these two men to be Judges of the fact, who
(...) but he appealed from their sentence, and was absolved by the people. This
was (...) of the two men, to whom they added a third, and for that they had the
(...) of capital crimes, they had also the government of the prisons of
malefactors: (...) Liuius says, That this Magistrate was employed in the
condemnation of Caius (...) Capitolinus: and they also did punish all them that
were found to be of Cattelins (...).

(...) the Prefect or Governor of the City, his jurisdiction extended
throughout (...): he took knowledge of all crimes that were committed: he gave
audience to^ (...) fled unto the Statues and complained of their Masters. He
had also power (...) as also those which accused any woman to have committed
adultery with her (...) Tutors and Curators appeared also before him for all
matters which concerned (...), and they took knowledge of the ingratitude of
freemen to their Masters. (...) charge of all things that were ^old, that the
prices might be reasonable. He sent (...) all parts, to give him intelligence
what was done. Finally, his creation having (...) long, his jurisdiction was
given to the Praetor of the Feries, or feasts, until that (...) began to create
him again.

(...) most ancient Authors affirm, That the Consuls power was instituted in
(...) the kings: for the kings being expelled, they found two men which had the
like (...) but limited in regard of the time, for that it continued but a
year. They had (...) or Sergeants, and all other marks which the kings were
wont to have. And for (...) should counsel that which was profitable for the
Commonweal, they were (...) Consuls. The first Consuls after the expulsion of
the kings, were Lucius Iunius Bru^^, and Tarquin Collatinus. Brutus agreed with
his companion, That but one of them at (...) should march with the royal
ensigns, to the end that the people, seeing them (...) with these marks,
should not complain that they had gotten two kings for one. (...) were twelve
Lictors which carried rodds with Axes, and went before the (...) Valerius the
Consul was Author of a law, by the which it was lawful to appeal from all
Magistrates; and then the Consular authority began to be less than the Regal.
Lucius Sequatius.

The Dictators authority was so great, as there was no appeal from his
sentence, and he had sovereign jurisdiction over the people of Rome. They were
not accustomed to create a Dictator, but upon some occasion which did threaten
ruin to the city. In the beginning they might not choose a Dictator which was
not a Patricius; yet in the wars which the Romans had against the Falisques,
they did choose from among the people C. Marius Rutilius to be Dictator. The
first Dictator at Rome was Titus Largius. This office (by reason of his power)
might not be held above six months: but under the name of this office, Lucius
Scilla, and Julius Caesar, made themselves masters of Rome, and sought by that
means to avoid the odious name of Tyrants.

The Master of the horse had jurisdiction over all the soldiers: The first
was called Spurius Cassius, who was created by T. Largius the first Dictator.
Finally, the office of Magister Equitum was the same with the Dictator, that
the Praefectus Praetorio was with Caesar.

The occasion of creating Tribunes, was the division of the people with the
Senate: So as when the people were retired to the sacred Hill, they pacified
them, promising, That A. Virginius, and T. Vetusius. Then there happening
another separation, they added three more; and afterward five: so as the
Romans had ten Tribunes, whose authority grew so great, as whatsoever the
Senate had concluded, was good, if the Tribunes did allow of it. They stood at
the entry of the place where the Senate did assemble, who acquainted the Senate
with what they had decreed, to allow thereof, or to add, or take away what they
should think profitable for the Commonweal, and for a sign of their
Confirmation, they should add unto the writing the letter T. The greatest
importance of the institution of Tribunes, was, That they interposed themselves
at intercessions, that no violence might be done by other Magistrates: and the
lesser was, That Plebescita, in the which the authority of the Senate was not
required. They did also assign Provinces to them that went to govern them in
the place of Consuls, as we read in Plutarch in the life of Cat^. They did also
observe, That if all the Tribunes were agreed except one, he alone might
contradict and cross all the rest.

In the war of the Eques, the Consulls Albus Posthumous, and Sp. Furius
created T. Quintius their Proconsul or Lieutenant: since which time there have
been Proconsuls, which have had all the marks of Consuls, only they had but
six Lictors, whenas they used their jurisdiction committed by the Consulls, yet
soon after they began to have a private authority: for the bounds of the
Empire being large, it was decreed, That

The Proconsulls were accustomed (by reason of the multitude of their affairs)
to send Legates into their Provinces, who did exercise jurisdiction, not of
their own authority, but as deputies to the Proconsul, who could not
substitute them before he came into the Province. If the Legates found any
matter of importance which required the (...) of the Judge, the Legates were to
refer that to the Proconsul, for that they had (...) ^^^horitie, either to
beat or to put to death; yet they might give a Judge to them that (...) and
tutors to pupills.

(...) diles of the people, ordained that they should make the public feasts,
(...) must spend according to their dignity and patrimony. Pedian says that
(...) been made Edile, and having at his own charge caused a very rich
theater (...) built, would have therein a chariot with certain elephants,
besides the stately (...) which he caused to be made. The Ediles had the charge
to see every Roman set in (...) to keep the order of his dignity: if the
buyer were deceived by the seller, in (...) sick beast for a found, he had
recourse unto the Edile, who had charge of the (...) ditches, aqueducts, and
buildings.

(...) Prefect of wheat had the charge to provide corn from all parts, and
command (...) had more than would serve his own turn, to sell it, setting a
reasonable price. (...) people of Rome were often relieved by this Magistrate,
whenas they were in want. (...) his business of corn grew to be of such
authority, as all persons which in other (...) not allowed to accuse, were
admitted in this, as whores, and such like.

(...) Tribunes Military, whom they took indifferently from the people or
Senate, were (...) twenty in number, sometimes more, and sometimes less; but
in the (...) created only three, which were A. Sempronius Amacinus, L.
Attilius, and (...), and they came from being Consuls to be Military Tribunes
with Consular (...) then as M. Genucius, and P. Horatius left their
consulships: and this Magistrate had (...) with the Consulls, only the name is
changed, and the people deal in it. (...), although in the beginning they were
of small authority, yet it grew so (...) thereon depended the manners and
discipline of the Romans, the government (...), the jurisdiction of private
men, and the tolles of public places (...) the Romans. They took out of the
Senate such as they held unworthy, and (...) they thought good: they took horse
and arms from soldiers that were (...) and they that delighted in persumes
and rich apparel were noted by them with (...) of infamy, and put out of the
army. In the beginning when as one Censor (...) held that the other would
serve for both: but it was decreed that one Censor (...), the other should
leave his office, and they should creat two new: the reason (...) that at such
time as the Gauls took Rome, one of the Censors being dead, they (...)
^^^stitute another in his place, the which afterward they held for a bad
presage. The (...) had also power to limit usury.

(...) of the city had authority to make new laws, and to disanull old, and
in (...) whatsoever he ordained was called Lex honoraria. They granted unto the
Pretors (...) signs, and in a manner all consular Ornaments. This Praetor of
the city did ride (...) in white.

(...) end there being a concourse of all nations to Rome, they created a
Praetor, which (...) Peregrinus, who heard the causes of strangers: and in the
end the number (...) ^reat, as there were sometimes eighteen Pretors. But
after they had taken (...), Spain, and the province of Narbo^a, they created
as many Pretors as there (...) ^^ouinces taken, to the end that some of them
should take knowledge of the affairs (...), and the rest of the business of
the provinces. Afterward Scilla added the (...) torture, as for
counterfeiters, parricides, and poisoners, and he created four (...) ordained
two Pretors, and two Ediles, who had the charge of corn, and they (...)
Cereaux, of the name of Ceres. Augustus afterward made sixteen Pretors, (...)
added two, whereof Tiberius took away one, and Nerua added another.

(...) the Tribunes of the light horse were with the kings, or the Masters of
the horse (...) Dictator, such were the Prefecti Pretorij with the Emperors:
for these holding (...) place unto them, and being to correct the public
discipline, their authority (...) great, as whereas in the beginning they did
appeal from the Prefect, this appeal (...) away by the prince, who thought
that such as had attained to that dignity by (...), should judge as himself.
These Prefects had a privilege, that Minors against whom they had given
sentence could have no remedy, whereas they might have had, being

Augustus thinking that the preservation of the public did not belong to any
but himself, ordained seven troops of soldiers in such places of the city
as had most need, to the end they might speedily relieve such places as should
be set on fire: and the order was such as one troop or company did keep two
regions of the city, and the Tribunes were the heads of these troops, and the
Prefect of the guards had the command of them all; he took knowledge of
causes concerning fire, and thefts, if the crime were not so great, as it was
needful to deliver the party into the hands of the Prefect of the city:
besides, the Prefect did watch a good part of the night, and went armed
throughout the

It remains that we speak of Caesar's Procurator, who was Judge betwixt Caesar
and the people. This Magistrate had ample authority, so as whatsoever he did
manage for the Emperor, was of as great force as if the Emperor himself had
done it. But if this Procurator did alienat any thing of the Emperors as his
own, it was not therefore held that the Emperor had alienated it, which might
not be done without the Emperors consent. Finally if he treated of sale or of
donation, he did nothing that was of force, for that his office was not to
alienat the Emperor lands, but to manage his affairs diligently. And whenas
a slave of Cesars was made heir by testament, he ordained that he should
succeed in this inheritance, which came directly to the Emperor, for that the
slave gets all Caesar were heir, and his Procurator did enter into the
inheritance, he did thereby put the Emperor in possession. This Magistrate had
no power to banish.

The name of President is general, for that the Proconsuls, the Legates of
Caesar, and all that governed provinces (so as they were Senators) were called
Presidents.

The Government at this day.
(...) business. After this report, the Petitioners sue to have a brief,
conformable to (...) ^^port, that is to say, it shall be first done by them that
make the abridgements, and (...) written by the Clerks, then dispatched by
others, by the Chancerie, or (...) ^hamber, and sometimes extraordinarily by
the Secretary: and when all is done, (...) the seal of lead.

(...) great Penitencier, in that which belongs to his absolution, does
exercise the (...) Peter, S. John de Lateran, and S. Marie Mayor. But he grants
no (...) for the observation of humane laws, but in some cases: and he himself
by a (...) Commission from the Pope, hears suitors, then having known their
demands, (...) be any reason why the Petitioner should be heard, and that which
he requires (...) accustomed to be granted by the Pope, he writes by
authority of his office, (...) virtue of his general Commission from the
Popes mouth; and assures in his (...) that by virtue of his Commission, he
writes from the Popes mouth: writing always (...) of these manners, Fiat
informa, Fiat de speciali, Fiat de expresso, and by these (...) of speaking, he
lets them that tax understand the importance of the Request; (...) ^he writing
of the Penitencier does vary in form, so the taxes of the payments are (...)
the officers. And the multitude of humane laws, both of the Pope, of (...) of
Monasteries, is so great at this day, as men being in some sort bound, and
(...) ancient liberty, fly with great humility to the Penitentier, who
marks (...) the Suppliants demand; then they dispatch the Bulls under his
name (...) And for that many times he does not write back precisely, requiring
some (...) of the Suppliant, he appoints Judges by his writing, who shall take
(...) fact, and herein he puts others in his place. This office has for the
greater (...) of them which come for expeditions, four and twenty men to
defend (...) these are called Proctors of the Penitentiarie. He gives
Dispensations to marry (...) degrees prohibited, as also he admits the
Legitimation of bastards. He (...) the lack of members in any that will
receive Orders, or hold Benefices, as also (...) ^any. He absolues for murders
in Foro conscientie, and in regard of Clerks, (...) Courts, with a retention
of Benefices, and dispensation for the rest. He does the (...), perjury,
change of vows, and dispenceth with the Regulars of any (...) for their rules.
Moreover, he gives indlugences to places and persons, and (...) Commissions in
form of law, as upon the nullitie of some marriage, and such (...)

(...) every day demand the signing of such things from the Pope as proceed
they all agree in the Signature. Wherefore the Pope has appointed a Cardinal
Placet P. whenas they treat of matters of justice: but when there is a question
of grace, he writes, Fiat vt petitur P. And this P. signifies the Popes name,
as Paul; but if he has another name, as Iulio, he writes I. and so of the
rest. And if the Pope subscribes at any time, not at any ones suit, but of his
own motion, he does not set down, Vt petitur, but adds in the end, Motu
proprio. But the Cardinal of the Signature of Grace, writes always after one
form, Concessum in praesentia D. N. Papae; then he sets to his name, and yet
he does not subscribe in the Popes presence, but it is lawful for him to do
it by his general Placet D. N. Papae; and adds his name: and if the business
be directed to the Judges of Provinces, he sets, Concessum in praesentia D. N.
Papae; then the Cardinal adds his name, and sometimes he writes, Placet prout
de iure, Placet arbitrio Iudicis, Concessum arbitrio, etc. And you must
understand, that writings of justice which are sent to Judges of Provinces,
come not unto the Regents hands, but are presently referred unto the Datarie,
like unto those of Grace, where he sets the day of the date; then he writes
them into the Register, and then they deliver them unto the Petitioners, or to
their Solicitors, in that form that they must be dispatched. For the expedition
whereof, there are three means; when it is a matter of justice, Sub Annulo
piscatoris: but if it he a matter of grace, he is dispatched by the said
Chauncerie, or by the Chamber, and sometimes extraordinarily by the Secretary.



(...) shortest way, or else in regard of the matter which is in question, or
else for that the (...) cannot be dispatched by the Chauncerie, but requires the
Popes express com^^^^^ement. In this place they did condemn malefactors to
Ecclesiastical (...) temporal, according to the quality of the person, or of
the crime, and they did (...) many other things. But the affairs of Rome are
so multiplied, as the (...) this burden by little and little, comes seldom
into this Audience, except it be (...) which does import his revenues, or does
concern some bad expedition of (...) Pope does sometimes dispatch the foresaid
matters by himself, without the (...) of his Chamber, and in the execution he
calls for the Secretaries of his (...).

(...) Chamberlain is accustomed by the advice of seven Clerks, and sometimes
of (...) private motion, to write in form of law to the Judges, as of all
profane (...) belong to Magistrates in the temporal Estate of the Church, and
without it, (...) payment of the tenthes, fruits, benefices, spoils of priests
that be dead, and other (...) which concern the Apostolic Chamber: and he
writes ^uery day as if he had (...) ^^undement from the Popes own mouth, and
his writings are called letters of the (...) ^^ber, the expedition whereof are
made after two sorts, for either they are made up (...), or else they are open
without the Chamberlains seal.

(...) Treasuror has the custody of all the money that enters into the
Chamber, and (...) is to receive it, keep it, and spend it where need is.
Sometime this money is (...) the hands of some great merchant, who receives it
by commission from the (...), and makes payments, and he is called the Guardian.
The Auditor of the (...) charge of Spiritual matters, and is followed by the
Governor who does (...), and is the executioner of the secular arm, decides of
truces, (...) complaints of vassalls against their lords, although they be
capital, within (...) of Rome. He has authority over all the office^s of the
city, and takes care (...) quiet of the city and court of Rome. If thou will
read the chapter of Sixtus the (...) of Iulio the second, thou shall see at
large the authority of this Governor.

(...) President of the Apostolic Chamber receives the account of all those
that (...) to deal with money of the Chamber within the city of Rome, or
within (...), and makes his account in the Audience of the Chamber.

(...) for that they treat sometimes in the Audience of the Chamber, of matters
(...) Treasuror and private persons, it has been ordained that private men
should (...) Aduocat in this Audience, at the public charge, for the defense
of poor men's (...) ^^gainst the Aduocats of the Treasure.

(...) is another Aduocat which defends the Treasurer as well in the Audience,
as (...), before the other Judges in the courts of Rome, where it is needful to
answer (...) law; and he is of the Consistoriall Order.

The Proctor of the Fis^ or Treasuror, defends all fiscall matters in the
Audience, and (...) any other Judges in the court of Rome: and fiscall matters
are those whereas they (...) the public liberty, or of the public
treasure. This office is very necessary and (...) authority in the court of
Rome. This Proctor out of the Audience takes (...) the secret causes, sees them
at his pleasure, and gives his advice, although he (...) of the Judges: he is
admitted in public Consistories, and may require that (...) a public
instrument made by one of the Protonotaries for a perpetual (...) things done
publickely.

(...) Commissarie of the Apostolic Chamber does execute the affairs of the
(...) the Judges are not to deal: he has charge of exactions, ambassages,
(...), and other things which belong unto the Chamber.

(...) last of all those of the Apostolic Chamber, is he which defends the
^ights and (...) assigned to Cardinals, or any thing else that concerns the
said Cardinals. The (...) of the Judges of the court of Rome being very great,
and there being many in (...) does many times fall out, that by reason of the
great employment of Judges, ^^ometimes of purpose, matters are protracted
longer than the quality of causes, and the troublesome abiding in prison does
require: wherefore the Cardinals do every

Near unto the two last prisons, that is to say, of the court of Sauelle, and
of the tower

Iulio the second, Leo the tenth, and Paul the third.



The Pope has twelve Chaplains, or Auditors of causes of the sacred palace,
to whom he gives power to hear them a part that plead, and upon their report
the Pope gives sentence.

At Rome every man is in a short space accepted for a citisen, and may easily
participat of the first honors of this city, where they may better than in any
other city, hope for a recompense of their industry and wit, and in the end
aspire by his fortune and virtue to the greatest dignities of the Church. (...)
^opes have been accustomed to give the Legations of Provinces which are vn^^^
power, and the government of the chief towns, to their own kinsmen as
^^^gie men, as Secular, or to those that are their creatures. It is the manner
which (...) Italy; and at Auignon they have a Legate or Vice Legate, who is a
Governor, (...) charge of Ecclesiastical matters, and of those that concern
justice: And more^^^re is a General which is a Knight; he has the charge of
all the soldiers (...) garrison within the county of Venisse, and of all that
concerns arms. (...) ^ope assumeth power to confer Benefices in the
countries of other Princes, al^^^ be somewhat restrained, by reason of the
graunts of certain Popes to diverse (...) and Princes. Yet such as receive not
benefices from him, must have his confir^^^ and have their Bulls from the Court
of Rome: and moreover also, pay the (...).

(...) it ^it in this place to give an account as well of the institution and
manner of Alexander the third at the Council of Lateran held in the (...) our
Lord God 1259, where there were two hundred and eighty Bishops, (...) That he
was lawful Pope that should be chosen by two third parts of the Car^^^ were
present; and this custom has continued unto this day, but that in the (...)
Redempton 1417, at the Council of Constance, Martin the fist was cho^^^ ^old
the schism at that time: but Gregory the tenth ordained first, at the
Coun^^^, the Conclaue, which has from time to time been reformed, and reduced
(...) see it at this day.

^^^dinals assemble to choose a Pope after one of these three manners, either by
(...) or by Adoration, or by Scrutin and Billets, by the which they gave their
(...) they favored. It suffi^eth then to understand, that all the authority
to (...) consists in the Cardinals; and that they are the chief members of
the (...) as it were the head, whom they assist, being his Counselors and
Coadiu^^^ privileges have been given them by diverse Popes, and especially by
Paul (...) and some others have granted them the moytie of the reuenews of
the ho^^^ in regard thereof, at this present they enjoy half the Annates of
Benefices (...) dispatched by the Consistory. There were wont to be but fifty
and three in all, (...) ^^^se and decrease at the Popes pleasure, and Pius the
fourth had at one time (...)

(...) discourse upon the Popes next successor, are accustomed to consider the
(...), for that a time of peace requires one thing, and that of troubles ano^^^
(...) all things are out of order, they must seek to have some one to stay of
them that aspire to the Popedom, as for that many do get by the change of
Popes.

The Religion of the Ancient Romans.
Pan Lyceus (named by many Faunus) and Syluanus, holds the first rank, and to
him they dedicated the Lupercales, and that the Luperces did sacrifice. Some
say that this Sacrifice came from Euander a fugitive king of Arcadia, who came
unto that place whereas since the fortress of Rome was made.

The Shepherds who had this god for their head, did sacrifice unto him naked,
with Faunus whenas he sought the love of Iola wife to Hercules. But others say,
That Romulus sacrificing to Pan, naked, by reason of the heat, was advertised
that certain thieves carried away his flock, so as he followed them naked as
he was, and took them: so as in memory thereof he would have the Priests
which should perform this sacrifice, naked. The special devotion which they
had to this god, and to these priests, was, for that the women which could not
be delivered, nor conceive with child, had recourse to the Luperques; and
having been beaten with certain little whips died in goats blood, they were
delivered, or did presently conceive. They did solemnise the feast unto this
god, on the eighteenth of January, as Ouide reports.

Then were the Potitiens, and the Pinariens, families so called, who were
ordained to sacrifice to Hercules. The Potitiens, instructed by Euander, did
for a long time govern this sacrifice, until that this charge being given to
public slaves, the family of the Potitiens came to sail; the which happened
by the means of Appius Claudius their enemy: and the Romans did believe that
for a punishment he fell blind.

The Ar^a^x or Aruales, brethren, gave council to the people of Rome, to the
end their fields might bring forth come. Romulus was the inuenter of this
religion, and they were called Ar^a^x, for that Aru^^ signifies a field. They
were twelve in number, and they gave them with the order of Priesthood a Crown
of the ^ares of corn, with certain (...) a ^rooked rod called Litue. Then
having beheld the city and the fields round about (...) unto the gods, he
divided the regions from the East unto the West, leaving the ^^^nd upon the
South, and the left upon the North, and observing (without any (...) ^^^aking)
the farthest place he could see, holding his rod in the left hand, and lay^^^
right hand upon his head to whom he would presage any thing, saying, O father
(...) it be agreed that such a one shall enjoy such a thing, give some apparent
sign, (...) I have performed my charge: and then he told what tokens he would
have Iupi^^^ and if they did succeed the Augure was good. In time this art was
much estee^^^ ^ome, so as the number of the Augures increased as well as their
authority, and (...) ^^^ted a College of Augures, who in the beginning were
but three.

Pompilius king of the Romans was the first that ordained the Flamen Dial, for
^^^ore, the kings did execute the office of high priests. Numa considering that
in ^^^imes kings might rather be like to Ramulus than himself, and be more
affected to ^^^n religion, he ordained four priests, whom he called Flamines,
who should ^^^ally attend the service of the gods: and these priests were
dedicated to many ^^^at is to say, one to Jupiter, whom they called Dial, two
to Mars, and one to Quiri^^^ Romulus. The other Flamines dedicated to any other
gods than to Jupiter, carried (...) of the gods to whom they were vowed. And
Numa would have Jupiters Flamen (...) honorable roabe, and have a seat of
Y^ory, the which in those days they did ^^^nt but to the greatest Magistrates.
He alone had a little white hat, and he did ride. (...) not swear, nor carry
the fire of his sacrifice into any place that was not sa^^^ ^^y one did enter
girt into his Temple, he must ungirt himself, and cast it away. (...) knot
about him. If an offender whom they led to whipping fell down upon (...)
before him, it had been a sin to whip him that day. He that was not of a
free (...) could not cut the hair of this priest. He might not touch a goat,
nor yuie, (...) any raw flesh. His beds feet must be defiled with dy^t, and no
man might lie (...). The parings of the Dials nails, and the clippings of
hair, were hidden in ^^^nd under a flint stone. It was not lawful for him to
go into the air without a (...) high priests did ordain the like when he was
in any covered place. He might ^^^ch an^ dowe mixed with leucine, nor put off
his shirt but in some covered place, to (...) should not be naked under heaven,
as under the eye of Jupiter: and no man (...) with him when he dined, but the
king which did sacrifice. He never came into (...) where there was a dead
body. Varro says, that the ancients had as many (...), as the Dial, the
Martial, the Quirinal, the Vulcanien, the Falagre: and as (...) Bishops,
Archbishops, and Cardinals, they had their Flamin, their first Fla^^^ ^im that
was above all the rest.

^he Vestall virgins which kept their sacred fire, it is so well known as I
will say (...) but if this fire went out they were beaten with rodds by the high
priests. There (...) put into this Temple but virgins, whose parents must be of
a free (...) took them from the age of six years to ten at the most. The ten
first years they (...) the form of sacrifices, they spent as much time in
sacrificing, and the ten last ^^^ ^^ey did instruct the young virgins which
were newly taken; which thirty years (...), they might marry: but they that
did marry were unfortunate. The people of (...) honor them wonderfully. And
besides the fire whereof I have spoken, they ^^^^^pe the Palladium, or (...)tue
of Minerua, and other sacred things of the Romans. (...) when they were taken
in Adultery they were put to death after this manner: They (...) ^^graded, and
carried on a co^^in bound, with their faces covered, with g^e^t silence a
stone, as if it had been a Sepulcher, the people cast earth upon it, and
continued all that

The Saliens were dedicated by Numa to Mars, being twelve in number, then
Hostilius added twelve more. They were called Salines for their leaping in
their sacrifices. They did wear certain painted cassocks, and upon their
breasts a piece enricht with gold, silver, and precious stones.

In the beginning there were four high priests taken from among the Senators:
afterward the people obtained that they should have as many chosen of their
order. These had a head whom they called the most high Priest, who knew with
what and when they should sacrifice, and had the care how to gather money for
the charge of the service of

The Fecial priest did preside at the public faith given unto people: and
they did hold, that a war which had not been first denounced by the Fecial,
was not just. When they made a peace, the Fecial demanded of the General of the
army, if he commanded him to make a peace with the enemy; the which he having
affirmed, he said, o such a one, I demand grass of thee; whereunto the General
answered, that he should take it; which having taken, he demanded if he made
him messenger to the people and Senate of Rome? the General answered, That he
did, so as in doing it neither he nor the people of Rome might be deceived.
Then they made a peace, with prayers to Jupiter, that if the Romans

The two men of the sacraments, had the charge to read the sacred books, and
Sybill^s verses, and to interpret them. They were also chief in the ceremonies
which were made Apollo: and if there were any monster borne, or any prodigy
did happen, they sought to pacefi^ the gods with their sacrifices.

The seven men of the Epulons, were contained in a kind of priesthood, of the
which there are few that have written. Pliuie before he made an oration, and
fearing them that were there to hear him, faith, The Consulls were in the
midst, and next, one of the seven men of the Epulons: and it is said that
they accept the excuses of the daughter of the Augures, of the ten sacred men,
of the Flamins, and the seven men of the Epulons. I should speak of their
ornaments, vessels, sacrifices, and instruments, but I will forbear, for it
would be tedious.

A CHRONOLOGY,
Paul the fist, who holds the

S. Peter, first Pastor or Bishop of the Catholic Church, according to the
opinion of the Papists.



Peter, having written the deeds of S. Peter, yea his combats with that
detestable Simon the Inchanter. He was beheaded by the command of Saturnius
the Consul, who held him for a Sorcerer, for that he had driven a devil out of
the body of his daughter. He was so renowned for his Holiness, as he raised
up the dead in diverse places, going forth of the city to preach the word of
God. He held the Sea eleven years, three months, and twelve days.

Traian, having been Bishop nine years, four months, and six and twenty
days.

Domitian, and was buried in the Vatican, having held the Sea six years, five
^oneths, and two days.



The Sea was vacant seven days.

Traian, having reigned thirteen years, and five months.

The Sea was void nineteen days.

Adrian; and being demanded why he did not answer, For that (said he) in the
time of prayer, a Christian man speaks with God. He died, having held the
place seven years, five months, and nineteen days.

The Sea was vacant fifteen days.



The Sea was void two days.

months, and five and twenty days.

The Sea was vacant seven days.



The Sea was vacant three days.

Prudentiane, the Temples of Christians having been in former times in ^idden
and obscure caves. He held the place eleven years, five months, and seven and
twenty days.

The Sea was void thirteen days.

Anacletas, That Clarks should wear no beards: That no Bishop might be
consecrated Metropolitan of the Province with a less number than three. He
suffered Martyrdom having been Bishop nine years, eight months, and four
and twenty days.

The Sea was void seventeen days.

Gratian reports, that he ordained, That no man should keep an oath which he
had made to do ill. He died, having held the place seven years, eleven
months, and eighteen days.

The Sea was void one and twenty days.

Fugati^s and Damian^s, men of piety and religion: by whom the king and his
people were baptized. He did ordain that no man should abstain from any kind
of meat for superstitions sake: and that no man being absent, and not
convicted, should be condemned for any crime. Having augmented the Catholic
Religion by his good example, and left peace unto the Church dispersed in a
manner over all the earth, he died, having reigned fifteen years, and
eighteen days.

The Sea was vacant five days.

Pius touching the celebration of Easter upon the Sunday, contrary to the
customs of the Churches of Asia, whom he excommunicated: for the which he was
reprehended by Ireneus. He suffered Martyrdom, having been Bishop twelve
years, one month, and eight and twenty days.

The Sea was void twelve days.



The Sea was void six days.

Rome, where remain the Relics of many holy Martyrs. He instituted the
four Ember weeks: some attribute unto him the decree of celibate of priests;
but Poli^^re in his ^i^t book, and fourth chapter writes, that they could not
altogether take ^arriage from the priests of the West (for the Grecians, and
they of the East do mar^^^) until the time of Gregory the seventh, in the
year 1074. He was made a Martyr having reigned five years, one month, and
thirteen days.

The Sea was void six days.

Damasus does attribute unto him the decree for the making of vessel of silver
or tin: whereupon Boniface Bishop of Mentz said, that in old time, priests of
gold used chalices of wood: But now priests of wood use chalices of silver. He
drew many unto the faith by his holy life, and suffered Martyrdom having been
Bishop seven years, seven months, and five days.

The Sea was vacant three and twenty days.

Polidore and Damasus say, that Pope Marcel was the author of these Cardinals,
in (...) year 1302.

The Sea was void one day.



The place was void six days.

Philip father and son, the first Christian Emperors, and accepted their
treasures: he ordained again touching the history of Martyrs: he did forbid
to take a wife in the fist degree of consangui^^tie, and would that every
Christian should communicate thrice a year, that is to say, at the Feasts of
Easter, Whitsunday, and the birth of our Savior. He was made a Martyr, chiefly
in hatred of the Treasures which he had received from the Empe^o^: having
reigned thirteen years and eleven months.

The Sea was void six days.

Gratian, and being accused of high treason, for that he had written to S.
Cyprian, was whipped and put to death under the Emperor Decius, having held the
place two years, two months, and three days.

The Sea was void two months and five days.

SCHISM I.

Nouatus, a priest of Carthage, as S. Cyprian does witness writing to
Cornelius, who condemned him for a heriticke in two counsels held at Rome.
Nicostratus was an other Antipope in Affricke.

Gratian attributes this decree to Zozimus. He was made a Martyr having lived
in the place one year, three months, and thirteen days.

The Sea was vacant one month, and five days.



The Sea was vacant one month and twelve days.



The Sea was vacant eleven months and fifteen days.



The Sea was void five days.



The Sea was vacant five days.



The Sea was vacant eight days.

Dioclesian, suffered Martyrdom, having held the chair twelve years, four
months, and six days.

The Sea was void two months, and eight days.

Dioclesian, and did willingly suffer Martyrdom, having reigned seven years,
nine months, and six and twenty days.

The Sea was vacant twenty days.

Euariste, and reduced them to five and twenty: he was made a Martyr, having
been Bishop five years, six months, and one and twenty days.

The Sea was vacant twenty days.



The Sea was void seven days.



The Sea was vacant seventeen days.

Constantin (as some w^ite) to the Catholic faith, who afterward caused the
tyrranous persecutions against the Christians to cease. He died, having been
Bishop twenty years, two months, four days.

The Sea was vacant fifteen days.

THE FIRST GENRALL COUNCIL.

Constantin the Great, by three hundred and eighteen Bishops from all parts of
the world, to pacefie the Estate of the Church, troubled chiefly by the
detestable heresy of Arrius, where he was condemned: and it was concluded,
That the son of God was Homousion, that is to say, consubstantiall to the
father, according to the Symbol of our Creed.

Credo in vnum Deum, etc. should be sung by the Clergy and people after the
preaching of the Gospel; he died within eight months, and twenty days.

Constantius an Arrian, son to Constantin: he died, having held the place
fourteen years, five months, and sixteen days.

The Sea was vacant five and twenty days.

Constantius an Arrian (according to the opinion of some) he consented to
adhere unto them, to his great infamy: yet in the end reclaiming himself, he
died a Catholic, having held the Chair fifteen years, four months, and
seventeen days.

The Sea was void six days.

SCHISM II.

Liberius. Onuphrius holds him for the second Schismaticke: he was martyred by
the Arrians, having held the place ten years, three months, and eleven days.

Jerome: He caused to be said in the Latin Church after the end of the
Psalms, Gloria Patri, etc. composed by Flamianus Antiochenus; the Symbol of
Constantinople, and the Confiteor. The ordinance for the singing of Psalms by
turns, comes from him and S. Ambrose. He died, having been Bishop eighteen
years, two months, and ten days.

The Sea was vacant seventeen days.

SCHISM III.

Damasus after the death of Liberius and Felix: and then began the third
Schism, whenas the ambition of honors began to seize upon the hearts of the
Prelates of the Church.

THE SECOND GENERAL COUNCIL.

Gracian and Theodosius, emperors, for the heresy of Macedonius Bishop of
Constantinople and of Euroxe, denying the Holy Ghost to be God, where they
were condemned.

Huua made themselves Christians. He died, having been Bishop thirty years,
one month, and five and twenty days.

The Sea was vacant a month, and fifteen days.



The Sea was vacant ten days.



The Sea was vacant two and twenty days.

Platina) bastards and wicked men. He died two years, four months, and seven
days after his election.

The Sea was vacant nine days.

Eulalius, by the Emperor Honorius, son to Theodosiu^; who repealed him
again. He died, having held the place four years, nine months, and eight
and twenty days.

The Sea was vacant nine days.

SCHISM IIII.

Boniface was chosen by a part of the Clergy, and was put out of Rome with
Boniface: He died within three months, and seven days after he had been
chosen.



The Sea was void a month, and eleven days.

THE THIRD GENERAL SYNOD OR COUNCIL.

Theodosius the second, of two hundred Bishops, against the Heretics,
Pelages, and Nestorius, Bishops of Constantinople, who denied the divinity of
Jesus Christ.



The Sea was v^yd one month, and eleven days.

Gregory the Great instituted the greater, having made many Decrees. He did
forbid the singing of Alleluya, and Gloria in excelsis Deo, in the time of
Lent: he died, having been Bishop twenty years, eleven months, and two
days. The Sea being void seven days. Before this Pope, the Sea of Rome did
number their years from the passion of Christ.

THE FOVRTH GENERAL SYNOD.

Martian, of two hundred twenty five Bishops, against the heresy of Eutiches
a Priest of Constantinople, confounding the two natures of Jesus Christ.



The Sea was void ten days.

acknowledge any of the Laity in the possession of a benefice. He died having
held the chair fifteen years, six months, and three and twenty days.

The Sea was vacant six days.



The Sea was void five days.



The Sea was vacant five days.

Anastasius as an Eutichen. He died miserably, having emptied his bowels like
unto Arrius, two years, eleven months, and four and twenty days after his
election.

The Sea was void two days.

Laurence, and of another called P. Alton, so by them began the fifth Schism:
for Theoderic king of the Goths, who then held Italy, hearing that the
seditious Clergy of Rome would depose Symmachus, he sent this Alton to hold
the Sea, and to chase away the other two: yet Symmachus being purged of the
crimes which were objected against him, was restored, and died having held the
place fifteen years, seven months, and eight and twenty days.

The Sea was vacant two days.

SCHISM V.

Symmachus died the first year.

Eutiches, he caused them to be banished the city. He did great alms deeds,
condemned the heresy of the Manicheens which sprang up again, and caused
their books to be burned. He died having held the place nine years, nine
months, and seventeen days.

The Sea was void five days.

Theodoric an Arrian, to the Emperor Justin at Constantinople, to restore the
Arrians to their liberty, and having obtained it, notwithstanding being
suspected by Theodorick, he was imprisoned by him, where he died in great want,
two years, nine months, and six days after his election.

The Sea was void one month and seven and twenty days.



The Sea was vacant three days.

Dioscores: and died two years, and two days after his election.

The Sea was void three months and five days.

SCHISM VI.

DIOSCORES a Roman, being chosen by some, during the Schism, against
Boniface, died soon after.

Mercury, having received a confession of the Faith from the Emperor
Justinian, signed with his own hand, with a goodly present, died having held
the place two years, four months, and six days.

The Sea was void six days.

Justinian to leave the heresy of Eutiches, with the which he had been
seduced by Anthemius a Bishop of Constantinople: then he died having held the
place a year, and nineteen days.

The Sea was void six months, and twenty and five days.

Anthemius the heretic to his Bishopric of Constantinople, by the
commandment of the Empress, was falsely condemned to have sought to deliver
Rome unto the Goths, and was banished into the Island of Pontus, where he died
of poverty, one year, five months, and two days after his election.

The Sea was vacant five days.

SCHISM VII.

Siluerius an ambitious man, and who had been the cause of the expulsion of
Siluerius, o^tained the Papal dignity by force, and through the favor of
Theodora wi^e to the Emperor Justinian: who a^terwards caused him to be drawn
out of Rome, with the consent of the Romans who hated him mortally, and carried
to Constantinople, where he received many outrages and indignities, being led
through the town with a halter about his neck, and in the e^d banished, for
that he would not restore Anthemius the heretic to his Bishopric of
Constantinople, according to a bad promise he had made to Theodora, whereof he
repented him. He died having held the place seventeen years, six months, and
nine and twenty days.

The Sea was void one month, and five days.

THE FIFTH GENERAL COUNCIL.

Anthemius Bishop of Constantinople, and Theodore an eloquent man, who said
that the virgin Mary had brought forth a man only, and not man and God: where
it was concluded that she was Theotocos, the mother of God.



The Sea was void four months and five days.



The Sea was void ten months and sixteen days.

Narses, who was incensed against the Empress Sophia, it being also afflicted
by famine and pestilence, died having held the place four years, one month,
and nine and twenty days.

The Sea was void four months.



The Sea was vacant six months and five and twenty days.

Maurice: He invented many ceremonies and prayers, the particularities whereof
you may read in Platina. Some attribute to him the abstinencie from flesh in
Lent, but others hold it is much more ancient, and that he only added the four
days from Wednesday to Sunday to make up the number of forty. He died, having
held the Chair thirteen years, six months, and ten days.

The Sea was vacant five months, and seventeen days.



The Sea was void eleven months, and six and twenty days.

Phocas, ordained, in a Council of seventy two Bishops, thirty Priests, and
three Deacons, That the Bishop should be chosen by the Clergy, and the people:
and that all they which should come unto the dignity by gifts and favors,
should be excommunicated. This was a holy ordinance, but much neglected to the
ruin of many. He died within eight months, and three and twenty days after
his coming to the Chair.

The Sea was void ten months, and three days.

Marie, and of all the Martyrs Then was the Feast of Al-Saints instituted, the
twel^th of May. Having made a Monastery of his house, and given leave to
Monks to preach, baptize, and confess, he died, six years, eight mo^eths,
and eleven days after his election.

The Sea was vacant four months, and three and twenty days.



The Sea was void one month, and six and twenty days.



The Sea was void thirteen days.

Peter's Church with gold, silver, and goodly Tables. Afte^w^rds he died, having
held the Chair twelve years, eleven months, and seven days.

The Sea was void one year, seven months, and eighteen days.

Dagobert of France had the like zeal at the same time, who caused the Church
of S. Denis to be built, enriching it wonderfully, yea with the relics and
spoils of other Churches. This Pope died within one year, two months, and
four days.

The Sea was vacant one month, and two and twenty days.



The Sea was void one month, and fourteen days.

Theodor Bishop of Jerusalem, was liberal to the poor. The election was of
force, being made by the Clergy and people, and confirmed by the Exarcke, as
lieutenant to the emperor. He died, having been Bishop six years, five
months, and eighteen days.

The Sea was vacant four months, and one ^ay.

Pyrrhus, Sergius, and Cyrus, being absent, and Paul who was present,
Patriarchs of Constantinople, Heretics, Monothelites, denying two wills in
Jesus Christ. By the commandment of the emperor Constantin the third, an
heretic, he was banished unto a city of Pontus, where (having endured many
miseries) he ended his days, having held the Chair six years, one month,
and eight and twenty days.

The Sea was void eight months, and eight and twenty days.



The Sea was void one year, and seventeen days.



The Sea was vacant two months, and fourteen days.



The Sea was void four months, and six days.

Peter's Church to be paued with marble: and by his integrity he subjected the
Church of Rauenna to that of Rome, the which pretended to be head of it self.
He died two years, five months, and ten days after his election.

The Sea was void two months, and eight and twenty days.



The Sea was vacant seven months.

THE SIXTH GENERAL COUNCIL.

A General Council was held at Constantinople of two hundred eighty nine
Bishops, against the Monothelites, who denied two wills and natures in Jesus
Christ. The Patriarch of Constantinople for^ooke his heresy; but Machaire of
Antioch would not leave it, and was therefore deposed from his Bishopric.
Marriage to the Pri^sts of Greece was allowed there, but not to the West^rne
Church.



The Sea was vacant one year, one month, and one and twenty days.

Constantine the fourth allowed the election of Popes to be sufficient, being
made by the Clergy, and people of Rome, without the authority and
confirmation of the Emperor: the which was not long observed. He died ten
months, and seven and twenty days after his election.

The Sea was vacant two months, and nine days.

his predecessor, by the Bishops of Ostia, Portence, and Velitercia, the which
he ordained should afterward be observed, as the custom is yet. He died
within one year, and nine days.

The Sea was void two months eighteen days.

SCHISM VII.

Theodore a priest of Rome being chosen by the Roman army, held the chair
for certain days against Peter, and these two were the Authors of the seventh
Schismfoure, both which being expelled, Conon was created.

Angel, for his holy life, doctrine, and beauty, was chosen Pope, after a
great contention against Peter and Theodore. He died within eleven months.

The Sea was vacant two months and five and twenty days.

SCHISM VIII.

THEODORE a priest of Rome, a rich man, who had corrupted the soldiers with
money, held the Sea for certain days.

PASCHAL an Archdeacon, being convicted of art magic during the Schism of
Theodore, had also the ^h^are for certain days, but in the end both being
expelled, Sergius was created.



The Sea was void one month and twenty days.



The Sea was vacant one month and eighteen days.



The Sea was not void at all.



Justinian the second kissed his feet in sign of honor; and so that custom was
brought in by this Emperor, the which continues unto this day. He was the first
of all the Popes which did oppo^e himself boldly against the Emperor Philip
Bardanes, who would have taken away images. He died having held the chair
eight years, one month, and twenty days.

The Sea was vacant one month and ten days.

Boniface a learned Monk into Germany to preach the Gospel, where he
converted many: he excommunicated the Emperor Leo surnamed Iconomachus, for
that he attempted to take away images. So the Emperors proceeding was the cause
of the increase of the Roman See: for then Rome, and in a manner all Italy,
retired themselves from the Emperors obedience. The Exarchat seized, being held
by the Lombards: and from that time the princes of France were called to
succor the Popes, who were by them (as Protectors) defended and enriched. He
died having held the place fourteen years, ten months, and two and twenty
days.

The Sea was void one month and five days.

from the Emperor, he retired himself into France to Charles Martel from whom
he obtained what he desired. He died ten years, eight months, and four and
twenty days after his creation.

The Sea was void two days.

Pepin to be king of France, in the place of Childericke, who was forced to
become a Monk, and freed the French from the oath of allegiance which they had
made to him. He died ten years, three months, and fifteen days after he
came to the place.

The Sea was void eight days.



The Sea was vacant one day.

Pepin against the king of the Lombards, with great presents, that is to say,
the seigneurie of Rauenna, of a great extent, the which in former times did
belong unto the Emperors Lieutenants: having anointed Pepin king of France,
he died having been Pope five years, and nine and twenty days.

The Sea was vacant two and twenty days.

Stephen, a man very pitiful to the poor, sick, and prisoners, whom he did
visit alone in the night. He was created Pope, notwithstanding the election
made by some of Theophylactes. Paul died, a great defender of widows,
orphans, and poor people, having held the place ten years, and one month.

The Sea was void one year, seven months, and seven days.

SCHISM IX.

Paul, and held the Sea certain months.

SCHISM X.

CONSTANTIN of Nepese a Layman, was created by the Laity by force, and against
the Canons: he held the Sea one year, one month, ten days.

PHILIP a Roman Monk, during the Scisme was created by the Laity against
Constantin, and held it five days, but both being expelled, they created
Stephen.

Constantin and Philip both Antipopes. Stephen having in a Council at Latran
revoked the ordinances of Constantin the Antipope, and disanulled the seventh
Council at Constantinople, called by the Emperor Constantin the fifth (some say
Leo the third his father) for that which concerned images; died three years,
five months, and seven and twenty days after his election.

The Sea was void nine days.

Charlemaigne king of France to succor him against Didier king of the
Lombards, who lost his realm in a Council of one hundred fifty and three
Bishops, which Segebert calls general. He gave to Charlemagne power to choose
the Pope, and other Prelates, and ordained that his Bulls should be sealed in
lead. He died having been Pope seven years, ten months, and seventeen days.

The Sea was not void at all.

THE SEVENTH COUNCIL.



Charlemagne who restored him to his dignity, having purged himself by oath.
After that he had crowned Charles the emperor, he died, having been Pope
twenty years, five months, and eighteen days.

The Sea was void twenty days.

Lewis the Gentle, whom he crowned at Rheims; then returning to Rome, he died
six months, and three and twenty days after his election.

The Sea was void two days.

Lewis the Gentle, ex^used himself by letters and embassages: Then the
emperor did quit this goodly Prerogative and right of election, reserving
only that the new Pope should renew amity by embassages, presently after his
election. He died, having been Pope seven years, three months, and
seventeen days.

The Sea was void four days.

Zinzius. He died three years, six months, four and twenty days after his
election.

The Sea was vacant two days.

SCHISM XI.

Eugenius, held the Sea cert^ine days.



The Sea was vacant three days.

Lewis the Gentle, to hold the Feast of all Saints in France and Germany, upon
the first day of November. He lived Pope sixteen years.

The Sea was void fift^ene days.



The Sea was not void.



The Sea was vacant six days.

AN ADVERTISEMENT.

Some Historians, yea of great authority, set in this place Joan the seventh
or eighth, a German or English woman under the habit of a man, being a woman,
studied in such sort as she was aduaun^ed to be Pope, and ruled two years, and
certain months, at the end whereof (being with child) ^^e was delivered in a
public Procession, and died. Martinus Polo^u^, Platina, Volateranus, Philip,
Berg. Nau^lerus, and others.

and defended the widows and orphans. He was deposed, and in the mean time
Anastasius usurped the Sea. Afterward he was restored, and died, having been
Pope two years, eight months, and sixteen days.

SCHISM XII.

Benedict, held the place for certain days, and was the Aut^or of the twelfth
Schism.



The Sea was vacant seven days.



The Sea was void two days.

THE EIGHT GENERAL COUNCIL.

Photinus Bishop of Constantinople, who was rejected and excommunicated, and
Ignatius (unjustly deprived) was restored.

Ioane) a learned man, came into France, having escaped out of prison at Rome:
He crowned three Emperors in four years, Charles the Bald at Rome, Lewis the
Stuttering, in a Council held at Troys, and Charles the Gross after his
return to Rome, the which never happened to any Pope. He died, having held the
place ten years, and two days.

The Sea was void three days.



The Sea was void two days.

Nicholas, That no Emperor should deal any more with the election of the
Pope, but that it should be free unto the Clergy. He died after his election
one year, three months, and nineteen days.

The Sea was void three days.

Ber^rdus Bishop of Poictiers. He held the place six ye^res, and nine days.

The Sea was void five days.



The Sea was void five months, and two days.

SCHISM XIII.

SERG^VS the third, a Roman, created during the Schism against Formosus, held
the Sea for a certain time, which Schism was cruel and scandalous, and
lasted long.



The Sea was void five days.

F^^mosus to be broken; he unburied his body, and cut off two of his fingers,
and th^n inter red him among the Laity. In the end repenting him of his
villainous acts he became a Monk, having held the Sea one year, two months,
and nineteen days.

The Sea was vacant three days.

Formosus, disanulli^g those of Stephen: he was Pope four months, and three
and twenty days.

The Sea was void one day.

Platina says, that in those days men came unto Ecclesiastical dignities by
corruption, and not by virtue, as in former times.

The Sea was void one day.

St^phen, and ^atefied the decrees of Formosus in the presence of the Emperor,
and of king Charles the Simple. He died having held the place one year, and
fifteen days.

The Sea was void one day.



The Sea was vacant six days.



The Sea was not void at all.

SCHISM XIIII.

Leo, having so wickedly made himself Pope, as we have said, lost it within
seven months after. He was put in prison, and died poorly.

The Sea was not void.

Formosus the one hundred and thirteenth Pope, to whom he had been a
Competitor, to be taken out of the grave, and his head to be cu^ off as if he
had been alive. He died having held the place seven years, three months, and
sixteen days.

The Sea was void five days.



The Sea was void two days.



The S^e was vacant six and twenty days.

Albert Marquis of Tuscane; and for that he did attribute unto himself all the
glory of this victory, he was slain by the soldiers; having bin Pope
fifteen years, two months, and fifte^ne days.

The Sea was void one day.



The Sea was void one day.

He died having been Pope two years, one month, and fifteen days.

The Sea was void two days.



The Sea was void one day.

Otho the first, was the first Emperor which gave the oath of fidelity to
this Pope, whom he freed out of prison, where he had been put by the Romans:
and Leo confirmed unto him the power to choose the Popes. He died after three
years, six months, and ten days.

The Sea was void one month.



The Sea was void ten days.



The Sea was vacant three days.



The Sea was void twelve days.

Otho the first, what a scandal the church did suffer by his detestable life.

The Sea was not void.

John the twelfth had been deposed for his wicked life, in a council held at
Rome, almost of all the Bishops of Italy) was substituted by Otho the Great,
defendor of the Church, and a very religious prince: and he held the Sea one
year, six months, and seventeen days. Presently after the departure of
Otho, John the twelfth was called home again by the seditious and inconstant
Romans, and Leo expelled, who retired himself to the Emperor to avoid a
greater Schism. John being thus restored, held the Sea three months, and
eight and twenty days, at the end whereof being taken in adultery, he was
slain by the woman's husband.

LEO the eight was restored by Otho, and held the Sea eight months, and two
and twenty days: and Bennet the fist was banished and degraded by Otho, after
that he had besieged, and taken the town. Leo seeking to prevent the malice of
the Romans, who proceeded in the election by corruption and practices,
ordained in open Senate, That no man should be made Pope without the consent of
the Emperor, And he restored the donation made unto the Church by Justin.

The Sea was void six months and one day.

SCHISM XV.

Leo, held the place certain days.

Peter their Provost, and then banished, but nearing that Otho the first came
against them with a great army, they called him back again. This Provost was
delivered over to the hangman, who stripped him, and set him upon an ass with
his face turned, and his hands bound under the tail and so was led through the
city, after which he was sent into exile, and his adherents punished.

The Sea was void thirteen days.



The Sea was not void at all.

Cinthius a Roman citisen, where he was strangled: others say, he died of
hunger, for which injury there was no justice done. Platina wonders at the
change of things, for that now the Sovereign Bishops of Rome have a greater
power.

The Sea was void one year, and ten days.



The Sea was void twenty days.



The Sea was void three days.

SCHISM XVI.

Boniface the seventh, Bennet the sixth, and John the foureteenth.

Boniface the seventh, his enemies, to whom he had been competitor, where he
died of hunger.

The Sea was not void at all.

Peter, he fled to Constantinople, from whence he returned, hearing that John
the foureteenth was chosen Pope, whom he put in prison, and (as some write) he
caused his eyes to be put out: and he died of hunger. He governed the Church
the second time, four months, and six days.

The Sea was vacant ten days.



The Sea was void one day.



The Sea was void six days.

Otho the third, having been forced to retire himself into Germany, by the
practices of Crescentius the Consul, who had caused John the seventeenth to be
chosen Antipope. The Consul was hanged by the people, and the Antipope was
deprived both of dignity and life, having first lost his eyes. This, with
other causes recited by Platina, gave way to the seven Electors of the Empire,
the which was confirmed by Gregory, in a Council held at Rome. He held the Sea two years, eight months, and three days.

The Sea was void eight months, and ten days.

SCHISM XVII.

Gregory was restored. They put out the eyes, and cut off the nose and cares
of Crescentius, and afterward hanged him, being first murdered by the people,
as Platina reports.

Robert the French king, and to the Emperor Otho: after which, he was
Archbishop of Rheims, and then of Rauenna, and in the end Pope. Some write,
that he came to this dignity by magic, which he had studied in Spain. He
was before called Gilbert or Gerbert: and died, four years, six months, and
twelve days after his election.

The Sea was void fine and twenty days.

Odile Abbot of Clugny, who had been amazed at the noise he had heard about
Mount Etna, which grew by reason of the blustering and raging waves of the Sea,
and the vomiting forth of fire in the Mountain. Berno writes, That he was also
given to the study of Negromancie. He died within four months, and five and
twenty days.

The Sea was void nineteen days.



The Sea was voydone month.

Volat. Platina, and Genebrard, wonder how this Pope could be so honest a man;
considering the great troubles and combustions which had been in the lawful
succession of Sovereign Bishops, as in old time in the Synagogue under the
Antiochi.

The Sea was vacant eight days.

Henry the second, was restored, having agreed with his enemies: he held the Sea eleven years, three months, and one and twenty days. They report that
he was seen by a Bishop after his death, riding upon a black horse,
entreating him to give his money which was hidden, unto the poor, saying, That
what he had given did profit him nothing, being gotten by rapine, and that he
was grievously tormented. Platina.

The Sea was void two days.

Bennet, according unto Platina, having long made war against the Romans, and
having not taken any Ecclesiastical orders, being supported by the Emperor
Conrade, was chosen Pope, which place he held eight years, eight months, and
nine days.

The Sea was void two days.

Tuscalan, being of a villainous life, was twice dejected by the Romans, and the
other two which follow, chosen. He held the Sea twelve years, four months,
and ten days. He appeared in a monstrous shape after his death, saying, That
he had lived without law or reason. Plat. Berg.

SCHISM XVIII.

Bennet depoted: but being found more unworthy than Bennet, he was expelled,
having held the place but one month, and Bennet restored. Ambition and
corruption (too ordinary a thing amongst them) are of more force than a
Christian life, to attain unto dignities, a lamentable thing says Platina.

Bennet and Siluester, held the Sea one year, and twelve days. This Schism
growing by these three Popes was the cause of great mischiefs. Plat.

Bennet, or rather by sale, was forced by the Emperor Henry the third, to
leave it within one year, seven months, and twenty days.

A council was held at Sutrin near unto Rome in the presence of the Emperor
Henry, where these three Popes were deposed, and the election given again to
the Emperor, and to his successors, to avoid Schisms. Herm. Gontr. in his
Chronicle.

Damasus the second his successor, in the ninth month, according unto Platina:
but Onufrius faith, that Damasus was a good man.

Plat.

The Sea was void six months and three days.



The Sea was void eleven months and four and twenty days.



The Sea was void four days.



The Sea was vacant six days.





A Council held at Rome by Pope Nicholas, and one hundred and eighteen
Bishops: where it was ordained, That the Popes election should belong unto the
Cardinals, Bishops, and Priests (yet the rest of the clergy and people should
allow of ^.) choosing some one of their College, although he were not honored
with the title of Cardinal.

The Sea was void three months.

Candole a very rich and powerful Bishop, and so raised the nineteenth
Schisine. There was a sharp encounter, but Alexander had the victory. He was
Pope eleven years, six months, and five days.

SCHISM XIX.

Alexander, called before Candole, a Bishop: he held the Sea, and was Antipope
five years, and then was deposed.

Hildebrand, excommunicated Henry 4, for that he sought to meddle with the
election^ and conferring of Bishoprics: he caused Rodulphus duke of Sueuia to
be made Emperor, who was vanquished by Henry: he was thrice imprisoned, first
by Cynth^^ son to the Provost of Rome, and afterward by the Emperor, from
whence he escaped by the help of the Romans, and of Mathilda countess of
Mantoua, and of Guischard the Norman, prince of Pouille, who led him to
Salerna, where he died having been Pope twelve years, one month, and three
days. The quarrel for inuestitures, betwixt the Popes and Emperors, was the
cause of great mischiefs. Mart. Pol.

The Sea was void one year.

SCHISM XX.

Henry the fourth, and Gregory deposed, who held the Sea in Schism one and
twenty years against Gregory and his successors.

Henry the fourth, and died within one year, three months, and four days
after his election.

The Sea was void five months and three and twenty days.

Mathilda countess of Mantoua, who had drawn Gregory the seventh out of
prison, and left her lands unto the Church, now called the patrimony of S.
Peter, he came into France, where he forced king Philip the first to take his
wife again, leaving her with whom he had lived in adultery. He died having
held the place eleven years, four months, and eighteen days. Some write
that he was a turbulent man, and therefore they called him Turbanus, and that
he had been a household servant and disciple to Pope Gregory the seventh, who
was given to all diuilish arts. Benno.

The Sea was void fourteen days.

Henry the fourth, Emperor, and persuaded his son to take upon him the
government of the Empire, by whom he was imprisoned; having kissed the Popes
feet, he was forced to yield unto him the inuestiture of Bishoprics, and
Abbaies that were vac^nt: which power he afterward left, fearing to loose the
Empire. In the end he died, having been Pope eighteen years, five months,
and nine days.

The Sea was vacant three days.

Clement the third, held the chair against Pascall, two years and four
months.



Theodoric) did also hold the Sea against Pascal the second.

The Sea was void two days.

Cinthius a Roman of great power, but he was presently set at liberty by the
people. Having excommunicated the Emperor Henry the fist, and Gregory the
eight his Antipope, fearing the Emperors forces, he fled into France, where he
died, a year and five and twenty days after his election.

The Sea was vacant two days.

SCHISM XXI.

Burdin, was created during the Schism against Gelasius the second, and held
the Sea three years.

Calixtus maintained the Sea against the other Pope, and the Emperor Henry the
fifth, who resigned his right of the inuestiture and collation of Benefices, the
which had been the cause of great combustions. He held the Sea five years,
ten months, and thirteen days.

The Sea was void one day.

A GENERAL COUNCIL.





The Sea was void one day.

SCHISM XXII.

CELESTIN the second, a Roman, chosen by some Cardinals, caused a Schism
against Honorius the second.

Roger the Norman, who called himself king of Naples, by whom he was
vanquished in battle, and was put in prison, from whence escaping, he came
into France, where he held two Counsels, one at Rheims, and another at
Clermont, and having obtained succors from king Lewis the Gross, and from the
Emperor Lothaire, he returned into Italy, and held the Sea thirteen years,
seven months, and eight days.

The Sea was void one month, and one day.

SCHISM. XXIII.

Innocent the second, and was Antipope, who stole away the treasure and
relics to pay his soldiers, and having been the cause of this Schism
against Innocent the second, died of grief in the eight year.

The Sea was vacant certain days.

Anacletus, during the schism against Innocent the second; the which he held
five years.

A GENERAL COUNCIL.



Patritij. He had been chosen without the consent of the people, who now are
excluded from that prerogative by Innocent the second, and that power reduced
to the Cardinals alone. Onuphr.

The Sea was void twelve days.



The Sea was void one day.

Bernard: he was chased out of Rome for that he would not confirm certain
Consulls or rather Senators: he fled into France, where he persuaded king Lewis
the Young, and Richard king of England, to make the third voyage to the
Holie-land, and then returned to Rome, where he died, having been Pope eight
years, four months, and twelve days.

The Sea was vacant one day.



The Sea was void one day.

Frederic the first, for that he had resisted him, seeking to join Lombardie
to the Sea of Rome. He died within four years, eight months, and eight and
twenty days.

The Sea was void three days.

Frederic the first, whom he excommunicated; who seeking to be absolved, and
being upon his knees before him, Alexander trod him under his feet, and
commanded them to sing, Super Aspidem, and Basiliscum, etc. to whom the
Emperor answered, Non tibi, sed Petro; and the Pope replied, Et mihi, and
Petro. Volater. This Pope held the Chair one and twenty years, eleven
months, and three and twenty days.

The Sea was void one day.

SCHISM. XXIIII.

Alexander the third, was Antipope four years, and seven months.





A GENERAL COUNCIL.

Genebrard writes) of three hundred Bishops, as well of the East as West, for
the reformation of manners: wherein, the doctrine of the Vaudois was condemned.
It was also decreed, That in the Popes election, two third parts, concurring in
their Suffrages, should suffice to avoid all future schism.

Frederic, king Philip Augustus, and the king of England, to make the fourth
voyage to the Holie-land. He died, five years, two months, and eight and
twenty days after his election.

The Sea was not void at all.

Saladin, Souldan of Egypt, having been held by nine Christian kings for the
space of 88 years, died for griese, having held the Chair 1 year, 10 months,
25 days.

The Sea was void one day.



The Sea was void ten days.



The Sea was void three days.

Philip Augustus had put away his first wife, the which he took again,
leaving the second. He dispensed with a Nun, sister to the king of Sicile, to
marie with the Emperor Henry the fourth, and died, having been Pope six years,
nine months, and eleven days.

The Sea was not void at all.



A GENERAL COUNCIL AT LATRAN.

Ioachim, and others. Plat. Tom. of Counsels.

Frederic the second, excommunicated him for that he had rebelled against the Sea of Rome: he confirmed the orders of begging Friars, and took from the
Carmelites the partie-coloured habit of white and yellow: he ordained that the
ho^^shold be carried to sick persons with reverence. He died, having been
Pope ten years, and eight months.

The Sea was vacant one day.

Innocent ^h^ third, caused the decretalls to be gathered together by Raymond
Barch his chaplain: he forbad the reading of the civil law at Paris: he
excommunicated the Emperor Frederic the second, delaying his voyage to the
holy Land, the which he afterward accomplished and took Jerusalem. He died
having reigned fourteen years, and five months.

The Sea was void one month and one day.



The Sea was void one year eight months and fifteen days, by reason that
the Cardinals were detained prisoners by the Emperor Frederic the second.

Frederic the second of the Empire, for that he had rebelled against the holy
See: he ordained that the Cardinals should ride on horseback, and wear red
hats, to signify that they were ready to shed their blood for the defense of
the Church. Thus the Cardinal was the supreme order and dignity among the
Clergy: and this increase of honor was the decay of the Church. He died
having written upon the Decretals and Authentiques, and a book of the
imperial and pontifical jurisdiction against P. de Viues, who attributed all
to the Emperor. He held the place eleven years, five months, and fourteen
days.

The Sea was vacant thirteen days.

A GENERAL COUNCIL.

Frederic the Emperor, whereas many feasts were instituted, and S. Lewis king
of France declared the head of the fifth expedition to the holy Land.

Augustine out of woods, and brought them into towns, commanded them to preach
and confess: he condemned the book of William of S. Amor, a doctor of Paris,
who had written against the begging Friars: and died six years, five months,
and five days after his election.

Charles duke of Anjou brother to S. Lewis, king of Sicile, and died having
been Pope three years, two months, and four days.



The Sea was void two years six months and nine days.



The Sea was void ten days.

A GENERAL COUNCIL AT LION.

Niceph. Greg. who said that Michaell Palaologus Emperor of Greece came thither
in person.



The Sea was vacant nine days.

Gregory the tenth, touching the election before he went out of the Conclaue,
and died after one month, and seven days.

The Sea was void five and twenty days.



The Sea was vacant six months and four days.

Vrsins in Rome, a man of understanding and of a great spirit: he took from
Charles king of Sicile the office of Senator: he persuaded Peter king of
Atragon to pretend an interest to the realm of Sicile, which was the cause of
the Sicilian Euensong, so bloody for the French: he expelled Notaries and
Petefoggers out of Rome, saying that they lived of the blood of the poor: he
brought Flaminia with the town of Bolonia, and the Exarcat of Rauenna (which
had been long subject to the Emperor) under the power of the Romish See; and
seeking to make a nephew of his, king of Lombardie, and another of Tuscane: he
died having been Pope two years, eight months, and nine and twenty days.

The Sea was void six months.

Charles to the office of Senator, excommunicated the Emperor of Greece, and
the king of Arragon, depriving him of his realm, and giving it to Charles
brother to Philip the Fair. In the end he died after four years, one month,
and seven days. Some write that he was of so holy a life that sick men
received health coming to his Sepulcher.

The Sea was vacant four days.

Peter of Arragon, and died within two years, and two days.

The Sea was void ten months, and eighteen days.



The Sea was vacant two years, three months, and two days.

Charles the second, king of Naples, chosen Pope. Afterward, by his
simplicity, suffering himself to be circumuented by his successor, having
cunningly told him in the night, That he should leave his dignity of Pope, for
that he had decreed, that Cardinals should ride upon Asses, in imitation of our
Savior (a most holy ordinance, and prodigiously overthrown, as Genebrard
faith.) He left the Papacy, and retiring himself to the deserts, was taken by
Boniface his successor, and put in prison, where he died for want, five
months, and seven days after his election.

The Sea was void ten days.

Celestin, speaking unto him through a Reed, as if it had been an Angel, and
by a hole made in his chamber: he reigned as a Lion, saying, That he had power
to give and take away kingdoms; and to show his pretended authority, he
excommunicated the French king, and gave his realm to the Emperor Albert: he
died like a dog, having unworthily held that dignity eight years, nine
months, and eighteen days. He ordained the year of Iubile once in a hundred
years: and was the first which gave Indulgences. In this miserable time, the
Emperor of the Turks took his beginning in Ottoman.

The Sea was vacant ten days.

Philip the Fair from the excommunication of his predecessor, and two
Cardinals of the house of the Colonre^ he died (as some thought) poisoned by an
Abbess, who presented him with ^igges. He held the place eight months and six
days.

The place was vacant ten months, and seven and twenty days.

Clementins. He obtained Auignon (whereas the Popes See remained 72 years) and
the county of Nice, of Lewis king of Naples, in recompense of the tribute due
to the Church of Rome. He excommunicated the Venetians usurping the city of
Ferrara, being of the Patrimony of the Church. In the end he died, having
been Pope 8 years, 10 months, 16 days.

The Sea was void one year, three months, and seventeen days.

A GENERAL COUNCIL HELD AT VIENNA.

Francis, of the which one Dulcinus was the chief, were condemned for
Heretics, as the Templers were in like manner. There it was also decreed,
That the Hebrew, Chalde, Arabique, and Greek Tongues should be publicly
taught in the Universities.

Lewis the fourth, by reason whereof he gave him an Antipope. This Pope fell
into some errors, which he retracted, being admonished by the Divines of
Paris. He was Pope 18 years, 3 months, 28 days.

The Sea was vacant sixteen days.

SCHISM. XXV.

John the one and twentieth, by the persuasion of Lewis the fourth, emperor.
He died a prisoner in Auignon, having craved pardon of John, whose Image he had
caused to be burnt as an Heretic, having been Pope 3 years, 3 months, 14
days.

Cisteaux, a learned man, and severe, distributing the goods of the Church
equally, without respect of kindred, saying, That the Pope had no kinsmen. He
h^ted the emperor Lewis, no less than his predecessor John* He reformed the
order of Cisteaux, and Benardins, building them a College at P^ris. He died,
having held the Sea seven years, four months, and six days.

The Sea was void eleven days.

Bennet: he was held a learned man, and liberal to all, yet he was an enemy
to the Emperor Lewis, and ratified the excommunication of Bennet and John the
two and twentieth: he abridged the Iubile to fifty years. He sought to
reconcile Philip of Valois (the French king) and Edward king of England. He
died, having been Pope ten years, and seven months. I. du Tillet says, That
in those times Benefices were sold, and all was subject to money.



The Sea was void eleven days.



The S^e was vacant one month, and fifteen days.

William: he was a great doctor of the Cannon Law, and being absent in a
certain Embassage was chosen Pope. He was very earnest to resist the Turk,
against whom he ca^sed a croisado to be preached: he went to Rome to pacefie
some troubles in Italy, and in his return died at Marseille, having been
Pope eight years, two months, and three and twenty days.

The Sea was vo^d t^n da^es.

without the priuitie of the French; the which he did by the advice of his
scholmaster Baldus. He was Pope seven years, two months, and seven and
twenty days.

The Sea was vacant twelve days.

Ioane queen of Sicile had done him, which was the cause of the six and
twentieth Schism: and ha^ing caused five Cardinals to be drowned, he died,
having held the Sea eleven years, six months, and five days.

URBAN the sixth, did celebrate the third Iubile.

The Sea was void nineteen days.

SCHISM XXVI.

Urban and his successors.

The Sea was void fifteen days.

Peter de Luna a Spaniard, called Bennet the thirteenth, he held the Sea
fourteen years, and eleven months.



The Sea was void fifteen days.

Peter de Luna, after Clement the seventh. He held the Sea at Auignon during
the Schism against Boniface the ninth, and his successors, he was a learned
man, and died in the thirtieth year.



The Sea was vacant three and twenty days.

Bennet sitting at Au^gnon should do the like, but they ^^fusing, they w^^e
both deposed by the Council held at Pisa, and would not obey. He was Pope eight
years, seven months, and five days.

A COUNCIL HELD AT PISA.

Gregory the twelfth, and Bennet the thirteenth were deposed, and Alexander
the fi^t chosen i^ their places, but they would not obey the Council; so as
there were three Popes for one.

Platina says, he was bold, cruel, and more martial than his quality
requir^d: he deprived Ladislaus king of Naples, of his realm, for that he h^ld
Ostia and other places belonging to the Church of Rome, and gave it to Lewis
duke of Anjou brother to Charles the fifth: his prodigality was so great, as he
was wont to say that he had been a rich Bishop, a poor Cardinal, and a
begging Pope. He died within t^n months, and eight days.

The Sea was void thirteen days.



The Sea was vac^nt two years, five months, and ten days.

A GENERAL COUNCIL AT CONSTANCE.

Sigismond, where he assisted with four Patriarchs, nine and twenty
Cardinals, seven and forty Archbishops, six hundred and five Bishops, and
sixty and four Abbots and Doctors; in the which three Popes were deposed:
John the three and twentieth, remaining at Bolonia, Gregory the twelf^h at
Rome, and Bennet the thirteenth in Spain; and Martin called the fifth, was
chosen in their place by a general consent, and so the six and twentieth
schism ended. There it was decreed that the Council was above the Pope. To
this Council came John Hus, and Jerome of Prague, under the Emp^rours safe
conduct, where constantly maintaining their doctrine grounded upon the word of
God, they were condemned, and afterward burnt.

Collonnies, was chosen by three and thirty Cardinals at the Council of
Constance: he confirmed the decree of the Council, that the Pope should be
subject, and tha^ there should be a Council called every ten years. He died
having been Pope thirteen years, three months, and ten days.

The Sea was void eleven days.

Bennet the thirteenth, was chosen by certain Spanish Cardinals, or
Anticardinalls, and held the Sea as Antipope four years.

Clement: in ^he beginning he was of a good life, but bad council made him to
pervert all, provoking the Romans to arms, so as he was forced to fly in a
Monks weed, being chased away with stones. He held ^he See fifteen years,
eleven months, and one and twenty days.

The Sea was vacant eleven days.

A GENERAL COUNCIL AT BASIL

A General Council was held at Basil for reformation of the Church, and
against the doctrine o^ John Hus and the Annates, the subst^nce whereof is
contained in a pragmaticke sanction, published in a Council which the French
Church held at Bourges: there Eugenius the fourth was depo^ed, and ^medius an
hermit, before duke of Sauoy, was chosen and called Felix the fourth: he was
supported by the Emperor. This was the 27 schism, so as part of Christendom
followed one Pope, part of it another, and some obeyed neither the one nor the
other.

A GENERAL COUNCIL AT FLORENCE.



SCHISM XXVII.



Amedee of Sauoy, or Felix the fourth, did quit the Sea to suppress the
Schism, remaining a Cardinal, and Apostolic Legate, in his countries of
Sauoy. He was Pope eight years, and nineteen days.

The Sea was void fourteen days.



Borgia. Soon after his being Pope, he proclaimed war against the Turk, as
he had vowed before he came unto it, the which was held admirable. Having
instituted the Feast of the Transfiguration, he died, three years, and four
months after his election.

The Sea was vacant twelve days.

Aeneas Syluius, a very learned man, having been Secretary to the Emperor
Frederic the third, ^ent in embassage to many Princes, and Secretary to the
Council of Basil, was in the and chosen Pope. He was opposite to Lewis the
eleventh, for that by the advice of his Court of P^rliament, he would not obey
him, and abolish the Pragmaticke Sanction, concluded at the Council of Basil,
the which he himself approu^d by two learned books written before he was
Pope. It may be he grew ambitious, and changed his manners with his name. He
held the Sea five years, eleven months, and seven and twenty days.

The Sea was void sixteen days.

There was a Council of the French Church held at Orleans, by reason of the
Pragmaticke Sanction, which Pope Piu^ the second would have abolished as
heretical: Against the which, the Court of Parliament at Paris, and the
Universities, opposed. This assembly was also against the Annates, by the
which the Court of Rome draws infinite summe^ of money out of France, Duar. l.
5. c. 11. sets down at large the other Popes which did ^p^ugne this
Pragmaticke Sanction.

Eugen^us the fourth, and Cardinal of S. Marcke, a man of a goodly
repres^ntation, but ^n ^nemie to learning: He was proud, increasing his
majesty by arms, and avarice, confer^ing Ecclesiastical livings to his own
profit, at what time all things were sold at Rome. He exceeded all his
predecessors in pomp and show, enriching his My^er with Diamonds, Saphyrs,
Emeraulds, Pearls, and other stones of great price, and would be seen after
that manner, augmenting also the pomp of Cardinals with a scarlet gown, and
a hood. He reduced the Iubile to five and twenty years. He disa^ulled the
Abbreuiatures instituted by his p^^decessour, and died, h^uing held the Sea six
years, ten months, and six and twenty days.

The Sea was void four days.

Paul: he was held learned. To take away all occasions of jelousie and envy
betwixt the four orders of begging Fri^rs, he made them all equal in
privileges. He had many good parts, but he loved his kindred too much, as many
have done, abusing greatly the goods of the Church. He was Pope thirteen
years, and four days. Sixtus the fourth, celebrated the sixth Iubile, in the
year of our Lord God 1475.

The Sea was void sixteen days.

and Promoters, like unto Pius the second, and Sixtus the fourth. He was the
first of all the Popes which advanced his bastards to honors and wealth after
an unaccustomed manner. He held the Sea seven years, ten months, and seven
and twenty days.

The Sea was void one month, and sixteen days.

Roderic Borgia, a man endowed with six great vices which cannot be spoken
without horror. He practiced to be Pope by all Deuillish arts, and was chosen
by the corruption of many Cardinals, whom he oppressed afterward. He sought by
all means to heap up treasure, to satisfy his lustful desires, especially
to advance his four bastards, the one of which was Caesar Valentin Borgia,
whom he made a Cardinal, and was afterward duke of Valentinois in Dauphine,
for whom he troubled all Italy by the rest. He made Rome a receptacle of
thieves. Finally, there was nothing (how holy soever) but he sold, as you may
read in the Authors of his time; and Thannasarius has left these verses
written in Latin.

Alexanders sells all, the holy Keys he sold,

Both Myters, Altars, and the Cross of gold:

He bought it all; who can him then deny,

That to retaile which he so dear did buy?

He caused the tongue and hands of Antonius Mancinellus to be cut off, for that
he had written an eloquent Oration against his villainous and lewd life. He died
of poison which he had prepared for others, having held the Sea eleven years,
and eight months.

ALEXANDER the sixth, did celebrat the seventh Iubile, in the year 1500.

The Sea was void one month, and three days.

Pius the second, was chosen by the Cardinals after great strife and
contention. He was a great enemy to the French, for that he had taken a great
part of the kingdom of Naples. He had a will to reform the Church, to
celebrat a Council, and to raise a great army against the Turk, but he died
within six and twenty days after his election.

The Sea was vacant four and twenty days.

Sixtus the fourth, and Cardinal of S. Peter at Vincula, was chosen Pope. He
was a man of a quick spirit, and subtle, and more fit f^r arms than
learning. He recovered Bolognia, and many towns from the Venetians, namely,
Imola, Seruia, Rauenna, and others, with the help of the French. Afterward,
he solicited the Emperor Maximilian, and Henry king of England, to make war^e
against them, to expel them out of Italy, having defeated his army, with the
Spaniards and Venetians, in battle at Rauenna. He excommunicated the French,
and gave the realm to the first Conqueror, as he had done the realm of
Naua^re, which was unjustly invaded by the king of Castille, and taken from
John of Albret. He held the Sea nine years, five months, and one and twenty
days.

The Sea was vacant eight and twenty days.

A SYNOD HELD AT TOVRS.

A National Council of the French Church was held at Tours, by all the
Bishops, and most of the Doctors of France, against Pope Iulio the second: and
another at Pisa, Milan, and Lion, by the authority of Maximilian the emperor,
and of king Lewis the twelfth, against the same Pope, defending his right by
others.

A GENERAL COUNCIL AT LATERAN.

Iulio, and afterward hindered by him, but it was continued by Leo the tenth,
and ended in the year 1517, for the reformation of the Church, and war against
the Pope.

Medicis, was made Pope at the age of twenty years: he was learned, eloquent,
and liberal, loving learned and virtuous men; yet he loved his pleasures too
much, and his own good nature was often abused by such as were enemies to rest
and quiet: he deprived the duke of Vrbain of his dukedom, and gave it to
Laurence de Medicis his nephew, father to Katherine ^e Medicis the French
queen: having published remission of sins to all such as gave money to make
war against the Turks, he abrogated the pragmaticke sanction, not without some
tumul: and murmur of the whole Clergy of France. He died ^ith joy, hearing
that the French were expelled out of Milan, having been Pope eight years,
eight months, and twenty days.

The Sea was void two months and seven days.

Charles the fifth: he was a learned man, and lived discreetly without any great
expense or pomp, neither did he con^er benefices rashly: yet was he not
pleasing unto the Romans, notwithstanding his many good parts. He held the Sea
one year, eight months, and nine days.

The Sea was vacant two months and four days.

Medicis, cousin german to Leo the 10: some say that he was his son or his
base brother. He was a man of a great spirit, cunning, subtle, and politic.
He held the party of Francis the French ^ing, against the Emperor Charles the
fifth, and treated the marriage of Katherine his ^eece, with Henry then duke of
Orleans: he besieged Florence the town of his ^^th, for some indignities which
the Florentines had done to them of his house, and ^^ter a year he took it by
composition (wherein he is not condemned to have been (...) rigourous against
his country) making Alexander his nephew the first duke, who ^^empting to
force chaste ladies, received his reward, and was slain by his own kinsmen. He
held the Sea ten years, ten months, and seven days.

CLEMENT the seventh, celebrated the eight Iubile, in the year 1582.

The Sea was void seventeen days.

Farnese: some write that he was endowed with many virtues, a lover of peace,
seeking always to reconcile the French king and the Emperor: but he oppressed
his subjects with tributes, and loved his kindred more than was fit, making his
base son Peter Lewis duke of Parma and Plas^nti^, the which was the cause of
his death, being miserably slain by the nobility ^^d the people, whom he
would force to live in Plasentia and leave the fields. Some write that this
Paul was a Magitian, a murderer, and an incestious person. He was Pope five
years, and eight and twenty days.

The Sea was void two months and nine and twenty days.

THE COUNCIL OF TRENT.



John Maria de Monte, having been President in the Council of Trent and
Bolonia, was chosen Pope: he changed his manners with his name, for after he
was Pope he gave himself to war, gormandise, and voluptuousness, yea scoffing
at his own dignity. He held the Sea five years, one month, and sixteen
days.

IVLIO the third, celebrated the ninth Iubile, in the year 1550.

The Sea was void seventeen days.



The Sea was void two and twenty days.

C^raffi, an austere man, and in show very zealous to reform the abuses of the
Clergy, detesting auerice, rejecting the resignation of Benefices in any man's
favor, and dispensations: finally being in show borne to restore the Church;
but some write that he used great exactions and tyrannies, and was the cause of
great wars; so as after his death the people of Rome used his image with great
indignity, cutting off the head, and right hand, and casting it into Tyber, as
they would have done his body if it had not bin guarded, and they defaced the
arms of his house. He was Pope four years, two months, and seven and
twenty days.

The Sea was void four months and seven days.



The Sea was void nine and twenty days.



The Sea was void eleven days.





The Sea was vacant thirteen days.

Felix Perret, Cardinal of Montalto, a Tuscane, whose father was a Swineheard.
He held the Sea five years, four months, and three days.

The Sea was void eighteen days.



The Sea wa^ void two months, and nine days.

Sfondrati, before Bishop of Cremona. He was Pope but ten months, and ten
days.

The Sea was void thirtee^e days.



The Sea was void one month.

Hippolit^s Aldobrandini, Cardinal of S. Pancratio, great Penitentier. Falling
sick of a Catarre, he died the third of March, in the year 1601, having been
Pope thirteen years, one month, and four days.



The Sea was vacant eight and twenty days.

Octauio, of the noble family of the Medicis, was chosen with a wonderful
applause of the whole College of Cardinals, and the people of Rome made as
great demonstration of joy for this election; but it continued not long, for he
died within seven days of a fever, to the great grief of all men.

The Sea was void twenty days.

Bourgesi of Sienna, but borne at Rome of a Roman woman, his father coming
thither to dwell. He now holds the Sea.

Having set down the number of the Sovereign Bishops, it seems very fit in
like manner to specify the order, names, and tytles of Cardinals which are
living at this day, seeing they have the chief charge in the Sea of Rome.
Wherein the Reader shall be advertised, That all Cardinals are divided into
three orders, that is to say, of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, not that the
Cardinals Priests be no Bishops, or that the Deacons be not Priest^ and
Bishops, but for that their first institution was such, some to carry the
tytles of Bishops, others of Priests, and some of Deacons: So as the Cardinals
of S^urdis, and of Rochfoucaut, ^hereof the one is Archbishop of Bourdeaux, and
the other of Clermont, and yet they have but the title of Priests: As also, the
Cardinals of S. Flore, and Perriti, are Priests, and yet they are called but
Deacons. For which reason they are here set down, according to their ranks
and tytles, and not according to the time of their creation. And to the end
that the change of one language into another should breed no difficulty to
know them by their names and tytles, they are left as they are commonly called.

CARDINAL BISHOPS.
1 FRANCIS of the title of Bishop of Ostia, Deane of the holy College,
Cardinal of Ioyeuse, Protector of France, and Archbishop of Rouen, a
Frenchman, created by Pope Gregory the thirteenth, the ninth of December, in
the year 1583. 2 Anthony Maria, of the title of Bishop of Porto, Cardinal
Gal^o, Bishop Dosme of la Marque, created the seventeenth of September 1586, by
Sixtus the fifth. 3 Anthony of the title of Bishop of Sabina, Cardinal
Saulius, a Geneuois, created the eighteenth of December 1587, by Sixtus the
fifth. 4 Evangelist Palot of the title of Bishop of Tusculum, Cardinal
Coseuein, Archpriest of S. Peter of Cardarola of la Marque, created the
eighteenth of December 1587, by Sixtus the fifth. 5 Friar Gregory Petrochin of
the order of the Hermits of S. Augustine of the title of Bishop of Preneste,
Cardinal of Montelparo of la Marque, created the twentieth of December 1589,
by Sixtus the fifth. 6 Paul Sfondrati of the title of Bishop of Albe, Cardinal
of S. Cecile, President of the Signatures of Grace, a Millanois, created the
eighteenth of December 1590, by Gregory the fourteenth.
CARDINALS PRIESTS.
7 Peter, of the title of the most holy Trinity, Montepinci, Cardinal of
Gondij, Prior of the Cardinals Priests, a Florentin, created the eighteenth of
December 1587, by Sixtus the fifth. 8 Bennet, of the title of S. Lawrence in
Lucina, Cardinal Justinian, a Geneuois, created the seventeenth of December
1586, by Sixtus the fifth. 9 Francis Maria des Marquis of Mont S. ^^rie, of the
title of Mount S. Maria in Transteuere, Cardinal of Monte, created the
foureteenth of December 1588, by Sixtus the fifth. 10 Frederic, of the title of
S. Marie of the Angels in Thermis, Cardinal Borromea, Archbishop of Milan,
created 18 of December 1487, by Sixtus the fifth. 11 Octauio, of the title of S.
Praxede, Cardinal Aquauiua, Archbishop of Naples, a Neopolitan, created the
sixth of March 1591, by Gregory 13. 12 Flaminius, of the title of S. Marie of
Peace, Cardinal Plat^o, a Milanois, created the sixth of March 1591, by
Gregory the foureteenth. 13 Peter, of the title of S. John, and S. Paul,
Cardinal Aldobrandin, Chamberlain to the holy Church of Rome, Archbishop of
Rauenna, President of the Briefes signed, and Protector of Sauoy, created the
twelfth of September. 1593, by Clement the eight. 14 Octauio, of the title of S.
Sabina, Cardinal Bandin, a Florentin, created 15 of June 1596, by Clement the
eight. 15 Friar Anne of Scars, of the title of S. Susanna, of the order of S.
Bennet, Cardinal of Giury, a Frenchman, created by Clement 8, the fifth of June
1596. 16 Lawrence, of the title of S. Lawrence. In Pane and Perna, Cardinal
Blanchet, a Bullonois, created the fifth of June 1596, by Clement the eight. 17
Bartholomew, of the title of S. Peter in Vincula, Cardinal Coesio, Archbishop
of Compse, created the fifth of June 1596, by Clement the eight. 18 Francis of
the title of S. Marie de Populo, Cardinal Mantican Vtinens of Frioul, created
the fifth of June 1596, by Clement the ^^ght. 19 Pompee, of the title of S.
Balbina, Cardinal Arigon, a Roman, created the fifth of June 1596, by Clement
the eight. 20 Boniface, of the title of S. Prisca, Cardinal Beuilacqua, Bishop
of Coruiana Ferrarois, created the third of March 1599, by Clement the eight.
21 B^rnard, of the title of S. Anastatius, Ca^dinall Roias of Sandoual,
Archbishop of Tolledo, a Spaniard, created 33 of March 1599, by Clement 8. 22
D^minic, of the title of S. Peter in Monteaureo, Cardinal Tuscan de R^ggio,
created the third of March ^599, by Clement the eight. 23 Francis, of the title
of S. Siluester, Cardinal Dietrichstein, Bishop of Vlme, Prince of the sacred
Empire, and Protector of the realms and estates of his imperial majesty, a
German, created in the year 1599, by Clement the eight. 24 Robert, of the title
of S. Maria in Via, Cardinal Bellarmin Politian, created the third of March
1599, by Clement the eight. 25 Francis, of the title of S. Marcel, Cardinal
Sourdis, Archbishop of Bourdeaux, a Frenchman, created the third of March 1599,
by Clement the eight. 26 Dominic, of the title of the twelve Apostles,
Cardinal Gymniasius de Castro, a Boullonois, created the ninth of June 1604,
by Clement the eight. 27 Philip, of the title of Sancta Maria super Mincruam,
Cardinal Spinelli, Bishop of Auerzo, a Neopolitan, created 9 of June 1604, by
Clement 8. 28 Anthony, of the title of S. Croix, in Jerusalem, Cardinal
Zapata, a Spaniard, created 9 of June 1604, by Clement 8. 29 Charles of the
title of S. Thomas in Parione, Cardinal Madriati, Bishop of Trente, a German,
created the ninth of June 1604, by Clement the eight. 30 Charles, of the title
of S. Clement, Cardinal of Contes, Bishop of Ancona, a Roman, created the
ninth of June 1604, by Clement the eight. 31 James Dauy, of the title of S.
Agnes in Agone, Cardinal of Peron, a Frenchman, created the ninth of June
1604, by Clement the eight. 32 John D^uphin, of the title of S. Marck, Bishop
of Vicenze, and called Cardinal of Vicenze, a Ven^tian, created the ninth of
June 1604, by Clement 8. 33 James of the title of S. Stephen in Monte Coelio,
Cardinal Synesius, Bishop of Ciuita Vecc^ia de la Marque, created 9 of June
1604, by Clement 8. 34 Erminius of the title of S. Maria Transpontina,
Cardinal de Valentibus de Tri^io, created the ninth of June 1604, by Clement
the eight. 35 Ferdinand Taberna, of the title of S. E^scbius, Cardinal of S.
Eusebius, a Clement the eight. 36 S^ipio, of the title of S Crisogono, Card^^^l
Barghese Archpriest of the Church ^^ateran, Legate of Auignon, a Roman, ^^^ated
the eighteenth of July 1605, by (...) the fifth. 37 Horatio Cardinal Spinosa
Legate of Fer^^^, Archbishop of Genoua, created the Paul 5. 38 Maffee of the
title of S. Onuphrio, Car^^nall Barbario, Bishop of Spoletum, Legate in
Bolognia, a Florentine, created ^he eleventh of September 1606, by ^aul the
fifth. 3^ ^^hn Garzius of the four holy crowns, ^^rdinall Millin, Vicar to the
Pope, a ^^mane, created the eleventh of Sep^ember 1606, by Paul the fifth.
Boniface of the title of S. Pudentiana, Cardinal Caietan, Legate of Romagnia,
Bishop of Caf^an, a Roman, created the eleventh of September 1606, by Paul the
fifth. 41 M^rcell of the title of S. Quirice and Iuli^^, Cardinal Lantes,
Bishop of Todi, a Roman, created the eleventh of September 1606, by Paul the
fifth. 42 Francis Forgas Cardinal, Archbishop Paul the fifth. 43 Francis, of the
title of S. Calixtus, Cardinal of Rochfoucaut, Bishop of Clermont, a
Frenchman, created the tenth of December 1607, by Paul the fifth. 44 Michaell
Ange Tonti, of the title of S. Barthol^mew in Insula, Cardinal Nazar^^, Paul
the fifth. 45 Fabr^tio, of the title of S. Augustine, Cardinal Verall, a Roman
created the four and twentieth of November 1608, by Paul the fifth. 46 John
Baptista, of the title of S. Sixtus, Cardinal Lenius, Bishop of Ferrara, a
Roman, created the four and twentieth Paul the fifth. 47 Decius, Archbishop of
Damas, and Nuncio for the Apostolic See in Spain, Cardinal Carrafe, created
the seven and t^entieth of August 1611, by Paul 5. 48 Dominicke of the title of
S. Martin in Montibu^, Archbishop of Nazaret, Cardinal Riuarola a Geneuois,
created the seven and twentieth of August 1611, by Paul the fifth. 49 Metellus
Bigus of the title of S. Alexis, Bishop and Cardinal of Suane, a Siennois,
created the seventeenth of August 1611, by Paul the fifth. 50 John Bishop of
Beziers, Councellor to the most Christian king, and chief Almoner to the
queen Regent, Cardinal Bonsi a Florentine, created the seventeenth of August
1611, by Paul the fifth. 51 Philip Bishop of Aquin, Vice-Legat at Auignon,
Cardinal Filonard a Roman, created 17 of August 1611, by Paul the fifth. 52
Peter Paul of the title of S. Nerrea and and S. Achilea, Auditor General of
the Apostolic Chamber, Cardinal Crescence a Roman, created 17 of August
1611, by Paul the fifth. 43 James of the title of S. George, Treasurer General
of the Apostolic See, Cardinal Serra a Geneuois, created the seventeenth of
August 1611, by Paul the fifth. 54 Friar Augustine, General of the order of the
preaching Friars, of the title of S. Maria de Ara Coeli, Cardinal Galamin of
Brisequelle, created the seventeenth of August 1611, by P^^l the f^f^. 55
Horatio of the title of S. Savior in Lauro, Auditor of the Rot^, Cardinal
Lancelot a Roman, created the seuent^^nth of August 1611, by Paul the fi^t. 56
Gaspard Chanoin of the Church of Toledo, Cardinal Borsa^ Spaniard, cr^ated the
seventeenth of August ^611, by Paul the fifth. 57 Friar Felix Centin, Proc^^^
General of the Friar Minors Conuentu^^s* of the title of S. Jerome of
S^lauonia, Cardinal Asenlan, created the seventeenth of August 1611, by Paul
the fi^t.
CARDINALS DEACONS.
58 Francis of S. Flora, of the title of S. Maria in Via Lata, Cardinal
Sforcia, the first Deacon, a Roman, creat^d the 12 of December 1583, by
Gregory the thirteenth. 59 Alexander Peretti, of the title of S. Laurence, in
Damaso, Cardinal Montalto Vice Chauncelour of the Church of Rome, Protector of
the realm of Polonia, a Roman, created the thirteenth of March 1585, by
Sixtus the fifth. 60 Odoart of S. Eustace, Cardinal Farnese, Legate of the
Patrimony, Protector of the realms of Arragon, England, and Sueden, a Roman,
created the sixth of March 1591, by Gregory the fourteenth. 61 Andrew of S.
Ange in foro piscium, Cardinal Pepretti of Montalto, created the 5 of June
1596, by Clement the eight. 62 Alexander of S. Marie the New, Cardinal of Est,
a Ferrarois, created the third of March 1599, by Clement 8. 63 John Baptista of
S. Marie in Cosmedia, Cardinal of Ti, a Florentine, created the third of March
1599, by Clement 8. 64 John of S. Adrian, Cardinal of Auria, a Geneuois,
created the ninth of June Clement the eight. 65 Charles Emanuell of S. Nicholas
in Carcere Iuliano, Cardinal Pie a Ferrarois, created the ninth of June 1604,
by Clement the eight. 66 Maurice Emanuel Cardinal of Sauoy, son to the most
excellent Duke of Sauoy, created the tenth of December 1607, by Paul the fifth.
67 Ferdinand of the title of S. Marie in Dominica, Cardinal Gonsague, Prior of
Barlette, son to the most excellent Duke of Mantoua, created the 10 of
December 1607, by Paul the fifth. 68 Lewis of the title of S. Agathe, Cardinal
Caponi a Florentine, created the four and twentieth of November 1608, by Paul
the fifth.
So as there are in all sixty and eight Cardinals, of the which there are six
Bishops, one and fifty priests, and eleven Deacons.

By Gregory 13.
Bishops 1. Deacons 1.
By Sixtus 5.
Bishops 4. Priests 4. Deacons 1.
By Gregory 14.
Bishops 1. Priests 2. Deacons 1.
By Clement 8.
Priests 23. Deacons 5.
By Paul 5.
Priests 22. Deacons 3.
After which denumeration, it is not thought superfluous nor impertinent, to
make a repetition of them, according to their ranks, and the office whereunto
they are appointed, by which means the reader shall be fully satisfied, of all
that depends of this college.

The se^en Cardinals which are Bishops.
THe Bishop Cardinal of Ostia does consecrate and install the Pope, and
therefore The Bishop Cardinal Porticese. The Bishop Cardinal of Albe. The
Bishop of Pilastre or Cardinal Prenestin. The Bishop Cardinal Tuscula^. The
Bishop Cardinal of Sabin. The Bishop Cardinal of S. Rufina.
These assist the Pope on Sundaies, and Festival days in the Church of S.
John de Latran, whenas he does celebrate divine service.

The Cardinals which are Priests.
These serve at S. Peter's. The Cardinals of the title of S. Marie beyond
Tyber. Chrysogon. The Cardinal of S. Cecile. The Cardinal of S. Anastasius.
The Cardinal of S. Laurence in Damas. The Cardinal of S. Maurice. T^^
Cardinal of the title of S. Martin des Monts.
^hese serve in the Church of S. Paul.

The Cardinal of the title of S. Sabina. Priscus. The Cardinal of the title
of S. Balbinus. The Cardinal of the title of S. Nerea, and Achillea. The
Cardinal of S. Sixtus. The Cardinal of S. Marcell. The Cardinal of S.
S^sanna.
^^^se Priests Cardinals which follow, serve in the Church of S. Marie the
Great.

(...) Cardinal of the title of the twelve Apostles. (...) Cardinal of the
title of S. Eusebius. Potentiana. T^^ Cardinal of S. Peter, and S. Marcelin.
T^^ Cardinal of S. Clement. The Cardinal of S. Vital.
^^^se Priests Cardinals which follow, are in the Basilique S. Laurence.

The Cardinal of S. Praxeda. The Cardinal of S. Peter at Vincula. The
Cardinal of S. Laurence in Lucina. T^^ Cardinal of Sancta Croix in
Jerusalem. Stephen on Mont Celio. The Cardinal of S. John, and S. Paul. The
Cardinal of the four holy Crowns.
T^ere are after these sixteen Cardinals Deacons, that is to say: T^^
Cardinal of S. Marie in Dominica Archdeacon. The Cardinal of S. Luce of the
Seven seats. The Cardinal of S. Marie the New. The Cardinal of S. Cosmo, and
S. Damian. The Cardinal of S. Adrian. Gregory. The Cardinal of S. Marie in
the Greek Schole. The Cardinal of Sancta Maria in Porticu. The Cardinal of
S. Nicholas in the Tusculan Prison. The Cardinal of S. Ange. The Cardinal of
S. Eustace. The Cardinal of S. Marie the Egyptian. The Cardinal of S. Marie
in the Broad-way. The Cardinal of S. Agathe. The Cardinal of S. Luce among
the Images. Quirice.


The Cardinals which are Bishops sit near unto the Pope when he does celebrat
Fe^^i^all days: The Cardinals Priests assist him when he says Mass: and the
Deacons ^^ire him, and serve him at the Altar.

The Estate of the great Duke of Tuscanie.
THE ESTATE OF FLORENCE.
The Contents.
1 THe situation of the State of Florence, composed of three bodies of a
Commonwealth reduced into one 2. A description of the cities of that State, and
first of the city of Florence, the great circuit, and pleasant situation
thereof; her palaces and stately buildings: of Pr^toline, of Pogio, and other
houses of pleasure. 3. Of the city of Pisa, the antiquity thereof, and other
things worthy observation. 4. Of Pistoya, 5. Of the State of Syena, and the
Towns thereunto belonging. 6. The State of Florence commended for the Trebian
Wines, the Melons of the country of Pisa, and pasture grounds of Pistoya: the
Mines of Alablaster, Azure, Vitrioll, and other Myneralls: Fountains of Salt
waters, whereof they make Salt. 7. The subtlety, crafty wit, and great
frugalitie of the Florentines; great lovers of liberty. The inhabitants of
Syena, liberal, magnificent, and courteous; they of Prato sacril^gious; and
they of Pistoya, given to bloodshed and murder. 8. The fertil^tie of the
country of Syena, and riches of the Florentines in the traffic of Silks and
Woolls, Serges, and Cloth of gold. 9. The Clergy of the State of Florence,
possessing five hundred thousand crowns of yearly rent. 10. The reuenews of
the great Duke, what sums they 11. The strength of the great Dukes Estate,
consisting in the situation of the Mountains upon the Frontiers, and the
Fortresses of Syena, Florence, and Pisa. 12. What number of horsemen he
enteraineth. 13. His forces by sea. 14. The order of the knights of S.
Stephano, instituted by duke Cosmo. 15. Of the Alliances and Intelligences of
the Great duke with neighboring princes. 16. Of the administration of justice,
and election of the magistrates of this State. 17. Of the Archbishops and
Bishops that be in Tuscanie. 18. The Genealog^e of the D^kes of Florence.





(...) city of Florence is six miles in circuit, and contains more than
ninety thou^^^^ habitants. It stands in a plain environed which with
mountains, and seated vp^^ (...) river Arno, which passes through the midst
of the city, which is joined to^^^^er by four fair^ bridges of stone: it is
also paued with square stone, the streets are ^ong and large, and always
clean, and it has very fair places, and in them diverse statu^s; Pitti) is
not inferior to any in Italy, and surpasses many palaces of the kings
^^^^ope, both for the g^eatnesse of the building, for architecture, and for
ornament; (...) for the beauty of the gardines, fountains, statues, and other
things. This buil^^^^ ^as in times past vnadui^edly undertaken by a gentleman
named Luke of the house Cosmo: he was afterward put to death for matte^^ o^
State. There are diverse other stately palaces, as that of the Medici, the
Storzzi, and ^t^ers. Among other sigularities of this city, the Cathedral
Church is much comm^^^ed for the excellency of workmanship, the steeple
whereof is both for stuff and ^^^^ure very rare, and without this Church it is
paued all with m^rble. There is also a (...) Library in S. Laurence Church,
built and replenished with exce^lent books by the Medici, in the which are
many rare manuscripts. To be short, Charles Archduke of ^^^^ria said as he
passed through Florence, That it was a city which should not be seen (...) on
Festiual days. Besides this palace, the great duke has another out of the
city called

^^^^erra stands on the top of a hill: the walls whereof are made of squared
stone, almo^^ six foot of length, and joined together very nea^ly without
mo^^er: it has five fair gates, and at every gate a very fair fountain: the
walls sufficiently manif^st the antiquity thereof, in like manner do the
sepulchers, the Epitathes in Hetru^cane letter^, the most ancient statues of
marble, and many other things.

Strabo were joined together a^ Pisa, and extended themselves so large, and
with so great vi^lence, that it was impossible to discern any thing from one
bank unto the other. But at this present Serchia passe^h to Luca, and is very
far from Arno. This city is very great, divided by the river, and joined
together with two bridges, others write but one: the walls thereof are very
high, and of marble in some places, but most brick. There is a Church which
has gates of ^^asse, and close by it a steeple built with exquisit and
artificial cunning: for without, it stones, and are in one and the same
street, not all together, nor yet far distant one Charles the eight the French
king, and being again fifteen years after subdued, the city remained in a
manner desert: for the citisens thereof impatient of the government of the
Florentines, passed into Sardinia, Sicilie,

But the great duke Cosmo did his best endeavor to repeople it, erecting an
University, and building a goodly palace for the abode of the knights of S.
Stephano, giving many priuiuiledges to the inhabitants; notwithstanding it is
at this day so ill built and inhabited, as some hold there are not above
fourteen thousand persons, and yet it is not much less in circuit than
Flor^nce.

Pistoya is seated at the foot of the Appennine; but it is ruinated with
dissentions,

The Florentines, in stead of putting to death the heads of these two factions,
brought them (as it were into banishment) within their city, where the Donats
having taken upon them the protection of the Black, and the Cerchi of the
White; Florence was Lewis the first, of Anjou, for forty thousand florins of
gold to the Florentines, in like manner as Cortona was sold unto them within a
while after by king Ladislaus. There are besides, other good places in the
State of Florence, as Prato, Presche, S. Miniat, Empoli, S. Geminian, Fiquene,
Pietra-santa, Barga, and upon the sea coast Liuorne, and further off Plombin,
three miles thence.

The State of Florence boundeth upon Siena, an ancient city, which having
been a Guelphes and Gibelins, two fatal factions, grew up in Italy. This is
a fair city, and strong of situation; but which has lost, together with her
liberty, many of her people and much of her splendor: it is five miles in
compass, and contains about twenty thousand souls, and is distant from
Florence but three and thirty miles. The towns of the State of Siena are
Pienza, Montalcino, Quinsi, Saona, Massa, Pienca, and Grosset, with six and
twenty other places walled about, but slenderly peopled.

The Qu^litie.




The country about Pistoya is mountainous, but there are exceeding good
pasture

(...) river of Chiene runs through the territory of Arezzo: It is full of
mudd, and (...) ^urtfull to them that dwell near it. True it is, that they
labor daily to dry up (...) marshes, and to stop the course of the waters.
At the foot of the Apennin, you (...) country of Mugelle, crossed over by the
river of Syeua, which is pleasant, and (...) great store of fruits: and
between Arno and the country of Arezzo, you have (...) ^ne, which is rich in
corn, wine, and cattle. But Valdarne abounds greatly in

(...) fields about Syena, are employed to pasture, and feed many Beeues,
Bufles, and (...). They yield also good store of wheat, wine, and oil, and
abound in all sorts of (...) ^ut to speak in general of corn, Tuscanie does
not yield sufficient to feed the ^^^^^ts, but their wants are often supplied
from Sicilie, and other countries.

Their Manners.
(...) humors of the Tuscans appear best in the Florentines; for they have
subtle Thucydides is most true, That such men as be somewhat blunt of wit, do
b^^^ govern a Commonwealth, than they that be of too subtle a spirit. They
are (...) in trade of merchandise, and have not their like in raising of
buildings. They wea^e their apparel modest and grave, and surpass all the
Tuscans in civility, and fair ^p^ech.

The inhabitants of Syena differ very much from the humor of the Florentines:
for

Moreover, the Italians attribute certain qualities to the inhabitants of the
Cities of th^^ State, which I will not let pass in silence. They term the
Florentines slow, gorgeous and sumptuous, especially when they have strangers,
as none is more prodigal than wrongs done unto them. They of Prato commit
sacrilege in time of war. The men

The Riches.




The dukes revenues are esteemed by some to be a million and a half of
ducats, say^^g Monsieur de Beauregard a French gentleman, who has made great
prises of (...) ^eares when he has been at sea. Some are of opinion that the
dukes yearly reue^^^^ ^oth not amount to above 1100 thousand ducats, setting
down in particular how it is rai^^d, and what every chief town does yield.
Some hold that the deceased great (...) ^^nd about ten millions of gold in his
pre^ecessors coffers, and to the value of two (...) of jewels: and it is
credible that he has much augmented this sum.

The Forces.
WE may say that the Estate of this prince is of iron, for that besides the
natural These men are apt to arms and discipline, being proper to this
Province, the which has

Every soldier is tied to pay for his arms, which are given him for his use,
and must keep them clean and in good order for all necessities without any
charge to the prince. The great duke may upon every occasion draw all this
company of soldiers to Florence

Furthermore, he has caused a good number of Pioners to be enrolled, whom he
uses also in time of peace, making them to labor in fortifications, and
causing them to turn the course of rivers, and to make the lands better.

As for horsemen, this prince entertaineth ordinarily one hundred men at arms,
to

As touching the sea forces, duke Cosmo had in times past very great care of
them, Charles the fifth, the resignation of the Isle of E^be, from the Lord of
Plombin, who was Lord and Master thereof, both for that he could not defend it
from pirates that had ruined it, and for that it might by means of the slender
defense thereof, fall into the power of the Tu^kes, and so by reason of the
situation it would be much prejudicial and hurtful to all Italy: yet he left
all the revenues to the Lord of Plombin, and under his government all the
villages and open places. This Island ^^smo. There is for defense upon the
mouth of the haven two castles seated upon the (...) of two mountains, which
are esteemed to be exceeding strong, and in a manner im^^^gnable, by reason
both of art and situation. He has within the same many ca^^^^^, and all sort
of munitions. The great Duke has his Arcenall at Pisa, because that ^^^^^^ie
abounds in wood, hemp, annd other matters for to make and furnish many

Duke Cosmo, desirous to maintain the sea discipline, and to give more
reputation to Pius the fourth and fifth many privileges, and among others, That
they might have two hundred crowns pension of the goods of the Church, with
liberty to marry, but they are tied to serve in his armies at sea, and also
they are not capable of any co^^^^nd, until they have served three years
together in the galleys. And to give the greater reputation to this order, this
Duke instituted himself great Master of the same. As for instruments of
war, the great Duke is sufficiently stored, for he has about an hundred and
fifty fieldpieces in the castle of Florence, and his other places are as well

He endeavors greatly to maintain himself in the Popes friendship, for
that his to them in time of war) the greatest quantity of victuals they
p^ssibly can, into Med^cis, namely first of Leo, and after of Clement, who
wholly subdued

As for the king of Spain, the great Duke having now married his sister in
law, it must be thought he has with him very good correspondencie, and it is
also held that he supporteth the Spaniards, and has knit a strict league with
his brother in law. Yet it is not (after the opinion of many men of judgment)
wholly to break off with France, because the Queen is too near allied unto
him, and has always given him great testimonies of her love and friendship.
But it might so be, that the soliciting of his wife, or rather of some others,
ill affected toward the French, might withdraw him from the amity which his
father bare to the French King and Queen. Moreover, he sees that

As touching the Genowayes, they had no good intelligence with the late Duke,
by reason of the Spaniards: but since that this Duke has made an alliance with
the king of Spain, we need not doubt but that this Commonwealth is wholly at
his devotion, and yee^deth him all the testimonies of love it can.
Notwithstanding that the pretense of Corsica, as belonging to the State of
Pisa, might hinder this amity.

As for the Duke of Sauoy, though outwardly there are seen nothing but offices
of

This prince is in good amity with the duke of Mantoua, by reason of
parentage, and it is assuredly believed, that they run one course for their
preservation: yet it is not known, whether the alliance lately made in Sauoy,
will in time withdraw the amity of the duke of Mant^ua, for some
considerations, which is better to conceal than express. As for the duke of
Vrbin, by reason that he holds him inferior to him in greatness and
strength, there falls out often times grudgings, such as the limits of
jurisdictions do

Lastly, the citisens of Luca are in the midst of the great dukes State,
enclosed on all sides within the same, having scarcity of victuals and all
things necessary: and because they cannot have them but from the great duke,
or by means of the passage of such

The Government.
NOw must I discourse of the administration of justice, of the distribution of
magistrates, and of all the forms and manner of virtuous and well ordered
living in this Don John de Medicis, for that he is young, and has no great
experience in affairs. There are no counselors of state; so as we cannot say
that the council has censured any thing, but that it is the princes pleasure:
and so the resolutions which are made, are more secret and more assured.

As touching the second part, which consists in judgments, it is performed
by the same magistrates that decided matters in time of liberty, as well for
civil as crimill causes: for civil processes of suits are determined by a
certain number of Doctors of the Rota, like as at Rome and Bononia; and the
criminal causes as asoretime: the place of Confalonner being given to one, who
changing his name is called Lieutenant. There we

Out of the first box they draw the magistrates of greatest importance, out of
the second, the middle sort, and the inferior out of the third: and when they
have drawn five gentlemen for each magistrate, he which has most voices in the
council is chosen. These boxes are renewed every fist year, and he that would
pass from a lesser magistracy to a

True it is, that he seldom troubles himself with matters pertaining to the
magistrates, but he has a secretary of the criminal, who takes knowledge of
all the most important crimes in question, and makes report thereof unto the
prince, who gives direction before they give sentence: the which he does to the
end that magistrates knowing that their acts are known, and often examined by
the prince, may have the more care to administer justice duly, for fear of
insamie and punishment: and he does it also for to have an absolute
sovereignty in all things. He maintains this kind of government, for that
seeing he must use persons which administer justice, he will with this little
shadow of

This is also observed at Siena, and for the same respect; for there is to be
seen the ancient magistrates and counsels, with the authority of the palace
and seigneurie, and in a word the relics and shadows of the commonweal
that was in former times, and

Their Religion.


A GENEALOGY OF THE DVKES OF FLORENCE.
COsmo de Medicis was the first that laid the foundations of the glory of that
great family,

Peter de Medicis imitator of his father, behaved himself in the government of
the commonweal more like a private citisen, than a Prince. He died in the year
1472.

Laurence de Medicis, surnamed the Great prince of Florence, governed the
commonweal with his brother Julian, called Prince of the youth, or younger
sort; which Julian behaved himself in the government as his father and
grandfather had done. He died Laurence was slain by the Paccians, in the year
of Christ 1478.

Peter de Medicis, prince of Florence, degenerating from his father, was
expelled from the government, and died in the year 1503. Julian de Medicis,
surnamed the Magnificent, his brother, was also deposed, and died in the year
1516.

Cosmo de Medicis, son to Peter, was slain for making loueto married women.

Laurence de Medicis, brother to Cosmo, having been driven away with his
father, was made Duke of Vrbin by Pope Leo the tenth, his uncle by the fathers
side, and died in the year 1519.

From Laurence de Medicis issued Katherine de Medicis, wife to He^rie the
second the Alexander de Medicis, who was slain in adultery, after he had
received of Charles the fist (his father in law) the title of Prince,
togetherwith the seigneurie.



Cosmo de Medicis, surnamed Father of the country, had a brother named
Laurence, a citizen of Florence, whose son was Peter, who lived as a private
man without any dig^i^ie.

Peter had two sons, Laurence de Medicis, and John, who were banished by
Peter son of Cosmo duke of Florence.

Laurence had a base son by a Concubine, called Iulio de Medicis, who was
Pope, by the name of Clement the seventh.

John, brother to this Laurence, had issue John de Medicis, named at his
baptism Lewis, a valiant and excellent Captain, who died in the year of our
Lord God 1526.

Cosmo de Medicis his son, at the age of eighteen years, substitute to his
cousin

Alexander in the principality of Florence, wisely governed the Commonwealth.

This same, of duke of Florence, was the first that was made Great duke of
Tuscanie, by Pope Pius the fifth, in the year of our Redemption 1569; and these
words were written in his Crown by the Popes commandment, PIUS V. PONT. MAX.
OB EXIMIAM DILECTIONEM, ET CATHOLICAe RELIGIONIS ZELVM, PRAeCIPVVMQVE,
IVSTITIAe STVDIVM DONAVIT. He died in the year 1574. His children were

Francis de Medicis, second great duke of Tuscanie, who died in the year 1587.
He married first Jane of Austria, daughter to Charles the fifth, and afterward
Blanch a Venetian, who lived not above five hours after her husband. This
Prince had (among other children) the most illustrious Princess Marie de
Medicis, who at this day is Queen of France.

Ferdinand the brother of Francis, having given over his Cardinals Hat, was
the third great duke of Tuscanie. He married Christina daughter to Charles duke
of Lorraine. He died not long since, leaving for successor his son

Cosmo de Medicis, who has married Marie of Austria.

The Estate of the Duke of Urbin.
THE ESTATE
The Contents.
1 THe confines and compass of the Duke of Vrbins Estate, and the towns which
he does possess. 2. The territory fertile in corn, wine, oil, figs, etc.
but the



V^bin is one of the most ancient towns of Italy, of the which Pliny and
Tacitus make mention. In the time of Conradin, the last duke of Suabe, it was
subdued by the Earls of Montfeltre, whose successors increasing in power, in
process of time had also Eugubie. This town is fair, and well built, and the
duke makes his ordinary abode there. Pisaure has also as fair houses as any
town in Italy; and Fossombrone, called Forum Sempronij, is also very well
peopled.

The Quality.



A Good part of this Estate lies upon the shore of the Adriaticke sea, and is
very commodious, and of great profit, by reason of many things which may be
brought thither from all parts. They carry their wines of Pisaure to Venice,
for the which the inhabitants receive much money, and also for their dried
figes, which they sell to the Venetians, Bolonians, and to other places.

The revenues of this prince, in possessions, rents, and customs, is about
100000 crowns

The Forces.
THis duke is much to be esteemed, first for that he may draw out of his Estate
above one thousand and two hundred good soldiers, which have been trained up
in war, and who would readily follow their prince, if any good occasion were
offered: secondly, for that although he does not enjoy any great revenues, yet
he is the master of his subjects hearts, who would employ all for his service.
As for places of strength, the town of Vrbin is of good defense: but Pisaure
(whereas the duke does commonly remain Francis Maria, and was continued and
made perfect by his son Guy Vbalde that now lives, who entertaines a good
garrison of soldiers, with store of artillery, munition, and other things
necessary for the defense of a town. He has in his palace a hall full of
goodly arms, near unto the which in another chamber, he has arms for six
hundred men, to the which they may go by a secret passage to the dukes own
chamber. Moreover there are some other good places for the bigness, in this
princes Estate


FRederic of Montfeltre, for his excellent virtues, was in his youth adopted
for son by Guy Antonie Vbaldini, seigniour of Vrbin, who having lived many
years without children, made his account that Frederick should be the heir
of his Estate; by reason whereof, Frederick being like to succeed him in his
seigneurie, had great means, using himself courteously, and making show of
those goodly parts which were in him, to win the love and affections of all
the people. Guy Balde Antonie had in his declining age one son, who was
called Odo Antonie, so as Frederic remained excluded from this seigneurie, and
yet the peoples affection was nothing diminished, his virtues having Odo
Antonie, after his fathers death, ^uling very insolently, and ^^cenciously, was
slain by certain conspirators, being very young, and left no heirs behind
him. Some write that seeking to satisfy his lust with a gentlew^man of a noble
house, he was slain by the people, and dragged ignominiously through the
streets.

Frederic Vbaldini, after the death of Odo Antonie, was called to the
government, by a general consent of all the people; and he had not only this
Estate in see from the (...) Frederic, among other things, that he was wise,
eloquent, (...) uer of le(...) fortunat in war, respected in peace, honored
of the princes of Italy, and beloved dearly of his own people. He did
beautify Vrbin with go^d^^e buildings, and especially with that sumptuous
palace, whereas he built a stately l^br^tie, replenished with so great a number
of rare books, covered and garnished with gold, silver, and silk, as it was
an admirable thing to behold, before that Caesar Borgias made himself master
of Vrbin; which books were disperced here and there, in the time of the said
Caesar Borgias, and so that worthy work was ruined. He purchased Fossombrone
for thirteen thousand florins of gold, of Galcazzo Malatesta, and died
general for the Hercules of Este, duke of Ferrata. After his death he left for
heir

Guy Balde his son, who notwithstanding that he married, being in his younger
years much given to war, continued full of the gout, and without hope to have
any children. This prince, not able to attend any other thing, by reason of his
indisposit^on, had a desseigne to have a goodly court, and full of virtuous
men, and rare in all professions. so as using courtesy to all men of merit, as
well as Elizabeth of Gonzague, his wife, yea one striving to exceed another in
the entertainment of virtuous men, he drew together so great a number of such
worthy persons, as the like has not been seen in the court of any prince,
yea he gave the form and model of a well ordered court, to other princes.
Alexander the sixth, against the Vrsini, whose army was defeated, and he taken
prisoner; yet afterward being betrayed by Caesar Borgias, son to Pope
Alexander, he was in danger to be taken prisoner by him. Returning afterward
into his Estate, and hearing that Paulo Vrsini the duke of Grauina, Vitellozzi,
and Leu^^otti of Fermo, had been surprised at Senegallia by the said Caesar,
he was forced to fly: but after the death of Pope Alexander he returned, and
was very joyfully received of his people. After which he lived quietly, and in
the end past to a better life, being much lamented by his subjects, having
first adopted

Francis Maria de la Rouera, who was sisters son to Guy Balde, his father was
captain Sixtus, and base brother to Pope Iulio. This Francis gave h^mselfe to
the exercise of arms, wherein he grew so excellent, as he deserved to be
called the light and beauty of Italy. He had many honorable charges in the
war: he was captain general for the commonweal of Ven^^^, and a little
before his death, he was also made general by land, of the league which was
betwixt Pope Paul the third, the Emperor Charles the fist, and the seigneurie
of Venice. Besides the duchy of Vrbin, the county of Montfeltre, and the
town of Senegallia, which was enoied by his father, he had also from the Pope,
in recompense of much money which was due unto him from the Church, and for many
good services done unto the holy See, the town of Pesate or Pisaure, which
was wont to be held by the Ssorces. During Iulio the second, Franc^s Maria
lived peaceably in his Estate, not charging his people, but caring only to
purchase their loves, the which princes should esteem much more than any
treasure. But Leo having succeeded Pope Iulio, he had great crosses and
troubles, for that the Pope in a short time deprived him of his Estate, and
gave it to Laurence de Medicis who was father to Katherine de Medicis the
French quee^e. But having with the loss of his Estate, lost neither ^he
greatness of his courage, his valor, military judgment, nor the love of his
people, he dared with four thousand Spaniards (who followed him willingly in
regard of his valor, being poor of money, and wanting all other things) to
encounter so great a power as that of the Pope, for there (...)rye of his
Estate; and having made a great slaughter of his enemies, he recou^red all
Leonora Gongaza, his wife, two sons, Guy Balde who succeeded him, and the
Cardinal: and three daughters, whereof the one was wife to the duke of one of
the greatest Princes of the realm of Naples; the second was married to the
Lord Alphonso of Este; and the third was wife to the Marquis of Massa.

Guy Balde, son to Frauncis, was the fourth Duke of Vrbin, for
notwithstanding that Laurence de Medicis did call himself for a time duke of
Vrbin, yet being not of this line, he is not numbered among the dukes.

Guy had two wives, the first was Iulia Varena, duchess of Camerin, which
duchy he Francis Maria, for notwithstanding that Pope Paul the third
pretended that it was fallen in lapse to the Church, by the death of the Duke,
without heirs male, yet he had some fear to make war against so valiant a
Prince, who prepared to defend himself resolutely: but Francis Maria being
dead, and leaving this duke but young, the Pope did soon make himself master
thereof, and gave it in fee to Peter Lewis his son, but soon after he
exchanged this Estate with Parma and P^^isance, with the consent of all the
Cardinals.

This duke took to his second wife Victoria Farnese, a fair, wife, and
virtuous Princess, and much beloved of the duke her husband. He had six
children, whereof two daughters were base, who were honorably married, one
lawful daughter by the duchess Frederic Borromeo, nephew to Pope Pius the
fourth, and afterward to the duke of Grauina, a Prince much esteemed in the
realm of Naples, of the Family of the Vrsini. By his last wife Victoria, he
had two daughters, (whereof the eldest was married to the prince of Bisignan,
who was one of the greatest of the realm of Naples, of the house of the
Sanseue^^ns, who has above one hundred thousand crowns a year rent;) and one
son, which is,

Francis Maria, called by his grandfathers name, a Prince of an excellent
spirit, and given to all exercises of the body.

The Estate of the Duke of Mantoua.
THE ESATE OF THE
The Contents.
1 WHat the Duke of Mantoua does possess at this day. 2. Antiquity of the
city of Mantoua, and how it was built before Troy 3. Enjoyed by diverse Lords,
and in the end reduced under the command of the Gonzagues. 4. Scituati^n of
the Town of Mantoua: the stately buildings, and the Palace of Marmirol. 5. Of
the Marquisat of Montferrat, sometimes held by the Paleologues: when, and by
whom Mantoua was made a Duchy. 6. The country of Montferrat very fr^^tfull:
A fountain of hot and ^hysicall water at A^que. 7. Mantouans, lovers of the
H^brew tongue more than any other nat^^n: 8. The reuenews of the duke of
Mantoua, and what he draws yearly from hi^ Estate. 9. His Forts, and
Caualle^ie. 10. Of the Senate of Mantoua: and of the government of Montferrat.
11. A list of the Du^es of M^ntoua.



Manta the Prophetess, daughter to Tyresia the Theban, was the foundresse
thereof. Some write, that Ocno son to Tiberino king of the Tuscans, and of
the said Manta, finding Tuscanie to be ouercharged with people, past the
Appeni^ Hills, and the river of Po, with a great army, to seek Aran^e king of
Chiusi, to be revenged of Lucomone, who had ravished his wife: who entering into
this country expelled the Tuscans, and forced them with their Captain R^tius
to retire into the mountains, which they called Retia, by their Captains
name, and is now the Grisons country.

The Gauls held these countries of Mantoua and Tuscanie, giving the names of
Cispadana, Charles the Great, it was again brought under the subjection of the
Emperors: but their power and authority declyning, by means of the deuisions
and quarrels betwixt the successors of Charles the Great, the towns of Italy
sought to emancipate themselves, and live at liberty, and Mantoua did the
like, until that the Emperor Otho the second, did inuest Theodebald or Tedald
Earl of Canosse, giving him this town, and the jurisdiction, for the good
services which he had done him. Boniface his son succeeded him, who dying
without issue male, Beatrix his wife took upon her the government, and after
her, that noble countess Matilda, who was dispossessed of her Estate by the
Emperor Henry the 3, who returning into Germany, Tedald sailed, and Mantoua
recovered her liberty again, yet under the protection of the sacred Empire.

About the year 1200 Sordelle or Sordet, Vicont of Goite, made himself
master of Mantoua, a wise and valiant man, who finding that this cousin
Ezzelin of Padoua, a most cruel tyrant, aspired to the seigneurie of that
city, r^sisted him valiantly with arms. After his death, they did choose two
out of the body of the nobility, which were as Tribunes of the people, and
these were Pinamonte of the Bonacolsi, and Otonello of the Ze^^^b^lli, a good
and a wise man, whom Pinamonte caused to be stain to make himself

B^rdelono Bonacolsi succeeded him, a man deprived of all virtue, insolent,
without judgment, ignorant, arrogant, base minded etc. but he continued but
one year in his tyranny, being expelled, and banished with his brother Thomas
by the people, and by Bottigella Bonacolsi, a man of a great courage; so as
Bardelono died at Padoua in banishment. The State remained afterward in the
hands of Bottigella, a hardy, a valiant, and ve^^uous man, who governed it
with great love of all men, but dying about the year 1308, his brother
Passarino a man of a great courage, succeeded him: who not content with the
seigneurie of Mantoua, subdued many Castells, with the city of Modena,
Francischino Pico de la Mirandola, but he was afterward slain in the midst
of the marketplace, by Lewis of Gonzaga, or by the soldiers which were led by
his sons Guido and Feltrino: who taking Francis the son of Passarino with
his children, and Butrino his brother, he sent them to Nicholo Pico the son
of Francis, who slew them cruelly, to revenge his fathers death, whom Passarino
had slain. Thus the tyrannic of the Bon^colsi ended in Mantoua, and Lewis of
Gonzaga, the son of Guy, took upon him the government of the commonweal
with great applause of the people. It was an ancient and noble family in
Mantoua, and some write that they had their beginning from a Germane, at such
time as the Lombards did reign in Italy: in which family the government of
Mantoua has continued to this day.

Andrew M^ntegna that excellent painter, where are to be seen seven great
tables, in the which is drawn the order of Caesar's triumph, made with such
great art and judgment, as it may well be termed the maisterpeece of most
excellent painters. There are many other rare things worthy of admiration to
be seen in that city, the which for breuities sake I omit. Fi^e miles or
thereabouts from Mantoua, going upon the high way (the which is planted
Mantoua, the rest are of small moment.

Otho the 2, who gave one to either of the sons of Aleran of Saxony, in
whose family this Marquisat continued, till that the issue male ^ailing, it
was transported to Andronic Paleologue Emperor of Constantinople, having
married Yoland daughter to Boniface Marquis of Montferrat, who sent Theodorus
his eldest son thither, and he governed P^leol^gues, until the death of
George in the year 1534: after which there being many pretendants for the said
Marquisat, the Emperor Charles the fifth hearing the reasons and allegations of
all parts, in the end adjudged it to Frederic of Gonzaga, who had married the
sister of Boniface of Montferrat, and made him the first duke of Mantoua. The
duke of Mantoua has in this country three good towns, that is to say, Casal
S. Vas, built by Sixtu^ the fourth, in the year 1474, the which is well built,
and peopled with many ancient families, and among others, of the Earls of S.
George and B^^ndrate: it suffered great loss in the year 1530, being sacked
by the soldiers of the Emperor Charles, for that the citisens refused the
government of Frederick Gonzaga: There is also Alba, which Pliny calls
Pompeia, the which is greater than Cassall: and Aique the which is a good
town. There is also the towns of Villa Noua, Balzole, Trine, Pallais, Biance,
Libourne, which belong unto the duke of Mantoua: and near unto Po, is Ponte di
Stura, so called of the river Stura. There is a strong Castle, whether Lodouic
Sforza duke of Milan was carried, being betrayed by the Suisses, and sold unto
the French near unto Nouara. Being in this Castle with one servant, at night,
sighing, he said, O inconstant fortune, where am I? yesterday I commanded
above twenty thousand men, and now I have scarce one servant, and am a
prisoner. And to be short, they hold that the duke does possess above sixty
and five towns, besides an infinite number of villages.

The Quality.


The Manners.



THE duke of Mantouas country is able to entertain the owners, but not to
draw any


THe city of Mantoua is exceeding strong, as well by reason of the situation,
as for the Vincent Gonzaga, (...) Mantoua and Montferrat, built another Fort,
held impregnable, the which they

The Government.
THE ^uke of Mantoua has in his chief city a Senate, who does judge of all
matters

The Lords, Marquisses, and Dukes of Mantoua.
L^^is Gonzaga, took upon him the government of Mantoua, about the year
1328. Guydo, Philippino, and Feltrino, and by the second, Conrade, Albert, and
Frederic, and as many by the third, who was of the house of Ma^^^^^^, and those
were Azzo, James, and John. He died in the year 1360, on the fifteenth of
(...), being ninety years old. (...) his son succeeded him in the State: He
was a quiet, modest, and religious Vgulin, Francis, and Lodouie. The two
younger killed the elder, during their fathers life time, for that he governed
the State. Afterward Francis died without children before the father, and then
succeeded.

^^^ouic, or Lewis the second, who having governed the State twelve years, he
died in the year 1382, leaving one son called

Francis, being but thirteen years old. He did manage arms with great
judgment and commendation, and maintained his Estate against the force of John
Galeazze Viscont, (...) duke of Milan. They write, that he was wise, of great
authority, learned in Histo^^^ a lover of learned men, and virtuous, an
admirer of the praises of the Ancients, sweet

John Francisco his son, being but twelve years old succeeded him, who on
the two and twentieth day of September, in the year 1433, was by the Emperor
Sigismond created Marquis of Mantoua, upon a Tribunal in the Marketplace of
S. Peter in Mantoua. Afterward he gave him for his arms an Eagle sables in a
field Argent, with a cross Paula Malosesta, whom the writers of those times
have much commended for her great virtues. Being four and fifty years old,
after many worthy works, he died, on the three and twentieth of September, in
the year 1444, dividing his Estate betwixt four sons.

Lodouic his son succeeded in the Estate of Mantoua, being two and thirty
years old: he had great contention with a younger brother called Charles, and
vanquished him. And having lived sixty years with great love and
commendation, he ^ied in the year 1478. He was very courteous, affable, and
bountiful, and (for a martial man) eloquent, and religious. He made many
worthy works within the city, and began the Sebastian, and in like manner
the sumptuous Temple of S. Andrew. He received the Emperor Frederic the third,
and the king of Denmark with great state. He left five sons, giving to the
four youngest portions.

Frederic his eldest son succeeded him, and was the third Marquis of Mantoua:
he was a wise and discreet man, both in war and peace. His subjects loved him
much, for that he was liberal, and would lend them money without any profit,
if he found them fit for traffic; for above all things he hatedydlenesse. To
virtuous men he was mild, bountiful, and courteous, and honorable to
strangers. He died in the year 1484 leaving three sons by Marguerite,
daughter to the duke of Bauaria, that is, Francis, Sigismond (who was
Cardinal) and John.

Francis came unto this State, being but eighteen years old: he was of a
reverend, amiable, and grave aspect: he was much given to arms, and martial
discipline, which purchased him great reputation with Princes, not only in
Italy, but also with the emperor Maximilian, with Lewis the twelfth the
French king, and with the Seigneurie of Venice. He had three sons, and as
many daugters, by Isabella, daughter to Hercules of Este, duke of Ferrara: and
he died in the year 1519, to whom succeeded his son

Frederic, being eighteen years and ten months old: he was nothing unlike
his father in profession of arms: so as he was made General of the Churches
army, by Pope Leo the tenth, being yet very young; and in like manner for the
Florentins, wherein he showed great valor and judgment. He received the
Emperor Charles the fifth with Marguerit, daughter to William Paleologue,
Marquis of Montferrat, and had the said Marquisat in dowry, the which the duke
of Sauoy pretends to belong unto him, and has of late sought to recover it by
arms. He died in the year 1540, leaving three sons and one daughter, and
the duchess with child of the fourth son. He was about forty years old.

Francis his eldest son, being about six years old, came to succeed his
father, and to be duke. The Estate of Mantoua was governed by the authority of
Cardinal Hercules of Este, his uncle, a man of great judgment and learning.
Soon after his marriage with Katherine, daughter to the Emperor Ferdinand, he
fell into the river of Minel, and

William succeeded his brother Francis in the Estates of Mantoua, and
Montferrat, which was made a duchy by the Emperor Maximilian the second, in
the year 1573, and the said William died in the year 1587.

Vincent succeeded his father William in the Estates of Mantoua, and Montferrat.

The Estate of the Duke of Modena

The Contents.
REasons why the Pope pretends the duchy of Ferrara to belong unto the holy
See. 2. Ferrara yielded unto the Pope by Don Caesar of Es^e: and what the
treaty and accord was betwixt his Holiness and the said Don Caesar, before he
left the town 3. Modena, a town sometimes commanded by the Romans, then
(...) by the Goths, Huns, and Lombards: when, and how is was reedified. 4.
Commanded ^^^rs Lords. 5. Of Reggium, and the diverse Lords of it, before it
came into the possession of (...) Caesar of Este. 6. The soil of Modena and
Reggium, situated in a good air, abounding

ALphonso, duke of Ferrara, dying without any issue male lawfully begotten,
left only one base son, that was legitimated, called Don of Este, who
presently took possession of Ferrara, and all his fathers Estates: but the
Pope pretending the city of Ferrara to be a fee of the Church, and that it was
fallen unto him for want of issue male lawfully begotten of the said duke,
levied an army to dispossess him: but Don Caesar sending to plead his title
and right, Don Caesar of Este out of Ferrara, for many ^^^sons, by the whch he
pretended that the duchy of Ferrara did belong unto the holy See.

First he said, that the confession, and declaration of the people of Ferrara
(who did accept and aduow him for their true Lord) should serve for a
sufficient proof: secondly, that he had the acknowledgements of all the dukes
of the house of Este: and thirdly, an infin^^ number of bulls and inuestitures
granted from Popes, beginning at Pope Innocent the third. Moreover, he did
allege, that the Popes had often recovered Ferrara, by way of right, and by
arms, out of the hands of diverse that would have seized thereon. Besides this,
that many Emperors had declared, that the city of Ferrara did belong Charles,
son to Charles the Great, which was in the time of Pope Pascall the first,
who confirmed the donation which Pepin had made, and named Ferrara of the holy
See: then Otho the first, in the donation which he made to Pope John the
second, confirmed the said donation, the which was also confirmed at the
Council of Lion, with all the privileges.

As for the people, he said, that in the time of Gregory the ninth, they made
(at the ringing of a bell) in an open assembly, a procurator or deputy called
Bonin, to perform his obedience unto the Pope, and the Pope granted him
certain revenues: that in the ^^me of Pope Vrbin the fourth, Honorius the
fourth, and of Boniface the eight, the said people did acknowledge the holy
See, paying a certain rent unto it: that in the time of Clement the fifth,
which was in the year 1301, the fifth year of his reign, the said people did
acknowledge the holy See, and the Pope sent thither a Lieutenant and
Go^^^nour, he made laws, appointed the manner of government, and created many
(...) and the people performed an infinite number of acts, in acknowledgment of
the ho^^^ See.

And for that in the time of Gregory the ninth, they of the house of Este
began to Azon of Este, had been established governor there by Pope Gregory
the eleventh: that afterward in the time of Gregory the eleventh, in the
year of grace 1372, the first year which he gave the inuestiture to the said
Lords of Este, holding Cardinal Peter at Ferrara for Legate, he sent him an
inuestiture, in the persons of Nicholas and Albert, children to the said Azon,
during their lives, paying a rent of four thousand ducats; commanding the
said Legate, not to give the said inuestiture, if they did not formerly promise
with oath to yield up the said town, after the time of

That the said Lords of Este had always obtained a new inuestiture, for the
prolongation of their first grant, since Boniface the ninth who confirmed the
said inuestiture unto them: and to be short, that Alexander the sixth having
made an alliance with the said Lords of Este, in the year 1501, confirming all
the inuestitures, beginning since Sixtus the fourth, he granted them a new
inuestiture unto the third generation, reducing the rent to one thousand
crowns, for that they had been at great charges in bettering and beautifying
Leo the tenth, in the beginning of his Popedom, restored the duke unto his
Estate, which he held before the deprivation of Iulio, and that afterward the
said Leo, by reason of Modena, and Reggium, deprived and excommunicated the
said duke, who was absolved and restored by Adri^n the sixth, upon certain
conditions, which have been always observed, That the duke should not make
any salt at Comachia, but only the holy See: that Clement the seventh, for
that the duke had entered into Reggium, during the vacancie of the holy See,
did excommunicat him, calling Christian princes to his aid, for the recovery
of Ferrara, but for that the duke made many goodly offers unto the Pope, it
took no effect, and his peace was made.

Paul the third invested the said duke, as well for himself, as for the
descendants of Alphonso, Paul the third was for the direct line of Alphonso,
grandfather to the deceased duke, to whom they said Don Caesar. was son:
whereunto the Pope answered, that the said inuestiture was for the direct
masculine line, that was legitimat, and that the said Don Caesar being base,
could not be comprehended.

And to show that he was base borne, they did publish a genealogy of the house
of Este, made and printed by Jerome Folet, and dedicated to the deceased duke
Alphonso, where he did show that the father of Don Caesar who was called
Alphonso, was not borne of Laura Eustoica, and of the duke Alphonso, setting
down the wife which he had, and not placing this for his wife, and that it did
not appear that he was legitimat by any subsequent marriage, the which if he
should prove, yet the words of Paul the third, were not to be understood, but
only of lawful children, and not of those that were made legitimate.

As for that which they might pretend, that there had been a duke base borne,
and that therefore the nature of the ^ee past indifferently: the Pope answered,
that for so many Pius the fifth, ^^^ch made bastards unable to hold any fee of
the Church.

He said also, that they were not to have any regard to the pretentions, of
meliorations ^^^parations, which (he said) had been done in the said duchy,
and did amount to ma^^ ^^llions, for that besides the Bull of Pope Pius the
fifth, where it was said, that it (...) not be retained for any reparations and
expenses: they should hold for many (...) that they were no debts; first, for
that it was a special conuention and renunci^^ ^ade by the said dukes, in the
time of Gregory the eleventh, for that they promised ^^^eld up the fee, the
masculine line being extinct, and might not demand any thing af^^^

(...) as for that which D. Caesar did urge, that the nomination of the duchy
did belong (...) people, by the which he pretended to be named; the Pope
answered, That the (...) had no right, according unto a declaration which they
had made in the time of (...) the fifth; and that it cea^ed, in case there were
any, by reason of so many (...) Gregory the ninth, which (...), that he did
inuest him duke for that he was pleasing unto the people, yet was (...) ^ot any
nomination of the people, but the people said, That they made him duke, for
(...) ^he was comprehended in the inuestiture of John the two and twentieth.

(...) and, the Pope by his reasons, and with an army which he had raised,
forced D. depart out of Ferrara, and to remain duke of Modena and Reggium; and
the (...) of the accord made betwixt his Holiness and him, were as follows:

(...) D. Caesar should carry away all that he had, by the month of January.

(...) he should renounce and quit the title of duke of Ferrara, and of earl
of Rouigo.

^^at D. Caesar being gone out of Ferrara, and the jurisdiction thereof, should
no more

that the artillery should be divided betwixt the Pope and D. Caesar, and that
the Pope (...) choose first.

That within the space of three years, D. Caesar should sell all that he had
in Ferrara, or (...) the territories thereof, else it should be all held for
confiscat.

(...) as for all the dignities, which he, or any of his, should obtain
hereafter, they should ackn^^ledge it from the holy See.

Modena, which was in old time called Mutina, was a very ancient town,
standing vp^^ Vi^ Emilia: Some hold, that it was built by the ancient Tuscans,
among many others, (...) past the Apennin Hills to seek new dwellings: but the
Gauls coming into Ita^^^ Marc Anthony besieged Decius Brutus: After which,
it was somewhat repaired, but not fortefied as before, to the end it should not
serve for a retreat for mutinous and ^e^^^^ous men. Being afterward quite
ruined by the Goths, and Lombards, it was reedi^^^ or rather new built, in a
place somewhat distant from the old town, after the (...) Charles the Great,
having subdued the Lombards, and secured Italy from the invasion of the
Barbarians, and made his son Pepin king of Italy, the Italians seeing
them^^^ues assured of their goods, and that they enjoyed their liberty by the
means of the Via Cl^u^^^ where they took council, whither they should
restore their ruined country, or (...) greater town in some other place.
After long debate, every man speaking his (...) in the end it seemed so
difficult unto them all, as they were ready to d^part without any conclusion:
Then stepped up Anthellano of Magnoni, a wise man and of a great spirit,
Anthellano was heard willingly, and his council accepted by all the citisens,
with great applause, and so they began the building of their new city. The
first gate called Salicetti, was built by the noble family of the Boschetti,
with their friends, drawing the Pallisadoe unto S. Peter's gate, the which was
built by the Freddi and their friends: the port of Saragosse by the family of
the Gazzons, and their adherents: and that of Rodecoca by the Gorzans: the
Sasfoli, with their friends, built the gate which is called Bazzouaria: the
Sauinians, with their adherents, built the gate of the New citi^: and that of
Ganacette, was built by the Manfredi, Pedochi, and Pandelli: The gate called
Albretti was built by the Pies and Papazzons: and they of the family of Rodea,
with their friends, built the port of S. John. After Charles the Great, if we
shall believe Volateran, who says, that it was in the year of Grace 1100.
This city grew to be in great reputation among the people of Italy, and they
maintained themselves in liberty a good time, under the protection of the
empire, yet in the end it became subject unto Opizze, son to Reynold of Guy
of Guidone, Bishop of Modena, Legate to Pope Benedict the eleventh, the Pope
consenting thereunto in regard of a tribute of ten thousand crowns, which the
new Lord should pay unto the holy See: and Henry the seventh allowing of
nothing that the Popes did, and usurping the rights and lands of the Church
which were belonging to the Patrimony thereof, made Francis Pi^ of Mirandula
his lieutenant at Modena, reserving notwithstanding the sovereignty to
himself. This Pi^ was expelled by the Guelphes, and Passerin, Butrton, and
Bonacolsi, lords of Mantoua, seized thereon, and held it quietly until the
year of Grace 1327, when as their own insupportable tyranny, rather than any
conspiracy of the citisens, expelled them. In the year of our Redemption
1331, Manfredi of Pic was made Vicar or Governor of Modena, with his cousin
Guido, by John king of Bohemia, who was no sooner out of Italy, but they
delivered over Modena to the right lord Obizze, second Marquis of Ferrara,
Obizze was invested by the Legate of Pope Benedict the twelfth, and made Vicar,
or Vicegerent perpetual of this town: the which the house of Ferrara did
enjoy until the year 1510, whenas Pope Iulio the second took it from him,
and gave it to the emperor Maximilian the first, who engaged it to Pope Leo
the tenth for forty thousand crowns. But afterward Pope Clement the seventh,
being besieged by the army of the emperor Charles the fifth, Alphonso of Este,
the third duke of Ferrara, embracing this occasion, recovered his own, and
entered into the possession of Modena, the which Pope Iulio had taken from him,
and so it has continued unto this day under the house of Este. It was well
fortified by Hercules duke of Ferrara. It is very well peopled, and there are
many Rangoni.

Lepidus. It was called Reggium Lepid^, to distinguish it from Reggium Iul^, in
Calabria. Some write, that it was ruined whenas the Goths being incensed
against Stilicon, spoiled Italy, and that in the year 1314, the Obizze of
(...), the first of that name, Marquis of Ferrara: but in the year 1326, the
citisens gave the town unto the Church of Rome, to the which they yielded
obedience two years, John king o^ ^^hemia, but two years after, the said king
being gone, the Fogliani entered the city, (...) ^^ew all they could find of
the family of the Manfredi, and made themselves masters thereof: but fearing
they should not be able to maintain their tyranny, they sold the (...) Mastin
de la Scala Lord of Verona; yet before he could enter and take possessi^^^ of
Gonzaga came, and made himself Master thereof, who built a citadell near
(...) ^he port of S. Nazare. In the year 1359 Feltrin Gonzaga took upon him
the ^^^^^ment against the liking of his brother the Lord of Mantoua, who being
incen^^^ against him, cancelled him out of the family of the Gonzagas, and
deprived Gonzaga: and he not able to (...) his brothers forces, sold it for
sixty thousand ducats to Barnabe Visconte Lord of (...), in the year 1370,
and so it remained under the government of the Visconte, vnt^ the death of John
Galliazze the first duke of Milan, which was in the year 1402, (...)many
tyrants made themselves Lords of diverse cities of Italy, where amongst the^^
Ortobon took Parma, having slain the Rossi, and made himself prince of (...)
the which he held unto the year 1409, whenas he was slain by Sforce
Cotignole, by the ^^^suasion of Nicholas the second, of the house of Este, and
Marquis of Ferrara, who (...) upon him the government, left it for an
inheritance to the house of the Estes, to ^^^n it remained subject, until the
year 1512, whenas Pope Iulio the second took it Alphonso duke of Ferrara, and
made it subject unto the Church until the year 1523, ^^^^as Pope Adrian the
sixth dying, Alphonso duke of Ferrara went with forces, and (...) Reggium, the
which the citisens being out of hope of succors yielded unto him, since which
time, the successors of Alphonso have enjoyed it quietly. These two towns
(...) to Don Caesar of Este, who enioyes them at this present with the title of
duke.

The Quality.
THe territory about Modena abounds with corn, beans, and other things
necessary

The Manners.
THe citisens of Modena have always showed themselves very desirous of
liberty,

The Riches, Forces, and Government.
THese two towns, and their territories, are reasonably rich, but we cannot
speak much of the revenues of the new prince. As for the Forts, these two
towns are strong, but Reggium more than Modena, by reason of a good citadell
which it has: and this new duke entertaines a garrison in either town. As for
the government, it is yet so new, as there can be nothing certainly spoken
thereof, so as it is better to pass it over with silence until some better
occasion.

The Commonweal of Lucca.
THE COMMONWEAL
The Contents.
1 THe beginning of the name of the town of Lucca. 2. The situation, circuit,
and confines. 3. A cross of gold of great value in the Church of S. Croix,
engaged by the Pis^ns to them of Lucca. 4. The town of Lucca governed by the
Goths, by the Emperors of Constantinople, and by many other Lords. 5. The
soil very fruitful, and in a good a^re. 6. Inhabitants of Lucca quick
witted, courteous by nat^re, loving liberty, and their ^^^g^age sweet and
pure. 7. Their riches consisting in silver and tr^fficke in silk. 8. The
c^mmon-weale of Lucca weak, and of small resistance. 9. Of the Council of
L^cca, consisting of three sorts of persons: of the Gonfalonier, the chief of
the common weal, and of his election by the Assorters. Of the Commander of
the seigneurie, 10. Of the three S^cretaries, and of their power and
jurisdiction. 11. Of the co^^cel of the Colloque, consisting of 18. citisens.
12. Of 6men appointed to ouersee the treasure. 13. Of the Rota consisting of
three Doctors strangers. 14. Of the court of merchants composed of nine men,
and the office called the Abundance. 15.. Of the commissaries appointed over
men of war 16. Of the counsels of the Descoles, and what their charge is 17.
Of the office of lodging, composed of eight persons, who have the care of
strangers. 18.. Of the guard of the palace.

Lucumon king of the Tuscanes. Strabo writes, that the city of Lucca is near
unto the mountains of Luna, and at this day the country is called Desiderius
king of the Lombards. They have goodly buildings, and the citisens are noble,
wise, and discreet: who with their wit have long maintained themselves in
liberty, notwithstanding that they have been often troubled by their
neighbors. Toward the North, it confines wi^h Carfagnana, a good valley, and
full of warlike people, and apt to arms. Of all the other three parts, it is
environed by the great duke of Tuscanie.



N^^fe^es, lieutenant to the Emperor Iustini^n, and so continued under the
Emperors Boniface became master thereof, who had married Beatrix, daughter to
the emperor Henry, of whom came Matilda, who was af^^^^ards wife to Godfrey,
after whose death she remained heir of a great Estate, and esp^^^^lly of this
city. In the time of Pope Honorius the fourth, the citisens recovered their
(...) of the Emperor Rodolphus for one thousand two hundred florins. After
some (...) Vguccione of Fagiola became master of the city, who was afterward
expelled by (...) people, with Neri his grandchild: and after him Castruccio
Castracani (who had been imprisoned by him) took upon him the government:
and so in an instant he was expelled, and the other which was a prisoner, was
made Lord. This man was much beloved ^n ^his worth by Galleazze Viscont, and by
Azon his son, lord of Milan. He was an ^^^mie to the Florentins whilst he
lived: and having defeated their army, he besieged ^^^rence in such sort, as
if sickness and death had not prevented him, without doubt he (...) subdued
it: He had also seized upon Pisa and Pistoya. He left two sons, who were
^^pelled out of Lucca by Lewis of Bauaria. Soon after, Lucca was sold by a
German ^^rison, which Lewis had left there to Gerrard Spinola a Geneuois, and
afterward recom^^^ded to Peter Rosso, by John king of Bohemia, and consigned
by Rosso to Mastin de la (...) lord of Verona: who sold it to the Florentins,
which held it nine months. In the (...) time, the Pisans pretending to have a
greater right than the Florentins, by the concession made unto them, by the
emperor Henry, besieged it, but in the end they Charles the fourth, passing
into Italy, and coming to Lucca, at his departure he left a French Cardinal
for his Vicar, or Vicege^^^^ ^ho after his departure sold the Luccois their
liberty for five and twenty thousand (...) of gold. Having thus obtained
their liberty, they presently ruined the Castle (...) Castruccio.

(...) Luccois preserved the liberty which they had gotten, until the year
1400, when (...) Guinisi, one of their citisens, made himself Lord thereof,
and did govern it (...) with great felicity. Having gathered together a great
treasure of gold, silver, (...) precious stones, and having many goodly sons,
and finding himself in great glo^^^, and in the height of fortune, and being
in great reputation with all the princes of Philip Viscont duke of Milan, who
put them into a dark and ob^cure (...) where they ended their days mi^erably,
in the year of Christ 1430, and so in an (...) he lost the honor, riches,
seigneurie, and glory which he had gotten in so many years, with his sons
and life. The Guinisi being expelled, the city f^ll again into ^ombustions:
but in the end, they recovered and settled their li^ertie, ^he which they eni^^
^ith great peace and quietness unto this day. This city has brought forth
many

The Quality.
THe territory of Lucca is of small extent, but the soil is good, and yields
much unto

The Manners.
do wonderfully affect the study of divinity; that they are kind in the
reception

The Riches.
Castruccio Castracani, who made himself Lord of the town, many families did
abandon it, for that they would not obey a tyrant: They that retired themselves
carried with them the art of silk, with much other wealth, into diverse parts
of Italy, and and they also carried to Florence the art of making of cloth of
gold, wherein they excel. This Common weal is not rich, having but a small
jurisdiction, but there are many private men exceeding rich, and all their
wealth consists in ready money.

The Forces.
N^rfes General to the Emperor Justinian, yet it is thought that it were not
able to make any great resistance against the great duke of Tuscanie, if he
would undertake to make himself master thereof, unless they were assisted by
some other. But they hold, that he draws more profit and commodity, leaving it
thus free, than if it were subject unto him.

The Government.


The city of Lucca is divided into three parts, which they call Tiercieros;
the one is of S. Savior, the other of S. Paulin, and the other of S. Martin.
The Council does choose the Seigneurie out of the said three parts, or
Tiercieros, that is to say, they create three men for every third part of
Tiercie^o^, which in all make nine: besides the which, they choose a
Gonfalonier, who is the chief of the Common-weal^h, and he is chosen one
year out of the Tiercieros of S. Savior, the second out of that of S. Paulin,
and the third out of S. Martin, and so they change successively according to
the said order. These ten are chosen every third year, and all, except the
Gonfalonier, are called Ancients. The election is made after this manner: they
create three men, called Assortitori, one out of every third: These men have
charge to number the suff^ages and voices Domi^^^ ^^d another of S. Franci^:
these Assortitori have authority to assign what time the (...) shall serve, as
to appoint one for one month, and another for another month: (...) being done
by them, who are the chief men of Lucca, they keep it secret, and (...) oath
not to reveal any thing.

(...) that the Assortitori be chosen, they create the seigneurie, whose charge
is to hear matters of justice, and to take notice of petitions, and pardons
which are demanded.

(...) office of Secretaries, which are three in number, are very important.
These have

Council of the Colloque is composed of eighteen citisens, the which are
(...)

The six men have charge of the expenses, and public revenues, and dispose of
all

The Rota, which is ordinary in many towns of Italy, consists of three
doctors stran^^^,

(...) court of merchants is composed of nine men, whereof they choose three out
of every

(...) have also another office which they call of the Abundance, it consists
of nine (...) which are chosen like unto the rest, three out of every third.
These men have charge to see that the city may be well furnished with corn,
and they hear all matters which

They that have the office of munition, have charge to see that there be
prouisi^n of corn, for three whole years. They do often visit the magazins
and storehouses where they keep their munition, and they refresh it, and renew
it, as it is spent.









The Commonweal of Genoua.

The Contents.
1 DEscription and division of Liguria, and of the country of Genoua; with the
chief towns thereof. 2. Situation of the city of Genoua, and the circuit;
with their power at Sea. 3. The change of many Lords, governed by Earls, then
by Dukes. 4. Of the town of Sauona. 5. Of the Island of Corsica, the bigness,
circuit, and (...): the parts, with the towns and castles. 6. Liguria and the
country of Genoua, hilly,

the town of Bobbia begins to bend toward the North, and dividing Italy
t^rough

Giano Genio Prisco king of Italy, and from him took the name: others write
by Ianus the son of Saturn, and by Mago the son of Haniball the
Carthaginian, and repaired again by Lucretius Surius, by commandment of the
Senate. It was in good esteem two hundred and ninety years before the coming
of Christ, as does appear by a Table of Brass, which was found of late in the
valley of Pozzenere, and is set in S. Laurence Church, where it is written in
ancient letters, That under the Consulship of Lucius Cecilius, and of Quintus
Manutius, the Senate of Rome sent Judges to decide the suit, which was depending
betwixt the Victures and the Geneuois, by reason of the neighbor valleys: and
for that the execution of the sentence, and the freeing of prisoners which were
detained, should be made at Genoua; it may be conceived that in those days it
was in some estimation.

This noble city of Genoua, stands upon the shore of the Ligusticke Sea,
having aspatious and goodly port, which being opposite to Afric looks toward
the South, as the town does also, having on the back of it the North. Part of
it stands upon the declining of a hill, and part in a plain, and betwixt two
valleys, being six miles in circuit. There are a great number of inhabitants
and stately Palaces, especially along the Sea shore, so as there can be nothing
more pleasant and beautiful to behold: and this is the reason why they call it
Genoua the proud. Round about this city there are goodly gardens and pleasant
villages. In some places there are palaces and houses better built and set
forth than in Genoua it self, as at Albano, Bisagni, Misagno, Marasi, Maltade,
Balchena, Castelletto, Carbonaro, Minuta, Montegallo, with an infinite number of
others.

This town has been always in reputation, and held for one of the keys of
Italy, by reason of the situation. It has in former times been very
powerful at sea, so as her citisens have won famous victories, and have
extended the bounds of their dominions unto the river of Don or Tanais: for
they conquered the town of Theodosia, which they now call Caffa, in the
Taurique Chersonese; and moreover they made subject to their power, the Islands
of Cipres, Lesbos, and Chio, with the town of Pera in Thrace. Rotares king of
the Lombards took it, and spoiled it: afterward, it was recovered by
Charlemaigne, who had taken Desideriu^ king of the Lombards at Pauia, and then
they were subject to Pepin son to Charlema^gne, Ademar Governor, or Earl of
Genoua, armed forth a fleet of galleis and other warlike vessels, and went to
succor them of this Island; who meeting with the Sarrazins fleet at Sea,
incountred it valiantly, and defeated it, though he himself was slain. Yet
notwithstanding the Geneuois seized upon the Island, and carried away thirteen
of the enemies ships to Genoua: since which time Corsica has been always
subject to this Estate. Matters succeeded well until the year 935, which was
a very unfortunate year for this city, for that ( Bereng^rius the third
usurping the name of the Roman Empire, Stephen the seventh, being Pope of
Rome) the Sarrazins being confederat with the Carthagenians, and coming into
Italy, they took and sacked Genoua, where having slain many cruelly, in the
end they carried away all the young children they could find, and past into
Affricke, leaving the city wholly abandoned and without inhabitants. But
Andrew Dandolo who was then duke of Venice writes) within a short time, all the
said ^^i^dren were brought back again: since which time it has increased
much, as well ^^ people as in goodly buildings, and in po^er at Sea, where they
commanded for a (...), keeping pi^ats from theeuing at their pleasure. After
Charlemaigne and his (...), they endured much by the tyranny of their own
citisens, and were sometimes (...) to receive strangers to be their Lords, and
by their civil discentions they lost all (...) which they had at sea. This
city has been diversely governed, first by four (...) created by the people,
for one year, and then by six: and in the year 130 they (...) three Consulls,
and fourteen men for civil affairs. In the year 1142, the (...) made
choice of ten Consulls to govern the common weal for a year. (...) they
created a Praetor, who with the Consulls should have a care of the city, the
(...) was in the time of Frederic B^rbarossa, who commanded them to make this
choice, (...) the other cities of Italy. In the year 1257, there was a
captain of the people cho^^^ and made a companion to the Praetor, the which
continued six years; after which (...) ^aue all the authority unto the
Praetor. Thus they continued with diverse changes, (...) ^he year 1318, whenas
the people gave themselves to Pope John the two and (...) and to Robert king of
Naples, by whom they were governed unto the year 1335, (...) which time (the
hatred and factions grown betwixt the citisens) the families of (...), and
Dorij, were expelled the city: and so their civil discords increasing, the
(...) thought it fit to create a new magistrate, who might be perpetual, to see
by this (...) if they might pacify the combustions of the city, an^ preserve
it: whereupon (...) ^ade choice of Simon Bocca Negra, and named him duke, in
the year 1339, which (...) continued with many mutinies and alterations of the
subjects, until that (...) of the Guelphes and Gibellins began, so as the
Guelphes were forced to (...) aid from Charles the seventh the French king, who
sent a French governor unto (...) he behauing himself insolently thirteen
years, and going to Milan, thinking (...) at his return to Genoua, he was shut
out of the gates and lost his government (...) 1403. After which the citisens
d^d choose John Maria Viseon^a duke of Milan, (...) Protector, who sent Theodor
Paleologo marquis of Mon^ferrat, to be his Lieu^^^^^^, who governed the city
four years: but John Maria being slain, the citisens (...) duke: within six
years after they called Philip Maria Anglo duke of Milan, to be (...)
Protector, under whose protection they lived fifteen years, with great (...)
in the end the citisens disdaining that he had so honorably received Alphonso
(...) Arragon and Naples, with the noblemen and barons their prisoners, and
(...) them at liberty without their priuitie, they gathered together, and
created eight (...) of the liberty: who within a while after being dismissed,
they made a duke, (...) 1436. In the year 1450, Peter of Campo Fregoso being
duke, and ^is (...) unpleasing to the citisens, they ^orced him to fly, by the
favor of Charl^^ ^he (...) king, under whose protection the city remained,
until the year 1461, whenas (...) having expelled the French, made choice of
a new duke: but the French king (...) incensed, sent an army to Genoua, which
forced them to return under his (...) Yet afterward they took arms against
the French, seeking to take Castelletto, (...) ^he French had fortified for
king Charles, but finding themselves too weak, they (...) aid from Francis
Sforce duke of Milan, who sent them good succors, by which (...) ^xpelled the
French. Whereupon the Geneuois to show themselves tha^kfull to (...) sent four
and twenty Ambassadors to Milan, to present him the scepter, (...) ^eyes, and
seal of the city, and cho^ him for their Lord in the year 1464, the (...)
and his successors eni^ied fourteen years. Then the citisens taking arms
(...) John Galeazzo, they recovered Castellette, and expelled the garrison,
creating a (...) But in the year 1488, the citisens sent an Embassage to Milan
to the said duke (...), and did present unto him the standard of S. George, the
keys of the city, (...) seal, swearing obedience and fealty unto him: after
which the duke created John (...) Adorno governor of Genoua: and so the
Geneuois remained subject to the (...) G^leazzo, and to Lodoui^ Sforce eleven
years, until the coming of Lewis the twelfth, the French king, who expelled
Lodouicke Sforce out of the duchy of Milan, in Paulo de Noui, a dier of cloth,
an ancient, and an honest man, who although he refused much to accept of this
office, yet they forced him to undergo it, and so they rebelled from the
French king; to whom all the nobility went to crave aid, that they might
return into their country.

The French king came to Genoua with a great army, and forced the people to
obedience, restoring the gentlemen, and cutting off the head of P^ulo their
duke: and to the end he might keep Genoua under obedience, he caused a fort to
be built upon the Iulio the second, and the Venetians; the Geneuois recovering
their liberty, created John Fregosa duke of Genoua, yet afterward Lewis the
French king sending an army into Italy, it returned under his obedience, but
continued not long, the French being defeated at Nouara. In the year 1513,
Octauio Fregosa was made duke of Genoua, with the consent of the people. At the
coming of Francis the French king in the year 1515, he gave over his office,
and made an accord with king Francis, and remained governor of the city, in
the kings name, and so continued seven years, until the year 1522, whenas
Prospero Colonna, General of the league made betwixt Pope Leo the tenth, the
Emperor Charles the fifth, and the Florentines, came and took Genoua with the
governor Octauio Fregosa, giving the town in sack unto the soldiers for
three days. After all this, in the year 1527, Francis the French king being
in league with Pope Clement the seventh, the Venetians, Florentines, and
others, to expel the Emperors forces out of Italy, the king sending Monsieur
de Lantrecht with forty thousand men by land, and Andrew Doria with a fleet by
sea, they besieged Genoua, and forced it to submit it self under the French
kings obedience, who presently sent Theodor Triaulze to be governor. The next
year the citisens sent an honorable Embassage to the king, entreating him that
he would be pleased, that the city might enjoy her ancient liberty,

Sforces dukes of Milan, and also of the French, and of themselves; but now
they obey the Geneuois. There are come three Popes out of this town, that is,
Gregory the seventh, Iulio the second, and Sixtus the fourth.

Passing the river which they call of the East, behind it lies Capo de Monte,
Porto Fino, Hercules, and some have held, it was that which Ouide calls
Teraphne. It has for bound^ upon the West and North the Ligusticke Sea, upon
the East the Tyrrhene and Ionian Seas, and upon the South the straight of Sea
which is betwixt it and Sardina: For it has upon the North Strabo writes)
which make seven miles and a half: others say, a Germane league, which may be
gone in an hour. Leander sets ten Italian miles, and others nineteen the
Mercator, who has made a more exact computation than any other, sets but six
miles. Strabo makes this Island to be one hundred and sixty miles long, but
without doubt, it is but 120. Pliny has made it sixty miles broad; and
Strabo seventy, the which is true. The circuit (according unto Pliny) is
three hundred twenty two miles, and according unto some, three hundred and
five, and to others three hundred and ninety, but the truth is, it is just
three hundred twenty and five miles. It is in the fifth climat, and does hold
the twelfth and thirteenth paralells, and the longest day in Summer is scarce
fifteen hours.

This Island was first held by the Tyrrheniens or Tuscains, then by the
Carthagenians

This Island is divided at this day into four parts, that is to say, the
exterior part, and the inward part, the country that is on this side the
mountains, and that which lies beyond the mountains. That part which looks
to the Sun rising, is called the interior part, and that which is opposite, the
exterior. That part which is nearest unto Italy, is called of this side the
mountains; and that which looks toward Sardinia beyond the mountains. Yet the
inhabitants call one another on this side, or beyond the mountains, according
to

Pliny says, That there were three and thirty towns in this Island, the
which has also bin ^oted by Martian Capella.. But Strabo writes, That they
were no towns, but castles, and does number only four towns in his time,
amongst the which there were two colonies; the one called Mariana, of Marius;
and the other Aueria, sent by Scylla. But at this day, there is in a manner but
one town, called La Bastie, near unto the Sea, the which is but a small one:
upon the farthest part of Corsica, which looks toward Sardinia, there is a
castle called Boniface, sometimes named the port of Siracusa, where there is a
good haven. Some years since, the Gen^uois sent a colonie of their own nation
to inhabit there, who built a little town near unto Boniface, upon a port of
the sea, which they call

The Quality.
THe country of Liguria is for the most part rough and hilly, whereas there is
nothing Strabo says, it was in old time very bar^en, and had nothing worth
the relating, but that within (where there is nothing in a manner but hills,
forests, and precip^ces) there were very huge trees, as there are at this
day, which they employed to make shipping, with the which they did rob and
spoil to the strait of Gibraltar. But now the land is better manured, yielding
great store of very good wine, for in the country which is near unto the
town of Tabia, they make wine, which yields nothing to the malmsie of Candie,
the which they call wine of Apian; there is also in Liguria great store of
oil, so as some years it yields 20000 barrels. Near unto the town impossible
to see any thing that is more delightful, and such diversity of fruits, as it

Pliny and Diodorus write, and there are also many venomous trees, from which
if the Pliny calls Musmo, and the inhabitants Muffolt, the which has hair
like a goat, in stead of wool. They do also find Alume, and mines of iron in
the county of Niobe. There are Salt Pits in like manner, which they commonly
call Reya, near unto the port of S. Florent. And near unto Niobe, there are
deep valleys, the which are continually covered with snow, under the which
they say, there is much Crystal. They find Corrall in the Sea betwixt Corsica
and Sardinia, near unto S. Boniface.





The Manners of the Ancient.
Strabo: but Thucidides thinks, that they are come from the Sicilians. Flores
makes mention of the Ligurians, who hid themselves in holes and caves of the
mountains, as the Ossubes, Deciat and Buriat, say the like. This country has
in old time bred many great Captains.

As for the Corsicans, Strabo says, That whenas the Roman Captains made any
roads into this Island, bringing great numbers of slaves to Rome, they did
admire these Barbarians,

The Manners at this day.
AT this day, the Geneuois and Ligurians have shaken off all their
brutishness, whereunto they were given, and are grown very industrious,
quick witted, and subtle, the which they show in their affairs, and in the
great traffic which they use, whereas Francis, that the Geneuois would give
themselves unto him, he answered suddenly, that he would none of them, and that
he gave them unto all the diuills, their resolutios were so inconstant. They
are for the most part tal, and of a pleasing aspect. They live in their private
houses miserably; but when there is question or any charge of show, they are
sumptuous, or rather excessive. They have many good soldiers, and good
captains among them, as we may observe in the house of Doria, and in the
marquis Sp^^^l^, one of the most confident, vigilant, and most advised
commanders of our time. They are also valiant at Sea, and understand traffic
exceeding well.

As for the Corsicanes, they are nothing so civil nor nea^ as the Italians;
they are Caesar did write of them in that regard: but they are good soldiers,
and very courageous; and whenas this nation should have no other great captain
but the Marshall of Ornano (as in effect it is all the honor of this nation)
yet shall it be for ever glorious in this consideration. Finally, they are so
full of revenge, as the Italians have a common proverb which says, That they
must never trust a Corsicane, neither alive nor dead, for that as soon as any
one is slain, presently all his kinsmen meet to kill him, if it be possible,
that slew him: and notwithstanding that they make some accord, yet there is no
great trust in it, for that he may be surprised when he dreams least of it; so
as the best course is to look well to himself, and not to make any strict
league of amity with reconciled enemies. When the Corsicanes come into a

The Riches.
THey carry great store of citrons, oranges, lymons, and oil, from the river
or country George, which does govern it discreetly, and diuides unto those
that have an interest in the Mount, and it makes a stock for the necessities
of the commonweal. They Spinola has made, wherewith he has paid the army
in the Low Countries: for it is well known, that his mother has gone often
unto the exchange, demanding to whom her son was indebted, to the end she
might pay it, notwithstanding that the sums

As for the commonweal, it cannot be said what they do draw clearly from
those countries which they hold; and many think that it is not rich, and that
if there happen any extraordinary affairs, private men desirous to maintain
it, would supply her wants, for that they have little, or no public treasure
at Genoua, having no treasury full of gold

The Forces:
Boniface. This seigneurie does commonly entertain certain companies of
Corsicans within Genoua, for the guard of the city, and in Corsica, Geneuois,
who are put into garrison in the best places. And besides that, there are
certain companies of light horse, who run along the coast to hinder the
surprises and spoils of the Turks, who notwithstanding do often carry away
many people to Alger, or to some other places in Afric: so as we must make no
great account of the Geneuois forces but at sea, where they are yet
sufficiently strong, having their support, the which might fail them, if he
himself were engaged in any great action. They do commonly entertain four
galle is for the guard of the river

The Government.
Adornes, Fregoses: in the end they recovered the liberty which they now
enjoy: for Genoua being under the subjection of the French, and Andrew Doria
quitting the service of king Francis, whose Admiral he was, freed himself and
his country from servitude in the year 1528, wherein he showed a noble
resolution: for that having means to seize upon this Estate, and being
entreated, and as it were forced by his friends, who had power to command him,
he did choose rather to leave it at liberty, with as much glory to future
ages, as any one could merit that had been so rare a president. For the which
the Geneuois did worthily erect a statue unto him for a perpetual glory and
memory of this fact.

The city with this new reformation took the form of government, which they
now Centurioni, Lomelini, Spinoli, Doria, Palla^icini, Cibi, Iustiniani,
Ternari, Sauli, Ar^^ri, Marini, Catanei, Seluaggi, Negri, Grilli, Promontori,
Imperiali, Negroni, Vsodamar, Pi^^lli, Calui, Frenchi, Itaboni, Freschi, etc.

Of the whole body of these families they made a Council of four hundred
persons yearly, who with the duke and the governors have the rule of the
Commonweal. This Counsel chooses the duke and the eight governors, and
these governors have

The duke is the head of the Common weal, and has the titles and honors due
unto

The manner of choosing the duke is thus: The third of January the Senate
assembles with the Petty Council, without the presence of the precedent duke,
for that having ended the time of two years, he returns the first of January
unto his house, and there remains as a private person, and Procurator of the
Commonweal for his life. The Petty Council

There are eight governors which sit upon the same form with the duke, as his
Counselors. that is to say, the Petty Council choose other eight and twenty,
and these eight

Every one of the said eight governors, after the time that his office is
expired remains protector of S. George for two years: so as in the College
of procurators, you shall always see the eight which have governed the
Commonweal, and all these enter into the Senate with the duke and the eight
governors, deliberating of matters of importance; and these governors have
the charge of all the Estate, and two of them remain in the Palace with the
duke, and the other six in their houses, and they are changed alternatiuely,
two every three months. Of the Procurators there are some for life, and these
have been dukes; and some are only for two years, that is to say, they



There is an office of seven men, called Extraordinary, who represent in a
manner the Princes person, for that it is employed in the conduct of the Common
weal. Their charge is, to prolong and cut off suits, and to give tutors to
Pupils; and if it happen that the kinsmen be at suit among themselves, or that
a poor man pleads against a rich, they do commonly appoint what magistrates
they think good to hear them that plead. Their office continues six months,
and is of great dignity.

Andrew Doria, forone of their first Syndics: and they have their place with
the Senate, and in the palace near unto the duke.





There are forty captains in the city of Genoua, chosen from among the
gentlemen, who are changed every year. Every one of these has one hundred men
under his charge, which in all make four thousand, and these the commonweal
does employ upon any occasion; for they guard the city when there is any
doubt, and when the seigneurie goes abroad, these forty captains attend on
them, being all attired in velvet, which is the ornament of the seigneurie.
Moreover all the men of the city and suburbs,

The office and magistrate of S. George (noble amongst all others in this city)
was instituted Paul, and others of the Sun, and every one of these was
governed particularly by diverse citisens, who had the charge to pay the money
due unto lenders justly, and to keep the accounts betwixt them and the common
weal. But by reason of the great number of purchases made even by foreign
nations, and the multitude of governors, there followed much confusion; so as
the seigneurie resolved that all purchases should be reduced to one, called the
purchase of S. George, and that it should be governed yearly by citisens, who
should provide and give order that reason should be done unto lenders, and
hence grew the beginning George.

And for that they knew that the said office governed the foresaid matters with
wisdom and justice, and that the commonweal was full of affairs, the number
of places increased greatly; so as the commonweal alienating her rents, the
charge of this office grew daily greater, making diverse places and communalties
subject to their government. By reason whereof this office obtained many
privileges, first of the seigneury, then of many Popes, Emperors, and Lords
which have commanded the city of Genoua: so as the office of S. George,
although that it depends of the public, and of the seigneurie of Genoua, and
of them which govern the palace, yet is it not subject unto the seigneurie;
but all they that are admitted to the seigneurie, or to the government of the
town, swear George, and to maintain it. And for that naturally things have
weak beginnings, the which in time grow perfect; this magistrate is better
ordered and governed now, than it was in the beginning. It does not pay a
certain sum unto lenders, in regard of the profit and interest, but more or
less, according to the proportion of his revenues, and the occasions which he
has to lay out, and disburse for the preservation of things which concern his
charge, and as the customs

Moreover, it has gotten a great command, with many goodly revenues, the
which it had not in the beginning. Since which they have made new laws and
orders; so as it is much more powerful, touching the expedition of causes, the
punishment of offenders, and the manner of governing the people which are
subject unto it. And he that shall duly consider all things, shall see that by
reason of this magistrate the body of the city contains in a manner two
communalties, the one great, and the other less: the great is governed by the
palace, and comprehends the whole city: the less is governed by the Mount of
S. George only, touching the foresaid matters, and contains all the lenders.





This Magistrate, or Mont of S. George is Lord of the Island of Corsica, whither
they send yearly a Governor, a Leiutenant, a Judge, and other officers. The
like they do in Heresana, which is a place strong of Castells and Forts
frontiring upon the Florentines, and at Vingtimille a very ancient city, and
to many villages, castells, and boroughs, and also to Tierze and Piene, whither
also they send captains, presidents, and officers. This Mont of S. George is
very rich in treasure, arms, and council, and has never failed to

This has been the estate and government of this city ever since that prince
Andrew Doria freed it from the subjection of the French in the year 1528, as
has been said. But since they have been in danger to fall into a new
servitude, at the least into great combustions: for in the year 154^ (some
write 49) John Augustine Earl of Flisco, a young man, bold, and ^loquent,
sought to make himself perpetual duke of Genoua, and it subject to the
French. Upon the fifth of January the said year, he had seized upon a port,
and had defeated and spoiled the sea army of prince Doria, and stain John
Doria his nephew: and thus being in his conceit a victor, seeking to leap from
one galley to another being armed, and in the night, he fell into the sea and
was drowned, and so his ambitious Charles the fifth.

In the year 1574 there fell out a new tumult and combustion in the
commonweal; for being molested with their accustomed civil discentions, the
city was that year divided Matthew Senaregue, a citisen of great authority,
and at that time Chancellor, and chief Secretary of the State, and ch^efe of
the faction of the new; who by his singula^ wisdom did often lay before them,
both in their public and private Counsels, how unfit and unseemly it was to
live in one city divided into factions and partialities, showing by good and
lively reasons, how much better it were for every one in particular, Senaregue
being not able to persuade the faction of the old to this conformity, nor to
divert them from their obstinacy: they estranged themselves the more from the
company of the new, and were so incensed against him, as he was many times in
danger of his life: and their hatred was the greater, for that he had in a
manner the whole government of the State. But Senaregue opposing himself with
great judgment against all their pernicious dessignes, moved chiefly with a
generous disdain, he employed himself in such sort, as the party of the new,
having taken the charge of the government, expelled in a manner all the old
and forced them to retire out of the country, seeking to take arms against
the new. This combustion might Senaregue foreseeing the great danger, and
preferring the public good before all private affection, how just soever, had
not by his authority suppressed the power of his faction: drawing the emperor,
the king of Spain, but especially Pope Gregory, to deal in those affairs, so
as his Holiness doing what he could possibly to pacify the discentions of the
city. In the end, the fury of arms ceased. Senaregue having therein showed
an admirable integrity and judgment: who by a general consent being sent
ambassador to Rome, preserved the greatness and reputation of his party,
pacifying wisely the two factions, which were mighty, and able not only to
have ruined their own country, but to have filled all Italy with
combustions, war, and confusions, whereof his Holiness did give a most
honorable testimony, writing the Senare gue to the duke and Procurators of
the Commonweal of Genoua.

The Religion, and matters of the Church.
THe Geneuois, and Corsicans, are all Romish Catholics. Genoua is an
Archbishopricke,

In Corsica there are the Bishoprics of Mariana, Nebia, Ajasse, Aleria, and
Ciuita, wher^of some are under the Archbishopricke of Piza.

The Commonweal of Venice.
THE COMMONWEAL
The Contents.
1 DEscription of the city of Venice. 2. The number of the Castles, Towns,
and Estates subject to the Seigneurie of Venice. 3. Bressia. 4. Verona. 5.
Bergamo, Vicence, Creme, etc. 6. Friuli and her Towns, among others, A^uilea
built by the Romans. 7. Istria, and the chief towns of this Peninsula. 8.
Corcyria, now calied Corfo^: The situation of these Islands, and the confines:
The length and 9. Cephalonia, the circuit, towns, and ports. 10. Zante, the
situation and circuit. 11. The Island of Crete, the length, breadth, circuit,
and situation: the ports, rivers, and mountains: containing in old time a
hundred towns, for the which it was called by the Ancients, Hecatompolis. 12.
Bounty of the air of the Marquisat of Treuise, and the chiefer^uers. Verona
abounding in oil, wine, fruit, and fine wool. Olives of Bergamo. Excellent
wines of Friuli. Physical herbs of Istria. 13. Corsou, abounding in honey,
wax, oil, salt pits, oranges, lymons: and the fountains of Cardachie. 14.
Cand^e, abounding in m^lmsey, milk, honte, cypres: infected with Phalanges,
which are venomous Spiders. 15. Description of a beast in Candie called
Boue-estain, like unto the Stagge in swistnesse: and how it is taken. 16.
Fishers the first inhabitants of Venice, and Riualto. 17. Venetians of a grave
18. They of Crete in old time held the best Archers of the world. Inuenters of
the Pyrricke dance, continued among the Peasants unto this day. Their laws
practiced throughout all Greece. 19. Of the grave humor of the Venetians of
this age, their great judgment in affairs, their industry in arts,
magnificent, politic, and greedy: The Veron^is, studious and faithful: The
Padouans inconstant: The Vicentins reuengefull: and the Candio^s liars. 20. Of
the reuenews of the Common^weale of Venice, and what it may amount unto yearly.
21. Extraordinary means of exa^tions, to entertain armies, and to relieve
the State. 22. Of certain means to get money for the Seigneurie. 23. Of the
Forts which are in all the Venetians Estate. 24. Of the Cernides, which are
soldiers appointed for the defense of their Forts. 25. What their horse and
foot be. 26. Of their sea forces, and galleys at sea: Of the admirable arsenall
27. Gouern^ment of this Seigneurie, and first of the duke and his power. 28. Of
the Council of ten, and the Senate which they call the Pregadi, and whereon
they treat. 29. The Commonweal of Venice paralelled with the Roman State. 30.
The defects and imperfections of this Seigneurie. 31. Religion of the Greeks:
Shismetickes tolerated in the Island of Corfou and Ca^^^^. 32. A catalogue of
the dukes of Venice, their lives and most remarkable actions.

THe Commonweal of Venice, for the greatness, nobility, riches, goodly
palaces, situation, and other good parts, is admirable among all the towns of
Europe; the situation thereof being so commond^ous for all things, as it may
be held rather a divine than a humane

^^^tila, who coming into Italy with a great army, spoiled all the towns of
the firm land, so as the ancient Venetians, Padouans, and others, searing the
fury of those barbarons Huns, retired themselves with their wives and families
into those Islands, wherea^ the Padouans began to build them dwelling at
Riuoalto; and this was the first found^^on of the city of Venice, which first
beginning some write was about the four hund^^ and fiftieth year of our
salvation: since which time it has been augmented and g^^^ne to that
greatness which we see at this day: neither has it for the space of one

T^^ Venetians do hold in Lombardie and in the Marquisat, besides Venice, six
towns



Beessia is the second town of Lombardie, it is very ancient, and built as
some write Cenomannie, who descending into Gaul expelled the ancient Tuscans.
It has had many Lords, and about the year 1421 it was made subject to Philip
Maria Viscont duke of Milan, unto whom they yielded upon certain conditions:
but the citisens being oppressed by him, they gave themselves to the seigneurie
of Venice, under whom they have continued unto this day. It is very populous,
and the jurisdiction is great, good,

Verona is a great town and very pleasing, beautified with goodly buildings,
and inhabited Anastatius, and that great Amphitheatre built by L. V. Flaminius.
The territory is fruitful, and yields corn, wine, oil, and other fruits with
abundance of fine wool. There is no great difference betwixt Verona and
Padoua touching the

Bergamo, Vicence, Cr^ma, and Treuiso differ little touching the number of
inhabita^^s, and are equal to Modena which has a particular Duke: but Vicence
has a great territory, that of Creme is but small, and Bergamo is of a
reasonable great extent.

Friuli lies betwixt the river of Liuence, Istria, the Alps, and the Gulf of
Venice: it Attila, so as this let being taken away, the Herules, Huns, and
Lombards past at their ease, and of late days the Turks. At this day Aquilea
seems rather a village than any thing else: yet it retains still the
Patriarchs Church, famous for the memory of S. Mark, and for the power of the
ancient Patriarchs which have remained there. This seat was transported to
Grada by reason of the frequent incursions of the Barbarians under Pope
Pelagius. But the Venetians having Nicholas, and Aquilea enjoyed the title: but
for that the air of the town is unwholesome, the government of Friuli and of
all that belongs unto it was reduced to Vdena, a town which has five miles in
circuit, and contains about sixteen thousand souls.

Istria begins at the river of Risan or Formion, and extends unto S. Vit, or as
some others Strabo was the bounds of Italy. The Venetians who desire to people
it, give unto them that will go and inhabit there, a certain

Corcyria (a famous Island by the records of the ancients) is that which at
this day they Al^^ous king of the Pheacians, and Nausicas his daughter, who
enjoyed those goodly gardens where of Homer speaks.

Cephalonia has a hundred Italian miles in circuit, and it lies not far from
the continent

Zante, sometimes called Zacynthum, lies right against the gulf of Corinthe,
now called

The Island of Creta or of Gandie, has in length from East to West about 60
French Ptolomey describes it. It was famous in old time, for that it had a
hundred towns, and therefore the Greek poet called it Hecatompolis. The
situation is more Easterly than that of the country of Morea, lying betwixt
the countries of Attica, and that of Cyrene in Afric, being but two days
journey by sea from either province. At this day, according to Belonus, there
are but three towns of note in this Island, that is, Candie, in old time
Matium, the chief of this Island, whereof it takes the name; then Canea,
sometimes Cidon; and Rhetynno. It has a port which is not very commodious,
but those of Canea and Candie are very safe. In this Island are the rivers of
Melipotame, Scasin, Cladile, Epicidome, Pliny calls Cadussi, and at this day
Madure; and Dicte, which they call Sethie. This Island seems to be made to
command all Greece for that it lies not far from Peloponesus, and may command
all the sea toward Greece. It was sold to the Venetians by the Marquis of
Montferrat in the year 1194.

The Quality.
THe Marquisat of Treuiso has a good air, and temperat, the fields are
pleasing, and but no store of wheat, or any other thing: it is subject to the
great change of air, (...)



In the Island of Cephalonia, there is neither river, brook, nor fountain of
fresh water, so as when their tame cattle would drink, they gape both evening
and morning to receive the dew. Some write, and among others Herodotus, that in
the Island of Zante there were fountains which with the water did vomit forth
pitch in great abundance. There is scarce any thing else that is worthy the
noting.



Dioscorides says, for that the only sent of it kills Serpents and other
venomous beasts.


THe first that lived about Venice (according to the opinion of some) were
fishermen, Attila in the year 456, or as others write 450, and the inhabitants
have retained the diverse humors and manners of all these places.

As for the other places of the marquisat of Treuiso and Friuli they have
embraced

The Island of Candie did flourish in former times, whenas her king did hold all
Greece Cydon. They were all armed whenas they daunced; and it (...) been so
continued in this Island, as the Pesants dance on holy days in the hottest
time of Summer, not caring for any shadow, and with their arms, that is to
say, a Plato does witness, especially the Lacedaemonians took their practice
from them. They had one which did enioine that all their children should be
bred up in public, to the end that the poor having the like breeding to the
rich, they should have no cause to envy them; and it was also ordained by the
laws, that to inure their children not to fear any thing, but to bear all
things with patience, they should be accustomed to arms; and to make them
contemn heat, cold, hunger, and thirst, they should carry a bow and arrows
in dancing, and their apparel should be fit for war. All the Candiots were
forced to marry being of age, and then they were dismissed from the company

The Manners at this day.
carry themselves like princesses, they of Verona gracious, they of Bressia
diligent, they of Treuiso jealous, and they of Bergamo subtle, and that there
are many men which speak ill. Padoua has good soldiers, Vicence many Earls,
and Bressia inhabitants which are not charitable to the poor. They of Friuli
are fiery, sudden, always watchful, and wonderful industrious, having an
active spirit, and very subtle. The inhabitants of Istria are neither long
lived, nor of great courage.

The inhabitants of Candie are by nature apt and ready to do evil: the
ancients gave them the title of liars: they are subtle and covetous, and do
hardly endure labor, nether do they learn any art or science perfectly. It is
true that at this day, as Belonus says, they do practice from their youth
(according to their ancient custom) to shoot, wherein they excel even the
Turks themselves; and they are active and valiant at sea as much

The Riches.


These be the revenues of this commonweal, which is subject to the accidents
of other Estates of Christendom, that is to say, they consume in a manner all
this money in their ordinary charges, for the entertaining of soldiers,
armies at sea, in the fortification of towns and castells, and in the fees of
magistrates and officers of the city:

The first, is to raise the tenths which are already imposed upon gentlemen
and bourgesses,

Whenas then they have recourse unto this first means, they do it easily, for
that all pay it willingly, and do freely assist their country. But if this
su^t^ceth not, they fly unto the second, which, is that gentlemen serve for a
certain time in their offices without any fee: and moreover they ordain the
chief honors which are accustomed to be given

Another means to make money is also practiced by this Commonweal, the which

The third means to draw money, is whenas the Commonweal upon some great
necessity

They have also been accustomed to take money upon exchange, and to give eight
in the hundred to them that would lend, and this was only for eighteen
years. Moreover they have made many Lotteries of lands belonging to the
public, where they have drawn by blankes publicly in the presence of the
chiese Senators.

These are the means which the Seigneurie has used to levy money in their
former

To conclude, the State of Venice has means to levy money without any
discontent of the gentlemen, citisens, or people: for in their great
necessities, the prince, and many gentlemen, and bourgesses, have freely g^uen
great store of treasure to the Commonweal; and some have given their wives
jewels, considering that the Commonweal being afflicted had more need of
help than their wives had of ornaments. And no^ only private men of Venice have
given money to the Commonweal, but also the towns which are subject unto her,
have relieved her with great sums of money, besides the taxes where with they
are charged. The reason is, for that they love the mild government of

We must therefore conclude, that it is no easy thing to know what treasure
the city of Venice has in her coffers. Let us now see what the forces of this
Commonweal are, seeing we have discoursed at large of her wealth.

The Forces:
Lignago, and Crema; some others are so great in circuit, as they cannot be
besieged

In the Island of Corfou there is an excellent fort, which is as it were the
key or port to enter into the gulf, so as with small forces they may hinder
the entry of the greatest army.

In the Island of Candie, the town whereof this Island takes the name, and
Canea, are exceeding strong, both by art and situation: but Rethymo and Scitia
cannot be termed strong but in regard of their situation: and in the to^ne of
Candie, there is a good arcenall of galleys.





This State in like manner was accustomed to entertain in Lombardie, about one
thou^and light horse, but they have left off to make this superfluous expense,
for that they

To treat of their warlicke preparation for the sea, as of the thing which is
of greatest

There are many times two hundred galleys in this Arcenall, besides others at
sea, the which have been accustomed to be forty in number: and there are also
twenty great galleys, the which in regard of the lesser may be called men at
arms, for that they are neither so light nor so fit to row as the rest: but
they work a greater effect in a sea fight having a good wind, and they are
able to charge one hundred small galleys: they make their armies invincible,
being of greater service than ships of war, for that besides their fails, they
may use their oars. There is in this Arcenall so many means to arm an
infinite number of men, as it is an admirable thing to ^ce, and there is such
abundance of

As for timber to make new galleys there is great abundance, not so much for
the quantity and greatness of the woods which the seigneurie has near unto
the sea, as for the care they have throughout all this Estate to preserve their
oaks, the which are easily transported to Venice by sea, and by the rivers
which fall into the sea near unto this city.

But to speak in a word what may be conceived of the Arcenal, I say that in
the whole world the like is not to be found, nor better furnished with good
workmen, which are to the commonweal makes not any, but may use them when
they have n^ed. They want

For the guard and safety of the gulf of Venice, and the Islands of the
Ionian sea, they

Whenever the Turk arms, they do in like manner increase the number of
their galleys, and then they make a General of their army, whose name is so
much esteemed by the Turks, as they dare not come near the gulf, much less
the city of Venice. But notwithstanding that this guard be strong, yet is it
not able to secure all vess^ls which

It is no difficult thing to conceive what number of ships and galleis the
segneurie may set forth, for that wanting neither timber, arms, men nor money,
they may arm what they please: and although for a long time there has not
been seen at sea above one hundred galleis, and few ships, yet be that will
look into former times, shall find that two

Wherefore if necessity did press the Venetians, we must think that at this
day whenas they abound more in wealth, and are more mighty in subjects, having
also an Arcenal better furnished than ever; they are not only able to set forth
the like number of vessels, but also to exceed it; and if they do it not, the
reason is for that they would not hazard so many in one action: and although
they be inferior to the Turks in number, yet are they not in power, and it is
most certain that if they were set upon by the Turks galleis, they would not
fear to fight with them, and for this cause the Turks durft never

The Government.


This Commonweal has one head, who represents the Majesty of the empire in
his roabs, his gravity, and reputation, and he is called Duke or Captain; by
whom it seems all the rest are led, to see his attire, and the outward
carriage of an absolute prince: of whose election we will speak hereafter, and
of his power.

For the government and preservation of this flourishing Estate, Great Council.
they have made a great Council, which does consist of an assembly of all the
gentlemen of Venice, so as every

One of the chief members of the Commonweal is the Council of the Pregadi,
for Pregadi.
They are so called (according to the opinion of some) for that they were in
old time assembled by the public officers, and as it were intreat^d by them
to come and give their advice touching the affairs of the Commonweal. The
Council of the Pregadi consists of one

They have been accustomed during the necessities of the Commonweal, to
grant a privilege to enter into the Council of the Pregadi, to such as had
assisted the Commonweal with a certain sum of money, the law prefixing a
certain time how long

Next to the Council of the Pregadi, is the College, The College.
which is the third member of the Commonweal, and of great reputation. This
College does chiefly consist of three magistrates, which are the great Sages
or wisemen, the Sages of the firm land, and the Sages of the sea, and it
contains sixteen gentlemen; the great Sages are six in number, and either of
the other two five. Moreover, it is composed of the Seigneurie, that is to say
of the Prince, of the six Counselors, and three heads or Presidents of the
forty. And you must understand, that whenever we say the College, it is
meant by the assembly

The Duke.
The supreme magistrate of the city is called Duke: his authority in the
beginning was great, but it has bin since moderated. And to the end every
thing may be plainly understood, whenas the Duke is dead, the six Counselors,
with the three Presidents of the forty, enter the palace, whereas the eldest
Councellor carries himself as Vice Duke: and for this cause he does manage
certain business which belongs unto the Dukes office.

Six Counselors.
The supreme marks of the Venetian empire, are settled in the Dukes person, for
that he seems to be absolute lord in the Commonweal. But notwithstanding that
he enjoys this great dignity, yet has he not full power in any thing: for
that he may not determine of any thing without the presence of his Counselors,
which are six, and they are always chosen of the most honorable gentlemen of
the city, according to the greatness and dignity of the place. These six
Counselors sit with the Duke and dispatch all affairs, especially private and
particular, as to give audience, to read public letters, grant privileges,
and such like: in which the Duke cannot do any thing without the presence

Co^ncell of Ten.
The Council of Ten is a member of the Commonweal, of very great importance,
whose authority is like unto that of the Pregadi, over the whole city, for
that it may treat of all affairs of State, and is not subject to any greater
power. It is true, that they do not practice this authority but in cases of
great importance, which were impossible to prevent by other means: as to
determine of a war, to conclude a peace, to manage a business secretly, and
such like: the which if they were treated of in the assembly* and afterward
consulted of in the Council of the Pregadi (as they ought to be) happily they
should not be managed with such secrecy and speed as the time required. When
as they

Procurator of S. Mark*
The office of Procurator of S. Mark is of great reputation; for that this
dignity like Mark, and of the treasures thereof: afterward Sebastian Ziant
having at his death left great foundations to the Church, there was another
created for the managing of that which he had left, and so from time to time
they have been augmented, so as in the year 1423 they came to the number of
nine, whereof three had the charge of S. Marks Church, and of the treasures:
three had the care of such goods as were left by them that dwelt of the one
side of Canalgrande,

The Auogadori, or Tribunes of the commons, are places of great importance,
Auogador^.
and numbered among the chief. The authority of this magistrate is great, for
that it is necessary in all consultations there be at the least one of the
Auogadori, whereof there be three: they have the care and charge to see the
laws and privileges observed. There are infinite other officers and magistrates
in the ci^ie of Venice, the which to avoid ^ediousnesse

We may hereby obseru^ that the seigneurie of Venice is merely Aristocratical,
distributing the chief honors, dignities, and offices to the gentlemen of
Venice; and the lesser which have no power, unto the common people: and yet to
content them, the seigneurie has left them the office of Chauncellor, which is
one of the worthiest and most honorable within the city, being also continued
for life: and moreover they have the offices of Secretaries of Estate, which is
also very honorable.

The duke although he seems to be a prince, yet is he nothing but the first
gentleman of Venice, and has but the conclusion, when there is question of
voices in what body

Finally there is a wonderful equality worthy of much commendation in this
city,

The people of other towns subject unto this Estate, are in like manner very
faithful; for that he which goes to govern them, has no other end but to do
justice to every man, and to assist the towns which are under his charge; for
in doing so, at his return he obtaines greater honors, but if he govern
himself otherwise, he is punished, and no more employed: there is another
reason why these people love the Venetian government,



Seeing that we have related the perfections of this commonweal, it shall not
be impertinent to set down her defects in particular, although they be of no
great moment.



The second defect is, that they employ none but Italian footmen, although it
be certain that they have lost much of their ancient reputation, the which
has happened by the diversity of fighting; so as in their battallions they
are much inferior to the Suisses and Germans: wherefore this commonweal
should have good numbers of Suisses and Germans in their armies, by which
means their footmen should be better esteemed.

The third is, that they make not any one of their subjects, but a stranger
General of

But these defects are not all past remedy, and for this cause those wise
Senators have a continual care to prevent all inconveniences, and have no
other desseigne but to preserve the State in peace and liberty. Without doubt
they are not like to have any troubles and combustions among themselves, for
they never suffer any private quarrel to grow among them, but they presently
pacify it, either by love, or by the authority of the sovereign council of
ten. Moreover there is not any citisen or gentleman


THe Venetians are firm Romish Catholics, as all their subjects be which
remain

The Dukes and Princes of the Commonweal of Venice: and the most remarkable
things which past during either of their governments.
1. Christopher Patriarch of Grada, to govern according to the laws, and to
have no regard but to the public good. He pacified their differences with
Luitprand king of the Lombards, and made a league with king Aripert. He forced
the Equilins, who had rebelled, to obedience, as well by his authority, as by
arms, and increased their revenues. He governed twenty years, six months,
and eight days.

2. MARCEL TEGALIAN, of the same place of Heraclea, was chosen to succeed him,
by the common consent of the people. He was devout, affable, and modest, but
not so careful of the government as his predecessor. The Patriarchship of
Grada was transferred Luitprand, and there growing great wars, by reason of
the two Bishops, he meddled not, but died, having bin duke nine years, and one
and twenty days.

3. HORTEE HIPPATE, surnamed Vrse, a nobleman of Heraclea, purchased great
reputation by his worthy exploits. Paul the Exarke or gouernou^ of Rauenna
had recourse unto him, the Grecian army being defeated, and siege laid before
Rauenna, by Luitprand. He recovered Rauenna, took the kings nephew prisoner,
s^ew the duke of Vincence, and restored the Exarke to his rights. He suppressed
them of Aquilea, who troubled the public quiet, and he encouraged the youth
to arms. He was slain by reason of the discentions of the Iesulains, having
bin prince eleven years, and five months.

After the death of this third duke, in the year 737, they made an assembly,
in the which it was decreed and concluded, That they should not choose any duke
for six years, and that they should create a master of the soldiers which
should be annual: the which continued five years, for in the year 742, they
proceeded to the election of a duke, since which t^me the Commonweal of Venice
has always had dukes unto this day. The first which was chosen in this
office, ^as Dominic Leon; the second Felix Cornicula; the third Theodat son
to Vrse, (...) from banishment, and was continued the year after, but he died
before his time expi^ed; the four^h Julian Cepare, who was subrogated in his
place; the fifth was Ciane Fabritiatie, who had his eyes p^t out, an^ was
dismissed.

4. THEODAT HIPRATE son to Vrse, was declared duke, five years after the
death of his father: during the which, the people were governed by a master of
the soldiers, As^olfo king of the Lombards. He was slain by Galla a citisen
of Malamocco, in the thirteenth year of his principality.

5. GALLA of Malamocco, a wicked and seditious man, carrying himself as
protector of the public liberty, was created in the place of Theodat: but
his wickedness being discovered, and that he sought to make himself absolute
lord, which was the re^^^^ why Theodat, the people put out his eyes, and within
one year took from him the government which he had usurped.

6. DOMINICO MONEGARIA of Malamocco, was set in the place of G^lia. The people
to restrain the dukes authority, made choice of two Tribunes yearly: but he
being a bold and an insolent man, sought to tyrrannize over the people, who
being inc^nsed, put out his eyes, the fist year of his principality.

7. MAVRICE GALBAIA, a gentleman of Heraclea, was chosen to this dignity for
his wisdom, justice, and wealth. He made his son duke with him, and they
governed together. In his time, the Church of Grada being molested, he sent an
ambassador to Stephen to reconcile the difference. The Bishopric of S. Peter
of Castel-Oliuolo was erected, and he died, having governed three and twenty
years.

8. JOHN GALBAIA having bin duke nine years with his father, governed the
commonweal alone nine years. After which time he made Maurice his son
companion of his principality: but both of them being of bad life, and
insupportable, for that they had slain John Patriarch of Grada, casting him
from the top of a high Tower, Fortunatu^, the Patriarchs successor, made a
conspiracy against them, whereupon a new duke was chosen, whereat they being
amazed, the father fled into France, and the son to Mantoua in the sixteenth
year.

9. OBELERIVS, being chosen prince by them of the intelligence of Fortunatus,
took Beat for companion, and Valentine their third brother was also associated
by them unto this dignity. It is to be noted, that of these three, Beat is put
in the rank of dukes, in the Council hall at Venice, for that Obelerius had
persuaded Pepin king of Italy to make war against the Venetians, and that
Beat had defended the Commonweal, having reigned five years.

10. ANGE PARTITIATIVS, having carried himself valiantly in the war against
Pepin, was chosen duke, the people being retired to Realto. He was founder of
the dukes palace, in the place where that now stands which was built since. The
division of the empire being made in his time, the Venetians were left at
liberty. The city was divided into Sestiers, or parts. The Pregadi, and the
Forty for criminal causes was instituted. He

11. JUSTINIAN PARTITIATIVS, having been ^ssociated in the dignity, by his
father, was after his death confirmed by the people. He called home John his
brother from Constantinople, and took him for companion. He augmented the
peoples authority, and relieved Michael emperor of Constantinople, against
the Sarrazins The body of S. Mark was in his time brought from Alexandria,
and taken for their protector; and the Church which is at this day, was
consecrated to his honor. He died the second year.

12. JOHN PARTITIATIVS, brother to Justinian, remained in the dignity, and did
much augment the Church of S. Mark, which he caused to be served by a good
number of priests, establishing the Primicerio. He caused the head of Obelerius
to be cut off, whom Obelerius party. He made war against the Narantins, whom
he subdued. In the end, there was a conspiracy made against him, and being
surprised by his e^emies, near unto S. Peter's Church, going to hear Mass,
they stripped him of his ducall ornaments, and confined him to Grada, having
shaven his beard, the eight year of his principality, where he became a
Monk, and died.

13. PETER TRADONIC of Pola having carried himself to the peoples content in
the war against Pepin, was chosen duke. He did associat John his son, and
they gave succors to the Emperor of Constantinople, who caused Theodosius
Patritius to entreat them. He was made Protospataire of the Empire, to whose
succor he sent sixty galleys. Lewis the second granted him many privileges:
and in the end he was slain by a sedition,

14. VRSE PARTITIATIVS having pacified the sedition, was made duke. The Turks
having spoiled Dalmatia even unto Grada, were deseated by him, and John his
son who Basilius honored him much for this action, and made him
Protospataire of the Empire. He governed seventeen years.

15. JOHN PARTITIATIVS son to Vrse, having been confirmed in his dignity,
took and burnt Comachia, and spoiled Rauenna to be revenged of the earl of
Coma^hia, who had taken his brother Badoaire prisoner, and wounded him to the
death. Gr^wing sickely, he caused the Church of S. Cornelius, and S. Cypri^n to
be built at Malamocco, and having governed five years and six months, he
renounced the dignity.

16. PETER CANDIAN was chosen after the voluntary demission of his
predecessor: he was valiant and expert in arms, yet very devout. He went in
person with ten galleys

DOMINICKE TRIBVN is put in the rank of dukes by some, others that have not so
curiously looked into the history have omitted him, having been duke but three
months and thirteen days. There is nothing memorable in his time but a
certain privilege granted to Chioggia.

17. PETER surnamed Tribun, son to Dominic being chosen duke, obtained of
Guyon emperor and king of Italy, a confirmation of the ancient privileges.
The barbarous H^^s came into Italy and burnt Heraclea, Cape d'Arger, and
Chioggia. This prince defeated them with much honor: and this was the third
time that strangers would have

18. VRSE BADOAIRE was called Partitiatius, and was the first which changed his
name. He sent Peter his son to Constantinople, who was made Protospataire. In
the year 920 he obtained of Radolph emperor and king of Italy, the
confirmation of the ancient authority of the Venetians to coin money. He
gave himself wholly to pieti^, and in the twentieth year he renounced the
dignity to become a Monk, and lived religiously.

19. PETER CANDIAN the second, was a valiant man, and made war against Lanterio
marquis of Istria, who hindered the Venetians traffic, whom he subdued, and
conquered the people of Capo d'Istria. He vanquished Albert son to
Berengarius the emperor,

20. PETER BADOAIRE son to Vrse was redeemed by him from the Sclauonians. He
did rule but two years and seven months, always in peace, which he made show
to love much. The Emperor Berengarius did him many favors for his merits.

21. PETER CANDIAN the third, son to the second Candian, did associat his
son Peter to the dignity: he armed three and thirty vessels twice against
the Narantins: at the second time he made a peace with them. His son being
blamed by him for his bad behavior, revolted against him and the commonweal.
The people would have slain Guyon son to Berengarius, annoied the
commonweal, the which did much trouble his father; so as he died in the
fifteenth year.

22. PETER CANDIAN the fourth, being called from banishment (notwithstanding
that the people had taken an oath never to receive him) was made prince with
great applause. He wrought so with Pope John the twelfth, as the ^^^hop of
Grada was made Patriarch, and Metropolitan of all the Venetian Estate, and of
Istria. The Emperor Otho granted him many honorable privileges. He ruined
Vderze, and was slain^ in a sedition of the people, having governed twenty
years.

23. PETER VRSEOLA was a very devout man, and chosen by the people against his
Beato Romualdo of Rauenna to live a religious life: having governed two years,
two months, and twenty days.

24. VITAL CANDIAN son to Peter the third, made a league with the Emperor
Otho. He fell sick in the beginning of his charge; so as having made a vow to
become a

25 TRIEVNE MEME was very rich, but no man of State. In his time there were
great discentions betwixt the families of the Morosins and Caloprins, by reason
whereof there were great murders committed. He held the Morosins faction,
which made the rest retire to Verona, to the Emperor Otho. He gave the Island
of S. George to the Abbot Morosin, and renounced the principality the twelfth
year, to become a Monk.

26 PETER VRSEOLA the second, was a politic man, who dealt so with the
Emperors Basilius and Alexius, as the Venetians were freed from customs. Otho
the Emperor being at Verona did him the honor, among other things, to christen
his son. He

27 OTHO VRSEOLA having governed a while with Peter his father, was confirmed
in the dignity at the age of eighteen years: he won such reputation, as
Geisca king of Hongarie gave him a sister of his to wife. He vanquished them of
Istria which had rebelled, and went in person into Dalmatia to the enterprise
against Cresmur. In the end they that envied his glory conspired against him,
who having shaven off his beard, he was confined into Greece the seuenteeth
year.

28 PETER CENTRANIC or BARBOLAN succeeded Otho: but not able to pacify Orso
Patriarch of Grado, brother to Otho, who was retired to Constantinople, was
constituted attending his return. He continued about a year in the palace, and
left the principality, hearing news of Othos death. Dominic Vrseola sought to
usurp the dignity, but he was expelled by the people the next day, and died
at Rauenna.

29 DOMINIC FLABENIC was chosen during his exile by the faction of those who
had expelled Dominic Vrseola: in his time in the year 1040 there was a National
council called touching ecclesiastical orders. He brought the State in
jealousy of the family of the Vrseoli, and sought to supplant it. He governed
ten years, four months, and twelve

30 DOMINIC CONTAREN was very pleasing unto the people: He pacified Dalmatia,
which had been much afflicted by the rebellion of Zara: he favored the
Normans against Robert king of Pouillia. The discord which was betwixt the
Commonweal, and Pepo patriarch of Aquilea was pacified by him. He caused the
monastery of S. Nicholas upon Lido to be built, and died in the eight and
twentieth year.

31 DOMINIC SILVI^ going to the funeral of his predecessor, was in the midst
there of saluted duke by the acclamations of the people, and purchased such
reputation, as Nicephor^^ emperor of Constantinople gave him his sister in
marriage. By her persuasion he made war against the abouenamed Robert, and at
the first won an honorable Mark with marble, and caused it to be wrought
after t^^ ^osaicke fashion: He died the thirteenth year.

32 VITALIS FALE^ (...) being made duke, did presently obtain of the emperor
Alexius the souera^^^^ of Dalmatia, and Croatia, Henry, successor to the
empire, did him great (...), and being come upon devotion to Venice, he
christened his daughter. The (...) Proprio was instituted in his time, and the
work of S. Marks Church (...). He governed twelve years.

33 VITALIS MICHAELI, by his valor at sea did much extend the limits of the
commonweal. Vrbin the second, to conquer the Holy land, with other Christian
Princes. The Island of Smirne, Suria, and Hie^^^alem were taken from the
Insidels. He died the sixth year.

34 ORD^LAFIVS FAL^RIYS, son to Vitalis, assisted king Baldwin against the
^^^idels in the conquest of the Holy land, and they had such success, as they
divided the (...) betwixt them, throughout all the realm of India. In the
eight year of his (...), Malamocco was in a manner all burnt and drowned,
which made them to (...) Bishops See to Chioggia. He went in person to the
war against Zara, which (...), and having won the victory, he returned the
second time, where he died (...), the fifteenth year of his principality.

^OMINIC MICHAELI, being made duke, for his great reputation and merits, (...)
(by the means of Pope Calixtus) to succor the Christians in the Holy land,
with (...) ^undred sail, causing the Infidells to raise the siege from before
Ioppa. He took (...) which he gave to Vanmond Patriarch of Jerusalem. Emanuel
the emperor made (...) against him, from whom he took Chio, Rhodes, Samos,
Metellin, and Istre. He (...) the principality the thirteenth year.

^ETER POLANVS, son in law to Michaeli, was a very wise man, so as he (...)
chosen Arbitrator betwixt Conrade and Emanuel, emperors. He made war against
(...) of Pisa and Pidoua, whom he vanquished. He did arm against the duke of
(...) ^auour of the foresaid Emanuel, from whom he recovered many possessions
taken (...) ^he empire. Somesay, that it was his son which won those
battles, and that he (...) being fallen sick, returned, and died the
eighteenth year.

^OMINIC MOROSINI cleansed the gulf of certain Pirates of Ancona, whose (...)
Guiscard was taken and hanged. He besieged Pola, the which he took, with
(...), which towns had rebelled in Istria. He made a league with William king
of (...) from whom he obtained many exemptions for the traffic of merchants.
Zara (...) Metropolitan at his instance, and he caused Dominic the ninth his
son to (...) earl. He beautified the city of Venice with buildings, and
began the Tower (...). He died, seven years, and five months after his
election,

(...) MICHAELI the second, subdued the Tarentins, who had rebelled the (...):
he committed Vlricke patriarch of Aquilea to prison, with twelve Chanoins.
(...) hundred days he put one hundred galleys and twenty ships to sea,
against the (...) Emanuel. The family of the Iustiniani, was in his time
reduced to one only, (...) was ^ Monk, whom he drew out of a Monastery, by
the Popes consent, and gave (...) his daughter in marriage. There happened a
great plague in his time, whereof the (...) imputing the fault unto him, he was
wounded, and died, having governed (...) years, and seven and twenty days.

^EBASTIAN ZIANI was the first that was chosen by ten electors. In his time
(...) was a great Schism in the Church, by reason of the emperor Frederic
Barbarousse, (...) Alexander the third abandon the holy See, Octauian having
been made (...) Alexander retired to Venice, where having served long in the
Monastery of the (...), he was in the end known and taken forth by the Prince
and Seigneurie. (...) made war against the Venetians upon this occasion.
Octauian his son was (...) who was the means of a reconciliation, that his
father came to Venice to kiss the (...) seet: In requital whereof, he
obtained many privileges, and died in the fifth (...) of his government.

AVRIA MARIPIERE was the first duke that was chosen by the forty which (...)
^reated to that end, after the death of Ziani. They gave him six Councillors
to (...) his resolutions. He conquered Zara, which had rebelled the fourth
time: He (...) succors to the Christians against the Sarrazins, which had
usurped the Holy land (...) eight years after that Baldwin had delivered it.
Ptolemaide was recovered, and (...) successor to Emanuel the emperor,
delivered many Venetian merchants. (...) ^^nounced the principality the
foureteenth year, to become a religious man.

HE^RIE DANDVLO was also chosen by the forty. They of Zara were again (...),
and Pola subdued. In his time Constantinople was taken, with the empire (...)
^ast, wherein he assisted the French Princes and Barons. He died the thirteenth
(...)* being General of all the Christian armies.

^^TER ZIANI son to Sebastian was made duke some time after the death of
Dandulo, the Correctors being then instituted. In his time there came
Ambassadors Constance, daughter to Tancred king of Sicile. In the end, he
renounced the principality, having governed four and twenty years.

43. JAMES TEPVLI was made duke by lot, in concurrence of Renieri Candolo, who
had as many voices as he. Candie rebelled, and the seditious were punished.
Zara, which had shaken off the yoke, was made subject again. There was war
against the Fetrarois, and against Ezzelin, who had seized upon Padoua. In the
end, he quit the principality the twentieth year, and died soon after.

44. MARIN MOROSINI, was made duke by the forty, by reason of the precedent
concurrence. In his time there was another Colonie of gentlemen sent into
Candie, who built Canea. He made war against Ezzelin that besieged Mantoua:
who through rage and despite flew twelve thousand Padouans which he had in his
army. He died the fourth year of his principality.

45. RENIERI ZENO being Podesta at Firma, was chosen duke, and sent for with
four galleys. Under him the Commonweal obtained a famous victory against
them of Genoua; but the joy was short, for that Michaell Paleologus expelled
the French and the Venetians out of Constantinople, being assisted by the
Geneuo is forces, fifty eight years after the taking of the city. They of
Genoua were defeated again: and having

46. LAVRENCE TEPVLI was made duke, in remembrance of the victory which he won
of the Geneuois at Tire. He made a noble alliance for two of his sons, with two
strange ladies, the which was afterward forbidden by a law. Ceruia made it
^e^fe subject to the Commonweal, and the Bolonians were defeated. He governed
seven years and five and twenty days.

47. JAMES CONTARIN at the age of eighty years, of Procurator of S. Mark was
made duke. The law against bastards was published, and they excluded from all
public charges. There grew certain rebellions in Istria, and by them of
Genoua, which were pacified. In the end, for his great age, he renounced the
dignity, by the advice of

48. DANDVLO was chosen, being absent. The city in his time was much afflicted
with waters, and earthquakes. He made war in Istria against the Patriarch of
Aquilea, and the Earl of Goritia. At the instance of Pope Nicholas he did
succor the Archbishop of Tripoli with five and twenty galleys. He died the
seventh month after the eight year of his government.

49. PETER GRADONIC, a valiant man, freed the Commonweal from two great
dangers, the one by reason of a great disgrace which happened in a battle
against them of Genoua, and the other for the conspiracy of Baiamonte, whom he
suppressed being in arms upon S. Marks place. It was ordained, that the
gentlemen should have

50. MARIN GEORGE was so good as they surnamed him the Holy. Venice was
always excommunicated in his time, by reason of the taking of Ferrara. Zara
rebelled the sixth time, and they had much trouble to bring them to their
duties. He built the monastery of S. Dominic, and died eighty one years old,
having governed ten months and ten days.

51. JOHN SOVRANCE had the honor to recover Zara, and other places, distracted
in his predecessors time. Negropent was recovered, and war was made against
them of Genoua. The excommunication was taken away at Venice, by the means of
Francis Dandulo, who cast himself at the Popes feet with an iron chain about
his neck. The number of the Procurators of S. Mark was augmented unto six. He
governed sixteen years, and six months.

52. FRANCIS DANDVLO, who had so much humbled himself for his country, was
^^^^nced to the highest dignity. They of Pola and Valese submitted themselves
to the ^^^^nweale, the which bred a war against the Patriarch of Aquilea.
Padoua was ta^^ (...) Albert Scaliger, and Treuiso with the country remained
to the commonweal. (...) into league with the Christian princes against the
Turk, and in his time there (...) threescore Ambassadors at Venice. He
governed ten years, and ten months.

^^ ^ARTOLOMEVV GRADONIC, Procurator of S. Mark, was made duke being (...) and
six years old, by the c^ssion of Andrew Dandulo. In his time happened (as
(...) ^eleeue) that great miracle of S. Mark, S. George, and S. Nicholas, who
delivered Ve^^^om a great and iminent innundation. Candie rebelled, and the
rebels were se^^^^ punished. There fell a great dearth in the city, which bred
a coffeehouse in the (...). And he dyed the fourth year.

^^ ANDREW DANDVLO who had quit the place to Gradonic, caused the dearth to
(...) having sent for corn into Sicilie. He obtained of the king of Babylon
free traffic (...) ^^gypt. Zara rebelled the seventh time, and was
suppressed. A war was made against (...) of Genoua, and the city was afflicted
with two great accidents, the one an Earth^^^^ and the other the plague. He
governed twelve years wanting some months.

^^ MARIN FALERIVS was chosen being Ambassador at Rome. Having received (...)
from certain private men, the which not being revenged, according to his de^^^^
resolved, being fourscore years old, to make himself absolute Lord. The
con^^^^ being discovered by Nicholas Lion, he had his head cut off in the
palace: and it (...) ^reed that in the place of his Pourtrait should be
written, This is the place of Ma^^^^rius, who for his heinous offense lost his
head. He was duke ten months.

^^ ^^HN GRADONIC surnamed Naso, had an excellent wit and a bad face. The war
(...) ^ewed against the Geneuois, which ended with a peace. He had war also
against (...) of Hongarie for Dalmatia. Treuiso was besieged in his time, and
he went thi^^^^ ^erson. He governed one year, three months, and fourteen
days.

^^ ^^HN DAVPHIN was chosen duke, being in Treuiso for defense thereof against
(...) of Hongarie. The Senate sent to demand free passage for him, which being
re^^^^, he fallied forth with two hundred horse in spite of the enemy,
whither the Se^^^^ame to receive him: within a short time he ended this war,
and recovered Conilian, (...), and Asola. He made a peace for the sovereignty
of Dalmatia, and died the (...) fortieth year of his age, having governed four
years, two months, and eleven (...).

^^ ^^AVRENCE CELSE upon a false bruit of a victory against the Geneuois, was
(...) luke in concurrence of Peter Gradonic, Leonard Dandulo, and Mark
Cornaro. Candie (...) and they had great difficulty to recover it, whereupon
they made a Tourney, (...) public feast upon S. Marks place. He died two
days after the fourth year of his ^^^palitie.

^^ MARK CORNARO a very learned and a wise man, sent into Candie, which had
(...), where there grew cruel wars, the Pope giving full indulgence to them
that (...) go. The rebels being severely punished, the commonweal presented a
certain ^^^ber of galleys to Pope Vrbin the fist. He governed two years, five
months, and (...) and twenty days.

^^. ANDREW CONTARIN fled into the country of Padoua for fear of being
^^^sen duke, as presaging the ruin which should happen in his time to the
Common^^ale. First there was a war made by them of Trieste, and afterward by
Carrara, for the (...) of Padoua, the which was such as Chioggia being taken,
the city of Venice was (...) ^xtreame danger: but in the end he went in
person against the enemies, defeated (...) and recovered Chioggia. He dyed
having governed fifteen years, four months, (...) fifteen days.

^^. MICHAEL MORESINI, was a man full of all wisdom and learning. Some (...)
in his time the Island of Tenedos was taken, and not in his predecessors.
There (...) diverse laws made, and among others, it was ordained that
murderers which were (...) should afterward loose their heads. He ruled but
four months, and five days, and died seventy and four years old.

62. ANTHONY VENIERI, a rigorous obseruor of justice, causing his own son
to be banished, for that he had lightly offended the family of a gentleman of
Venice. He made a league with Galeazze Visconte, against Carara, from whom he
took Padoua. He succored the Emperor Emanuell against the Turk, and did aid
Sigismond king of Hongarie, who came afterward to the Empire. S. Marks place
and that of Realte were much beautified in his time. He died having ruled
eighteen years wanting one month, and three days.

63. MICHAELL STENO had the dignity of Procurator of S. Mark, with that of
duke. There was a famous battle won against the Geneuois: Carara was
vanquished Ladislaus king of Hongarie in like manner Jest Zara. He died having
governed thirteen years, and three days.

64. THOMAS MOCENIGO was first of all General of the gulf. He embraced peace
to the end the citisens might traffic. Vd^na came under the obedience of this
State, with the country of Friuli, by the means of the Seigniours of
Sauorgnani, who were made gentlemen of Venice. The Florintins had succors
given them against the duke of Milan. He ruled ten years, and three months.

65. FRANCIS FOSCARIN did much suppress the duke of Milan, who began to sease
upon the liberty of Italy: Brescia, Bergamo, and other towns of Lombardie
were gotten Paleologus against the Turks, who usurped Constantinople in the
year 1453. He was chosen Arbitrator by the duke of Milan, in certain
controversies of neighborhood. The king of Datia was made a gentleman of
Venice. Then the duke for his great weakness was dismissed, having governed
four and thirty year, and six months.

66. PASCHAL MALIFIERE being Procurator of S. Mark, was chosen duke in the
place of Foscarin, who died two days after his dismission. There was a law
made that from that time no duke should be deposed. In his time printing was
brought into Venice. The Arcenall was much enlarged, and he entertained the
people in peace, during four years,

67. CHRISTOPHER MO^O was also of a Procurator of S. Mark made duke He
entertained peace for a time, but in the second year of his government, the
Turk grown proud by the taking of Constantinople, declared wa^ against the
Venetians. They made a league with Pope Pius the second, and the duke of
Bourgondie, but the Pope dying they were left alone and maintained the wars
twenty years. He died having reigned nine years, and six months.

68. NICHOLAS TRONI was fortunate, for in his time the affairs of the
commonweal succeeded well against the Turk. Peter Mocenigo General in the
Archipelago, having joined with the Pope, the king of Naples, and them of
Rhodes, drew together eighty James king of Cypres coming to Venice married
K^therine Cornara the adopted daughter of S. Mark. He governed one year, eight
months, and five days.

69. NICHOLAS MARCEL Procurator of S. Mark, after certain laws made by the
Correctors, was chosen duke. In his time there was a conspiracy in Cypres, to
make the realm fall into the hands of Ferdinand king of Naples. Peter Mocenigo
went thither with a great army, pacified all, and punished the rebels
seuerly. Scutarie was besieged by the Turk, and valiantly defended by Antonio
Loredano. This duke governed one year, four months, and seventeen days.

70. PETER MOCENIGO was chosen duke in remembrance of his brave exploits.
Lepanto was besieged in his time by the Turks, and valiantly defended by
Antonio Lore^^^^. They carried their arms against the Island of Stalamene, and
the said Loredano his valor to defend it. The daughter of king Ferdinand came
to Venice with the Cardinal

71. ANDREW VENDRAMINE, was unfortunate in his government, for the Ven^^^
army was twice put to rout by the Turks: once near unto Croya in Albania;
(...) ^he second time in the country of Friuli. In his person he had this
happiness, That (...) of a goodly stature, he had a most beautiful wife, and
goodly children, whom he ^^ed by marriages to the best Families. He governed
one year, and eight months.

72. JOHN MOCENIGO, brother to Peter Mocenigo, having continued the war
Ferdinand king of Naples, at the request of (...) Sixtus the fourth, which was
the cause of the long war of the league. In the end, ^^^^ce was made, the
Commonweal having gotten Rouigo and Polesan. The city was (...) deformed by
fire and plague; and this prince died having governed seven years, (...) six
months.

73. MARK BARBADIC (the plague being ceased) repaired the palace which the
(...) burnt. He had a maxim different from all other Princes, to know how to
par^^^^d forget the private injuries which had been done him, and to revenge
them se^^^

74. AUGUSTINE BARBADIC opposed himself against Charles the eight the (...)
king, whenas he made war against the house of Arragon, for the realm of
(...) which he conquered. The Turk took Lepante, Modene, and Corone, from the
Commonweal. The realm of Cypres was under the protection of the Senate, and
(...) Katherine brought to Venice. The office of Health was created by reason
of (...). The duke governed fifteen years and one and twenty days.

75. LEONARD LOREDAN endured a cruel war against the greates Princes of
(...), a league being made at Cambray betwixt the emperor Maximilian, the
French Iulio the second. All the Venetians Estate upon the firm land was
taken, except (...), but in the end it was recovered. He lived in the
principality nineteen years, eight months, and twenty days.

76. ANTHONY GRIMANI, being General in a famous overthrow, was thereup^^ut
from his charge of Procurator of S. Mark, and confined to Cherses. He brake
his punishment, and retired to Rome to the Cardinal his son, where he did so
many ^ood offices, as he was not only restored to his dignity of Procurator,
but also made duke being eighty two years old. He governed but one year, ten
months, and two days.

77. ANDREW GRITTI carrying away the greatest part of the glory for the
recoverie Charles the fifth, and Francis the first, and also against Soli^^^. He
governed fifteen years, seven months, and eight days.

78. PETER LAVDE continued the defense of the commonweal against the Turk,
with whom in the end he made a peace, the which he maintained and enjoyed
during the (...) betwixt the abouenamed Charles and Francis. He governed six
years, and eight ^^yes.

79. FRANCIS DONAT, making use of the peace, beautified the city with many

80. MARK^ ANTHONY TREVISAN, a man wholly given to devotion, had a care to
have the Commonweal flourish in riches, and good manners, he labored by his

81. FRANCIS VIVIER could so govern the Commonweal, as notwithstanding that
in his time the Turk made war against Pouillia, and the French king in
Tuscanie, yet the Queen of Poland was royally entertained at Venice. He
governed two years, one month, and twenty days.

82. LAVRENCE PRIOLI was solicited by the Pope to make war against the
emperor, but being a friend to the Commonweal he would not offend him, and
did mediate a peace. In his time a peace was made betwixt France and Spain.
Charles the

83. IEROSME PRIOLI, brother to the precedent duke, enjoyed great honors which
Pope Pius the fourth did unto the Commonweal, whom he favored much, hea^ing
her ambassadors in the place of audience for kings. In his time the Council
of Trent was concluded, whether he sent for ambassadors Nicholas de Ponte, and
Matthew Dandolo. The Commonweal did christen the duke of Sauoys son, borne of
Margueri^e of France. He died, having governed eight years, two months, and
four days.

84. PETER LOREDAN, for the concurrence of two others, was chosen beyond all
men's hope, or his own. The Arsenall was burnt in his time, and there was a
great dearth of all things. Selim, successor to Soliman, thereupon took an
occasion to break

85. LEWIS MOCENIGO, the war being kindled against the Turk, lost the
realm of Cypres, Nicosya having been taken, and Famagosta yielded. The
Commonweal made a league with Pope Pius the fifth, and Philip king of Spain,
so as their forces being joined together, they obtained a famous victory of
the Turks, in the year 1571. Some two years after, Henry the third, the
French king, past by Venice, where he was royally entertained and fea^ted. This
prince died, having reigned seven years.

86. SEBASTIAN VENIERI was chosen by a common consent, with so great applause,
as certain Turks came to kiss his feet. There were five Correctors of the
laws

87. NICHOLAS DE PONT was created duke, he was very learned in all arts,
whereof he had made public profession in Venice. He past through all the
honors wherewith the Commonweal may gratify her citisens. The Seminary of S.
Mark was instituted by him. Gertaine princes of Iappon being arrived at
Venice, were received with great favor. He caused the bridge of Canareggio to
be built; and governed seven years, nine months, and thirteen days.

88. PASCALL CIGOGNE, Procuratour of S. Mark, was chosen as he was at

89. MARIN GRIMANI, Procurator of S. Mark, was so pleasing unto the people, as
on the day of his election they made extraordinary signs of joy, the which
were continued for many days after. The second year of his principality, he
caused the duchess his wife to be crowned in triumph, to whom Pope Clement the
eight sent a Rose of gold. In his time there was great joy for the peace
concluded betwixt the French king, and the Aldobrandin passing to Venice, was
most honorably entertained there, with other Cardinals. There was so great a
swelling of water in the fifth year of his principality, as the Gondoles and
Barks went upon S. Marks place, as in the lake. He (...) to the great grief
of all the people, having governed ten years, and eight mo^^^^.

90. ^^ONARD DONATI having for his merits, singular wisdom, and dexterity in
the (...) of affairs, past through all the honors which the commonweal may
give (...) whom she finds faithful, was set in the place of Grimani the tenth
of Ianua^^^. He had been sent Ambassador to Constantinople, toward Mahomet,
newly (...) the Empire of the East, to perform the accustomed complements in
name of (...) ^^mmonweale. He is so practiced in affairs, and has so happy a
memory in a soul (...) to be religiously zealous to the common good, as the
Senate refers more to him, (...) ^hey have done to any of his predecessors. The
Senate has been excommunicated (...) time by Pope Paul the fifth, for certain
pretentions of the holy See, and it may be (...) that he carried himself like
an immouable rock for the defense of the State against (...) ^ightnings: so as
two of the principal pillars of Christendom threatened ruin, had (...) most
Christian Henry the fourth, the French king, embraced these two pillars, (...)
them up, to set them straight, by the means of his Ambassadors, who have
(...) a triumphant arch to the immortality of his glory. This prince who
enioies ^^^ppinesse of peace, does continually acknowledge the love and
particular affecti^^^ich he bears unto France.

The Commonweal of Ragouse.
THE COMMONWEAL OF RAGOVS.
The Contents.
2. Beginning of the word Sclauonia, the bigness, length, breadth, climat, and
the chief towns. 3. Ragouse a town of Sclauonia, tributarie to the Turk.
Her situation and Islands. 4. The soil bearing ^^^ue, fruits, fat fish, trees
laden with oysters which they gather every three years. 5. Gra^^^ Island full
of gardens, of orange trees, lymons, and Pomegranets. Langoste another Island
^^^^ng in olives, and grapes, and famous for the fishing of sparts. 6. The
ancient inhabi^^^ Ragouse, barbarous and cruel by nature, and inclyning to
the humor of the Scythians, (...) thence they are descended. 7. Custom of
them of Ragouse to go with half their heads (...) contrary to the Hongarians.
Lovers of equality. The manner of their apparel, and the (...) which are
most in price. 8. Of their marriages and alliances, limited by the law to
(...) ^^ousand ducats. 9. Of their language and enstruction in learning both
divine and ^u^^^^ 10. Riches of the Ragousens consisting in traffic. 11.
Their small forces. 12. The ^^^^^ment of Ragouse conformable to that of Venice:
and first of the great Council. 13. Of (...) ^egad^, annual magistrates and
their jurisdiction. 14. Of the petty Council, the charge (...) ^^^tinuance of
this magistrate. 15. Of the election of the Rector, chief of all the Coun^^^.
Of the five Pouruaiers. 17. Of six Consuls instituted for civil causes in the
first (...). 18. Of the five criminal Judges. 19. Of the Officers upon the
art of wool. 20. Of (...) of thirty appointed for causes of appeal. 21. Of
five men called Pourue^ors, or (...) of the health, and their authority. 22.
Of the Officers appointed for customs. (...) the Chamberlaines. 24. Of three
Treasurers appointed for the custody of the public (...), and of Orphans
money. 25. Of the Officers of the armorie. 26. Other Officers (...) for the
sale of wheat and wine, and for the reparation of the ways. 27. Of the six
Cap^^^ of the night. 28. Of the Notarie, or Secretary. 29. Of the
Chauncellors. 30. Of the (...) Captains and Earls sent unto governments,
without the town of Ragouse. 31. Of the (...) Proc^^at^^s of the Cathedral
Church of Ragouse.



Justinian the first, being come out of Sarmatia, past the river of Danubius,
and then a part of them fell upon Macedonie, and the other upon Thrace.
Afterward in the time of the Emperor Maurice who died in the year 602, and of
Phocas his successor, they made themselves masters of Dalmatia. It is true
that at this day the name of Sclauonia extends from the river of Arse unto that
of Drin, being in length



The Quality.
^^^taine valley whereas in winter there gathers together such abundance of
wa^e^, as it (...) lake, the which does nourish fish which grows so fat, as
they fry it without any oy^^. In the spring time the waters drying up, they
sow corn in the same place, the (...) grows abundantly, so as one place
yields them fish and corn in one year. More^^^^ ^^ey use diverse industries by
sea, and among others they make their ^rees bring them (...): for they bend
down the bows of their trees, and stay them under the water (...) ^^ones; so
as in two year there are so may oysters fastened to these branches, as it
^^^^ge to see: then the third year they are in a manner good to eat.

(...) upon the sea is the Island of Grauosa, which is a very pleasant place,
and full of gar^^^

The Manners of the Ancient.
He Inhabitants of this country were in old time cruel and barbarous, and
were con^^^inually Florus writes of them, That in the first war against the
^^^haginians, in the time of Queen Teure, they were not content to rob and
spoil, (...) ^^ey did practice all kind of wickedness. They were the Sclauons
which cut off the (...) of the Roman ambassadors, and burnt them which
governed their ships: And (...) which did increase the Romans disgrace, was,
That these people were then governed ^^^man: For Procopius faith also, That the
Sclauons (a people of Scythia) did enter (...) into these countries in the time
of Justinian, and in the end stayed there; so as ^^^^cient Inhabitants did
partly embrace the manners of these strangers newly come. (...) ^i^ius calls
this nation Fierce, and given to spoil at sea: and therefore the Romans (...)
^^wayes Legions in this country, as well for other occasions, as to bridle the
(...) ^^mour of this people.

The Manners at this day.
Hey of Ragouse let their hair grow from the middle part of the head upward,
and

They go diversely attired; for the younger sort fashion themselves after the
Florentin ^^^ner, others carry cloaks, and the most ancient great sleeves,
like unto the Senators of ^enice, and it is forbidden for any man to wear
garments of silk, except the Rector of (...) Commonweal, the Doctors, and
Knights. In Summer, when it is very hot, they (...) cassocks of single
taffa^a. There is the like restraint for women's apparel, for that (...) may
not wear any thing but cloth during their lives, but when a maiden marries, it
^^^full for her to wear silk during a whole month. There is also something
betwixt ^^^en, which shows the difference of their qualities; for on festival
days, the gentle^^^en are accustomed to wear a hood of cloth, lined with red
sandall, which they are ^^und to wear after they are married. Moreover, they
wear taunie, red, or blew cloth, (...) they are allowed to have sleeves of
silk at their pleasure.

As for marriages, they are accustomed to allie themselves only to persons of
their are not above four and twenty that govern, for that the houses sailing
(as all things

It is true, that if a gentleman for any private respect, or commodity, take a
wise which is not of the country, he may do it, so as she be a gentlewoman of
that country which lies betwixt Zara and Cattaro, and not otherwise: but
whosoever takes a stranger to wife (as we have said) he must have at the least
the worth of one thousand ducats of gold for the dowry of this wife; but yet
it is not much observed. And whereas marriages are limited by the law to one
thousand ducats of gold; yet at this day they exceed it more, so as some
father will give three, four, five, and six thousand ducats, yea more,
according



Besides these physicians for the soul, the Commonweal does entertain men
for the health of the body, that is to say, two Physicians and two Chirurgians,
with great wages: these men are bound to visit all sick persons, without any
see, especially the poor, and to do whatsoever is necessary, according to
their profession, for the health of the citisens.

The Riches.


The Forces.



RAgouse has not been always a commonweal, for that it has obaied diverse
lords

There are first the Pregadi, which should be commonly sixty, all gentlemen:
but it sel^^me

The petty Council (so called in regard of the great) is the council of the
Rector, which is composed of eleven persons, all of diverse families; who assist
the Rector, or head

This Rector who is the head of all the Counsels, is chosen in the great
Council by

This Rector assembles with the Counselors upon working days after dinner,
and also upon holy days, upon some occasions. He commonly gives the morning
to the Pregadi, or to the great Council, according to occurrents. But if the
Rector be not there, the most ancient Councellor enters into his place, yet
they dispatch not any thing without his presence. They give this Rector a
Lieutenant, who has jurisdiction in matters which do not exceed three ducats
of gold, and he is his Lieutenant for civil matters ^nly, and for no other
and: the Counselors cannot be chosen Rectors the year that they (...) in their
magistracy.

Next there are five Pourueiors, who are men of fifty years old and upwards,
and

















There are in like manner Justices, who have a care that all things may be well
ordered concerning victuals, and look that the waights and measures and other
instruments of merchants and trades men be just, according to the laws: and in
their office the arts which are subject unto them are marked.





The revenues of them of Ragouse consist for the most part in wine, and
therefore they (...) ^rected three officers upon the counterbands, and these
men have charge to dispatch (...) whenas they are made for wine, and there is a
great punishment ordained for (...) that shall infringe them, for that the law
prohibits the bringing in of any for^^dden wines.

There are some also which have the care of the city streets, and of public
places,

There are also six Captains of the night, who one after another have the
guard of the

^hey have a Secretary whom they call Notarie, who is present in all their
secret af^^^^

^^^ides the abouenamed, there are three Chancellors, who serve the Consulls,
and in

^^^rie night they send a Captain to the castle of S. Laurence, which is
without the (...) and he has no entertainment, but is forced to do it. They
do also send (...) the New Fort, and these go by order, and they are commonly
young men: but (...) any one has past forty years, he is f^eed from this
subjection.

The Captains and Earls, which go into gouernements abroad throughout the

The Religion.
THese people are all Romanists. The city has a Bishop, who does make his
ordina^ie

The Estate of the Empire
A DISCOVRSE
The Contents.
1 EXtent and greatness of the ancient Roman Empire: Her declining and great
weakening, by civil wars; by the translation of the seat from Rome to
Constantinople; and by the division which the Emperor Constantine made unto
his 2. Division of the Empire into East and West: and what the partition was in
Charlemaignes time. 3. A general description of Germany, the circuit, bounds,
and provinces, and first of Alsatia, and the chief towns. 4 Of Wittemberg,
the towns and castles. 5. Franconia, vulgarly Frankenland, subject to five
Princes: the limits and good towns, Spire, Worms, Mayence, or Ments,
Francfort, etc. 6. Of Sueuia: and of the realm of Bohemia, commonly called
Behaim, the l^ngth and confines of these two Estates, the rivers and chief
towns. 7. Mora^ia, the rivers, counties, Seigneuries, and the chief town,
Olmus. 8. Ba^aria, or Bayern, high and low, the chief towns. 9. Austria, or
Oesterreich: the confines and rivers. 10. The county of Tirol 11. Stiria or
Steirmarck, the Earledomes, and chief towns. 12. Carinthia or Kaerndten, and
the best towns. 13. The two 14. Westphalia: the limits and towns. 15. The
duchy of Cleues, and her best towns. 16. The country of Iuliers. 17. The
Lantgrauiat of Hessen. 18. Turinge. 19. The ancient Saxony, high and low: her
earledomes and towns. 20. The Marquisat of Brandebourg, divided into two
Marches. 21. The Earldom of Man^field. 22. Lusatia. 23. Silesia. 24. Misnia
or Meyssen. 25. Liege. 26. The Archbishopricke of Treues. 27. Holsatia. 28.
Besanson. 29. Under what climat Germany lies: the air troublesome and sharp
in winter: abounding with all sorts of corn and pulses: mines of Silver,
Copper, Iron, Lead, and Gold: Fountains and mines of Salt: Vines, Safron, and
Fur Trees. 30. A particular observation what every prouin^e in Germany does
yield, and first of Alsatia abounding in wheat, wine, and pastures. 31.
Allemandes, why in old time called Germans; having no 32. A particular
observation of the manners of some people of Germany. 33. Of the Saxons,
divided into four Estates. Given to the superstition of Idols, and to the
adoration of trees, fountains, forests, and high grown woods. 34. Of the art
of divining, which they ^s^d. 35. Manner of living, and the laws of them of
Suabe, or Sueuia. 36. Of them of B^u^ria. 37. The Germans at this day divided
into four Estates and what their manners are in general, their kind of
living, their apparel and exercises. 38. Particularities of every province ^n
their l^^es, and of their manner of living, apparel, and disposition of body
and mind. 39. Riches of Ger^^^ie, in mines of Silver, and other mettalls:
Fountains, and pits of Saltwater, traf^ique, 40. Of (...) ^^perors revenues.
^1. What forces the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Maximilian the (...) drawn
out of Germany, whenas they armed against the Turk. 42. Number of (...) the
Emperor may draw to field, and of the Germane foot and horse. 43. Their sea
(...) allies. 44. Of two things which the Empire wants. 45. When, and by whom,
the (...) being hered^tarie, was made elective. 46. Of the three members of the
Empire, whereof (...) Electors make the first. 47. Of the second member of
Princes and Noblemen. 48. Of (...) member of the Empire consisting of free
towns. 49. Of the Counsels of the Circles, (...) ^h^t end they were
instituted. 50. Institution and erection of the Imperial Chamber (...) 51. Of
the charges and dignities of the Empire reduced to the number of four. (...)
What their sittings be at the Diet, and of the order that is kept in general
Processions. (...) Of the three Counsels which are at Diets, and of what
persons every Council is composed. (...) Of the Germans religion, and of the
beginning and progress of the profession of Luther, ^^^^lius, and others in
that country: and of the Estate wherein it stands at this day. 55. In (...)
Estate the Romish religion is in Germany, and what religion the seven
Metropolitans hold. (...) A list and catalogue of the Emperors of the West,
their lives, reign, and death.

Traian did extend from the Spanish Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, in whose time
the army which was in great Britain, past to the firm Land; and Holland,
with the neighbor (...) revolted, and in a short space (the frontires being
unfurnished with soldiers) (...) past the river of Danubius, and the Alains
the Caspian ports, the (...) power and reputation, the Goths ouer-ran Misia
and Macedonia, and the (...) into Gaul.

(...) did afterward restore the Empire to her ancient beauty, for that he
(...) Odoacre king of the (...), coming into Italy with a mighty army,
forced Augustulus to quit the Empire (...) West through despair, the which
happened in the year of grace 466, for that the (...) Alaric king of the
Vandales had taken (...), and the same Vandales had seized upon Andalusia, and
afterward upon (...), the Alains held Portugal, the Goths the greatest part
of Spain, the English (...) Britain, the Bourgondians Prouence, the Francons
Gaul, and the Huns (...) (at this day Hongarie.)

The Emperor Justinian did some what restore this Estate, for that by the
means of his Mahomet began to afflict both the Empires, which in a short time
were oppressed by the Sarazins, who made themselves in a manner absolute
masters of the one side, of Syria, Aegipt, and the Archipelagus, and on the
other side, of Afric, Sicile and Spain: who also in the year 735, seized
upon Narbona, Auignon, Tolouse, and the neighbor countries: so as by little
and little the Empire of the West was quite ruined, and that of the East grown
so weak, as the city of Constantinople could hardly defend it self against
the Mahometans, much less give any aid to them of the West. The which Leo the
third Charlemaigne king of France, the which happened in the year of our
salvation 800.

Charlemaigne. Blondus says, that this division was first allowed by the
Emperesse Irenea, and afterward confirmed by the Emperor Nicephorus. Some say
that by this means Pope Leo transported the Empire to the Germans, for that
Charles was a German by blood and nation, as all the Francs which came into
Gaul were of Franconia,

The Empire remained by this means, so divided, as it could never be
afterward united, notwithstanding that Emanuell Comnenes hearing of the
deprivation of Frederic the first, made great offers to Pope Alexander the
third: so as this disunion began by the transport of the Imperial seat from
Rome to Constantinople, and came unto the height of it in the creation of
Charlemaigne, who remained possessor of that which had been assigned unto him
by the Pope. Since the Empire was reduced into narrow and straight bounds
having nothing remaining, but Germany, and a part of Italy, for that the Pope
did peaceably enjoy a great country in Italy, and the Venetians (who were in
a manner betwixt both the Empires) lived in absolute liberty with all their
Estate, not depending Clement, and then under Nicholas the second, and his
successors, who allowed (in regard of the public good) of what the Antipope
had done; and Lombardie, and Tuscanie (partly through the disobedience of Henry
the fourth and fifth, and of Frederick the first and second Emperors, toward
Popes, and partly by reason of the mutinous humor of the people) did still put
the Emperors to more pain and charge, than they brought them aid or profit.
Wherefore Rodolphus not only neglected to go into Italy (for that the crosses
and misfortunes of his pr^decessors had amassed him) but he also sold the people
their liberty at an easy rate: for they of Lucca paid but ten thousand
crowns, not the Francis Ssorce having conquered the Estate of Milan by arms,
cared not to obtain the inuestiture, thinking that he could maintain himself
in the possession of this Estate, by the same means which he had gotten it. To
conclude, the Empire at this day is wholly reduced to Germany, yea and in many
places the Emperors authority is in a manner extinct.

Strabo, Ptolome, Pomponiu^ Mela, Pliny, and others, as well Grecians as
Latins, contain it betwixt the rivers of Rhin and Vistula, Tacit^s says, that
the Ger^ans are rather divided from the Sarmatians and Daciens, by a mutual
fear and by

The Germans have held beyond the Rhin, the towns of Constance, Ausbourg,
S^^usbourg, Worms, Mentz, Conflans, Bonne, Cologne, and many other places vn^^
^he sea. They also comprehend the Suisses at this day among the Germans, and
in like manner the Prussians who dwell beyond the river of Vistula: so as
Germany should ^xtend beyond the Rhin unto Picardie and Bourgondie upon the
West, and unto the

But omitting what I have spoken elsewhere of Low Germany, discoursing of the
Low Countries, and also of Suisserland, speaking of that Commonweal, and
passing also under silence the Estates which acknowledge not the Emperor; I
will begin first (...) Alsatia, or the country of Elsas, which does frontire
upon the Suisses. This province ^^ divided into hgh and low: the high is a
Lantgrauiat, and contains Suntgoye, and ^^^goye. All this country comprehends
a great number of towns, boroughs, and (...) and is very well peopled. The
chief towns are Rubeaquum, which was built by (...) Romans, now called
Rufach, and Schlestatt, or Selestad in high Alsatia, Fribourg in

The country of Vittemberg, or Wittemberg, confines upon the East and South
with

Franconia, otherwise called East France, and vulgarly Frankenland, has for
bounds

Not far from Franconia, near to the river of Rhin, is the town of Spire, in
the which is the Imperial Chamber: then Worms, which is famous by reason of
the Diets, and assemblies: after which is Mayence commonly called Mentz, whose
Archbishop is an

Sueuia, or Suaube is the highest part of all Germany: it has for bounds upon
the

The Emperor who raigns at this day does also hold the realm of Bohemia,
commonly called Behaim, which lies within the limits of Germany. This realm
has for confines





Base Bauaria lies beyond the river of Danubius, and contains thirty and four
towns, forty and six boroughes, with many castles and villages. This part is
called Nortgoy: the chief town is Noremberg, which is eight miles in circuit,
and has in it many fair and stately buildings, and is compast in with two
walls: the other chief towns are Ratisbonna, called in their vulgar tongue
Regenspurg, in old time Augusta Tiberia, and before Artobriga: Passauu, upon
the mouth of the river of Inn, which falls into Danubius: Lanshut upon Iser,
and Saltzbourg an Archbishopricke upon the river of Saltz.



Paul 3: in it there is a very fair Castle. In this coun^ie is also the town
of Maran upon the river of Thesin, and those of Bolzan, and Hale.

Frederic Barbar^usse. There are many Earledomes in this co^ntrie, and among
others that of Vuarasdin upon the river of Drauu, and that of I^bnan upon Mure.
The chief towns are Celia or Cilte, Fruch, and Greezie, which (...) a very
strong Castle looking toward Austria, and in like manner the town of Sepian.

Carinthia, commonly called Kaernd^en, confines upon the West and South with
Friuli,

There are two Carnioles, the one is called the Dry, and in the vulgar tongue
Vnder^rain.

The country of Westphalia is taken by some for the true and ancient Saxony:
the Ptolomee Obnobies. The chief towns are Munster, Dusseldorp, Wesal,
Oldenbourg, Osnabourg, Mind, and Herworde. A good part of this country is
subject to the Bishop of Cologne, a town seated upon the Rhin, with a double
wall and double ditch, having eighty and four towers, and nineteen parishes.

The duchy of Cleues lies of either side of the Rhin betwixt Cologne and the
Low

The country of Iuliers, or of Guelich, has taken his name of the chief
town, the

The country, or Lantgrauiat of Hessen confines upon the East with Turinge,
upon

The country of Turinge has upon the East the river of Sal, upon the North
the forest

The Palatinat lies betwixt Franconia, Alsatia, the country of Witt^mberg,
Lorraine, and some part of Luxembourg. This country besides many boroughes,
villages, and Robert the elder prince Palatin was the founder of a famous
university, in the which in process of time there have flourish^d many
learned men: and the same Robert (being king of the Romans,



The chief town of base Saxony is Alba, near unto the which is the town of
Mansfeld, the chief of an Earldom. The counties of Lauuembourg,
Mekelembourg, and Lunembourg are also contained under base Saxony, with the
countries of Holsace, Stormar, and Dithmarsie. Above Saxony toward the North,
stands Magdebourg upon the river of Elb, the which is strong both by situation
and art, whose Archbishop ^arries the name of Primat of Germany; and yet the
Archbishops of Mentz, Treues, and Cologne, who are Electors, nor the Archbishop
of Saltzbourg, yield nothing unto him.













The Archbishopricke of Treues, commonly called Trier, is bounded upon the
North

Holsatia, commonly called Holstein, has for bounds upon the East the river of
Bilene,



The Quality.
Germany is under the sixth, seventh, and eight climat, betwixt the seven and
fortieth, Cornelius Ta^^^us writes that the air is troublesome, and Seneca,
that it is always Winter, yet it enjoys (...) air that is reasonably mild
and temperat, but somewhat cold, yet it makes them healthful (...) strong. The
soil bears wheat, barley, rye, oats, and all kinds of grain, and pulse in
abundance: the fields are fertile, and the meadows bear abundance of
grass. There is also in Germany many mines of silver, copper, iron, lead, and
other mettalls; yea and of gold in some places. There are also very good
fountains, and mines of salt. Pliny writes that in the ancient Germany they
found crystal, onix, topazes, and other stones. There are very fair gardens,
and orchards, whose sight is very pleasing in Summer and Autumn.

upon the banks of Neccar, and Mein. But of that side where it confines with
high Honga^ie,



Alsatia does bear abundance of wheat, especially in the plain, where there
are excellent fruits. The mountains and little hills bear good wine, and the
pastures are also very good upon the mountains, and in the valleys.

The soil of the country of Wittemberg is partly rough, and will bear no
wine, but there are excellent pastures, and some part of it is stony and full
of sand, but fit to bear fruits, and some part also is champian and apt for
tillage. There are also rivers, lakes, and pooles full of fish.

Franconia is part of it plain, and part hilly. And although the soil be not
fat in some

Suaube has some part of it plain, and the rest hilly. But it is fertile and
well manured in all places, unless it be where there are lakes, forests, and
mountains. There is great store of game, both for hawking and hunting,
abundance of wheat, and great numbers of cattle. There are also many rivers
which come from all parts and fall into the Rhin.

Bohemia abounds in barley and wheat, but it wants olive trees, and has few
vines, which bear not much, by reason of the Northerly winds whereunto it is
subject, the which does seldom suffer the grapes to come to maturitie. It
brings forth much saffron, whose color, juice, and smell is very pleasing. It
abounds so in silver, as there is scarce any other thing to be seen in the
veins which they find out: these mines are in the territory of Cromlauu, and
in like manner in those of Budvueisz and Kuttemberg. They have also very good
gold in some places, with tin, lead, copper, and iron, wherewith this country
abounds: but especially there are very good mines of iron ne^re unto the

Morauia has for the most (...) a fat soil, and by consequence apt for corn,
and the little hills are also fit for ^^^es, which agree better with this soil
than with that of Bohemia: all is so (...) manured, and so full of people that
give themselves to tillage, as there is (...) place left to feed their cattle.
John Dubraue has written that they find Insens (...) Myrrh in this country,
not that falls from any tree, but which is drawn out of the ground, and it is
only found in one place, which they call Gradesque.

The high country of Bauaria is in a manner full of mountains and forests
and watered with lakes and forcible streams, and for this cause fit for
pasture, and for the planting of fruit trees which yield abundance of fruit:
but their champian fields bear good

The low country of Bauaria abounds in wheat, cattle, fish, foul, wild
beasts, and other things necessary for the life of man. This country does
breed great store of ^wine by means of their akorns and crabs. There are also
in this country many fountains or

The country of Austria is plain, and lies open to the Northren winds. It
brings forth good store of wheat, wine, and other fruits. The air is very
wholesome, and they find abundance of silver.

As for the country of Tyrol it abounds in mines of silver, copper, and
lattin. The mountains of this country are very high, always covered with
snow, and abound with wild beasts.

Stiria is a country altogether hilly, except upon the East parts, where
there are goodly

As for Carinthia, there are valleis and little hills which yield store of
come. It has also very many lakes and rivers.

Westphalia is fitter to feed cattle than to bear come: there are forests in
some places. The soil is unfit for vines: but there are diverse fruits, as
aples, nuts, and akornes, wherewith they feed great store of swine. There is
also store of mettalls in the territory of Cologne.

The duchy of Cleues does enjoy a sweet and temperat air, and the soil does
yield great store of wheat. There are good pastures, and reasonable good rivers
which do water it.



The country of Hessen yields abundance of all things necessary for the life
of man, except wine, whereof notwithstanding, it is not altogether unfurnished,
for that there grows some near unto the river of Rhin. There is great store
of cattle. The soil of Waldec bears much corn and wine, it is watered with
many rivers, and rich in mines, from whence they draw gold, silver, copper,
quicksiluer, iron, lead, salt, and alumne.

The Palatinat wants not any thing that is necessary for man's use, upon the
hills there grows excellent wine, especially about Baccharac, the which is much
commended above most of the wines in Germany, and there grow also upon these
hills abundance of

Turinge yields good store of corn, and a kind of herb which the Latins call
Isatade, which serves for the use of diers.



In the country of Mansfeld they have great store of mettalls, and flint
stones which are easy to break, the which being heat yield copper, with good
store of silver. There is also in this country a salt lake, in the which if
the fishermen cast their nets too deep, they are burnt, as if they had been
in the fire.

Lusatia yields wheat and all other kind of grain in abundance, like unto
Silesia, which has also a great number of pooles for fish.

Misnia yields good store of wheat, wine, and honey, and does feed much
cattle. In curing of diverse deseases, amongst the which is that of Tongres,
whereof Pliny and some

As for the country of Treues, it is uneven, for that in some places there are
rough and barren mountains which bear nothing but oats, and in some parts
there are hills which be green and fertile, and are well planted with vines:
but the country is much more yielding toward the rivers of Rhin and Moselle.
This country is watered with many rivers, torrents, and small brooks which fall
into Moselle, and then discharge themselves into the Rhin. By reason of these
many rivers and waters, the inhabitants are abundantly furnished with fish.
The forests of this country are full of stagges, and other wild beasts. There
are in this country two lakes of an admirable depth, whereof the one is called

The Manners of the Ancients.
Strabo, for that they did imitate them in behavior, and were as it were like
unto Hercules who they said, had been sometimes in their country, and they
used numbers and measures, though without any proportion in their singing, the
which was invented to amase the enemy. They were sudden in their affairs and
marched with great precipitation. They were unfit for travel, and could not
long endure the discommodities which follow war, especially thirst and heat.

In old time they had no use of gold or silver, and they made as little account
of silver plate, which was given unto captains, or presented unto their
princes, unless it were of earth: gold and silver has since been known and
esteemed by them, only in regard of traffic and commerce. There was as
little use in old time of swords, but they rather used long staves,
boare-speares, or pikes with a little iron at the end, fitter arms to
encounter an enemy, were it to charge him a far off, or to join and come to
handy strokes: their horsemen carried lances and targets, and the footmen did
cast many darts when they came to join battle: they did either fight naked,
or else they did use a certain short cassocke; and there was no diversity of
habits to distinguish the companies, they did only paint their targets
diversely, to the end they might be known. There were few that

Their king was chosen out of the body of the nobility, and had no power to
do all things after his own fancy, not to use every thing absolutely at his
pleasure. They did choose for heads of their armies such as exceeded the rest in
virtue, and knew better how to execute, than to command. It was not lawful
for any one to beat or to kill another,

They did commonly carry unto the war certain tables, which did represent
their Gods, and to this end they drew them out of temples built in forests.
When they went

Mercury, but they offered none but beasts to Mars and Hercules. They did also
use lots and divination in matters of small importance, the resolutions of
affairs depended upon the heads of cities, but in those things that were of
consequence, they did assemble the whole body of the city to determine
thereof. They did not begin any enterprise but during the new Moon, and when
it was full, and they did not account by the days, but made their computation
by nights. They came armed to their assemblies, and when they would show that
they did concur in opinion with any one they did only shake their pikes,
which was the most honorable sign of their approbation, but if the
proposition did displease them, they showed it by some great murmuring.



It was not lawful for the magistrate to do any thing either in private or in
public without his arms. They were very curious to be well followed, for
that they which had the gallantest troops of youth in their trains were
honored above the rest. It was infamous for a soldier to survive his
commander being slain in war, unless he died after that he had won the
victory. The prince did fight to vanquish, and they that followed

When they were not in war, the most valiant and wor^hiest among them had no
other care but to sleep, eat, and drink, leaving the charge of their families
and husbandry to their wives; wherein also the old men were employed. Their
ordinary abode was in villages and hamlets, where their houses were separated.

Their attire was a cassocke made close before with a buckle or a lace, and for
want thereof with thorns. The rich did differ in habit from the poor, not for
that they were larger, but more straight, and so fitted to the body, as it
seemed to be glued to the members

The Germans among all the Eastern and Northern Nations have from the
beginning contented themselves with one wife, although there were some that did
mary many The wife did not bring a dowry to her husband, but the husband gave
it unto his wife: they did not care to adorn their wives, or to spend their
estates in buying of jewels, and moueables, but they gave them a paere of oxen
ready yoakt, a horse with bridle and furniture, a target, a pike, and a sword.
It was an admirable thing to see the modesty and continency of their wives,
being in a manner never seen at public places or feasts; so it was seldom
heard of among so populous a nation that there was any adulteres^e: and if it
happened that any woman were convicted of this crime, first they did cut of her

It was not lawful among them to mock at one another vices, for that they
thought this custom was fitter to corrupt good manners, than to reform the
bad.

Young men began late to have the acquaintance and company of women, and by
this means their youth were more lusty and active: neither did they much
hasten the marriage of their daughters, to the end that both parties might be
more fit and able for generation. A murder committed, was recompensed by a
certain price, and a number of cattle, and the murderer agreeing did make
satisfaction to all his family that had been slain. They took great delight
to entertain and lodge strangers, and it was a great error among them to
refuse his house and table to such as came. They were accustomed to give
presents mutually one unto another, without reproaching any thing; for that
they did not hold themselves beholding in any sort one unto another, for any
thing they had

They spent whole days and nights in making good cheer, so as they held
dunkennesse for no vice: and after their drinking there was nothing seen but
quarrels; and there was a murder sooner committed, than an injurious word
spoken. They treated of affairs both of peace and war in their banquets, and
in old time they were not cunning, but delivered their conceptions plainly and
simply. The day after they had consulted, they did retract what they had
formerly resolved, to the end they might deliberat the second time, likevnto
men that knew not how to dissemble, standing upon the second deliberation, and
thinking that they could not err, having so well consulted upon a business.
Their drink was made of barley, and like unto wine: but they that lived near
unto rivers had wine

They taught their youth to pass cunningly through ranks of pikes, and naked
swords, to the end they might be more expert in battle. They were so given to
play, as having lost their goods, they would engage and sell their liberties;
so as he that lost remained slave unto the other: and althought that the looser
were young and strong, yet he suffered himself to be bound, and sold like a
beast in the market.

They divided the year into three seasons, that is to say, into Winter, the
Spring time, and Summer, like men that knew not Autumn, for that they had
neither wine, nor fruits to gather in that season.

Their tears were soon past at the death of any one, but their griese
continued long graven in their souls. It was the office of women to weep and
lament, and for men only to have a remembrance of the dead.

Appollinarius does teach us. Before they left the country which they had
spoiled, their custom was to take the tenth of all their prisoners, whom they
murdered with an execrable ceremony: they thought that by this means they
were discharged toward their gods, in sacrificing those whom they had taken in
war.

They did seldom suffer their neighbors in peace, but they lived quietly
among themselves, and the lords provided with great courtesy for all things
that were necessary for



These was punished with greater rigor, for he that had stolen but three soulz
of their

The Saxons were in old time given to the superstition of Idols, and did
worship (...) that were very green and full of leaves, and laden with
branches, and in like manner ^^^re fountains. They had also the body of a
great tree set into the ground in an open place which they call Irminsual,
which signifies an universal pillar, as if it had supported all things: this
tree was beaten down by Charles the Great when as he subdued the Saxons, and
transported them into Flanders and Brabant, to the end they should not
Mercury, to whom they did sac^^^ice (like unto the other Allemans) upon
certain days those whom they had taken in war. They held it nothing fit for
the majesty of their gods to be shut up in temples, on that they should make
any image to represent them, thinking it impossible for man to comprehend that
which is of a divine majesty. They did dedicat high grown woods, and the
thickest and obscurest forests to their gods, and there they disputed of the
greate^^ secrets of nature with much honor and reverence. This people was also
given to o^^^ue the flying, eating, and entrails of birds, that by this means
they might divine of future things.





As for them of Suaube or Sueuia, Caesar faith in his Commentaries, that it was
a great

They suffered merchants to come into their country, more to sell the pillage
which

Tacitus says that they did shorten their hair with tying and wreathing it
upon their heads, and that the princes carried their hair better comed and
trimmed than the rest. At a certain time of the year they sent deputies out of
every quarter of Germany, and there they did massaker and sacrifice a man in a
place that was thick covered with trees. It was not lawful for any man to set
footing into this place but with his hands bound, to the end he should
acknowledge that he was less than the gods, and if by chance any one fell to
the ground he might not rise again, but be dragged forth. This foolish
superstition Isis. Finally the Romans having drawn the Sueuians to their
obedience and friendship, they always did them this honor to put them before
in their armies, and to give them the point in battles rather than to any
other nation.

Polybeus) dwelt in hamlets built without any walls, or enclosure, and the
ground was their bed with a little straw. They lived of flesh, and were wholly
given to war and labor, living very sparingly, and making no account of arts
and sciences. Their wealth consisted in gold and cattle, which things might be
easily transported if they should be forced to change their dwellings.

The Manners at this day.


The second Estate is of the nobility, which comprehends the princes, earls,
barons, knights, and gentlemen. The princes are more esteemed than the rest,
not so much for their greatness, or the antiquity of their families, but for
that they are more mighty than the rest, as having more land, seigneuries, and
revenues. But it is strange to see the princes, earls, barons, and their like,
obey their Emperor upon the first command, as his

All the gentlemen take delight in hunting, and say, that this exercise belongs
only to them, and that they have the grant and privileges of princes. If any
passenger, or any one of the third Estate is convicted to have hunted,
especially hares, hyndes, fallow

When as they go abroad they are followed by a great troop of their domesticke
ser^^^ts, and march with such a granitie, as they are easily distinguished from
the people. If they go any thing far, it is on horseback, for that they hold
it a dishonor to go on foot, and say, that it is a sign of a strange misery,
and poverty, and yet if they want any necessaries, they hold it no shame to
take it by force and violence. If they have received

Thethird Estate contains the Citisens, and Bourgesses of towns, whereof some
are immediately subject to the Empire, without acknowledging any other lord:
others besides the Emperor have princes, or are subject to the Clergy. The
citisens of towns line ingreat love and concord, they carry themselves
honestly, and traffic together both in public and private, and oftentimes
they feast one another. They seldom deceive one another, and have very few
controversies. At what time, or in what place soever

The ordinary apparel of the men is of wool, and that of the women of linen
cloth, and sometimes of wool, but of diverse colors. They love to be in the
French fashion. They attire themselves in black at the funerals of their
kinsfolks, and they mourn thirty days, during which time they cause prayers
to be said thrice for the deceased, that is, on the day of the Interment, on
the seventh day, and on the thirtieth. This nation is much devoted to the
service of God, so as there is not any Artizan whatsoever, but he

They entertain young men, who for to study have voluntarily banished
themselves out of their countries and wander throughout the world, whereof
sometimes there are so many in one town, as it is a wonder how they are able
to maintain them. The citisens lodge them for the honor of God, then they go
begging their bread and singing from door to door, where they are relieved
with abundance. Joining to every parish Church there is a house which belongs
to the public, whereas they read the liberal arts, and these poor men, with
the children of the town and others, are taught there by learned men, who have
stipends to that end.

The buildings of rich men are of stone, lime, and sand, the poor have their
lodgings low,

The last rank and Estate is of Pesants, and the country people, who manure
the land, and whose condition is miserable. They remain far^e one from
another, every one with his family, living poorly and wretchedly. Their
bread is black, and for the most part



The Saxons meat is hard, ill dressed, and of gross digestion, as Lard,
Sausiges, and Andouilles, or Chitterlings dried in the smoke, raw Onions, and
salt Butter: and in some places they sees the meat on Sunday which they eat
all the week after. As for

The W^stphaliens are witty and good warriers, but vicious and cunning.

The Francons or Franconians differ neither in proportion of body not in
manner of habit from the rest of the Germans. They endure much labor, and both
men and women are given to dress and trim their vines, so as not any one lives
idle. These people being pressed with poverty sell their wine, and drink water,
for that they contemn

Fi^^ w^^kes before Christmas every Thursday, the children, both boys and
girls, go knoc^ing at every door, and singing songs, which contain the
near Nativity of

Upon Christmas day, they set the representation of an infant newly borne, upon
the (...) about the which the children leap and dance, and the old folks
sing; upon New years day the kinsfolks and friends salute one another, and
shake hands, wishing a (...) New year. They spend the day together in good
cheer, and according to the an^^^ custom of their ancestors, they send
presents one unto another.

^^on Twelfth day every house makes a cake of fine white fluore, honey, pepper,
and (...), and then they create a king as follows. The mistress of the house
is she that (...) the cake, into the which when she kneads it, she puts a small
piece of silver, then (...) it upon the harth, she cuts it into as many pieces
as there are persons in the house, (...) gives to every one his part: yet there
are certain pieces assigned, first one to Christ, (...) to the Virgin Marie,
and last to the three wise men that came to worship him; and (...) ^hese parts
are given to the poor: he that has that part wherein the piece of silver
^^^aines, is saluted as king, set in a chair, and raised up thrice by the
whole company (...) great cries of joy. The king being thus raised up on high,
has a piece of chaulke in ^and, with the which he makes so many crosses upon
the top of the plancher of the ^^^mber where they meet. During the twelve days
of Christmas, there is not any house ^ranconia but is perfumed with incense, or
some other sweet sent, to prevent (...).

^t Shrouetide the Franconians run up and down the streets attired like
devils, or (...), striking without discretion such as pass by with little
baggs filled with sand. Upon (...) wednesday in many places, all the boys of
the parish meet together, who taking all (...) maidens which have most
frequented dancing that year, and yoaking them like (...) unto a chariot,
upon the which there is a minstrell set, who plays upon some in^^^ent, in this
manner they conduct them to the first water which they find.

^^ing the Rogation week many parishes meet together, and the young girls and
(...) ^arch before in procession with garlands of flowers upon their heads, and
staves (...) sallow in their hands. The priests of every church are very
attentive to hear ^arishioners sing, and they that have sung best have
(according to their sentence, and (...) custom) certain measures of wine
given them to quench their thirst.

(...) Whitsonholidaies, their manner is both in Franconia and almost
through^^^ Germany, for them that have horses, or can borrow any, to meet
together, setting ^^^est al^o on horseback, who carries the holy sacrament;
and in this manner they go ^^^the precincts of their territory, singing hymns
and songs, and praying unto God ^^^ would preserve the fruits of the Earth.

(...) S. Vrbans day, they that trim the vines set forth a table in some
public place, ^ouer it with a fair cloth, and with leaves, herbs, and sweet
smelling flowers, where^^^y set the image of S. Urban. If the day be fair and
bright, they drink freely, and (...) in the honor of his name: but if it
rain, or the weather be close, they cast dirt (...) this saint, and defile the
cloth and whatsoever is upon the table, with stinking (...) for that they
think their vines which are then in flower, will bear, or not, accor^^^^ as
the day is fair or foul.

(...) S. John Baptists day, both men and women go dancing about a bonefire,
and (...) garlands of verue in and other herbs, and they carry great
nosegaies of flowers, (...) they call Esperons, and they look upon the fire
through these flowers, thinking (...) they shall have no diseases in their eyes
that year. They that will depart before the (...) quenched, cast in first
certain herbs wherewith they are girt, using these, or such (...) words, Let
all my misfortunes part, and be devoured in this fire. At the same time (...)
have pots of Earth full of holes, which the young maidens cover with roses and
(...) flowers, then they put a candle burning into them, which they set upon
tops of (...) to serve as lam pes.

^^llages, the young men which are to marry, carry young fur trees, and cut
off all (...) branches downward, beautifying the top of the tree with
looking-glasses, pieces of (...) scutchions, and other things that glister, the
which they plant in the ground, and (...) during the Summer.

Autumn when as their grapes are ripe, it is not lawful for any man to
begin his (...) without his leave to whom the tithe does belong, and all they
that have vines (...) quarter, must begin their vintage together, and bring the
lords right into the valley,

The Franco^^^s do celebrat the feasts of S. Martin, and S. Nicholas, the one
at the table in drinking hard: the other at church in praying: then every man
tastes of his wine, and at Wirtzbourg, and in other places they give somewhat to
the poor. They cause Nicholas day the children which go to school those three
amongst them, one of which is the bishop, and the other are his deacons. This
bishop made at pleasure, is that day conducted to the church by the whole
troop of scholars, being attired in his pontifical roabes, with the which he
does assist at divine f^^n^^e, at the end whereof, he and his deacons go
singing from door to door to get money, and they deny that this is an alms,
but a charitable succor due to the bishop. They teach their children to fast
the eve of this Saint, and therefore in the night when they sleep, they put
some piece of silver in their shoes, telling them that it proceeds from

As for them of Sueuia, the richest and of mostnote among them are in a manner
all given to merchandise, and make a common purse to that end, and every man
knows what sum he shall adventure: with which money they not only buy silks
and spices, but all other small mercerie wares, as spoons, points, looking
glasses, and puppets, and they also buy wine and corn to keep, the which they
sell again for the double of that it (...). They have letters of commission
from princes, by the which all men are forbidden to buy wine or corn in any
other places, but whereas they have their storehouses. True it is that they do
not use this traffic themselves, but they have their factors who give

As for them of meaner quality, their greatest trade is to make linen cloth,
to the which they are so given, as in many places you shall not only see women
and maidens at the di^^^ffe, but also men and boys spinning among them. They
make a certain cloth of lin^en mixed with cotton which they call Pargath, and
another all of linen, called in their language Golfch.

The Sueuia^^ are much given to incontinencie, and the women are as tractable
as men can desire, and both the one and the other begin this lewd life soon,
and leave it late: and therefore there is a common proverb, That the country
of Suaube alone is able to furnish all Germany with strumpets, Franconia with
rogues and beggars, (...)

As for them of Bauaria, they are so slouenly, rude, and brutish, as if they be
compared with the rest of the Germans, they may justly be termed barbarous.
But the vices wherewith they are mostinfected, are discourtesie and theft. They
attire themselves most commonly in blew, and do rather wear boots and buskins,
than stockings. The most devout (...) them go often in pilgrimage in great
troops, especially to Aix la Chapelle.

Austria has princes which carry the title of Archduke, and whenas any one
comes unto this (...), they use a strange ceremony: for not far from the town
of S. Vite, in a great and deep valley, there are the ruins of a town to be
seen, but the name is not

After which the duke comes being accompanied with a great troop of his
nobility, (...) whom they carry his Ducall ornaments, and all his train are
in great pomp: (...) prince is plainly attired, wearing the habit of a Pesant,
with the cappe and shoos, ^^^^epheards hook; so as one would rather take him
for a man of that condition (...) a prince. He that fits upon the stone, seeing
the Archduke come, cries out in the ^^^^^nian Tongue, What is he that marches
so proudly? To whom the multitude ^^^derstands by, answers, It is the Lord of
all the country. Then the Pesant demands (...) would be just in his
judgment; if he desires the good of the country; if he be of a (...)
^ondition, and of a noble extraction; if he deserves this dignity; if he will
keep (...) ^ommaundements of God like a good Catholic, and defend the
Church: whereat (...) ^^all cry, yea: and then he that sits upon the stone
says, By what means can he take ^^^^om this place? Then the Steward to the
new Prince answers, This place shall be (...) ^^^med from you with the price of
sixty pieces of silver; these beasts shall be yours, (...) those garments
which the duke wears: and moreover, you, and your family, shall (...) from
all Taxes, Imposts, and Subsidies. After this, the Pesant strikes the duke
(...) upon the check, aduising him to be an upright Judge; which done, he goes
(...) from his seat, takes his spoils, and retires himself: then the duke
goes up unto (...), and drawing forth his sword, he turns himself round
about, and promises (...) the people all the duty of a good Prince, and of
an upright Judge. Some hold, (...) do also bring him water in a Pesants hat,
and that he drinks thereof for an (...) of his future sobriety. From thence
they go unto a Church near unto the place, (...) to the Virgin Marie, where
the duke assists with all his troop at divine (...) ceremonies being ended,
the Prince casting off his rusticke habit, he puts on (...), and feasts with
his nobility. After dinner, they return unto the meadow, (...) ^he duke
hears the complaints of every man, and does justice unto all, (...) ^ealtie
and homage of all his vassalls and subjects. The Pesants have this (...) the
duke in his dignity, for that they were the first which received the (...)
that country.

(...) have a strange kind of proceeding against thieves, especially toward
that (...) the town of Klagen stands. If any man be suspected of theft, they
hang him (...) and then they make his process; if he be found innocent, he is
taken down ^^^^ed, and his funerals are made at the public charge; but if
he be judged (...) suffer him to hang until he fall in pieces.

^^^^tire of the Carinthiens is of wool, but not died, and they do commonly
wear (...) speak the Sclauon Tongue. But the Stirians are gross and rude,
and have all (...) swellings under their throat, as it hinders their speech:
yet they do imitate (...) in their behavior and attire, and also in their
speech, except it be those (...) along the river of Draw, who use the Sclauon
Tongue. As for them of (...) speak no German but Sclauon: yet there are many
which at this day speak (...) tongue, especially in preaching. This people
were never tied in general by (...) which drew them unto virtue, but their
will serves them for a law. They are (...) ^^^^ge breasted, and have their
hair white; they are ambitious, glorious, (...) contemn others, and in all
other things do not much differ from the (...)

^^^conclude, the Germans make profession to be very loyal, and to speak the
truth, (...) ^^^^ther borne to simplicity than to subtlety, the which they
know not how to (...) of themselves: but in a strange country, they are the
more fit to deceive others, (...) they are not much distrusted; and we may say,
that chastity is more (...) kept in this country. Drunkenness is no vice
amongst them, yea, they say, that (...) deceiptfull men have brought in an
abstinence from wine, to the end they (...) not, discover their bad
conceptions, having drunk hard.

The Riches.


They make money of their Saltpits, and of their Wines, which they transport
into other countries. Their Fayres are of good consideration, especially those
of Franckfort, (...) he^ merchants come from all parts of Europe, yea and
sometimes out of Afric and Asia.

A^^atia makes great commodity of her mines of silver, copper, and lead:
Franconia of wine and liqu^ris where with they lade great wagons, and transport
it into foreign countries: Morauia of Incense and Myrhe: Bauaria of fat swine,
which they send into diverse pa^ts of Europe, and in like manner other cattle,
wheat, and salt, where of they have

The country of (...) great commodity of an herb or grass which they call
(...) for Dyers (...) of H^ssen lends forth much Wool, and in like sort Gold,
Silver, Copper, Qui^ksilu^^, Iron, Lead, Salt, and Alumne in great abundance.
Turingia does also make great commodity of that herb for dying; and Misnia
of their mines of gold. Finally to speak^ generally of Germany, it does not
yield in riches to any other Province of Europe. But to come to particulars,
you must understand that the revenues



The Empire is bound at the least, by custom, to entertain (whenas the
Emperor goes to Rome to receive the crown) twenty thousand foot, and four
thousand horse for eight months; and this is called the aid of Rome, whereof
the Emperor may put a good p^rt into his purse. Sometimes also they grant
unto the Empire expeditions against heretics, sometimes against the Turk, by
virtue whereof he has levied at one time four hundred thousand Florins.
Female (...) pounds (...)
Finally, the Emperor has better means than many persuade themselves, for
that he draws only out of Alsatia, Suanbe, and the Grisons country, whereas
the house of Austria has fourteen Communalties (under her jurisdiction) about
two millions and half of Florins in ordinary rent, and as

The Forces.
(...) we proceed any farther, it shall be good to consider what forces former
(...) ^^^rors have drawn out of Germany, seeing it is in a manner solely from
thence that Charles the fifth had about ninety thousand foot, and thirty
thousand (...) whenas he went to Vienne against the Turk, of the which there
were many (...) and Italians. Maximillian the second, had near one hundred
thousand foot, and (...) thousand horse, at Iauarin against the Turks, and yet
there was not any want or (...) of victuals. When as the Emperor Charles the
fifth made war against the (...) there were in both armies (which held the field
for certain months) about one (...) and fifty thousand men.

The forces of Germany are in truth very great, both for that they have
abundance William of Nassau prince of Orange, had upon the frontiers of
Flaunders (...) ^^^nce eight thousand horse, and ten thousand foot of the same
nation, and the duke (...) three thousand. I forbear to speak of the number
of Germans which entered (...) Low Countries under the command of duke
Casimier, and into France also in (...) 1587, and many times since. Finally,
wheresoever they make war in Europe, (...) ^^^waies many Germans, in which
number I do not put the Flemings, who have (...) made armies of eighty
thousand men; not the Suisses, who according to the (...) of some, are able to
draw together one hundred and twenty thousand foot for (...) ^owne defense,
and who have sometimes sent forth thirty thousand, as they did (...) they were
drawn into arms to defend the Estate of Milan against king Francis (...)

(...) ^^^^^ning to our discourse, the best Germane footmen come out of the
countries (...), Sueuia, and Westphalia; and their best horsemen out of that of
Brunswicke, (...) especially from Cleues and Franconia. They handle a two-hand
sword, a pike, and a (...) ^peare, better than a harquebuze: they are good men
in battails and in the open field, (...) to break, as to withstand the enemies
shocke: wherein their order and discipline (...) in a manner natural unto them)
does much help them, and their kind of march (...) grave and slow, and the
defensive arms which they use. But they must have a (...) ^under of some other
nation, who can tell how to employ that which is good in (...) for it has
been seldom seen that they have done any thing worthy of their (...)
^^^^^ent glory, under the leading of a German general. They are not fit for
assaults, for (...) they are commonly heavy, and laden with fat. They are
rather constant than hardy, (...) f^r^ous than valiant; for that they never
attempt any thing, wherein they show (...) courage: and whenas they are
victors, they kill all they encounter, without any (...) of age or sex, if the
war continue, and they are besieged, they yield soon: if (...) ^ampe, they
have not the patience to attend the victory in temporizing, if their (...)
^^^tempt succeeds not, they are amazed and undertake no more: if they be once
(...) put to flight, they never make head again, and most commonly when the
armies (...) most ready to join they cry out and mutine for gelt.

(...) their armies are of great charge, and very troublesome, for that they
carry their (...) to war, and consume so much victuals, as it is difficult to
lead them, and impossible to maintain them, being most certain, that no good
can be expected without victuals.

Emanuell duke of (...) sent unto the Emperor six hundred Harquebuziers on
horseback, Cosmo duke of Florence entertained three thousand foot, Alphonso
the second, duke of Ferrara went in (...) with one thousand and five hundred
horse so well appointed, as there were not better in the whole army; William
duke of Mantoua went also with gallant troops: and (...) like manner Henry of
Lorraine, duke of Guise led three hundred gentlemen: so as with those troops
which Pope Pius the fifth did add, Maximillian the second (to whom the Empire,
in a diet held at Ausbourg in the year 1566, had granted forty thousand



They do also want Readiness, being a difficult thing to assemble a diet or
parliament, without the which they cannot do any thing, and they must have
three months respite after the first sommons and notice thereof: being then
assembled, they loose much time by reason of the diversity and contrariety of
opinions; and when any thing is concluded, it is slowly put in execution,
although the war requires speed, and that opportunities are lost in an instant.

There is also another inconvenience, which is, that when as they have resolved
to give a certain number of men unto the Emperor, and for a certain time,
they never come together; for that when as some march unto the enterprise,
others return home to Charles the fifth made good proof, meaning to pass into
Italy, contrary to the will of the French and Venetians. The communalties of
Germany in a diet held at Constance had promised him great numbers of foot,
and three thousand horse, and yet ^e could never draw above five thousand men
together, so as his enterprise p^oued vain. In like manner ^^^se free towns
had promised unto the Emperor Maxi^il^^^ the second, an army of ^^^r^eene
thousand men to make head against the Suisses who had invaded his Estate and
Sueuia, and yet he could never have half of them together, for when as the
soldiers of one ^^^^munaltie came, others returned unto their Maximilian
thought to (...) this inconvenience, whereof he made trial in the enterprise
of Segeth, causing (...) ^^ue these succou^s in money, not in men, for that he
thought with money to make as many men to march as he should need, or at the
least the best part of them. But it is a folly to think to unite Germany, or
to effect any matter of importance, whilst th^^ ^hese opinions shall hold them
so divided.

(...) conclude, we must not think (notwithstanding all these defects) that
the (...) weak, as some ignorant of the affairs of the world would make men
believe: (...) has a great country, and much people, great store of
victuals, and sufficient ^^^^fure to vnderdake any enterprise. But all his
loss grows by the Turks neighbour^^od, who confines from the Carpathien
mountains, unto the Adriatic sea, and is able (...) only to weaken, but also
to wast and consume greater forces than the Emperors. (...) it is well seen
that all Princes which are neighbors to the Turk by land, wast (...) treasure
whilst they are in peace with him, by reason of the great charge they are
^^^ed to undergo in fortifications, and entertainment of garrisons: and their
expenses (...) greater during the wars, for the Turk has so great forces,
and so ready upon all ^^^asions, as he is better armed in time of peace, than
most other princes are in time of ^^^re; so as they which confine upon him,
must be always in Alarm, and fear so pow^^^ll an enemy. Before that the
Emperor resigned the realm of Hongarie to the (...) duke Mathias his brother,
who is now both king and emperor, he entertained (...) twenty thousand men
upon the frontiers, and moreover spent much in fortification^^ and other things.

The Government.
(...) Pope Gregory the fifth which instituted the Seven Electors: And although
that Charles the ^^^eat, was, for that Otho the third had not any children: but
the reasons were diverse; (...) first of all the empire being grown weak, the
Pope and Emperor thought to raise (...) ^^^tifie it by the means of that
person which should be chosen, without regard of (...): after which, they would
suppress the dissentions which did grow by the (...) of Electors.

(...) Emperor then is the chief and head of the empire, and has under him
three

The first of these members is that of the seven Electors, which are (...)
Archbishop of Mentz, Lord Chauncellor of the empire in Germany, who has (...)
Chancerie all the records of the Diets or Parliaments. (...) Archbishop of
Treues, Lord Chauncellor of the empire in France. The Archbishop of Cologne,
Lord Chauncellor of the empire in Italy. The king of Bohemia the chief
Cupbearer of the empire. The Count Palatin of the Rhyne chief Caruer, or
rather Lord Steward of the (...). (...) duke of Saxony Lord Marshall, and
Judge of the Court, who carries the sword (...) the emperor. (...) Marquis of
Brandibourg Lord Chamberlain of the Empire. (...) have full and absolute power
to choose the emperor, to the end that no man may (...) himself the imperial
dignity as hereditarie. (...)


(...) second member is of Noblemen, as well Ecclesiastical as Secular, which
be (...) Archbishop of Magdebourg, Sal^zbourg, Besancon, and Breme.

The Bishops of
B^^berg. Wui^zpurg. (...). Sp^^^^. So^^^^^org. (...) (...) Co^^^^tz.
^^^^ildesheim. Paderborn. Chp^. Halbe^stat. Fe^^^en. M^^^^ster. O^^^bourg.
Pass^uil. Frising^n. Kempse. Gurck or Goritz. Seckauu. Hana^de. Basil. Sitten
or Wallis. Regensbourg. M^^^^en. Nau^^^ourg. Mi^^en. Lubeck. V^^ecli^. Camin.
Swe^in. Genena. Ca^^^ay. Verdu^. Losanne. Metz. Toul. Luyck. Trent. Brixen.
Mersbourg. Labach. Vierina. Brandenbourg. Ratzenbourg. Schleswick. Ha^elbourg.
The Princes and Noblemen which are See^l^rs.
The duke of Bau^^i^^ (...) Archduke of Austria. The duke of Saxony. The
Palatin of Bauaria. The duke of Iuliers, Cleues, and Berck. The Marquis of
Brandenbourg. The duke of Brunswick. The duke of Lunembourg. The duke of
Pomerania. The duke of Mekelbourg. The duke of Lauuembourg. The duke of
Holsten. The duke of Lorraine. The Landgraue of Hessen. The Duke of Wittenberg.
The duke of Zweybrug. The Duke and Earl of Spanheim. The Marquis of Bade. The
Landgraue of Luchtemberg. The Prince of Anhalt. The Earl of Hennenberg. The
Burgaue of Hessen.
Princes that be of the Clergy,
The Prince and Abbot of Fuld. The Prince and Abbot of Hiersfeldt. The Prince
and Abbot of Kempten. The Prince and Abbot of Reichenaw. The Prince and Provost
of Wissemburg. The Prince and Abbot of S. Gal. The Prince and Abbot of
Salifeldt. The Prince and Provost of Elwangel. The Master of the order of the
Teutons. The Master of the order of the Knight of S. John.
The Abbeys of
Waingarten. Solmansweiler. Kreutzlingen. Murpach. Walkenriedt. Schuttern.
Weissenow or Minderaw. S. Blaise. Maulprun. The Prince and Abbot of Corbey.
The Abbeys of
Schussenriedt. Bir^e^sha^sen. Stei^^^ Rhin. Scafhausen. Kempeseck.
Waldsachsen. Finsideln. Rockembourg. Ochsenhausen. The Provost of Selts.
The Abbeys of
S. Gilgen of Noremberg. Nuembourg. S. Maximin near unto Treues.
Heueldshausen. S. John in Curtel. Gengenbach. Konigsbrun. Rodt or Roden.
Markthal. Rockenhausen. S. Peter in Schwartzwald. The Provost of Odenheim. The
Prince and Abbey of Stable.
The Abbeys of
S. D^^^. Be^^^^^sen. ^^^^^gen. ^^^^^^ngen. (...) ^^^enbourg. (...) (...).
S^^^^ in Thurtal. ^^^^hausen of Cons^a^ce (...) ^^^^^aim. ^^^imeram of
Ra^isbonna ^^^egorie of Munster ^^^herode. ^^^meille of Munster ^^^den.
^^^perg. (...) (...) (...) (...)
The Provost of
(...) (...) gasden.
Abbesses or Nunneries of
^^^^^bourg. (...) ^^^^nster of Regensburg (...) Munster of Regens. K^^^^gen.
(...). (...) Gemrode. ^^^^chaw. ^^^^munster. ^^^^p^ch. ^^^^enzel. ^^^dt. (...)
of (...) of Coblentz. (...) of Elsas. (...) of Osterich. (...) of Inder Etsch.
The E^led^^es of
^^^^enstin. ^^^chberg. ^^^^staig. (...) (...) ^^^^berg. Zimmeren. Otingen.
Sultz. Hohen Zollern. Castle. Vertheim. Reineck. Hohenloe. Erpach. Leiningen.
Falckstein. Hanau. Luchstemberg. Nassaw, Breda, and Dille^burg. Wisbaden and
Iltztain. S^lbnulden. Walde purg. Nassau in Weilpurg. Beil stein. Konigstein
and Epstein. Eisenberg the high. Eisenberg the low. Mersen. Budenghen.
Wirnemberg. Solms. Atsenberg.
The Earledomes of the Rhin.
Horn. Seyn. Wintzlingen. Rhin. Bistch. Salm. Weldentz. Dengen. Rappin.
Hardech. Hohenstein. Wolkenstein. Schaumburg and Giengen. Dieremburg and in
Someraw. Mansfelt. Stolberg. Buchlingen. Barbey and Mullingen. Gleichen.
Schwartzemburg. Suemberg. Jude, lord of Ruech. Ples. Plawen. Weda and
Ringelberg. Olnbrug. Locbenstain. Regenstain. Westfriesland. Eastfriesland.
Vanderlippe, or of Lip. Oldemburg. Hose. Delmenhorst. Westemburg. Munzemburg.
Lemgow. Waldeck. Diepholt. Steinfort. Benthem. Brunchorst. Witgenstein.
Spigelberg. Biuersdorff. Teckelnbourg. Dortmund. Windorff. Rippershoden. Hagen,
or of la Hay. Hoonfels. Leisenek. Bergen. Mandercheid. Reiferscheidt. Egmont
and Isselstein. Tubinge. Blankenberg or Blammont: Kirchingen or Krehanges.
The Barons of
Gundelfingen. Geroltzeck. Ober Hewn. Rapolestain. Saffen. Sonneberg.
Winenberg or Wanneberg. Degenberg. Obersulzberg. Tautenberg.
The Lords or Seigniors of
Tussen. Stutgart. Iustingen. Schenlingen. Rapoltskirchen. Hohen Rechperg.
Berletzick. Hohen Konigsperg. Hohenfeldt and Tipoltskirch. Braides.
Reichelsperg. Limburg. Kunsech. Kunseckerberg. Geraw. Reichensten. Muntzenburg.
Lostenstein. Ridberg. Ringen. Somirisse. Bergen and Waelhem. Wildenfels or
Widerfels. Haber or Hauer. Senster. Roggendorff. Alendorff. Kunigfuckerberg.
Morspurg and Befort. Brandenstein and Ranss. Wolfstein: Permont. Fronsbek.
Flackenstein. Witten.
The third member of the Emperor is that of the free towns, which are
Antuerpe in the duchy of Brabant. Ausbourg in the country of Suabe. Basil in
Suisserland. now cantons, and Berne in Suisserland. not contributarie. Byberach
in Suabe. Boppert upon the Rhin. Boichorn. Campen in Ouerissel. Cologne upon
the Rhin. Colmar in Alsatia. Constance in Suabe. Deuenter in Ouerissel.
Dortmodt in Westphalia. (***) Dunkelspoel in Suabe. Duyren in Iuliers. Ever in
Bermewout. Erfort in Turinge. Estingen in Suabe. Francfort upon Meyn. Francfort
upon Oder. Fridberch in Wederewaure. Friburch in Brisgawre. Gheylhuysen in
Wedewaue. Ghinghen in Suabe. Gottinghen in Saxony. Groningue in Friseland.
Gemunde in Suabe. Hagenau in Alsatia. (***) Halle in Suabe. Halle in Turinge.
Helpron in Suabe upon Neckar. Hambrough in Eastland. Heyde^^^elt. Isnen.
Ingelsheim above Rhincau. K^^^stouren. Key^^^s-berch. Key^^^uterne in Westrick.
(***) Kem^^^^ Suabe. Kuyr in Suitz. Landaun near to Spire. Lindauu in Suabe.
Lubeck in Saxony. Lucerne in Suisserland. Lunebourg in Saxony. Meydenbourg in
Saxony. Men^minghen in Suabe. Metz in Lorrain, now belonging to France. Mentz
upon the Rhin. Mulhuysen in Turinge. Mulhuysen in Sugouia. Noorthuysen in
Turinge. Nuremberg. Nymeghen in Guelderland. Norlige in Suabe. Oderheim upon
the Rhin. Oppenhen upon the Rhin. (***) Pollendorp. Poppinghen in Suabe.
Rauensbourg. Regensbourg in Bauaria. Rottenbourg upon Tuber. Rosem or Rosheim.
Roteuil in Suabe. Ruylinge in Suabe. S. Gal in Suisserland. Sleystadt in
Alsatia. Spyers upon the Rhin. Swymfort in Franconia. Strasbourg. Treues upon
Mosella. Werlinghen in Suabe. Weerd upon the river of Danou. Vlme in Suabe.
Vange in Suabe. Wesel upon the Rhin. Wesel in Cleueland. Wetzelaer in Hessia
(***) Wyle in Suabe. Wy^^heym in Franconia. W^^nbourg. Worms upon the Rhin.
Zurich in Suisserland. Zwol in Ouerissel.
^^sides this order of Three members, to prevent all divisions in the empire,
and to

(...) first Circle is that of Franconia. (...) second of Bauaria. (...) third
of Austria. (...) fourth of Suabe. (...) fifth of the Rhyn. The sixth of the
Electors of the Rhyn. The 7 of base Germany, or Westphalia. The eight of high
Saxony. The ninth of base Saxony. The tenth of Bourgondie.


Touching that which we have spoken of the members of the empire, Munster
says,

The Charges and Dignities reduced to the number of Four.
The four Dukes.
^runswick. ^a^aria. Suabe. Lorraine.
The four chief Mars^alls.
^^^^^pen^heim. (...) (...).
The four Landgraues.
Turingia. Hessen. Luchtemberg. Alsatia.
The four Bourgraues.
Meidenbourg. Neurenberg. Reneck. Stronbourg.
The four Earledomes chief in the war.
Flanders. Tirol. Aldenbourg. Ferrara.
The four chief Abbeys.
Fuld. Kempten. Wissembourg. Murbach.
The four Buroughs of the Empire.
Aldembourg. Meidenbourg. Rottembourg. Meckelbourg.
The four Knights.
Andlauu. Meldengen. Strondeck. Fronberg.
The four Metropolitan Cities.
Ausbourg. Aix la Chapelle. Metz. Lubeck.
The four Villages.
Bamberg. Vlme. Hag^ena^. Selestad.
The four Ru^ticks.
Cologne. Ratisbone. Constance. Saltzbourg.
The four Marquises.
Misnia. Brandebourg. Morauia. Bade.
The four Earls.
Cleues. Schwartzembourg. Cilia, or Gretz. Sauoy.
The four Lords of Italy.
Milan. Escala. Padoua. Mirandola:
The four mountains.
Munerberg. Friberg. Heidelberg. Nurenberg.
The four Barons.
Limbourg in Franconia. Thusis and Raconie Lord of Tockembourg. Westerbourg.
Aldenuuaden.
The four possessions of the
Ingelheim. Altdorff. Liechtenauu. Denckrendorff.
The four Hantsm^n.
Hurn. Vrach. Schombourg. Metsth near to Coures.
The four hereditarie offices of Suabe.
The Caruer of Walpourg. The Cupbearer of Radach. The Marshall of Moredorf. The
Chamberlain of Kemnat.
The four servants.
Waldeck. Hirten of Fulchen. Amsperg. Rabnauu.
Yet many of these dignities are changed, and quite extinct by the death of
such as held them.



When as the Emperor is in his seat* the Archbishop of Treues must sit right
against him; the Archbishop of Mentz has his place upon the right hand, and
the Archbishop

When as they go in any public Procession, they are to observe this order:

The Archbishop of Treues goes before the Emperor, and the other two of either
side of him, and then the king of Bohemia follows presently after.

The Archduke of Austria, as a prince of the Empire, has no place among the
secular Princes, by reason of the difference for presedence, but among the
Clergy, who go before. In a Diet held at Ausbourg, in the year 1548, all the
Provinces of Bourgondie

The duke of Lorraine was wont to be held for a prince of the Empire, but now
this ^^^past into France.

(...) free cities of the Empire (which acknowledge no other lord but the
Emperor) ^^^h their own laws, and have all in a manner a mixed and popular
Estate; yet in (...) them (among which is Nuremberg) the chief men govern.
The form of (...) in these free cities was not in the beginning of any great
esteem, whenas by (...) favor they purchased their liberty of Emperors, or
from the princes that ru^^^^ them.

(...) man can be called Emperor unless he be first crowned by the Pope: but
he may ^^^ke upon him the title of Caesar, or king of the Romans, or king of
Germany, if he (...) been chosen by the Electors. The Emperor does not
command absolutely in Ger^^^^,

^he three Estates come unto the parliament, and of these are framed three
counsels. (...) Electors enter into the first, and whenas the king of Bohemia
is not Emperor, he ^^^es not to the diet, but is absent from their
consultations, and is rather an Arbitrator ^^^an Elector; for that if their
voices be equally divided, that is to say, three of the one (...) and three of
the other, he to whom he gives his voice is chosen.

(...) second council consists of all the other princes as well
ecclesiastical as secular, in^^^ which there enters two for all the rest, and
two others for all the Earls and Ba^^^ the Empire. The third council is
composed of the free towns.

^^^mperor, or king of Romans propounds unto all these what he thinks good,
and ^^^cell retires it self to consult what they shall resolve upon these
matters which ^^^unded. But as for the towns, although that they may give
their opinion by ^^^uncell, yet have they no voice in deliberations. The
council of the Electors ^^eir opinions last, and is most esteemed.

(...) of Germany is at this day much perverted, so as if the Emperor does
call ^^^liament, the princes will not come in person, but send their agents, to
whom (...) no authority to resolve or conclude of any thing, unless they be
formerly ad^^^ whereof they will treat, and for this reason they dispatch
little.

^^^hing the particular government of towns, and their manner of justice, you
shall ^^^and (as I have formerly said) that there are some towns immediately
subject to the ^^^or, and acknowledge no other lord: and some other, besides
the duty they owe (...) Empire are also subject to princes and other noblemen,
either ecclesiastical or (...) ^ut as for those which depend solely of the
Empire, they have goodly priuiled^^^mptions, and prerogatives, for that they
are governed according to the laws ^^^^nces of imperial towns, under the
charge and conduct of certain magistrates (...) be chosen for the administration
of justice and mannaging of the government. (...) year they choose one among
the bourgesses of a town, who in the distribution ^^^e, is as it were the head
thereof, and may be called pr^sident: he with certain ^^^ncellors or
assistants chosen by the people, does hear and judge of all civil or cri^^^
causes within the jurisdiction of the town. In civil causes, he that is
condem^^^ (...) appeal from their sentence unto the imperial chamber: but in
criminal causes (...) no appeal from them, the which may seem very strange,
for that these Judges ^^^imed, nor have not read the laws (the which were very
necessary in such oc^^^) but they care not so as they judge according to the
laws and customs of the (...) of every town, and the jurisdiction thereof.
There are twelve of these Judges (...) every town, and also in some
bourroughes, men without reproach, upright, (...) commendable for the
sincerity of their lives, according to the testimony of all (...) although
they have never studied the law; for that the people in this case do (...)
respect honesty, experience, and practice, than knowledge without virtue.
These (...) ^re bound to administer justice, and yet they receive no fees, nor
have any recompense for their pains, but honor, whenas they have discharged
themselves well,

As we have formerly said, they choose Judges also in certain borroughs, but
not in all* for in most of them they establish certain men, whom they call
bourgomaisters, who ^erue as Judges and Arbitrators to end all such
controversies as may grow betwixt the laborers and pesants, and they have also
charge of the affairs of the village, but yet they deal not with the policy
and administration of justice, which belongs to the lords, or to their officers.

The Religion.
Leo the tenth having sent forth his pardons and indulgences to heap up
treasure; Luther having been an Augustine Fryat began to exclaim against the
dissolution and excess which reigned in the Clergy, saying that the revenues
of the Church were employed in pomp, vanities, and matters of worse practice:
and withal, he did write sundry books both against the Mass, and the
superstitions of the Church of Rome, and also against the disordered life of
the Pope, and his Clergy, so as in a short time his doctrine was embraced and
follow^d by diverse princes and free towns of Germany. In the end the Emperor
Charles ^he fist was forced under pretext of keeping the public peace, to
sign a decree, and to allow Luther, and to pass from the one unto the other,
with a condition that a secular prince should not by this change loose his
Estate, nor receive any blemish in his reputation, but the ecclesiastical
should loose his dignity, and they to whom it did belong should presently
choose another which was a Catholic.

But let us see in what Estate Germany stands at this day touching Religion.
It seems in our time that the Protestants religion is much advanced, and very
strong, for that the princes that be Caluinists and Lutherans get the
possession of Bishoprics and Abbeys, and leave them as a part of their
inheritance to their successors, seeking to plant their opinion wheresoever
they have power and authority: yet in most towns there are some churches and
marks of Popish religion, as at Mind (although they be all in a manner
Protestants) there are Catholic Chanoins, and in the great Church they sing
Mass. At V^me, Strausbourg, Nubourg, and in the Estates of Brandebourg,
Saxony, and Brunswicke, there are many religious houses of Nuns; yet in some
places they are forbidden to admit any new, the which sometimes they cannot do
for want of a Popish

To return to the purpose, they of the Palati^ar of Rhin, have been diverse
times for^^d to change their opinions, as it has pleased their Earl. Augustus
duke of Saxony was (...) and protector of the profession of Luther, and
Christierne his son after his fathers (...) ^rought Caluinisme into Saxony,
who being dead, duke Frederick expelled it (...) and restored Luthers doctrine.

(...) of the princes of Germany follow the profession of Calvin or Luther.
They that (...) Luther are the Marquis of Brandebourg, the Dukes of Saxony,
Brunswicke, and ^^^berg, the Earls of Mans^eld, and the free towns which
confine with the ^e^ (...) Calvin is followed by the Counts Palatins of Rhin,
by them of Strasburg, ^^most of the sea towns.

^peak^ generally, the nobility is more fallen from the Romish religion than
any (...), the rich than the poor, and the towns more than the villages, and
yet the free (...) are more earnest than the villages. And it is a thing
worthy observation, that of ^^^ly free towns which are in Germany, there
came unto a diet (which was held of (...) years for the Catholics) but three
small towns of Suabe, that is Camonde, ^^^heelspille, and Vberlinque, whereas
the princes of Austria, the dukes of Bauaria, ^leues (who is now extinct) with
Philip of Bade, and the Lantgra^e of Leutem (...) have constantly continued in
the Romish profession, and there has returned unto ^^^in Count Vlric of
Elprestein, with James Marquis of Bade, and some others: To con^^^^e, all the
free cities are fallen from the Church of Rome, except those three which
^^^haue named: yet there are some Catholics at Neurembourg, Franckford, V^me,
^^x la Chapelle, and in some other places.

But to show in what estate the Romish religion now stands in Germany, you
must

^^^hbishopricke of Treues is the freest of all Germany, for that not only
with^^^ (...), but throughout all the diocese they do not allow of any but
the Romish (...) and the reason for the most part is, for that this town had
never any Bishop ^^^as a Catholic, and most commonly very zealous.

^^e Archbishop of Cologne has with great difficulty maintained the Romish
reli^^^^ and would never admit the exercise of any other profession. In the
year 1543, (...) having discovered that the Archbishop Herman had an intent to
bring the (...) religion into the town, and into his whole diocese, having to
that end caused (...) (...) to come from Lipsic, and Martin Bucer; the Senate
and Chapter oppo^^^selues, and wrought so, as in the year 1549, Herm^n was
deposed by the Popes (...) and Adolfe chosen in his place * yet could he not
prevent it, but that some (...) whereof this Archbishopricke has seventeen)
have received the Gospel, (...) place under this Archbishopricke the Churches
of Liege, Munster, Osnobourg, (...).

As for Liege, the Romish religion has continued to this day, and in like
manner ^^^^^ghout all the diocese, which is very great.

(...) has been much afflicted with Anabaptists, but these being extinct, the
(...) has returned to her former estate.

(...) Church of Osnobourg has been greatly molested: for Luthers opinion
began (...) footing there in the year of our Lord 1521. And although tharten
years after ^^^^^ters were expelled, yet they were received again, and
supported by the (...) and Bishops. Since the year 1574, unto the year 1586,
Henry of Saxony vsur^^^ of this Church, and that of Breme.

^s for Mind, there is no marks of the Romish religion, but a part of the
Chapter, and (...) ^elebration of the Mass.

Touching the Archbishopricke of Mentz, the Protestants are dispersed
throughout (...) part of the diocese, yea in the great town of E^ford;
whereas both the gentle^^^

(...) Spi^e, the Lutherans do far exceed the Papists. The Chanoins of the
Ca^^^^^ Church being desirous to preserve that little which remains, have
instituted a ^^^ Semi^^^^ of twelve young men, by whose means, and of the
College of Jesuits, they hope to fortify their party.

The inhabitants of Worms withdrew themselves first from their Bishop,
touching Luther ^^yerie free among them, yet the Clergy are for the most part
Catholics. They of H^^bi^o^^^ane in a manner all Papists, by reason of the
great care which their Bishops (...) expel all other opinions. In the diocese
of Ausbourg they are for the most (...) ^^therans, for that there are commonly
in the City fifteen Ministers which (...). But there are two things which
support the Romish religion; the one is, the ^^^^cie of the Senate in that
opinion; the other is a College of Jesuits which the ^^^^es have built there.
Moreover, there are more Papists than others at Ginsbourg, (...) and
Almangauie, and diverse Conuents of religious women. As for Hyestad, (...) have
no publ^^^ exercise of their religion. In the diocese of Hildesie

Coming to the Archbishopricke of Saltzbourg, it is most certain that this
town has in a maner^ one but P^pi^ts. But at Rati^bona, which is subject unto
it, they make p^^^^que pro^ession of L^thers doctrine, and there are few
Papists, except the Clergy, who (...) favor of the duke of Bauaria.

Bohemia (...) part follows the opinion of John Husse, who was burnt at the
Council of (...) with Ier^^e of Prague, in the year 1417, contrary to the
pasport and warrant which was given the^ by the Emperor Sigismond: but some
write, that th^^ country is much infected with Anabaptists and Pica^ds, and so
are the countries of Picard, who brought the heresi^ of the Adamits out of
Flaunders into the country of Bohemia.

As for Austria, in the town of Vienne, they are for the most part Papists: at
the le^^^ wise the Ministers do not preach publicly. And to conclude, in all
the prouince^ and towns of Germany, they are divided touching religion. The
country of Tyro^ which is subject to the house of A^stria, is most devoted to
the Romish religion. (...) is for the country of (...), they are all Papists.

BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE Emperors of the West, beginning at Julius Caesar
the Founder of this Empire, and continewing unto Mathias the second, now
reigning.
1. JULIUS CAESAR was Founder of the Roman Monarchy, and yet he took Brutus,
Cas^^us, and other conspirators, in the year of the world 3886, which was ^en
hundred and eight years after the building of Rome, and in the 184 Olimpiade,
^^d before the birth of our Savior Christ 47.

2. OCTAVIUS AUGUSTUS, called also Caesar, nephew to Julius, suc^eeded him, and
^^^ke the name of Emperor, which signifies chief of the army, and made the
title of ^bsolute command over all those countries which obayed the Romans. He
lived ^^entie and five years lacking five and twenty days, and reigned
fifty and six years, ^^oning the twelve with Anthony and Lepidus in the
Triumuirat. He died in the year

3. TIBERIUS, son in law to Augustus by Liuia, and adopted by him in the
year of the World 2940, after the foundation of Rome 762, and in the
seventeenth year of C^^^ ^as chosen Emperor. He had the Empire twenty and
three years: by nature he ^^troublesome, a mocker, base, cruel, and malicious.
In the fifteenth year of his reign (...) Savior Christ being thirty years
old was baptized by S. John. The eighteenth year of (...) Empire he was
crucified. In the ninteenth year S. Paul went to Damascus, and (...) converted
to the Faith. He lived seventy and eight years, and reigned three and ^^^ntie.

4. Tiberius, borne of Germanicus son to (...), who was brother to Tiberius,
in the year of the world 4001, of the foundation of (...) 789, and in the year
of grace 39. This was a horrible monster, cruel, and insup^^iable, who plunged
himself into all villainies and disorders, and had the company of ^^^ree
sisters. He lived eight and twenty years, and reigned three years, ten
months, (...) days.

CLAUDIUS, nephew to Tiberius, and son to Drusius, succeeded in the year of
the World 4005, of the foundation of Rome 793, and in the year of Grace 43,
be^^^ fifty years old, he came unto the empire by corruption, promising three
hundred (...) fifty crowns to every soldier. He had profited well in
learning, having had T^tus (...) for his Scholemaister. He was poisoned by his
wife, being sixty four years old, (...) had reigned fourteen years.

NERO, son in law to Claudius, and adopted by the policy of Agrippina, in
the (...) of the World 4019, of the foundation of Rome 807, and in the year of
Grace 57, (...) seventeen years old, was created Emperor by the soldiers,
to whom he pro^^^ed as much as Claudius had given them. He caused his mother
Octauia to be slain, (...) Poppe^, and his two wives, Seneca his
Scholemaister, and many others. The Christi^^^ were under him cruelly
murdered. He thrust himself through with a sword, ha^^^g lived two and
thirty years, and reigned almost fourteen. The Family of the Cae^^^ ^^yled
in him.

SERGIVS GALBA, of the house of the Sulpitij, was chosen by the Legions of
^^yne, and then confimed by the Senate. He was a good Prince, but by the
practices of (...) he was slain in the Marketplace of Rome, and his head was
carried to Otho. He (...) seventy and three years, and reigned but seven
months, and seven days.

^^ILVIVS OTHO (as soon as the soldiers had slain Galba) obtained the Empire
by his death, he was a villainous monster, and companion to Nero in his lechery
and Vitellius, he ^^abbed himself with his dagger, having reigned only four
months, and lived fifty and eight years.

9. AVRIVS VIT^LLIVS a glutton, cruel, lustful, and bloody, having caused
many Roman gentlemen to be slain, the soldiers murdered him, and cast his
carcass into the river of Tyber. He lived fifty and seven years, and reigned
but eight months.

10. FL. V^SPASIAN, of the family of the Flauiens, after the great disorders
and cruel^ies committed under Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Otho, and Vitellius was
saluted Emperor during the lives of his predecessors: he reformed the
provinces, legions, armies, Titus to besiege Jerusalem the fourteenth of
April, (...) the second year of his Empire, and in the year of Grace 72. He
died of a flux, being (...) and nine years old, three months, and seven days:
and he reigned ten years.

11. TITUS VESPASIAN succeeded his father in the year of the World 4043, of
^^^foundation of Rome 831, and in the year of Grace 81. He was called the
Delights (...) mankind, by reason of his justice and bounty; he pardoned his
brother Domitian, who had practiced his death: being surprised with a sever he
died, at the age of thirty and nine years, five months, and five and twenty
days, having reigned two years, two months, and two days.

12. DOMITIAN succeeded his brother in the year of the World 4045, of the
foundation Nero for the first: he appointed one hour every day to catch flies,
and therefore he was called the h^^ter of flies. He was incestious and
l^cherous, for the which he lost his life, in the five and fortieth year of
his age and the fifteenth of his Empire.

13. N^^VA being ^ery old was chosen Emperor in the year of the World 4061, of
the foundation of Rome 849, and in the year of Grace 99. He was a good prince,
and a just, and restored the goods and offices which Domitian had wrongfully
taken away. He c^^sed the persecutions against the Christians to cease, he did
abolish public plays, Trau^an borne in Spain for his son, and he left the
Empire more flourishing than all the rest. He died being seventy and one years
old, having reigned one year, and four months.

14. VLP. TRAIAN entered into the Empire whenas Ner^a sent him the decree of his
adoption unto Cologne, being two and forty years old, in the year of the
World 4062, of the foundation of Rome 850, and in the year of Grace 100. He was
wise, a good justicer, well advised in war, valiant, and fortunat in execution;
by a decree of the Senate he was called the Good Prince. He caused libraries to
be built, and did often hear Plut^rch. Going to suppress the Jews he died,
being sixty and four years old, and having reigned nineteen years, six
months, and fifteen days.

15. ADRIAN in the year of the World 4080, of the foundation of Rome 868, and
in the year of Grace 118, came unto the Empire. He was adopted by Traian, but
he did write unto the Senate that he would not accept of the Empire unless they
commanded him. He was wise, and well practiced in affairs, learned and well
spoken, sometimes mild, and sometimes cruel. He did visit the provinces of the
Roman Empire more than all former Emperors had done. His life was in the end
of his days so odious as he required them to kill him: he lived seventy and
two years, and five months, and reigned one and twenty years, and eleven
months, his bones were interred in the Castle of S. Ange at Rome.

16. ANTONIUS PIUS was Emperor in the year of the World 4102, of the foundation
Adrians daughter, and ^^s adopted by him. He was a man of a goodly stature and
full of wit, eloquence, and ^^^^^^ie. He was the only prince that was free
from the blood of his subjects: he did (...) respect the authority of the
Sena^, and appointed good pensions for the professors Adrians Sepulcher.

ANTONIUS VERVS, son in law to the other Antonin, succeeded him in the ^^^ire.
In the beginning he joined unto him his brother Lucius Verus, and then the
em^^^e was governed by two Emperors, having equal power. But this Antonin was
good, (...), modest, bountiful to learned men, and fortunat in war. There
was under him a ^^ecution begun against the Christians, the which ceased, he
having obtained a battle ^^^he means of a legion of Christians, after the
which he did abolish all Edicts made ^^^st the Christians. He suruiued Lucius
Verus eight years* and died being sixty one ^^^res old, and was Emperor
eighteen years.

LUCIUS VERVS, having been associated in the empire by Marck Antonin his
^^^ther, for the ^^^all time of his reign, is not named amongst the good or
bad Prin^^. He reigned with Antonin eleven years, and died being forty and
two years (...): he was laid in Adrians Tomb.

COMMODVS succeeded his father Marck Antoninus Verus in the year of the ^^^ld
4143, of the foundation of Rome 931, and in the year of Grace 182. The Ro^^^
Monarchy was in her flourishing estate, from Julius Caesar unto Marck Antonin,
but ^^^^^wards it was tossed with continual seditions, and civil wars.
Commodus at the age of (...) years being in a hot house, upon a sudden
dislike caused the master thereof (...) into a burning furnace, a presage of
his future cruelty. He did drink most ^^^^^nly all night, and did wallow in
all kind of execrable vices, with three hundred ^^^^^bines, and as many young
boys; he framed his life like unto that of Caligula. He (...) Infant Lucilia
his sister miserably, and did ravish the rest. He was slain by (...) his
Concubine, and by Letus great Provost of the Empire. His body was by
^^^^maundement of the Senate cast into Tyber, having reigned thirteen years.

PERTINAY succeeded Commodus in the year of the World 4156, of the foun^^tion
of Rome 940, and in the year of Grace 194. His father was a bondsman
infran^^^d, and had been a Scholemaister, then a soldier, and in the end
advanced in such (...) he governed the provinces of Rhetia, Norica, Misia, and
Dasia. And for that he (...) Roman, the murderers of Commodus did choose him
Emperor, but seeking to re^^^ the Pretorien soldiers, he was hated, and
therefore slain by them; who carried ^^^ad upon a lance to the camp of
Julian his successor: He was sixty years old, (...) ^^igned but six months.

IVLIAN, for that in so corrupted an age great men had no authority, the
soldiers were exceeding bold and insolent. Sulpitian Provost of Rome, and
Digius Julian (...) so shameless, as to traffic at what price they might
have the Empire: Sulpitian ^^omised to every pretorian soldier five hundred
crowns, and Julian promised six hundred twenty five, and so he was chosen
Emperor; he was a glutton, a player at dice, and (...) not his promise with
the soldiers: whereupon they began to hate him, and he grew (...) ^^^^hearted,
covetous, and base, as he was slain by an unknown soldier, and was em^^rour
but seven months, and fourteen days.

PESCENIVS NIGER governor of Syria was saluted Emperor by the soul^^^^^ that
were in Syria, but Seuerus who had been chosen by the Senate went against Ni^^^
with whom he fought thrice. In the third battle Pescentus Niger and his wife
were ^^^e, and Se^erus remained sole Emperor. The goods of Pescenius were all
confiscat, (...) his race extinct.

SEV^^VS succeeded Julian in the year of the World 4157, of the foundation of
Rome 945, and in the year of Grace 195. He was honorably received by the
Senate ^^d soldiers, and proclaimed Emperor. Being come unto the Capitol, he
degraded (...) soldiers which had slain Pertinax, and banished them the
empire. He did also put (...) to death, who had been the author of the
murders of Commodus and Pertinax: He vanquished Pescenius Niger in Syria: He
made a voyage into England, where he died

24. CLAUDIUS ALBINVS made himself Emperor in France. Seuerus having defeated
Pescenius, returned to Rome to make war against Albinus, whom he had
associated with him in the empire: but Albinus became treacherous, practicing
the death of Seuerus, the which made him to lead a great army against Albinus,
who commanded in France as an Emperor of the Romans, and gave him battle
near unto the city of Lion, where Albinus was defeated and taken, and led
half dead unto Seuerus, who Albinus to be rooted out: which done, Seuerus was
Emperor alone.

25. ANTONIN BASSIAN CARACALLA, son to Seuerus, was Emperor in the year of
the World 4175, of Rome 963, and in the year of Grace 203. He was an
incestuous and cruel monster: He slew his brother Geta with his own hands,
hanging about the neck of his mother Iulia, and crying out, O mother they kill
me; so as she was all covered with her sons blood, and wounded in the hand:
yet afterward she married with her son in law Bassian. He caused many Roman
Senators to be put to death, and among others Papinian, Provost of the city.
In the end he was slain at the instigation Macrine, great Provost of the
empire, by a soldier called Martial, whose brother he had put to death. His
body was sent to Iulia his mother in law and wife, who seeing it, fell upon
it, and suffered her self to be slain: such was the end of the incestuous. He
lived forty three years, and reigned six.

26. ANTONIUS GETA, in the life of the Emperor Se^erus his father, was
associated by him in the empire, being his youngest son. This young prince
made show to be heir of his fathers virtues: but the Emperor Bassian
conspired his death, and to attain unto it, he watched when he might find him
alone, who being on a time in the Chamber of his mother Iulia, second wife to
the Emperor Seuerus, he flew him. This execrable murder did purchase Bass^an
many enemies.

27. MACRIN great Provost of the empire, was created Emperor by the army which
was in Assyria, in the year of the World 4182, of Rome 970, and in the year
of Grace 220. He had been a bondsman infranchised, and a Notarie in the time of
Commodus. He made his son Diadumenus Emperor in the beginning of his empire.
He gave himself to play, and began to be hated of the soldiers, by reason of
his miserable and froward disposition. He was cruel, and an inuenter of new
torments. He caused two soldiers (for that they had ravished their hostess)
to be sowed together in a Bullockes hide, leaving their heads out, to the end
they might speak one unto another, until that vermin, stench, and other
torments had killed them. He was slain in Antioch, having reigned fourteen
months.

28. VARVS HELIOGABALVS, son to Bassian (as some thought) was Emperor by the
practices of his grandmother Maea, in the year of the World 4184, of Rome 972,
and in the year of Grace 222. He did associat his cousin Alexander in the
empire. He brought his mother into the Senate, and made her to give her voice as
a Senator: There she published many laws which were called Matrimonial. He
abandoned himself to all abominable dissolutions, and exceeded Nero and
Caligula in villainy: he semeed a monster rather than a man, and did ravish the
vestall virgins: he caused his privy parts to be cut off, thinking to be as a
woman, and married himself as a woman, and did cohabit with as a woman.
Finally, being come to the height of all his villainies, he was slain with his
mother, being hidden in a privy. His body was cast

^^^ ALEXANDER SEVERUS was by the consent of the Pretorian soldiers and (...)
made Emperor, in the year of the World 4187, of the foundation of Rome 975,
and in the year of Grace 225, being yet very young, he governed the Empire by
^^^ncell of V^pian. The most severe act he ever did, was the death of Thurin^s
(...) whom he caused to be smoakt to death, for that he did not justice, but
took money (...) parties. He made an edict, the which he would have inuiolably
observed, where (...) other things there was, Do not unto another what thou
would not have done unto (...). He began to be hated by reason of his
severity, and was slain in Gaul by the ^^^ers at the persuasion of Maximin.
He lived but nine and thirty years, three (...) and seven days, and reigned
thirteen years.

^^^ MAXIMIN (borne of a base family in Thrace, and of barbarous parents) was
(...) Emperor by the soldiers without the consent of the Senate, in the year of
the World (...) of Rome 988, and in the year of Grace 238: he also made his
son Maximin (...). By his first trade he was a sheepeheard in Thrace: he came
to Rome in the time of ^^^us, and being exceeding strong and active of body,
he did run as swiftly as Se^er^^ (...), whereupon he was made an archer: under
Bassian he had the charge of one (...) foot. Being Emperor he grew exceeding
cruel and proud, so as the Senate declared (...) an enemy to the Empire, by
reason of his wickedness: he caused all the servants of ^^^^edecessors
Alexander to be cruelly put to death: so as the soldiers understanding (...)
will of the Senate, they cut the throats of Maimin and his son sleeping at
noone day (...) tent, the father being three s^ore years old, and his son
nineteen, having reigned (...) years.

^^^ GORDIAN the elder was against his will with his son thrust into the
imperial (...) ^eing three score years old, to free the people from the
tyranny of Maximin* (...) Gordian his son was slain by the means of
Cappellus, and the good Emperor ^^^o much the fury of his enemies, hung
himself for that he would not fall alive (...) hands. He reigned but five
months, and was lamented of all good men, he was (...) ^^nter, a caruer, and
learned.

^^^ ^LENVS MAXIMUS, the son of a locksmith, for his great deeds of arms
(...) all the dignities that could be desired: he grew so hautie and proud as
he used ^^^ties against the Romans, which made the soldiers to hate him, and
to (...) him and Balbin^^, and fell to ^^ti^e in the palace, from which being
(...) dragged them to their tents, and there flew them, having reigned two
years.

^^^ ^^LIV^ BALBINVS was chosen Emperor with P^pienus, to suppress the
^^^^nesse of Maximin. He was a Spaniard and learned, and did pace^ie the
seditions ^^^d grow daily in Rome, by his eloquence and knowledge: but fortune
did so ^ma^^^ his prince, as the two Gordians being slain in Afric, the
people of Rome aspired (...) G^rdian, wishing that Balbinus and Maximus would
have resigned their (...) him. By the hatred of the soldiers and people of
Rome they were slain, and (...) Empire but two years.

^^^ ^^^IAN the second, being but sixteen years old began to govern the
(...) of the World 4203, of the foundation of Rome 991, and of our (...) after
that Maximin and his son had been murdered at the siege of (...) and
Balbi^us slain at Rome. He was a lover of justice, honest, peaceable, (...)
^^loued, and more respected of his subjects than any other prince. Finally
there ^^d nothing in him but age; whereupon an Arabian called Philip made him
odious men of was, showing them how young their Emperor was, so as he s^borned
nine (...) soldiers, who slew this good prince being two and twenty years
old, and (...) six.

^^^ (...) HOSTI^IANVS was created Emperor by the Senate at Rome, to (...) of
the commonweal, having received news of the death of the (...), which
troubled them much. Hostilianus was a brave prince, but being f^ll (...) he
died soon after.

^^^ (...) the Arabian having caused Gordian to be slain, came unto the Empire
(...) year of the World 4209, of the foundation of Rome 997, and in the year
of (...) He came to Rome the second year of his Empire the caused the secular
games to be celebrated (which they did never use to do but in the beginning of
an age) Deciu^ his lieutenant in Illiria revolted, and was called Emperor. He
resolved to go against Deci^s, leaving his son at Rome, but the Pretorian
soldiers cut his throat; which being understood by Philips army, the
soldiers slew him also at Verona. He reigned five years.

37. DECIVS was chosen Emperor in the year of the world 4214, of Rome 1002,
and of Grace 252. He was a Hongarian of a noble family, and was advanced with
the consent of the Senate: his son Decius was also called Emperor: he did
persecute the Christians Fabian to be put to death at Rome, Alexander at
Jerusalem, and Babias with his three sons in Antioche. In diverse places there
was nothing heard but the sighs of poor Christians who were forced to live in
deserts among bruit and savage beasts. He did fight twice against the Goths,
and in the last, both he and his son was slain, the father being fifty
years old. They reigned both but two years, and six months.

38. Q. HERENNIVS HETRVSCVS is not put among the Emperors by some writers, yet
his portrait is found in the book of Hubert Gollatius, and that he was son
to Decius.

39. VIBIVS GALLVS HOSTILIANVS succeeded in the Empire after the death of
Decius, having been chosen by the Legion which was preserved in the Scithian
wars; Augustus, and so saluted him; having obtained the Empire more by fraud
than virtue, being fitter for a distaffe than a sword, which was the cause of
great combustions.

40. VOLVSIAN, all troubles being pacified by the wisdom and valor of
Aemilian, and peace being settled in the Empire, the Emperor Gall^s returned to
Rome, and made his son Volusian companion in the Empire, and commanded that
he should be called C^sar: their reign had been very short (for that they
were found to be exceeding vicious) if a horrible plague had not happened, the
which continued ten years, and was general. In the mean time Ae^ilian was
chosen Emperor by the soldiers; whereupon Gallus and Volusian, the father and
the son prepared a great army to go and fight with Aemilian seized upon the
Empire, and made open wars against the friends of Gallus, putting them to
death wheresoever he found them. Gallus reigned but two years, and eight
months, and Volusian two years.

41. AEMILIAN after the defeat of the father and the son in Mauritania, was
Emperor: he was of a poor family, but by reason of the victories which he had
obtained in many places, grew so presumptious, and promised himself such
success, as he presumed to write unto the Senate that within few days he would
free Thrace, Mesopotamia, and Armenia from the oppression of his enemies: but
he was deceived, for he received present news that Appius soldiers had chosen
another Emperor to expel him. But the Aemilian, they consented unto his
death, and he was slain by the soldiers in the fortieth year of his age, and
having reigned three years.

42. LICINIVS VALERIANVS in the year of the World 4218, of Rome 1060, and of
Grace 256, being old, was chosen Emperor by the army which was in Baua^ia: he
was of the family of the Cornelians at Rome, and was beloved of the Senate for
his virtue and valor, and received Emperor by the consent of the Senate and of
all the other armies. In the beginning he showed himself mild unto Christians,
but afterward a Magitian of Aegipt persuaded him to persecute them, and to
sacrifice men unto Idols, but it continued not long, for going to make war
against the Persians, he was descated and Saporez king of Persia used Valerians
back as a foot stool when he went to horseback, and in the end he caused him
to be flead quick. He held the Empire but two years.

43. GALLIEN after the taking of his father was called Emperor in the year,
of the Nero, the plague of mankind, and the basest and most cruel that ever
lived: being given wholly to his pleasures, and not caring to redeem his
father; which made him to be hated of the soldiers. In his time there were
thirty of his Lieutenants which were saluted Emperors in their several
armies, all Tyrans, most of which slew one another: the which did much weaken
the empire, and he himself having lost many battles against Posthumus, was
slain by a Sclauonian. He reigned fifteen years. In the History of Gallien
there is the first mention of the French, which had assisted the Romans in
their wars.

44. SALONIN VALERIAN reigned during the captivity of Vaelerian his father,
Gallien: but he was (contrary to his brother) a good, wife, modest, sober,
bountiful, and learned Prince: the Senate did much esteem him, but the hatred
which the people bare unto his vicious brother Gallien, made them cold in their
affections to him, so as being with his brother in the battle against
Posthumus, they were pursued unto Milan, whereas the French put them to the
sword, and their bodies were buried in the same place.

45. LABIENVS POSTHVMVS (the Roman State being in a manner ruined) was chosen
Emperor by the Gauls: Gallien and Valerien brethren, disliking a companion,
marched toward France to fight with Posthumus, who having defeated them, made
himself master of all Gaul, and had already made it a realm: but one of
the Captains Lollianus, slew Posthumus and his son, whom the father had
associated with him in the empire, and caused to be proclaimed Augustus by the
French.

46. FLAVIVS CLAUDIUS was chosen Emperor by the army which was near unto
Milan; and the Senate confirmed this election, in the year of the World 4233,
of Rome 1021, and of Grace 271. The words which were recited in the Senate are
these: O Emperor Claudius, thou art our brother, thou art our father, thou art
our friend, thou art a good Senator, thou art a true Prince: Whereby we may
conceive what a worthy person he was: he expelled the Goths, and cut them in
pieces: he chased the tyrant Aur^olus out of the Commonweal, and died, having
reigned two years.

Claudius, was chosen by the Senate for the merit of his brothers virtues: but
he was very fearful and timorous, and loved a private life. Wherefore the
soldiers knowing his humor, made choice of Aurelian in the army. Which
Quintillius hearing, he fell into a melancholicke and desperate humor, causing
himself to be let blood in the foot, being in the water, to the end that death
might not be very painful unto him. He died seven and twenty days after his
election.

48. AVRELIAN was chosen emperor by the soldiers, in the year of the World
4235, of Rome 1023, and of Grace 273. He was a valiant man, and of great
experience in the wars: He defeated the Marcomanes and Sueuians. Italy being
pacified, be entered Zenobia, a Queen of great courage; whom he took, and led
in triumph to Rome. He led his army into Suabe, from whence he expelled the
Bohemians: and meaning to go into the East, the soldiers slew him near unto
Bizantium. He reigned five years, and six months.

49. TACITUS, in the year of the World 4241, of Rome 1029, and of Grace 279,
was for his virtues declared Emperor, by a decree of the Senate, to whom the
armies of the empire had left the charge. He was taken and chosen out of the
body of the Senate, and advanced to the imperial Throne. Then the Commonweal
of Rome used their judgment in the election of emperors. He died of a fever
in the city of Ta^sis, six months

50. ANNIVS FLORIANVS, after the death of his brother Tacitus, seized upon the
empire: but for that he was a prince of a bad constitution both of mind and
body, the soldiers did choose Probus: which Florian seeing, he caused himself
to be let blood in the foot, holding it in warm water, whereof he died, the
second month after his

51. VALERIVS PROBVS, in the year of the World 4242, of Rome 1030, and of
Grace 280, was by the voice of the army which was in Tarsis, the consent of
the Senate, and of all the armies of the empire, chosen emperor. Presently
after his election, he drew all the armies of the East into Gaul, where he
vanquished the French and Germans; he suppressed the Goths in Asia, and cleansed
Cilicia from thieves. Near unto Syrmium, he pressed the soldiers to labor in
the drayning of certain waterish and morish places: but they mutined against
him and slew him, having reigned six years.

52. CARVS, borne at Narbona, great Provost of the empire, was created in the
year Numerian and Carin with him: He made war against the Persians, who were
revolted, and made them subject to the empire. He gave battle to the
Sarmatians, of whom he slew 1600, and took 20000 prisoners, with great
spoils. He undertook the conquest of Ctesiphont; but being come to the river
of Tygris, there fell so great and fearful a storm, with such violent
lightning and thunder, as this good emperor was slain, having reigned two
years.

53. NVMERIANVS succeeded in the empire by the death of his father: he was one
of the most accomplished princes of his time, learned, a good Orator, and a
valiant knight, having been with his father in the Persian wars. This Prince
governing the army Aper his father in law, great Provost of the empire,
watched an opportunity to kill him, who being thus sick, caused himself to
be carried in a Litter, to the which Aper coming, he made a show that he would
comfort him, but he slew him miserably, and then he shut the Litter without any
discovery. He reigned but two years.

54. CARINVS during these things remained in Gaul, living with all pleasure
and content, the which ended with the lamentable death of his father and
brother; he seized upon the West empire of Gaul: the which bred great and
bloody wars. He may justly be called the plague and poison of mankind, and
the most abominable that heaven did ^uffer to be borne. This monster married
nine wives, whom he caused to be delivered Dioclesian being chosen at Rome
reigned peaceably. Carinus marched with a mighty army against him, where there
were diverse battles given; but in the end, that of Carinus was defeated, and
himself slain upon the field, having reigned two years.

55. DIOCLESIAN, a valiant and wise prince, was chosen emperor in the year of
the World 4250, of Rome 1038, and of our Salvation 288. He made Maximian his
companion in the empire; and for that it was needful to have many heads, they
named also two more. Dioclesian named Valerius Maximin, and Maximin named
Flauius Constantius, father to Constantine the Great. The emperors Dioclesian
and Maximian met together at Nicomedia, to the end they might ruin the
Christians. They made an edict that Dioclesian and Maximian did of their own
free wills leave the empire in one day: and soon after, Dioclesian drunk
poison, and killed himself, having reigned five and twenty years.

56. VALERIVS MAXIMIN being associated in the empire, was a cruel, furious,
and brutish man: he pacified a great insurrection of Pesants which were
revolted: he went into Afric, where he ended great enterprises: he defeated
the Gentians and erected an immortal Trophe of his worthy victory. He gave
over the Imperial Scepter, having reigned twenty years, to return unto the
private estate of his former condition.

57. CONSTANS, a mild and virtuous prince, being called to the government of
the empire, divided it with Valerius Maximin, and had for his part Gaul,
Spain, Italy, and Dauphine, the which he governed peaceably. He passed into
Asia, and vanquished the

58. VALERIVS MAXIMIN being associated in the Empire with Constance had for his
part Illiria in Greece, and in the East. He was a sheepeheards son, but cruel,
bloody, barbarous, valiant, and hardy, which procured him great victories and
conquests. He did choose with him for Emperors Maximin and Seuerus, and reserved
unto himself the countries of Illiria, whether he retired himself with his
wife. He was surprised with a grievous disease, and seeing that he could not be
cured, he slew himself.

59. MAXIMIN the second was made Emperor, and had for his portion the Eastern
province: he did associat Licinius who was a valiant man, whereof he repented
himself,

60. SEVERUS (associated to the Empire with Valerius Maximin) was a good
prince, and a valiant. He had cruel and bloody wars against Maxentius, who
did so practice with the Pretorian soldiers, as he was chosen Emperor without
any contradiction of the Senate: Seuerus having lost the battle fled
shamefully, and was taken at Rauenna,

61. MAXENTIVS came unto the Empire by cunning and fraud, causing himself to
be chosen by the Pretorian soldiers, and confirmed by the Senate: he was
turbulent, crafty, furious, cruel, and wicked; so as Seuerus who had been
chosen Emperor by all Italy and Afric, was defeated and murdered by him:
the which Constantin hearing being then in Gaul, he past into Italy to take
revenge, and gave battle to Maxentius, in the which he was defeated by
Constantin near unto the Miluian bridge, having reigned seven years a cruel
and vicious tyrant.

62. LICINIVS successor to Maximin, whom he had associated in the Empire, was
of base parentage, ignorant, brutish, and hating learning: he persecuted the
Christians cruelly, Constantin the Great made sharp wars against him, and
having vanquished him he was slain by his own men, being seventy years old,
and having reigned fourteen: he had married Constantia sister to Constantin
the Great, by whom he had one son called Licinius the young, whom Constantin
created Emperor.

63. MARTINIAN was chosen Emperor by Licinius, whenas Constantin made war
against him: he was inconstant, yet valiant; he raised an army to succor
Licinius against Constantin, but he was defeated and put to rout: he hated the
Christians much. He ended his days miserably, having lived forty years, and
reigned two.

64. CONSTANTIN the Great, being in France, was sent for by the Senate to expel
Maxentius; but he was doubtful whether he should lead his forces or not: but
God did let In hoc signo vinces: the which made him resolve to march toward
Rome, where he vanquished Maxentius, and drowned him afterward in the river of
Tyber: so as after the defeat of Maxentius, Constantin and Licinius were
Emperors together, in the year of the World 4272, of Rome 1060, and of Grace
210, that is to say, Constantin in the West, and Licinius in the East. They
lived peaceably about five years; but Licinius disco^ering his hatred against
the Christians, and persecuting them with all violence, they retired themselves
to Constantin, who levied an army, and with his son Crispus gave battle to
Licinius near unto Andrinopolis, where he slew him, and so Constantin was
Emperor alone, who reformed all things both touching religion, and justice. The
six and twentieth year of his Empire,

65. CRISPVS eldest son to Constantin the Great, after the death of Licinius
was associated in the Empire by his father; he was learned, and instructed in
the arts by Lactantius Firmianus. He was in the war against Licinius, but he
lived not long. Some say that Fausta his mother in law, Constantins second
wife, pressed him to have his company; but seeing the foulness of the fact, he
absented himself, and she seeing herself refused, went unto the Emperor her
husband to whom she complained with hypocritical tears that Crispus his son
had sought to dishonor her: which Constantin hearing, and giving credit to his
wives words, commanded suddenly that they should kill him, the which was
presently done. Some write that the Emperor caused Fausta his wife to be
slain, having discovered the truth of the fact.

66. CONSANTIN the second, in the year of the World 4303, of Rome 1090, and of
Constantin the Great, succeeded their father, who by his testament had divided
the Empire, that is, to Constantin (who was the eldest) France, Spain, the
Alps, and England; Constance had Italy, Afric, Greece, and Illiria;
Constantius the youngest had the East, and was sole Emperor: but the eldest was
more proud and glorius than the other two, and not content with his portion,
made wars against his brother Constance to take away Italy, where being with
his army, he was d^feated near unto Aquilea, and trodden under the horse feet,
whereof he died, being five and twenty years old, and having reigned three
years.

67. CONSTANCE by the death of Constantin, had his portion augmented with all
his brothers countries. He was twenty years old when he defeated his brother.
In the Magnentius Emperor at Ausbourg, who slew Constance sleeping in his bed:
his death is memorable, for that he himself had preserved this Magnentius in
Sclauonia, when the soldiers would have slain him, and covered him with his
roabe. He reigned thirty years.

68. CONSTANTIVS or CONSTANCE, the youngest of the three sons of Constantin
the Great, led an army of 60 thousand men against this murderer Magnentius,
who came to encounter him in Sclauonia with 30 thousand soldiers, as well
French as Germans: Constantius won the the battle, and Magnentius fled to
Lion where after Constantius remained sole Emperor, and had great war both
against the French and Germans. He made Julian his cousin Emperor to encounter
them whilst that he made war against the Sarmatians and Persians. He died of a
fever in Silicia, being one and forty years old, and having reigned four and
twenty years.

69. MAGNENTIVS having slain his master Constance, seized upon the Empire,
which he held not long, being put to flight, and his army defeated. He reigned
three years, and six months.

70. IVLIAN the Apostat, who before had been companion to Constantius for the
space of six years, in the year of Grace 365, remained sole Emperor a year,
and seven months. Libanius, who infected him with the opinions of I^mblicus
Maximus a Pagan Philosopher, from which time he disdained the Christian
doctrine, and followed the opinions of the Pagans. He became a sworn enemy to
Christians. Seeing himself sole Emperor, he did sacrifice men: he sent forth
edicts against Christians, and did open the idols temples, prohibiting to give
any offices to Christians: he would not suffer their children to be received
into the Rhetoric schools, and did write against the Christians, persuading
the Jews to reedifie their Estate. Finally he died miserably being thirty
years old.

71. IOVIAN, or IOVINIAN was Emperor in the year of the World 4329, of Rome
1117, and of Grace 367. He was a good and religious prince. He made a peace
with the Persians, and returned into Asia, he pacified many people, and settled
quietness in the Churches, he called back them that had been banished for
religion, and commanded Julian had taken from them, causing the Idols Temples
to be shut up, and died having reigned only eight months.

72. VALENTINIAN succeeded him in the year of the World 4330, of Rome 111S, and
of our Salvation 368: he was of Hungary. In the time of Julian he had been
deprived of his estates and offices, for that he had been a Christian. He was
a good prince, and a wise. He caused his brother Valens to come out of
Hungary, and made him Emperor with him, and some time after, his son
^ratian. Valentinian left the East unto his brother, and marched himself into
Gaul, where he defeated the Germans and Saxons.

73. VALENS, who had been Emperor with his brother, suruiued him three years:
He was ignorant and cruel, who notwithstanding his brothers admonitions, was
an Arrian. He entreated the Christians very cruelly. He made war against
Procopius, who affected the empire, but his soldiers delivered him unto
Valens, and he put him to death. He went against the Goths near
Andrionopolis, where he was wounded, and carried into a cottage, whereon the
enemies set fire, and burnt him alive, having reigned thirteen years, and five
months.

Valentinian the first, were Emperors together, in the year of the World
4344, of Rome 1132, and of our Redemption 382 Gratian made Theodosius partner
of the empire, with whom he reigned four years, having commanded eight years
before with his father, and three with his uncle Valens. He was learned, a
Poet, and one of the best Orators of his time. After the death of Valens, he
called home all the Christian Bishops, and expelled the heretics, commanding
all the Churches with one common consent to hold the Nice^e Creed. He returned
into France, whereas he did more esteem the German soldiers than the Romans:
so as the governor of Lions cut his throat, being two and thirty years old.

Gratian his ma^ster, who suffered himself to be governed by him, seized upon
the empire, and defeated the emperor Valentinian the second, brother to
Gratian, in battle, whom he forced to fly into the East to Theodosius: but
he leuying a mighty army, came and defeated Maximus, whom he took and put to
death, having reigned but one year.

76. VALENTINIAN the second, by the help of Theodosius, returned into France,
the which he governed seven years as Emperor: but Eugenius his Secretary,
and Colonel Arbogastus, a Goth by nation, corrupted the Grooms of
Valentinians Chamber with money; so as being at Vienna in Dauphine, they
strangled him with a cord. Eugenius caused himself to be called Emperor, and
was taken and carried to Theodosius, at Arbogastus slew himself.

77. THEODOSIUS, in the year of the World 4345, of Rome 1133, and of our
Salvation 383, a Spaniard, and of a noble family, was the last Emperor both
of the East and West. Having vanquished Maximus, and put him to death, he
returned to Rome, whereas he did shut up the Temples of their Idols, and did
wholly extinguish the sacrifices of the Pagans, and their Bachanales, which had
continued until the time of Valens. He restored the Christian religion, with
all good laws and justice: but news coming unto him that Valentinian had been
strangled, and that Eugenius, and Arbogastus marched with a great army toward
the Alps, and had protested that they would restore the sacrifices Theodosius
resolved to go and encounter them causing the name of Christ to be drawn in all
his ensigns and standards, for that one night being in prayer, and slumbring,
one appeared unto him and persuaded him to go against his enemies, whom he
defeated and cut in pieces. He died at Milan the seventeenth of September, in
the sixty and five year of his age, having reigned seventeen years.

78. ARCADIVS, after the death of his father Theodosius, succeeded with his
brother Honorius in the empire: Arcadius was in the East, in the year of the
World 4362, of Rome 1150, and of Grace 400: he was a courteous Prince, and a
good Catholic. His father had left him Rufin to be his Tutor, thinking that
he would be faithful, but Rufin being a French man borne, propounded to make
himself Emperor, for he drew in Alaric king of the Goths to terrify
Arcadius, but his treason being discovered, he was slain by the Italian
soldiers. He lived thirteen years after the death of his father.

79. HONORIVS, son to Theodosius, and brother to Arcadius, was emperor of
the West, and had Stilicon for his Tutor. In the eleventh year of his empire,
and in the year of Grace 409, Redegise came into Italy with an army of
200000 Goths, the which was Stilicon, and Redegise taken and strangled. After
this victory Honorius grew conceited that Stilicon affected the empire:
whereupon he caused him to be slain with his son Eucherius. Alaric, king of
the Goths, came to Rome, and took it after two years siege, the first day of
April, in the sixteenth year of the empire of Honorius, and in the year of
Grace 414. He reigned sixteen years.

80. THEODOSIUS the second, son to Arcadius, being nine years old, succeeded
his father, in the year of the World 4374, of Rome 1166, and of our Salvation
412, and in the 15 year of the empire of Honorius: His Tutor was called
Anthemius, by whose wisdom he was instructed in the fear of God, and the
public affairs well governed. He made a peace with the Goths, and employed
them against the Huns and Persians; and Nestorius; after which he died at
Constantinople, having reigned forty two years, and lived one and fifty.

81. VALENTINIAN the third was associated in the empire by Theodosius the
second, after the death of Honorius, in the year of the World 4392, of Rome
1180, of our Salvation 430, and in the ninth year of the empire of Theodosius
the second. He was the last Emperor of the West until Charlemaigne. He was an
adulterer, a magitian, and a murderer of great captains which had done him
service. Boniface his lieutenant in Afric was defeated by the Vandales, so as
they seized upon Carthage in the 34 year of the empire of Theodosius the
second, and the 17 of Valentinian the third. He reigned 30 years.

82. MARTIAN, lieutenant to Theodosius the second, succeeded his master, and
was Emperor of the East, in the year of the World 4416, of Rome 1214, and of
our Redemption 454. He was wise, valiant, and fearing God: and to pacify the
troubles of the Church, he concluded a peace with the Persians, and with the
Vandales in Afric. Having reigned six years, he died at Constantinople.

You must observe, that after the death of Valentinian, the Roman Empire was
much dismembered and torn in pieces: for the French held a great part of
Germany and Gaul; the Ostrogothes, Hongarie; the Westgothes, Spain; the
Vandales, Afric; and many called themselves Caesar in Italy; so as in the
space of twenty years there were nine Emperors which reigned, and succeeded
one another, and slew one another, the last was called Augustulus. This
diminitiu^ 465, Leon the Great living at Constantinople. He took Rome, and
caused himself to be called King of Rome and Italy, and went up in triumph to
the Capitole, where he made himself to be crowned. He abandoned Rome, with
many other neighbor towns, to blood, murder and spoil. He gave the third
part of his lands to the soldiers, and committed infinite villainies. They ruled
in Italy until the reign of Justinian.

83. LEO the Great, of Thrace, was chosen emperor at Constantinople, in the
year of the World 4423, of Rome 1221, and of our Redemption 461, by a general
consent of Anatoli^s. He was a good prince, and fearing God: he reigned
seventeen years.

84. ZENO being son in law and lieutenant of the army to Leo, in the year
of the World 4441, of Rome 1239, and of Grace 479, was made Emperor by his
son, for that Leo the Great had by his last will named Leo the second son
to Zeno, but Leo the second dying, he made his father Emperor, who sent
Theodoric king of the Goths into Italy as his lieutenant against Odoacre, who
was vanquished and slain by Theodoric. During his reign, Constantinople was in
a manner all burnt by an accident of fire, and in it there were consumed above
120000 volumes of good manuscripts, which was a great loss. Zeno was very
cruel, miserable, and a drunkard, who wallowing in his drukennesse and full of
wine, the Emperesse his wife caused him to be buried quick, having reigned
seventeen years.

85. ANASTASIVS was in the year of of the World 4456, of Rome 1244, and of
Zenos wife: he won the love of the people by abolishing a certain annual
tribute. He suppressed diverse seditions, and made a peace with the Persians. He
did openly profess the heresy of Eutiches, expelling Euphemius, who had
crowned him, out of Constantinople, then he caused Macedonius his successor to
be slain, and did much harm unto the Church. His reign was very fatal unto
Christians, being eighty and seven years old, lightning and thunder fell upon
him and consumed him to ashes, having reigned twenty and seven years.

86. IVSTIN the son of a sheepeheard of Thrace in the year of the World
4483, of Rome 1271, and of Grace 521, being for his valor made captain of
Anastasius gards, and respected by the soldiers, received certain money from
Amantius to win Theocretian his friend: but Justin practiced them for
himself, who with the consent of the Senate, and of the soldiers was received
Emperor. Amantius and Theocretian sought to be revenged, the which Justin
descouering, he put them to death. He was a good Catholic, banished the
Arrians, and did much for the Churches of the East. Being old, he created
Justinian his nephew Emperor in his life time in the presence of Epiphani^^
patriarch of Constantinople, and of the Senate, which Epiphanius did crown
Justinian his wife, and Justin died the eleventh year of his Empire, having
left Justin whom he had adopted for son.

87. JUSTINIAN who had been companion to Justin the space of four months,
remained sole Emperor in the year of the World 4490, of Rome 1278, and of
Grace Bellissarius his lieutenant against the Persians, whom he suppressed and
pacified. He was also sent into Afric, whereas Carthage yielded, and Gilimer
king of the Vandales was taken, and this was the last king of the Vandales; so
as Afric was again made subject to the Empire. Bellissarius was also sent
into Italy, where in five years he recovered all the towns which were held
by the Goths, especially Rome in the eleventh year of the reign of
Justinian, and in the year of Grace 537, and then returned to Constantinople:
but Totila raised the power of the Goths again in Italy, and Narses was sent
thither, who expelled them happily, but he drew in the Lombards. In the time of
Iustininan there was a collection made of laws, and it was afterward called
the civil law. A Counsel was held at Constantinople, and order set down for
the restraining

88. IVSTIN the second, grandchild to Justinian, was created Emperor in the
year of World 4528, of Rome 1317, and of our Redemption 566. He did moderat
imposts and usury: but by reason of his infirmity he could not manage the
affairs. Martin his lieutenant made war during four years against the
Persians, and under his reign was the beginning of the Exarques or six
governors at Rauenna, and of the Lombards reign in Italy. He governed eleven
years.

89. TIBERIUS the second, was sole Emperor in the year of the World 4539, of
Rome 1327, and of Grace 576, and both he and his wife were crowned by the
Patriarch Eutiches. He continued constant in the Catholic Church, and did
many alms deeds for the interting Maurice of Capadocia against the Persians,
who defeated them, and recovered Mesopotamia: at his return Tiberius gave him
Constautin his daughter to wife, and appointed him Emperor in the presence of
the army, and so died having reigned seven years.

90. MAVRICE of Capadocia succeeded his father in law, in the year of Rome
1333, and of Grace 584. He was crowned by a Patriarch called the Faster.
Caignan king of Maurice, in which battle he took twelve thousand Romans
prisoners: but there fell a plague in Caignans army, which slew seven of his
sons in one day, whereupon he retired, sending Maurice word that if he paid
a crown for every prisoner, he would send them back, the which Maurice
refused; whereat Caignan being incensed, he caused the heads of all the twelve
thousand prisoners to be cut off: upon this occasion, and for his other
baseness, the soldiers mutined, and thought to have slain him with stones
upon Christmas day, as he entered into the Church. In the end the troops which
lay upon the river of Danow advanced Phocas, and saluted him Emperor, who
caused Maurice

91. PHOCAS was Emperor in the year of the World 4566, of Rome 1355, and of
Grace 604. He was a Thracian borne, and of base parentage: having bin crowned
in the suburbs of Constantinople by the Patriarch Cyriacus, after the death of
Maurice, he put his friends to death. He was cruel, wicked, dissolute,
arauisher of men's wives, a murderer of innocents, an exacter and spoiler of
provinces, a drunkard, and a lecher: and whilst that he abandoned himself to
these vices, Caignan king of Hongarie, and the Persians spoiled the Empire: for
Cosroes king of Persia seized upon Jerusalem, and took Syria. He slew ninety
thousand Christians, and carried away the true Cross whereon Phocas was hated
of the people. Priscus son in law to Phocas joined with Heraclius governor of
Afric, and with one Photius, whose wife Phocas had ravished, th^se three
arrived at one instant at Constantinople with their armies, and seized upon
Phocas: the soldiers cut off his arms, legs, and privy parts, after which
they cut off his head, having reigned eight years.

92. HERACLIVS son to Heraclius governor of Africa, after the execution of
Phocas, was chosen Emperor by the consent of the Senate and armies, in the year
of the World 4573, and of our redemption 612. He was crowned by Pope Sergius,
and the same day he married Fabra Eudoxia, who was also crowned. He made a
peace with Caignan king of the Huns, and sent also to make an accord with
Cosroes king of Persia; who made auuswere Heraclius was not daunted, but relied
upon God, and led his army into Syria near unto Arot. Cosroes had retired
himself into his country, and was punished for his pride by a notable means
chosen of God. Cosrces named Mardassez his younger son to be his successor,
Syroes who was the eldest took his father Cosroes and cut his throat, having
first slain his brother Mardassez, making himself king by this means; and to
be the more assured, he made a peace with Heraclius, and set the prisoners at
liberty, among which was Zacherie Patriarch of Jerusalem, restoring the true
Cross. Under this Emperor began that detestable sect and religion of Mahomet.
He reigned one and thirty years.

93. CONSTANTIN the third, son to Heraclius was made Emperor by the Senate, in
the year of the World 4605, of Rome 1396, and of Grace 644. He was very
unfortunate in the war against the Sarazins: he flue his brother Theodosius, and
put good men to death, who blamed him for adhering to the errors of the
Monotholites. By his commandment Theodorus Calioppa (Exarque or governor of
Rauenna) took Pope Martin by treason, and sent him prisoner to Constantinople,
from whence Constantin banished him to the Taurike Chersonese, where he died
soon after of hunger. Constantin went into Italy against the Lombards, where
he was defeated, and afterward made a truce with them, where having spoiled
Rome he came into Sicile where he was strangled, washing himself in a bath. He
reigned seven and twenty years.

94. CONSTANTIN the fourth, his father did associat him in the Empire, in the
year of the World 4605, of Rome 1423, and of our redemption 670, whenas the
Sar^azins army at sea approached near unto Constantinople, and was repulst In
the end they were forced to make a peace with the Goths for thirty years.
The Emperor called the sixth

95. JUSTINIAN the second, son to Constantine the fourth, was made Emperor
by his father, in the year of the World 4649, of Rome 1440, and of our
Salvation 687; a cruel and bloody man. He had two flatterers which were the
cause of his ruin: the one was Theodosius a Moine, who was in such credit as
Justinian called him General or great Master; the other was Stephen,
Chaplain to the Emperor. These two Mignons intreat^d the captains of the
empire roughly, among others Leontius, whom they kept two years in prison: but
having escaped, he made himself Emperor, with the help Justinians nose, and
sent him into exile into an Island, whereas he caused these two Mignons to be
drawn by the feet through the town, and afterward burnt. Tiberius the third
of Apsimare returning out of Afric, from whence he had been expelled by the
Sarrazins with his army, not daring to come near Leontius, was saluted
Emperor by this army, but being taken by Leontius, he cut off his nose, and
kept him prisoner. And Justinian recovering his estate by the means of the
king of Bulgaria, he caused Leontius and Tiber^us of Apsimare to be drawn
through the streets, then setting his foot upon their necks, he caused their
eyes to be pulled out, and their heads to be struck off, and Heraclius
(brother to Tiberius) to be hanged. This done, the soldiers Philippicus
Bardanes emperor, who marched toward Constantinople: he caused Justinian and
his son to be drawn from an Altar, and to be slain by his commandment. He
reigned ten years before his exile, and six after his return; thus were three
emperors slain in a short time.

96. LEONTIVS or LEO was a Priest and Senator of Constantinople; he conspired
with certain factious people to expel the Emperor Justinian, the which he
effected; for entering with his seditious troop into the palace, he sent him
into exile, as has been said, and caused himself to be saluted Augustus: he
continued Emperor but three years.

97. TIBERIUS the third, of Apsimare, usurped the empire upon Leontius, and
caused Justinian went unto his uncle the king of Bulgaria, now called Hungary,
by whose means he entered into Constantinople, and caused Tiberius Apsimare,
and Leohtius (who was a prisoner) to be taken, and having caused them to be
dragged by horses through the streets in view of all the world, until they
were in a manner torn in pieces, he cut off their heads, Tiberius having
reigned seven years.

98. PHILIPPICVS BARDANES commanded Justinians army at Sea, and was chosen
Emperor by the said army, after which he came to Constantinople, whereas he
caused Justinian, and his son Tiberius, to be slain. Philippicus being in
quiet possession of the empire, he disanulled the decrees of the sixth Council,
by the persuasion of a Monk Philippicus when he slept. By his commandment all
Images were beaten down, and cast out of the Churches, the which did much
discontent Anastatius the second, who by his impatiencie and great rashness,
with his consorts, put out Philippicus eyes, and expelled him the empire,
having reigned two years. He was Protector of the Monotholites, and other
great heresies.

99. ANASTATIVS the second, a very learned man, in the year of the World
4667, of Rome 1468, and of our Salvation 715, was chosen emperor: and for that
he loved the peace of the Church, he suppressed all the enemies of the sixth
Council. He levied Anastatius deposed and confined into a monastery, having
reigned one year and three months.

100. THEODOSIUS the third, having been the author of the sedition and sack
Anastasius of the empire, caused himself to be called emperor: He was of
Constantinople, and of base parentage, but of a great spirit: but some write,
that he was forced to accept of the government of the empire. In the beginning
he caused Images to be restored in Churches; by his virtue and good government
he purchased the love and obedience of his people, yet Leo Isaurus his mortal
enemy made cruel war against him, wherewith the people were much afflicted:
but Theodosius being tired with these civil wars, resolved voluntarily to
leave the empire, and having reigned two years, he became a Monk.

101. LEO the third, called before Isaurus Conon, being in the army against
the Sarazins, Theodosius was chosen Emperor, returned out of Nicomedia, having
taken the son of Theodosius, he compounded so with the father as he quit the
empire. After which, he took an oath of the captains and soldiers, in the
year of the World 4670, of Rome 1471, and of Grace 718. In the second year of
his empire, the Sarazins besieged Constantinople; but they were chased away,
and their ships burnt: after which he made war against Images, and commanded
by an Edict, that they should be cast out of Churches: for this cause he was
called Iconomach, which is to say, an enemy of Images. He reigned four and
twenty years.

102. CONSTANTINE the fifth, surnamed Copronyme, for that when he was baptized
he berayed the font. He was crowned during the life of his father Leo Isaurus,
by the Germain, in the year of the World 4704, of Rome 1495, and of Grace 742.
He was much more vehement than his father to cast Images out of Churches:
whereupon one Artabardus was chosen Emperor, with the consent of the
Patriarch, and of the Nobility: but Copronymus, at the end of two years
defeated Artabardus in battle, and having taken him, he caused his eyes, with
his two sons, and the Patriarchs, to be put out; he caused him to be whipped,
and set upon an Ass with his face to the tail, the which he held in his hand,
and so was led through the streets. He was a magitian, and a man given to all
vices. He reigned five and thirty years.

103. CONSTANTINE the sixth, in the year of the World 4744, of Rome 1535, and
of Christ 782, son to Leo, and Irene, being twenty years old, sought to
manage Constantine for Emperor, but the army of Armenia detesting it, took
an oath unto the son, and so the other armies followed this example; yet for
all this the treason was not suppressed: for Constantine having reigned seven
years, his mother (taking an occasion, for that he had left his wife, and put
her into a monastery, to take another) sent certain soldiers to take her
son prisoner, who being in their hands, they put out his eyes, whereof he
died within few days after of melancholy, and Irene reigned three years after
her son, and her son fifteen years.

At this time the Empire was divided into two, which was in the year of Grace
104. CHARLEMAIGNE, after the death of Constantine the sixth, was called into
Italy against the Lombards, whom he expelled Italy, and conquered by force of
arms the city of Rome, with the towns of Rauenna and Milan, with all the
forts of Pouillia, and Campagnia. He gave peace unto the Church, which had
been oppressed two hundred years by the Lombards; so as he was declared
Emperor of the Romans by Pope Leo, to the great joy and content of all the
people. Seeing his death to draw near, Lewis emperor and king of the Romans,
and he made his nephew Bernard king of Italy; and soon after he died, being
seventy two years old, in the year of Grace 814, having reigned Emperor
fourteen years.

105. LEWIS, surnamed the Gentle, the only son of Charlemaigne, after the
death Bernard, his kinsfolks, and allies. He made Lothaire his eldest son
king of Bauaria, Pepin king of Aquitaine, and kept the youngest with him,
giving him the title of King of Italy, the which moved Bernard son to Pepin
king of Italy to take arms against the emperor: but his coming into Italy
terrified Bernard and his allies, and made them fly; but in the end, he
yielded himself unto the emperor, who carried him prisoner to Aix. He put out
his eyes, and then thrust him into a monastery in the year 818; and in
Bernards place he made his son Lothaire king of Italy and emperor. His
sons conspired against him, and forced their father to yield unto them, and
to become a Lewis his children had within a while after some compassion of
their father, and restored him to the imperial dignity. Thus was Lewis
restored within a year, and pardoned his children who had sought it. At the
return of this voyage Lewis died, being sixty four years old, having
reigned seven and twenty years. He was interred at Mets.

106. LOTHAIRE succeeded after the death of his father: he kindled a bloody
war against the brethren, the which did so weaken the French, as they were in
a manner ruined. Writers say that in the first battle there were above one
hundred thousand men slain; but the noblemen of the Empire reconciled them in
such sort, as the realms of Lewis the Gentle were divided into four parts:
Lewis had Germany, Charles was king Lothaire had the Empire and Italy, with
the countries which lie betwixt the rivers of Rhin and Moselle, Metz, and
Treues; and Pepin son to Pepin, had Aquitaine. This transaction was published
in the year of Grace 843. A while after Lothaire did voluntarily give over the
Empire, and became a monk in the monastery of Brume in the year of Grace
855, where he died the year following, having reigned fifteen years.

107. LEWIS the second, eldest son to Lothaire, went into Italy to expel
the Sarazins; but the plague fell into his army, and he was forced to leave
the country of Beneuent in guard to Adagise a Lombard, prince of Salerne, who
in the Emperors absence took the Gretians part, and drew almost all Italy
into revolt. Lewis having received these news, returned into Italy to punish
these traitors: having recovered the towns Adagise to fly, and did execute
his companions. Having pacified Italy, he dyed at Milan, in the year 874,
having reigned nineteen years. He was learned, wise, religious, and quick in
giving council.

108. CHARLES the Bald, son to Lewis the Gentle, hearing of the death of
Lewis, having no children, raised an army, past into Italy, to take the
Empire from the Germans, and came to Rome, where he was declared Emperor the
five and twenteth day of December in the year of Grace 875. He died at
Mantoua, and some thought that a Physician, a Jew by Nation called Sedechias,
his familiar friend, had poisoned him. He died in the year of the World 4840,
and of Grace 878, having been king of France six and thirty years, and Emperor
two.

Lewis surnamed Germanicus, heir of the realm of Italy by Car^oman, and of
Germany by reason of Lewis, after that Pope John had declared him Emperor, he
happily expelled the Sarrazins out of Italy, then he returned into Germany,
and governed France in quality of tutor to Charles the Simple. Finally he was
hated and contemned of his subjects, by reason of his infirmities, having his
mind also as diseased as his body. They made him renounce his Empire, and
Arnold was set in his place. He died soon after in a poor village of Suabe
the thirteenth of January in the year of the World 4850, and of Grace 888.

110. ARNOLD base son to Carloman being Emperor, Italy was full of tumults and
sedi^ions. Berengarias and a duke of Spoletum, contended who should be king of
Italy. Arnold (being busied in war against the Sclauonians of Morauia) could
not go into Italy before he had subdued those people, the which having done,
he past into Italy, where he pacified the troubles which were at Rome, and was
by Pope Formosus (whom he cau^ed to come) declared Emperor, the tenth year
after he had taken upon him the government of the Empire. Finally having taken
Spoletum by force, he came to besiege the castle of Cauarin, in the which was
the wife of Guy, who being a cunning woman, seeing Arnold died the nine and
twentieth of November in the year of the World 4802, and of Grace 900, having
been Emperor twelve years.

111. LEWIS the third, having been created Emperor after the death of his
father Arnold, governed the Empire for a time with the aid and assistance of
Otho duke of Saxony, and of Otho Archbishop of Mentz his tutors. The civil
discords which had begun in his fathers life time increased much. Italy and
Germany were full of divisions and civil wars. The Hongarians being gathered
together, spoiled the limits of Bauaria, and Lewis went to encounter them with
all his forces, and gave them battle, the which continued from the ninth of
August unto the twelft, but in the end he was defeated and put to rout, where
he lost the brauest of the nobility of Germany. The Hongarians being victors
got the country, until that Lewis purchased a peace at a dear rate, whereupon
he dyed with grief. He fell sick and died the twelfth of January in the year
of the World 4873, of Grace 911, and of his Empire the twelfth.

112. HENRY surnamed the Oyseluer, or Keeper of birds, was chosen to the
Empire in the year of Grace 919, and labored what he could to pacify the
civil wars, and to settle a peace in Germany, the which he did. He made war
against the Sclauonians whom he vanquished in battle: which done he turned
his forces against the Danes, Henry went to meet them, and gave them battle,
where they lost above forty thousand men, the rest he expelled out of
Germany. After this great victory he prepared himself to go into Italy, but
he was surprised with an apoplexy, which turned to a palsy, and having
appointed his son Otho Emperor, he dyed, being sixty years old, having
reigned eighteen years, and after the birth of Christ 937.

113. OTHO the second, succeeded his father Henry: he was surnamed the Great,
by reason of his brave exploits, having pacified Germany with other sorraine
realms, and Hildeberg Bishop of Mentz, in the year of Grace 939, after which
he past into Italy, whereas he restored Pope John the third, and caused his
son Otho to be declared Emperor: after his return into Germany, he was
surprised with an apoplexy, whereof he died in the year of Grace 974, and the
37 of his reign.

114. OTHO the third, succeeded his father in the year of Grace 975. The
beginning of his Empire was fortunat, but the end was not answerable: having
settled an order for the Estate of Germany, he levied a great army to go
against the Grecians and Sarrazins, to whom he gave battle, in which he was
defeated, and put to rout: the Emperor casting away his arms fled toward the
gulf of Tarent^m and Rosana, where he leapt Otho having lost his army, and in
a manner all his Empire, gathered together the small remainder of his forces
and then renewed the wars, in the which he cut in pieces all the garrisons of
Sarrazins, for the which he was surnamed the Pasport of Sarrazins. He died of a
flux the eight of December in the year of Grace 983, and of the World 4945,
and in the tenth-yere of his Empire. He was interred at Rome.

115. OTHO the fourth was declared Emperor. At his entrance he settled a peace
in Germany, and labored to pacify the seditions of Italy* Crescentius
having usurped the Consuls power at Rome, expelled the Pope out of his seat.
The Emperor went thither Bruno son to Otho for his successor, who was called
Grego^i^ the fi^t. He sent him before to Rome and followed, after, where being
received, he p^rdoned Crescentius, and causing himself to be declared Emperor
by the Pope, he resolved Crescentius of his own private authority expelled
Pope Gregory, and made one called John of Plaisance Pope. The Emperor hearing
of these news, returned to Rome, where he entered the city and took
Crescentius, whom he caused to be set upon an ass with his face to the tail,
and so to be led through the streets, then having suffered a thousand
indignities, he caused him to be hanged with twelve of his companions at the
city gate. The Emperor having settled Gregory, made a decree with the Popes
consent, who did confirm and publish it; that from thence forth the Germans
should have all right and power to choose the Roman Emperor, and it should not
be lawful for the Pope to proclaim any prince Emperor, but him whom the
princes of Germany had chosen: whereat the Romans did Otho returned again to
Rome, where he fell in love with Crescentius widow, but she seeing that the
emperor prepared to go into Germany, and would not marry her, poisoned him
for spite. He died the twentieth of October, in the year of Grace 1001,
having reigned nineteen years.

116. HENRY the second, surnamed the Holy, came unto the empire a year after
the death of Otho: He prevailed against those which had opposed themselves
against his election: he subdued the Henetians who had rejected the Christian
religion; and having settled an order for the affairs of Germany, he levied an
army to go into Italy for Andreuin, who was vanquished and slain. In this
war Henry was taken, who having deceived his keepers, cast himself over a
wall, but he put his thigh out of joint, for the which he was afterward called
the Limping. Finally, he died the thirteenth of Iulie, in the year of Grace
1024, and of the World 4986, in the 24 year of his Empire.

117. CONRADE, the Salique, was chosen Emperor: He past into Italy to keep
them in awe that would tend to any revolt: he confirmed the possession of the
empire Henry to be emperor: being returned, he died suddenly, the fourth of
June, in the year of our Redemption 1039, and of the World 5001, having been
Emperor fifteen years. He lies buried at Spire.

118. HENRY, surnamed the Black, succeeded his father. In the beginning he
was engaged in two important wars; the one against the Bohemians, who refused
to pay the yearly tribute which they ought; but Henry vanquished them, and
forced them to return under the obedience of the empire; the other was, to
restore Peter king of Hongarie, who had been expelled by Otho, the chief of
the Bohemians. Henry marched into Hongarie, where he defeated Otho near unto
Iauerin; who being taken, he was brought Benedict the ninth, Siluester the
third, and Gregory the sixth, all three contesting who should be Pope. The
Emperor went into Italy, where (by the advice of a Council assembled by his
Imperial authority) these three Popes were deposed, and Clement the second
chosen in their place: and having been declared emperor by the Pope, he
returned with his army into Germany, where he was scarce arrived, before the
Pope died of poison; and after him another Pope called Damasus, who lived but
three and twenty days: the emperor advanced another Pope called Leo the
ninth, and he followed the emperor into Germany, who within a while after
sent Leo back into Italy, the which was full of seditions. The emperor Christ
1056. He was Emperor seventeen years, and lived forty, and was buried at

119. HENRY the fourth, began to be Emperor at the age of seven years:
during his youth he had bloody civil wars, and was forced to set hand to
work at the age of fourteen years. Germany was full of combustions and
civil wars: he vanquished Otho duke of Bauaria. Pope Gregory the seventh
did excommunicat him at the pursuit of the Saxons, sending a Bull by the which
Henry was put out of the Church; and he sent a crown of gold to Raoul duke of
Suabe, commanding the Bishops of Germany to leave Henry's party, and to
adhere to Raoul, who accepted the name of Emperor, and was crowned at Mentz.
There were nine battles betwixt Henry and the Saxons: but Raoul

120. HENRY the fifth succeeded: at his entrance he vanquished Henry duke of
Lorraine, and Robert earl of Flanders, and forced them to swear fealty unto
him. He led an Pascall, and the ancient privileges of the empire were
confirmed by a public proclamation. The Emperor was scarce out of Rome,
whenas the Pope disanulled all those decrees, and retracted his promise,
persuading the Saxons to levy a great army, who gave battle unto the
Emperor, the eleventh of January, in the year 1115, in the which he was
defeated. The Emperor returned again into Italy, but seeing himself
tormented by the Popes practices, and the many seditions of his subjects,
transported with rage and fury, caring no more for his country; and being
importuned by the Bishops, who entreated him to quit some part of his right, he
granted unto the Pope what he demanded, the which was published at Worms,
the five and twentieth day of January, in the year

121. LOTHAIRE the second, of Saxony, invaded the empire in despite of the
German Princes. He had for competitor Conrade, who was sisters son to Henry
the fifth: but S. Bernard reconciled these Princes, and Lothaire enjoyed the
empire. The Emperor went twice into Italy, where he pacified all troubles. He
erected an University for the study of the laws, and the ornament of the
country. Returning into Germany he was surprised with sickness, whereof he
died upon the way, the sixth of December 1138, and of the World 5100, having
reigned eleven years.

122. CONRADE the second, after the death of Lothaire, was chosen Emperor by
the Estates, held at Mentz. He vanquished Henry the Proud, duke of Saxony and
Bauaria, who contended for the empire. Guelphe his brother put himself into
the town of Weinsberg, who after a long siege, being oppressed with famine, was
forced to yield, and the spoil of the town was given unto the soldiers. The
women b^sought the emperor to give them leave to depart with what they could
carry away, who granted their request, thinking they would not carry any
thing but their greatest wealth; but they took their husbands upon their
backs, and their children in their arms, and went forth after this manner.
The Emperor seeing the love of these women, made them a banquet and pardoned
them. Afterward he went into Asia with king Lewis, whereas he gave

123. FREDERICK surnamed Barbarousse, was chosen by the testament of Conrad:
he accepted the Empire, and came to Rome, whereas Pope Adrian the fourth
crowned him the eight and twentieth of June, and then he returned into
Germany. Italy revolted against the Emperor, whether he went and gave them
battle, in the which there were twelve thousand Romans slain upon the place;
then he besieged, and took Rome. Pope Alexander excommunicated the Emperor,
who came to Venice, and there he cast himself at the Popes feet; who setting
his foot upon the Emperors neck, said, Super Aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis:
to whom the Emperor answered, Non tibi sed Petro, and the Pope replied, Et mihi
and Petro. The Emperor having obtained absolution, and pacified Sal^din fled
out of Asia, and Frederick pursuing his victories conquered Silicia, and cut
in pieces the Sarrazins army, expelling Saladins troops out of the lesser
Armenia. The Emperor being oppressed with heat, went into a river to bath
himself, where he was drowned the tenth of June 1189, having reigned seven and
thirty years.

124. HENRY the sixth, succeeded his father Frederick in the year of Grace
1190, with the consent of the princes of the Empire. He married Constance
daughter to Roger king of Sicile, who brought the realm of Sicile unto her
husband for a dowry. Henry past Celestin. By the Popes persuasion he sent a
goodly army into Asia, being accompanied with the greatest noblemen and
princes of the Empire: but the sudden death of Henry brake off the course of
their enterprises. He went into Sicile to arm certain galleys to follow the
army: but being at Messina, he was poisoned by his wife, who hated him for his
adulteries. He died in the year of the World 5160, and of Grace 1198. He
reigned seven year, leaving his son Frederick but five years old, under the
government of his brother Philip.

125. PHILIP the second, son to Barbarousse, was chosen Emperor. He had great
wars, most part of the princes adhering unto him: but the Pope, and some other
princes opposed themselves against him, who having promised the crown to Otho
son to Henry the Philip, the which was the cause of great wars betwixt Otho
and Philip; but in the end Philip enjoyed the Empire. Then the Pope sent two
Cardinals to absolve Philip, reconciling him unto Otho by the means of a
marriage with his daughter. All matters being thus agreed, the Emperor being at
Bamberg to take physic, he caused all that were in his chamber to depart,
remaining alone with Henry Truchefs, with whom he past the time: hereupon Otho
of Witelsbach surnamed the Young, making noshow of discontent, entered into the
chamber, and wounded the Emperor in the throat with his dagger, whereof he died
the two and twentieth of June in the year of Grace 1208, and of the World
5170, having reigned ten years. The Emperesse seeing her husband slain after
this manner, died of grief.

Philip, but he enioied it not long; for he was deprived by the Popes sentence,
who had advanced him. He was crowned at Rome by Pope Innocent the third; but
having gotten the possession of Romagnia, Ancona, and Pouillia, the Pope
excommunicated him; and the Bishop of Mentz published the excommunication in
Germany, which was the cause of great civil wars. Otho seeing himself
assailed by many enemies, and that the princes had chosen Frederick the second,
Emperor, he retired into Brabant, where having lost a battle against
Frederick, and seeing himself abandoned by his people, he willingly quit the
Empire, the third year of his government.

127. FREDERICK, was crowned at Aix, Otho having quit the Empire in the year
of Philip the French king: having pacified Germany, they propounded unto him
the war of Asia, the which he promised. He parted from Brunswicke with his
army to go to this enterprise, the eleventh of August 1228. Being joined to
the Christians army at Ptolomaide, he made a truce for two years with the
Sultan which was very beneficial; for he recovered the possession of the
realm of Jerusalem, and the Christian prisoners were set at liberty without
ransom: and having set

After the decease of Frederick, there were Schisms in the Empire until the
time of Rod^lphus, so as most historians which have written the lives of
Emperors, take all that time for an interraigne or vacancie of the Empire; not
holding them for Emperors which follow, until Radulphus, for that they were
chosen by diverse factions during the civil wars, and were never

CONRAD son to Frederick the second, was created king of Romans his father
being living, and was poisoned by Manfred his base brother in the year of
Grace 1254.

HENRY Lanpgrau of Turinge, was chosen king of Romans in hatred of Frederick,
and of Conrad his son, and died being wounded with an arrow before Vlme in
the same year that he was chosen king of Romans.

WILLIAM Ea^le of Holland was chosen king of Romans, and allowed by Pope
Alexander; who hoping to go to Rome to be crowned, died in the ninth year of
his reign, and of Grace 1255.

RICHARD brother to the king of England, was also chosen king of Romans by
Conrad Archbishop of Cologne, and Lewis Count Palatin of the Rhin, and died in
January the sixth year of his reign 1257.

ALPHONSO king of Castile was also chosen king of Romans by the Archbishop of
Treues, and the Marquis of Brndebourg, in the year 1257, in January, the
electors being divided.

128. RODVLPHVS, or RALFE of Haspourg being four and fifty years old, was
solemnly chosen in the town of Francfort by the electors of the Empire the
first of October 1273, and was crowned with great solemnity. He resolved to
suppress all seditions, tumults, thefts, and wars in Germany: and to this end
he caused his troup^s to march Ottacrus king of Bohemia, and vanquished him in
two battles, he being slain in the second, the six and twentieth of August
1278. He commanded seventy castles and strong forts to be razed, which served
as retraits for thieves, and did cause nine and twenty of their chief leaders
to be executed. He came not into Italy, yet he continued in good terms with
the Pope; so as by his wisdom, judgment, virtue, and felicity, he quenched
the civil wars, and was the cause that Germany was restored, having been
long in combustion. Being old he died the fifteenth of Iulie, in the year of
Grace 1591, and of the World 5253, having reigned nineteen years. He lies
buried at Spire.

129. ADOLPHE of Nassau was chosen Emperor the first of May 1292, at Francfort
by an imperial diet. At his first entrance, he went and served the king of
England who had wars against the French king, in regard of a hundred thousand
crowns, for which cause the princes of the Empire did no more esteem him, but
scorned him openly. Finally, Albert of Austria being invested in the Empire
went to field: Adolph came to meet him, and they encountered near unto Spire,
whereas a battle was given the second of July 1298, in the which Adolph was
slain by the hand of Albert, as he did rise having bin overthrown, having
reigned eight years.

130. ALBERT son to Radulphus duke of Austria, was received to the government
of the Empire by the seven Electors, who all with one consent proclaimed him
Emperor Albert came not into Italy, yet he appointed g^ue^nors there, and
entreated Pope Boniface the eight to proclaim him Emperor, the which he did,
and withal, the Pope gave him the realm of France, for that he had
excommunicated Philip the Fair. Albert made no war out of Germany, but
against diverse noblemen and princes within the country, upon diverse occasions.
He was slain near unto the Rhyn by his own nephew, from whom he had taken
the duchy of Su^be, as from a prodigal, being accompanied by certain Barons,
the first of May, in the year of Grace 1308, and of the World 5270, having
reigned ten years.

131. HENRY the seventh, earl of Luxembourg, was chosen by the Electors at
Francfort, the first of November, and confirmed by the Pope, upon condition,
that he should pacify Italy within two years. Italy, which had not seen an
emperor in sixty years, was bathed with her own blood, and was exhausted of
her treasure by Tyrants, who held her Bartholomews day, the four and twentieth
of August 1313, having reigned six years. He lies at Pisa.

132. FREDERIC the third, of Austria, was chosen Emperor, and Lewis of Bauaria
Lewis was crowned at Aix, and Frederic with a less train was crowned at Bonna
by the Archbishop of Cologne: Germany was pres^ntly divided into two factions,
and this kindled a cruel civil war, the which continued eight years: there
was a truce made, and they sought to pacify these controversies; but vpn S
Michels day, in the year 1323, Frederic was defeated and taken prisoner, and
put into a castle standing upon the river of Nabe: he was afterward set at
liberty, upon condition, that he should carry the title of Emperor, with
Lewis, during his life, but not to challenge the rights and power of the
empire. He was poisoned with a love drink, in the year 1330, the 13 of
January.

133. LEWIS the fourth, after the death of Frederic, remained sole Emperor he
went into Italy, where he caused himself and his wife to be crowned: he had
great contention John the 22, who was then resident at Auignon; so as this Pope
excommunicated him, and caused Charles son to the king of Bohemia to be
chosen. Lewis caused an Edict of Abolishion to be made touching those which had
followed the party of Frederic, by which means he reconciled the German
princes unto him. He caused an Imperial Diet to be held at Strasbourg, whereas
he made known the cause why the Pope had excommunicated him, and that he would
submit himself unto a Council. The Pope commanded all the German and Italian
Princes to quit Lewis party; so as he could not be absolved, the which was the
cause of great troubles. He died a year after the election of Charles, the
eleventh of October, in the year of Grace 1347, and of the World 5309, having
governed the empire three and thirty years.

Lewis, but after his death the Electors rejected him, and made choice of
G^ntier earl of Schuartzembourg in Tutinge, the second of February, in the
year 1349, but he lived not long, for Charles corrupted his physician, so as
on a time Gontier being ill disposed, in stead of a potion, was poisoned by
him; who doubting thereof, forced the physician to drink the rest, and saw him
fall down dead before him, but Gontier lived not long after. He lies in S.
Bartholomews Church in Francfort. Charles remaining sole Emperor past into
Italy, in the year 1354, where he received the Crown of Iron at Milan: then
he went to Rome, where he was declared Emperor: being returned to Meta, he
held a great Imperial Diet, whereas that famous Edict of Charles was made,
called the Golden Bull. He solicited Wenceslaus was crowned Emperor, and
married Ioane Countess of Holland and Zeland, daughter to the duke of Bauaria.
The Emperor being joyful to have advanced his son to the greatest dignity
in Christendom, died at Prague, the seven and twentieth of May 1375, having
reigned thirty years.

135. WENCESLAVS, being fifteen years old and six days, after his election,
was

136. ROBERT, Count Palatin of the Rhyn (after that Wenceslaus had been
dejected Galeus, duke of Milan; but he lost a battle, and so retired into
Germany, leaving the Italians to kill one another. Having pacified Germany,
he died in peace, the eighteenth of May 1410, and in the year of the World
5372, having reigned ten years.

137. SIGISMOND, king of Hungary and Bohemia, was chosen Emperor, who
presently thought to pacify the troubles of Christendom, and to unite all
princes to renew the war against the Turk. There were at that time three
Popes, Benedict the third at Auignon, John the three and twentieth at Bolognia,
and Gregory the twelfth at Riminy. Sigismond pursued a Council to remedy
these mischiefs, and made a speedy journey into Italy, France, Spain, and
England: he wrought so with all kings and princes, as they yielded to have a
Council held at Constance, whether came some Christian kings and princes, and
the emperors of Greece and Trebisond were there also in person. The emperor
returned into Italy, where, on the three and twentieth of December 1431, he
made his entry into Milan, and having received the Crown of Iron, he took his
way toward Rome, where he was crowned upon Whitsunday, the two and twentieth
of May: From thence he retired into Hungary, but he had a horrible civil
war in Bohemia, by reason of the death of John Hus, who was burnt at the
Council of Constance, contrary to the pasport which the emperor had given
them. In the end he fell sick, and

138. ALBERT of Austria, son in law to Sigismond, succeeded him in the
empire, and in the two realms of Hungary and Bohemia, in the year 1438. He
had some war in Bohemia, but it was soon quenched; and the year following, he
was surprised with a flux, having eaten mealons too greedily: he died in
Hungary the seven and twentieth of October 1439. This sudden death was the
cause of new troubles.

139. FREDERIC the fourth, of Austria, was chosen Emperor the tenth of March
Elenor, daughter to Edward king of Portugal: he was declared king of Lombardie,
and two days after he was acknowledged emperor of the Romans, in the year
1442. Hearing that Germany was in great combustions, he made have to return,
but he soon pacified all. In the end, he died of a flux, being very old,
having reigned three and fifty years. At this time, some write, that the art
of Printing was invented in Germany, and that the first Books were printed at
Mentz, and in the year 1440, the city of Constantinople was taken by the
Turk.

140. MAXIMILIAN, son to Frederic, came unto the empire the sixth of February
1486. He was a great lover of learned men, and gave new life to all good arts
and sciences Charles the eight the French king. He was also in war against
the Suisses. Finally, he held the last imperial Diet in a great assembly of
the princes of the empire, in Selim had rooted out the Mamelus, and caused the
last Sultan of Egypt to be hanged. He died of a flux the twelfth of January
1519, being nine and fifty years old, one month, and twenty days, having
reigned two and thirty years, and eleven months.

141. CHARLES the fifth, king of Spain, was chosen Emperor by the Electors the
eighteenth of June 1520. He took arms against the great king Francis his
competitor in the Empire, and made a league with the Pope and king of England.
He sent the duke of Bourbon into Italy, to succor Anthony de Leave who was
besieged in Pauia; they gave battle unto the French, whereas king Francis and
the chief commanders were Elenor his sister to the French king, having paid
two millions of gold for his ransom. He returned into Germany, and resolved
to go and meet with the Turk at Vienna, and to give him battle, but the
Turk fled away with great loss. The Protestant princes of Germany made war
against him, whom he put to rout. He pacified Germany, made a league with
Iulio the third, to drive the French out of Italy. He levied a mighty army
in Germany, and came and besieged Metz, whereas he found that his good fortune
began to fail him. His son having married Marie queen of England, he gave
him the realm of Naples, and finding himself much tormented with the gout, he
renounced all his Estates, and left the Empire to his brother Ferdinand in the
year 1555. Being afterward at Brussells, he caused all the noblemen to take
an Philip, and so returned into Spain, where he died the one and twentieth of
September 1558, being seven and fifty years old, eight months, and one and
twenty days, having reigned eight and thirty years Emperor, and four and
forty king of Spain.

142. FERDINAND of Austria, brother to Charles the fifth, was proclaimed king of
Romans in the city of Cologne the fifth of January 1531, and was crowned at
Aix the eleventh of the same month, notwithstanding the protestation of
nullitie made by the Elector of Saxony being a Protestant. This controuersiie
continued some years, but it was ended. Now we must come to the election of
Ferdinand to be Emperor. In the year 1558, the Electors assembled after their
accustomed manner, and did choose Ferdinand Guzman his Ambassador to Rome to
acquaint the Pope with his election. In the year 1559 he held an imperial
Diet at Francfort, where they treated of peace and religion. In the year 1561
the Protestant princes of Germany assembled at Newremberg, whether came two
Legates from Pope Pius to exhort and entreat them to assist at the Council of
Trent, where the should have audience, presenting the Popes letters unto the
princes. In November 1562, the Emperor, Eelectors, and other princes assembled
to choose a new king of Romans, whereas Maximillian son to the Emperor
Ferdinand, crowned not long before king of Bohemia, was chosen Emperor and
crowned king with great pomp and solemnities, the five and twentieth of Iulie
1564. Ferdinand died at Vienne in Austria being sixty years old, nine
months, and some days, having Anne queen of Hongarie.

143. MAXIMILLIAN the second, son to Ferdinand of Austria, was chosen Emperor
soon after his fathers death. He held his first Diet at Ausbourg, whereas they
did treat especially of a war against the Turk, and the Vaiuode of
Transiluania, and what forces they should employ for the defense of the realm
of Hongarie against the Turk an hereditarie enemy to Christians. The Emperor
demanded of the Estates of Germany forty thousand foot, and eight thousand
horse to make head against the Turk, who was already entered into Hongarie.
This year 1566, Soliman Emperor of the Turks came into Hongarie with an
army of sixty thousand foot, and great numbers of horse; Mahomet concealing
the death of Soliman took the town by assault: the loss whereof

144. RODOLPHVS the second, eldest son to Maximillian, came unto the Empire
by the death of his father, and succeeded in the realms of Bohemia and
Hongarie, being Mathias, his brother, the realm of Hongarie, and all the
Archduchie of Austria without any reservation. He died without children the
tenth of February 1612, having reigned five and thirty years, four months,
being sixty years old.

145. MATHIAS brother to Rodolphus succeeded him in the Empire, and was chosen

Contents of the Golden Bull.
Because we have formerly made mention of that memorable edict called the Golden
Bull, made by the Emperor Charles the fourth, in the year 1356, touching the
election of the Emperor, it shall not be impertinent to set down the chief
heads thereof, before we describe the manner of this last Emperors election.
The Emperor being dead, the Archbishop of Mentz does presently advertise the
other electors, and appoint a day, that within three months they or their
ambassadors may meet at Francfort, with full authority to choose a new
Emperor: and if Mentz neglect it, the rest of the electors Charles the fourth,
and the Popes decree; and whatsoever shall be done contrary to the tenor
hereof, shall be void.

Arrival of the Electors of the Sacred Empire in the Town of Francfort upon
Main, deputed for this election.
John Schweick^ard, Archbishop of Mentz, and the most reverend father in God,
and most noble prince and lord Ferdinand Archbishop of Cologne, respectively
high Chauncellors of the Empire for Germany and Italy, and Electors. In like
manner also the most noble princes and lords John Count Palatin of the John
George duke of Saxony, Iuliers, Cleues, and Berg, high marshall of the sacred
Empire, and elector, at that time vicars of the holy Empire, every one in his
place, set down by the golden Bull.

On Monday following, the eleventh of May, there arrived in the town of
Francfort the most reverend father in God, and the most noble Prince and Lord
Loth^ire, Archbishop of Treues, high Chancellor of the sacred empire in France,
and in the realm of Arles, and Elector: as also, the same night the
Ambassador of the most noble prince and lord John Sigismond, Marquis of
Brandebourg, high Chamberlain of the sacred Empire,

On Wednesday, being the thirteenth of May, arrived the most famous and mighty
prince and lord Mathias the second, king of Hungary, and Bohemia, etc.
Archduke of Austria, duke of Bourgondie, Stiria, Keruten, Crain, and
Vurtemberg, Marquis of Morauaia, Earl of Habspurg, Tyrol, etc. with a great
and gallant train, well appointed, in the which were a hundred Harquebuziers
on horseback: All which Electors and Ambassadors were honorably entertained
in the town of Francfort, by the horsemen which had been levied by the town,
whereof the most part were Bourgesses.

The order and sitting of the Electors, Noblemen, and Ambassadors in the
THe Electors of the sacred Empire, of Mentz, Treues, Cologne, and
Administrator of the Elector Palatin, the duke of Saxony, and the Ambassador
of Brandebourg, being arrived (as has been said) on the twelfth of May, they
held a Council in the Rommer, or Townhouse, in a Hall appointed to that end.
There was in this Hall seven seats covered with black velvet, and cushions of
the same, set in order one by another near unto the window, in the which the
said Electors did sit, with the Administrator and Ambassador, that is to say
(to begin at the right hand) first the Palatin, then the king of Bohemia in
quality of Elector; and after his said majesty, the Elector of Mentz, then

Among diverse things that were propounded, whereof the point of the oath was
one, the which (according to the tenor of the golden Bull) the Inhabitants of
the town are bound to swear. Wherefore the Electors required it both of the
Senate, Citisens, and soul diers that were entertained by the town; and to that
end they appointed Saturday, the sixteenth of May, with express commandment
to avoid the town of all such as did not belong to some of the Electors:
whereof the Magistrate gave notice to the Inhabitants the Friday before, by the
sound of a drum, and a public Proclamation.

The form of the oath which the Magistrate, Senate, and Soldiers of Francfort,
swear unto the Electors of the sacred Empire.
ON Saturday following, which was the sixteenth of May, before dinner, the
Electors, with Adrian Gans, Lord of Putlitz, Ambassador for the Elector of
Brandebourg, being set in chaires of black velvet (after the former order) in
a great Hall within the Town house, having a scaffold raised a foot high; the
magistrate of Francfort first of all took the said oath in the same form as it
was propounded unto them by Francis Philip E^ust, Chauncellor to the Elector of
Mentz, and after this manner: That before all things the Magistrate of Francfort
should with all fidelity promise and swear to the most reu^rend Prince and
Lord John Schweickhard, Archbishop of Mentz, and Elector, etc. presenting
himself in his own name, and in the name of other Lords

Presently after this, the Senate promised and swore it publickely in the
presence of many assistants, according to that form of oath which had been
propounded by the elector of Mentz, Chauncellor: which done the administrator
of the elector Palatin, and the ambassador to the marquis of Brandebourg did
arise from their seats to go unto the window which looks toward the market
place, whereas they saw the inhabitants, who according to the advice which was
given them the day before, were there assembled to take the same oath. And at
the same instant the soldiers which had been drawn from all the quarters of
the town into a place called the Ramhoff, and afterward led in good

On Tuesday the second of June before noone, the magistrate of the town of
Francfort made a new proclamation, commanding all strangers that were not
comprehended in the train of some one of the electors, or not bound by oath
unto the Senate, presently to depart the town: and after noone all the town
gates were shut up.


ON Wednesday the third of June 1612, the Royal election was made: and first of
all the inhabitants were armed, and drawn into diverse parts of the t^wne,
especially they that were placed in two ranks from the Rommer unto S.
Bartholomews Church were gallantly appointed. Then did the Magistrate cause a
great bell to be ru^g half an hour, the which they call the alarm bell.
After seven of the clock the electors came Bartholomews Church. First there
marched a great number of Counselors, Noblemen, and others belonging to the
Electors: then followed on horseback John Philip of Hohenecke, and Melchior
seignior or lord of Eltz, marshalls to the Electors of Mentz and Treues, either
of them carrying in his hand a sword in a golden scabard: after them followed
the most reverend fath^rs in God and princes John Schweickbard Archbishop of
Mentz, and Lothaire Archbishop of Treues, attired in their electorall roabes,
which were of scarlet furred, and garnished without Ferdinand Archbishop of
Cologne on the right hand, and his royal majesty as king of Bohemia, and in
quality of elector on the left, wearing Pleickhard of Helmstet marshal of the
Palatinat, and Maximillian of Pappenheim marshall of the sacred Empire, either
of them carrying in his hand a sword in a golden scabard, and after followed on
horseback the most illustrious princes and lords, John Palatin of the Rhin,
administrator to the elector Palatin, on the right hand; John George duke of
Saxony, Iuliers, Cleues, and Berg etc. elector, in the midst; and Adam Gans
seignior of Putlitz, as ambassador to the elector of Brandebourg, on the left
hand; of the which the two electors of the Palatinat, and Saxony had also
robes of crimson velvet furred, and garnished without Veni sancte spiritus,
which the musitions ended being in a gallerie over the quier.

Then the Suffragan of Mentz began to say mass; but the Palatin, the duke of
Saxony, and the ambassador of Brandebourg (who have not been accustomed to
assist at those ceremonies) retired themselves with their people into the
conclaue of the election, which ioines unto the quier upon the right hand,
where they stayed until the ma^le was ended, and then they returned to their
places. Having s^ng, and ended the hymn of Veni sancte spiritus, the electors
with the ambassador of Brandebourg came before the altar, whether every one of
them was led by his marshall, carrying a sword in the scabard, except the
aforesaid ambassador of Brandebourg; and there by virtue of the Golden Bull,
they took the oath after this manner: Every one of them ascended to the
highest step of the altar, where turning toward the assistants, the elector
of Mentz

The oath being taken, the electors returned to their seats, after which
(having ended the Veni Sancte spiritus, with other collects which depend
thereon) they entered into the imperial Chapel, or conclaue of the election,
which place is narrow and long, ioining to the quier toward the South, having
an altar adorned with rich tapistrie, wrought with gold and silk: and there
they began to proceed to the election of a king

The Electors having been some time together in the Cappell or Conclaue of the
election, having in the mean time often called in their chief Counselors and
Notaries, and sent them out again: in the end, having agreed upon the
election, and the Proclamation being made in the Chapel of the election, they
came forth, all having continued Adiutorium nostrum in nomine Domini; and the
Psalm, In virtute tua laetabitur Rex, etc. with other* Prayers fit for the
action, and in favor of the king newly chosen: which being ended, the Electors
Te Deum laudamus, from one end unto the other, in three kinds of music, upon
the Organs, with voices, and lastly, by the Kings and Electors Trumpets and
Clairons.

A Theater or Scaffold erected before the Quire, for the King of Romans newly
chosen, and for the Seven Electors.
THis done, they opened a door upon the right hand of the Quire, and raised
his royal Majesty above the Altar, and the Electors, with the Ambassador of
Brandebourg, conducted him toward a Theater or Scaffold, built without before
the Quire, covered George Foicderic G^e^ffencloe de B^lraeht, great Provost of
Mentz and Worms,

Proclamation and publication of the Election.
THat whereas by the death of the most illustrious and most mighty prince and
lord Rodulphus the second, Emperor of the Romans, of most happy memory, the
sacred empire was v^id; the most reverend, most noble, and generous princes and
lords the Electors, and Ambassador there present, had (as it was convenient,
and according to the tenor of the Imperial laws, made to that end) mutually
agreed of the election and choice of another head, to the honor and glory of
the Almighty, to the profit and peace of Mathias the second, King of Hungary
and Bohemia, etc. Archduke of Austria, our most loving lord, and did choose him,
in the name of the Almighty, for King of Romans, and future Emperor. This
mutual election was published in the behalf of the Electors, and their
deputies, to the end that every man might do the honor and duty which he
ought unto his royal Majesty

After this publication, the trumpets and drums began to sound for joy, and
in the mean time the Electors, with his royal Majesty, rose from their
chaires, and went down the scaffold; first of all he of Treues, then the three
secular Electors, with the Ambassador of Brandebourg altogether, that is, the
Palatin with the Ball of the empire, upon the right hand, Saxony with the
sword in the midst, and Brandebourg with the scepter upon the left, his royal
Majesty followed, and a little distance off, Mentz upon the right hand, and
Cologne on the left. Thus they went out of the Church, and took horse before
the great door, conducting his Majesty in the former order unto his palace,
which Mathias the second, King of Hungary and Bohemia, was by a mutual
consent of the Electors, and the happy applause of all men, chosen for King of
Romans, and head of the sacred empire.

Although the election were finished as has been set down, yet the Electors
continued their Assemblies every morning in the Townhouse, there to consult
and to resolve Corpus Christi day, they made a Procession from S. Bartholomews
Church unto the Convent of the preaching Friars, where his Majesty, with the
Ecclesiastical


The Contents.
1. WHat Provinces and Countries Are contained under Hongarie, and from whence
it takes the name. 2. The bounds of this realm, and climat. 3. Division of
Hongarie into two parts, and whence comes the name of Buda, the chief town of
the realm, the goodly, and strong situation thereof. 4. Description of other
chief^ towns, amongst the which is Stridon where S. Jerome was borne, and
Iemarin 5. Of the wheat of Hongarie changing every third year to a better kind.
Of the Sulphurous wines of a strong sent, and making men suddenly drunk. 6.
Description of rivers, lakes, and fountains of hot physical waters, and the
most famous mountains of the country. 7. Of the mineral salt of Maromarusia,
and the miraculous waters turning wood into stone: other waters which boiling
transform their element into stone: others which run in Winter, and freese in
Summer, and others which mollify iron like dirt. 8. Of the copper-mines of
Meusole: and of the gulf in the county of Zoile, which has such a deadly
sent as it kills birds that fly over it. 9. Hongarie inhabited at diverse times
by diverse barbarous Nations, as Pannoniens, Goths, Huns, and Scythians. 10. Of
the disposition of the nine Circles which in old time did enuiron the country,
and the watchword which was given from one Circle unto another. 11. Hongarians
in old time savage, seditious, and revenge full; at this day civil, and given
to the exercises of arms. 12. Their manner of living, and apparel: of their
marriages and funerals. Hongarians accustomed to wear long mustachoes and
shaven beards. 13. Their wealth consisting in cattle, and abundance of
victuals, and of the small forces of this realm. 14. Of two chief magistrates
of Hongarie, whereof the Palatin is the first; and of the kings other officers.
15. Of the cumbat which they grant in causes that are hard to decide. 16. Of
successions, whereof the males only are capable. 17. Diversity of sects of
religion which reign in Hongarie. 18. Of the number of Archbishops and Bishops
which are in this Estate. 19. A Catalogue of the kings of Hongarie, their
reign, and death. 20. Relation of the troubles which happened in the year
1605, for matters of religion, and for the charges and dignities of arms. 21.
Articles of the peace made for Hongarie, with Botscay in September 1606. 22.
Conference at Debrita betwixt the Ambassadors and Deputies of the Emperor and
Archbishop Mathias: and of that which was concluded for the deciding of their
controversies. 23. Ceremonies observed in Hongarie at the reception and
coronation of king Mathias.

Seeing that this Estate has been always divided from the Empire, it is not
impertinent to make a particular discourse thereof, to the end we may know the
country which king Mathias had under his power, being but king of Hongarie. It
does therefore contain at Ptolome contains betwixt the rivers of Danou and
Tibisce, and the mountains of Sarmatia, and it does also embrace that part of
Dacia, which they call Transiluania, the which notwithstanding, has his
Vayuodes, and obeies not this new prince. It has taken this name from the Huns
or Hongres, a people of Scythia which have dwelt there, and which came out of
Iuhre, or Iugre, a country of Scythia lying upon the North-West,



Transiluania (which is comprehended by some within the realm of Hongarie) is
called by the Saxons Seuenburgen, or septem Castra, for that they had built
seven Castles there. It is environed round about with high hills and woods, as
with walls, so as the passages into it are very difficult, by certain rivers
and brooks, among which there is the river of Alutha, where there is a strong
Castle built, called Roteth, to defend the passage; and upon the river of
Mariscus is another fort called Brosch. The chief towns are Hermanstade,
Corona or Cronstat, Schlesbourg, Medowiza, Nosa, Clausenbourg, Millenbach,
Weissenbourg: but the chief town is Cibinium or Hermanstade, seated in a
moorish place, so as the access unto it is very difficult. The country is
populus, and the hills are rich in gold mines; neither do they want silver,
copper, iron, nor falt. They

They place this realm in the midst of the sixth and seventh climats, so as
it comprehends the sixteenth and seventeenth parallels, and the longest day in
Summer is above

Attilas brother, or else they draw it from the Budins a people of Scythia, of
whom Heroditus makes mention: Appian, Irenicus, and Althamera take it for Curte
mentioned by Ptolome, others for Aquincum, whereof the same author speaks, and
Autonin: the vulgar people call it Offen. If we will consider the situation of
this town, which is partly hilly, and well fortified, we shall find that
there is not any more pleasant nor stronger in all Hongarie Soliman Emperor of
the Turks, the twentieth of August 1526. The Soliman in the year of Grace
1520. Next along the river of Danou stands-Singidum taken also by the Turk. In
the midst of the way betwixt the^^ two towns is the valley of Maxons,
whereas John Huniades won a famous victory of Mahomet Emperor of the Turks,
in the year 1456. Going up the river th^r^ are man^ Jerome was borne, and in
like manner the strong town of Comora, which the Turks have so often
attempted in vain, standing in an Island of the ^ame name. There is also
Iauerin, commonly called Rab, a town seated upon the river of Danou, the which
seems impregnable, and yet was first taken by the Turk, and afterward
recovered by the industry of Monsieur de Vaubecourt, a French gentlemen. I
pass over in silence the other towns, as of small note. Near unto Iauerin,
upon the banks Traians bridge, built upon that river in Moesia, an admirable
and memorable work, consisting of twenty Arches, of square stone, the which
were one hundred and fifty foot high, besides the foundation, and sixty foot
broad, and they are seventy foot one from another. It is a thing to be admired
by what means, force, or art, they could build these several pillars in this
deep and violent stream, and lay the foundations of so great a burden, the
bottom of the river being very muddie, and there being no means to turn the
course of the water. The Arches about the water were ^uined by the
commandment of Adrian the Emperor, but the Piles stand still, for a
testimony to posterity; that there was nothing impossible to the power and
wealth of the Roman empire.


THe realm of Hongarie is by nature provided for of all things, for that there
grows

Finally, there is scarce any country that has more and greater, rivers than
Hongarie;

also baths and physical waters, especially about Buda. There are hot waters,
whose fish John, are good against scabbes. In the territory of Zepus there are
waters whereas wood is turned into stone: and near unto S. Martins Church, in
the same place, there is a water which seems to boil, the which turns into
stone, both above and under the ground, and this stone is almost like unto the
Pumeise. Near unto the same place, there are waters which flow in winter, and
freese in summer, so as they are accustomed to go thither to seek for ice.



The Manner of the Ancients.
Attila, who enriched this country with the spoils of other nations. But
Charlemaine vanquished them, and took from them a great treasure which they
had gathered together, at Buda. Lastly, in the year of Grace 900, in the time
of the Emperor Arnold, the Hongres coming out of Scythia, ^el upon this
country, who joining with the remainders of the Huns, spoiled all Germany;
but in the end, they were somewhat suppressed by a defeat which was given them by
the Emperor Otho, near unto Ausbourg, in the year of our Redemption 954.



Procopi^s does distinguish the Huns, calling some White, and the others
Nomades: he speaks of the white after this manner, The Huns Euthalites do not
lead a pastoral life, like unto the other Huns, but keep themselves very
neatly, and are the fairest among the Huns. These never made any roads into the
Romans territories, and are not of a savage aspect like unto the rest. They
have a king which commands them: and he is most happy among them that has
most friends, who are most commonly at his table, and are partakers of his
cre^^^, p^ise, and fortune. The P^onians had not any towns, as Appi^n
Alexand^i^^^ writes, but lived in hamlets according to their families; neither
did they use any ordinary course of judgment, ^^^re being not any prince that
did command o^



The Manners at this day.
(...) Hongarians at this day are of a mild disposition, and reasonably civil.
They love (...), and will not do any thing unless they practice arms: neither
are they much (...) arts and trads, nor to traffic, but they are exceeding
strong. Their manners (...) ar^^rally rude; and they are more disposed to war
than peace. They contemn ease (...) pleasure, and live not in towns but as
strangers, with a de^^eigne to be soon gone. (...) men lodge their delights in
their gardens and baths, and care not for their buildings but to be at large:
the rest live in cabins and little lodgings ill made: They sleep (...) any bed
until they be married, but lie upon the ground, or upon hay, an ordinary
(...) to most of the neighbor Nations.

Their garments are long and stately. They give not any dowry unto women when

The Riches, and Forces.
NOtwithstanding that Hongarie sends into Italy and Germany, great store of
oxen Mathias being now come unto the Empire, may well preserve that which
remains in Hongarie, if during this calm he provide for all occurrents of
war. It is very probable that if the Turks should fall upon this country,
it would hardly withstand them without the forces of the Empire: for all the
power of this realm is not able to make head against the Ottomans, their riches
and means being small, and not able to make any great leuies, for that the
country is not rich of it self, and they want seaports and traffic, whereby
countries have means to get money, and to grow rich, and moreover the Turks
hold the best part. It is true that the Hongarians are good soul^^ers, but the
Turks also are not to be contemned, who exceed them in number, and are

The Government.
He king of Hongarie gouerns his realm by the means of two magistrates,
whereof realm in the kings name. They account in this rank the Palatin of the
realm, who is

The second magistrate is appointed for matters of justice, and this m^gistrat
comprehends three officers of very great authority, that is, the Vice Palatin
of the realm, the Personal Judge of the presence, who holds the kings place
in judgments, and is above all other Judges, and the Vice Judge of the court.
The lesser officers are those, who are rather executioners of judgment, than
magistrates, that is to say, two Protonotaries of the personal Judge, one of
the Vice Palatin, and one of the Vice Judge of the court. All these are called
masters, and have joined unto them the Archbishop of Strigonias secretary,
who is called Fiscall, twelve Assistants, and certain sworn notaries.

Besides all these, there are the kings officers, as the Treasurer, the high
Chamberlain, and other Chamberlaines, the lord Steward of the kings house, and
other masters of

Since that the house of Austria came to possess this crown of Hongarie, they
have made their government more absolute, and the people more servile, having
lost much of their former liberty: for in the ancient government, whenas
their kings meant to undertake a war, to conclude a peace, or to alter any
thing in the government of the commonweal; their manner was to assemble the
Barons, Bishops, and Gentlement at a certain place, where by the consent of
the greater part their kings had power to confirm, abrogat, or to make laws,
to denounce war, conclude peace, and to charge their lands with impositions
according to their necessities: which assembly is still in use, but





The Religion.
Ma^omet, which is much dispersed in this realm by reason of those places
which the Turks hold, it is most certain that there are many opinions Arri^^
has got footing there, and Atheism has also crept in. It is a thing worthy
of consideration, that the towns subject unto the Turk are little infected
with heresy, and contrariwise, those which the Christians hold are full: the
reason is, for that the

^^^ngarie has two Archbishopricks, and seventeen Bishoprics: The
Archbishop^^^^re, Quinque Ecclesia, George Drascouit, to help his country,
obtained of the Emperor Ra^^^^s a part of the revenues of the Prouostship of
Turrochia, for the institution of a Se^^^^ of Hongarian youth in the town of
Vienna, whereas they do willingly embrace (...) ^^ristian doctrine, and the
ceremonies of the Church,

The Kings of Hongarie.
THe first Christian king of Hongarie was Geyza, who having caused himself to
be

^^ephen his son, who was put in the number of Saints, was king of Hongarie,
in the (...) of Grace 997: He married the sister of the Emperor S. Henry,
called Gizele, and (...) among other children S. Emery, who died young before
his father.

(...), nephew to Stephen by his sister, succeeded him, and made himself (...)
his loose life. He was expelled the realm by the Hongarians, who advanced in
his place the brother in law of S. Stephen.

Al^^, who governed the realm more insolently than Peter, and made himself o^
ious by hi^ pride. He was slain in war the third year of his reign, and
afterward Peter

Andrew, cousin to S. Stephen, was made king in the year 1007. He restored the
Christian religion in Hongarie, and reedified the Churches which had been
ruined: t^en seeing himself old, he appointed his son Solomon to be king.

^^la, brother to Andrew, made war against him, and won a victory, after
whose ^^ath he went to Alba-regale, where he caused himself to be crowned.
This Bela had a (...) in the third year of his reign, and bruised all his
body, whereof he died soon after, (...) the realm to Solomon his nephew.

Sal^mon, after the death of Bela, was restored to the realm in the year
1063, by the (...) of He^rie the fourth, who had given him his si^ter in
marriage.

(...) expelled Sal^mon out of the realm, and was proclaimed King at
Alba-regale: ^^^^^wards, being willing to resign the realm to Solomon, he
died the third year of his ra^g^e, and then the Hongarians would not accept of
Solomon, who died in an Hermit^g^

^^dissaus, a good; holy, and just man, and who contained himself in
perpetual chastity, was chosen King by a general consent, notwithstanding
that he refused it: After many victori^^ he died, in the year of Grace 1095,
and of his reign the nineteenth, having appointed ^^lmo his younger son to
succeed him in the realm.

Al^^, did qui^ the realm to Coloman his elder brother; but afterward these
brethren fell to de^ate, and the Hongarians being loath to endure an intestine
war betwixt the brethren, orday^ed that they should enter combat, and that
the Victor should be King. ^^^^nan re^^sed the combat; for that he was crook
backed, lame, and pourblind. In the end, he put out the eyes of Alme, and of his
nephew, and would have gelt Bela his nephew, to the end he might have no issue.
But the executioner fearing the wrath of God, and (...) the realm should
remain without heirs, pulled away the stones of a little d^gge, and carrying
them unto him, ^atisfied him with this fraud. Coloman died of a troublesome
disea^e, in the year 1114, and of his reign the one and twentieth.

Stephen his son was king, not being yet eight years old, and in the mean
time another governed the realm in his name. He reigned eighteen years; and
for that he had no children; he adopted his cousin-german Bela, the son of
Alme, and declared him King by his testament.

Bela, notwithstanding that he was blind, governed the realm in peace: he died
of the dropsy, in the year of Grace 1141, and of his reign the ninth.

Geysa his son reigned after him, and died in the year 116^.

Stephen, eldest son to G^ysa, was his successor in the realm, and died in
the year of our Redemption 1173.

Bela, brother to Stephen.

Emeric his elder brother, reigned eight years, and died in the year of Grace
1200.

Ladislaus his son reigned but six months.

Andrew, brother to Eme^ic, succeeded his nephew Ladislaus, and died in the
year 1235, having reigned four and thirty years.

Bela, eldest son to Andrew, reigned six years, and died in the year 1275.

Stephen his son succeeded him, and died in the third year of his reign.

Ladislau^, son to Stephen, surnamed Chune, was slain in the year 1299,
having reigned about fourteen years.

Andrew, son to Stephen, reigned eleven years, and died in the year 1301.

After the death of Andrew, some did choose Wenceslaus king of Bohemia, and
others Otto duke of Bauaria, who was shamefully expelled by the Hongarians,
after that he had mad^ his entry with great pomp.

Charles, son to Charles Martel king of Sicile, whom some call Carolobert,
was chosen King of Hongarie, in the year 1310.

Lewis his eldest son, being yet young, was made king: he made great war
against the Neopolitans, and won many victories of the Italians. He died,
being six and fifty years old, in the year of Grace 1382, having left his
realm in the hands of his sister Marie, whom he married to Sigismond, son to
the Emperor Charles.

Marie governed the realm for a time under the command, and by the counsel
of Nicholas de Gare, for that she was yet very young. But in the end, the
Hongarians sent the Bishop of Sagabria into Apulia, to Charles the son of
Andrew, to persuade him to come into Hongarie to be King. He came* and king
Sigismond having a little before solemnly married Marie, who was then of full
age, fled to his brother Wenceslaus. But Charles was slain in the year 1585,
by the practices of Marie, and of her mother, and of Nicholas de G^re. In the
end, Elizabeth the Queens mother was drowned by Hornsch a friend to Charles,
and the young Queen was led prisoner into Croatia, and put into (...) keeping.
Sigismond levied a great army, he took Hornach, and caused him to be dragged
up and down at a horse tail, then to be pinched with hot pincers, and in the
Sigismond who having levied a great army in the year 1396 (^n ^he which there
were French succors) was defeated with a notable loss by Bajazet E^^erour of
the Turks, near unto Nicopolis. Some hold that in this battle there (...)
^wentie thousand Christians, and sixty thousand Turks slain. This King and
Em^^^^ together died in the year of Grace 1437, in the seuentieth year of his
age, of ^^^^aigne of Hongarie the fifteenth, of his reign of the Romans the
seven and twentieth, ^^^ohemia the seventeenth, and of his Empire the fifth.

Albert duke of Austria son in law to Sigismond, was at one instant created
king of ^^ongarie, and Emperor of Romans. He died of a flux having eaten too
much of a me^^^^

^adislaus brother to Casimir king of Poland, was called to be king. He came
into Hon^^^^, and was so received. King Alberts widow had a son after her
husbands death, ^^ed Ladislaus: she wrought so with some princes, as he was
anointed and solemnly ^^wned at Alba-regale upon a Whit sunday, being not yet
four months old. In the end ^^ey that followed the party of Vladislaus were
the stronger. This king was slain at the ^^taile of Varne, whereas the
Christians were miserably defeated by Amurath Empe^^^ of the Turks.

Ladislaus was created king after the death of Vladislaus. But for that the
Emperor Fre^^cke refused to give him unto them, H^niades was chosen governor of
Hongarie, who Ladi^^^ was brought to Vienna, and received with great honor by
the Bohemians and Hon^^^^s in the year of Grace 1458. Ladislaus was made sure
to Magdeleine, daughter to (...) the French king; but as they made preparation
for his marriage, he died in a man^^^ ^^^denly, having languished but six and
thirty hours. He was nineteen years old.

(...) Cor^i^us son to Huniades was chosen king of Hongarie, at the age of
eigh^^^^ ^eres. And notwithstanding that the Emperor Frederick had been
chosen at the (...) time, yet he made an agreement with Mathias, who was
crowned by the hands of (...) the sixth year of his reign, and of Grace 1464.
He died without any children, (...) ^^igned seven and thirty years.

(...) son to Casimire king of Poland, whom the Bohemians had received for
(...), was also chosen king of Hongarie after the death of Mathias.

(...) succeeded his father Vladislaus in the realm of Hongarie, and died in
battle (...) the Turks in the year 1526.

^^^dinand of Austria, Emperor, succeeded him, and made war against the Turks
in (...) for the space of eight and thirty years.

^^ximilian of Austria Emperor.

^^^^bus the second, Emperor, having held the realm of Hongarie a long time,
resig^^^ ^^^^er to his brother Mathias of Austria, who is at this day Emperor
and gouernes (...).

(...) A brief recital of the controversies happened in the said realm,
since the peace made with the Turk in the year 1605, unto this day, for the
knowledge both of the government and the religion of this Estate.
(...) controversies which happened in Hongarie, as well for religion, as for
the char^^^ Botscay Isthan duke (...) revolted against the Emperor in high
Hongarie and Transiluania, having (...) many noblemen to his party, upon the
assurance which the Turk gave him. (...) ^^scay went to field with great
numbers of the Heiducques, which are horsemen, (...) himself prince of
Transiluania, and heir to Battorie, making a declaration (...) the ^^perors
lieutenants, which were four; who joined their troops together (...) we^^
against Botscay: both armies met, and the Hongarians both foot and horse (...)
unto Botscay; the fight continued six hours, whereas Bellio^use fled, and the
^^^^^anes and Silesians were cut in pieces. Pets and Pallas L^ppay were taken
pris^^ers by Botscay, who sent Pets with certain ensigns to Herdar Bascha, to
show his ^ff^c^ion unto the Turk, and Pallas L^ppay remained lieutenant to
Botscay: they published a ^^claration that they took arms for their liberty
and consciences, and to hinden the persecutions of the Gospel* so as the
Clergy and Jesuits were forced to fly to Vienna. They of Cassouia revolted,
and thrust the Priests and Clergy out of their towns, and became Protestants,
according to the confession of Ausbourg. Baste lieutenant to the Emperor
published a general pardon in his name, but it prevailed not. He besieged
Cassouia in vain, there being a garrison within it of six thousand men, so as
he raised his siege, and in his return he took Epper and other places, upon
condition to suffer them to live in Botscay, (...) thirty wagons laden with
silver and cloth which came from Vienna. This army of (...) amassed the
neighbor places, and the German soldiers and other strangers were (...)
pieces. ^aste persuades Botscay by his letters to harken to a peace, and to
draw the (...) to their obedience: Botscay aunswers that he is content, upon
condi^^^^ that h^ should enjoy the principality of Transiluania, and be the
Emperors lieutenant in Hongarie, that the French and Vallons should depart the
country, that the soldiers should be paid, that the Protestants religion
should not be molested, that Bellie^use (...) had in the cause of the troubles,
should be delivered into his hands, to do justice of him, that the Emperor
should come in person to the Estats at Ponson, and that the Germans Bas^e
seeing these demands made no ^^^were: all Transiluania obaies Bots^ay, he
receives certain money from the Turk, where with he paies his soldiers, and
calls the Estates of Hongarie to a general assembly the last of April. The
Earls of H^^in, Nadaste, and Bude, who had ^ought with the Turk, ^ell to
Botscays party, having an army of twenty five thousand men, so as
Transiluania, Moldauia, and Val^ch^ (...) Botscay, which made the Archduke
Mathias, in the Emperors name, to seeked peace with conditions very beneficial
to Botscay; and to this end he sent Heleas H^^^, who conf^r^ed with the
Emperors Commissioner, who let him understand, that his master would never
refuse a peace, granting him that which he had formerly demanded, and (...)
that in the Senate of Hongarie there should Botscay, he sent his great Vezir
into Hongarie, to treat of a peace (...) with the Emperor. Botscay sends to the
great Vezir, who was come to ^uda, and demands (...) him of the propositio^s
made for the peace of Hongarie, being (...) to break (...) pro^^^e which he
had made to the great Turk, which was not to make a peace with the Emperor
before he had given him advice, and that he should maintain the Turks in
their camp. The Vezir desired nothing more than a peace, and Botscay should
(...) part to Vienna, to ma^^ the peace of Ho^garie betw^^^ the Emperor and
him; and that the Emperor and the Vezir should depute men of quality to agree
upon some truce, and (...) their con^rou ^sies, and that they should meet about
Komo^ra, ^h^ which was effected after a war of fifteen years. The treaty of
peace for Hongarie being made with Botscay in September 1^0^ at Vie^^a, i^
contained (...) where of these be the contents.

First, That they should (...) in liberty of conscience throughout all
H^ngerie, na^ely the Catholics, L^therans, and Ca^^ri^^^, and ^here should be
none but those thre^ religions. Secondly, That the Arc^duke ^athias should be
lieutenant general for the Emperor throughout all Ho^garie, and (...) all
things should remain in the Estate it was at B^^s^^y should r^maine Prince of
Transiluania, Earl of Si^^^^^, and Palatin of high Hongarie, and for want of
heiresmales, all should return unto (...) Emperor, and his daughters should be
married according to their quality at the Emper^^ ^harge. Fourthly, That from
^hence forth the Palatin, and the general Treasurers Botscay did not (...)
enjoy it: for after all his toils, thinking to reap the benefit of this
peace, his C^^^^cellor poisoned him to get his Estates, the which having
discovered, he caused him (...), and having confessed it, he cut off his head.
Notwithstanding all remedies (...) Antidotes, Botscay died at Cassouia the
thirteenth of December, but before his (...), he called an assembly of the
Esta^es, whom he pe^suaded to obey the emperor, (...) do him good and loyal
service, and to ^iue in peace one with another.

This peace of Hongarie being made and signed at Vienna, the Archduke Mathias
Botscay retired them^^lues from the said assembly, some seven French leagues,
to the end they might be arbi^^tors of such controversies as might arise. In
the end, upon the sixth of October, the de^^^ies parted from Vienna, under the
conduct of Colonia Budian, and his troops, there ^^ing with them, the two
Bashas of Buda, who were prisoners at Vienna, the one called ^^^man, and the
other Aly, and they carried with them six wagons, in the which were ^^^otie
thousand Florins, a goodly cloak, and certain pla^e, which they should
pre^^^^ Botscay, to give conclusi^^ to this peace, so much desired. All these
deputies, after many meetings, in the end ^^^^uded upon fifteen Articles, the
which they signed, whereof these are the con^e^^^.

(...) every one should return into his possessions, reedifie his houses and
castles, and (...) in the same estate that he was in before the war.

That the Emperor should be called Father, and the Turk Son, and these
should (...) titles which they should give one unto another by their
Ambassadors: and writing respectively, they should use the word of Emperor,
and not of King.



That the realms, lands, and seigneuries of the house of Austria should be
compreh^^ded in this peace.

That all acts of Hostility should cease, and transgressions be punished by
exemplarie ju^^^.

that it should not be lawful for either part to surprise any fort, town,
house, nor any (...), nor to send any Spy into Hongarie.

(...) the treaty of peace made with Botscay should be truly observed.

That merchants might traffic freely, and pass through the limits of the
country,

That the Basha of Buda, the Governor of Iauerin, and he of Sclauonia, should
have authority to pacefie all factions and divisions that might arise, and if
they were of im^ortance, the Emperor and the Turk should be mediators.

That all prisoners should be set at liberty according to their quality.

That the Archduke Mathias should send an Ambassador with a present unto the
Vi^^^, as also the Vizier Amurath should send unto the Archduke Mathias and the
Empe^^^ should send a present of two hundred thousand florins unto the great
Turk.

That the great Turk should send one unto him of the like value.



^^at it should be lawful for them of either part to pursue their debts, and
they should (...) all privileges and freedoms as before the war.

That Vactia should remain unto the Emperor, and Gran unto the Turk.

The Basha of Buda treated the Christians with great magnificence and pomp,
giving ^o every one of them goodly presents. There was great joy at
Constantinople, and in (...) Emperors countries, ^or this peace.

The death of B^^scay ha^pening afterward, it caused diverse alterations in
these Provinces; and the peace was all observed in Hongarie, by reason of the
roads which were made by the Imp^rialls, and others. To prevent these
disorders, there was an assembly called of the noblemen of Honga^ie, and
Transiluania, who desired that their King should rema^^ within the country, to
the end that his presence might suppress all these new combustions, and they
made a protestation in the Cathedral Church of Presbourg, Mathias seven weeks
in vain, after the day assig^^^ for the States, they would return home to
them that sent them. The noblemen (...) high Hongarie made another assembly at
Cassouia, the fourteenth of October, where it was re^olued, not to divide
Hongarie from Transiluania. The Heyducques being discontented, notwithstanding
these assemblies, did not forbear their spoiling: they (...) diverse castles,
and declared themselves friends to the Turks, and enemies to the Germans and
Walloons. The Archduke Mathias comes to Presbourg, whereas the Estates of
Hongarie were held the fifteenth of January, with one hundred wagons, and two
hundred horse. The Bishop of Iauerin, and all the noblemen were there to
receive him. The Cardinal Archbishop of Gran arrived also, and Helias Hasky
came with Botscay, but Helias Hasky, with the deputies of high Hongarie,
opposed themselves, showing that this assembly was only called to suppress
the Heyducques. The Archdukes deputies propounded unto the assembly an
offensive and defensive league: there was some dissension betwixt the Clergy
and Poli^itians (for so they called the noblemen' of high Hongarie) but all
being pacified, they met in Heli Haskyes house, where it was concluded, that
they should not alter any thing of the peace made at Vienna, and that the said
league should be made betwixt the Estates and the country. As for the
discontented Heyducques, Helias Hasky and Turso took Mathias returns to
Vienna, where he called a new assembly of the Estates, acquainting them with
what had been done at Presbourg, and with what difficulty he had kept the
noblemen of Hongarie from falling from the empire, entreating them to make
ready certain money, if the rebellious Heyducques did not lay down arms.
The Archduke Mathias aspired to be King of Hongarie, and to attain unto his
dessignes, he resolved to settle a peace in the country, as well with the
Heyducques which were mutined, as with the Turk. And to this end, Heli^s Hasky
and Turso, who had the charge to treat with them, prevailed so as they drew
fifteen companies of horse unto their pay, so as in an instant there was a
dissension Mathias assembled a^ army upon the confines of Morauia; whereof the
Emperor being advertised, he sent the Cardinal Districhstein to the Archduke,
being at Vienna, who brought him the ratification of that which had past as
well with the Turk, as with the Lords of Hongarie; his Majesty desiring that
the offensive and defensive league made at Presbourg should be broken,
whereunto the Archduke would not yield. The Cardinal understanding the
Archdukes mind, advertised the Emperor, who entered into fear and distrust of
his brother, and gives him occasion to provide for his safety. He causes the
Estates of Bohemia to assemble at Prague, commands all the towns to take
arms, leuies soldiers, whom he holds near unto his person, and writes unto
the Electors, Princes, and Estates

Whilst the Emperor is thus in alarm, the Archduke parts from Vienna, and
comes (...) Mo^auia to the town of Cmaym, where was the Rendez vous; his army
consisting of ^^^ntie thousand old soldiers, as well horse as foot, eight and
twenty pieces of ordnance, Colonits to follow him with the b^^ie of the army,

After many voiages, and a pasport granted by the Emperor and the Estates, the
Arch^^kes Ambassadors entered into Prague the six and twentieth of May. Count
The^^in the chief of the embassage was brought into the assembly, where he
saluted them

(...) he should cause the crown of Hongarie to be delivered to the Archduke,
re^^^^

The contents of seventeen articles having been read, concluded, and assigned
of ^^ther part, the crown of Hongarie and all the marks of roialtie were
delivered unto Stephen, the Golden Ball, the Buskins and Antique Roabe, and the
royal Scepter, the which were sent unto the camp by the Em^eror; whereas the
Archduke caused his army to be put in battle to receive it, going ^^rth
himself with a great number of noblemen: all the ordnance was shot off thrice,
(...) the soldiers discharged their pieces as often. After all these things,
the siege was raised from Prague, having divided his army into three parts to
retire to Vienna.

King Mathias coming to Vienna, the inhabitants went forth to meet him the
fourteenth of July, and made him an entry, as to their sovereign Lord. At the
same time there arrived at Vienna an ambassador from the Turk sent by the
Basha of Buda, for a confirmation of the peace with the king, and with
presents: having had audience, he returned with ratification of that which he
demanded, after which there was an en bassador sent by the king to
Constantinople with rich presents.

Mathias parted from Vienna, and came to Presbourg the two and twenti^th of
October, where he was received in great pomp by the noblemen of Hongarie,
there being above ten thousand men at arms. On the sixth of November they
presented unto

First, that the exercise of the Protestants religion should be free throughout
all the realm, yea and in that where he then was, and should ch^s^ his seat.
That no Germane governor should be installed in any place in Hongarie, and that
in all the frontire towns lying upon the Turk there should be governors that
were borne in the country. That the crown of Hongarie should be kept by
secular men. That before all things there should be a Palatin chosen. That the
king should make his residence in the country, and in absence the Palatin
should have all power with the Senators, and that whatsoever they did, the king
should confirm. That the offices of the kingdom should not be ^old,

These articles were presented unto the king, and after some qualifications
which the king required, Helias Hasky was chosen Palatin, and Mathias
proclaimed king of Hongarie the fourteenth of the said month, and was
anointed and crowned in S. Martins church on the nineteenth day, and these
were the ceremonies.

The crown was brought upon a royal chariot from the Castle unto the Church
with Helias Hasky, the Crown: Cardinal Fortgas^ did the office, being
assisted by many Bishops and Pr^lats Colonita Marshall of Hongarie held, and
laid it thrice upon the Clergy in form of a Cross; then he received the
communion by the hands of the said Cardinal. After Mass they cast a larges of
gold and silver unto the people: which done the king entered by a gallerie from
S. Martins Church unto another called the Deschausses, where after they had
read the Gospel unto him, he made two and twenty knights: then being attired
in his royal ornaments and the crown upon his head, he went to horse, and
issued forth by S. M^chaells gate, where he came unto a pillar covered with
cloth, where he took an oath unto the H^ngarians, Mathias, in seven months,
caused himself to be crowned King of Hongarie, and to be acknowledged Archduke
of Austria, and Marquis of Morauia, the which he enjoys at this day.


The Contents.
1 THe beginning and Etymology of the name of Poland, the greatness, and the
Provinces of this Realm. 2. Division of Poland into high and low, and their
chief towns. 3. Description of Cracouia, the chief city of base Poland: the
neighbor places and duchies. 4. Of Liuonia, and her chief towns. 5.
Lituania, her bounds, chief City, Duchies, and Palatinats. 6. Samogitia, her
length, and confines. 7. Mas^^ia, the Etymology, and beginning of the name of
this Province, with her chief towns. 8. Vol^i^ia, her situation, and
provinces. 9. Podolia, her limits, and chief city. 10. Russia, the Etymology
of the name, her bounds, country, and chief town. 11. Podlassia, when and by
whom united to Poland; her chief towns. 12. Pomerania, her confines,
compass, chief towns, and 13. Prussia, her bounds, length, and chief
rivers, when reauced into a secular principality, divided in old time into
twelve Dukedomes, but now into two Countries; her chief town Mariembourg. 14.
With what things Poland does abound; and the incredible number of beeues
wherewith their forests are replenished: Of mines of Azure, Lead, Tron,
Copper, and Salt. 15. The Polonians descended from the Selaues: their
ceremonies at the naming of their children: what gods they did generally
worship. 16. Fire, Wood, and Serpents, worshipped in old time by the Lituanians:
with whom the Priests did consult in time of sickness: their sacrifice of a
Cock; their feasts, and their ceremonies at their obsequies and funerals. 17.
The manner of living of the Polonians at this day, the ^orme of their
Characters in writing, and of the use of the Latin tongue, common to towns and
villages: The nobility haughty and proud by nature; their fashion 18. Their
riches in all sorts of Grain, Honte, Wax, Flax, Hemp, Cattle, and namely the
Salt of Olcen, and Velisques, Azure, mines of Iron, Amber, Furs of Sables,
and other beasts. 19. Of the revenues of the King of Poland, what it comes to
yearly: and of the riches of the nobility. 20. The forces of Poland, wherein
they consist: Of the great number of their horsemen, of the carriage of their
artillery, and other munition of war: Of the strong places of this realm,
of their ships, galleys, and other sea forces. 21. Their neighbors as well
enemies as friends, and their mighty allies. 22. Their form of government,
and modern policy, more like unto a Commonweal than a Realm: Of their
earthly Nuncios or messengers, their authority in assemblies and public
consultations of this State: Of the authority of their King, and of the
Nobility. 23. Of the discord among the orders of Senators and Knights: Of
noble Families, 24. Of two members which make the whole Estate of Poland: and
of the number of Archbishops, and Bishops, Palatins, Marshalls, and other
dignities of this Realm. 25. Of the opinion of Lutherans and others brought
into Prussia, and into the whole Estate of Poland by Merchants, and by Albert
of Brandebourg: and what provinces do still hold the Ro^is^ religion. 26. A
Gen^alogie of the Dukes and Kings of Poland.

Lechus the first king which did inhabit Poland, who settled his abode at
Gnesne, about the year of Grace 550. This realm is greater at this day than
it was ever, by reason of Lituania, and Liuonia, which have been added to this
Estate. It extends to the rivers of Note, and Orb, which diuides it from
Marchia, and to Odera, which does in a manner seperat it from Silesia; and unto
Beresina and Nieper, which divide it from Muscouia, and from the Baltique sea
to the river of Mester, which diuides it from Moldauia; and it extends also to
the Carpathian Iagellons; for in the year 1386, Iagellon, sometimes duke of
Lituania, married the princess Ediege, who Iagellon came to fail: for their
kings being loath to deprive themselves of a patrimoniall Estate, and whereof
they were absolute Lords, nor to subject it to the election of the Polonians,
still deferred the accomplishment thereof, under pretext, that they feared the
Lituanians would revolt, and that by this means they should loose that which
did belong unto them: but seeing on the one side, that the princes of their
blood began to fail (for that the males ended with Sigismond Augustus, King of
Poland) and on the

As for Liuonia, it did in old time belong unto the Teuton Knights, who had a
great master: but being deprived of a great part of their Estate, by the great
duke of Muscouie, in the year 1558, for matter of religion; they recommended
themselves to Sigismond, king of Poland, who took them into his protection.
True it is, that this province was not freed from the Muscouites command, but
by king Stephen, in the year 1582.

But having spoken of all these provinces in general, let us say something in
particular; Lechus, first Founder of the Polonians, planted his seat there,
building the town of Gnesne. This province contains these principal towns,
which have others less in their jurisdictions, that is to say, Posnania, the
Metropolitan town, which has under it Rosceim, Medzyrzeczu, Ostresouu,
Vuschauu, Sremk, Prenecz, and Rogozno: Caliz, which has under it, Gnesne,
Pyzadry, Vuarte, Naklo, Land, Konin, Slupeza, and Kolo: Siradia, which has
been taken for a great Duchy, and did belong unto the second son of the
Kings of Poland; it has these towns under it, Orluuia, Piatek, Bresinia,
Karnazeu, Inoulodz, Biechou, and others: Cujauia, or Vladislauia, which has
under

As for base Poland, since that the royal seat was transported to Cracouia, it
has been

Cracouia or Cracou, is the chief town of base Poland; and as Petrus Appianus
Ptolome calls Carodumun: but leaving those controversies, I say that in this
town is the Castle or Palace of the kings of Poland, in the which they are
crowned and interred; by reason whereof it is the most renowned place of the
whole realm: there is also in this town a goodly university. The longest day
of Summer is of sixteen hours and one eighth part. There are these three
towns ioining to Cracouia,

Liuonia is a very great province, which has in length near unto the Balticke
sea

Lituania, which is of a great extent, lies near unto the Muscouite, and has
for bounds Ptolome) which coming out of Muscouia, and running beneath Chiouie,
falls into the Pontike sea.

Samogithia lies near to Lituania, and is fifty miles long. It has for
confines upon

Masouia is a province of great circuit, ioining to Poland, and carries the
name of one Mass who was duke, but being wholly defeated by Cazimire duke of
Poland, in the year 1045, he fled into Prussia, where having endured many
afflictions in the end he hung himself. It confines upon the East, with
Lituania; upon the West, with Poland; upon the North, with Prussia, and upon
the North, with Russia and Poland. This province had John and Stanislaus the
only heirs of this Estate, dying young, in the year 1526, this duchy
returned to the crown of Poland.

Marschouia is the the chief town of this province, and has under it the
towns of Czirko, Egrod, Zekrozin, Cziechanouu, Czerniensk, Poltouuosk, Rosan,
Varka, Blonic, Zarsin, Gadziek, Prasni, and Loraza. This province was strangely
spoiled and ruined by Mendog duke of Lituania in the year 1246, and 1260.





Russia, which they also call Roxolania or Ruthenia, and was in old time
(according to

Sigismond king of Poland, great duke of Lituania: in it are the towns of
Byelsko, Bransko, Suras, and Tykolzin, whereas they keep the kings treasure:
there is also Knyssin, where there is a royal palace, with a great park full
of diverse kinds of beasts, and goodly channels and ponds full of fish. You may
also see the towns of Narew, Vasilkou, and Augustou, a very strong town,
built by king Sigismond Augustus.



Her towns which are within the country, are Stetin, the chief of the whole
countire,

Prussia, which some others call Borussia, Prutenia, Vlmigauia, and Hulmigeria,
has

This province was sometimes under the Teuton Knights: but after the year
1419, the country and town of Prussia offered their obedience to Casimir King
of Poland, and revolted from the Knights: and afterward, in the year 14^0,
Prussia refused to obey these Knights, and subjected it self to the King of
Poland, and the soldiers of the order which were in garrison, sold
Mariembourg, with many other towns and castles, in the year 1457, for 476000
florins. Yet the Knights refusing to swear unto the king of Poland, in the
year 1498, they made war with variable success; until that Prussia was
reduced under a secular Prince, which was Albert Marquis of Brandebourg, the
fo^re Sigismond King of Poland, having taking a solemn oath unto him, and the
said king gave him all the lands of Pr^ssia, to hold them of him as his
lieg^^^an.

Prussia was in former times divided into twelve duchies or provinces, in the
year 573, by Venedus their prince, according to the number of his children, to
either of which he a^^igned a province which carried his Lords name. These
provinces or duchies are, Sudauia, which was wholly spoiled by the Teuton
Knights; Sambia, at this day called Szamland, Natangia, Nadrauia, Bartonia,
Galinde, Varmie, or Wermelande, Hogkerlande, Culme, Poemsania, and Michlouia.
Every one of these provinces contains ^any towns, built at several times by
the Teuton Knights: for that after the Christian religion

Prussia is now divided into two countries, the one belonging unto the duke,
the other unto the king. The duke has his seat at Montroyall, which the
inhabitants call Cumisberg, a sea town, where there is an university built by
Albert the first duke, who beg^n by the means of the king of Polonia, to enjoy
all the lands of these countries, as vassal to the crown of Poland.
Mariembourg is the chief town of that part of Prussia which the king does
particularly enjoy, besides that which he has yielded unto the duke. This
town is rich, well peopled, and strong, having a castle well furnished and
fortefied, seated

The Quality.
POland is a plain champian country, covered with many forests, but having
few that there are diverse great forests, in which there are many wild beasts.
There is also

They have no mines of gold nor silver, but in the territory of Cracouia,
whereas they say there is no silver, as at Sandomire, whereas they have also
found one of Azure: but this country yields lead, iron, and perfect copper,
and there is great store of salt, especially that of the Mine, which is
excellent. In Poland the longest day in Summer does not exceed sixteente
hours, and forty minutes.

Liuonia is a country full of marshes, plain for the most part, and without
mountains.

Lituania is for the most part full of Moors and Forests, and therefore not
very accessible. There are very great lakes, the which in some places are
like unto Seas. There are also many nauigable rivers, the which are more
frequented in Winter than in Summer,

As for Samogithia, it is exceeding cold, and in a manner continually frozen.
There are great store of forests, whereas they find abundance of honey, the
which is better, more delicat, whiter, and has less wax mingled with it, than
in any other place.

Masouia, is for the most part full of woods, whereas they find great store of
Bugles, and wild Bulls.

Volhinia, yields abundance of all sorts of grain and fruit, and it has many
forests, in which they find great store of wild beasts, and there are pooles
which abound in fish: It has much good pasture, and store of honey.

As for Podolia, it is exceeding fertile, so as for one they are accustomed to
reap a hundred, and in breaking up the ground a little, and sowing it with
wheat, it bears three

South Russia is exceeding fertile, and abounds in horses, oxen, sheep,
sables, and foxes. There is such store of bees, as they not only hide their
honey in hiues and hollow trees,



Prussia yields abundance of all things, and is much more happy than all the
countries which lie near it. For it is pleasant and profitable of all sides,
by reason of the great number of ports it has upon the Balticke sea, and of
diverse g^lfes of the sea. The air is

The Manners of the Ancients.
Iessan, that is to say Jupiter, Ladon, which was Pluto, Niam, Diana, Marzim,
Mars, Ziztl^a, Ceres, Zie^ane, which was Venus, having the like opinion of
these gods, to other nations, and they did sacrifice in like manner as the
Greeks and Romans, solemnizing their feasts with banquets, dancing, singing,
and all kinds of sports. And Dlugosse the historian writs, that this kind of
reioicing continued unto his time, which was some years after that the
Polonians had received the Christian religion, yea at this day the Lituanians
dance and rejoice. They do often repeat the word Ladon in their dancing, with
clapping of their hands, as Dlugosse says; for god, Ziuie, which signifies
that vital force of the air which gives vigor to things that have life. They
did also worship the god or goddess Pogode, which was the cleerenesse and
temperatnesse of the air.

As for the Lituanians, they had in old time for their gods, fire, wood, and
serpents, them dyed, they did burn his best moueables with his body, and his
fairest bones, of^ering

As for the Samogithians, it is not long since that they were ignorant of gold,
silver, copper, iron, and wine. Among them it was lawful for a man to have
many wives, and for the son to marry his mother in law after his fathers
death, and the brother his sister in law. This people had fire for their
greatest god, the which they held sacred, and which was never out, but was kept
upon a high mountain, by their sacrificator. They had forests which they did
worship as Saints, and as the abiding places of their gods, and they

They of Liuonia were for a long time barbarous and uncivil, and given to the
worshipping of gods, almost like unto the former. The simplicity of this people
was so great, as having pressed honey, they did cast away the wax, as a
superfluity and ordure. They had commonly in their mouths this word of Iehu,
whereof they of that time knew the explication.

The Prussians were in old time very cruel and barbarous, and great drinkers,
taking most delight in mares milk, before they knew the use of Metheglin. They
had liberty to marry as many wives as they lift, and they held them in
subjection like unto servants. When they were tired with labor, or with over
much drinking, their bathes and stoues did help to refresh them, yea in the
extremity of Winter, they were accustomed to

The Manners at this day.


As for the Lituanians, passing through the country in Winter, they govern
themselves by the North Star, as others do at Sea. They have no use of
money. The women of this country have friends by their husbands sufferance and
leave, whom they enjoy in their sports of love when they please, and yet if a
married man had a Mistress, he

The people are miserable, and held in great captivity, for that great men
when they pass through the country accompanied with many footmen, enter into
Pesants houses, and take away what they please, yea and many times beat them
cruelly. It is not lawful for a farmer to come empty handed before his
Landlord; and as for others, besides their rent, they are bound to give them
weekly three or four days work. If their C^^ats wife be dead, or if he
marries, or has a ch^ld borne, they are bound to give him a certain sum of
money, for this consideration only, that he hears them in confession all the
year long. If any one has committed a crime worthy of death he must hang
himself,

The Liuonians are much given to gluttony and drunkenness, and this
dissolution and excess is practiced more in rich men's houses than in any other
place. He that can bear most wine, and continue longest at the table eating,
is welcome; but in the end, he has for his reward, scabbes, gout, bloody
flix, dropsy, or some such like disease. Some gentlemen are liberal to these
gluttons and drunkards, and in the mean time to entertain this liberality,
they ransom the Pesants; so as whatsoever these poor men can get with much
sweat and pain, the other spend in excess and disorder. The Pesants are in a
manner all slaves, and when any one not able to endure ^unger, whipping, nor A
Fa^thing and so^ething m^^e.
houle like Wolves, and they have continually, as in old time, the word Ichu in
their mouths. When they are demanded what they mean by this word Iehu, they
answer,

They hold that the ^omen of the town of Rig in Liuonia, are gallant and
stately, and contemn them that come from any other country. They should be
well married if they were not called Ladies. They are not given to do any
thing, but live continually in idleand delights. In stead of spinning, or doing
some other work fit for women, they have coaches and wagons in which they go
abroad in Winter, and little boats in Summer to sport themselves upon the water.

The Samogitians are of a goodly stature, but uncivil, rude, and barbarous.
They are bold and apt to war. They wear corselets, and use pertu^sans, like
unto our men, but

They marry many wives, and without any consideration of blood, nor
parcentage, for

The richest and men of greatest power in stead of cups of silver, or gilt,
have some

The Masouians differ not from the Polonians in regard of their manners and
apparel, and they use the same language, only they add certain whistlings,
which makes them to differ a little: but they are exceeding valiant. The
Volhinians also are full of courage, but their language and manners are like
unto the Russians.

The Southern Russians are strong and valiant: in war they use the bow, and
a pike of twelve foot long. They do strangely hate the name of King. The
Polonians have colonies in a manner throughout all this Russia, and almost all
the Knights and chief of the country are Polonians.



The Prussians, especially the nobility, descend from the Germans, and retain
much of their nature. They build higher than the Polonians, and their customs
continue longer than those of others. They have also more art and industry,
and much more policy than others; for that to speak the truth the Germans
do much exceed all other Northern Regions, either in arts, or in the
government of towns.


THe wealth of the Polonians consists in abundance of grain of all sorts,
whereof the country is so plentiful, as in the year 1590, and 91, it did not
only relieve the neighbor countries, but also the river of Genoua, Rome, and
Tuscanie, notwithstanding that their neighbors were in great want of
victuals. They do also make much money of their honey, wax, flax, hemp,
beeues. sheep, horses, and bugles. But their greatest commodity grows by the
saltpits of Ocen, which were found out in the year 1252, and also by them of
Vilisgue in the territory of Cracouia, and in diverse other parts of Russia,
whereas they sees the water drawn out of deep pits. Some write that in those
hollow

They do in like manner make great commodity of their Azure, and of their
mines of iron, whereof they have store in the wooddie countries: copper, lead
mixed with silver in some places of the jurisdiction of Cracouia, and upon the
limits of Silesia; quicksiluer at Tustan in Russia. At Biezze, and in the
mountain country they draw Vitriol, the which being boiled turns green, and
into a stony substance: they have in some places marble and alablaster. In the
Baltike sea, near to Dantzic and Montroy all towns

To conclude, take away the port of Dantzic, you shall not find any other place
of traffic which is of great importance. For as for that which is drawn from
other ports of Prussia and Liuonia, it does not enrich the realm with silver,
neither will it pay for the silks and cloth which is brought thither out of
Flanders and England; nor for the wine,

To return to our discourse, the Polonians sell great store of furs, and
skins of diverse beasts, as sables, and foxes, which are very dear. But to
conclude, the whole country having no great traffic, except the town of
Dantzic, and there being no great trade in any other towns, nor the people of
the country very industrious; moreover the Polonians being of that nature as
they love to make good cheer (especially the gentlemen) money, and the entry
cause them to disburse little. Hence grow es the wealth of the

Sigismond Augustus did engage some part, and king Henry a year before his
departure (meaning to bind the nobility unto him) did alienate for above three
hundred thousand dollers of rent. But their kings may much augment their
revenues by the death of such as are in possession, annexing unto the crown
those goods which they were wont to give unto private men. The king may spare
the greatest part of this revenue, for that he is defraied with his whole court
in Lituania, and also in some part of Polonia, whilst he remains in these
^^ouinces. The kings revenues should be much greater, if he were not so
bountiful to his Palatins and Chastelains, to whom he commonly gives two third
parts, and sometimes more of all the rights and duties of their governments.
But in necessities of war, and in Stephen mantained a war against the duke of
Muscouie for the space of three years.

As for the nobility, their wealth is commonly well divided betwixt the
noblemen and gentlemen, for there is not any one much richer than another, and
the greatest has not above five and twenty thousand crowns in yearly
revenues. We must except out of this number the duke of Curland, and Cunisberg:
who although they acknowledge the king of Poland to be their Superior, and
they his Feudataries: yet are they no lively members of the realm, for that
they have no place in their Diets and Assemblies, nor Casimire. In the end the
great maistership falling into the hands of Albert of Brand^bourg, he became a
Lutheran, and of great master, duke of Prussia.

The Forces.




Sigismond Augustus, King of Poland, did often attempt to have the Estates
resolve upon the fortification of Crac^uia, by reason of the Emperors
neighborhood; but he could never persuade them to that which he desired; both
for that they would not give their kings means to become absolute masters, by
reason of their garrisons, as also, for Stephen in his enterprise of Liu^nia,
had about 16000 foot of these two nations, and above 40000 horse of his own
realm in his army.

As for the conduct of artillery and pioners, they employ Tartarians, and the
Pesants of the country. This realm is reasonably well furnished with
artillery and munition of war; both for that the nobility have much
ordnance in their castles and private houses,

The forces of Poland, whereof we have made mention, are such both for number
and quality, as there are few realms in Europe, I will not say that surmounts
them, but that

Yet it may be they would resolve more speedily if there were question of the
defense, and preservation of the estate, for that the fear of loss and
consideration of danger makes every man diligent. But in my opinion they would
be very show and irresolute, if they should consult of the enterprise of any
conquest; for that the hope of good does Sigismond the first, the Estate of
Poland and Smolen^ue, and yet he showed no apprehension nor feeling worthy of
so great a King, and so powerful a realm. And the same Muscouite invaded
Liuonia, which had put it self under the protection of Sigismond, and found no
resistance. But we must confess, that the forces of Poland, which are great,
valiant, and depend not of any one, will always show themselves ready and
resolute if the king have credit and authority among them.

We have an example hereof in the person of Stephen Battorie, in whose time
Poland not only maintained it self in reputation to be able to resist any
foreign forces, but also

Moreover, the quality of horses does much import; for that the Flanders
horses do much exceed them of Friseland and Germany, and the Hongarians them
of Poland: the Genets of Spain exceed the horses of Turkey, and the Barbarian
horses are swifter than the rest. As for the Coursers of Naples, they are not
so swift as the Gennets, but they will endure travail much better, and they
are reasonably swift. Experience has taught us that the Germane horsemen are
not fit to give chase to an enemy, nor to fly from them, for that they are
too heavy: whereas if the Valachians, Hongarians, Polackes, Turks,

As for Sea fights, ships of burden have no great agilitie, for that they
cannot stir, nor turn without wind: great Galleasses move somewhat better,
but not much; only the common galleys are good for this purpose. Wherefore we
have seen that Christian nauies consisting for the most part of ships, have
many times lost a good part of Summer, which is the only season to do an
exploit; whereas the Turks fleets were soon made ready. But there is nothing
that makes the Turks more active and speedy than their kind of living,
contenting themselves with little; for that wine and such delights do

Charles. Moreover, this prince having married a daughter of the hou^e of
Austria, may live in peace with the Emperor. And as for the princes of
Germany, (...) forces are so equally balanced, that the Germans fear not
that the (...) will force their towns, which are well fortified, and furnished
with all things necessary,

On the other side the Polacks confine with the Muscouites the Precop of
Tartaria, and the Turk. As for the Muscouite, I have spoken waht is fit in the
discourse of Mascouia. In regard of the Precop of Tartaria of the Taurique
Chersonese, he may draw to field about fifty thousand horse, and many more
with the help of the other Tartarians his friends, as he did in the year
1569, whenas at the instigation of the Turk he led eithtie thousand horses
against the Muscouites, and when he burnt the town of Mosco in the year 1561,
but he cannot continue long in any enterprise of importance, and his trade

The great Turk is very near to Poland, making himself master of Valachia,
which was sometimes feudatorie to the crown of Poland, according unto certain
contentio^s which past betwix Alexander Palatin of Valachia, and Lad^slaus king
of Poland in the year 1403: and also in the year 1432, betwixt Elias Palatin,
and Ladislaus the third,

The Government.
POland has always been governed as a Monarchy, and they carried only the
name of prince, until that the Emperor Otho gave the royal diadem and honor
unto Boleslaus Chobre, soon after that he had received the Christian faith,
about the year of Grace 1100. This honor did not pass the fourth king: for
after another Boleslaus, the princes of Poland abstained from the name of king
for above two hundred years. Premisle took upon him that title again about
two hundred and sixty years since, and so it has continued unto this day. In
the beginning the princes authority was more free, not being subject to any
laws, and having absolute power not only of their Estates, but also of life
and death. Since that the Christian religion has been generally received, it
began to be moderated, first by the holy admonitions of Bishops and Clergy
men, whose authority was great among those people, being then rude and without
knowledge of learning: and then by the merits and services of the nobility
employing themselves in writing nor by tradition. They only know that the
Archbishop of Gnes^e has Stephen had instituted new Bishops, Palatins, and
Chastelains in Liuonia whenas he conquered it) and some small number of other
persons, enter into this election. The earthly messengers have also a certain
authority: they call certain men so, which are as it were agents of
jurisdictions or circles of the nobility, which are held throughout the
provinces, especially in those provinces which are governed by States. These at
the time of their Ladislaus (who was afterward restored) they made choice of
Wenceslaus of Bohemia: yea they have always carried honor and respect Edige
whom they married to king Iagelon, and in our time to Anne married to king
Stephen. And it is well known that Sigismond the third, obtained the crown of
Poland, especially for that he was son to Katherine, sister to Sigismond
Augustus, and to the said Anne. But although the kings authority, as we have
said, depends of others in that which concerns the election; yet is it
absolute in many things after that he is chosen. He appoints the diets, and
prescribs what time and place he pleases. He chooses the secular Counselors,
and names the Bishops who shall afterward remain Counselors, without any
other formalitie. He is absolute Master of the revenues of the crown, and
Lord immediately of his subjects (but he has no right over the nobility) and
does absolutely execute the resolutions made in Diets. He is sovereign

The new king of Poland being chosen, he is required to take an oath, That he
shall reign according to the laws and statutes of his ancestors, that he shall
maintain the rights and privileges of every order, and shall not diminish any
thing of the revenues and limits of the realm; yea he shall endeavor to
recover that which others have lost: and in like manner all the whole Senate
does promise to obey him. In former times their kings were anointed and
crowned in the Cathedral Church of Gnesne, but now in that of Cracouia, by the
Archbishop of Gnesne, and two other Bishops. Being anointed betwixt his
shouldiers with a sacred oil before the altar, where he receives the communion



The kings of Poland, to fortefie their empire, have done one thing which is
very remarkable, for as the Romans augmented their forces in communicating the
freedom of Rome, and the rights of the country of Latium, to the inhabitants
of towns and provinces conquered: even so they have much enlarged, united and
fortefied their Estate, giving privileges to the nobility of Poland in
provinces, conquered either by force of arms, or by any other means, and in
equalling their nobility to that of Poland. In this manner king Ladislaus
united Russia and Podolia to Poland, Sigismond the first Pruss^a, Sigismond
Augustus Lituania, and Stephen Liuonia: wherein they showed themselves

The things worthy consideration, touching the goue^nement, are, That the
diversity of sects which are within the realm of Poland, breeds perpetual
hatred and iarres among those people; and they not only creep into provinces,
towns, and families, but they also grow betwixt the father and the son, the
husband and the wife.

Moreover, the discord of dependances is great in this realm, for that this
crown being

There is another difference, which is that of the orders of the realm, that
is to say, of the order of Senators, and that of Knights: for the understanding
whereof, you must them, they choose four or six out of the whole company which
are called earthly Nuncios

The other discord is that of noble families, amongst whom there is little good
intelligence, and in case they should come to the election of any one of these
houses, whenas during the vacancie of the realm, there might grow great
disorders, according to the power and means of the parties.

The last discord is that of Provinces, as Lituania, Russia, and Liuonia, for
that the gentlemen of these Provinces do hardly endure (their country being
greater) to be governed and subject to the Polonians. But there were good
means to remedy all these things, according to the example of king Stephen,
who sought in the general Estates to reconcile the points of religion, and to
settle a form in future elections, to the end that the factions of the
nobility might be suppressed, and by this means prevent many disorders



The other member is of the secular noblemen, which are the Palatins,
Chastelains,

The Palatins of the whole realm of Pollonia (who are as it were Governors of
provinces) are those of Cracouia, of Sandomir, and Lublin in base Poland: of
Posnan, Calis, Sirad, Lancicie, Vladislauia, Breast, Rau, and Ploc in high
Poland: the Palatin general of Masouia, he of Droic, General of Russia, he of
Belzen, Palatin General of Podolia, he of Volhinia in Lituania, he of Tron, he
of Minsce, he of Kiouia, he of Misczislauia, he

The king calls the Senators to Council by the gromes of his chamber, or by
his letters missiue if they be far off; and he does use this means to assemble
the States: for in regard of the great distance of places they do not assemble
often unless it be for some great occasion or solemnity, as to assist at the
marriage of the prince, or of his children,

Having formerly made mention of certain chief officers of the Estate of
Poland, Office of Palatins.
it shall not be impertinent to speak something of their places and offices,
and first of the Palatin, who is so called, in imitation of the Romans, who
under their Emperors did much esteem and honor the Count Palatins. His
charge is in the war to be leader of

The Chastelains are as it were lieutenants to Palatins, and leaders of the
nobility, every one under his Palatin. Chastelain.
They are called Chastelains in regard of the castles or towns which are
assigned unto them, not that they have any jurisdiction in them, but only the
charge of war, as we have said; and many have also annual revenues. The
Chastelain of Cracouia alone, besides the name and revenues, is nothing common
with the rest: but he has the honor free without any charge, except that
which is common to

The Marshall of the realm is master of the kings court, Marshall of the
realm.
and administrator of the public Council, to whom it belongs to assemble the
Council, by the commandment of the king, or primat. They impose silence and
give audience, they have power to speak their opinions, to give entrance to
foreign ambassadors, and to exclude them out of the Council which have no
place there, to pronounce the kings ordinances in cases of infamy and crime,
to moderat public pompes, to entertain strangers of account, to pacify and
suppress tumults and seditions, not only about the Senate and in public, or
whenas the king goes forth in public, he carries before him a Septer of wood.

Chauncellor and viceChauncellor.
The Chauncellor and Vice Chancellor are distinct names but of equal power.
They have the superintendancie and oversight of all letters patents, and
writings which come from the prince, or go unto the prince, and in like manner
which come from the Senate, and go unto the Senate. They have the kings seals in
their custody, the Chauncellor has the great seal, and the Vice-Chauncellor
the less, and their authority is so great as they may sign many things
without the princes advice, and reject that which they see contrary to the
laws, notwithstanding the kings express commandment to the contrary. They
make answers in the kings name, and propound unto the Senate of what matters
they are to consult. Finally they set down in writing, diuulge and publish the
decrees

Treasurer.
The Treasorer shows his charge by his name, he keeps the kings treasure with
the marks and ornaments of the realm, which are, the crown, the ball, and the
scepter; he gouernes the plate, stuff, and revenues, writings, and public
monuments: all receivers, and such as disburse the princes money must yield an
account unto him. He is master

There are two heads and leaders of the army, which they put in the number of
magistrates, and officers of the realm, whereof the one is called General and
chief captain of the army, the other Marshall or Captain of the Camp. The
first commands in all matters of war next unto the prince, and is his
lieutenant. He leads the army, appoints the place where they shall camp, and
orders the battle: he gives the sign when they shall fight and retire: he
has the care of victuals in the camp, and sets the prices, and does punish
malefactors. The captain or marshal of the camp is as it were his lieutenant,
and is appointed by the king: he has charge over Sentinells and watches, and
does command

The Religion.
John Hus, it began also to disperse it self thoughout the countries that were
subject to the crown of Poland: but king Ladislaus assisted by the noblemen
and Bishops of the realm opposed himself violently against it. Luthers
doctrine, young men went to study at Lipsic, and Wittemberg, partly to learn
the Germane tongue with their other studies, and partly for curiosity, they
returned home to their houses either altogether Lutherans, or less affected to
Papistrie: so as Sigismoud who then reigned did forbid young men to go and
study in those places. This prohibition did somewhat stay the course thereof,
for that partly by reason of the liberty of the Polonian gentlemen, and partly
by the neighborhood of countries infected with that opinion, and in Arrius and
Ebion.

The first which received the doctrine of Luther and some others were they of
Prussia, for that the merchants brought it with their commodities out of
Germany, and dispersed Luthers opinion, deposed the old Senate, and created a
new of unworthy men, they made a Notarie, Consul, profaned the Churches,
carried away the ornaments, and did a thousand indignities to the priests and
religious persons. And notwithstanding that the king went thither and did in
some sort pacify the town, yet the Papists lost their churches, and the Mass
was in a ma ner quite banished: so as there remains at this day in Dantzic but
one convent of the order of S. Dominicke, who have free exer^ises, and one
monastery of religious women within the town, and another

But to return to the progress of Luthers doctrine, and of other sects in
Prussia: the disorders whereof I have spoken were followed by the falling off
of Albert of Brandebourg, who by the persuasion of Henry and George his
brethren became a Lutheran, and of great master of the Teuton knights of
Prussia, made himself duke of a good part of that province. The people of his
country did presently embrace the opinion of their duke, and afterward it
entered into that part of Prussia which is subject to the king of Poland, where
it had extended it self farther, if the Bishops had not opposed themselves. In
Luther and others, the Anabaptists have got some footing, especially at
Cunisbergue; and there are some which follow the opinion of Osiander.

As for Liuonia, in the time of the Emperor Frederick the first, certain
preachers past into that country, and profited much; among others, there was
one Mainard of Lubec, who for this cause was consecrated Bishop of Liuonia by
the Archbishop of Breme. He had for successor Bertold Abbot of Cisteaux, who
entering into fight against the enemies of his profession was slain. For this
cause they brought the order of the knights of the sword into Liuonia, to
defend the preachers and their doctrine by arms. This order growing weak, in
the end united it self by the Popes authority with the Teuton knights, and
Albert of Brandebourg, who freed them for a certain sum of money, in the
year of our Redemption 1513. There were at that time five bishoprics in
Liuonia, that is to say, Derpt, Asilia, Oefelia, Curland, and Riuaille, with
the Archbishopricke of Rig. In the year of our Salvation 1528, the great
master and the knights did openly embrace the opinion of Luther, the which had
by little and little crept into Liuonia, as it had done formerly into Prussia:
yet all the Bishops continued constant for a time. In the year of Grace 1557,
the Knights made war against the Archbishop of Rig, being of the house of
Brandebourg, for that he would Sigismond king of Poland, who had taken arms in
his favor, they set him at liberty, and restored him to his former estate:
After whose death, Rig fell into the power of the Polonians. Soon after, the
order of Crosse-cariers ended, by the death of William of Furstenberg: but
before that this order was extinct, these knights were assailed by the duke of
Muscouia, and being dispossessed of the greatest part of their Estates, they
put themselves under the protection of Sigismond king of Poland, who
notwithstanding gave them small succors. In the mean time the Muscouite took
the town of Derpt, and most part of the rest, and transporting the Liuonians
into other places, planted colonies of Muscouites there. On the other side,
John king of Sueden, having taken arms against the Muscouite, scised Magne
brother to the king of Denmark, made himself master of Oeselie, and Curland,
in which is the Bishopric of Vinde. In the end, Stephen king of Poland made
war against John, great Duke of Muscouie, and forced him to yield Liuonia
unto him, to avoid a greater incon^enience.

There are in this province six sorts of people, that is to say, Estons,
Germans* Suedens, Paternoster, and it is difficult to help them therein, by
reason of the difference of their language.

The Germans dwell in cities which they have built for the most part. Rig is
the Metropolitan of Liuonia, where there were no remainders of popery, but one
monastery of religious women, in the which there were two Nuns in the year of
our Redemption 1587, (whereof one was a hundred years old, and the other
little less) until that king Stephen had built a College for Jesuits, who
were expelled by the persuasion of the Ministers, Stephen made frustrat that
dessigne: but they were restored in the year of Grace 1591, by the authority
of king Sigismond and the Estates of the realm. Those places which are held by
the kings of Sueden and Denmark, have small remainders of the Romish religion,
and they are wholly deprived of the exercise thereof.

As for those towns where the Polonians have planted themselves, they have
labored, and do daily, to reduce them to the Romish Church. To which end,
they have a College of Jesuits at Derpt, a town almost equal unto Rig, and
upon the frontiers of Muscouia. And to conclude the discourse of this country,
king Sigismond made an edict Luthers doctrine to preach in Liuonia.

As for Poland, the opinions of Luther and Calvin have been in a manner
generally received, especially by the nobility of the country: King Sigismond
Augustus seemed to favor them, and gave them great liberty; but Henry his
successor, and after him Stephen Battorie opposed themselves.

As for the Lituanians, they were in old time subject to the Muscouites: but
Bartic great Can of Tartaria, having in a manner vanquished the Russians, they
of Lituania, whereof Erdizuil was then prince withdrew themselves from under
their command. Afterward Mindoch, great Duke of Lituania, became a Christian,
and was honored Innocent the third, but he returned soon to Idolatry.
Finally, in the year 1386, the fourteenth of February, Iagellon, great duke
of Lituania, received the Christian faith, and was baptized, and having married
the Infanta of Poland, he caused all his subjects of Lituania to be baptized.
But by reason of the little care they have had to instruct them since, the
greatness of the country, the mixture of the Russians (who, besides heresy
and schism, have a thousand strange superstitions) and by reason also of the
disturbance of the Lutherans; and other opinions of their time, the inhabitants
have not been confirmed in the faith: for in Lituania and Samogithia, which is
one of her dependances, they discover in many places many heads of Idolatry.
In some places they do worship a domesticke god, whom they call Distipan, that
is to say,

The Samogithians do yet in many places nourish certain black serpents which
have Tellus, or the Earth, and diverse beasts to the god Ziemienni. There are
also some Mahometans, since that Vitolde prince of Lituania began in the year
1399 a hoord of Tarta^ians, and ledged it upon the river of Vache two miles
from Vilne, suffering them to live after the Mohammedan manner; and there are
also some in other places. The Zuingliens many years since Radiuil does help
much in Lituania to advance the Romish religion.

As for the South Russians, the nobility for the most part follows the Church
of Rome (notwithstanding that there be some which are otherwise affected) and
the people acknowledge the authority of the Patriarch of Constantinople, and
follow the errors of the Grecians. At this present in all Russia, comprehending
also Lituania, they do number but five Romish or Latin Bishoprics, that is to
say, Vilne, Samogithia, Kiouia, Ianou^,

To conclude, the provinces subject to the crown of Poland, which are near
unto the Balticke sea (the which are Prussia and Liuonia) participat much with
the opinions of

But to the end you may the more easily judge of the number of Schismatickes, I
will set down two examples. Luc^orta a town of Volhinia contains about a
thousand families, whereof there are one hundred and seven of Romish
Catholics, and the other are Russians, Grecians, and some Armenians. In the
town of Poloce which king Stephen won from the Mu^cou^tes, the Grecians have
seven Churches, and the Latins but one, and that has continued many years
without a priest. There are many in base

A GENEALOGY OF THE DVKES AND KINGS OF POLAND.
LEch was the first which had command over the Polacks, but the histories of
Poland

After his death his children, and his childrens children did rule according to
their degrees of age. Their deeds and the times of their governments, are not
noted in histories.

The race of Lech being wholly extinct, the princes and chief noblemen
resolved in the beginning to choose and establish some prince over them: but in
the end they were Gracebus, who lived at the foot of the Sarmatick hills, near
unto the river of Vistula. It was he that built Gracchouia.

He left for his successor Gracchus his eldest son. They hold that it was
four hundred years before the birth of our Savior. This Gracchus eldest
son to the first, having taken possession of Poland, was slain by his
brother, for which fratricide he grew odious Vande their sister for their
princess. They say that she did sacrifice herself unto the gods for a great
victory which she obtained against the Teu^ons, casting her self from the top
of a bridge into the river of Vistula.

The posterity of Gracchus failing, the people mad a new choice of twelve men
to govern the country: but they fell into dissension, and in the mean time
the enemy entered Poland by force, and spoiled it, the governors making no
resistance. The people seeing this, they did choose for their Sovereign prince
a valiant man, well experienced in war, and very discreet, called Pre^islaus,
to whom they gave the name of Lesko, by reason of his great policy. He was
the fist governor after Lech the first of that name. After Lesko the second.

He left his son Lesko the third for his successor, who reigned very wisely,
and had one lawful son called Popyel, and twenty bastards. He left the
principality to Popyel, and to either of the rest a province.

The children of Lesko the third.

Popyel, lawful. Boleslaus. Casimire. Vladislaus. Vratislaus. Oddo. Beruin.
Pribislaus. Premislaus. Iaxa. Semian. Semouite. Semonislaus. Bogdale.
Spitzigure. Spitzmere. Sbignee. Sobeslaus. Vissimire. Czessimire. Vislaus.
Popyel being installed disliked the mountains of Gracchouia, and trasported
his seat to Gnesne which stands in the plain: afterward this place displeased
him, so as he made choice of a new abode among the lakes, and there built the
town of Cruicnize, the which he made the seat of his principality. In the end
he was eaten with rats.

After the death of Popyel, the Polonians did choose for their duke a countriman
called Pyast, who made honey: he was a man of a small stature but very strong.

Semouite son to Pyast succeeded him, and did much extend the limits of the
realm. He left one son very young, called

Lesko, which was in the time of the Emperor Arnold, and of Michaell Emperor
of Greece.

Lemom^slamus his son succeeded him, and afterward left the principality to
his son.

Miesko, who reigned in the year of Grace 963. Some call him Mietzlaus: he
made Boleslaus king of Bohemia, whose daughter he married called Dambro^ke.

^^^^slaus his son succeeded him, and in the year of Grace 984 married Judith
daughter to Geysa of Hongarie. He was created king by the Emperor Otho, and
crowned in the

^ietzko, or Mietzlaus his son succeeded him. He did nothing but by the
Council o^ (...) wife, and was wholly given to all sorts of pleasures: for
this cause the people (...) his father had subdued, retired themselves from his
obedience, namely, the Bohe^^^ and Morauians: yet he kept the Russians (who
also would have revolted) under his ^^^^ction.

^^^simire his son, after that he had been a Monk at Clugny, was made king,
and left (...) Cloister by the Popes permission, upon condition that every head
of a family in the Peter's successors. He was crowned at Gnesne in the year of
Grace 1041, and died in the year 1058.

^oleslaus his eldest son was crowned king the same year 1058. He gave
himself to ^^ disorder and dissolutnesse, and being reprehended by Stanislaus
Bishop of Craccho^^, who did excommunicat him seeing him obdurate in his sin,
he slew him with one ^ow of a sword. The Pope hearing it, took the crown from
the realm of Poland, and ^^solued all the subjects from their obedience to the
king, who soon after fell mad in ^^ngarie, whether he had retired himself,
and died.

^ladislaus his brother succeeded him, in the year of our Redemption 1082, but
he ^s not crowned, notwithstanding that he was called King, for that the
Bishops feared Boleslaus; and ^^^ignee his bastard, Massouia, high Poland,
Pomeran, and Prussia: he died in the ye^^ of our Salvation 1102.

(...) realm of Poland being thus divided, Sbignee made war against his
brother Bo^^^^^ who did easily vanquish him, and brought all that under his
subjection which (...) held: so as this miserable man was forced to cast
himself at his brothers feet, and (...) a grant of him to remain duke of
Massouia. In the end, seeing his brother to (...) rebellious, he caused him to
be slain. After many brave exploits, having lost a (...), he died, as they say
of grief, in the year 1139.

^^^^slaus his eldest son, to whom he had given for his part, the lands of
Gracchouia, Stra^^ia, Lancicia, Slese, Pomerand, and the sovereignty of the
realm, was chosen soue^^ine prince, according to his testament: but not
content with his portion (which was ^^^^ght part of the realm) he commanded
them all not to obey his brethren, and raised (...) against them: but they
entered into Gracchouia, and won the castle, forcing him to^^ out of Poland,
and to fly into Germany to Conrade king of Romans.

^^^slaus, called the Crespe or Curled, his brother, by the consent of his
other brethren, (...) chief noblemen of the realm, was made sovereign lord
of the country, after ^^^^^ght of Vladislaus, in the year of Grace 1146. He
died in the year 1173, and made (...) to the benefit of his only son Lesko.

^^^^zlaus, uncle to Lesko, and brother to Casimir, was chosen for sovereign
duke of (...) Poland, and duke of Pomerand, whereunto they added Gracchouia,
with the whole ^^^^nce: but for that he became a tyrant, they set Casimir his
younger brother in his place, (...) died suddenly in the year 1192, having
taken a certain drink.

^esko, eldest son to Casimir, surnamed the Fair, succeeded him, Mietzlaus
being dis^^^^ented therewith, wrought so with Hellene mother to Lesko, as he
being very old, re^^^^ed the possession of the monarchy, and of Gracchouia.
But afterward going into (...) Poland, Lesko was again put into the castle of
Gracchouia: yet Mietzlaus was (...) restored to the sovereignty thereof in the
year 1202. But he died soon after, (...) the seigneurie to Lesko, who died in
the year 1227.

^^leslaus, the Chaste, succeeded his father Lesko, and died in the year 1274
having (...) years. Wherein we must observe that Conrade, who had carried
himself as tutor (...) children of Lesko* governed from the year 1227 unto
1243.

^^^^rie, the Bearded, was successor to Boleslaus the Chaste.

(...), the Black, came after him, and died in the year 1287.

Doleslaus, duke of Masouia, was chosen after him, but he was deposed.

Henry, surnamed the Wise, succeeded him, and died in the year of Christ 1290.

Henry, son to Boleslaus, duke of Legnits, was his successor, and after his
death his two dukedomes were divided to two dukes: that of Gracchouia fell to
Premislaus, and Vladislaus Locketec^ had the duchy of Sandomiria.

The Polonians considering that it was more expedient for them to have but one
Prince, whom they might all acknowledge, did, in the year 1295, in the month
of June, make choice of Premislaus the second for their king, and he was
anointed and crowned in the Church of Gnesne: but he was within a short time
slain through the hatred of the great men of the realm, being 38 years old,
having reigned only 7 months, and 11 days. Casimire, was afterward chosen
king: but by reason of his dissoluteness, he was deposed in the year 1300,
and they did choose

Venceflous, king of Bohemia, who was crowned at Gnesne, and died in the year
1305. (...) Lochteck found means afterward to make himself duke of
Gracchouia, or (...) but some Polonians in the mean time did choose for their
prince Henry (...) of Gragon^a; and those were they of high Poland, Posnan,
and Calisia: but Lotchteck had always the victory against his Competitor
Henry, and was accepted for Sovereign by all the other Polonians. This
Lochte^k obtained the royal crown from the Pope, the which he took in the
Church of Gracehouia, in the year 1320. He died in the year of our Redemption
1333.

Casimire his son succeeded him, and reigned forty years.

L^wis, King of Hongarie, Ca^simires sisters son, was chosen King of Poland,
and crowned in the year 1370. He governed the realm twelve years.

(...) or Edige the young^st of the two daughters of Lewis, was crowned Queen
of Poland, and the Polonians gave her power to govern the realm until that
she were married unto some Prince, in the end, Iagellon, great duke of
Lituania, being yet an Idolater, married (...), upon condition, that he should
become a Christian, and unite the du^^^^ of (...) to the crown of Poland.

Iagellon, great duke of Lituania, was king of Poland by means of his marriage
with (...), in the year 1386, and at his baptism he was called Vladislaus. He
died in the year of our Salvation 1434.

Vladislaus his son succeeded him: he reigned ten years, and died being one
and mont^^ years old.

(...) his brother, great duke of Lituania, was called to the crown of Poland,
in the year 1445, and died in the year of our Redemption 1492.

John Albert, eldest son to Casimire, succeeded him, and died in the year
1501.

After the death of John Albert, the Polonians did choose Alexander his brother,
who died at Vilnein a voyage against the Tartarians, being five and forty
years old.

Sigismond, the youngest of all Casimires children, was chosen king of Poland,
in the year (...). He died in the year 1549.

Sigismond Augustus, his son, succeeded his father the same year, and died in
the year

Henry of Valois was called to the crown of Poland, in the year 1573, and
parted out (...) about the midst of October to go thither: but Charles the
ninth, the French (...) dead, he left Poland, to come and reign in his own
native (...) in the year 1574.

(...), of the house of the Princes of Transiluania, succeeded him, and made
long (...) others, with very happy success. He died in the year 1687.

(...) son to the King of Sueden, and of Anne Queen of Poland, succeeded
Charles, sometimes with loss, sometimes with advantage. This war keeps the
Polonians (...) their armies against the Turk, or the Muscouite.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE ESTATE OF THE KING OF DENMARK.
The Contents.
WHat Islands and countries the realm of Denmark contains: the bounds and
principal parts, whereof the first is called Inia, or Iutland, an ancient
habitation of the Cimbrians: the limits, length, and breadth. 2. Of four great
Bishoprics contained in Iulia, and what governments, cities, and castles are
under every Bi^^^cke. 3. Of the huge rock of Skarring klint, and of the
fearful Angle of Iulia, and the (...) of the duchies of Schleszwich and
Holsatia, lying in South Iutia. The beginning of (...) two names, their towns
and castles. 4. Of Scania, a province in old time divided into (...), the
governments, towns, and castles, and of the admirable clock of Land
represen^^^^ the motions of the Stars and Spheres of heaven. 5. Of the Island
of Selande, the (...), breadth towns, and castles. 6. Of the Island of Fionia,
or Fuynen, divided into four (...) governments, the situation and limits,
with the principal towns and castles con^^^ within it. 7. Of Norwaie, and the
bounds, castles, governments, and towns. 8. Of (...) of Island, divided into
four parts: the Bishoprics, and Monasteries. 9. Of the (...) the air, and
fertility of the province of Denmark: of their good pastures, and (...): of
the fields, yielding every three years interchangably fish and corn: mines of
(...) silver, lead, and copper: of the fishing of cod. 10. A fountain whose
smoke trans^^^^^ that which it touches into stone. 11. Of venomous fishes
exceeding long. 12. Of the (...) of Island covered with snow, and vomiting
forth flames and fire at the foot of them. Of the beginning of the Cimbrians,
and the descent of that nation into Italy. 14. Of (...) complexion and
disposition both of body and mind of the people of Denmark, their (...) and
manner of living and apparel. 15. Their wealth in the traffic of cattle,
(...) horses, cloth of Watman, soulpher, and salt butter. 16. Of the revenues
of the king of (...) and wherein it consists. 17. What number of ships he is
able to arm. 18. How ma^^rements (called Herets) there are in Denmark. Of the
form and ceremonies observed at ^^^nation of their kings. 19. Of the five
orders which are in Denmark, and of the chief (...) and offices of this
realm. 20. Of the government and particular policy of every (...). 21. The
doctrine of Luther, when and by whom it was brought into this realm. (...)
Catalogue of the kings which have reigned in Denmark.

THe realm of Denmark contains a great tract of land and sea, with

^^^marke is only united in two places to the firm land. It is bounded upon
the (...) the Germane sea, upon the East by the Balticke, toward the North by
Norway, Sueden; and upon the South, Holsatia and Pomeran. The whole country of

(...), commonly called (...) land, which some hold to be Gothia, the ancient
abode of (...) Cimbrians, is (...) C^mbrique Chersonese by Historians, and
Historiographers; and it is divided into South and North. It has for bounds
upon the South, the river of Eyder, and is about eighty miles long, running
from the river of Elb toward the North. The greatest breadth is not about
twenty miles. The Northern part extending it self toward Norway, ends near
unto Scage, a town of great note amongst mariners, by reason of the ^^ats which
they find neerre unto it. The greatest breadth of this country is

The bishopric of Rip contains thirty Gouernements, seven Cities, and ten
royal D^rothi^, widow to Chrillierne the third, erected an University at
Koldinge, at her own charge. The diocese of Arrhus contains one and thirty
Governments, seven Cities, and five Castles. The town of Arrhus is famous by
reason of Christei^^e ^ founded an University, and the castle of Orunme. It
has under it the (...) of Ha^sholm, Ostholm, Iegen, Cisland, Egholm, Bodum,
and Morsee, three Gouernements, one City called Nicapia, and the castle of
Lundslod, which has near unto it an Island ca^^ed Age^oe. The diocese of
Wibourg imbraceth sixteen Gouernements, three Cities, and as many Castles.
Near unto the Peninsula of Wenslie, where it ends in a point, is the Angle of
I^tia, very dangerous and fearful to Seafaring men: such is all the
We^te^^e shore of I^tia, so as they that will pass by Sea to Norway, or into
the East country, are forced to go far about to fly that coast.

South Iutia, called Nordalbinge, comprehends the two dukedomes of Schleswick,
(...) Ho^^atia* The dukedom of Schleswick takes his name of the chief town.
This (...) was in old time called the Dukedom of Iutia, which waldemar, great
grandchild to Abel king of Denmark, received first in see of King Henry,
about the year of our (...) The general government of these two dukedomes
belongs unto (...) Adolph duke of Holsatia, interchangeably one after (...) of
Sch^eswick He^debui or Heideba, saying, That a (...) of Denmark called (...)
it that name. This town is very commodious (...) for that it has a good
(...). Near unto this place is the fort or castle of (...), where there is so
great a (...) house, as some years there have past 50000 (...), the towns of
Hussena, and Haderslebia. The Princes, Lords, and (...) many houses and castles.

(...), which takes his name of the abundance of wood which is there, (the
which (...) Holt in the German tongue) has for bounds toward the East, the
river of (...) the West, the river of Store; toward the South, Elbe; and upon
the North, (...). It is divided into four parts, which be, Ditmarsia,
Holsatia, Stormaria, and (...). The chief towns of Holsatia are, Segeberg,
which is in Wagria, four miles (...); Itzohoa, which has a goodly situation;
Store, which is compassed about (...) goodly nauigable river; Chilonia,
commonly called Kile, the which has a good (...) whether merchants come from
Germany, Liuonia, Denmark, and Sueden. There (...) the towns of Crempe and
Reinholdbourg; and in Ditmarsia, Meldorp, Heininkste, ^^^ell^kste, and in
Stomaria Hambourg upon Elb.

(...) is a great province of the realm of Denmark, joining unto Sueden. Some
call Frederic the second king of Denmark, ^he ^oundations thereof in the Sea
with very great expense, and now this building (...) nothing can shake it.
There is an admirable clock in the town of Land, (...) great art, where
there is to be seen the motions of the Sun and Moon, (...) like things, and
whenever the hour strikes, two horsemen encounter one (...) who give so many
blows as the great bell which hangs in the Tower sounds (...) ^here are many
other singularities in this clock, as the three Kings or wise men (...) to
worship Jesus Christ in the Virgins arms, whenas the hour strikes. But (...)
make a full description it might be very tedious.

(...) and of Selande, or Sialand, is the greatest of all those of Denmark. It
is about under i^ the Islands of Amagria, Huen, or Vueen, Moenesland, in which
is the town of

Canut, the other to S. Francis.

The Islands comprehended under Fionia, are ninety in number, lying toward
the South, and for the most part habitable. The chief are Langeland, Lawlande,
Falstria,

Tassinge or Tossinge, a chief Island among many others, near unto
Swinebourg, a town of Fionia, is a league long. From the town of Assens in this
island, it is two leagues unto Iutia: and from Nibourg in Seland, four leagues
by the Baltique sea, the which is many times very dangerous.

Aroe, lying at the entry of the duchy of Sleswic, whereas they pass into
Fionia, by the gulf of Arse to the town of Ascens, contains four villages
peopled. Near unto it they reckon the Islands of Romso, Endelo, Ebelo, Boko,
Brando, Zoroe, Aggernis, Hellenis, Iordo, Bi^kolm, and others. There is also
the Island of Huene, whereas there is to

castle i^ Bergerhuse, under which are the towns of Berg and Staffanger. Berg
or Bergue (...) of the greatest traffic, and a storehouse of corn for all
Norway, whereas (...) ^ouernor and Bishop remain. There is also a very
commodious and safe port: (...) castle is that of Nidrosia, vulgarly called
Trundtheim, and in old time (...) ^^metimes the Metropolitan of all Norway, but
now reduced to a borough. The (...) is Wardhus, the which is no ways
fortified, but is only appointed for the go^^^ of that country to live in
during the Summer season.

(...) which some take for Thule (and are therein contradicted by Saxon the
Gramarian, (...), Milius, Iouius, and Pe^cer) is situated, not under the first
Meridian, as some (...) served, but eight degrees beyond it. It is in length
one hundred German leagues, (...) which some have added four and forty more,
and the breadth is sixty and five (...) leagues. It has been subject to the
kings of Denmark since the year of (...) 1260, and is divided into four
parts: they call the Eastern part, Aust, (...), the Western Westfiordung, the
Northern part Nortlendingafiordung, (...) Southern Suidlendingafiordung. They
have no towns, in stead whereof they (...) mountains. This Island has two
Bishoprics, Holam which has under it the ^^^^steries of Pingora, Remested,
Modur, and Munkeniere; and that of Scalholt, (...) has under it the
monasteries of Videy, Pirnebar, Kirckebar, and Sckirde. Some that this Island
is twenty days journey long.

The Quality.
Northern Iutia yields great store of wheat, rye, barley, and such like: it
abounds

(...) South Iutia, the duchy of Sleswic abounds in cattle, and that of
Holsatia is full (...) and forests, there are many great oaks, but generally
beech trees, with the ^^^reof they do fat their swine, whereof they have great
numbers. Their fields do ^^angeably every three year yield great store of fish
and come: for during three (...) they till and sow their ground, and reap the
corn: then three years following (...) their pooles ouerflow them to the end
that the fish may feed upon the grass, and (...) be made fat wit the mud which
the water brings. They have neither vines nor (...) in this country; but there
is great store of wild beasts, and also many horses. (...) many rivers which
water this country, whereof the chief is Eidere: there (...) others, but most
of them may rather be termed brooks than rivers. On that side (...) Balticke
sea does wash Holsatia, and the dukedom of Sleswic, it makes goodly (...)
which are very commodious for merchants; and in some parts they take great
(...) fish, especially of salmons. The country is plain and has few
mountains.

(...) does not yield to any country for the bounty of the air, goodness of
the ^^^moditie of ports, and riches of the sea, in the fishing of the lakes and
rivers, in (...), and in mines of gold, silver, copper, and lead.

(...) Island of Gotland abounds with wheat, butter, cheese, and diverse kinds
of beasts. (...) also goodly fur trees, and fair stones sit for building.
Seland yields all kind (...) in abundance.

(...) has a good soil, and very fruitful; for it yields abundance,
especially of (...), and yet they never lay any compass upon their ground: and
therefore (...) has written that the entry into towns is very noisome, by
reason of the dung (...) they cast forth, they having no use thereof to soil
their land: it does also feed an (...) number of oxen, kine, and horses. There
are many forests in this Island, in which (...) many goats, stags, hares, and
foxes. The neighbor sea does furnish it with great (...) fish.

The Island of Lawland yields so much wheat, and such abundance of small nuts,
as

In Norwa^e the air is very calm, so as the sea does not freese, and the snow
continues not long. But the soil is not very fertile, and does hardly serve to
feed the inhabitants. It abounds in small cattle, and has many wild beasts:
amongst others they find while bears which are of an extraordinary bigness:
and in like manner, beuers. Finally the coast of Norwaie which lies upon the
West has many whales, against who^e fury the mariners use Castorium steeped,
which is a present remedy; for that as soon as they cast it into the sea,
these monsters hide themselves in the bottom of the water. In this sea they
take great store of cod, which they call stockfish. They take it chiefly in
January,

As for Island it is exceeding cold, and the land for the most part unmanured,
especially toward the North, by reason of the Northern winds which blow with
such vehemency, as it suffers not any thing to grow. It is frosen continually
for the space of eight months: and yet in many places it is full of heat and
fire under ground; the which by the Antipe^ista^is of the cold, which stops the
pores of the earth, and takes from it the liberty of respiration, increases
and kindles within the bowels of the earth. The land is not fit to receive any
feed, neither does it bear any wheat: but they hold an opinion that it y^elds
such abundance of grass, as i^ they do not sometimes keep their cattle
from feeding, they are in danger to surfeit and die with fullness. Jonas
confesses that there are Pl^^ie calls Pyga^ges. There is little wood throughout
all the Island, whereas they fearce fi^d any thing but Juniper trees.

In many parts of this Island there are bathes, and fountains of hotewater,
and there (...): and after the like space that they had cast the stone, it
falls again. This (...) very clear, yet no man durst ever taste of it, or
touch it. In the midst of this (...) is a lake which casts forth so venomous
a fume and smoke, as it k^ls the birds (...) it.

(...) the sea that lies near unto this Island, it does furnish the
inhabitants with great

^^^re are three very high mountains in Island, whose tops are always
covered with (...) and at the foot they burn continually. The first is called
Hecle or Heila; the se^^^^deda Croix; and the third Helge, that is to say,
Holy. Near unto that of Hecle (...) which is not far from the sea, there
are mines of sulphur. This mountain (...) continually, but no man knows with
what fire, nor of what substance, yet it (...) should be sulphur for that
there is abundance in this Island. This mountain (...) thunder, and sometimes
it casts forth fire, sometimes flaming water, then black (...) pumice stones in
so great abundance, as it darkens the Sun, and makes the ^^^bitable within
six miles round about. Sometimes when these tempests are past, (...) is calm,
the which happens when as the Western wind blows: some des^^^^ desirous to
search out the cause of this fire, fall oftentimes into those breaches (...)
the which are so covered with ashes, as they cannot see them. And if they cast
(...) into these caves, they are cast up again with a great bruit and noise:
by (...) they of the country say, That this place is the prison whereas damned
souls (...). And in truth there are strange things seen, and many Islanders,
especi^^^^ those that fish near unto this mountain, will tell the day when as
a battle is (...) they know not the place: for (as they say) they see devils
which go and (...) souls with them. Every year, the ice which has lain
continually (...) together, melting in the beginning of Iulie, there comes a
great aboun^^^^ (...) the shore near unto Mount Heila, the which makes so
great noise, as the (...) of the country say, that they be the cries and
complaints of damned souls, (...) been tormented in the flame, or put into
pieces of ice which flote up and (...) for the space of three months about
this mountain. The mountain of Helge (...) ^ame nature. There is moreover a
gulf or a breach, whereas they see many (...) and apparitions.

The Manners of the Ancients.
(...) this country was in old time the abode of the Cimbrians, it shall be
fit to Manilius the second, nor yet Cep^o the (...) these were defeat^d, and
put to flight, and Italy had been lost i^ Marius had not (...). These
Cimbrians are come from the Cimmerians, who being entered far into (...) being
expelled by the Scythians, and bending st^ll toward the West, past into (...),
and then into the Cimbrick Chersonese. Plutarch reports in the life of Marius,
(...) said, that as often as the Cimbrians took arms (the which they did not
always, but whenas the commodity of the season and time did suffer them) they
did set Lygda^e, and that the most valiant stayed near unto the sea shore, and
began to inhabit a country full of woods, which did reach unto the forest of
Hercinia. Festus says, That this word of Cimbrians does signify in the Gauls
language, Thieves or Robbers.

The Manners at this time.
Achilles Gassarus says, That it was in this country whereas a Monk first
invented Artillery. The inhabitants of Norway are simple, they love strangers,
and entertain them well: There are not any thieves or pirates among them, at
the least the number is very small.

The Islanders, when they first began to inhabit this Island, did not busy
themselves to build any towns or villages, but eu^rie man planted himself
where he thought it most pleasant, some upon hills, others in valleys, some in
forests, and some near unto the Sea shore, building their houses of timber and
flagges, and making the windows in the roof. They lodge all under one roof,
with their oxen and horses. They live very simply, and

^^other kind is of those which they call Bouden: and these are as it were
nobles who (...) keep a^ many fishermen and servants as they have boats and
troops. (...) kind is of the Clergy, whereof there are very many amongst
them, and these (...) from all imposts and customs which others pay. Many
Islanders are excee^^^^ proud for that they are very strong. There is no
distinction of apparel betwixt (...) and women, neither is it easy to know
one from another. The women are (...), but they know not how to attire
themselves. They are generally given to (...), and have familiar spirits which
do them service; and they only are held hap^^^ (...) fishing, which are called
up in the night by the devil to go to fish: and notwith^^^^ding any endeo^r of
their ministers to pourge them from this impiety, yet it is so (...) in their
souls as they cannot leave it, such power has Satan over them. It is (...)
matter for them with the help of the devil to sell you a favorable wind, as
(...) been often tried by experience, and singing, to stay ships when they are
under full (...), and to free them when they are stayed, the devil having
taught them a remedy (...) excrements and filthy ointments wherewith they do
rub the prow and (...) of the ship, causing the spirits to fly away that
stay it. They are not given to (...), having no ground fit for tillage, and
they live only of butter, without salt, milk, (...), and fish, which serves
them for a kind of bread, being ground into poulder with (...). They use
neither physic nor physicians, yet they live so long, as many of them (...)
been one hundred and fifty years old, or more. The greatest part of them
nei^^^ seenor eat any bread, and if at any time they buy wheat or meal from
them that (...) them, they mingle it with milk, and keep it long for the
delights of the (...) which they call Drabbel in their language. The Germans
which traffic in (...) a certain place in the haven of Haffne^ordt, where
under Tents they fell (...) shoes, cloakes, looking-glasses, knives, and such
other merchandise of small (...) They come not unto the port, but they bring
with them maidens fit to marry, (...) the merchants if they have any wives,
and if they answer no, then they (...) night with them for bread, biscuit, or
some other thing of small price: (...) fathers lend their daughters to these
merchants for a month, or for all the time (...) in this Island.

(...) all night under one roof, as I have said, they piss in one pot, and in
the (...) their mouths, teeth, and hands, for many reasons, for that they say
it (...), makes them strong, supples the ^inewes and hands, and keeps the
(...). In Winter before and after the Solstice, whenas the Sun declines,
(...) Sagitarius, and Capricorn, and also in January, they have no day, nor
any (...) what comes from the Moon and Stars, until the month of February.
It is in (...) about the Solstice of Summer during the months of May, Iun^,
and (...) Sun being always over their horison, when they have not any night
in their (...) February whenas the days begin to be long, they begin to
fish, and take (...), as it is almost incredible; for as soon as the fish
(which for three (...) have seen no light) discover the hook and bait, they
run all unto it, and (...) taken. Whenas they have taken the fish they pull out
the bones and garbage, (...) they make oil, and lay the rest upon heaps,
leaving it in the air which is so (...) with the wind and Sun only which
hardens it, they are of better taste and will (...) than if they were salted:
they use their flesh after the same manner, and keep (...) having hung it in
the wind, for they have no use of salt.

The Riches.
(...) North sends into Germany great store of cattle, as I have said, and
Scania vents great great store of fish, silver, copper, and lead; and Gothland
sells much

Norwaie receives much money for a kind of fish which they call Berg, the which
is very delicate, and is carried far by merchants which traffic there. They
make no less profit of the cod which is taken, and in like manner of many
goodly skins which they find there, of butter, tallow, hides, the fat of
whales, of tar, and of rasters, mastes, and boords.

The merchants do much enrich the islanders, for that they bring from this
island cloth commonly called watman; great heaps of sulphur, dried fish,
butter, tallow, wool, many white faulcons, skins, horses, and such like. They
have such abundance of fish, as they

As for the riches of the king of Denmark they consist in great numbers of
cattle, and Frederi^ the second. The merchants pay at this place a custom for
their merchandise.

The Forces.
Valdemar, and afterward revolted, were after ^undrie accidents which happened
since the year 1500, unto the year 1559, wholly subdued by Hen^y the second,
king of Denmark: but they had before defeated John son to Christiern
Christiern the second, at the request of Henry the second* the French king,
sent a navy of a hundred sail into Scotland against the English, in which
were ten thousand soldiers. In my opinion (having so great a country lying
upon the

The Government.
ALl Denmark is divided into one hundred eighty and four gouernements, which

There are five orders in all Denmark.

The first order is of the kings house.

The second is of the nobility. But you must understand, that among these
nobles there are neither Earl^s nor Barons, but all must^proue their gentry by
a long continuance of their ancestors. They carry plain shields, and they
hold it a blemish to their Nobility Charlemaigne and Hemming king of Denmark,
as the Vrens and some others. These enjoy their lands, with jurisdiction to
ex^cute malefactors, and they have power to hunt upon their own lands like
unto the Earls of Germany.

All the goods, moveable and immovable, left by the father and mother, are
equally divided among the brethen, and the sisters are also by an especial
privilege admitted to have their parts, yet the brother has two parts, and
the sister one, and the brethren have the castles by the right of eldership,
but the eldest brothers portion is no bigger than the rest.



There is also a law in Denmark by the which the king is prohibited to buy any
lands of the Nobility, least it should cause some sedition betwixt the king
and the chief of the realm: yet the king may exchange lands with them; but
the noblemen may not buy any lands of the Pesants which are the kings vassals:
for some Pesants have hereditarie

There is in Denmark a Lord Steward like unto him in France, whose residence
is most commonly at Hafnia, as the Kings Lieutenant. There is also a Marshall,
who in the time both of peace and war has a care of that which concerns the
wa^re. The Admerall causes ships to be made and repaired, and disposes every
year of that which is necessary for the sea. He has under him a
Vice-Admerall, and in every ship there is a Captain who is of a Knights race.
There is also the Chancellor of the realm, before whom they do appeal from
all the Provinces and Islands, and from him unto the King.

All the provinces are divided into Haerets or Dioceses, which comprehend many
parishes.

The Danes have a written law, drawn into form by Valdemar the first, and by
the Bishops and Senators of Denmark. If the first Judges give an unjust
sentence, they are condemned to loose half their goods for a fine, whereof the
King has one moitie, and the party interessed the other. The Chancellor, who
most commonly does follow the Court, has seven or eight noblemen Secretaries
for assistants, and the king himself does treat of all affairs. I^ there
happens any matter of importance, the king causes the Counc^ll to assemble. It
is not lawful for the king to impose any tax upon the realm,

The third order is that of the Clergy, in the which there are seven bishops:
the Archbishop of Land, and the Bishops of Roschilde, Ottensche, Rip, Wibourg,
Arrhus, and Slesuic, and this order does also comprehend the Chanoins. These
have the tithes of the realm, the which notwithstanding are diversely
distributed in diverse provinces. The Bishops receive one moitie for the tenths,
and the King has the other, yet the Chanoins Voldemar the first King, who writ
unto the Pope, which demanded some such matter of him: We have received the
realm from our subjects, life from our parents, and religion from the Church
of Rome, the which if thou do require again, I send it thee by these
presents.

Christierne the third ordained, That Clergy men should not sell any thing
without the kings express leave.

The fourth order is of Bourgesses and merchants, which live in towns and
boroughs. These have particular privileges which they enjoy, and have their
private fields and forests

The fifth order is of Peasants, which are of two sorts: the first are called
Freibunden, that is to^ay, Free-labourers: these have hereditarie lands, and
pay some tribute yearly. They give themselves also to the tr^de of mercandise
and fishing: they are not subject to any services, neither do they pay any
taxes but with the consent of the Senators and the Kings Council. The other
have no hereditarie lands, but farm them of the King, of Noblemen, and of the
Clergy, and are bound to do many services for their Lords, according

And for that all the nobles are equal in this realm, not any one bearing the
title of Duke, Earl, or Baron, there is no man so rich as he dares oppose
himself against the Kings blo^d, for that the fathers inheritance is always
divided amongst the sons and daughters.

There is a Council at Wibourg, whereas all civil causes are decided almost
^^roughou^ the year, and there they determine of controversies for lands,
inheritances, and such

The towns of the duchy of Slesuic enjoy the privileges of those of
Denmark, and their inhabitants use the same law. The subjects may appeal from
any magistrate whatsoever unto the Senators, and no farther.

The order of Senators does often consist of 24 men which be of the order of
knights,

They of Holsatia had in ^ormer times eight and forty men which had the
oversight of the whole countries, and the appellations of all the parishes went
before them: but ^ince they were subdued and divided into two parts, they did
choose in either of them twelve men with a governor, who most commonly is a
doctor of the law. All these have good entertainment from their princes, and
they add unto them a Secretary and a President out of the body of the
nobility of Holsatia. He that is for the king is most commonly Governor of
Steinbourg, and he whom the duke appoints as Governor of Gottorpe. But it is
lawful for the subjects to appeal unto the Senators of the two dukedomes of
Slesuic, and Holsatia, and no farther. In old time they had

As for Island there are two Bishops, who are as governors, the one of the
Northern

is affected unto them, then assuring them of his love, to the end they may not
fear to acquaint

The sermon being done, every one of the Zokmaders (being twelve in number)
sitting upon the ground, opens his book, in the which the laws and customs
of the Island are written in their language; then having heard the accusation
and defense, they search their books, for the decision of the cause, whereupon
they confer together and pronounce the judgment: if the suit be of
importance, they come and demand the lieutenants advice, to do him honor, but
yet he has no power to judge. All their suits are for theft, adultery, or
murder: they that are condemned to die have their heads cut off with an axe,
others are marked in the forehead with a hot iron the which is a great in^amie

The Religion.
CHristierne the second, king of Denmark, having given passage to the doctrine
of Luther into Suedeland, was also the cause that it was dispersed over all
Denmark: for being returned from his voyage of Sueden, he discovered himself
within a short time to be a Lutheran. But soon after he was taken by his own
subjects, and expelled the Charles the fifth, his brother in law. In the year
1532, having made ready an army at sea, he sailed toward Denmark. But being
first bea^en with a furious tempest, in the which many of his ships and men
were sunk, and being afterward defeated by his enem^es, he fell into the
hands of Christierne his successor, and died in prison. Christierne who
succeeded him, being allied to Gostaue king of Sueden (both which married the
sisters of John duke of Saxony, a fauorer of Luther) gave himself wholly to
root out the Romish religion within his realms: the which he easily effected,
committing all the Bishops within his Estates to prison, where they died. And
it is observed that of all the Bishops of Denmark, Norway, Island, Sueden, and
Gothland, there was not any one that did abjure his religion, neither Ioac^im
Pomeran a minister of Luthers profession. Christierne had for successor
Frederick, a Lutheran, who they write was given to gluttony, and died of
excess upon a Good Friday. Under him the Danes were more confirmed in Luthers
doctrine. He that reigns at this day does also maintain the same doctrine
very earnestly throughout his dominions.

THE KINGS OF DENMARK.
Dan who gave his name to the whole country was lord of Denmark, and had two
sons Humble and Lother. Humble succeeded his father, and was expelled by
Lother.

Schiold, his son succeeded afterward.

Gran was his successor, and died in the war which he had against

Su^bdager king of Norway, who married the king of Denmarkes daughter by force,
and conquered this realm.

Froton, his son.

Haldan the son of Froton, he murdered Roen and Scatz his brethren.

Helgon by the death of Roen his brother was absolute lord of Denmark.

Rolfo his son succeeded him; he was slain, and the realm made subject to
A^^^l^ king of Sueden: and Hoth^er brother to Atisle was king of both realms.

Roric, son to Atisle.

Wiclet. ()

Wermond, his son.

Vfo, son to Wermond, who made the country of Saxony tributorie; and of
dull, simple, and faint hearted, he became wise, discreet, and valiant, and of
stuttering, well spoken.

Dan, his son. (* * *)

Huclet.

Froton the second. ()

Dan the third.

Fridleue.

Froton the third, his son, who, they hold, lived at such time as Christ came
into the World.

Hiarne.

Fridleue the second.

Froton the fourth. (* * *)

Ingel.

Olaue:

Harald the first. ()

Froton the fifth.

Haldan the second.

Harald the second, who was vanquished by Eric or Henry King of Sueden, who
brought Denmark under his obedience; but Haldan recovered it and Sueden in
like manner. Vnguin was then King of Gothland, and Haldan did substitute him
Governor of Denmark after him.

Vnguin had for successors

Siuald the first.

Sigar. (* * *)

Siuald the second.

Haldan the third.

Harald the third, who made war seven years in Sueden, and died there.

Ol^, son to Siuard king of Norway, and nephew to Harald by his sister.

Emond.

Siuard or Siuald the third.

B^t^lus, his brother.

Iameric, son to Siuald. ()

Brother, his son.

Si^ar^ the fourth, whose race was vnknown^.

Bior, son to Siuard, succeeded his father.

Harald the fourth.

Germo, his son.

Gotric, or Godfrey, who was in the time of the Emperor Charlemaigne. He was a
virtuous man, given to war, and very bountiful.

Olaue, his son.

Huming, son to Olaue.

Siuard, son to the daughter of Gotric, and of the king of Norway.

Regnier, son to Siuard, who was hasti^, and given to lust.

Siuard.

Eric, or Henry, who was baptized with his brother Harald at Mentz.

Eric, son to Siuard, nephew to Regnier, who remained in a manner alone of
the blood royal: he having persecuted the Christians in his youth, died a
Christian, having been converted by the instructions of Anscher, Archbishop of
Hambourg.

Canutus his son reigned after him, and died without any show of a Christian.

Froton.

Gormo.

Harald: these three were good Christians.

Gormo the third succeeded him, and did persecute the Christian religion.

Harald, son to Gormo, a Christian.

Sueuo, or Sueno Otton, his son, who usurped the realm in his fathers life
time; then he left the Christian faith, and was afterward converted, being
expelled his realm, whether he returned after the death of Eric, king of
Sueden, who had made himself master thereof.

Canutus, son to Sueno Otton, surnamed the Great, for that he brought five
kingdoms under his obedience, that is to say, Sueden, Norway, England,
Denmark, and Henry the third married his daughter Gunilde.

Canutus the third, who died, having reigned two years, leaving no children.

Magnus, son to Olaue King of Norway.

Sueuo, or Sueno, nephew to Canutus the Great, by his sister.

Harald, his son, who died having reigned two years.

Nicholas, son to Sueno, succeeded in his place, and was slain by his
subjects.

Eric succeeded him, and was also slain.

Eric, son to Aquin, nephew to Eric the Great, who became a Monk, and
therefore the realm fell to Sueuo, nephew to Eric the Great.

Waldemar, about the year 1161.

Canutus, his son.

Waldemar, his brother, who died in the year 1242, having reigned forty
years, often victorious, and often vanquished.

Eric, his elder brother, succeeded him, and was slain by his brother Abel.

Abel succeeded in the realm, but he was slain by the Peasants in Friseland.

Christopher, his brother.

Eric, his son, who died in the year of Grace 1286, and was slain by his
household servants.

Eric, his eldest son, succeeded him, and died in the year 1321, having
reigned five and thirty years.

Christopher, brother to Eric, died in the year 1333.

Valdemar, his son, succeeded him: he was expelled the realm, then restored,
and chased away again, and reestablished. He died in the year 1375.

Marguerite, the only daughter of Valdemar, having married Aquin, king of
Norway, was Queen of the realms of Denmark and Norway: she vanquished Albert
duke of Mekelbourg, who had been called by them of Sueden to reign over them,
and by this means she was also maistres of Sueden.

Eric, duke of Pomeran, adopted by Marguerite, was chosen King, in the year
1411, but he retired himself afterward into Pomeran, in the year 1438.

Christopher, duke of Bauaria, was after him chosen King of Denmark, in the
year 1439, and died in the year 1448.

Christien, or in the Danes language Christierne, earl of Aldenbourg, was
chosen king of Denmark and Norway, after the death of Christopher. He died in
the royal castle of Coppenhagen, in the year of Grace 1481, having reigned
four and thirty years.

John, his son, succeeded in the realm.

Christierne the second, son to John, made long war against them of Sueden,
and in the end was expelled himself out of the realm of Denmark, by reason
of his tyranny: and seeking to recover his realm, he was taken by Christierne
his uncle, and put into prison at Sundebourg in Holsatia, where he died.

Frederic, duke of Holfatia, uncle to Christierne, was after his death king of
Denmark.

Christierne the third, eldest son to Frederic.

Christierne the fourth, who reigns this present year 1614.


GRoenland is an Island not hitherto much discovered, lying in the Hyperborian
sea, betwixt the degrees of sixty six and seventy seven. It was first
discovered by Nicholas Zeno a Venetian, in the year 1380. It is called
Groenland by Antiphrases, for that

The inhabitants live of wild foul and fish, whereof they have great
abundance, and there are many white bears, white foxes, and hares. There is
in this Island a monastery of the order of S. Dominicke, dedicated unto S.
Thomas, near unto the which there is a burning fountain, which is conuaied by
pipes of stone unto the Monks sells, the which does warm them as if they were
in stoues, and boiles their meat as if they had fire. And they write that not
far from this monastery there is a mountain like unto that of Heila



The inhabitants of this island which live upon the sea shore, have some
knowledge of the Gospel, but they that live within the land, have no light of
the truth, but are wholly given to incantations and magic art.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE
The Contents.
1. THe great circuit of the realm of Sueden, the chief provinces, and
bounds. 2. Description of Gothland, the limits and best places. 3. Of Finland,
and her towns. 4. Of Boddia or Bothnia. 5. Of Lapland, the greatness and
bounds. 6. Another di^ision of Sueden into eleven provinces, containing eleven
Dukedomes, and twelve Earledomes. 7. Another partition of this realm into
seven 8. Sueden fertile in hou^e, silver, copper, lead, steel, and fishof all
sorts: rough and hilly in many places: the air temperate, pure and wholesome.
9. A particular description of those things which every province does yield.
10. Of the valor of the ancient inhabitants of Sueden, their customs and
laws, their gods, and diverse kinds of sacrifices: their arms and manner of
fighting. 11. The strong constitution of body and good wits of the modern
Suedens: the simplicity of their manners: the diverse kinds of bread and meat
which they use: their manner of apparel, dwellings and buildings 12. Their
riches consisting in abundance of victuals, mines of lead, copper, and
silver. 13. Of the kings ordinary and extraordinary revenues, and how many
tons of gold come yearly into his coffers. 14. Of the sould^ers of Sueden,
and what companies of foot and horse 15. Of the nauall forces of this Estate,
and what ships the king may arm in time of war. 16. The number of the chief
forts of this realm his allies, and confining adversaries. 17. Of the
Viscounts, Lamens, Lansmans, and other Judges and Offcers appointed for the
administration of justice in every province. 18. Of the laws ordained against
usury, adultery, and murder. 19. Of the officers which have charge of the
kings revenues and treasure. 20. Sects of Luther and Calvin, how brought into
Sueden. 21. A Catalogue of the kings which have reigned unto this day.

THe affairs of Sueden are in that estate, as the uncle usurps and detaines
from his nephew the realm which did lawfully belong unto him; so as duke
Charles has made himself king of one part of this Sigismond king of Poland,
the right heir of Sueden, has conquered another part by arms, and does daily
contend for the rest. But howsoever the State stands, I will represent this
realm as if it were in the power of his lawful lord.

To come unto the point, the realm of Sueden comprehends the duchy of
Finland,

The country of Sueden has for bounds upon the West, Norway; to the North,
Lapland, and Bothnia; upon the East, Finland, divided by the gulf of Bothnia,
and Li^o^ia, separated also by the sea; and toward the South, Gothland. There
are many dukedomes and Seigneuries in this province, as the duchy of
Angermania on the frontiers of Lapland, then those of Midelphat, or Midelpad,
Ientia, Dalecarlia, Vermelande, Dalia, Helsinge, Gestricia, Fieringe,
Caperdalia, that is to say, the valley of Latona, and Ouplandie,

Gothia, which signifies in the German tongue a good Land, has for limits upon
the



Boddia, or Bothnia, is divided into East and West, according unto Magin, but
as other

Lapland extends it self from the frontiers of Sueden unto the Northern sea.
There

Corelia, or Carelia, according unto John the Great, is beyond the gulf of
Finlande, and extends unto the frosen Sea. their longest day in Summer is of
twenty hours and a half. Hexholin, or Kexholin, is the chief town.

The King of Sueden does also hold in Liuonia, Riuaille, Narue, Pernouia, and
some others. Moreover, he has the islands Alandes, in which are the towns of
Vames, Vibourg, and Castrolme.

There are some which make another division of Sueden, that is to say, into
eleven provinces,

Another division is into Bishoprics, which in old time were seven in number,
comprehending most part are very well peopled: so as in Finland there are some
which contain a thousand

The Quality.


The air is commonly pure, and by consequence all Sueden is very healthful,
neither is the air so sharp nor so insupportable, nor the cold so violent, as
some persuade themselves that have not made trial thereof: yet in some places
(where there are moors and waters which settle by negligence or otherwise)
they feel the air heavy, and have great mists and moisture which distemper
the brain. They live most commonly long, especially upon the mountains, and
other places which are more exposed to the Northern winds; so as there are many
which attain to the age of one hundred and thirty, or one

Gothland abounds in corn, cattle, and horses, in sea fish, and of fresh
water, in lead,

Finland is more pleasing than the province which they particularly call
Sueden, it exceeds it in bounty, and yields more corn, for that it is for the
most part plain, and is not so hilly nor so moorish. Bothnia is not very
fruitful, but in the one and the other

The manners of the Ancients.
Sidonius Appolinarius, who describes the doings of Theodoric. Their laws do
likewise teach us sufficiently, that this nation was reasonably civil and well
governed, but that other people flattering themselves, and hating these new
conquerors, were not pleased

They did worship the god Thore, as the most powerful of all the gods, who had
a crown upon his head, a scepter in his hand, and twelve crowns about him.
They hold that it was the same that others called Jupiter, for that these
Northern people did religiously Jupiters day; the which is likely, for that at
this day in Suethland they call lightning, and thunder, and such like things,
the noise of Thoron. This god had one of either side called Othin and Frigga.
Othin did represent Mars being all armed, and the Goths did believe that he
did assist them in their wars and yet they dedicated Wednesday unto him, the
which is Mercuries day: they did sacrifice unto him such as they took in the
war. Frigga was the goddess of beauty, grace, and love, and did rule
(according to their opinion) at marriages, and at all kind of pleasures. They
dedicated Friday or Venus day unto her, and at this day in Sueden they call
certain stars, the distaffe and spindle of Frigga, by an ancient tradition.
They gave unto this goddess a bow and a sword, for that in these countries the
women were borne Methotim who had been a great Magitian, and had ordained many
particular ceremonies for the service of their gods. Fro, Satrape of the gods,
was also lodged among them, and worshipped near to Vpsale: they did offer
black sacrifices, and had every year plays in the night in his honor. They
did worship H^llere, who was a great warrier, and so great a Magitian as he
used a bone covered with caracters in steed of a ship to pass the sea. They
added unto these Vagnost and Hadinge, and Rostiolph of Finland, for that he
foretold many things. Among these they put Rostare, who took such delight in
man's blood, as they vowed unto him the souls of those against whom they made
war. There were yet many others whom the they held children of Thoron, or of
Othin.

The Goths observed in their sacrifices the number of Nine, considering (it
may be after the Pithagorian manner) that this uneven number of three times
three should be preferred before all others: and it may be Zamolxis and some
other Philosophers had taught it them. And notwithstanding that they did every
day yield some honor unto their gods, yet they did honor them more solemnly
every month, sacrificing unto them nine days together nine sundry sorts of
beasts, adding thereunto humane sacrifices. And as for the man that should be
sacrificed, he was plunged a live into a ^ountaine that was by, and if he died
they held it for a good sign, and the priests drawing him forth did hang him
in a forest which they held to be holy, and they did believe that he was
transported Bleixe did rule; to whom they s^nt a messenger in a bark with
seven oars, commanding him to demand of this god that whereof they had need.
They were so affected to the service of their gods, as whenas they heard any
noise in the air they shot off their arrows, making show that they would
succor their gods, who they thought were then assailed by some others.
Moreo^^^ they had hammers of brass, with the which they made a great noise,
and did imitate the thunder.

They had also a custom when as they went to fight, to sacrifice horses, and
to carry the heads of them before their armies, and after their victories they
did also sacrifice unto their gods, and made plays in their honor. Their
arms were a bow and a sling. And this is all in a manner that can be said of
the manners of the ancient Goths, and of those of the realm of Sueden. We
might make some relation here of the manners of the Herules, Vandales, and
Lombards which are come out of Scandia: but it is sufficient to have spoken of
those which the Goths and Suedens have followed, according unto the John the
Great Archbishop of Vpsale.

The Manners at this day.


They use two diverse languages in all the countries subject to the crown of
Sueden, that is to say, the Sueden tongue, which they speak in all the
provinces of Sueden, Gothland, Northway, and Denmark: wherein we may observe
that the Saxon tongue

Their manners are commonly simple, and such as may befit men which having not
seen the greatness of the world, nor any thing that may incite their minds to
ambition, live without any great desire of honor or of other things, being
content with their natural food: and for this cause they have no care to till
any greater quantity of ground than what is necessary for them, for if they
would cut down many great and unprofitable forests, they should reap
abundance of corn, the which being sown in May is ready to be reaped in
August, by reason of the great heat and force of the Sun, which is in a
manner always upon the earth. But notwithstanding that this ancient
simplicity reigns yet in many, yet since the coming of foreign soldiers,
that is to say, of Germans, English, Scottishmen, and others, they have lost
much of their inclination,

The women are modest and wise, and abstain from drunkenness. Their food is
most commonly of corn of two sorts: they sow the one in May, and the other in
November.

They have abundance of flesh, whereof they salt the greatest part, as beeues,
hoggs, geese, and such like. They seldom eat any veale. They use fresh fish
both salted and smoaked, and so me that is not salted during the extremity of
the cold, and in like manner feasants and partridges, whose flesh is harder
than that of more temperature countries. They should have abundance of pulses,
and of all sorts, if they did bestow any pain and care, but they use little,
but ordinary and common pease, or others which are like unto

The apparel of the common people is plain and fashioned in a manner like unto
that of the people of Lombardie; yet they wear caps and other garments of
skins, but it is very simple. The women in towns (and especially at Stokolme)
wear upon their gowns along cloak of black cloth, with many pleats. The
gentlemen are attired after the German fashion, and some in court after the
Italian, but most commonly like the French.

Their houses (except the churches which are of stone) are of wood, but much
better built than those which are in the plains of Polonia: yet there are
towns which have houses of stone. They do not ordinarily use stones, but
chimnies, which after the wood ^b^u^nt may be shut up with a plate of iron,
which they may thrust in and draw forth at (...) pleasure, except in some
places where there are marshes.

The Lapponians are small of stature, but very active. They handle their bow
exceeding well, and wear strait garments. In Winter they carry whole seal
skins or of bears, the which they tie upon the top of the head, and leave no
place open but for the sight:

The Riches.
THe wealth of this realm consists in abundance of victuals, which is very
great: for should be much greater, for that the Suedens neither know how to
spare their wo^d,

As for the kings revenues, there are four kinds of things which make the
body of his

I have said since that the Suedens have withdrawn themselves from the Romish
religion, Henry, was soon wasted by reason of the wars.

The mines yield silver, whereof they make the dollars of Sueden, the which are
much esteemed for their bounty: and for that they find little gold, they coin
few crowns. Besides the dollars there are quarter dollars and half quarters,
and a kind of coin called rosques, and half rosques, which signifies round
money, whereof a dollor makes two

They did also not many years since find a certain mine of salt, but it soon
decayed, as some think by the negligence of such as should have had care
thereof.

The king has the tenth of all the mines whereas they wo^ke not at his charge,
and for this cause he paies his men with copper and other mettalls: and if the
peasants did not hide the veins of diverse mines which are daily discovered,
and there were store of good and diligent masters, it is thought that the
profit which they should draw, would amount to a great sum.

Besides all this, the king has throughout this realm the tax and tenth of
wheat, rye,

When the king is to make any war for the defense of his realm, or else does
send any troops abroad, he gives notice thereof to the provinces, who furnish
them with such victuals as are necessary. Yet there is this difference in the
contribution, that the nobility nor their subjects do not-commonly
contribute; but whenas they make a general contribution for the war with the
consent of the nobles, their subjects are accustomed to pay half as much, as
they ought to do which are immediately subject to the king.

The people are in like manner bound to contribute for the dowry of every one
of the kings daughters when she marries, and the sum of this contribution
has been for a long time one hundred thousand dollars, besides the plate, and
the moueabl^s of her house.

The revenue of skins is sometimes great, sometimes little, according as the
snow is great or little, for the more snow they have, the more beasts they are
accust^med to take.

From the most Northern parts of Lapland, the king draws the greatest part of
skins, and his majesty to understand the truth sends a commissioner yearly
thither, who uses such diligence to know how many beasts they have taken, as
the king cannot be deceived. The skins which are laid a part and chosen for
the king are distributed in his court to his kinsmen and friends, and for
recompense to merchants, who have given or ought



In the year 1578, it was thought that they did lay up yearly into the kings
treasure (deducting the extraordinary charges and expenses) about six or seven
^uns of gold, whereof every one is taken for one hundred thousand G^rmane
dollars. Yet the sorts

In like manner they should draw much more from their mines if they did employ
strangers, as well for the sparing of wood (as I have said) as for other
things. Yet of brass

The Forces.


These soldiers are borne in the country, as being acustomed to meats which
will keep, they do not care for dainties, nor for diversity of dishes: moreover
every one of these makes his own shoes, apparel, stocks of harquebuzes, and
other necessary things which keeps them from idleness, sin, and mutinies,
wherewith armies are commonly troubled being full of idle and unprofitable
people which do ouercharge a country. There have been sentinells seen in
the castle of Stokolme, which have watched with great patience during the
extremity of cold, and have not been relieved almost in a whole night, which
in Winter does last about eighteen hours.

Every company of foot has his captain, his lieutenant, and ensign. The
captain and in old time he had no other pay monthly but five parts of a
dollar As they march

Every company of horse (which is less in number than the foot) has in like
manner a captain, a lieutenant, and a corne^, and they are accustomed to give
unto a horseman but twenty dollars a year, and a garment, with the exemptions
and conditions formerly mentioned: yet the commanders of companies, and
^others of most note, received

There are eleven companies of horse commonly in Sueden and Gothland, and two
in Finland; yet if the king desires to have a greater number, he may easily
raise them, if he have money.

In Finland there are two companies, the one of simple soldiers, the other of
gentlemen: and the reason why he has so few men in so great a country, is,
for that he is forced to draw the greatest part of his mariners, and men that
serve in his armies at sea from thence, as other provinces which are more
toward the North do, which either for that they are full of mountains and
barren, as Angermania, or else for that they want horses, as Dalecarlia, are
subject to furnish the sea army with a good number of mariners.

In Smoland, Westrogothia, and Ostrogothia, there are some companies of horse
gentlemen, and Westrogothia abounds with gentlemen more than any other, and no
man may be a captain of foot or horse, if he be not a gentleman. Theirhorses
are somewhat less than those of Friseland, but strong, and inured to labor,
and to eat little.

Their order is to take a view or muster yearly of all these companies, and
the king does advertise the Seneshalls of the day and place when it shall be
done: they do not always keep one day or the same place, neither is it
known long before, nor the same men do not always take the musters, to the
end they shall not practice any revolt.

Moreover in the kings court, the gentlemen served in such sort, as there were
always



In the war which John the third, king of Sueden had with the king of Denmark
before their accord was made at Stetrin, the Sueden brought seventy good
ships, besides many other good vessels, and besides the troops of horse which
he had at land, he had eighteen thousand men in his ships, who when it was
needful landed to fight; for that in those countries they are accustomed in
winter to fight upon the ice, as well for the facility of passing of lakes and
rivers that are frosen, as for to carry their victuals more easily; and in
Summer they fight at sea.

The means to entertain so great a number of mariners costs the king much,
but out John the third, said that a war which did cost the king of Spain a
million, did not stand him in a hundred thousand dollars.

The great number of these mines is the cause why they have so much ordnance in
these countries, as well in forts, as to arm their ships. In the castle of
Stokolme alone there have been numbered four hundred pieces, some double
cannons, some culuerins,

The sea army is most commonly in time of peace divided into diverse parts of
these realms. The greatest ships lie in the port of Stokolme, where they are
safe without anchour, for that from the maine sea unto Stokolme they sail
about forty Italian miles among rocks. They do ordinarily number in this port
whenas the ice is molten, and that ships come from foreign parts, two or three
hundred sails.

The kings other ships are in some ports of Sueden, but there are many more in
them of Finland, to make head again the Muscouite, and to keep them from
bringing any thing out of Germany or other places to help him against the
king of Sueden, and

There were wont to be many forts in these countries: but by diverse accidents
of war, and through sundry ielousies and other occasions, many of them have
been ruined: yet since the war which Sigismond king of Poland, and lawful
heir of Sueden made against his uncle Charles the Usurper of that which did
belong unto him, they have made a great number.

The principal which are at this day in being, are those which follow. Toward
the Venus lake, there is the fort of Elfelsbourg, and not far from thence two
others, whereof the one is called Goltbourg, that is to say, a castle of gold,
and the other Croneberg. Toward the Balticke sea, six leagues from Scania, a
province of the realm of Denmark, is the castle of Calmas, and in Ostrogothia
the castle of Vassena. There is the fort of Borlzolomia in the island of
Vlande, then those of Scechorgue, Nicopia, Gripselmia, and the castle of
Vpsale: there are also the castles of Stocolme and Ourbou, the which are eleven
miles distant. These be the forts of note in the realm of Sueden.

As for those of Finland, there is one in the town of Abe, another farther off
called Elsingofors, and one at Tauastia called Iaffausthaaus, which signifies
the house of Tauast:

There is also in Liuonia the fort of Ri^alia, and also that of Ennuespel.

The king of Sueden confines upon the West with the king of Denmark, and
toward the East with the Muscouite. The Suedens have received much loss by
the Danes, for that among others, Christierne the second besieged Stocolme, and
forced it to yield, using great cruelty against the inhabitants, and filling
it with blood and dead carcases. Their hatred grows from the pretensions which
the king of Denmark has to Sueden: but the means to annoy it in this sort, is
by reason of the commodity, places, and ports, especially of the island of
Gothland, which is a member of Gothia: by reason whereof the Suedens pretend
that it does of right belong unto them. But after that Gustaue Henry and John
his sons had governed it one after another; notwithstanding that there were
great wars betwixt the Danes and Gustaue, yet this realm has still maintained
it self, and the town of Lubec, which is very powerful in those seas,
sometimes assisting one party, and sometimes another, does so balance the
forces of these two kings, as it keeps them both from growing too great, least
they

The Suedens make war against the Muscouite with more advantage; for that
Finland which confines with Russia, by the reason of lakes and marshes whereof
it is full, has a troublesome and dangerous entry, and it has often happened
that the enemies armies have been lost in the frosen waters. Moreover the
Suedens are accustomed to keep most part of their ships in those seas, where
they have the fort of Vibourg, which is very well furnished. There are also
upon the confines of the great duke of Muscouie, Narue, and Riuaille (whereof
we have spoken) and some other places, by means whereof they bridle them, and
we may with reason hold those forts good which are maintained in an

The Government.
Gustaue.

The king has commonly twelve Counselors, and besides these many other
officers, for that this realm is not only divided (as I have said) into
provinces, duchies, and counties; but also* every province is divided into
territories and jurisdictons, which comprehend

There are other officers above the Vicounts, which are like unto the
Seneschalls of France, called by the Suedens, Lamens, as sovereign Judges: so
as they appeal from the Vicounts to these Lamens, and from the Lamens to the
kings Council, and from this Council to the king himself. These Lamens do
visit a part of their jurisdiction yearly, until that having ended their
whole visitation they begin again: and as this does help them to a perfect
knowledge of the Estate of their affairs, and to order all things presently,
so does it bring ease unto the people; for that they exact the tribute of
parishes which they visit in one year, and do not charge the rest.

The territories were in former times divided in such sort, as to every hundred
families which dwelt out of towns they did appoint a Governor or inferior
Judge, who at a certain time of the year (although he makes not his abode
among them) goes to administer justice unto them: and the king according to the
valor and merit of men does sometimes give unto one of these Judges two
hundred families. All these charges are given unto men who are either noble by
birth, or that merit such offices for their wisdom and judgment.

The Lansman or Consul of every parish is commonly chosen from among the
peasants themselves, and in occurents he has recourse unto the Vicount. Among
other things this Lansman is bound to come unto the place whereas the king
makes his residence,



Smoland alone (which confines with the realm of Denmark, and is a large
province) has about two and fifty Vicounties, in the which are the most
valiant men of Sueden, and sometimes it has mutined with thirty thousand men
able to bear arms.

As for Stokolme, you must understand that the town it self makes four
Consulls for the politic government thereof; and these continue in their
offices during their lives. Two of them command successively over the rest
every year, and all four (notwithstanding

The laws which they generally use are ancient, and since the time of S.
Henry king Raymond went into these Northern countries, they added one article
which they call ecclesiastical, wherein it is declared, That the children of
priests or monks should be held in the same degree with them that are borne in
adultery.

The laws of Sueden make no particular mention of any usury, but in case that
a debto^ should be pressed by many creditors to pay that he owes; and if any one
of the creditors had lent money unto a debtor with any contract of interest, he
loses his right to demand the debt: and they have been accustomed not only
to punish the usurer, but also him that meddles with such people. And for that
in these realms they are accustomed to lend freely, this vice is not frequent
but at Stokolme, whither many have brought

The adulterer is punished with death, and it is without all remission if a
married man offends with a married woman; for that he is then delivered into
the husbands power to ^e punished: but if he be not married, he is condemned
for the first offense in a great pecuniarie fine; but it seldom happens that
he escapes without the loss of his head if he ta^en the second time.

H^ that bea^s another paies five dollars for a fine, and if he cut off any
part, as a finger o^ a^y other member, he paies the double, but if he be maimed
of any member, they give him a full recompense: if he hurt any other upon the
head, or upon the breast, and he that is wounded dies within the end of the
year, he that has hurt him is condemned

They impose a penalty upon the Judge, who being required twice to give a
difinitiue sentence, defers it, and by this means suits are not procted in
length. This proceeds from an ancient law, by the which they are forbidden to
have any proctor or advocate, so as every one propounds his own cause before
the Judge: but if it be a widow, a pu^ill, ^ mad man, or a fool, the nearest
kinsman follows the cause, and if he be not present* the Senate appoints a
tutor, and the business is soon dispatched. It is true that a ^^dge is
excused for some circumstances when as he finds reason why he should not
pronounce

As for officers appointed over the kings revenues, there is first a
Commissarie who or pension without his hand. This general Commissarie has a
Treasurer under him, who

The Religion.
^^stau^ being solicited by Olaus, Peter Nenicius a Lutheranand by one Laurence
Andrew Archdeacon of Strenge, but fallen from the Romish religion, brought the
doctrine of Luther into Sueden, for the desire he had to appropriate unto
himself ^he goods of the Church, at his new coming unto the crown; so as he
seized upon wha^ he pleased, and made a law, by the which it was ordained that
Bishops should not enjoy any thing but what pleased the king: He put the
universities of his realms into ^he hands of the Lutherans, forbidding all men
to go to study without the realm, but ^t Witemberg, and in some other
universities which favored Luthers doctrine: and causing the ancient
libraries to be burnt, he made the bible to be translated into the vulgar
Luthers doctrine all he could. Yet the profession of Calvin was received in
those countries which were subject to Charles third son to king Gustaue,
being duke of Vermelande, Sudermania, and Nericia. Henry son to Gustaue, and
his next successor, did not oppose himself. John his brother who succeeded
him, a man of good understanding was of another opinion, and did read the
books of the ancient fathers, but fearing some revolt, and ^i^ brother
Charles, durst not discover himself openly. Yet the conversation of his wife
K^t^er^n^, daughter to Sigismond king of Poland, made him to observe many
Catholic ^^^tomes; for he kept Lent; he abstained from flesh on Fridaies, he
preserved the monastery of Vassene, he did much honor to S. Brigit, bestowing
a shrine of silver upon Henry king of Sueden; the which he caused to be carried
by Romish priests into the church of Vpsale, he did often tax the Lutheran
ministers and C^luinists, as he said, of ignorance. He reedified the churches
which they had beaten down, and repaired altars. He sent first an Ambassador
to P^us the fourth, and afterward to Gregory the thirteenth: he suffered the
queen to have free exercise of the Romish religion, and to breed up their
son Sigismond after the same manner, who is now king of Poland, and lawful
heir of Sueden. Yea the queen obtained certain Jesuits for the assistance of
the people, who were in credit until her death, which happened in the year
1583. But soon after they were expelled the realm, so as there are few
remaining of the Romish religion. And at this day that Charles uncle to
Sigismond vsurp^s his nephews Caluins doctrine, the which he follows; so as
the inhabitants of the provinces which acknowledge him, are in a manner all
Caluanists, yet there are many Lutherans remaining.

THE KINGS OF SVEDEN.
John Olaus the Great, makes a great Catalogue of the kings of Sueden whose
names would be^edious. It shall suffice then to be begin with others, by
Sichtr^^g; who was ^ing of Sueden long before the birth of Christ, and was
slain by Gran king of Denmark, who brought this realm under his obedience. But
S^^bger Gran, and was king of Norwaie, Sueden, and Denmark.

Hasmond his son succeeded him in the realms of Sueden and Norwaie.

Vffoo was successor to Hasmond.

H^ndin reigned after him, then Hunding.

Regnier son to Hunding.

H^tbrod son to Regnier, under whom the realm of Sueden was made subject to
the Danes.

Atisle and Hothier his sonns recovered their fathers realm paying a certain
tribute which they ought to pay. But Rolpho king of Denmark vanquished.
At^sle, and brought Sueden under his obedience. Then H^artuar borne in Sueden,
did purchase such ^auour with this king, as he granted him the country of
Sueden with the title of a duchy, upon condition to pay a certain tribute;
and to make him more faithful, he gave him his Hiartuar cut off Rolp^os head,
and the Danes stew Hiartuar. Then Hothier brother to Atisle got possession of
the realm, and brought Denmark under his obedience; but he was expelled by
Baldeer.

Leaving here for a season in which the Suedens did nothing that was memorable,
I will come unto Augustus time, whenas Abric was king of Sueden.

Eric his murderer succeeded him in the time of our savior Christ.

Haldan son to Eric reigned after him, and was slain.

Siuard his son succeed him.

After him Eric, son to his daughter and to Froton king of Denmark, reigned
in Sueden, he was slain in war, and had for successor

Haldan, who not caring to have any children, gave the realm to

Vnguin, who left unto his son Siuald the two realms of Denmark and Sueden.

Regnaud was king after Siuald, then

Aluier, who was one of the greatest lords of Sueden.

I^go eldest son to Aluier.

Ingel brother to Al^^er.

Rugo son to Ingel succeeded being yet a child. He had for successor

Gotar, who was sl^ine in war by the Danes.

I^rmeric was after him king of Denmark and Sueden, about the year of Grace
380.

Here I must make a great leap for want of good and true histories, passing
from Iarmeric Frotton, who held the realm of Sueden whenas Lewis son to
Charlemaigne was Emperor. He was slain by the women of Norwaie.

Herot or Gerot.

Sort, who was vanquished by Regnier king of Denmark, and left the realm to
Biorn son to this Regnier, who had for successor

Wichsert his brother.

Eri^ the third son to Regnier.

Ostene slew him, and succeeded in the realm. But the brethren of Eric
revenged his death, and expelled Ostene, and the realm fell to Strubior son
to king Biorn.

Eric son to Olaue nephew to Regnier expelled Eric, and became king of Sueden.

Eric his son succeeded him, and was the first of the kings of Sueden, which
publicly received the Christian religion; he was at his baptism called James.
This happened in the year of Grace 1000, in the time of the Emperor Henry.

Esmond base brother to James a Christian only in name, succeeded him.

Stinkel a good king, and a good Christian. He abolished the idol which the
people did worship in the town of Vpsale, and died about the year 1100.

Afterward there were two Henry's or Erics who contended long for the realm,
and in the end slew one another.

Halstene son to Stinkel reigned after their death: but he was soon expelled
by the mutiny of the people.

Anaximandre was then chosen king: but for that he would not quit the rigor of
religion, he was expelled, and Aquin put in his place.

Magnus son to Nicholas king of Denmark succeeded him.

Suerco.

Charles his son.

Eric reigned after Charles, and lived unto the year 1249.

Birgier.

Valdemar succeeded Birgier, who being in a voyage to the Holie-land, his
brother Magnus seized upon the realm, and never restored it during his life.

Birgier was his successor, who associated his son Magnus in the realm, and
for that his brethren had bred him much trouble, he caused their heads to be
cut off at a banquet. This fact incensed the princes and noblemen of the
country against him, who expelled him with his wife, causing the head of his
son Magnus to be cut off: and then they made

Magnus the son of Eric King, whose head Birgier had caused to be cut off. He
added Norway to the realm of Sueden, and died in the year 1326.

Magnus, his son, succeeded him in these two realms. He was in the end
deposed.

Albert, son to the duke of Meckelbourg, was seated in the place of Magnus
the se^enth. He was taken with his son Eric by Marguerite wife to Aquin the
son of Magnus, and detained seven years a prisoner, and then Marguerite
became Queen of Sueden, Norway, and Denmark.

Eric, duke of Pomerania, adoptiue son to Marguerite, succeeded her in these
three realms, but he was in the end forced to quit all, and to retire into
Prussia.

Christopher, prince Palatin, and duke of Bauaria, nephew to this Eric by his
sister, was chosen King of the three realms, by the common consent of all the
chiefest noblemen of the three countries.

After the death of Christopher, the Suedens desired to have a King apart, who
should be of their nation, and they did choose Charles Canutus, who was of no
great extraction. Having reigned almost seven years, he began to find that he
had made himself odious to all men, and therefore having put the treasury of
the realm in a safe place, he retired himself by sea to Dantzic. Then the
noblemen of the realm called in Christierne to be their King. This Christierne
had been chosen King of Denmark and Norway, and by this means these three
realms were subject again to one prince. The Suedens made war long against
him, for that he had not kept the conuentions which had been agreed upon at
his reception, which was in the year 1469, so as in the end he was chased out
of Sueden, where he had only two forts remaining: and in the mean time
Charles, who

John, son to Christierne, having made long war against Sueden, brought this
realm under his obedience: but he was chased away, and departed secretly.

Christierne, son to John, continued the wars which his father had begun,
with great courage, and labored to make himself King of Sueden: but when he
saw they repulsed him, and defended themselves valiantly, he sought politiquely
to divide them, soliciting chiefly one called Gustaue, who titled himself
Archbishop of Vp^ale. He, in the year 1517, won many, and made them resolve
to deliver the realm into the hands of Christierne. After some wars, Gustaue
was dispossessed of his Archbishopricke, and then Christierne came with a great
army, but in the end, being put to the worst, he made a

Gustaue, son to Eric, who had been Archbishop of Vpsale, having escaped out
of Denmark, whether he had been carried among other hostages, whom King
Christierne had gotten by policy from them of Stokolme, began to declare
himself protector of the country, and the fourth year after the war began,
he attired himself like a poor man, and went throughout the country to show
his misery unto the people. In the end, he expelled the Danes, and was crowned
King of Sueden.

Eric, or Henry his son, succeeded him, who for his bad government was put
in prison

John, his brother, and son to Gustaue, reigned after him. He was a learned
prince, and of a good judgment.

Sigismond, son to John, has succeeded him, but he does not enjoy the realm
of Charles who usurps it, incensing them of the country against him being a
Catholic, and they following the doctrine of Luther and Calvin.


The Contents.
1. THe circuit and limits of the country of Musco^ie. 2. In what parallel and
climat this Empire is situated. 3. Description of the provinces, and of
Moskuu^ or Mosko the chief city of the Empire. 4. Of the duchy of Valodimer.
5. Of the duchy of base No^ograde. 6. Of the province of Rhezan and her towns.
7. Of the province and town of Smolenske. 8. Of the country of Mosaiski: the
length and breadth, and by whom it was conquered from Poland. 9. Of the duchy
of Roskoue. 10. Of the the country of Tu^er, and the renouned town of
Tuuerde. 11. Of the province of Pleskonia, the bigness, and the chief town
of Plesko^u 12. Of Nouograde the great. 13. Of the country 14. Of the province
of Biolysero, Volokde, and Iaroslaue. 15. Of the province of Du^ine. 16. Of
Susdali, and Vuiathka, a province taken from the Tart^rians. 17. Of Permia,
Petzore, Iugaria, Obdore, and other countries subject to the Musco^ite. 18. The
sterilitie of the soil recompensed by the multitude of beasts, as Elkes,
Bugles, Bears, Stags, Wolves, Hares, Bees, abundance of flax, hemp, and the
bounty of the air. 19. Description of the most famous rivers and lakes of
Muscouie, and the beginning and spring of Borysthenes discovered in our time,
and unknown to the ancient. 20. A particular observation of the fertility
and barrenness of every province, and of the Riphcan, or Hyperborean
mountains of an admirable height. 21. The strange custom of the ancient
Muscouites in the election of their prince, and the usage of their wives. 22.
Their strong constitution of body, 23. A more particular description of the
manners and customs of every country. 24. Their riches in the skins of Elkes,
Stags, Bears, Wolves, and Sables: in flax, hemp, honey, and wax. 25. Riches
of the king, and what his revenues be. 26. A notable relation of the stately
entertainment of Permisten Ambassador to the Emperor by the Muscouite. 27. The
strength of the Muscouites country in marisbes and rivers: in the thickness
of woods serving as rampires, and making the entry difficult; and of the great
numbers of horse. 28. What numbers of horse this realm may draw to field. 29.
Of the mighty neighbor enemies which confine with this Estate, and first of
the Precop prince of the Tartarians. 30. Of two other neighbor enemies, the
kings of Sueden and 31. Of the great dukes sovereign authoriti^ in his Estate,
and by what means he maintains it. 32. At what time the Christian religion
was brought in, and what their ceremonies be in the celebration of the Mass.
33. Of the circumcision and religion of the Morduois, li^ing according to the
law of nature.

WHen as in our common discourses we make mention of any duke, it Caesar or
Emperor, and yield him as much honor as ever was done to any prince. And if we
truly consider what his Empire contains, we shall find that he deserves a
higher style than that which they commonly give him, in steed of the name of
king, which they have found to be very odious to the Muscouites.



These Estates are part in Europe and part in Asia, and this separation is made
by the river of Tanais, otherwise called Don, the which is the common bound of
Asia and Europe. They are confined upon the North by the frosen sea, as also
upon the East, bending toward the South by the Tartarians; upon the South side
they have Lituania, and their nearest neighbors upon the West are they of
Liffland or Liuonia, and in like manner Finland, countries divided by the river
of Polne, and belonging to the king of Sueden. All these Estates draw their
general name from a country lying in the midst of Russia the White, which
extends toward the North and East, and is particularly called Muscouie. We
must note that the part of Russia which obaies the great Knez is called White
Russia, and that which does acknowledge the king of Poland Black Russia; yet





The other provinces are the duchy of Volodimer, where there is to be seen a
great

There is moreover, the duchy of Base Nouograd, where is also to be seen a
town



The province of Smolenko is situated upon the river of Neper, or Deneper,
called Ptolomee. This country was taken by Basilius duke of Muscouie, from the
King of Poland, who was the Protector. The chief town is also called
Smolenko: it is reasonable great, and is distant from Mosko about eighty
Polonian leagues.

The country of Mosaiski has in length about three hundred and fifty Italian
miles, John duke of Muscouie, predecessor to Basilius, Alexander King of
Poland. Biele, or Bielski, is in like manner a principality, or province of
Russia, having a town and castle of the same name upon the river of Opske.
This place is sixty German leagues from Mosko, and six and thirty from
Smolenko*

The duchy of Roschoue has a town of the same name, with a castle of wood,
and is from Mosko, toward the West, about three and twenty leagues. The town
stands

The country of Tuuer, or Otuuer, one of the greatest of Russia, hoth a town
called Tuuerde, the which is greater and more stately than that of Mosko, from
the which it is

The province of Plescouia, or Pleskonia, has in length three hundred and
thirty Italian

Nouograd the Great, is the greatest duchy of all Russia, and takes his name
from the

The country of Volske, or Votske, is seated betwixt the West and North, and
upon the left hand it has the castle of Iuuanouugrod. The province of Corelle
is from Nouogrod

The province of Bieleiezioro, or Biolysero, having a town also so called,
takes his name from the White Lake, near unto the which it lies, and in the
which there is a fort

The province of Duuine, drawing the name from the river that waters it, was
sometimes of the jurisdiction of Nouogrod: and the river has received her name
from the concourse of the rivers of Iuch, and Suchane; for that Duuine, in the
Ruthenian tongue,

Basilius the great duke of Muscouie.



The Muscouite has also under his empire the Czeremisses, which are under
Nouogrod, as the Nordues near to Volga are under base Nouogrod. There are also
other countries lying toward the North, which acknowledge the great Knez, as
that of Obdore, Condore, Culomorie, and Lappia, and in like manner certain
Hordes of Tarta^ians, as the Hord of Casan, the town of Astracham, or
Citracham, with the Hords of Nohaicois, and some others.

The Quality of the Country.
Demetrius being sent to Rome in embassage, reported, That a countrieman of his
knowledge, and his neighbor, had slipped down into a great hollow tree to seek
for honey, and that being at the bottom, he was up to the breast in honey, and
continued two days in that estate, living only of honey, until that seeing a
bear which came to eat of this honey, and had gotten down, he laid hold of
him, and so terrified him with his cries, as he made him to leap forth,

The air of Muscouie is so good, as it were a wonder to see it infected with
the plague: yet they have a burning fever which does so torment them, lying in
their heads and bowels, as they die within few days. The land opens and gapes
by reason of the great cold, as it does in our countries after a great heat and
drought. Yet sometimes it is hot in the country, for in the year 1527, the
heat of Summer was so violent, as the wheat yea and forests were burnt, as
Sigismond does write.

There are many goodly rivers, among which there are diverse very famous, as
well by Herodotus; but discovered in our time near to Dniepetk a village in
Muscouie in the forest of Wolkonzki. This river running toward the South, and
passing first by the town of Smolenko, then by Kiouia, and some other towns,
being grown great with many other waters, falls into the Euxine sea, among
others it receives the river of D^sna, called by the ancients Hipani, but in
such sort, as it being most clear of it self, and Desna muddie, it is not
troubled with it. Turante now called Duina, as Heberstein Rubo affirms, comes
out of the lake of Duina, near unto the spring of Neper in the same forest,
and falls into the Balt^cke sea. Rha now called Volga Herberstein says, that
this river does swell so in Autumn, as it is able to bear great ships full
fraught. The river of Ocque has her spring in the province of Misceneke, and
makes all the land which it waters fertile: it abounds in fish, which they
esteem more than all the rest of Muscouie. There are moreover many lakes,
whereof some are exceeding great: for besides the lake of Volga, of Duina, and
others, from whence the rivers of Muscouie take their springs, there is the
lake of Imen which the Rutheniens call Ilmer, above Nouogrod the great, the
which is twelve German leagues long, and eight broad.

But to describe more particularly the quality of these countries, it is most
certain

As for the country of Severe, it abounds in all things, notwithstanding that
there be having made any stay there. As for the province of Bieleieziore, it is
in a manner full of

The province of Duuina is reasonably fertile, and it is plentifully furnished
with fish and great store of beasts. Upon the sea coast of this country there
are many white bears which live most commonly in the sea, as they of the
country report. That of Viuatke is barren and moorish; but there is great
plenty of honey, fish, and wild beasts. In the province of Permia there is no
corn, but in recompense they have great store of stags and

In the province of Petzore there are great mountains and wonderful high
rocks, the which the ancients called Riphean or Hiperboreans, the which
continually are covered with snow. They are so high as some have been
seventeen days going up, and yet could not come to the top. There is not any
corn in this country, but many wild beasts.

The Manners of the ancient inhabitants.


The Manners at this day.


The women do commonly carry store of pearls and precious stones, especially
they want not to hang at their ears. She that has married the second time,
shall be held to be chaste enough: but if she come unto the third marriage, she
is held for to be unchaste: the like opinion they have of men. The people for
the most part are wonderfully given to whoredom and drunkenness: they are
very careful of the sick: they labor with horses: whereas in former times
they had no kind of money coined, now they use some: they speak the Sclauonian
tongue, but so mixed with other languages, and so corrupt, as the Sclauonians
and Muscouites understand not one another. The great duke suffers not his
subjects to go out of his country, by reason whereof, the Muscouites knowing

But to speak something in particular of certain provinces of Muscouie, they
of the

The Riches.




Whenas the Ambassadors of the great Knez return into Muscouie, he takes from
them the presents which they have received from princes, giving them some
matter of small value in exchange, and sometimes nothing at all. To conclude,
he draws unto himself all that he finds good in his Estates. By reason
whereof, they hold that he has great store of treasure in the forts of Mosko,
Ieroslauia, and the White Lake; the which has some show of truth, for the
great Duke John carried away in a manner all the Chalices, relics, crosses,
and silver, out of Liuonia: and it is not lawful to carry any money out of his
countries, unless it be to redeem slaves, or to pay the ransom of such as
are taken by the enemies in war. It is true, that by the loss of Liuonia
(yielded by the great Duke to Stephen King of Poland, in the year of our
Redemption 1582) he has

Philip Pernisten Ambassador for the Emperor Pernisten was amassed how he
could carry so great a burden. His eldest son was attired like himself.
They were served at their meat by a hundred gentlemen or thereabouts, all which
carried so many dishes of gold unto the table, setting them they took away
upon a great cubbord one upon ane another, not caring for the meat that was in
them. He sent unto Pernisten whenas he departed from his court three hundred
and twenty sable skins, every one of which was valued in Vienne at twenty
pounds sterling, and entertained him at his own charge during all the time he
remained in his country. He says also that whenas the great Knez did feast
him, there was in the Antichamber or Stoue such abundance of chargers, bowls,
and such like

The Forces.
IT is most certain that the incursions of the Tartarians Precopites, and
Nogaies (who are never quiet, not suffer their neighbors to live at rest, but
carry away whole provinces,

Conpuests are like unto grafts which should better the condition of an Estate,
and not impair it: for as they graft either to better savage trees, or to make
some plant bear

The great dukes of Muscouie in truth have far extended the bounds of their
dominions, John, who took the realms of Calan upon Volgue, and of Astracan
upon the Caspian sea, and subdued a great part of Liuonia; but many of his men
perished in these voiages, in battles and in assaults, or by the enemies
hand, sickness, hunger, or their continual toil: and after the conquest he
was forced to entertain great garrisons in his sorts, or to plant Stephen king
of Poland, he had not forces sufficient to defend the country of Liuonia, and
so many other important places which were taken from him; so he was forced to
quit all Liuonia unto the Polonians.

The greatest part of the Muscouites buildings being of ioists joined together
and earth in the midst; they do also for the most part make towers of
ioists, the which are so strong as they bear all kind of ordnance how great
and weighty soever. Some dispute

The strength of the country consists partly in the multitude of marshes and
rivers, and partly in the thickness of woods; and the Muscouites have been
accustomed to

There are also some forts built, part of stone and part of earth, but without
any flankers, or art of fortification, as those of Mosko, Nouogrod, Plescouia,
Porkouia, Staricia, Slobode of Alexandria, and Smolenko. But the walls of any
place of strength are commonly made of great beams, the which they plant in
such sort, as they leave a space in the midst which they fill up with earth
very artificially, leaving certain holes for

The subjects of the great Knez serve their prince in the wars in such sort, as
they seem rather fearful of punishment if they do not well, than to have
any courage or valor. They obey their captains readily upon the first command,
and endure all discommodities patiently, neither caring for cold nor rain,
they suffer hunger better than any people in the world, and content themselves
with little. Wherefore some are of opinion that they are fitter to defend a
fort, than to fight in open field; for that patience is required in the first,
but they must have courage and resolution for the other. Contrariwise the
Polonians are much fitter to encounter an enemy in open field: wherefore the
great duke Charles knowing the baseness of his people in skirmishes and
battles, and the resolution and courage of the Polonians, said that his men
had need of a spur to prick them forward against their enemies, and the
Polonians of a bridle to keep them back.

Stephen king of Poland made against the Muscouites, notwithstanding that he
had not above sixty thousand horse and foot in his army, the great duke could
never draw so many men together, as he could John the third, great Duke of
Muscouie, led unto the enterprise of Astracan one hundred and twenty thousand
horse, and twenty thousand foot. The same Duke did also invade Liuonia against
Alexander King of Poland, with three great armies, and retained another upon
the frontier.

The great Duke John added unto his horsemen certain thousands of
Harquebuziers, among which there were many strangers which did him great
service in defense of his country. This Prince every two year caused a
muster to be made throughout all his Provinces, of such as were fit for the
war, where he did inroll all gentlemen's sons, with the number of their
servants, and what horses they were able to bring. Their horsemen

He confines with the Precop, Prince of the Tartarians of the Taurique
Chersonese; commonly seen in Turks: but his men were defeated by the
Muscouites, assisted therein

The Tartarians Nogaies are more to be feared by reason of the sodainnesse of
their furious

Moreover, who so should undertake to make war against them, should enter
into a great charge without any hope of gain, for that they have neither town
nor place of strength by the taking and possession whereof they may be kept in
awe. To stay whose incursions, the great Duke entertaines great troops of
horse at Citracan, Caffan, and Viatique, as he does also at Gulugan, near to
the river of Don, to make head against the

Stephen king of Poland molested him.

The King of Sueden holds at the end of the gulf of Finland the fort of
Vibourg, where he entertaines a good garrison to make head against the
Muscouites. He does also keep in this Sea, and in the ports thereof, a good
part of his ships of war, as well to cross all the dessignes of the great
Duke, as to hinder the Germans from carrying any arms or munition. The
advantage of this Sea army has made the King of Sueden

We must now speak of the King of Poland, who has a country better
inhabited, and more civil than the great Duke; but not of so great an extent.
There is also this difference betwixt these two Princes, that the Muscouites
are more obedient to their Duke, and the Polonians more hardy and courageous:
the first are fitter to resist, and the Basilius took the duchy of Smolenko
and Polosko, and conquered a very great country in Liuonia. And on the other
side, Stephen King of Poland took Polosko, with many other places of
importance from the great duke John, son to Basilius.

The Government.
Meh^^^ ^isir^^^ to the great Turk said, that the Muscouite and the Turk
al^^^ among all other princes ^^^^e absolute masters of their goods; wherefore
(...) the enterprise of Steph^^ king of Poland very difficult. The great duke
uses an in^^^^d^ble care and (...) to maintain himself in this authority.
For first of all it is not ^^^full for any of his subjects to go out of his
Estates without leave, upon pain of death. And for this cause there are none of
his people that make any voiages by sea, nay they ^^re not, nor may not speak
unto an Ambassador, nor use a strange physician in their ^^^^nesse, unless
they have leave so to do^. He seeks also to make himself full of majesty
Mary. In his chamber, and in the withdrawing chamber attend men with roabes of
cloth of gold down unto the foot. To the end that no man may know more than
himself, he has not any ^^^^les for learning, but to read and write, whereas
they read nothing but the Gospel, John Chrysostom, or of some other. If any
one seems to have a desire (...) proceed further in the sciences, he should be
presently suspected to have some bad d^^^^igh^, and his attempt should not be
unpunished: the which the great duke causes to be observed, to the end that
none of his shall be more l^^^^ed than himself. Hence it grows that the
Secretaries and high Chauncellor never (...) not make answer to the
Ambassadors of for fa^^^ princes, but what the great duke d^^^ dictate. They
never name the great K^^zin any affairs they treat of, but they all rise up
with great honor and r^^^^^nc^^ the like is done at the table whenas he
inuites (...) one to drink, or makes him partaker of his dish, and in many
other such like occasions. They do also teach them from their infancy to
speak and make account of their

The Religion.
THe Russians and Muscouites received the Christian religion from the Grecians
in the and to eat the flesh of it. Pernisten reports that when he was
Ambassador there for the Nicholas, whose body they keep carefully and with
great reverence. They are much more ceremonious in matters of religion than the
Romanists; for that they never pass before a Monastery, a Church, or a Cross
(whereof the streets are full) but they alight from their horses and kneel
down, which the footmen also do, making the sign of the Cross, and saying
these words following, Miloy Hospodi, Miloy Hospodi, Miloy Hospodi, Lord have
mercy upon us. The same Pernisten says, That whenas they that were sent Miloy
Hospodi, and Alleluya, and all the assistants sing with him, making oftentimes
the sign of the Cross. They use candles of wax, images, and other things like
unto the Romanists, and especially holy water, and holy salt. At the end of
Mass, the Priests divide certain little loaves that are

In Monasteries they always say a Mass at the break of day, at the which men
only assist, and many through great devotion remain all night in the Church
with the Monks, who successively sing and praise God without ceasing. They are
also very devout in their affairs; for they never go out of their lodging, nor
enter in, but they bow themselves thrice before a crucifix or the Virgin Marie,
which they keep with some light in their chambers, and they make the sign of
the Cross, saying thrice Miloy Hospodi. This ceremony being done, they begin
to speak to them that are near them. They do the like

Processions are also very frequent there, and notwithstanding that it is
exceeding cold, yet they go far. Baptism is esteemed, and administered by them,
as by the Romanists, only they say, Let the infant be baptized in this
fountain, in the name of the Father, etc. Penance is also practiced by the
Confessor and the Penitent, who stands upright in the midst of the Church,
and never fits. Satisfaction is also frequent, as in the Primative Church, and
rigorous amongst them. They communicate, and go yearly to receive the holy
Sacrament, the which is consecrated for sick persons upon holy Thursday
only, and kept in the Church with great reverence under the kind of bread
only, whereof they break a piece with a silver spoone, and dissolve it in
warm water, and then give it

They honor the Saints much, and call upon them to pray unto God for them, and
they bear a particular honor to S. Nicholas their patron, as I have said. His
image is in the town of Massouia, and the prince does every morning (in the
place where it is) cause a great quantity of bread, flesh, and other things to
be offered, the which is afterward distributed to the ministers of the Church,
who do their office, and sing continually, praying unto God for the prosperity
of this great prince; who does also entertain another Monastery, near that
where the image of S. Nicholas is, called the holy Trinity, where there are
continually two hundred religious men, in whose Church S. Ignatius is Basil and
live very exemplarily like unto Hermites. And no man can pass two or three
leagues but he shall find a monastery.



One of their greatest errors is, that they hold that it is not lawful to
celebrat any other Counsels but the first seven: and as they embrace those
wholly, so they refuse all others that have followed; and hence grows their
discord with the Sea of Rome.

They have their Metropolitan, of whom the Clergy and all the Bishops depend.
They attribute as much to him as the Papists do unto the Pope. This
Metropolitan Philips fast.

As for the Prince, he observes carefully and strictly all the ceremonies
belonging to religion, and all that it commands: for being at the table, as
often as they change a dish, or give him drink, he makes many signs of the
cross. He fails not at any fast, and beats the ground with his forehead
through devotion like unto the rest.

The Morduois, who live upon the frontiers of Muscouie, use circumcision like
unto

A DISCOVRSE OF THE
The Contents.
1. THe contents and extention of the great Cham of Tartaria, the bounds, and
climat. 2. The situation and circuit of Cambalu, the chief city. 3. The
constilation of the air of those countries, their abundance in Rice, Wheat,
Silk, Rhubarbe, and Musk; in Camels and Horses; in stones which burn like
wood; in Pheasants and other birds. 4. Of the terrible lightning, thunder, and
winds, wherewith these countries are infested. 5. Description of the Lake of
Caniclu, full of Pearls, and of the other rivers of this Empire, 6. Valor and
manner of living of the Scythians, ancestors to the Tartarians: Their
barbarous custom to drink in skulls, and to wear the skins of their enemies.
7. Their chief gods, their sacrifices, and their bloody ceremonies in
contracting alliances, and at the funerals of their Kings, where they did
sacrifice the servants and officers of the Crown. 8. Another ceremony
observed at the interment of private persons. 9. Of the pa^^ting which 10. Of
the beginning of the Empire of the Tartarians, and how they were freed from the
dominion of their neighbors, by a Marshall called Canguist. 11. A description
of the nature, manners, custom, laws, meat and drink, apparel, exercises,
and kind of living of the Tartarians; their arms, and manner of fighting in
war: their ceremonies at the funerals of their Kings. 12. Their riches in
the traffic of Rice, Wool, Silk, Hemp, Rhubarbe, Musk, Chaml^t^, Ginger,
Synamon, Cloves, Gold, Sand taken out of rivers, Corrall, with mines of Gold
and Azure. 13. Their money made of the barks of Trees, and Cockell-shells. 14.
Their forces consisting in the strong situation, and greatness of Provinces,
in towns, and in men of war, camping out of Towns. 15. The names of the
Emperors of Tartaria graven in letters 16. Laws and military orders
established by Canguist their first Emperor. 17. Ceremonies observed at the
crowning of a new Prince. 18. Of the seal which the great Cham does use in his
Patents, and of his rigorous justice. 19. Of two Counsels, of War, and
State, and their jurisdiction, and of the power and authority of Astr^l^gians
in those countries. 20. Of the punishment of thieves and malefactors. 21.
Explanation of the word Hordes. 22. Of the Tartarians religion composed of
Mahometisme, Paganism, and Christianisme: their gods, the form of their
prayers, and their belief touching the immortality of the soul. 23. The
beginning and descent of the Tartarian Jews. 24. Of the error of the
Tartarians that be Christians, following the heresy of Nestorius. 25. A
G^n^alogie



This great Empire called by the inhabitants Mongul, which draws the name of
Tartaria

The chief city of this Empire is called Cambula, which some will have to be
in former

Besides the great and rich kingdom of Catay, there are many other goodly
realms, as those of Tangut, Camul, Tenduc, Tainfur, Thebet, and the town and
province of Caindo, of all which countries, I cannot make any curious
description, for that there is not any man found that has had full knowledge
thereof, or has imparted it to others.


THey hold that the country of Catay abounds in rice, wheat, and such like
things, and in a word they do much harm. It raines never in Winter, and
seldom does there

Paulus Venetus holds to be the greatest in the world: for he writes that in
some places it is ten miles broad, in some eight, and in some six. It is a
hundred days journey long. But to specify something, we must set down what
could be learned of the particularities of some provinces.

There grows much rhubarbe in the realm of Tangut, the which is transported
throughout the world. In the realm of Tenduc they find very rich mines of gold
and

This is all that can be said of the quality of these countries, both in the
general and particular: let us now observe the manner of living of the
ancient inhabitants, to come afterward to those which are practiced among
them, and to the qualities and humors which they have in our time.

The Manners of the Ancients.
Darius to fly with a great part of his army, and defeated Cyrus with all his
forces being led by a woman. Alexander the Great lost both soldiers and
commanders, whom he had sent thither, and had no better success than the
rest. The Scythians had heard speak of the Romans

Every one of their princes did give wine once a year to such soldiers as
had slain any of their enemies, and they that had not killed any, nor done
some memorable exploit, were put apart without any honor, which was an
insupportable infamy amongst

Their chief deities were the goddess Vesta, who commanded over all, and
then Jupiter, or Tellus, or the Earth, who they held to be Jupiters spouse, and
these were the gods whom they honored and sought to make favorable unto them.
Besides these, they did worship Apollo, Venus, Mars, and Hercules, yet they did
not erect any Temples or Altars unto them, except to Mars, to whom they did
sacrifice the hundred prisoner that, were taken in war. To the rest they*did
sacrifice beasts, and especially horses. As for swine, they did so little
esteem them, as they would not suffer one to be kept among their troops.



Whenas the Scythians contracted alliance with any one, they took a great
goblet in which was earth, whereon they did pour wine mingled with the blood
of both parties, with the which they did besprinkle the points of their swords,
their axes, arrows, and darts: then having made a great oath with long and
terrible imprecations against them that should break this league, they did all
drink of the wine of this goblet, and not only the principal parties, but
also all the chiefest men that assisted as companions to them that made the
league.

When their King died, they made a very deep hole of a square form, then
taking

They had this custom, that at the end of the year they did the like service,
with the loss of the lives of his best servants and officers, who are all
natural Scythians, free, and of noble race, and such as it pleased the King to
choose, for that no slave was admitted to and funerals of Kings, whenas they
were interred.





They of Catay, whom they called the Seres, lived lovingly and quietly
together, and yet notwithstanding this mildness, they fled the company and
conversation of other men; so as they would not traffic by word with any
stranger: but if they would make any bargain, and sell their commodities, or
buy others, the stranger was forced to pass the river, upon the banks whereof
either of them laid his merchandise; and then the Seres set the price of all
things in looking on them, and the stranger did of necessity pay what they
demanded.

An adulterous man or woman and a thief were never called in question, and
they say that in old time there was never any murder committed among them, for
that they did more fear to be found disobedient to their laws, than of the
threats and constellations,

No man amongst them touched his wife when she was with child, or had her
monthly flux. There was not any one among them that did eat any polluted
beast. They made no sacrifices, and every man was Judge of himself, following
naturally that which was reasonable.

Canguiste, (for so was the name of this Marshall) it is the will of the
immortal God, that thou freest this people from the subjection of their
neighbors, and that th^^ be^st ^ouernour and King of the Tartarians, who shall
make others subject, as they are now tributarie to their neighbors: This was
the cause that the Tartarians (being desirous to see themselves free, and to
command others) made choice of this Canguiste for their King, who was the
first prince of this people: this happened in the year of our Lord 1187. This
Canguiste, called Chinghie by some others, was a wise man, and of a good life,
and was the first which sought to root out idolatry from among the Tartarians,
forbidding by an edict when he was made King, the adoration of Idols, enioyning
them to worship one God only, by Canguiste seeing himself strong, failed not
suddenly to invade the Scythians his neighbors, on either side of Mount Imaus,
and made them his subjects and tributaries, and the Tartarians more hardy and
feared, whereas before they were only shepherds.


THe Tartarians are of a mean stature, and have very broad breasts and
shouldiers; and those in Winter, or in a rainie, season are white, and they go
not beneath the knee.

No stranger is admitted into the kings presence, of what dignity soever he
be, or any affairs of importance that he has, unless he be first purged. He
that enters the pauillion whereas the king, or any prince, or great nobleman
makes his ordinary abode, is instantly put to death. There are many other
things which they hold for irremissible faults: but

Their Kings are buried on Mount Altay, called by Hayton the Armenian, the
mountain of Belgian; and whenas they carry the body to be interred, they
that accompany it, kill all them they meet upon the way, saying, Go and serve
our King in the other life; and for proof hereof, Marcus Polus reports, That
whenas Mongu Cha^ was carried to be interred, which was at such time as Polus
was in Tartaria, his soldiers which did accompany

The Riches.
I Should want judgment to think that the Tartarians, who have made so many
incursions Polus writes, that the country of Caindu does also yield Ginger,
Synamon, and Cloves; the which notwithstanding is somewhat doubtful. There are
also some rivers which have gold mixed with their sand.

The money which they use is not all of one sort, for that in Cataya they
employ a certain kind of black money which is made of a thin skin which they
find betwixt the Prester Ian, who causes grains of salt and pepper to go for
current money, has very great riches. And for that the city of Cambalu is in
the midst of the great province of Cataya, they bring thither from the East
Indies, from China, and other countries, much rich merchandise, and among
others, precious stones, pearls, silk, spices, and

The Forces.
THey that will carefully consider of the forces of this great Emperor, may
easily judge that they consist, first in the situation of his countries, which
we have formerly showed to be exceeding strong, in his large territories, and
in the greatness of towns, as of Sucuir, and of Campion, built and fortified
after our manner, of Ergimul, Corazam, Thebet, and Caindu, all chief towns of
so many realms; and also in the abundance of victuals which they yield, and
in the greatness of his revenues: for that among other things, he exacts the
tenth of wool, silk, hemp, corn, and cattle, and he is absolute lord of
all that the Tartarians enjoy: but his chiefest forces consist in his men of

This Emperor does commonly entertain twelve thousand horsemen for the guard
of his person, and it is thought that he may draw more horse together than any
Prince whatsoever; so as his forces have two remarkable qualities: the one is,
that he has many

The Government.
THis Emperor whom the Turks call Vlucam, that is say, great prince, and the
Muscouits Czar Cata^ski, which is Caesar of Cataya, whose name they set in a
red table in letters of gold upon the temples of their chief towns, calling
him the son of God, the shadow of God, and the soul of God. He is so obayed
in all the provinces which Canguiste, who being chosen Emperor of the
Tartarians, and desiring to try if they would be ready to obey his will, he
commanded seven princes, who before had governed all these people, to kill
their children with their own hands: and notwithstanding that the fathers
found this commandment very rough and hard, yet whether they feared the fury
of the people who held this king as a divine thing, or that religion moved
them, for that they believed that God had given a beginning to this Empire, and
that they should contemn God in disobeying the kings commandment, they set
hand to work, and cut the throats of their own children: so as since, that
time the life and death of the Tartarians depends of the princes will, whom
Canguiste Chingis ordained that they which were of age to bear arms, should
come at a certain day to the place where he should appoint, and there he did
set down an order for his troops after this manner, That Disseigners or
Commanders of ten should obey Captains of hundreds, and these should be
subject to Commanders of thousands, and the last should also yield obedience
to the Colonells of every regiment. He also ordained that if any of the
Tartarians, or their slaves, should find a man, a woman, a horse, or any other
thing without the princes pasport, he might sease thereon, and hold it as his
own, and justly gotten. The exactions, imposts, and customs are so great, as
we do not read that any other nation was ever so charged.

whereas that ceremony is commonly performed. There, he to whom the Empire
does We pray thee, will, and command thee, to have power over us: whereunto
the new prince aunswers; If you will that I obey you in this, I must of
necessity do it: in the mean time prepare your selves to do all that I shall
command you, to come when I shall call you, to go where it shall please me to
send you, and to leave the whole Estate of the Empire in my hands to dispose
thereof as I shall think good. The Tartarians having consented thereunto, the
Emperor faith more: Wherefore the words of my mouth shall he unto you
hereafter, a sword, and shall take revenge of rebels. The people clap their
hands at these words, signifying thereby that they do accept the condition.
Which done the princes draw him out of his royal throne, and set him on the
ground upon a Felt, and Look up and acknowled God, and withal, behold the
place whereon thou art now set: if thou do govern thy Estate well, all
things shall succeed to thy hearts desire: but if thou do not govern they
people as it is fit, assure thy self thou shall be so spoiled of all
greatness and riches, that this Felt which is now thy seat, will not be left
thee to do thee service. Having spoken this, they give him the best beloved of
his wives, and raising them both up with the Felt, they proclaim them Emperor
and Emperesse of Tartaria, and instantly the great men of the Empire, and the
deputies of provinces which are under his obedience, bring him presents, in
sign of acknowledgment. They do also bring unto the same place the rich
moueables of the deceased king, whereof

This Emperor has all in his own power, and not one of his subjects dare say
that he has any thing in propriety. It is not lawful for any man to dwell in
any place but where he is assigned by the Emperor, who does also appoint
Governors, Generals of armies, and Colonels, and they choose Captains, and they
the members of their companies, and these God in heaven, Chuichuch Cham upon
earth: the Emperor is the force of God and men. This prince does never speak
unto foreign Ambassadors, and will

Paul writes that there were in his time in the city of Cublai Cham having
learned of them that this city should one day revolt, he caused another to be
built called Taidu, the which is very near. Finally, if any one has stolen
any thing of small value, for the which he deserves


THe Tartarians which obey the great Cham, are not all of one religion, but
differ in Mahomet, which was received into those countries, about the year of
our Redemption 1246. They obey the Pentateuque of Moses, and observe the
things commanded by the ancient Law, and they cry daily, Iahi Illo Illoloth,
there is but one God. Among them of Catay there are some Mahometans, but many
more Idolaters, whose belief is thus. They hold there are two gods, one of
heaven, and another of earth: of the first (to whom they cast Incense every
day) they demand nothing but health, and understanding: and of the other,
abundance Pythagoras. They honor also the Sun, Moon, and the four
Elements, and do sacrifice unto them. They call the Pope and all Christians
Dzinthis, which signifies Pagans; and Chaur, that is to Innocent the fourth to
receive the Christian faith. They were persuaded by the Mahometans to follow
the religion of the Alcaron, as the most pure, saying, that it taught the
adoration of one god only, whereas that of the Christians was full of Idols:
and moreover, that theirs was active, and did allow any thing to a free man,
putting arms into his hand, whereas that of Christ was only fit for effeminat
persons, Salmanazar King of Assiria, into the country of Arsareth, in the time
of king Oseas. Writers differ concerning the country of Arsareth, and speak
diversely: Some will have it to be the country of Colchos, called at this day
Mingrelie, for that Herodotus writes, that they of Colchos used circumcision.
But the greatest part hold that Arsareth Ching is, Founder of the empire of
Catay, and therefore they had retained circumcision, and some other things of
the law of Moses, so as they easily became Mahometans. But notwithstanding
they are in a manner all Idolaters in Catay. Besides the Mahometans, whereof we
have spoken, there are some Jews and Christians but few in number.

Nestorius, which has extended it self unto the town of Campion, and is yet
held by some which remain at Tangut, Sucuir, at Cambalu, and in other towns
of this empire. These Nestorians notwithstanding that they speak many
languages, according to the countries where they are, yet they celebrat their
office in the Chaldean tongue. Their errors that they hold are, That the
nature of man in Jesus Christ is without a person, and therefore defective: and
for this cause they put Christ in two persons. They do not call the Virgin
Marie the mother of God, for that they say the name of God comprehends the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and then she should be mother of all
three divine persons: yet now they Nestorius, Theodore of Mapsuestie, Diodore
of Tarse, and Paul of Samosates, and they condemn S. Cyrillus Alexandrinus.
They say that it is one thing to be God the Word, and another to be Christ.
They have not the first Council of Ephesus, nor the following. Their
Patriarchs are not chosen, but come to it by succession from father to son.
They first create him great Archbishop, then without any other ceremony he
succeeds the Patriarch which dies. In the year of our Redemption 1119,
Prester-Iean, who commanded in the province of Hatay, or (as some say) in that
of Tenduc (the in^abitants of the country call him Ioane) received this
Nestorian heresy, but he was ruined by the great Chingis or Canguist king of
the Tartarians, in the year of our Lord God 1162, forty Dominicke, by the
commandment of Innocent the fourth. And they find at this day, in the
countries which are subject to this Emperor, many Christians, which
notwithstanding follow this condemned sect. And some English men which have
been in those countries, report, that the Archbishop of Cambalu crowns the
great Cham when he comes to succeed in the empire.


IT were needful to have other relations than those which have come to light,
Paulus Venetus holds this order naming the Emperors that have reigned in
Cataya: First of all he sets Canguist, or Chingis, or Cinchis: secondly, Chuy:
thirdly, Barchim, then Allau, and after him Mongu, and last of all Cublay, in
whose court Paul remained some time. But Hayton the Armenian gives them the
names which follow. He names first Changy Cham, then Hoccora Cham, after him
Gino Cham, and after these Mange Cham, and then Cobila Cham, who built the
town of Ions in Cataya, which they hold to be the same that Cambalu. We must
follow in this list of Emperors Tamor Cham, who reigned in Cataya in the time
of Hayton in the year 1308. Among the rest Hoccara Cham had many children, the
eldest whereof was called Gino Cham, who succeeded his father in the Iochy his
brother came into the Western parts, and seized upon the countries of Persia,
Turquestan, and some other provinces; and another brother called Baydo
conquered the Northern countries, and taking the way of Europe, came into
Hongarie, and begat Tamerlan he that spoiled the Western provinces of Asia,
and some of Europe. Gino Cham died young in the East, and the nearest unto him
called Mango was made Emperor, who assailed a certain island in the East,
whose inhabitants had rebelled: but they diued secretly into the water, and
made holes in the keele of the ship wherein Mango was, so as he and all that
were in it perished. Then his brother Cobila, called Cublay by Paul, was
created Emperor, and made profession of the Christian religion, but his
successors have not maintained it. He that has made the abridgement Gerard
M^rcator describes this genealogy after another manner: He agrees with the
rest touching the first, and calls him Changy Chan, or Cham, saying that it is
the same that Paulus Venetus calls Cinchis, who lived about the year of Grace
1202. The Tartarians before his reign lived brutishly without laws or
civility, neither had they any reputation among the Scythians or other
nations, but paid tribute to their neighbors of the cattle which they had.
This Changi extended his Empire in a short time from China unto the Caspian
sea. He had for son Iochu Cham, who begat Zain Cham the third Emperor,
called by some others Bathi: This was he that spoiled Russia, Polonia, Silesia,
Morauia, and Hongarie. The fourth Emperor, son to Bathi, was Temir Cutlu,
whom our histories call Tamerlan, who ouerran all Asia, entered into Egypt,
took Bajazet Emperor of the Turks, and led him bound in chains of gold over
all Asia. The fifth Emperor, son to Temir Cutlu was Temir Gzar, who they say
was slain fighting valiantly against the knights of Prussia. The sixth issued
from Temir Gzar, was Macmetczar, who had for successor Armetczar, and he begat
Sziachmet the eight Emperor of the Tartarians.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE
The Contents.
1. Dliuers appellations of the realm of China, as well ancient as modern.
2. The circuit and how many leagues it contains. 3. A division of this realm
into fifteen provinces. The number of the towns and cities which are in every
province: Their situation and form of buildings, and their high ways paued
and 4. Description of the wall which diuides China from the Tartarians
containing five hundred leagues. 5. Of the royal palace of the Monarchs of
China. 6. Of the complexion and humor of the inhabitants. Admirable
fertility of the land, which bears three or four times a year. Fruits of
diverse sorts which it yields, honey, sugar, melons, plums, oranges of three
kinds. Abundance of silk, flax, hemp, cotton, corn, rivers, trees, musk,
beasts, and fish of all sorts, physical herb, mines of gold, silver, and
other mettalls, with rich pearls. 7. The Chinois industrious, active,
laborious, and naturally inclined to make good cheer, and to be well
apparelled; the form of their faces, and the hight of their bodies. 8. Their
manner to make musk in China. 9. The fashion and color of the garments of
gentlemen and common people; of men and women, and of their hair and painting.
10. Custom of the women of China to wear straight shoes, and why. 11. Great
industry of the Chinois in the art of caruing and painting, and to make
chariots to go with sails. 12. What merchandise they commonly sell to
strangers. 13. How Porcelaine vessel is made in that country. 14. Of the
dowry, marriage, nuptial feasts, and polygamie of the people of China, and
their laws touching successions. 15. Their strange custom by the which they
are forced within a certain time to marry, or to enter into religion. 16. Of
the marriage of their kings, and of their children, and of the solemn feasts
which they celebrat. 17. Ceremonies observed at funerals, obsequies, and
funeral feasts of the Chinois. 18. Their drink made of the herb Chia in
steed of wine, and what meat they prepare for their feasts and sol^mne
banquets. 19. Of the invention of their artillery, and of their characters or
hiroglyphicalletters 20. What their horses and caroches be in their iourneys,
and what ships and provision they have at sea. 21. Of their fishing with sea
ravens and diuedoppers. 22. Of the respective requests presented to the Loytia:
and their strange behavior in their visits and companies. 23. Riches of China
in mines of gold, silver, and other metals, pearls, Porcelaine vessel, rich
^urs, fl^x, wool, cotton, silk, sugar, honey, rhubarbe, camphire, vermillion,
woad, and musk. 24. The kings revenues, and what tribute he raises upon all
kinds of merchandise. 25. What his forces be, his men of war, and the
discipline which he holds; and first of the Council of war appointed in every
province. 26. Of his foot and horse, and of their furn ture and arms, and
manner of fighting. 27. Of his nauall forces. 28. A particular relation of the
soldiers en^ertained 29. Of the universities of China, and the visitors
appointed by ^^e ^ing: and of the solemn promotions which are made every three
year to the degree ^f L^ytias. 30. The oath which they take before the
visitors which are to receive the degree of L^ytias 31. Of the Council of
twelve Auditors, erected in the town of Taybin. 32. Of the vi^^^^yes 33. Of
other particular officers, as the Tompo, Quinchay, and other Judges, and their
manner of proceeding in the administration of justice. 34. Of the punishments
which they use against offenders. 35. Their l^wes touching travelers and
beggars. 36. Of the idolatry of the Chinois, and what Idols they worship their
sacrifices to the devil, and their belief touching heaven and celestial
things. 37. A description of many kinds of Lotteries which they use. 38. Their
opinion touching the creation of the world, which they say was built by their
Tain, a deity lodged in heaven. 39. Their belief touching the estate of the
soul departed out of the body: and their manner of praying for the dead. 40.
Of their Monasteries, and of four orders of religion, either of which has a
General called Tricon. 41. A Genealogy of the Kings of China.

THis great realm of Sinois, whereof Ptolome knew the name, but was Marcus
Paulus calls the Province of Mangi, and which we term commonly China, not
knowing what foundation the first Authors had to move them to impose this name,
unless it happened by corruption of the word, and that of Sina, they have made
China, changing one letter into two, and that custom and continuance has had
this advantage over antiquity to make it pass thus changed with our times.

Magin and Mercator) give it that of Tame, or else (according to the Author of
the general History of China) that of Taybinco, which signifies nothing but a
realm, and the inhabitants call themselves Tang^s. This country lies most
Eastward of all Asia, having for neighbor upon the East part the Ocean Sea,
the Islands of Corea, and the Islands of Iapon: on the South part the Ocean
Sea, and partly the realm of Cochinchina: upon the West the Bramas or
Brachmanes, and a part of Tartaria: and upon the North Tartaria only, from the
which this realm is divided by mountains, and for want of them by walls. It
extends it self in a manner from the tropicke of Cancer unto the three and
fiftieth degree of latitude, and contains in its length

This realm contains in circuit (as they write) 69516 Diez, which is a kind
of measure Martin of Herrada, Provincial of the Augustines at the Philippines,
and a most excellent Geometrician, and Cosmographer, has seen and found that
those which we have followed are true, and that this country had three
thousand leagues in circuit, and one thousand eight hundred

This realm is divided into fifteen provinces, whereof either of them has
more Among these Provinces there are two, the one called Paguya, or Pasquia,
and the other

The fifteen Provinces are called Pasquia, Canton, Foquien, Olam, Sincay,
Susuam,

The province of Paquia (whereas the King and his Council do commonly remain)
contains seven and forty cities, and 150 towns. The Province of Canton
contains

Among these great numbers of towns and cities, there are almost two hundred
of note, the which for the most part are built upon rivers which bear boats,
and are environed with large and deep ditches, and walls of free stone, from
the foot unto the highest part, and upon the top it is brick, which is made of
the same stuff they use for the pourcelaine vessel, the which is so well
cimented together, and grows so hard in a short time, as they are not able to
disjoyne the brickes with any pickax or hammer. The walls are so thick, as
four men at the least may march in front, yea in some places six, besides the



They have at the entry a spacious porch and open, garnished with cupbords
artificially made, which they fill with idols: after which there is to be
seen ponds full of fish, and gardens upon the tops of houses. The stones of
their buildings are carefully polished, and so plaistred as a man would say
they are gilt. The covering is polished after the same manner, and cymented so
artificially as no rain can hurt it: and these couerings continue above one
hundred years, the gutters being made of marble ingeniously wrought. Before
the doors of their houses they have trees which be thick and green, set in
order and by compass, and so pleasant to b^hold, as any eye were it never so
weary and weak would soon be recreated. Besides that many of these towns
are crossed through

As for those rivers which swell and rise so as they cannot plant any piles, or
build any arches, they make bridges of boats. Without the towns, especially
upon the sea coast, there are suburbs very well built with goodly great
streets, in which are tauerns and innes for merchants strangers, and in these
places besides the delightful drinks according to the custom of the
country, they find all kinds of meat both ready dres^ed and raw.



We must confess that there are excellent architects in this realm, and if
the workmen be good, their materials be the best in the world; for that as I
have formerly said, there is a kind of white earth whereof they make pauing
rile or brick, the which is so

Tzintzon, to defend China from the ^artarians. Yet you must understand that of
these five hundred leagues which this wall contains, Agntzi.

Suntien which is as much to say in their language, as a ecclesiastical city.
This city is so great, as a man on horseback may use good speed to ride from
one port unto another in a day: wherein they do not comprehend the suburbs,
the which are in a manner as great in compass as the city. It is so peopled
as the Chinois

At the entry of this city toward the East stands the kings palace which is
great and stately, where he commonly remains: yet he has two others, the one
in the midst of the city, and the other toward the West. This first palace
is so great, and so full of singularities, as it would require four whole
days to view it at leisure, as some report. First it is environed with seven
walls built in such sort as betwixt the space of every one of them, they may
easily lodge ten thousand soldiers which be ordinarily in guard in the kings
lodging. Within this palace there seventy and nine stately halls built with
admirable

The first of these halls is made of metal which is cast with great
curiosity, having a great number of goodly figures. The second has the floare
made of silver of great value. The third is of pure gold perfectly well
enamelled. The fourth is of such price, and there is such abundance of riches,
as it does far exceed the other three, for that it represents

The Quality.


They that are borne in the province of Canton, and upon all that coast, are
black like unto them of Fez in Afric, for that this country is in the same
parallel with Barbary. But they of other provinces within the land, are for
the most part white, yet some more than others the nearer they advance unto
the cold country: for there are some which have complexions like unto
Spaniards, and others which are white, and in a manner resemble the Germans,
being flaxen haired, and of a sanguine complexion. Finally,

It is most certain that the land does bear fruit three or four times a
year, and that which does also show the bounty of the air, is, that the
country swarms with children, the which are very beautiful in their youth.
But to specify something, this country brings forth all manner of green
things, and great store of diverse fruits like unto those that grow in Spain,
besides many others which are not known here, for that they differ from ours,
and all these fruits (as they say) are exceeding good. There are three

There is also a kind of plums which they call Lechias, which have a wonderful
pleasing taste; and moreover, they have this property, that they never fill
one, neither do they hurt the stomach though they eat many of them. There
grows abundance of melons, which are very big, and wonderful s^uourie, and
a kind of Apples of a brown color, the which are big, and of a very good
taste. There is great store of sugar throughout the realm, the which is so good
cheap as one hundred weight of the finest and whitest, when it is at the
dearest, is sold for six royalls, or three shillings starling.

There is great abundance of honey, so as it is very good cheap, and of wax
also, the Champian country is very pleasing to behold, and brings forth
odorif^ro^s fl^wers

The Loytias have a custom to plant great and thick forests, whereas they
breed up many wild Boares, Deares, Conies, Hares, and diverse other beasts, of
whose skins they make very good furs, especially of Ma^tins and Sables, of
which they have great numbers. There is abundance of Musk, which comes from a
kind of little beast that eats nothing but an odoriferous root called Camarue,
of the bigness of a man's finger. Moreover, there is great store of oxen, and
kine, which are of so small value, as a good one is sold for less than a
crown and a half; and also bugles which are not half the price; and

The Manners.




The garments which the nobility and men of account do wear are of silk of
diverse

The princes of the blood, or they that are advanced to dignity differ in
apparel from ordinary knights, for that the princes wear their cassocks
imbrodered with gold and silver about the wast, whereas others have but their
skirts garnished with gold. They use breeches artificially wrought with
backe-stich, and they wear very delicate buskins and shoes of velvet. During
Winter, although the climat be not very cold, yet they have their cassockes and
gowns furred, especially with sables, whereof they wear many about their
necks. They that are not married differ from the rest, for that they wear
their hair upon their foreheads and have higher hats. The women adorn
themselves

They are wonderful ingenious, they use caruing, and are great painters of
leaves, In the plain country they use a kind of wagons with fails which are
driven with the

Edward Barbosa has written. But if that were true, there should not be such
great store of Porcelaine in China, neither should





As for the king of China, when he is married, he makes choice of thirty
Concubines

As for fun^ralls, and ceremonies which concern the dead, they observe them
after they cover it with a sheet which hangs unto the ground, upon the which
they set the



They reckon their years by twelve Moons, so as eue^^e three years they add
one luna^ie month unto their year: and they begin the year at the new Moon
of March. Then they make a solemn rejoicing, and also upon the day of their
birth, which they celebrat in their houses, sending stately presents one unto
another. They make very sumptuous feasts, and by night represent Commedies and
Tragedies, in which pleasure no cost is wanting: these be Poesies composed at
pleasure, or ancient

This goodly inlaying serves them for a table cloth, and the table is trimmed
with deckings of silk, which hang down unto the ground. The guests are set in
chaires with backs, having cu^hions to rest them on: being set after this
manner, they bring first of all baskets, covered with garlands of flowers, and
full of fruit upon the sides, and in the

They have an invention in the making of artillery, to cast some which may be
taken

In their iournies besides horses of diverse sorts, they use litters, and
caroches drawn by horses, or else chariots for the wind, whereof we have
formerly spoken. They breed and covered with gold and silver, and they have
gardens of pleasure up on the top

They calke and trim their ships with a certain stuff which is very good to
keep them from worm eating, and to kill the beasts which pierce into the
wood. To empty a leake they set a pumpe within near unto the orelop or
hatches, the which has many small vessels so artificially made, as the first
which comes, removing his feet easily one after another, draws all dry in a
short space. There are multitudes of families which ^iue in boats upon rivers:
some-trafficke there, others play the cooks and feed passengers, and some use
their trades and occupations: and to conclude, there wants nothing necessary
for the life of man in these floting houses, so as they find as many
commodities there, as in

There are many Chinois given to study, but few apply themselves to Physic,
Philosophy, or Astrology. They keep their promise as far as the necessity
of commerce, and the opinion they have to enrich themselves with the prejudice
of another will allow. Strangers are suspect and odious unto them, neither will
they lodge them, or frequent with them. If they be pressed with debts, they fell
their children to free themselves,



The Riches.
WE may confidently believe that this country is one of the richest, or to
speak Vespasian never gathered so much together in his whole life. I know
there are

I say with them that have undertaken to write and have known it in the
country, or

The ordinary tribute which is due for every one that has a fire and
dwelling, is of two Mases by the year, which is a kind of money in value as
much as twelve pence of our English money: and although this tribute be very
small, and that the Loytias, who make a good part of the realm, nor the
governors, officers, captains, nor soldiers, pay not any thing; yet the
multitude of people is so great, as only that which is given for the expense
of the kings person, and his palace, with that which the rights of customs,

In fine gold, from seventeen to two and twenty carats, they give him four
millions two hundred fifty six thousand nine hundred Tahes, whereof every one
is worth

In Rice, which is the ordinary food of the realm, and of the neighbor
countries, sixty

The Forces.


Notwithstanding that he has in every province a Council of war, and in like
manner a captain general, and many men entertained, so as in an instant he
may levy great armies both by sea and land, according to the occasions which
shall be offered: yet he also

They set sentinells by night, and change them at their hours, and there are
some which always go the round with a good number of soldiers. And the better
to keep the towns in peace, it is not lawful for them to bear any offensive
or defensive arms, unless they be soldiers whom the king entertaines,
neither may they have any in their houses, or carry them in the fields.
Besides all this, the king has in the town of Taybin,

The soldiers of this realm are of two sorts: the one are borne in those
towns where places from father to son, and if any chance to die without
heirs, the king (...)

Every troop of a thousand men has a Captain and an Ensign beater, and
every company of a hundred has in like manner a Captain and an Ensign
bearer which depend of the other: wherefore to know the number of men which are
in a great army, it is only needful to reckon the Ensigns of a thousand men
which are very well known.

The horsemen have four swords hanging at their saddles, and fight with two at
once with great dexterity. They are accustomed to enter into battle being
environed with many of their household servants on foot, who are furnished and
armed as well as possible they can. These horsemen are politic and expert in
matters of war as well as the



F. Martin Her^^e was in this realm (which was in a time of peace) was as
follows.

In the province of Paguia, whereas the king lives most commonly, there were
two millions, one hundred and fifty thousand foot, and four hundred thousand
horsemen:

Upon the frontiers of the realm there are very small forts, but toward
Tartaria they have their wall whereof we have made mention, which is a safe
rampire for the whole

The Government.
ALl these great Provinces which we have formerly described, are under the
dominion does wonderfully daunt the courage of those people, and makes them
rather slaves than

They have laws written for above two thousand years, which continue in the
same estate they were in the beginning, as the Chinois affirm. And for that
the study of this law is the gate whereby they enter into honors and public
charges, many study it seriously, and do nothing but dispute among themselves
of politic affairs, and of the means how to govern the Estate well: and
when occasion is offered, they are curious to learn of strangers which come
into their Ports. The king entertaines professors in a manner in all his
towns. They choose infants in Schools, and young men well advanced, whom they
send unto the University, where there are men which have a great care over

Whenas any Visitor has ended his visitation of the province, he causes a
public proclamation to be made, whereby he ordains, That all the Scholars
which will take the degree of Loytia (which is as much as that of Doctor
amongst us, although the word of Loytia signifies in their language a Knight)
should come unto the chief Town: being there all assembled at the time
appointed, and presenting themselves before the Visitor,

On the day appointed to give the degree, all the Loytias assemble again
together with the Visitor in the Kings hall, where they made the examination,
being all in good order, and in their best apparel, they come in that should
receive the degree, being in their hose and doublets, every one having before
him a godfather, with the ornaments which he is to give his godsonne; which
marks or ornaments eue^ie one demands with great humility, of the Visitor,
kneeling upon his knee. Whereupon the Visitor causes

The king has in the city of Tabin a council composed of 12 auditors or
counselors, that are far off, having a desire their post should come as soon
as the rest, send many and

The provinces of Paquia, and Tolanchia are governed by the kings great
council, by the ministry of officers which are sent thither; and the 13
other provinces have every one a vice roy or governor, whom they call Insuanto,
who make his abode in the chief town. And although officers and men of justice
within the realm are generally called Loytias, yet every one of them has a
particular name according to the office which he bears.



When as they are in the hall where they hold the council (which is in the
viceroys

Besides these, there are also other private officers, as the Tompo, who has
the care of

If any one fails in that which concerns his charge, they presently put a
little flagge into his hand, and make him to hold it kneeling, until that the
audience does rise, and then the Judge commands the executioner (who is there
present) to beat him, who gives him as many blows as the offense seems to
deserve; and this is not infamous among them, for that it is an ordinary thing.

In all suits, as well civil as criminal, the Judges proceed always by
writing, and the reasons which they deliver, truth may be the better known:
and whenas they cannot

Whenas any one of these ten will change his street, or go to dwell in some
other town, or undertake a long journey, he is bound to ring a little bell, or
a copper basin, throughout his quarter, ten days before he goes, and to
advertise his neighbors of his intent, and of the place whether he goes, to
the end, that if he owes any money, or they have lent him any thing, they may
demand it before his departure. And if any one go

As for such as owe, and will not pay, the debt being verified, they have
execution against their goods, and if they have not wherewithal to satisfy,
they are put in prison, giving them a certain time to pay it, and if they pay
it not within that time, or satisfy their creditors, they are whipped gently for
the first time, and then they have a second term limited unto them, within the
which if they do not satisfy, they are whipped more sharply than at the first,
after which they prescrible a longer time, which if they do not keep, they
are most cruelly beaten: for this reason, every man is careful to pay what





At this day the governors of ports dispense sometimes with their going forth,
notwithstanding

The Judges and Governors do also suffer strangers for gifts to enter into
their ports, and to buy and to sell their commodities, giving them this leave
upon condition that they shall not go up and down their towns, not stay to
observe any thing that is secret. They give this leave in writing upon a
plaistered board, the which strangers set up on the prow of their ships whenas
they come into any port, to the end the guards of that place

Their poor beg not in the streets, nor at their temples whereas they pray
unto their idols, and there is a law by the which they are forbidden to beg,
and all others are enioined not to give them any thing that ask, but to
declare them unto the Judge of the poor, who is always one of the chief of
every place, and has no other care but to provide strumpet, and these young
women have a mother among them which dresseth them, and

Poor widows which are in necessity may sell their children to relieve them,
and therefore there are many rich merchants which traffic much therein, buying
young virgins whom they breed up very carefully, teaching them to sing, to play
of instruments, and such like: then when they are come to the state of women,
they lead them to certain houses appointed for strumpets. The first day that
they put a maiden to this trade, before they prostitute her in a public place
they lead her before a Judge whom the king

As for little boys whose mothers do also sell them for need, they put them
to a trade, and when they have learned it, they are to serve him that breeds
them up for a certain time; after which they are bound to give them their
liberties, and moreover to seek them wives, to marry them, and to settle them
in some place where they may get their living, whereunto they are constrained
by the course of justice, if they will not do it willingly. On the other side
young men are bound for an acknowledgement of the benefit they have received,
to go unto them that have bred them up the first day of every year, and some
other days with certain presents.

In the buying of commodities they use no money coined, but to prevent all
deceit, they buy and sell by the weight of silver clipped, and to that end they
carry a pair of sheers in their bosoms with a pair of balance in a case of
wood. If there be any question of greater weight, they have scales in their
houses with weights having the kings mark: they coin no money, but pieces of
copper of a farthing value pierced through and tied together, which serves to
supply silver that is weighed, or else to buy small commodities. Usurers (a
plague to a commonweal) being surprised in their villainies, are among other
punishments condemned in great fines. It is only lawful for lame men,
impotent, and blind men, among the meaner sort to lend money to interest for
their relief.

The Religion.




They do also hold a great number of men for Saints, which have exceeded
others in valor, knowledge, or industry, or that have led an austere life,
and in like manner those which have lived without doing wrong to any man, whom
they call in their language Pausaos, that is to say, very happy. They do
sacrifice also unto the devil, although

The first of these Saints or Idols was called Sichia, which comes out of the
realm of Trantheyco, that lies toward the West. This was the inuenter of the
religious men and women which are in the realm, who live in common without
marrying, and are perpetually kept in. And for that Sichia did wear no hair,
they that follow him have none also.

They have moreover, a Goddess or Saint, called Quanina, who was daughter to
king Tzonton, that had three daughters, whereof he married two, and intending
also to marry Quanina, she would not, saying, That she had made a vow to
heaven to live always in chastity. The father was much discontented, and for
despite put her into a place in manner of a Monastery, causing her to carry
water and wood, and to make clean a great garden which he had. The Chinois
report, that Apes came unto her to help her, that the Saints of heaven drew
water for her, that birds made clean the garden with their bills, and that
great beasts came from the mountains to bring her wood; the which the king her
father knowing, and conceiving that she did it by inchauntment, he caused the
place to be set on fire, wherein she was: she seeing that they burnt this place
for her occasion, would have put into her mouth a great silver pin wherewith
the fastened her

They do also hold one for a Saint called Neoma, borne at Cochi, in the
province of Oquiam. They say she was daughter to one of the chief of the
country, and that refusing to be married, she fled into an Island right
against Ingoa, whereas she died, having led a very austere life, and doing
many fal^e miracles. They that travel by Sea, ca^rie her Idol upon the poope
of their ships, and call upon it commonly, off^ri^g sacrifices



They use also another kind of lot, casting many little sticks into a vessel,
upon every one of which there is a letter written: these being mingled well
together, a young child puts his hand into the vessel, and draws out one,
then looking what letter it has, they take a book, and seeking out that leaf
which begins with this letter, they interpret that which they find in this
leaf, for that thing which moved them to make the lot.

They have also this custom, to have recourse unto the devil whenas any
affliction

Tayn, by his great knowledge divided the earth from heaven, and that heaven
remained in the upper part, the earth descending down, according to her
natural inclination. This Tayn created a man of nothing, whom they call
Panson, and a woman named Pansona. This Panson, by the power which Tayn gave
him, did also create another man of nothing, which was called Tanhom, with
Tanhom was a man of great knowledge, so as he gave names to all things created,
and understood, by the doctrine of Tayn, the virtue of all things, and the
means to apply them to the body to our all diseases. This Tanhom, and his
brethren, had many children, namely, Teyencom the greatest had twelve, and the
Tuhucom had nine, and the rest also had many. They believe that the rac^s of
these men have continued ninety thousand years, and that at the end of this
term all men failed, for that Tayn would be revenged of some wrong they had
done him, and also envying for that besides his instructions they understood in
a manner as much as himself, and did not acknowledge him for superior, as
they had promised when as he did inspi^e this knowledge into them. After this
it happened that heaven fell, and suddenly Tayn came to raise it again and
created another man upon earth called Lotzitza^, with two horns out of which
came a sweet savor, whereby many men and women were borne. In the end this
Lotzitzan vanished away, leaving many men and women in Lotzitzan was called
Azalan, who lived nine hundred years. Presently after his death heaven created
a man called Atzion, making his mother called Lutin to be with child with the
head of a lion which was in heaven. He was borne in the town of Truchin in the
province of Canton, and lived eight hundred years. After him came Vsao, and
then there were many people in the world who did eat nothing but raw things.
This Vsao taught them to make little cottages with trees, to defend themselves
from wild beasts which did annoy them much, and he instructed them also how to
make gar^ents.

After this came one called Huntzuy, who was the inuenter of fire, and taught
how they Hautzabon had a child whose name was Ocheutey, who invented many
things, and ordained marriages. They affirm that he came miraculously from
heaven for the good of the earth, for that his mother going upon the way found
the tracke of a man, and setting her foot thereon was environed with lightning
which came from heaven, and was instantly conceived with child. This Ocheutey
had a son called Ezomlon who invented physic, astrology, and divination,
and taught them how to manure the land. They report that he did eat seven kinds
of ^^nimous herbs, which did him no harm, and that he lived four hundred
years. He had a son called Vitey, who reduced Chinato a realm.

They do all in general believe the immortality of the soul, and in like
manner the

Whenas they will pray for the dead, one of them who is l^ke unto a priest or
sacrificer, caries a little drum, and one of the nouises a kind of clapper,
and another a bell, and they make an alter whereon they set such as they hold
for Saints and Aduocats for the dead, and they instantly per^ume them with
Storax, Insence, and other sweet smells. After this they prepare five or six
tables covered with much meat, for the dead, and for the Saints, and presently
at the sound of the drum clapper and bells, they begin to sing certain
canticles about the quire, and the young nouises go often unto the altar to
offer certain orisons written in paper. They spend in a manner the whole night
in these ceremonies

As for the common people, they believe that the souls which live ill before
they go to hell (which place they think should not be settled until the world
takes end) are sent for their misdeeds into the bodies of Bugles and other
beasts; and they that have lived well into the bodies of kings and noblemen,
whereas they remain in great joy.

There are in all their towns and boroughes many places made like unto
monasteries,



By the laws of the realm the eldest son of a family can be no religious
man, and

THE GENEALOGY OF THE KINGS OF CHINA.
Vitey was he, who (as we have said) reduced China into a realm, we will begin
with him and come unto the king that reigns at this day. Vitey was then the
first king of China, and they report of him among other things that he was as
high as seven measures of China, which is esteemed to be about four else and
two thirds. Moreover they say that he was six spans broad between the
shoulders, and that he was as valiant in mind as great in body. He had a
captain called Lincheon, who besides his valor and force was also exceeding
wise; so as he made subject to king Vitey all that great continent of country,
and made him ^earefull to all the world. They hold that this king invented the
fashion of their garments, the dying of silks, and the making of ships, and in
like manner the saw to cut wood. Above all, they say that he was a great
architect, and that he made a great number of stately buildings. He invented
also the mu^ler of silk which they use in that country, and was the first
which brought in the use to wear gold, pearl, and precious stones, and
garments of cloth of gold, silver, and silk. He distributed all the
inhabitants of his realm into cities, towns, and villages, and ordained all
the trades and offices, commanding that no man should deal in any other trade
but that of his father, without special leave from the

Vitey, who reigned two th^usand two hundred fifty seven years. I will
^orbeare to name them, least I should be two tedious, but I will rest satisfied
to set them down only which seem necessary, to declare the succession ^f the
crown, since the one hundred and sixt^ene kings, whereof we have made mention,
unto him that reigns at this present.

The last king of the race of Vitey was called Tzintzon, and this was he that
made that great wall, seeing himself assailed in many places by the
Tartarians. In the end (for that Agntzi, who was heir to the realm. This
Tzintzon being dead, and his son also, they took one for their king who was
called Anchosau, a man of great spirit, and full of valor, who reigned twelve
years.

Futey, his son, succeeded him, who reigned seven years, and died young.

After his death, his mother (who was of the blood royal) came to reign, and
governed the realm to the content of all men for the space of eighteen
years: and for that she had no heirs male, a son which her husband Anchosau
had by another wife succeeded her. This king reigned three and twenty years,
and had for successor

Cuntey, his son, who reigned sixteen years, and eight months.

Huntey, son to Cuntey reigned after him two and fifty years, and left for
his successor

Chantey, his son, who reigned thirteen years.

Ochantey, his son, succeeded him, and reigned five and twenty years, and
three months.

Cantey, son to Ochantey, reigned sixteen years, and two months.

Tzentzey, his son, ra^gned six and twenty years, and four months.

Anthey, son to Tzentzey, reigned but six years.

Pintatey, son to Anthey, reigned five years.

Tz^ntzumy, brother to Pintatey, succeeded him, for that he was not married
when he died: and he reigned only three years, and seven months.

Huyhannon, brother also to the two others, succeeded him, and reigned six
years.

Cubum, son to Huyhannon, reigned two and thirty years.

Benthey, son to Cubum, reigned two and thirty years.

Vnthey, his son, reigned thirteen years.

Othey succeeded him, and reigned seventeen years, and five months.

Yanthey, son to Othey, reigned but eight months.

Antey, his son, held the crown nineteen years.

Tantey, his son, died soon after his father, having swayed the scepter but
three months.

Chitey, his brother, reigned but a year.

Quantey, their brother, succeeded them, and was king one and twenty years.

Linthey, his son, reigned two and twenty years.

Yanthey, son to Linthey, reigned one and thirty years. He was a man of a
weak capacity, so as his subjects hated him; and a nephew of his, called
Laupy, rebelled against him, being assisted by two Knights that were brethren,
valiant men, who were then in Court, whereof the one was called Quathey, and
the othey Trunthey, who sought to make Laupy King. The uncle knew it, but he
was so faint hearted, and ill assisted, as he neither could nor durst prevent
it: which was the cause of many factions within the realm, there rising four
Tyrans, whose names were Cincoan, Sosoc, Guansian, and Guanfer. Laupy made
war against them, under a color to favor and assist his uncle; and having
continued Cincoan, taking a daughter of his to wife, and presently made war
against the other three Tyrans, with the help of his father in law.

This realm was then divided into three parts, whereof the one, and the
chief, followed Laupy after the death of his uncle, and the other Sosoc, the
third Cincoan, father in law to Laupy. And the realm continued thus for some
time, until that

Cuithey, son to Laupy, came to reign after his father; against whom a
Tyrant, called Chimbutey, rebelled, but he slew him, and he was so valiant as
he united the whole realm, having bin divided one and forty years, he
reigned afterward alone 25 years.

Fontey, his son, reigned after him seventeen years. And to be short, there
were fifteen kings of this line, who reigned one hundred seventy six years.

Quiontey was the last of these kings, against whom did rise the Tyrant Tzobu.
Of this man's blood there were eight kings, who reigned sixty two years:
Against the last, called Sutey, did rise one Cotey, of whose race there were
five kings, who reigned four and twenty years.

The last, called Othey, was slain by one Dian, and there were five kings of
his line, who Tzuy, and there were three kings of his race, who reigned seven
and thirty years.

Tonco revolted against the last, who governed the realm well, there were one
and twenty kings of his family, who reigned two hundred ninety four years.

The last, being called Troncon, married one who had been his fathers wife, a
wonderful fair woman, whose name was Bausa, drawing her out of a monastery
whereinto she had retired her self to be a religious woman. In the end, this
wife caused him to be slain, and then she governed the realm alone forty
years. Their Histories say, that this woman was wonderful dissolute, and that
having abandoned her self to the noblemen of the realm, she married a man of
base condition, that she might more freely follow Tautzom, who caused severe
justice to be done of this wicked woman. There were seven kings of his race,
who reigned 120 years.

The last was Coucham, against whom rebelled one called Dian, who seized upon
the realm, and there were two kings of his line, who reigned eighteen years.

Outon revolted against the last of these, and there were three kings of his
house, who

Outsim did rise against the last of these three, and left after him two
successors of his line, who reigned only nine years, and three months.

Tozo revolted against the last, and he, and his son, reigned but four
years.

Anchiu had war against the son of Tozo, and slew him, and then succeeded
him in the realm: He and two others of his family reigned ten years.

Zaitzon, of the line of Vitey the first king, revolted against the last of the
race of Achiu, and flew him. There were seventeen kings of the descendents of
this Zaitzon, who reigned all in peace for the space of three hundred and
twenty years.

The last of this line was called Tepim, against whom the great Cham of
Tartaria, called Vzou, invaded China, and made himself master thereof; so as
nine Tartarian kings reigned there during ninety three years.

Tzinzoum, the last of the nine, was so wicked, as he was the cause that the
realm was reunited, and that all did secretly rise to make one called Hombu
their king, a man of great valor, of the line of the ancient kings, who
gathering together great forces, in the end expelled the Tartarians out of the
realm.

There have been twelve kings of the family of this Hombu, accounting him
that reigns at this present: the eleven precedent reigned two hundred years.
He that swaies the scepter at this day, is called Bonog, and succeeded to the
crown by the death of his elder brother, who died with the fall of a horse.
They hold him to be a man of a good disposition,


The Contents.
THe length, breadth, greatness, and confines of Iapon, divided into three
members; and how many realms or seigneuries either of them contains. 2.
Description of the ancient Estate of this country governed at that time by
one prince alone called Vo, or Dair. 3. Of Meaco the chief town of Iapon:
Os^ac^^e, 4. Bounty of the air of this realm, abounding in rice, mettalls,
gold, high cedars which are exceeding big; and in beasts and foul. Of two
admirable mountains, whereof one passes the clouds, and the other burns
continually, and vomits forth flames of fire. 5. Of the subtlety of wit, and
disposition of body of the Iaponois: the manner of their hair, of their meat,
drink, and sleep: the color of their faces, their language, and the letters
wherewith they write: their arms, and their Academie to instr^ct youth. 6.
Their wealth in the traffic of rice, pearls, gold, and precious stones. 7.
Of the kings revenue. 8. Of the sea forces, and government of this Estate; and
first of the frequent change of princes, and gouernor's of provinces. 9. Of the
three principal magistrates, Zazo, Vco, Cubacama, and of the five orders into
which the people are divided. 10. Of the punishment 11. Of the impiety of the
Iapanois, denying the prouidencie of God, and the immortality of the soul:
and of their priests called Bonzes, divided into eleven different sects. 12. Of
their temples, and of their gods Fotoques and Cames; and the ordinary
apparition of the devil in diverse forms: and what policy he uses to make
himself to be worshipped. 13. Their ceremonies in funeral pompes. 14. Of the
Jesuits of Iapon, and the conversion of the people to the Christian faith by
Xauier and others of that company.

Marcus Paulus Zipangry, is a body composed of many Islands, separated by
small gulfes, straights, and turnings of the sea, and this mass of islands
extends from the one and thirtieth degree of altitude unto the nine and
thirtieth. The length of all this country is near two hundred leagues: the
breadth is not equal, for in some places it is not above ten leagues, and at
the most thirty. These Islands toward the East look to New Spain, upon the
North to the Tartarians and other unknown and savage people; on the West lies
China, and to the South certain unknown lands, with a great space of sea
betwixt them. They contain sixty and six petty realms, and are divided into
three principal members, whereof the first and called chief Iapon, contains
fifty three seigneuries or realms; the mightiest of them are those of Meaco
and Amagunce. The king of Meaco has under him four and twenty or six and
twenty realms; and he

The most famous of all these principalities is that of Coquina, in which
stands the famous town of Meaco. In former times all Iapon was subject to one
prince, who was called Vo or Dair, until that one of these Monarchs abandoning
himself too much to his Faxiba, one of his chief captains, who subdued at
the least fifty realms, and such is Taicosama or Taico at this day.



They do also esteem in these Islands the town of Fiongo eighteen leagues
from Meaco. This town was ruined for the most part, in the time of Nobunanga,
and in the year 1596, a great part was overthrown with an Earthquake, and
soon aftter it was burnt as some hold opinion. They do also place Amangasaquy,
a town which is fair by situation, five leagues from the sea, and right
against Sacaia, and in like manner those of Vosuquin, Funay, Tozam, and many
others.

The Quality.
Marcus Paulus the Venetian says, that in this country there is such
abundance of gold, as in his time the kings palace was covered with plates of
gold, as we may see the Churches in France and other countries covered with
lead. There are many trees like unto ours, and in some places the cedars are so
tall and great, as carpenters make pillars for their temples, and masts for any
ship whatsoever. Their meadows and fields are full of troops

The Manners.


They feed and ^eepe upon these mats, and put off their shoes when they go to
meat, least they should pollute them. The poorer sort, especially upon the Sea
coast, live of herbs, rice, and fish; but the rich make great chee^e, and
treat themselves delicatly:


THey have great traffic of many things at Iapon, for that besides the Rice
which

As for the king, besides the duty which the other kings owe him, to give him
presents, and to serve him both in war and peace, he has two millions of
gold for his yearly

The Forces, and Government.
WE may also easily conjecture what the forces of this prince are, for that
Faxiba, who governed before him that reigns at this present, had a dessigne,
after that

number of men. They distribute their Estates to their confident friends, to
have

Moreover, for that the princes change daily, they cannot be respected by the
people as their natural lords, and these princes, having no assurance of the
continuance of their authority, do not effect one estate more than another:
but hoping to attain a better with the like facility they got the first, they
put it in hazard: and sometimes alone, sometimes in the company of others,
they pursue diverse enterprises, and by this means hold all these Islands in
perpetual war. But Faxiba, for that he would be more absolute, did often use
to transport the princes from one country to another, to the end the lords
being

Moreover, he would that all these changes, as well they that were best
preferred, as others that had the worst portions, should go and do him
reverence and homage, and give him rich presents yearly: by means whereof he
drew unto himself the greatest part of the riches of Iapon. Moreover, he
employed the people in the building of diverse admirable Palaces, stately
Churches, good Forts, and fair Towns; and he had at

ZaZo) has the charge of sacred things among them: the second, called Vco,
has the command of dignities and honors: the third, whose Cubacama,
disposes of peace and war.

This people is divided into five orders, whereof of the first is of those that
have any authority or command: and these are all called Tones by a common
name; and yet there are other degrees of dignity amongst them, as amongst us,
those of Kings, Dukes, Marquises, and Earls: the other order is of those who
have the charge of sacrifices, and divine service, and these have their heads
and chins shaven, making profession to live without women, and they are divided
into many sects: but they are all by one general name called Bonzes: the third
is of Bourgesses, and the rest of the nobility: the fourth contains Artizans
and Seafaring men: and the last is of Laborers.




THe people of Iapon are given to all sorts of impiety, and hold such strange
opinions Nobunanga in the year 1551, he assailed their mountain, slew many of
them; and ruined four hundred temples.

The gods most esteemed in Iapon, are the Fotoques and the Cames, whereof the
first have spoken, where he found many bones of dead men. By this means he
freed his father

There are among these Idolaters a good number of Christians, which are more
zealous than we; so as notwithstanding that the kings of Tenze had put many of
them to death, and caused them to endure great torments and afflictions; yet
there are many which would never abandon the religion which they had embraced.
Father Xauier and Turian, Jesuits, have labored long there and and converted
many souls, for that in Amanguce they did number two thousand Christians in
the year 1556, and at Funie as many. In the year 1559, the number of
Neophites or new Conuertites was one hundred and thirty at Firande. In the
year 1562, two that were brothers in law to to the king of Cangoxima were
baptized with their wives. In the year 1563, Sumitancle king of Omure made
himself a Christian, and was called Bartholomew; then the prince of Simabara
did Francis, and the king of Arima was baptized and called Protaise; so as at
that time there were in those countries about one hundred and forty thousand
Christians, and above two hundred Churches. There were one hundred and
thirteen Jesuits, whereof there were forty priests, and seventy and three
laymen, of the which Just and Vacandono. In the year 1587, there were
converted about six thousand persons, and the year following almost as many.
The king of Bugen, and the successor of the realms of Cicungo and Cicuge, and
the lords of the Islands of Ojan, Gomotto, Genzure, and Xiqui(which is a part
of the island of Amacuse) did the like. This was the estate of the Christian
religion at Iapon, unto the year 1590. Since, there have been great wars, and
great persecutions against the Christians, even under Taicosama, who reigns at
this present: yet the faith does still flourish and extends it self in many
places.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE ESTATE OF THE KING OF BRAMA, OR OF PEGV.
The Contents.
1. NOtable conquests made by a Lieutenant of Pegu, being revolted against his
lord. 2. Whence it grows that they levy so easily in those countries of
Afric, and in the East, such huge armies: and what means they have to
entertain them. 3. An army of twelve hundred thousand and Aethiopians put to
rout by Paul Dias, a Captain of Portugal. 4. What realms the king of Pegu
does at this day enjoy: The situation and greatness of this State, and the
chief Ports. 5. Description of the realm of Siam; the situation and circuit,
with the provinces and chief towns. 6. Of Muantay. 7. Of Camboie. 8. Of
Cam^^e, Syncampure, Quedoe, Aue, and Verme. 9. Pegu abounding in Rice, little
Horses, Elephants, Parrats, Ciuet Cats, Canes as big as a hogshead, Rhubies,
Gum, Pepper, Benjamin, Musk, Aloes, Gold, Tygres, and Lions. 10. The
disposition of them of Pegu, given to women, and delights, 11. Barbarous
manners of the inhabitants of Camboye, whereas the women cast themselves into
their husbands funeral fire, and the noblemen into that of their prince. 12.
Garments of cotton serving them of Ta^massery for arms; their targuets of the
^arkes of trees, their drink of water with sugar, and their beds of cotton.
13. Solemn funerals of sacrificers, and their ceremonies. 14. Their ri^hes in
the traffic of Rice, Horses, Elephants, Gold, Silver, Gum, Musk, Precious
stones, Butter, Oil, and Pepper. 15. Of the Kings g^^^ consisting of 6000 men,
and 30000 Elephants: Of the Timars, and the good number of s^^ldiers which are
in the realm of Pegu. 16. Of the lands of that country, held all in fee of
the King for life, and not in perpetuity; and of the punishments ordained for
murderers, and debttors. 17. Of the religion of this country, and what their
belief is of the Divinity: Of the two 18. What opinion they hold of the
creation and continuance of the world: what gods they worship, and of the
condition and place of souls when they are separated from the body. 19. Of
the conuents of their Priests, having their heads and beards shaven, some
having rents, and others living upon alms.

which tend toward the North, and they have in length above one hundred and
(...)

He attempted also to make himself master of Siam, and came in view of Odie
the chief town of the realm of Muantay; but he prevailed little. He went to
this enterprise with three hundred thousand men, and spent 3 months to make
his way through craggie mountains, great forests, and inaccessible places,
where he lost one hundred and twenty thousand men, and carried away two
hundred thousand of the country of Siam, prisoners. After his return, having
recovered his former estate, he assailed the realm of Pegu, and conquered it:
after which, in the year of our Redemption 1567, he returned to the enterprise
of Siam, and vanquished the king, who killed himself with poison:

I say then first, that they make war either upon the frontiers, or in
countries far off, D. Sebastian king of Portugal, whenas he consulted upon
the enterprise of Barbary, that he had need of three torrents for this war,
the one of victuals, the other of men, and the third of money; and another
said, that to make war he must have money without end. But if all war
require a great charge, that which is made a far off demands as it were an
infinite treasure.

The great Turk has made trial hereof in the war of Persia, whereas so
powerful a John Jacques Tri^^lce, a very famous Captain, whenas one demanded
of him what things were necessary for the war, said, That he must have
always three things ready, the first was money, the second money, and the
third money. That which I say, must be understood when a prince draws the
charges of the war from his own countries, for that sometimes it happens
that an army entertaines it self as it marches by her own conquests,
Alexander the Great, and in the time of our grandfathers, great Tamberlaine
entertained very great armies for a long time out of their countries, for that
entering into provinces whereas they scarc^ found any one that Solomon came to
besiege in the year 1566, with three hundred and fifty thousand

But if they make not war far from their own countries, it is no difficult
thing to raise great armies in a short time: and to leave all ancient
examples, we read that they of Gant in Flaunders have sometimes opposed
themselves against the power of the French king with four score thousand
fighting men, for that their country was good and well peopled, and the war
being upon their frontires, or within their province, every man did (...) unto
it with provision to feed them certain days. But they could not continue long
in this estate, for that both provision and money did fail them, and they were
forced to r^^^ne some to the plongh, and others to their shops, from whence
they had their main^^^ce.

It appears then by these reasons that they may with more ease entertain one
hund^^d thousand soldiers, than we in Europe can do forty thousand. We must
add hereunto that the carriage of ordnance, munition, and other things
thereunto belonging is

These nations having such advantages of the bounty of the air, and of the
facility Belus, Ninus, Semiramis, of Cambyses, of Cyrus, of Darius, and of
Sesostris, and of latter times by the Arabians, Tartarians, and Mogores: but to
omit far fetched examples, yea to purchase credit of things past, by the
success of things present, that which happened in Angola in the year 1584 is
very famous.

Paul Diaz a Portugal Captain incountred in this country the second day of
February an army of 1200 thousand Aethiopians, which the king of Angola
opposed against Xerxes who drew to field the greatest army that was ever
written of, made his preparation seven years before.

But to return to the king of Brama, of late years he took the ports of
Martabana and Tarnasser, then turning his armies sometimes toward the North,
and sometimes to the West, he annoied the princes of Caor and Tipure, and made
himself master of the realm of Macin, and Aracan, having led to this
enterprise three hundred thousand men, and forty thousand Elephants.





Siam is a very great town, and fit for traffic; standing upon the bank of
the broad

Camboye stands upon the banks of the river of Menon, which coming out of
China,

^ampae is a sea town which gives the name unto the whole country. That of
Sin^^^re Ptolomee sets the town of Zabe; but Magni thinks ^^ father Ptolomees
Palure, from whence they go that will pass by sea into Chryse, or to (...). As
for the town of Malaca, I have described it in the discourse of the king of
(...). Quedoe is a famous town by reason of the pepper which grows in that
^^^lorie.

(...) was a rich kingdom of the Brames or Bracmanes, before that the king of
Brame

The Quality.
The ^oile of the realm of Pegu is wonderful fertile, and fit to bear wheat.
They

(...) country of Siam is plain, but environed with mountains, full of
grass, (...), Toward the East, upon the frontier of Cauchinchina, there are
great forests, in which

The country of Cambaya abounds in Rice, Flesh, and Fish, as also in Horses,
and Elephants, and it yields some little gold. The realm of Campae has
plenty of gold, and of all things necessary for the life of man. There is
growing in their mountains the best Alloes that can be seen, the which all
the nations of the East esteem no less than silluer. The realm of Aue has
store of Gurnets and Rubies, which they gather in the mountains. They feed a
certain kind of beast which bears musk, and in like manner great store of
Elephants and Horses; and the land abounds in all things necessary for the
life of man.

The Manners of the Ancients.
LEast I should distaste the Reader with importune repetitions, I will refer
him(touching this point) to the discourse of the realm of Narsinga, where he
may first see in general the ancient manners of the Indians, and in
particular, those of any country which are now subject to the king of Barme.

The Manners at this day.
Solomon. But the foolish Peguins say, that they came of a dog, and a woman
of China, who remained in this country after a shipwreck. They





Whenas the sacrificing priests chance to die, they burn their bodies, and
make a solemn


THe wealth of these realms may well be conceived by their fertility. For the
country

The realm of Siam sends forth pepper, musk, benjoin, gold, silver, and
tin, and (...) an infinite number of horses, and elephants. That of Camboie
yields some little (...) and does furnish strangers with many horses and
elephants. The realm of Cam^^^ reapes small profit but from the wood of
alloes. Quedoe is renowned by reason of the pepper which is exceeding good, and
for this cause it is sought after by merchant st^^^gers which come into those
parts. In the realm of Aue there are many merchants of precious stories,
especially of rubies, and garnets: they sell also some store of musk, and many
horses and elephants. By these things we may judge that the king of Bra^^, who
has countries furnished with so many things which are sought for from all

The Forces.


The Government.


Among them of Tarnasser, murder is punished with death without any remission.
Debtors are condemned to satisfy, if the creditor shows the schedule; for that
they write

The Religion.


The priests which are much honored in this country are attired in yellow
cloth (for that all that is yellow, for the resemblance it has with the Sun
and gold, is dedicated to God) and no women may enter into their houses, whereas
these priests feed not any hens for that they are females. It ^s so great an
offense among them to drink wine, as they stone those priests that are
convicted to have drunk any. They fast often, but especially

They have an infinite number of Idols, and among other things they worship the
four elements, and every man at his death makes choice of the manner of his
funerals, according to the element which he has worshipped, they that have
adored the earth are buried, and they that have borne any honor to fire are
burnt: they that have reverenced

In Pegu, the wiser sort make innumerable worlds successively one after
another, and an infinite number of gods, yet not all together, but more or less
to every world. They attribute five to that wherein we are, and say that there
are four already past. They believe that the world shall end by fire, and that
it renews continually with his proper gods. They put also certain men in the
number of their gods, but with condition, that they shall pass before into
fish, beasts, and birds of all sorts. They hold that there are three places
appointed after this life, that is to say, one of torments, another of
delights, and the third of satisfaction, or abbrogating, which they call Miba.
They hold, that the souls remain

They have conuents of priests near unto the Temples of their Idols, being
above three hundred for every place. They have the head and the chin shaven,
and wear long gowns

A DISCOVRSE OF THE
The Contents.
1. OF the great extention of the empire of the great Mogor, which contains
seven and forty realms; and of the establishment of two new Princes in this
Estate. 2. Description of the realms which he possesses, and first of that of
Cambaya: the 3. Of the realm of Bengala. 4. Of Sanque. 5. Of Dely. 6. Of the
beginning and spring of Inder, the chief river of the realm of Cambaya: and
of the fruitfulness of the country in Wheat, Rice, Wax, Sugar, Incens,
Fruits, Spices, Cotton, Silk, Elephants, Dromadaries, Horses, Precious stones,
and great Canes. 7. Of the rich armies of the ancient inhabitants; their free
conjunction, and shameless acquaintance with women in public, and the cruel
custom to massacre their parents being old. 8. Of the barbaroushesse of this
nation, eating the bodies of their parents deceased. 9. What their gods and
sacrifices were. 10. Of the disposition of this people, their color,
constitution of bodies apparel, marriages, and witchcrafts. 11. Their riches
in the traffic of Cottons, Silk, Spices, and Precious stones, and of the
kings treasures of Gold and Silver. 12. Their forces in the great 13. The
number of horse, foot, and Elephants, which the great Mogor may at need draw to
field. 14. A discourse of the lets, proceedings, and increase of this empire.
15. Of three sects of religion among this people: Paganism, Mahometisme, and
Iudaisme.





The realm of Bengala is also very great, and contains many towns as well
Maritime

The realm of Sangue, called by some others Citor, has the chief town of
the Maffeus) is situated in a place of advantage, having twelve miles in
circuit, and many goodly houses as well public or private, and is fortified
with very strong bastions, and enclosed with good walls. This country was in a
manner in our time subject to a woman called Crementina, who was as courageous
as fair, and ha^ing revolted against king Badurius, to whom she paid a
certain tribute, she was dispossessed of the town of Citor, where she had
fortified herself with thirty thousand foot, and two thousand horse: but
since, the great Mogor has made himself


THe realm of Cambaya is watered by many rivers, whereof the chief is that of
Indus,

The realm of Bengala is watered by the river of Chaberis, to the which some
give the name of Guenge at this day, holding it to be the ancient Ganges, and
yet they make mention of another river near unto this, the which flowing from
the mountain Adam to sin. There are also canes of that bigness, as they
serve for barrells and such

The country of Dely, besides the commodities which we have found in other
realms, abounds in horses, elephants, and dromedaries.

The Manners of the ancient.
Tamerlan, and that the Massagetes have inhabited this country; it shall not be
unfitting to speak something of the ancient manners of this people.

They inricht their sword girdles, headpeeces, and pouldrons of their harness
with gold, and moreover the poitrels of their horse and other furniturne were
covered with pure gold, whereof they also made their bits, as Strabo writes.
The ends of their lances were of brass, wherewith they did also trim their
quiuers, they having no use of iron nor silver. Every one of them took a wife,
with whom they did accompany in public and without all shame. If any one of
them desired to have to do with his wife, he had no respect who beheld him,
but only hung his quiver upon the chariot and so went and enjoyed her in the
very view of all men.





The Manners at this day.





BEsides that which I have spoken of cotton and silks, whereof there is such
abundance Maffeus reports of Badurius, who enjoyed (...) the realm of
Cambaya. He says (among other things) that whenas he went to Solomon Emperor
of the Tu^^^^ for succors, and withal he sent a present which was valued at
six hundred thousand crowns: but repenting himself that he (...) ^ought unto
this prince who could give him no speedy assistance, he attempted to (...) the
love of his neighbors the Portugals, not only in suffering them to build a
(...) in the Island of Diu, but also by rare and exquisit presents: whereby we
may con^^^ue what be the riches of the great Mogor, seeing that he not only
enioyes the greatest part of Badurius conquest, but also a great number of
other provinces, most of which

The Forces.
Having set down what the riches of this prince may be, we must come unto his
forces, and having consideration in like manner of Badurius army, which did
consist of Maffeus seems incredible, if we shall confer those forces with
those of the Badurius, he may levy armies whose number alone were able to
strike terror into all his





Moreover, he that has vanquished his enemies, does most commonly fear his
companions, and they that have been sharers in his victory; who to assure
himself of them, must break off his enterprises, and make a retreat sooner
than he desired, or ought. And besides, victories make Captains insolent, and
soldiers mutinous and disobedient, and if the one desire to march on, the
others will not follow them, as it happened to Alexander and Lucullus. We must
not pass over with silence, that great enterprises which succeed enrich private
men, but most commonly they leave the prince without treasure, the Badurius) by
the ruin of those countries through which it does pass and stay, does also
deprive it self of all maintenance: wherefore although the enemy defeat it
not, yet it is consumed by famine, the

And that which does also hinder the proceedings of the Mogor, is the nature of
places: for Mount Caucasus runs through these countries with a thousand
branches, whereof some bound in other realms; and others not content therewith
enuiron them round about, and is unto them as a wall: some stop up the
passages, others make them difficult

We must add hereunto the great loss of time which potent princes make in
their voiages; for that most commonly Summer is spent before they come to the
place appointed; and when they are there, their horses are half dead, and
their soldiers decayed both in number and strength: then comes Winter which is
opposite to the agressor, and favorable to him that defends; for he that
inuades must of necessity keep the field, and endure all the discommodities
of the weather, whilst the others lie in houses, and want not any necessaries:
wherefore all princes that have proiected great enterprises, for that the
difficulties are great to lead great armies from one country unto another,
have been forced to transport their men by sea, or upon rivers, as Germanicus
did in the German

The Mogor has no kind of sea forces, both for that he wants ports, and also
for that he has the Portugals to neighbors, who stop up all the gulf of
Cambaya with two important forts, which be Daman and Diu.

The last reason which stays the Mogor, has been the power of them with whom
he confines, which keep him from extending his dominions toward the East: for
he has for neighbor the king of Barme, who yields nothing unto him in power
and forces, seeing that the enioies so many realms and estates, and has under
him so many warlike nations, and brings such great numbers to field, as he
fears not any opposite power. If the Mogor has extended his Empire betwixt
Ganges and Indus, the other has augmented

The Religion.
THe wretched sect of Mahomet is so dispersed in Europe, Afric, and Asia, as
the greatest realms of the two latter parts of the world are infected with
this error.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE KING OF CALICVT.
The Contents.
1. THe length and breadth of the realm of Calicut, and a description of the
chief town, and the manner of their buildings. 2. The soil abounding in
pepper, and what kind of tree bears this spice: the time and manner how they
plant it, and gather it. 3. Of ginger, aloes, and other fruits which this
country yields, with the manner how to gather it. 4. A description of the
beasts and birds which this country breeds, and among others the Sarau, which
has a better voice than the parret. 5. Of apes and monkies; and of a
wonderful tree which bears dates or nuts, of which they make roapes, cloth
like unto satin, wine, sugar, and oil. 6. Of two kinds of serpents in this
country, whereof the one is not venomous. 7. Of the king of Calicuts marriage,
who never takes a wife until she be deflowred by the chief of their priests.
8. Of the five orders of the realm, and how every Estate lives; especially the
nobility and merchants. 9. Their manner of writing upon the leaves of palm
trees with pens of iron. 10. Their wealth in the traffic of pepper, ginger,
syn^mon, cloves, nutmegs, mace, musk, pearl, cods of spikenard and mirabolans
incens, aloes, camphier, and cassia. 11. Their forces in footmen, and armies at
sea: their arms and manner of fighting. 12. What forces the king may bring as
well to fi^^d, as to sea. 13. The 14. Of the abominable idolatry of them of
Calicut, worshipping the devil with a miter, in an oratorie full of figures of
devils. 15. Of the sacrifices which the Bramins offer unto the devil. 16. A
general pardon celebrated every year by the Bramins, and granted unto the
people in a certain temple of the province.

Pereimall king of all Malabar, who having divided his Estate into many parts,
whenas he meant to go to Meque, there to end his days, he left the name of
Zamarin to this king of Calicut. This realm is but five and twenty leagues
long, and ten broad. The chief town which gives name unto the whole realm is
situated upon the sea, and is three miles long: it has no walls, and
contains about six thousand houses standing a good distance one from another.
It has a mile in length beyond the port called Capocate. The houses of this
town are built low and of small price, for that they find water before they
have digded five foot; so as they cannot lay any deep foundations. Merchants
houses are valued at twenty crowns or there


THe soil of Calicut yields pepper, whereof they gather some within the town.
The Pli^^^ says, that the shrubs of pepper are like unto our Juniper, and that
some in his time ma^ntained, that they did not grow but about Mount Caucasus,
which is directly opposite a^^^nst the Sun: but at this day we find the contrary
by the navigations of the Portugals.

^he country of Calicut does also bear ginger, which is a kind of root that
lies not (...) three or four spans in the ground like unto reeds. Whenas they
draw out the

Calicut they find many beasts as Lions, Bears, S^agges, Goats, Wolves, Oxen,

This country has also store of Apes and Monkeys, which do much annoy
husband^^^^ especially the poorer sort, for that they run up the trees which
are like unto

(...) of this country are very high ^or the most part, and almost as big as
swine, they have four feet which are four cubits long, and they breed and
live in moorish places.

The Manners.




The women are not given to do any thing, but to deck themselves, to seem
more pleasing; so as when they go abroad, although they be naked, yet are they
laden with gold and precious stones hanging at their ears, necks, legs,
arms, and upon their breasts.



The Riches.


The Forces.
IN the province of Malabar they make not war continually on horseback, not so
much

First the soldiers are all gentlemen, and are called Naires. These being
seven years old are sent as it were to the schole of war, whereas certain
men excellent in that art, stretch their sinews and joints, anointing them
often with the oil of Sesame, by which means they get an admirable
disposition of nimblenesse, so as they will turn their joints and members
which way they please, as if they had no bones. After which they do exercise
them continually in the managing of arms, and for that they think no man can
grow excellent in many things, they give themselves to one kind of weapon as
they

There is among the Naires a rank of soldiers, which they call Amoques, who
with great execrations (to the which they submit themselves with their families
and posteri^^^) make profession to revenge the wrongs done to their companions.
But if any one k^^he king, they run with such fury to revenge, as the
greatest dangers cannot stay them: by reason whereof as the number of the
Amoques is great or small, so the kings at the Indies are held more or less
powerful. That which does augment the courage of the Naires, and make them not
to regard dangers, is, for that they have no particular

Edward Pacheco general for (...) king of Portugal, who at that time defended
the king and realm of Cochin, conti^^^^ng in this enterprise the space of five
months, in the which he had two hundred ships of war. In the year 1529 he
besieged the fort which the Portugals had made at Calicut,

As for sea forces, he has showed his power many times: for that being master
of many ports which are much frequented, when he lists he arms a great number
of vessels. It is true that at this day, all the sea forces of the Indies are
much inferior both in regard of ships and soldiers, to those of the
Portugals, to whom the use of defensive arms gives a

The Government.


As for debts, the creditor seeing that his debtor does but satisfy him with
words, he retires the contract, and taking the green bark of some tree, he
pursues the debtor, and having overtaken him, he binds him with this bark,
coniuring him in the behalf of the Bramins and the king, not to remove out of
the place until he has satisfied him. He that is thus coniured stirs not out
of the place until he has paid; for if he made any offer to fly, he should
be put to death without remission.

The Religion.


The king of Calicut has an Oratorie in his palace full of figures of
devils, as fearful as we paint them in these parts, and not much bigger than
medalls: but in the midst



It will not forget a general pardon which they have yearly in December, which
draws

A DISCOVRSE OF THE
The Contents.
1.THe situation of the country of Narsinge, the length, and chief towns,
Narsinge, and Bisnagar. 2. Of the province of Canara, or Concan, and the chief
Sea. towns. 3. Of the fertility of the country, abounding in Corn, Sugar,
Ginger, and other spices, Silk, Cotton, Figs, and Nuts. 4. Manners and
behavior of this people, and generally of all the Indians, divided into
^r^ch^^^nes, descended from Abraham, 5. Of the Hioboles; or Gymnos^^ his^^s,
^earing garments made of the barbes of trees, or of lynnen cloth that is not
combustible: their a^steritie of lafe, and abstinence from ^ine and women:
their exercises to maintain their strength of body and mind; their doctrine^
phylosophie, and subtle discourses with kings of divine and humane things, of
the motions of the heavens, and secrets of nature. 6. Of the Germans, given ^as
he speculation of man's body, to the c^re of diseases, and to divination, and
Negromancie. 7. Of the orders and Estates whereof the Indian people consist,
that is to s^y, Laborers exempt from the wa^^res^ Pastors or Shepherds living
in the fields in Tents; Handicrafts-men making instruments for war, and other
works; Soldiers, Magistrates, and Counselors. 8. The apparel of the Indians
at this day, and what the king wears going to the 9. Of the kings great
revenues, amounting yearly to twelve millions of gold. 10. Wherein his forces
consist; what horse and foot he has; his arms and munition for war. 11. Of
the Idolatry of them of Narsinge, worshipping the Devil, and dedicating
Temples unto him. 12. Of two kinds of sects, governing the religion of this
people, called Baneane, and Bramins: their doctrine, and auster^nesse of life;
and the Deities which they adore.






THis realm abounds in all things, and there wants not any thing necessary
for the


FOr that many of the ancient manners of them of Narsinge may be referred to
the



Whenas the king marched through the country, he had little bells and drums
which were carried before him, and if he entered into any park which was
enclosed, to hunt, he had still near about his person three or four women
armed: but if he did run in the open plain, he was mounted upon an elephant,
and he had about him many women, some upon chariots, and others upon elephants,
or horses, and these women did handle all kind

The Indians did worship Jupiter, the rain, and the river of Ganges, and those
whom they call the gods of every country. Whenas their kings did wash their
hair, every man did solemnize that day as a great feast, and they made great
and rich presents one unto another. In old time these people were divided into
seven orders and degrees, whereof the first were the Sages or Philosophers,
Gymnosophistes, and Brachmanes, who were honored more than all the rest. These
were free from all labor, and did not serve any, neither did they comaund any,
but only received from every one in particular what was fit for the sacrifices
of their gods: they had the care of the dead, as being held dear unto the
gods, and which knew what was done in helt. These Sages foretold them Abraham^
concubines, who sent them into the East, as we read in the holy writ, where it
is said that they carried certain gifts from him. These gifts of Abraham,
besides gold and clothes are the arts and sciences; especially Astrology, and
natural Magic, wherein they have not only excelled, but also are at this day
very skillful, if we shall believe the Portugals, who speak of their own
knowledge. Strabo, following Onesirites, diuides them into Brachmanes, and
Germans. The Brachmanes did put in practice the knowledge which they had
received from their ancestors, and did admit to the study of Philosophy the
Germans who were strangers and not of the race of the Sages.

Appolonius Thianeus went unto them with much toil, to hear Iarque their
prince discourse of nature, of the motion of the

They blamed victorious Alexander for that not being content with his own
realm, he did trouble all the East with his army. Behold what Strabo says,
who is followed by Pliny in his natural history. They have greatly inricht
moral knowledge as may appear by the words of Apuleius. I admire those who
know not how to plant a vine, to till the ground, or to graft a tree, to tame a
horse or a bull, or to sheare a sheep, yet give themselves to wisdom; neither
do I commend any thing they do, so much as the hatred they seem to bear to
idleness. For when the cloth is laid before they bring any meat, all the
young men come thither from diverse places and offices. Then the masters
examine them what good they have done since the break of day unto that hour,
to

The Germans care and study was to know man's body, they kept themselves
covered,

The Premmes were enemies to all these, and had no delight but to reprehend
others; and these Premmes were divided into Montagnars, Gymnetes, and Ciuils.



The third order was of all sorts of Pastors and shepherds, which did not live
in towns nor boroughs, but in tents in the fields, whereas they lived of
hunting, and did set snares and ginnes for beasts, by which means they did
preserve the corn from the destroying of beasts, which swarm in those
countries, and do much annoy the fruits and seed.

The Artizans held the fourth rank, and some made arms and instruments for
war;

The fifth order was of Soldiers, which not withstanding were the second in
number. These by a continual exercise made themselves apt for war, and how
great soever the number were, their horses and elephants, fit for the war,
were fed at the princes ^^^rge.

The sixth rank was of the Magistrates, who taking care of all things that did
pass, advertised the king, to the end he might provide for it.

The seventh and last order contained all those that did preside in public
Councels,

There were noblemen also appointed to see there should be no wrong done unto
strangers; and whenas any one fell sick, they had a care to succor him, and
if he died, they caused him to be buried, delivering his money and merchandise
to those that said they were his nearest kinsmen. The Judges of every place
had power to punish such as were convicted of any crime.

Toward the South Sea, and Malaca, there were shepherds which lived of raw
flesh,

In some parts there were people that did kill neither man nor beast, neither
did they (...) nor build, nor live in any house, feeding only upon herbs:
and for that they had certain grain like unto millet, which did grow of it
self, and without any industry, they gathered it, and boiling it, made use of
it for their living.

As soon as any one among them fell sick, he retired himself into the
desert, and

The Manners at this day.


As for them of Coromandel, if it chances that any year passes without
rain, they fall into such extremity, as they are forced to sell their
children for a royal, or six pence: the which is ordinary throughout all the
Indies, whereas the fathers sell their children for a small price, and many
sell themselves.

The princes desire much to have noblemen and gentlemen to be their slaves, who
many times are husbands to their daughters, and heirs to their masters
Estates.

The Riches.


The Forces.
John de Barros does show us sufficiently what forces may be drawn out of this
realm, describing the army which Chesnarae king of Narsinge led against the
Idalcan in the enterprise of Rachiol. He says, that the army was divided into
many members under their captains. In the foreward, did march Camaraique with
Tierabitara, with twenty thousand horse, twenty elephants, and fifty
thousand foot: then Tamanapaique, with three thousand five hundred horse,
thirty elephants, and sixty thousand foot: Hidapi^aique followed after, and
led five thousand horse fifty elephants, and one hundred thousand Condomare
had six thousand h^rse, sixty elephants, and one hundred and twenty thousand
foot: Comore led two thousand and five hundred horse, forty elephants, and
eighty thousand foot: Gendraye one thousand horse, ten elephants, and thirty
thousand foot: after him there marched two eunukes of the kings house, with one
thousand horse, fifteen elephants, and forty thousand foot: the page of Betel
led two hundred horse, twenty elephants, and fifteen thousand soldiers:
Comarbeque had charge of four hundred horse, twenty el^phants, and eight
thousand foot: the king came after with his guard, in which were six thousand
horse, three hundred elephants, and forty thousand foot, and of either side
did march the governor of the town of

The footmen were divided into archers, pikemen, and others which carried
swords (...) targets: and for that the last carried targets which were able to
cover a whole man, (...) had no other defensive arms. I will not pass over in
silence that in this war with (...) Iadalcan, the king of Narsinge having
received a great rout, he took courage, and Virapanai, and remains at
Nagapatan, and the other called Venca^^^^ has made himself master of the
places near unto Malipur.

The king of Narsinge to have his captains ready upon all occasions, does
every year

The Religion.
THe people of Narsinge do first of all believe in one God, the Lord of all the
world,

There are so many in this country, and throughout the Indies, as in a manner
two so^t^ of people govern their detestable religion, and the simple
consciences of these ^oore people. These be the Baneanes, and the Bramanes or
Bramins. As for the Baneanes, whose number is great in this country, although
they differ in sects, yet they all agree, not to kill any living thing, nor to
eat of that which has been slain. They observe

They marry but once, and when they die their wives are buried with them. They
do not interre other men, but burn them, and the women in like manner.
Widows which will not cast themselves into the fire, are held infamous, as if
they had been convicted of adultery. The Banianes wear garments like to the
ancient Brachmanes, and they believe that souls pass from one body to
another. As for the Bramans or Bramins, they are much more esteemed than the
Banianes, and are divided into two sects; for that some Parabramme, and his
three sons, in whose honor they wear three strings tied to their necks.


The Contents.
1. THe beginning of the Sophi of Persia, and of the planting and progress of
Mahomets 2. Situation, limits, and confines of the realm of Persia. 3.
Description of the provinces contained in this State: and first of Media,
divided into the Higher, and Atropatia; and of their chief towns. 4. Of
Assyria. 5. Susi^^^, and the bounds. 6. Mesopotamia. 7. Panchaia, her bounds,
and the royal town of Siras. 8. P^rthia, and the principal towns. 9.
Hircania, the limits, and situation of the chief town of Hyrean. 10
Margiana, and the limits. 11. Bactria, the bounds, and chief town Bactra. 12.
Paropamisse, and the limits. 13. Arta, and the principal rivers. 14. Of the
province of ^ra^giana, and the bounds. 15. Gedrosia. 16. Carmania, divided into
two, whereof the one is ^^lled Desert: their b^gnesse, and chief towns. 17. A
more modern relation of the chiefest (...), and which have continued longest
under the dominion of Persia. 18. Of the province now 19. Of Hierak. 20. Of
Kachon. 21. Aderbaion. 22. Gueylon. 23. Korason. 24. Ker^^^, 25. Maurenahar.
26. Vzbek. 27. A description of the fertility of one part of the pro^^^es of
this realm, and the barrenness and drought of the other part. 28. Abundance
in this country of Bitumen, and Naphte, Amomum, called by some Ethiopia
Pepper, Cotton, Dates, (...), Figs, Trees distilling Honey, Wine, bunches of
Grapes two cubits long, precious stones, E^^r^lds, Iacinths, Chrisolites,
Saphyrs black and yellow, Spiknard, Myrrh, wild beasts, as Tygre^, Panthers,
and Leopards. 29. The custom and manner of living of the ancient Persians, and
f^st of the dwelling of their kings in mountains, and what tribute they did
raise of their people* 30. Of the celebration of their marriages; pluralit^e of
wives allowed: of the exercise and breeding of their youth, and the manner of
their arms and apparel. 31. Ceremonies at their 32. Of the valor of the
anc^^^t Parthians, and the simplicity of their manners and apparel: their
arms and kind of fighting: their ordinary meat, and barbarous custom
touching the burying of the dead, first to expose the bodies to dogs and
birds, and then to bury the boanes. 33. Of the effeminat disposition of the
Medians; their alliances made with effusion of blood: their bread made of the
meal of Almonds: and their drink composed of roots. 34. Apparel of the
ancient Assyrians, and their custom to carry a Ring and a Scepter. 35. The
law and custom of Assyria, to expose the fai^e^^ virgins to sale, and to
marry the foulest with the money. 36. Another custom to set sick persons in
public places, to receive council and help from such as had been troubled
with the (...) infirmities. 37. Of the annoynting of their dead bodies with
honey, and of their funerals, like 38. Carnal conjunction of the Assyrian
Ladies with strangers, in honor of the goddess Venus. 39. Of the Mages,
Assyrians, called Chaldeans, in like honor to the G^^^osophistes, and Priests
of Egypt: what their doctrine was touching the Divinity; moral, and natural
things. 40. Custom of the Carmaniens to go to the war, and to fight upon
Asses; and not to marry, until they have made a feast with some head of their
enemies slain in battle. 41. People of sixty years old in Margiana,
knocked on the head by the custom of the country, 42. Civility, and
courteous d^sposition of the modern Persians, given to sciences, to traffic
and to mechanique arts; courting Ladies, and sumptuous in their apparel, using
at this present the Arabian tongue. 43. Their riches consisting in cloth of
gold and silk, and also, in the traffic of pearls and precious stones. 44.
What the revenues of this Persian Prince be. 45. What his forces, foot, and
Persian discipline, and what number of horse he may draw to field. 46. What
mighty enemies he confines with. 47. The government of the realm of Persia,
differing from that of the Turks. 48. Of the four principal sects of
Mahomets religion, and which of the four is followed by the Persians at this
day. 49. Of the Jews, and Christian Melchites, Nestorians, and Armenians,
dwelling in Persia. 50. An abridgement of the Chronicle of the kings of Persia,
according to the Historiographer Mirkond.

THe Sophies empire is at this day numbered among the mightiest monarchies of
all the East; and although it were for a time suppressed by the Sarrazins, and
also by the Tartarians, who brought it very low, and first under Chingis, then
by Tamerlan, or Tamberlan; yet it has recovered her ancient glory almost in
ourage, by the valor of Ismael. Sophie, of whose beginning it shall be fit to
discourse in this place, for that it does much import to the knowledge of the
Estate of the realm of Persia.

Mahomet (the Author of that cursed sect, which Aisse, daughter to one called
Bubac, or Abubacer, a man of great authority, and exceeding rich; and through
the favor of this Bubac, and of Omar, and Ottomar, his kinsmen, he gathered
together a great number of Arabians, and under color of religion conquered
many of the neighbor countries. In the mean time, he gave in marriage to
Ally, his cousin, his daughter Fatima, borne of his last wife, and dying, being
sixty three years old, he left him his Estate, and the superiority of all
his sect, with the name of Calise. But Bubac being discontented, that Mahomet
(who had made himself great by his favor) had preferred Ally before him,
Omar, and Ottomar, who desired rather to have this than the other for Calise,
for that he was of their blood, his age also giving them hope of a speedy
succession, as it happened. Bubac had these two for his successors one after
another; whereof Omar was slain by a slave, and Ottomar in a sedition; so as
the charge of Calise returned to Ally, but he did not enjoy it quietly, for
that many, under color that he had given consent to the death of Ottomar his
master, made war against him, and in the end slew him in the town of Cusa,
which stands near to the river of Euphrates beneath Bagder, and therefore it
is called Massadall, that is to say, the house of Ally, for that he was
interred there. After his death, they of Cusa declared Ocen, the son of
Fatina, Calise, who was also deposed, and poisoned Mauia, who made himself
absolute Calife, and had for successor Iasil his son. Ocen left twelve sons,
one of which was called Mahomet Mahadin, whom the Mahometans hold is not yet
dead; so as they expect him, saying, that he shall come to convert all the
world: and for this cause, at Massadal, where (in their opinions) this
conversion should begin, there is always a horse ready, which they bring unto
the Mosque with great solemnity. By reason of the controversies which Ally had
with Bubac, Omar, Ottomar, and Mauia, there has been since great contentions,
for that the Persians hold, that Ally was, by the testament of Mahomet,
declared true Calife; and the Arabians favor the three first. Matters being
thus irresolute, about the year 1369, the Mahometans, or Moors, finding
themselves without a Calife (for these ended, in the year 1255, with Mustacen
Mumbila, who was slain by Allacu king of the Tartarians) there did rise in
Persia one called Sophie, who said, that he was issued from the blood of Ally,
by his nephew Muse Cercin, who was one of the twelve sons of Ocen, in memory
of whom he changed the fashion of his turban, adding twelve points unto it, and
brought his sect into Guinne his son, and to him succeeded his son Aidar
who married the daughter of Assembec a mighty prince in Assyria, and Persia,
but newly established: but his son called Jacob Bec caused him to be slain,
fearing the credit and authority of Aidar; then he gave the two sons of
Aidar, the one called Ismaell, the other Solomon, to Amanzar his captain,
commanding him to imprison them at Zalque or Zaligue, a strong castle seated
in the mountains; but Amanzar detesting the cruelty of his master caused
them to be bred up in his own house with his children, and falling daungerously
sick, fearing least some disaster should come unto them, he gave them two
hundred crowns and horses, aduising them to go unto their mother. Ismaell the
eldest being come unto her house resolved presently to reueng his fathers
death, and after some enterprises happily executed, he took upon him the title
of Protector of the deeds of Ally or Haly, from whom he descended: having made
his Turban higher, he sent Ambassadors to all the princes of the East,
exhorting them to receive his badge with his sect: by this means, and by the
good success of his enterprises he made himself fearful to all the East: he
slew Ocen, who termed himself king of Persia, with ten of his brethren, so as
not any one remained but Morabec, who went to crave aid from Selim the first of
that name, Emperor of the Turks. He vanquished in battle near unto the
lake of Van or Vay, Sabacan king of the Tartarians of Zacatay, and meaning to
pursue the victory, and to pass the river of Abbian with his

It lies betwixt the Turks Empire, the Tartarians of Zatacay, the realm of
Cambaya,



Media is at this day called Seruan, and confines upon the East with Hircania,
and Parthia: upon the West, with high Armenia, and Assyria: toward the South
with the particular province of Persia: and to the North, with the Caspian sea.
This country was in former times the most powerful of all Asia, and was
divided into high Media and Atropatia.

High Media contains at this day the country which is about the city of
Tauis, Ortelius and Minador are of this opinion: whereas Paulus Iouius holds
that this should be Terua, and Niger Tigranoama, but falsely, according to the
opinion of learned Migin. This town is situated at the foot of the mountain
of Oronte, and some eight days journey from the sea of Bacu: it is in circuit
about sixteen miles, but not compassed about with any walls. Amurath took it
in the year one thousand five hundred eighty and five: but since it is much
d^c^yed as some hold. This in former times was the royal seat of the Sophies,
before that Tamas transported it to the town of Tasbin, which is the last
abode of these kings, and lies more Southerlie than Tauris. There is also in
high Media, the town of Turcoman betwixt Tauris and Casbin, and the towns of
Saru, Sultania, and Nassiuan, which according to the opinion of some is the
ancient Nasuana, or Artaxata. There is also the town of Ardouille, in the
which have reigned Guinet, Sederdin, and some other authors of the Sophies
Sect. They do also make some account of Marant at the end Amurath Emperor of
the Turks, and the Sophi of Persia. And although that the Turks have held a
part of this country somewhat long, yet may we well attribute it at this day
to the king of Persia, for that he has in a manner recovered all of late years
from the Turk.

Atropatia is the most Northerly part of Media, near to the sea of Bacu, and
it is divided from Armenia by the river of Canac: the chief town is Sumaquie,
and it is seated betwixt Derbent and Eree. There is also the towns of Sechi,
which is upon the frontires of Gurgestan; Iauat, on the confines of high Media;
and Eres, the which in former times was famous by reason of the great store of
silk which comes from

Niger calls Adrise, Girana Azemie, Pinet Mosul, Mercator Sath, and Castaldus
Arzerum, and some also give it the name of Cussestan) lies betwixt high Armenia
upon the North, Mesopotamia on the West, Susiana upon the South, there being
mountains betwixt them, and the country of Media upon the East. It was in old
time in reputation by reason of the Empire that was settled there, and of the
city of Niniue seated near unto the river of Tygris, the which was greater
than Babylon. In former times it contained the provinces of Arapad^it, Adiaben,
and of Sittacen, which some at this day call Botan, Sarca, and Rabia.

Niger calls Chus, and Mercator Cusistan, Niger does now call Chus, and some
others Sustre: it is built upon the river of Enele, which is now called Tirtir,
and has fifteen miles in circuit, being of a long form.

Mercator; but it is only a part of Azemia, whereof Assyria makes the rest, as
Belon affirms: it is situated betwixt the two famous rivers of Euphrates, and
Tygris, and has for bounds toward the North, High Armenia, near to Mount
Taurus; toward the West, Syria, joining to the river of Euphrates; upon the
East, Assyria, divided Crassus: Caramit, that is to say in the Turkish
language, a Black town, the which in old time was called Amida, and is in the
country which they call Alech, and the chief of all Mesopotamia, the which
was taken by Selim Emperor of the Turks: Merdin, the seat of the Patriarch of
the Caldeans: and Mosus, the seat of the Patriarch of the Nestorians, whose
authority extends to Cataya, and the Indies.

Panch^e, afterward the Grecians gave it the name of Cephene, and then it
took that of Persia, by reason of Persius who was transported out of Greece
into Asia: but now it is Mercator, yet some hold it to be Azemia, and Cedren
lays it in the country of Chorasan. It has for bounds on the North, Media;
to the West, Susiana; to the East, Caramania; and on the South, the Persian
gulf, which takes his name

Parthia, called at this day by Niger, Charassen, taking his name from the
town of Mercator) it is called Arach, or (by Alphonso Hadrian) Iex. It has
for confines upon the East, the province of Aria; to the South, Carmania the

Hircania, is called by some Barbarians, as Niger affirms, Girgiam, or Corcam,
but he Minado writes, that all Hircania is called Mesandre, but Erythreus calls
it Hyrach. Maria Angiolesse gives it the name of Straue; and Mercator, of
Diargument. The limits are upon the West, Media; upon the East, Margiana; to
the South, Parthia, Mount Coron being in the midst; Pinet affirms: the other
towns are Bestan, Mesandran, and some others.

Margiana is called Tremigan by Pinet, and Niger holds that it is a part of
Tartaria of Castaldus, and some others, call it Ieselbas: It has for bounds
upon the East, Bactria; to the West, Hircania; to the North, the river of Oxus;
and upon the South, a part of Aria. The chief city of Margiana, is Antioch,
to the which some at this day give the name of Ind^oy. In this country they
place the ma^shes of Oxiane, which they now call the lake of Barbacamber, or of
Maru.

Bactria carries at this day the name of Batter, according to Ramusius: but
Castaldus and Niger will have it a part of Tartaria of Zacaray. It has for
Alexander. But the royal town was Bactria, which took the name from a river
which is at this day called Bochara, as Niger writes, and is yet the chief of
the country, in which Auicenna the physician, and Zoroastes, were borne. Some
others say, that Istigias is the chief town of this province, the which is
not all under the Sophies command.

The country of Paropamisse, so called for that it is fashoned like an Island,
being watered Niger; but Minadoc gives it the name of Candahar; and others, of
Sablestan. It has for bounds toward the North, a part of Bactria, near to
the mountain of Paropamisse; to the East, Aria; to the South, Aracosia; and
toward the West, the Indies. Candahar is the chie^e town of this country.

Aria (to the which Niger gives the same name, and others, that of Eri) is
called by Castaldus, Corsan; and by Mercator, Se^nere, lies betwixt Margiana,
and ^actria, upon the North; on the West it has Parthia, and Carmania the
Desert; upon the South, Drangiana; and to the East, the country of
Paropamisse. There are in this country three principal rivers, Aria, Tonelet,
and Arapen. There is also the marish of A^en,

The Province of Drangiana is now called Sigestan, according to Mercator, and
many Niger says, that Aracosia, with Drangiana, is called Sigestan: Some say,
that they call this the realm of Cabul, the which is upon the frontier of the
Sophies kingdom toward the West, and that it has a particular king, which is
a Mohammedan. The

Niger affirms, and Circan, according to Castaldus: Mercator calls it Gest;
and Giraua, and Molet, give it the name of Guzarate: but it is most certain,
that Guzarate is the realm of Camboye. It has for limits toward the North,
Drangiana, and Aracosia; upon the West, Carmania; and toward the East, a part
of the Indies, or the realm of Camboye; and upon the South, the

Ptolome; one part is called Desert; and the other is comprehended under the
sole name of Carmania; and it is termed by some others the High country: Some
do at this day call it Dulcinde, or Carmania the Desert, in which there are no
towns, but only some few scattered villages. The limits are upon the North,
Parthia; to the West, a part of the province of Persia; toward the South, the
other Carmania; and toward the East, Aria.

The other Carmania lies betwixt Gedrosia the Desert, a part of Persia, and the
Indian Sea, and is called High or Great, to distinguish it from the Desert. All
this province extends it self near unto the Sea two hundred leagues; but
there is not any good port,

Thus I have succinctly set down what I could find among Authors, and the
relations of some that have traveled those countries: but it seems that
Teixiere (of whom we shall hereafter speak more particularly) has
distinguished it better, calling every thing by

A brief relation of the chief Provinces, and which have continued




Hienak, it is another province of Persia, great and important, the which has
for

Kachon is famous for the great abundance of silks of all sorts which they
have

Aderbajon, or Azarbajon As for this province it is very great, the chief
city whereof



These towns following are upon the shore, and near unto the Caspian sea.
Mazandaron, Strabat, Bos^am, Sabzabah, Nichabur (whence the Turks are come)
and others, all which in old time were the heads of realms and provinces, but
now

Karason. The Portugals do commonly call it Corasou, it is another province
subject Persia, and since Sehaeh Ismaell Sophi, have been buried. There is also
the town of Thun,



There are also many other provinces in Persia.
Sagistam, Tubarstam, Kable^tam, Nim, Ruz, Sphahar, Sistam, Curdestum,
Lorestam, and many others which are not so famous, the which to avoid
tediousness are not here mentioned.

The whole country of Persia, or at the least the greatest part is very well
furnished with wheat, flesh, and fruits both green and dry, as well such as
we have in Europe, as others, the which are sold good cheap: the people are
white and fair, and of a gentle disposition, and their garments are in a
manner like to the Turks. They follow the sect Morth Aly, which differs in
some articles from that of Mahomet. They fight for the most part on horseback
with a lance and target, bows and arrows, a sword or cimeter, shirts of
meal, and battle axes. They are strong in war, and endure much. The
Persians are all given to the reading of books, whereof they make great
account. They apply themselves much to poesy, wherein there have been very
excellent men, who have left good works. They are of an amorous complexion,
and have the knowledge of all speculatiue arts and sciences, and the professors
thereof handle them with much curiosity and subtlety: their common law
contains no more volumes but that of the sect whereof they make profession,
committing the administration of justice to men of reputation. The men are very
jealous, and the women not very chaste. To conclude,

There comes commonly from all the parts of Persia to Harmus or Ormus, great
Carauans to traffic with the Portugals, and with many Christians, Gentiles,
and Moors which remain there, to whom they vent their commodities, that is to
say, gold, silver, silks both raw and wrought, satin stripped with gold,
Persian tapistries, horses, woad, alume, rhubarbe, rosewater, and diverse other
merchandise; and in exchange they take garments and fine caps, cloves, sinamon,
agnus castus, cardamome, ginger, mace, nutmegs, sugar, tin, sandall, brasell
wood, pourcelaine of China, musk, amber, the wood of alloes, fine stones, seed
pearl, indico, (a color which they use in steed of woad) azure,

All the inhabitants of Persia are Moors Chyays, who make the better part, or
Pagans Gaoryazdie, which worship the fire, who although they be many in number,
yet are they few in regard of the rest. There are some Jews which live in
their liberty throughout all the provinces of Persia, of which there are eight
or ten families. There are also good numbers of Christians, Armenians, and
Nestorians.





The inhabitants are warlike, they fight on horseback, with bows and arrows,
a lance, sword, target, and shirt of male, always flying; yet they have much
increased their command in our days, amongst others, they have conquered the
realm of Kandar, the king whereof, some fifty years since, seeking to
fortify himself, made himself vassal to the Teixiere reports, which serves
as an introduction to his History, speaking of all these people, and the names
being changed, and agreeing not with the ancient, the Reader may be much
troubled in reading this discourse, especially whenas the affairs of Persia
were in their greatest confusion.

The Quality.


As for the country of Media, it is for the most part hilly, and cold,
especially toward

Assyria is a plain country, abounding in rivers, and exceeding fertile. As
for Susiana, toward the Persian gulf, it is very Moorish: it is exceeding
hot, by reason of certain high mountains which lie upon the North part, and
keep away those winds. It

Mesopotamia is wonderful fertile in some parts, and fit for the breeding of
cattle; but in some others it is subject to such heat, as many beasts cannot
endure it by reason of the extremity. There are few fountains in these
places, and the inhabitants are so subtle and malicious as they hide them. It
is ba^ traveling in winter in this country, by reason of the mire, out of
which a man can hardly draw his feet. There are also in this province

As for the province of Persia, it is of diverse qualities; for that the most
Northerly

In regard of Parthia, it is full of woods, and environed with very high
mountains, and although it be subject to great heat, yet it bears all things,
especially great trees, but it has no Olives. It is watered by a great number
of streams.

Hircania is plain and fertile; for it yields abundance of wheat, wine,
figs, and

Margiana is for the most part desert, and full of sand, except that part which
is watered by the rivers of Marge, and Aria, for there it is exceeding fertile.
The desert part is now called the Desert of Bigul: but that which is manured,
was sometime called the Margien field, being in circuit one hundred and ninety
thousand paces. Antiochus Sother (as Niger

Bactria is of diverse natures, for that some part is manured, and another part
desert. That part which is manured, lies near to the river of Ox, and brings
forth wheat, and such like things. There is reasonable good pasture, and many
waters, and it bears in a manner all kind of trees, except Olives. As for the
desert part, there is nothing to be

The province of Aria is subject to great heat, and environed with deserts,
forests, and mountains: yet there are some Champian fields which bear
fruits, near unto the mountains, which defend them from the heat of the
Sun. In these fields (besides other fruits) there grows good wine, which
will last ninety years. They gather also a

Gedrosia is for the most part desert, and full of sand. It has great want of
water, notwithstanding that it has rain in Summer, and it is subject to the
heat of the Sun, by reason whereof it is barren, yet it yields Nard and
Myrrh.

Caramania, the Desert, is also barren, and subject to great heat, and as for
the higher, the maritime parts are desert, and without trees, only they find
some Palm trees, and bushes: but the midst of the country is reasonable
good, and bears much fruit, and good wine.

The Manners of the Ancients.


The youth of Persia from the fifth year of their age unto four and twentieth
did ^earne to ride, vaut, and cast a dart and shoot, but above all things, to
speak truly. For ^he young men had for their masters and governors the
wisest, and most virtuous, so^er, and continent men that might be chosen, who
taught them, and read unto them histories,

Whenas they went a hunting, they followed their prey on horseback with darts,
and well steeled iauelins, and many arrows, and they used to cast stones with
slings. Their ordinary exercise before noone was to plant and graft trees, to
pull up roots, and to busy themselves in their gardens, and to manure their
grounds, or to forge, temper, and trim their arms; and others busied
themselves to weaue cloth, or to make nets for hunting and fishing. Their
children are richly decked, and bred up so delicatly during their infancy,

They had a certain stone called Pyrope of great estimation among them, the
which they would not suffer to touch a dead body for anything, so much they
did esteem it, and they did not carry fire unto funerals, to the end it
should not seem they did slightly regard him, whom they had in so great
reverence. From the age of twenty unto fifty they followed arms not knowing
what it was to plead, or to trade in merchandise. They used little bucklers
made like a Lozenge, and besides a bow and quiver, they carried a ^word and a
dagger going to war, and a pointed bonnet; they had upon their breast a corslet
made of scales very strongly. The princes did wear breeches and a ierkin with
sleeves coming to their knees and lined with white, and on the out side it was
painted, or died of freely, thinking that matters were better debated whenas
the stomach and brain were

They that were of acquaintance, and equal in fortune, age, and greatness,
embraced when they met, and kissed one another mouth. They that were somewhat
inferior unto them, they kissed them upon the cheek: but such as were of base
condition passing before any man of account, they made him a great reverence.
They buried the bodies of

They did hold that the heaven was Jupiter, and they did worship the Sun,
which was called Mithra according unto some, above any other Deity: they did
also worship the Moon, Venus, Fire, Earth, Water, and Wine: but they used no
Statue nor Altar, neither had they any temple, but did sacrifice upon some hill
or high place, to the end that every man might see it, and that the thing might
be nearer to heaven. They brought the beast that was sacrificed to the Altar,
having a crown, but with many curles, which being cut in pieces (the priest
doing that office) every man carried his part unto his house, reserving

Whenas they did sacrifice to the fire, it was of dry wood taking away the
bark, and casting upon it fat that is nearest to the bone, and then pouring
oil thereon. They did never blow the fire with their mouths, but with a fan;
and if any one did presume to blow, or to cast any dead carcass or beastly
thing into it, they did put him to death without remission.

There was not any one among them that did wash himself in a river, nor piss
in it, or

As for the Parthians who have been held to be very valiant before that wealth
made

As for martial discipline, their soldiers and men at arms were no men of a
free condition, but chosen from among their slaves, and therefore it was not
lawful for any one to make free a bondsman, so as the number increased daily,
and their forces became greater. They kept them carefully, and bred them up
like to their own children, teaching them to shoot, and to manage horses, to
the end they might serve in war; so as the king marching Marc Anthony, among
fifty thousand horse which he had in his army, there were not above eight
hundred of free condition, all the rest being slaves. They knew not how to
fight hand to hand, nor in a joined battle, and much less how

In old time, this people did so little esteem gold and silver, as they did
not use it, but for the ornament of their arms. As for their private kind of
living, they were very subject to their pleasures; wherefore plurality of
wives was allowed among them, but they were so jealous of their reputations, as
only death did purge the fault of adultery. And to the end they might not
fall into such inconveniences, the husbands never suffered

They lived only of beasts which they took by hunting, and they did
traffic, and parle together on horseback. The difference of estates and
conditions among the Parthians in old time was remarkable in this, that
gentlemen and free merchants went up and down the country on horseback, and
slaves on foot like unto Lackeis. The dead were not much honored among them;
for that their bodies were left upon the ground to feed dogs and birds, and
whenas they had eaten all the flesh, they buried their bones

They were devout, and given to the service of their gods, but proud,
seditious, cunning, deceitful, and wilful; holding that cruelty and violence
was a virtue in men, and mildness and courtesy in women: wherefore they were
never at rest, but either they made war among themselves, or did infest their
neighbors. They were very secret in their affairs, and of few words, and if
they did obey their kings and magistrates, it was rather for fear of punishment
than for any inclination they had thereunto.

The Medians have always been held to be soft and effeminat, but they were
good

This people made alliances in imitation of the Greeks, and they did sometimes
wound themselves in their arms and shoulders, from whence came abundance of
blood, for a testimony and assurance of the faith which they had sworn. And
for that upon the most Northerly part of this country it is barren, they dried
Almonds whereof they made

The Assyrians in old time did wear two robes, whereof the one was long,
coming

As for the laws which the people used, one was, that virgins which were apt to
be married would give most. But such as were not so commendable for their
beauty as they might Herodotus holds, that the ancient Venetians which lived
upon the coast of Illitia used the like custom.





Venus: and whenas they would do it, they went to the Temples of this goddess
in a great troop, with crowns upon their heads, and richly apparelled, to
present themselves, and to seem more pleasing unto men. Every stranger that
would enjoy any one, beheld her that liked him best, then he laid upon



These wise men (Chaldeans) went not out of their own country to study these
sciences, like unto the Grecians; but every man learned them from his parents,
holding them from them as by succession, and the children were instructed in
their houses, to the end that by this ordinary care they might profit the
better. Their knowledge was not ground^d upon doubts and opinions like unto
that of the Grecians, but they did persist constantly in those things which
they had once learned, whereas the others had diverse opinions touching the
principles and causes of every thing. The Chaldeans held it for truth and
Saturn; and they hold that the Sun was the most pleasing planet, giving it
more power than the rest: yet in their diuinations, they depended more upon the
aspects of Mars, Venus, Mercury, and Jupiter, for that those (as having a
course which is propper unto them) gave knowledge of future things, as if they
had been messengers and interpreters of the will of the gods. These Chaldeans
did also foretell what

They did feign twelve principal gods, to either of which they gave a place in
the Zodiake, and assigned him a month. Out of the Zodiake they did number
four and twenty stars, whereof there were tw^lue that looked toward the
North, and the other twelve to the South: they believed that those which
appeared were for the service of the living, and the others were for the
service of the dead, and did give them light under the earth. They made a
ridiculous computation of years, numbering three and forty thousand years
from their most ancient remembrance unto the coming of Alexander into
B^bylon: yet some excuse them, saying that they were lunarie years.

Mars. No man did marry a wife among them until he had cut off the head of
some enemy, the which was brought unto the king, who caused it to be set up in
his palace, mincing the tongue, the which he mingled with bread and tasted
thereof, and then gave it to him that brought it, and to his familiars to eat.
He that bad brought most heads was more esteemed than the rest.

As for them of Margiana, Strabo writes that in his time when as any one came
to the


THe Persians at this day to speak in general are the mildest and most
courteous people

They are also given to traffic, and to mechanicke arts, and make great store
of silks. The brethren, sisters, and other kinsfolks entertain a strict love
betwixt them, and they make great account of nobility: wherein they are
contrary to the Turks, who contemn it, and esteem none but those that are
commend^ble for their actions. There are among them many famous men, which are
come from ancient races, and have continued rich for a long time: and finally,
they are much to be preferred before the Turks, both in regard of their
nobility, civility, and quickness of wit. Moreover

The Persians yield as much to their passions as any people in the world, and
plunge themselves in all sorts of pleasures, cherishing the sport of love above
all things. Their in many courts of the Eastern princes. In former times they
had private characters, Mahomet, they have also used the Arabian tongue.

They are called Ayames, or Azamies, by reason of Assyria which carries the
name of Az^mia, as some think. They have also the name of Persians by reason
of the province of Presia, which is the chief of the realm; and Cheselbas,
for that they wear a red cap; and they are by many called Sophiens, being
under the dominion of the Sophi.

The Riches.


Bactria yields mettalls and some precious stones, as emeralds, jacinths, and
chrysolits, whereof the inhabitants make great profit. In the province of Aria
they gather a certain drug like unto myrrh, which the persians sell to
strangers at a good rate, with their black and yellow saphirs. The town of
Chirmain in Carmania is famous by reason of the great store of cloth of gold
and silver which the inhabitants make and vent.

Tammas Sophi of Persia, who reigned of late years, ordained that they should
levy no custom of any thing that entered into his dominions, or went forth;
and this custom did amount to 90000 tomans, that is to say (for that a toman
makes 20 French crowns) a million 800000 crowns: the which undoubtedly he had
not done if his revenues had not bin otherwise great, which invited him to ease
strangers, and his subjects which dealt in traffic after this manner: the
other reason is, that all the Estates of Persia are divided by the Persians
into seven provinces, or to speak more properly, generalities, whereof that of
Isp^an yields seven hundred thousand crowns, and that of Syras as much; and
yet

But if any one demands whence he draws his revenues, seeing he has dispossessed
himself of the customs which might rise by the importation and exportation of
merchandise: I will answer him that he draws it from the lands of his
dominions, from the tenths of fruits, from the profit of mines, and from shops,
for that whosoever will set up a shop or storehouse of any thing, is bound to
pay a certain sum yearly unto the king. He receives also much of particular
presents, and of the gifts of communalties, and confiscations, and such like,
bring him in great sums of money, besides the tribute of princes


THe forces of this kingdom consist more in valor than in number of men.
There

and although the sea of Bachu be eight hundred miles long, and six hundred
broad, (...) they have no shipping there, neither are there seen any ships in
those parts but Por^^^S, who coasting along the Persian gulf, make themselves
masters thereof, by means

And although the country abounds in metals and in excellent tempers,
especially (...) ^rouince of Corasan, yet they have no great use of artillery,
and they are less pra-^^^^ in fortifications, or to batter, besiege, keep,
and defend a town; for that all these ^^^gs are proper to footmen, whereas it
belongs to horsemen to fight in plain field, in (...) the Persians without
doubt are able to work great effects.

^oreouer, the Persian discipline has another important defect, which is the
want of (...) and this division proceeds from two causes: the one is the
greatness of princes, (...) is commonly accompanied with pride and
wilfulness: the other is the difficulty ^^^duct and of voyages, and this
defect grows by the want of waters and nauigable

(...) for the number of horsemen which the king of Persia may bring to field,
it has been seen in the wars which have past betwixt Ismael and Selim the
first of that name, Ismael and Solomon, and betwixt Codobande and Amarath the
third, for that none of these kings did draw together above 30000 horse against
the Turk, but they were armed in such sort, as they did never fear the
encounter of a far greater



He has not much to do with the Mogores, for that as France and Spain cannot
offend one another by reason of the strait passages, and the situation of the
frontiers which are tough and troublesome, which make the conduct of victuals,
and entertainment of armies difficult: even so, betwixt the confines of the
Indies and Cambaya, held by the Mogores, and the Persians, there are mountains
and deserts, which will not suffer those princes to invade one another, at the
least with any great armies; especially for that their horsemen (wherein their
chiefest forces consist) cannot march through such narrow straits, and uneasy
passages, yet they fight upon the frontiers of Cabul and Sablestan, whereof
some princes of the Mogores have made themselves masters.

The Sophi confines not immediately with the great Cham, for that there is
betwixt them two, first certain princes, then a great desert, and it seems
that the river of Ox, or Abian, has been always ordained to serve as bound
unto his Empire. This river rising in the country of Sablestan, under the
mountain of Dalanguer, after a long course (during the which it increases
much by reason of many rivers which fall into it) in the end it discharges it
self into the Sea of Bachu, and diuides the Sophi from Zagatai upon the North
part. The Sophi never durst pass this river, and Saba king of Zagatai having
past it, was defeated by Is^ael in a great battle. Cyrus king of Persia
caused a bridge to be made upon this river, by the which he past a great army
to go against Tomyris Queen of Scythia, who cut him in pieces with his people.

The Sophi confines with the great Turk upon all the Western part of his
empire, that is to say, from the sea of Bachu to the gulf of Saure, which is
for the space almost of fifteen degrees: and in truth he has no such
dangerous enemy, nor that keeps him more in awe; for that as often as the
Turk has entered his country, he has always lost something, unless were of
late years, that the Sophi has chased the Turks, and won some famous
victories. The reason why the Sophi has had these losses, was his manner of
making war; for that relying upon the number and valor of his horsemen, and
in his artillery and munition of war, he made no account of forts, but
ruined them he took, and did little esteem those which he kept, thinking that
he that imployes his forces i^ defense of places cannot be strong in field. But
since, being forced by necessity,

As for the Portugals of Ormus, he has no quarrel with them, for that he has
no sea forces, without the which he cannot recover this realm: and also the
Portugals have no meane^ to ^ake conquest ^^rre within the land. And the Sophi
Tammas being once persuaded to the enterprise of the realm of Ormus, he
demanded what did grow in this Island; if there were come, grapes, fruits, or
such like* and hearing that the soil of this country was barren, and that all
these things wanted, but that the traffic of merchandise which made this
realm rich, might bring him great commodities; he mocked at it,


WE must confess that the Persians are governed more politickely than all the

The Religion.
AFter the death of Mahomet the author of that cursed sect, which at this day
has so Alli, Abubequer, Ormar, and Odman his kinsmen, did every (...) write
for himself; for that there was not any one of them but did pretend himself
^^^rue successor. This contention was the spring of four principal sects: Ally
was author that which they call Imemia, and was followed by the Persians,
Indians, by many ^^ians, and by the Gelbins of Afric. As for the other sects,
I have referred it to the Ismael Sophi, who ^^ing himself to be of the race of
Ally, brought his sect into credit, and denounced (...) against his neighbors
that would not accept thereof. He did wear a red Turban (...) twelve points,
in remembrance of the twelve sons of Ocen the son of Ally, ^^^maunding that
all they that followed it should wear the like. Many nations follo^^^ him and
his sect, especially all they that dwell betwixt the rivers of Euphrates, and
(...), the Caspian sea, and the Persian gulf; so as since, all these people
have settled them^^^^^^ in this opinion.

Esdras and Nehemias led back the rest into the Holy land, and those (...)
stayed in this country, as Origin says, made choice of a head of the house
of Da^^, and called him the chief of the banished: then they built a town
upon the banks (...) ^^phrates, and named it Neardea, which is as much to say,
as a flood of sciences. ^^^re are in Corasan a province of Persia, Melchites,
who retain all the errors which (...) in old time condemned by the Grecians at
the Council of Florence, and these (...) the Patriarch of Antioche.

Moreover there are Nestorians brought into Persia, as Paulus Diaconus
affirms, by the (...) ^^lice of Cosroe king of Persia, who thinking to do a
despite to the Emperor Hera^^^, for that he had been defeated by him, ruined
all the Christian Churchs that were (...) ^is dominions, and having chased away
the Catholics, he planted Nestorians, who (...) now mixed among the Assyrians,
Mesopotamians, Medians, and Parthians.

There are also many Christians Armenians, who have past into Persia for fear
of the (...) forces and cruelty; and these have two Patriarchs, whereof the
one who is acknowledge knowledged as superior in high Armenia, remains in the
monastery of Ecmeazin Mahomet for the first anthor of their sects, yet they
hate these Barbarians no less than we do: and it is thought that if Christian
princes had made more account of the Embassage which the Sophi sent into Europe
of late years, than they did, there had been some hope that this prince by
little and little might have been drawn to the Christian faith.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE KINGS OF PERSIA, ACCORDING
The Contents.
1. A chronicle abridged of the kings of Persia according to the Bible, Philo,
and other authors. 2. Another chronicle abridged according to Herodotus,
Xenophon, Justin, 3. Cyrus ruins the Monarchy of the Medians, and settles
that of the Persians. 4. Histori^ of Daniell cast into the lions den, and why
the Jews had leave to build their temple. Cyrus conquers Lydia, and takes
Cresus their king: he makes war against the Scythians, by whom he was defeated
and slain 5. His Eloge; he was first of all called King of Kings. He brought
unto the Persians the use of long robe and Thyare, as some hold. 6. Cambises
conquereth Egypt, kills his brother Smerdes; his sacriledges and cruelties, and
finally his death. 7. Smerdes one of the Mages or wisemen causes himself to
be acknowledged king, and how he was discovered. 8. How Darius Histaspes came
unto the crown of Persia, his orders and conquests, he restored the sovereign
priesthood among the Jews: the great army he prepared against Greece if death
had not prevented him. 9. Xerxes declared successor to his father, for that he
was borne when his father was king, and his other brethren, before; he
punishes the Egyptians severely having revolted; his powerful army both by
sea and land to ruin Greece, his defeat and death. 10. Pretentions of Artahan,
his wickedness discovered, and his punishment. 11. Artaxerxes takes revenge of
the death of his father Xerxes, he sends an army of three hundred thousand men
against the Egyptians; he sends back Esdras to Jerusalem, and does him many
favors; the Egyptians shake off the Persians yoke: Cyrus the son of Darius
put in prison, and the reason, and when Darius the bastard died. 12. Cyrus
escapes out of prison; the perfections of this prince, and his death:
Artaxerxes Mnemon lo^es peac^, and seeks to reconcile the Grecians among
themselves. 13. The Jews being at discord, Darius Occhus sends Bagose against
them, who imposes a tribute: beginning 14. Darius dispossessed of his Empire by
Alexander the Great, and at what time. 15. When and how the realm of Persia
recovered her ancient beauty. Beginning of Artaxare, 16. Saporus conquereth a
part of Mesopotamia, and many ^^^^es from the Romans; he loses a battle
against the Emperor Gordian, and wins another against Valerian, where he took
this Emperor prisoner. Odenall king of the Palmerenians defe^ts Saporus in a
great battle, which stayed the course of his conquests. 17. Vardanes makes a
peace with the Emperor Probus, Carus recouers Mesopotamia from the Persians.
18. Narseus a man of great attempts, vanquished by Maximilian in a famous
battle, which ruined the Persians affairs. 19. Misdates crowned from his
mothers womb. Saporus, a great enemy to C^^istians, obtaines eight victories
against the Emperor Constance: but he was vanquished 20. Controversy for the
succession of the crown of Persia, betwixt the sons of Saporus: cruelties of
Artaxerxes. 21. Is digertes, tutor to the young Emperor Theodosiu^, and the
good offices which he did to his people. In the beginning he persecuted the
Christians, but in the end he was p^cified by the persuasion of Antiochus,
Governor to the young Christian Emperor his son, who was possessed with a
devil, recovered by the prayers of the good Bishop Math^nte. 22. War betwixt
Perosus and the Euthalites; the beginning of this people: ^^rosus does homage,
and swears fealty to the king of Euthalites, his falsehood which cost him his
(...) 23. Valens becomes tributarie to the Euhalites; Cauadus shakes off the
yoke: the cruelty of this ^^^nce, and his strange ordinance to make women
common. 24. The regents of Persia should be of the 25. Cosroe given to
learning, and honors learned men; he made ^^re against the Emperor Justinian,
with whom he was forced to make a peace, called a peace without end, but he
brake it presently, and being often defeated by Belisarius, he died of grief.
26. War of Hormisda against the Romans; the great defeat of Hormisda by the
Emperor Ty^^riu^, and another given him by Philipicus a Roman Captain: he
loses Nisibin, and a part of M^sopotamia, with the town of Arsemene; he
makes the Turks his tributaries and d^sposeth (...) realm: his execrable
cruelty against his fathers wife and children, whom he beats to death 27.
Conspiracy against Cosroe, who saues himself, having called upon the God
(...) Christians, and is restored to his realm: Narses reuolts against the
Emperor Phocus, (...) by Cosroe. 28. All Mesopotamia and Syria conquered by
Cosroe, with Palestina, Armenia, ^^^docia, Galatia, and Paphlagonia, the towns
of Edesse, Capesse, Cesarea, the town of Dam^s, (...) the holy city of
Jerusalem, carrying the holy Cross into Persia; he is in the end defeated
(...) Emperor Heraclius: his son caused to die in prison: Siroe delivers all
the Christians were captives in Persia. 29. Of the kings of Persia; the
Mah^metans expelled by the Tarta^^^: Tamerlan makes himself lord of the
greatest part of the East: Vsun Chassan descended (...) Tamerlan. 30. Vsun
Chassan marries the daughter of the Emperor of Trebisonde, and (...) his
daughter to Secaidar; the holy life of the wife of Vsun Chassan, the wars of
this prince 31. The tragical History of the death of Iacub Patis^^^ his wife,
and son: Secaidar takes arms against his prince. 32. Defeat and death of
Sacaei^^^ the breeding up of Ismael Sophi, his first enterprise, the bad order
of Alumut king of Persie; (...) the battle betwixt him and the Sophi, who
wins the victory, and takes Tauris: his great ^^^eltie against his own
mother. 33. Ismael wears a red Turban, whence comes the name of ^^^bas^ the
victory of Ismael against Marat Can; he conquers Diarbet, his policies to make
(...) the chief Lords of the country; he wins the best part of Sydulia, and
kills the king with his (...) hand: another defeat of Murat Can: the Tartarians
make war against the Sophi, and 34. The revolt of Vlama a Persian against
Tamas or Thamas: the conquests of (...) upon the Persians, who makes himself
master of Assyria and Mesopotamia; he takes Bagadet, and ^^oyles Tauris twice:
his army defeated by Deliment a Persian Captain. 35. The

A CHRONICLE OF THE KINGS OF PERSIA, ACCORDING TO THE HOLY BIBLE, PHILO,
Seeing that treating of other nations we have hitherto observed this order, not
only to describe the situation of provinces, manners, and religion of people;
their forces, wealth, and whatsoever was rare; but also to treat summarily of
the princes which have commanded there, of their wars and conquests, of
their increase, changes, and downefalls: It seems I should wrong the Persian
nation, who have sometimes h^ld the monarchy of the world, and command at
this present such warlike and powerful nations; to pass over with silence
their worthiest actions, and the names of the princes

Among the Modernes, there is a Portugal, called Teixiere, who having read a
Persian History, written by one called Turik Mirkond, a Persian borne, has
made an abridgement, by the which he seems to have plainly set down the
succession of these great princes, from the beginning of this monarchy unto
this day: but it is with such discordance from all that which other Authors
that have gone before them have written, as it is a (...) thing to reconcile
them; and ^e^ it may be it is not improbable to believe that he has come
nearer unto the truth* and if he does contradict in some things, as well
Teixiere, to the end that every man may the better judge what credit is to be
given to the one or the other, yet reserving to my self to add thereunto
according to occurents, not to contradict Teixieres Author, but for some
notable actions which happily have been omitted, especially against the
Turks.

And for that Philo and Metastbenes (ancient Authors) differ in opinion from
the Grecians, Cyrus having conquered the realm of Media from Astiages, he left
the said kingdom unto his uncle Darius, with whose aid he took Babylon* and
transported the Assyrian monarchy to the Persians. Two years after, the said
Darius returned into Media, and Cyrus reigned alone in Babylon, who afterward
having attempted to make war against the Scythians, he left his son
Cambises king in his absence, according to the custom of the Persians, which
was, to appoint a king that was nearest in blood to him that was king, whenas
he went to make war against any foreign nation; which might be the reason why
these Authors do not put Cambises Darius son to Hystasp^s, having bin chosen
king. Xerxes son to Dar^^s ^^^eeded him, but they put him not in the number
of the monarchs, for that going Darius Longuemain (...) son: but the Greek
histories have not omitted to place Xerxes and Cambises in (...) successiue
order of the said Monarchs: the which is the cause that they number (...)
years in the said Monarchy, that is to say, two hundred twenty and six; and
these, (...) hundred ninety and one, after this manner.

Cyrus with Darius his uncle reigned two years.

Cyrus alone reigned two and twenty years.

Darius son to Histaspes being chosen king, surnamed Artaxerxes Assuerus,
reigned twenty years.

Darius Artaxerxes Longuemain seven and thirty years,

Darius Nothus nineteen years.

^^taxerxes Mnemon five and fifty years.

^^rius-O^hus six and twenty years.

^^^se^es four years.

Darius the last Monarch (defeated by Alexander the Great who transported the
Monarchy to the Grecians) six years.

Another abridgement of a Chronicle, according to the Greek
^O set down the opinions of Herodotus, Xenophon, Iustine, Agathie, Procepius,
and many Joseph speak of their beginning. Sem, says he, the son of Noah
(...) sons who enioied Asia, from the river of Euphrates to the Indian Ocean:
for ^^^left of his blood the Elyacaites, from whom the Persians are descended.
But as for ^^rsian appellation, it is not of so long continuance; for they were
afterward called ^^^ie^s, of a king bearing that name; then Cepheniens, and
Arteens, and in the end (...) of Perseus the Ionne of Jupiter and Andromeda, as
Herodotus does witness; but Perseus, it is not found written: for presently
the country of (...) was made subject to the Monarchy of Assyria, under the
which it continued vn^^^t. Sardanapalus was expelled his seat, and slain by
Arbaces the first prince of the ^^^^ans, and by Belochphul king of Babylon: the
Monarchy of the Medians comprehen^^ the Persians, Bactrians, and Hyrcanians,
the last whereof that governed was Astia^^^ who lost his kingdom by the
persuasion of Harpagus, who was incensed against the (...) that he had slain
his son, and made him to eat his flesh. This Harpagus seeking some Cyrus,
grandchild to Astiages (who was then in Persia with his (...) ^iuing a private
life) that if he would revenge his injury and his own (his grand^^^ having
sought to kill him) he had means to give him such an entry into the realm
(...) as he might easily make himself Monarch, and free the Persians from
serui^^^. The which Cyrus understanding, he wrought so with his countriemen as
they re^^^, and shaked off the Medians yoke, refusing them tribute and
obedience. (...) of these news, sent for Cyrus to come and give an account of
his rebellion; (...) the prince answered, that he would come sooner than
Astiages should desire (...) the which put the king into arms, and not
regarding the wrong which he had (...) ^^to Harpagus, he gave him the charge of
the whole army, to his own ruin; for (...) to fight, all the greatest men of
the kingdom having intelligence with (...) unto Cyrus party, and the rest who
knew nothing sled, being abandoned by their (...), whereupon followed the rout
of Astiages army, who was forced to fly; ^^^atning to put Cyrus to death. And
going afterward to his wise men and divines troops being defeated, he was
taken prisoner by Cyrus, who stripped him of his Monarchy, Astiages extended
thither ^ and toward the West, it came (except the Assyrians, Syrians, and Jew
(...) the river Halys, and to Capadocia, the rest belonging to the king of
Lidia.

The reign of Cyrus and Ciaxare, or Darius.
Cyrus having thus vanquished his grandfather, began to reign with his uncle
Ciax^re, otherwise called Darius, son to Astiages, as some write, but he
should rather Zonares makes him very old, and yet Astiages when he was defeated
by Cyrus which was the same year, was himself at the battle which he lost.
It was this Ciaxare which caused Daniell to be cast into the lions den; for
as there was ^^reatielousie betwixt these two princes, by reason of the great
honor which every man (...) Cyrus for his valor: Darius Courtiers took
occasion hereupon to be revenged of Daniell, persuading him to make an Edict,
by the which during thirty days not any one of the realm should present any
petition to any prince, lord, or king whatsoever, no not unto any god, but to
him alone; for by this means, say they, they should stay the subjects from
having recourse unto Cyrus, as they had in all their affairs, presenting their
petitions unto him as to their sovereign king, who notwithstanding should have
no cause of jealousy or discontent by this Edict; for that, faith Zonares, they
should not except Cyrus began to reign alone by the death of Ciaxares, who had
before spoiled Assyria, and defeated the Assyrian Monarch: but he being allied
to many great princes of Arabia, Syria, and Lydia, they committed infinite
spoils in Media, which made Cyrus resolve to abate this Babylonian glory; so
as after many routs and defeats which he gave them, he came and laid siege to
the proud and ancient city of Babylon, the which he took by assault: after
which conquest he received the Jews into grace, giving them leave to reedifie
the temple, to serve God after their law, and to pray for him and his realm:
so as then they began to build the temple, and to enclose the city of
Jerusalem, the which happened in Serui^s Tullius reigned at Rome.

The reign of Cyrus alone.
Cyrus to be revenged of the Lydian, who was the mightiest prince of Asia,
passed the mountain of Taur, or Corthestan, or Aman, or the black mountain,
and sending his great friend Harpagus into the lesser Asia to subdue it, he
joined with him against Cresus, vanquished him in battle, took him prisoner,
and was ready to have him burnt, had he not remembered the saying of Solon to
this Lydian king: That no man should hold himself happy before his Cresus,
yet the Grecian Ionians of Asia lived in liberty, and were only allied unto
the Lydian, yet they were forced to come under the Persians yoke, and to
acknowledge him for their sovereign; so as Cyrus commanded at that time from
the Egean sea, and the Propontides, unto the East Indies: but as ambition is
insatiable; and not content with any greatness, he resolved to subject the
Scythians, who had committed great spoils in Asia; so as he marched with his
army toward that part of Scythia, which lies beyond the river of Araxis, and
also beyond the Bactrians and Hyrcanians, into the country of the Mas^agets
and Issedons, who are now called Tartarians, or the country of Samureund.
Cyrus To^^^ he sent to demand her in marriage, not that he cared for her, but
to have means (...) upon her realm. But she understanding the Persians
desseignes, forbad him the Cyrus, ma^ing her only son General of her army,
who not acquainted with the stratagems of (...) was surprised; for Cyrus making
show to fly, left his camp full of wine and victuals, where these poor
Massageres entering, (not accustomed to such dainties) feas^ed and drunk in
such sort, as they fell a sleep in their drunkenness: but this was their last
sleep, for Cyrus lying in ambush, came and cut some of them in pieces, and
took the rest prito^^ners. Spagarpise, son to Tomyris, and General of the
army, was among the capriues. The queen advertised of her sons disaster,
sent a Harold to Cyrus for his delivery, admonishing him to go out of her
country, or else she would give him his fill of war. In Spagarpise besought
Cyrus to let him be unbound; the which he did in courtesy, and then this
prince seeing himself at liberty, and having a sword by his side ^etesting
his misfortune to be a captive, slew himself before the king. Tomyris being
refused by Cyrus, came to fight with him, with the rest of her forces, and
although the P^rsians and Medians did fight valiantly, yet they were in the end
vanquished, and most (...) of them cut in pieces, and among the dead was also
the great Cyrus, for that he had (...) too much in his good fortune, and not
taken example by the calimities of kings (...) mighty than himself, whom he
had ruined and deprived of their Estates. Tomyris ^^ing of his death, caused
his body to be presently sought for, which being found, she Cyrus. The
Persians carried his body to Pasagarde, where his tomb was (...). This
Pasagarde was in old time the seat of the kings of Persia: Alexander the (...)
was also there, after he had burnt Persepolis: and it was there whereas the
Priests ^^^nnoint their kings.

As for Cyrus, he was a courteous, bountiful, virtuous, and gentle prince,
loving that (...) was worthy to be respected, reasonably just, and upright,
valiant in combats, and (...) of the greatest undertakers of the earth: his
ordinary abode when he was not with^^^ne by war, was in the cities of Suze,
and Ecbarane, or Babylon: It was he (as it Strabo, which title was continued
unto his successors, as we (...) see in Esdras, the first Book, the seventh
Chapter, and in the mixed Epistles of Hypo^^^, in that which Artaxerxes did
write to Poetus. It was Cyrus also that brought in use ^^ong robe of the kings
of Persia, which was a garment (according to Procopius of gold purple
diuersified with many figures of beasts and fowls. Moreover, they had a (...),
and sometimes a cloak of purple: yet they said that this cloak was rather a
kind (...), having sleeves hanging unto the hand. It is not certain whether he
or Artax^^^ began to wear a Tyare, but whosoever it was it is very ancient.
Cyrus in the end (...) son for successor, whom he had by his wife
Cassandana, daughter to Pharnaspes

Cambises, second Monarch of the Persians.
CAmbises was more cruel than valiant, and as insolent, proud, and an enemy
to ver^^^tue, Cyrus. The first expedi^^^ Amasis king of Egypt, whose daughter
he demanded in ^^^riage, being persuaded thereunto by his physician, who was
an Egyptian, and ene^^to king Amasis, for he knew well that Amasis would be much
afflicted to give his daughter and refusing her, it would be impossible for him
to escape the Persians han is. Ama^^^ ^ho dreamed not of this intended treason,
neither yet considered whom he sent, was so ill advised, as in stead of sending
his daughter to Cyrus, he put in her place a goodly Niretis, daughter to Apires
an Egyptian king, whom Amasis had put to death: This lady being in Persia,
whenas the king saluted her, he called her the daughter of Amasis: You are
deceived sir (quoth she) I am the daughter of a more honest man than Amasis,
that is, of king Apyres, whom Amasis had caused to be treacherously slain, and
has seized upon this realm. This did help much to incense Cambises, seeing
himself mocked by Amasis: so as having just occasion to revenge his father in
laws death, and to recover his wives inheritance, he past into Egypt by the
means of king Arabe, and defeated Amasis, and his son Phammeneus: Being come
to Memphis, he caused king Amasis, being dead, to be taken out of his tomb,
and to be whipped, as if he had had some feeling, Apis, and flew the sacred Ox
which the Egyptians did worship, hurting it on the thigh: he had also sent a
great troop of soldiers to ruin the Temple of Amon in Lybia, but they were
driven back by rain, storms, lighting, and tempests, so as they returned
without doing any thing. But although these were but false gods, yet was he
rigorously punished, for first of all he became in a manner furious, putting to
death his nearest kinsmen and decrest friends, and among others his brother
Smerdis, having dreampt that Smerdis was set in the royal Prexaspes (one of
the Mages, and his most confident friend) into Persia, to kill Smerdis, the
which he effected. Then he made the licentious law of marrying his own sister,
a matter never before practiced among the Persians: whereupon having consulted
with his Judges, they told him that there was no law which allowed of that
acquaintance, yet there was another law which dispensed with the kings to do
what they thought good, preserving thereby their heads if they had spoken any
thing contrary to this tyrans will, who having married two of his own
sisters, slew the youngest for that she had wept for her brother Smerdis,
lately slain. He was much given to wine, and was in a manner daily drunk, and
yet wine was hurtful unto him, for that he was subject to the
falling sickness: during Prexaspes, who had slain Smerdis? what opinion the
Persians had of him? whereto the other answered, That it was very good, only
they found it strange that he distempered himself with excessive drinking;
wherewith Cambises growing into collar, caused the son of Prexaspes to be
brought, and shooting at him, he hit him full upon the stomach, saying, That if
he had not touched his heart, they might justly call him drunkard, and the child
being opened, they found that the arrow had past through the midst of his
heart: the father seeing it, was forced to commend him that had deprived him of
his heir: from which time, he caused the brauest of his train to be murdered
upon the least conceit, whom afterward he called for, not remembering that he
had put them to death. But Cambises did suddenly receive the reward Pazisite,
in whom he relied most; and Smerdis, brother to Pazisite: This did trouble him
much, as well for the treason of this Mage, as to remember that he had put his
brother wrongfully to death: but being ready to march against the rebels,
going to horseback, his sword slipped out, and run in his thigh, in the same
place where he had stroke Apis, wherewith the boane being perished, it grew to
a gangrene, whereof he died near to Ecbatane, according to the oracle which
had been given him; having been monarch of the Persians seven years, and five
months, leaving no children that could succeed him, for the women are not
admitted to the succession in Persia.

The reign of Smerdis the Mage.
Cambises had caused his brother to be slain, although before his death he had
declared it, for they had a conceit that he spoke it, to the end Prex^^^ (...)
had slain him ^urst^ or confess it: so as all the noblemen by a general
(...) Smerdis for king, believing him to be the son of Cyrus. The Mage being
(...) unto the Empire, to settle himself there, and to win the hearts of all
men, (...) throughout all the provinces an abatement of the taxes and
impositions which (...) to beleuied among the people, whereby he purchased
their loves, so as all (...) ^^iects were a^ his commandment, except the
Persians: for Smerdis, assuring him^^^ if he came forth in view he should be
known, never showed himself in (...) as they began to suspect that this was
the Mage; to be fully satisfied whereof (...) ^^cceeded after this manner: Otan
son to Pharnaspes one of the greatest lords of (...) came unto a daughter of
his called Phedyna, who had attended upon Cambises, (...) did then serve the
Mage as his concubine: Otan demanded of her with whom she (...), but she could
not resolve him, for that she had never seen Smerdis the son of, (...)
afterward she sent him word that none of his women did speak together in
her^^^panie, for the king had separated them one from another; this did the
more con-^ (...) the Persians opinion that it was the Mage, and to make it more
manifest, he willed daughter to feel if he had any ears, for that he knew the
Mage Smerdis had his cut. ^y the commandment of Cyrus: the daughter having
obeyed, and finding the king (...) without ears, advertised her father, who
discovered the whole business to (...) and Gobria the chief among the
Persians: these three woone three others unto (...), which were Intaphernes,
Megabyses, and Hidarnes, Darius being come from his go^^ent of Susa, was also
associated in this conspiracy, saying that he was certain (...) Smerdis the
son of Cambises was dead; so as these seven noblemen managed their (...)
rises so happily, as the Mages were cut in pieces, and Prexaspes the murderer
of (...) the son of Cyrus, cast himself headlong from the top of the royal
palace, (...) first declared the truth, and incensed all the world against the
Mages, who reigned (...) eight months: so as the race of Cyrus continued not
long among the Persians, (...) third heir did not enioie his conquests.


(...) the death of the Mages they were forced to go to an election, and for
that the Darius by the policy of the mai^^^ his horse, he was held worthy to
command the Monarchy of the Persians. He ^oone to Histaspes one of the
greatest of Persia whom Cyrus would have put to death (...) dreampt that he had
taken the crown away for his children. Having the reputa^^^ be one of the most
valiant men of the realm, all the people of Asia did yield him Cy^^^ Cambyses,
yet could they never draw them to be tributaries. This Darius married the (...)
daughters of Cyrus, as well to honor his house, as to make the Persians more
affected (...) then having pacified all matters in his Empire in the fourth
year of his reign; he (...) ^aue to the Jews to reedifie the temple, and to
build the walls of Jerusalem, (...) them with gold, silver, mettalls, and
victuals, commanding them to pray unto (...) his health, and for the
establishment of his crown. This prince is called Assuerus (...) holy
scripture, and for him is written the History of Hester or Hadassa, by whose
(...) the Jews were preserved from the conspiracy of Hamon, and advanced to
honor (...) princes house. The first order which this prince did set down
throughout his whole Cyrus had been a father to the people, ^^^ses a lord and
tyrant, and that Darius was a merchant. Matters being thus ordered, he wont to
make war against the Babylonians who had revolted, being resolved to endure
Zopirus the some of Megabyses one of the seven p^inces which had slain the
Mage^, having caused his nose and ears to be slit, and his ha^re to be
ignominiously out, (...), and yielded himself to the Babylonians, faining that
Darius had done him that indignity, who not being ignorant of the quality and
greatness of (...) did easily belee^ve what he said: and having brought him
into their city, (...), where in the beginning he did wonders against (...) of
the inhabitants, who by this are admiring his valor, did so (...), as they
delivered the keys of the city into his hands. Zoprius (...) he desired,
wrought so as he brought in his prince, who having punished the Zopi^^^, and
would that for his sake it should be free from all subsidies. This war being
(...) ended, Darius meaning to take revenge as well of the death of Cyrus, as
of the (...) of the Persians by the Scythians, resolved to make war against
this nation; but (...) not the way which Cyrus had done toward the East, but
by the Hellespont, (...) passing into Thrace by a bridge, he joined the
Bosphorus and strait of Bizantium (...) called Constantinople, and entering into
Europe, he marched toward the Mus^^uites and other Scythians, keeping along
the Euxine Sea, and the rivers of Bory^^^e^es and Dunowe: but seeing that the
Scythians did but vex his army, and would never come unto a general combat;
and had slain many of his men by diverse surprises; Megabises the son of
Zopirus, who was head of a part of his forces, inuading these provinces,
chiefly, for that Amyntas king of Macedonie had put to death the Ambassadors
which he had sent unto him; and at the same time he sent Amasis against the
Africans, for that they had surprised certain of his ships, and slain
Arcesilaus the General, who was king of Cyrenea a country which is near unto
Egypt, but his death was revenged by this Amasis in the taking of this town
of Barce, the which is in the West of Afric. Soon after Otan (whom Darius
had left Governor of Thrace) took the towns of B^^ntium and Chalcedon, with
the Islands of Lesbos, Andros, and Imbros: and for that the Ionians were
revolted against Darius, being persuaded by Aristagoras their lord, who had
been moved thereunto by Histices the Milesien; he caused his forces to march
against them, and then the Athenians making themselves a party went to besiege
the city of Sardis in Lydia, the which they took and burnt. This bred a long
and cruel war betwixt them, for Darius having sent Artaphernes against them,
he came to battle with the Grecians, Ionians, and Milesiens, vanquished them,
and took the city of Miletum, and many others of Asia, which he made
tributaries; and in like Mardonius General of his army at sea, who vanquished
Macedonia agine; and although he had lost 20000 men in a great tempest at sea,
yet he entered Thrace, beat the Thracians, took their towns, and made them
subject (...) the Persian Empire; so as Darius was at that time the mightiest
prince of all them that had swaied the Monarchy before him.

Darius did at that time restore the sovereign priesthood among the Jews,
doing them all the (...) he could, in regard of his wife Heste^: and as the
Cariens a people of the ^esser Asia, near to Cilicia, now called Caramania,
would have interrupted the course of his prospe^^ties, he armed against them,
and vanquished them, as he did the Eretriens: but in requital, the Athenians
more favored by heaven than assisted by their forces, under Mil^iades defeated
his army in the fields of Marathon, M^rdonius (...) General of the Persian
troops: this made Darius resolve to raise so great an army, (...) ^ould be
able to ruin all Greece, in the preparation whereof he spent three years:
(...) to march, he had intelligence of the revolt of Egypt; yet having

Xerxes, fifth Monarch of the Persians.
Darius having ended his days, he left a great contention among his children
for the Ariamenes, or (according unto others) Artabazanes, be^^^ the eldest of
all his sons, said, That according unto the custom of the Persians, which
gives the right to the elder to be presumptiue heir, the crown did belong
unto him; he was son to Gabrias daughter. On the other side, Xerxes (the
son of ^^ssa, the daughter of Cyrus) although he were the youngest of them
all, said, That the ^^^ers were not sons to the king, but of a private man:
the controversy was decided by (...) sentence of the Estates of the country;
That all the rest were sons to Darius, but ^^^xes was borne the son of a
king: this right of eldership has always been prefer^^d in the royal races
of the kings of Persia; only Cosroe was preferred before his bro^^^r Cabada,
being the elder, for that he was deformed.

As soon as Xerxes was in quiet possession of the realm, he went against the
Aegypt^^, whom having subdued, he entreated them with more rigor than Darius
had done, Achmenes, his brother by the father, who was afterward (...) by
Inares the African, and king of Lybia. Egypt being pacified, he continued his
^^hers dessigne against Greece, having been four years to make his
preparation, be^^^s that which Darius had done, so as he exceeded the forces of
all the kings that had ^^ene before him, his army amounting to the number of a
million of men; and the place (...) the Randezuous was in the town of Sardis.
But as he persuaded himself not only (...) subdue men, but also to stay the
violent waves of the Sea, causing Helespont to be ^^^ipt, for that it gave not
a free passage to his army; he saw himself defeated by a hand^^^ of men,
first at Salamina, by the Athenians, under the conduct of Themistocles, and
^^wards at Platea, under that of Aristides, so as he did nothing of note in
this expedi^^^ thraustes, and a mighty army at land, under that of
Phearandates, both the one and (...) other army were defeated near to the
river of Eurymedon, by the valor and good ^^^rnement of Cymon the Athenien.
This did so abate the pride and presumption of (...), as he was forced to
retire home into his country, and to make that mo^able ^rea^^^ peace with the
Grecians, by the which he did promise and swear, That from thence^^^ his army
should not approach near unto Greece, than the carrere of a horse; and (...)
his galleys, and ships of war, should not sail beyond the Islands of
Chelidonia, and Artabanus, contemning him by ^ea^^^ of his misfortunes, having
a certain hope to make himself king; but he fel^ into the (...) which he had
prepared. Thus died Xerxes, who had made all the nations of the earth ^^^emble
by his powerful armies, the which wrought no effects worthy of so great
pro^^^ions, having reigned one and twenty years.

^^^t^banus, having thus treacherously murdered this prince, addresseth
himself to Artaxerxes, telling him that Darius, his eldest (...), had slain
the king his father, entreating him to join with him, before that Da^^^ should
get possession of the realm, and prevent him in revenging so cruel a mur^^.
The which Artaxerxes understanding, moved with a just disdain, arms, and
(...) followed, ^^^banus having dispatched him whom he most of all feared,
fortified himself, toge^^^^ with his children, and entering into the Palace,
fell upon Artaxerxes, whom he woun^^^ but not mortally, so as the prince
escaping at that time by flight, gathered together (...) forces, and, with the
greatest speed he could, came against the traitor, whom he cut in pieces,
remaining by this means in quiet poss ession of his realm: Artabanus

Artaxerxes, sixth Monarch of the Persians.
Artaxerxes was set in the royalty, he pursued all them cruelly that had
consented, ^^ ^^ich had any hand in the conspiracy made against his father
Xerxes, changing or (...) the governors of the Satrapies, in whom he did not
trust, and ordering his (...) in such sort, as all the world commended the
wisdom of this young (...) v^^o whom Themistocles the Athenian fled, being
expelled by the envy of his (...) citisens, and was honorably entertained by
this great Monarch. In the mean Acamenes, son to Darius, with three hund^ed
thousand fighting men, had news suddenly that the Atheniens had defeated his
whole army: He sought to incense the Lacedaemonians against the Athenians, but
not able to effect it, he sent three hundred thousand men more against the
Egyptians, under the command of two excellent Captains, Megabizes, and
Artabazes, who after ma^^ incounters, assaults, and sieges of towns, forced
the Egyptians to renounce the alliance of the Athenians, and in the end agreed
with the Athenians, that they should suffer Esdras to Jerusalem for the
se^ling of their policy, advancement of the Temple, and the revenues appointed
for the entertainment and sacrifices thereof.

Xerxes, the second of that name.
ARtaxerxes left at his death two sons, the eldest was called Xerxes, the
second of that name, who reigned but two months.

Sogdian.
THe other was called Sogdian, who reigned eight months, neither of which did
any thing worthy of memory, wherefore they are not commonly put in the rank
of kings, but I have herein followed E^sebi^^, who has comprehended them in
this number in his Chronicle.

Darius, surnamed the Bastard, the s^uenth, or (according unto others) the
ninth Monarch of Persia.
Darius (called the Bastard) came unto the Sait. The Lacedaemonians allied
themselves to Darius, and the Medians reuol^^^g were subdued by him, and forced
to come and acknowledge him for their lord. This king had two sons by
Parisatides his wife, the eldest called Artaxerxes, and the younger (...) this
(...), vali^^^ courteous, and well-beloved of all men, whom the king made Sat^pe
of Lydia and ^o^^ia, commanding him to aid the Lacedaemonians against their
^nemies: but h^^ insol^n^ie against some noblemen of the blood (who had not
saluted (...) after ^ royal manner, that is to say, with their hands close in
their gown sleeves, (...) them to death upon this occas^on) was the cause that
his father, being sick, sent (...) him to come and give ^n account of this
offense, and to be punished according to the Cyrus ob^ying, he left Lysa^der
the Lacedemonian (...), who, with other Gr^ci^ns, did serve him afterward
against his brother: (...) he was advertised of his father^ death, yet
notwithstanding he was (...), who kept him prisoner; and Darius the Bastard
died in the year 3562, the same year that Athens was taken and burnt by the
Lacedaemonians, and Dennis the ^^^tant expelled out of Sicilie, which year was
held remarkable for three things: the death of a great king, the deposing of
another, and the ruin of the most famous city of ^^^^ce. And Darius reigned
nineteen years.

Artaxerxes, the second of that name, the eight Monarch of Persia.
Artaxerxes, the second of that name, succeeded his father, and was surnamed
Mnemon: (...) he kept his brother Cyrus in prison, and sought his ruin; the
young prince who (...)

This king did love peace and rest, and having pacified the troubles which were
raised (...) brother, he had no other care but to reconcile the Grecians, the
which he effected, (...) to his predecessors, who sought all means to divide
them: whereupon the (...) sent a great and solemn Embassage unto them, of the
which Pelopidas was (...) ^s Plutarch reports, being honored above all the
rest. This prince having reigned* (...) thirty years died, leaving for heir
and successor Darius Artaxerxes.

Darius Artaxerxes surnamed Occhus, the ninth Monarch of the Persians.
(...) beginning of this Monarchs reign was against the Jews, who being
grown (...) ^o factions for the high priesthood, there was one among them
called John, which ^^^^sus his brother, being high priest, in the temple: but
God would not suffer this (...) unpunished; for the people lost their liberty,
and the temple was polluted by the (...) of Bagosus who punished the offender,
and imposed the tax of seven years upon ^^^^wes. Not long after, Occhus taking
a certain town from them, he banished the in^^^^ts, and transported them
near unto the Caspian sea, Eusebius calls them (...) (...) observe at this day
something of their Jewish religion. Against this Darius (...) ^^uolted one of
his chief captains and satrapes called Artabasus, who made head (...) against
the kings lieutenants, being supported by the forces of the neighbor (...) in
the end he lost his life, and the king recovered the countries of Egypt,
Cy^^^^d Phenicia, and took the city of Sydon by treason; causing him to be
slain that ^^^yed it. In the end having reigned six and twenty years, he was
poisoned (with(...) one excepted) by Bagoas the eunuch, and Arsames having
escaped this poi^^^ned in his fathers place: but his reign was not long; for
in the fourth year the (...) as poisoned him with all the blood royal, and
yet he could not seize upon the (...) which fell to Coloman a great nobleman of
Persia, who caused himself to be (...) the fourth of that name. This Bagoas
thinking to poison him as he had done (...) king forced him to drink the
poison himself, and so he was punished for (...) ^^eries.

Darius the fourth of that name, and last Monarch of Persia.
(...) being thus revenged of Bagoas came unto the Empire, where he continued
not (...), for having reigned six years, Alexander the Great made war against
him, and eight years after that Cyrus had taken it from the Medians, the which
is no great

The realm of Persia returning to her first beauty, when, and how.
Alexander the Great, the Macedonian lords making war one against another, who
should be sovereign amongst them, one Arsaces a gentleman of Parthia (others
say a Bactrian, for whose sake all the kings of Parthia called themselves
Arsacides) making use of this division, fell on Andiagorus the Persian, to whom
Alexander gave the government of Parthia, whom he dispossessed of that country,
and made himself sovereign, refusing to be subject to any Macedonian prince,
the which happened in year of the world 3717, the one hundred three and
thirtieth Olimpiad. So as the Grecians power decaying in the East, the
Parthians before unknown and without force made themselves Monarchs of the
East, the which continued two hundred years, unto the time of Artabanus the
last king of the Parthians, who was deprived both of Monarchy and life by
Artaxare, or Artaxerxes a Persian borne, but issued from base parentage, whose
beginning is reported after this manner: That his mother was married to one
called Pauec, a man of base and vild condition, as being a currier by trade,
who notwithstanding being skillful in diuinations, and foreseeing as it is said
by his knowlegde what should befall, it happened on a time that a gentleman
called Sanna, passing through the territory of the Cadusiens, came and lodged
at this Pauecs house which was very mean; who seeing by his art that his guest
should be the head of a great and noble family, he was at the first very
sorrowful that he had neither sister, daughter, nor any other woman of his
blood in his house to have the company of Sanna, and to have children by him,
which might be allied unto him: in the end seeing there was no other means to
attain unto this happiness, Artaxare, of whom we speak, who was bred up in
his supposed fathers house: but the young man having purchased great honors by
his valor; both of them contended whose he should be, Pavec saying that he was
his son, and Sanna that he had begot him: but in the end it was concluded
that he should be called the son of Pauec, and issued from the seed of Sanna.
Such was the beginning of this king (As Agathius writes) who suddenly made
himself king of all Asia, the which happened in the year of our Lord 228,
Vrhin the first being then Bishop of Rome, and Alexander the son of Mamea
holding the Empire, against whom the Persian had war, forcing the Romans to
retire, Alexander having given battle to the Persian with all his forces,
defeated him, for that he always remained in Syri^ and Mesopotamia, attending
the cure of his army, the Persian not daring to assault him, the which he
would have done, if he had been victor in the first encounter, the which does
prove sufficiently that the Persians had not the better; and so we may accord
Lampridus with Herodian.

This Artaxerxes dyed having reigned fifteen years, he was very skilful in the
knowledge and ceremonies of the Mages, and Philosophers among the Persians; so
as this kind of people grew to be in greater credit, and more insolent than
ever: for they had never


S^dporus, first of that name, and second in rank of this new race of the
kings in Persia, Antherus holding the Sea at ^^ome, and Gordian the empire,
which had great wars against this king, who making his (...) of the discord
that was betwixt the Senate, and the two Maximins, seized upon the ^^^test part
of Mesopotamia, and Syria; so as the young Emperor Gordian was forced ^^^arme
against him, wherein he was so fortunat, as he vanquished him, taking from him
(...) towns which he had usurped of the empire, the which Gordian himself
declared (...) Epistle which he did write unto the Senate. But Gordian having
been slain by the (...) Philip, whom they say to be the first of the empire
that made war against (...) Christian faith, Saporus continued his course
(for Philip remained not long in the em^^^^ being a tyran and persecutor of the
name of Christians) and fell upon Syria, Cilicia, (...) ^apadocia, against whom
Valerian going, thinking to terrify him by his presence, (...) won so
glorious a victory, as having defeated the Roman legions, he took the
^^^erour Valerian, and led him prisoner into Persia, where he died a miserable
servitude; (...) which had never yet happened to the Roman empire, to see their
sovereign, cap^^^ yet Odenat, king of the Palmireniens, holding the empire of
the East, opposed him^^^^ Saporus, and coming to battle, the Persian was
vanqui^^^ and pursued into Assyria; Odenat took the Persians baggage, and his
concubines; (...) if this Palmirenien had not opposed himself against the
Persian, the empire of (...) had been ruined. From that time he kept himself
quiet in his country, and ha^^^^ reigned one and thirty years, he left this
world, and had for successor Ormisdates.

Ormisdates, the third king of Persia.
^^misdates reigned but one year; and we do not read of any remarkable matter
that

Vardanes, the fourth king of Persia.
^^^danes was successor to Ormisdates, but there is no more found by him than
by (...) other, for the Persians continued for a long time quiet; yet, as
Vopiseus says, they (...) ^^^assadours and presents to the Roman Emperor.

Vardanes, second of that name, fifth king of the Persians.
^^rdanes the first, succeeded Vardanes the second, and the fifth in rank of
the kings Narseus: he had wars against the emperor Probus; but ^^^dea peace,
the Persian enjoying some of those towns which he had conquered; (...) Probus
did, for that he could not contain his soldiers in their duties, but he (...)
afterward slain, and Vardanes had good opportunity to conquer in the East,
(...) ^^borne at Narbonna, with his sons Carinus and Numerianus, having made
him(...), had not withstood him, who recovered Mesopotamia from Vardanes, (...)
into Assyria, and had done more if death had not prevented him. Vardanes (...)
^^^teene years.


(...), third of that name, who lived but four months, after whom Narseus
(...) unto the crown.

Narseus, the seventh king of the Persians.
THis was a man of great enterprises, who grieuing that the Romans should hold
certain land in Asia, which he thought to be of the ancient patrimony of the
Persians, meant to have his revenge, and therefore he went against Armenia and
Mesopotamia, which he made to waver by his arms: but he was repulsed by
Galerius Maximian the first time that he came to battle: but at the second
encounter, which was betwixt Carra and Callinicus, going rashly with small
forces to charge a mighty army, he was chased and beaten, retiring himself
toward Dioclesian, by whom he was so ill entertained, Narseus, Aseub,
Dormisde, and Saporus, in Armenia the Less, with whom he did fight with most
fortunat success, and with no less council than force and valor, for that
he himself being followed by two or three horsemen, performed the part of a
spy, and went to visit the enemies camp, which having vanquished, he chased
Narseus, took his baggage, made spoil of his treasure, and had for prisoners
his wives, sisters, and children, carrying away an infinite number of the
nobility of Persia, with invaluable wealth, forcing king Narseus to retire
himself, flying into the most solitary defarts of his realm, for Dioclesian
was with forces to second him) he was lovingly received, and with the honor
that is due to them that triumph, carrying the wives, sisters, and children of
Narseus, into Italy, who were led before his chariot whenas he entered
triumphing into Rome. Thus Narseus, who aspired to the empire of all Asia, lost
both that which he had conquered, and five of his own provinces beyond Tygris,
the which fell into the Romans power. After this great disaster, the Persians
affairs declined much, and Narseus lived not long after, but died the same
year after his defeat, and the seventh year of his reign.

Misdates, the eight king of Persia.
Misdates, his son, succeeded him, who was the eight king of Persia, and
lived in the time of Constantine the Great, he was (by the commandment of his
father) crowned in his mothers womb, a thing never read of in any other, that
the fruit not yet come to light, should carry the crown of a realm. He died,
having reigned seven years, and nine months, in the year of our Lord God
310, Marcel sitting at Rome, and Maximian Galerins, and Constantine the Great,
holding the empire, having done nothing that was memorable.

Sapor^s the second, and the ninth king of Persia.
SAporus, the son of Misdates, being come to age fit to command, he
recovered all that which his predecessors had lost beyond the river of Tygris,
in Assyria, and Mesopotamia, and in the year of our Redemption 336, whenas the
Christians began to appear in his country, being solicited by the Mages and
sacrificing priests, of whose will all that family of Artaxexes depended much,
being come from a man of the same vocation, he began to persecute the Christian
faith furiously, putting to death the holy Bishop Symeon, with one hundred
good and faithful men in one day, and his own governor: He began first by
exactions and subsidies, and in the end by banishments, and punishments, until
that Constantin the Great entreated him by his letters not to use the
Constantin, Sa^^^^^ began to persecute the Christians more than before, as you
may read in the Ecclesi^^^^ History; so as the pooresolitarie people which
lived in the woods and deserts of A^y^^^ and Mesopotamia, felt the fury of
this tyran, who made himself Lord of the ^^ Constantin, in the which the
Romans got nothing but blows, as Eutropius the Roman (...) writes, saying,
Constance was very unfortunate, for he suffered great afflctions by (...), who
took diverse towns from him, and besieged others; they cut many (...) armies
in pieces: and finally, he never had any battle against Saporus, wherein
(...) Barbarian had not the victory, unless it were near unto the city of
Syngare, where (...) the better, the furious rage of the soldiers depriving
him of that felicity, but (...) abate the pride of his adversary at that
time. Pomponius Letus writes more (...), saying, Constance did never any thing
in the East that succeeded happily; for that (...) enemy had always the
better: in the eleventh year of his reign he had the victory, (...) it was
lost again by the rashness of his soldiers near to Syngare: so Constance
ha^^^ been eight times vanquished, in this battle the victory being for him,
it remained (...) enemy, not without great loss; for that Syngare was lost
with Bizabde and (...). After this battle, Saporus fell upon the Armenians,
and went to besiege the city (...) ^isibis, but the Massagetes assailed him,
and he went to encounter them, yet did not (...) the siege; and in the mean
time Constance sent unto him for a peace, the which he (...). After this
Saporus made war against the Armenians, but he found that fortune (...) always
follow him, for Arsates vanquished him, and made him retire into Per^^^^ this
Armenian war was of no great charge; yet it caused great ruin to the Ro^^^^
^^pire: for Julian the Apostat thinking to speed better against Saporus than
his ^^^^cessor, went thither with his forces; but he was slain there, and his
army put to (...) for that he fought against him that had God for his
protector, although an Infidel: (...) used him to punish this Apostat, the most
disloyal and wicked man upon the earth, (...) was slain the second year of
his Empire, and of Grace 267, and in the eight and (...) care of the reign of
Saporus king of Persia. The death of this Emperor, and the (...) of the Romans
did not puff up Saporus, having considered the infinite number of (...) and the
multitude of elephants which had been slain, a thing which had never (...),
and seeing the Romans also ready to renew the war, having so valiant a (...)
under as Iouinian, he stayed and yielded to a peace; the which although it were
(...) beneficial to the Romans, yet was it necessary, considering the loss
they had (...) from the Persian; and that having Sapor^s in Front, and others
reuolting, it had (...) ^^^sie to shake the greatness of the Empire: yet
Amianus does much condemn (...), as proceeding from a saint and effeminat
heart, and accusing Iouinian as a (...) and of no resolution: but we must
pardon him, for that he transports himself (...) ^ctions, and does hardly
commend any one but his Julian the Apostat, whom he (...) ^^owed to the wars.

Artaxerxes, the tenth king of Persia.
(...) being seventy years old, and having reigned as much as he had lived,
(...) Artaxerxes heir and successor to the (...) but not of his good fortune:
for Saporus having had many wives, had by the (...) thie three sons, Ormisda,
Adarnasse, and Narses: and by another which was (...) ^^rentage, yet excellent
in beauty, he had Artaxerxes. As for Ormisda he held (...) party, which
transferred the right of eldership to Adarnasse, who ought to (...) ^^ed to the
crown: but his father finding his disposition to be too cruel, he (...) yield
to make him his successor. For as the Mesopotamians had presented (...) of
cammells skins, inricht with gold and other imbroiderie, he gave it to (...)
^^^^misse, asking him if this present were not very pleasing; whereunto he
an^^^^ if he were king he should take more delight to see a pauillion made of
the (...); so as this answer (with many cruel actions of this prince) made
him to (...) ^^ccession; for his father having assembled the council, it was
concluded by a (...) consent that Artaxerxes should command and succeed after
his father, but (...) no more happy in him, for his father being dead he
presently put his brother Adarnasse to death; he put out the eyes of Narses,
and committed Ormisda to prison, beginning Ormis^^ being a prisoner, his mother
wife and sister went to see him, with the kings permission, who gave him a
file, with the which he brake his fetters and fled, retiring himself to the
Emperor Constantin the Great to whom he did worthy services.

Artaxerxes then inioyed the peace which his father had sworn with the Romans,
and held the provinces which he had left him, having no war with any man, and
having reigned eleven years, he died, leaving Saporus his son for his
successor.

Saporus, the second of that name, the eleventh king of Persia.
SAporus, the second of that name, son to Artaxerxes, reigned five years,
but he did not anything worthy of memory.

Varanes, the twelfth king of Persia.
VAranes succeeded Saporus: he kept the peace with the Romans faithfully,
seeing the good fortune which did accompany them: he held the realm of Persia
after that Theodosius the Great came unto the Empire, and under the reign of
his sons Honorius Arcadius: having governed ten years he died.

Isdigertes, the thirteenth king of Persia.
ISdigertes came unto the crown in the year of Grace 406, Innocent the first
holding the Sea at Rome: this was he in whom Arcadius had such confidence, as
he made him tutor to his young son Theodosius as well to bridle them that
were mutinous, as to keep his son from troubles in the East: and whenas they
brought him this will made by Arcadius, he received it with great joy
maintaining the peace with the Romans which his father and grandfather had
sworn with great equity and fidelity: and moreuer he Antiochus, an excellent
man, wise, virtuous, and worthy of such a charge, whom he made protector of
the Empire, and defendor of his pupiles rights; the which he sent to the Sena^
in this mannner, as Paulus Diaconus reports: Arcadius being dead, and having
chosen me tutor to his son, I send a man fit to bold my place: let no man
then presume to attempt against the infant, least an intolerable war be the
ruin of the Romans And to the end there should be no doubt of his intentions,
he renewed the league betwixt the Persians and Grecians, and Antiochus did
write often to Isdigertes, for the good and support of the Christians; so as
the Christian faith was much propagated in Persia, wherein good Marunthe Bishop
of Mesopotamia labored much: for before the king did persecute them cruelly,
being thrust on rather by the Mages, and Auda a Bishop of a holy life did
indiscreetly beat down the temple of fire worshipped by the Persians, and the
king commanding him to reedifie it, he chose rather to die, than to do it:
wherein he was more to be commended than in pulling i^ down, for that in
seeking to do well he had been the cause of so much ill: yet, as has been
said, this persecution ceased during the reign of this king, who would not
only satisfy the Emperor, but also the good Bishop Marunthes: for that as
Paulus Diaconus writes, he had cured ^^r^nes the kings son, being possessed
with a devil. But Socrates in his ecclesiastical history reports, that the
reason was, for that Isdigertes being subject to a great pain in his head,
which the Mages could not cure, Marunthes with the sign of a (...) twenty
years, leaving his son Var^nes heir of the crown.

(...), the second if that name, the fourteenth king of Persia.
(...), the second of that name, being come to the crown of Persia, showed him
(...) as seuerie a persecuter of the Christians as his father had been
favorable. (...) whose decease, he proclaimed war against the Emperor
Theodosius the (...) surnamed the Young; with whom joining i^ battle, he^ was
vanquished, and had (...) him with more violence, but that he had a care of the
Christians which were in (...) fearing least the tyran should persecute them
more? He had begun his persecuti^^ the princes and noblemen which had received
the faith, whom he dispossessed of (...) estates, and reduced them to such
extremity, as they were forced to keep camels, (...) exercise some base
trade; then seeing them so constant in the faith, he put them to (...)
^^^^ellest death, that the Mages (who were his ordinary Counselors) could
in^ent? (...) his last defeat which he received by Theodosias, made the
persecution to cease: for the ^^^etor having more regard to the good of the
Christians, than to his own advantage, (...) Helyon Patricius, and Antolius
(Praetor of the East) into Persia, to demand a peace of (...), who accepted of
the condition, promising to perform the Emperors will, and (...) that time
the persecution ceased. He reigned twenty years, and died in the (...) of our
Redemption 447, Leo the first being Bishop of Rome; and then Theodo^^^ade war
against the Vandales.

Varanes, the third of that name, the fifteenth king of Persia.
^^ranes, the third of that name, being pressed with the same necessity that had
made (...) father to account of a peace, contained himself in quiet, and
always conti^^ ^he peace which his father had obtained: He died, having
reigned seventeen (...) and four months.

Peros^s, the sixteenth king of Persia.
(...) succeeded in the realm, he was a great warrier, hardy, and of a great
courage, Agathias writes: but Procopius calls these Nepta^^^alites, and says
thus: Perosus king of Persia fell into controversy for the limits (...)
^^untrie with the Huns Euthalites, whom they call Albes, against whom he went
^^^ghtie army.

(...) ^Euthalites are of the race of the Huns, and yet they are no neighbors
unto (...) join unto the Persians toward the North: their chief city is
called Gonza, (...) frontiers of Persia: they have often contended with their
neighbors for the (...) of the country, and they are not Nomades (that is to
say, shepherds) like unto (...) of the Huns; neither did they ever enter into
the territory of the Romans to (...) against them, unless it were in the
company of the Persians. They are (says (...) fair complexion, neat, and
have no furious aspect, like unto the rest, neither do (...) their
brutishness, having some policy among them: for the Euthalites obey (...) and
sole monarch, and they live ciuilely and politiquely, using reason and (...)
their neighbors, like unto all civil nations. They are esteemed most happy,
(...), that have twenty friends or more, with whom they do usually eat,
having (...) and seigneurie common together, and they have a custom, when any
one (...) dies, to carry him to the ground. Then he adds, that Perosus seeing
himself coopt up in such sort, as it was impossible to ^scape, the king of the
Euthalites sent him Perosus having asked council of his Mages, they answered
him, That as for the oath he might do at his discretion, but touching the
adoration, reverence, and homage, which the king of the Euthalites demanded,
that it was impossible, for that the Persians might not worship any other thing
than the Sun. But they gave him this council; that in the morning; at the
break of day, he should go unto the Euthalite, and that turning, toward the
Sun rising, ^e should do him reu^^ence, and worship the Sun; by which means,
he should escape the danger, preserve

Thus Perosus escaped a^ that time, but he was as disloyal in the keeping of
his promise, as he had been inconsiderat and rashy in his carriage: for he was
no sooner returned into his country, but he gathered an army together to
march against the Euthalites, having left Cavades his son to govern in his
absence: It was at this time that he was slain, with his other sons, all his
nobility, and the most valiant men among the Persians, having reigned twenty
years, in the year of Grace 484, Simplicius being Bishop at Rome, and Leo
holding the empire of the Grecians, carrying also the title of Emperor of Rome.

Valent, the seventeenth king of Persia.
Cavades was very young, but he was but the shadow of a king, and did nothing
worthy of memory: for to speak the truth, the Euthalites governed rather
than he, to whom he made himself tributarie, by reason of his quiet
disposition, and nothing fit to manage affairs so confused as the Persians:
but this continued not long, for he died, having reigned four years, and
paid two years tribute.

Cauades, the eighteenth king of Persia.
VAlent being dead, Cauades, son to Perosus, came unto the crown: at his
entrance he found the Persians much tyrannized by the Euthalites, but as he was
a warlike prince, and could not live in quiet, no though he had peace with all
men; he presently took arms against his enemies, beginning with the
Euthalites, and vanquished them, shaking off the yoke of their command: He
also made war against the Romans, and other people his neighbors, of whom he
won many victories. He was naturally cruel, and so choleric, as it was
impossible to pacify him being moved: he was of such a troublesome
disposition, as he could not settle himself, but cause some disorders either
with others, or with his subjects, and in his own Estates: so as he took
delight to change

Blase, or Lamase, nineteenth king of Persia.
CAuades, being a prisoner, and having no heirs male to hold his place, the
Persians assembled together for the election of a king, and did choose Blase,
brother to the deceased Perosus; for (according to their custom) it was not
lawful to make any regent of the realm, unless he were of the blood royal.
Being chosen king, he presently propounded, in Council, what should be done
with Cauades: the people would by no means he should be put to death, although
they were of diverse opinions and council: Gusanescades who was Chanarange,
that is to say, Governor of the country, seeing the Council so irresolute,
drew forth a little knife a finger long, and proportionably big, the which
the Persians do usually carry to pare their nails, and showing it to the
rest, he spoke unto them, saying, this little knife is sufficient to do that
which twenty thousand men could not afterward effect, declaring thereby the
mischiefs that Cauades would do if he once escaped out of their hands; but
all his persuasions could not win the Persians to put their king to death:
yet they consented that this prince who was cruel and indiscreet should be
kept in perpetual prison, and Blase, Lamase, or Zambase (for they give him all
these names) began then to reign, a just man, courteous, and very affable,
under whom the Persians did hope to live happily: but Cauades Seoses, who dwelt
near the prison.

This man devising day and night by what means he might free his prince,
sought all opportunities to speak unto them; and for that Cauades wife was
suffered to visit him, and to supply him with all things that were necessary:
Seoses let him understand by her that if he could find means to get forth, he
had horses, and all other things ready to conduct him where he would,
appointing him a place where all things should be in readiness. This was
suddenly put in execution; for the lady being in the prison, disroabed herself,
and took her husbands, and he being attired like unto a woman went Seoses and
the troops the which he had gathered together, fled unto the king of the
Euthalites, who gave him his daughter in marriage. Others say that he went to
the Emperor Anastasius: but there is small probability that this Christian
Emperor would give his daughter to this Infidel who had many wives: being
more likely, as some others say, that it was the daughter of the king of the
Euthalites, whom he married then; for that the Persians had put her to death
that preferred her husbands liberty before her own content, and had put her
life in hazard to draw him out of fernitude. Wherein the Persians did show
their spleen against this prince, seeing they did not pardon conjugall love,
which they should rather have reue^enced, than revenged in this princess.

Cauades then with the forces of the king of the Euthalites marched against the
Persians, who coming against him, he put them suddenly to flight, and then went
into the country and satrapie of this Gusanascades, who had given council to
put him to death, disappointing him of his charge of Charanange or Governor,
and puitting in his place Adergunibade: then coming to the royal palace he
seized thereon without any great difficulty, putting Blase and Gusanascades to
death: after which he made his great friend Scoses who had freed him from
prison, Adrastadaram Selane which was an officer having the command over all
his forces, like in a manner to the Constable in France. This Soeses was the
first and last which ever had any such office conferred upon him in Persia.


CAuades having thus recovered his realm, and grown wise by the frowns of
fortune, he governed afterward more modestly than he had done before. He ought
great sums of money to the kings of the Euthalites, which made him send to the
Emperor Anastasius to borrow; but being refused, it served him for a pretext
to make war against him: so as the Persians fell upon Armenia, and committed
an infinite number of spoils, taking the city of Amida, and meaning to pass
further, they were stayed by the Euthalites who made war aginst them. This
was the cause that Amida was recovered by the Romans, who as Procopius writes,
corrupted the Governor which Cau^des had left in the city. In the mean time
Cauades seeing himself old, and fearing ^ome change in the State of Persia
after his death, he resolved to dispose of his successor: and having three
sons, he sought to give the realm to the youngest which was called Cosroe,
for that the eldest whose name was Cauades was not pleasing unto ^im; and the
second, who was called Baze, having but one eye might not come unto the crown,
for that the law of Persia excluded all them that were lame or wanted any
Abenedes; and this in the end he obtained by his practices. From that time he
began to persecut the Christians, causing the hamstrings of some to be cut, who
notwithstanding were able to walk: but besieging a certain Castle of the
Indians, which was called Azubdabar, and not able to force it, in the end he
took it by the prayers of the Christians, in the which he found an inestimable
treasure. For this cause he did not only forbear to be cruel unto them, but
did also suffer any one that would to be baptized, causing all persecutions to
cease. He had war against the Emperor Iustine, the which continued not long,
for there was a peace presently Cauades put to death all the Manicheens he
could find in his realm, for that they had sought to make his son king, he
being yet healthful, and full of life, he having reigned after his delivery
out of prison thirty years, and eleven before, he left it peaceably to
Cosroe, for that the eldest of his sons had been slain with the Manicheens,
having conspired against his father. Cauades died in the year of Grace five
hundred thirty and two, Boniface the second sitting at Rome, and Justinian
holding the Empire.

Cofroe, the twentieth king of Persia.
COsroe came to the Monarchy of the Persians after his father, of whose
praises Agathius Thimeus did not exceed him: but Agathius having propounded
this, says freely, that this was impossible in a barbarous man being borne and
bred up among courtiers that were soft, effeminat, ignorant, and flatterers; so
as learned men could not have leisure so to instruct this prince. But the
reason of this opinion was the multitude of learned men that did frequent this
court, every man Agathius commends him above Cyrus and Xerxes.

As for actions of war, having had some quarrel against the Emperor
Justinian, who had surmounted the Goths, the most fierce, proud, and powerful
nation of the earth; and made head against the Vandals, and other people
coming out of the North, with whom notwithstanding he was forced to make a
peace for a hundred and ten years, the which was called the peace without end.
But Cosroe could not keep it, for within three years he brake it, and invaded
Calicia and Syria, taking the great city of Antioch: but Belisarius going
against him, made him retire, and vanquished him, as he had done in

After this defeat he retired into Persia: but he continued not long before he
came into the territories of the Empire, as one that aspired to more than the
Persian Diadem, and he fell upon Comagena, sometimes called Eufratisia: but
Belisarius disappointed his desseignes, and defeated him. This war was very
long, for it continued four and thirty years, during the time of the
Emperors Justinian, and Iustine, until that Martin, cousin to the Emperor
Iustine, came against the Barbarians, and gave them battle in a place which
was called Sagarthe, where he vanquished them. This year Cosroe dyed, having
reigned two and forty years, having always been in action against the
Romans. Agathius says that he died of grief in the royal city of Seleucia,
for Maurice who being General of the Emperor Iustins army in the East, had
by chance made an incursion upon the confines of the Arpians, who were
neighbors to a village whereas Cosroe was at the same time remaining, and
passing the river of Z^rma, put all to fire and sword: which he (who had not
been accustomed to be so braued John the third b^ing Bishop of Rome, Iustine
the Young holding the empire, and Clothaire, of the blood of Clouis, reigning
in France.

Hormisda, the one and twentieth king of Persia.
HOrmisda, the son of Cosroe, being come unto the crown after his fathers
death, hoping Armiardanes his General, who having made some incursions,
returned to his house rich in spoils, carrying with him an infinite number of
prisoners; but he was r^pulst the second time that he came to field, for
Tyberius being come unto the empire after Iustine the Young, he sent his
ambassadors to Hormisda to offer him peace. But the Persian grown proud by
his happy success, would not hear of any composition: the which did much
incense Tyberius, and was the cause that he levied a mighty army, with many
flying camps to assail the Persian of all sides. Hormisda was gone in the
mean time to ^poyle Armenia, where, in the end, the two armies mee^ing, there
was a bloody battle, but at last the Babylonians turning their backs, they
were the cause that the Persian was wholly defeated, where he lost his
pauillion, baggage, elephants, and whatsoever was rich. And Hormisda made a
law, by the which the kings of Persia were forbidden to hazard their persons in
any fight, least they should miscarrie. After this defeat, Hormisda armed
again, but Tyberius having sent two valorous commanders against him, Maurice,
and Narsetes, the Persians were so well beaten, as they took from them that
which before they held, and what they had conquered in the times of Justinian,
and Iustine: yet Hormisda seeking to deface this blemish by some generous
action, labored to pursue a revenge of the wrongs which he had received, but
all was in vain; for he did but increase his loss, for that Philippicus,
lieutenant to the emperor, took from him Nisibin a city of Mesopotamia, and
entered far into the realm of Persia, from whence he carried a great prey which
he brought safely into Media. And two years after, Mauricius holding the
empire, the same Philippicus invaded Persia, and spoiling it as he ^ast, he
stroke a great terror into the whole country, having taken the city of
Arcemenes, and vanquished the Persians in battle, wherein they were confident
to have the victory, for that the Mages had to assured them: but the event did
belie their false predictions, for they received a great check. To conclude,
all the time of Hormisdas reign, he was but once fortunat in battle against
the Romans; for which defeat, the emperor Mauricius deposed Philippicus from
his charge of General of the army, and put Commentiel, who was Governor of
the East in his place. At the same time, Hormisda made the Turks his
tributaries, receiving them into pay to march against the Romans: but this
could not prevent the defeat and flight of Bara Gener^ll of the Persian army,
whereas most of Hormisda deposed him from his charge, but he not able to endure
that ind^gnitie, revolted against the king, making such a conspiracy, as in
the end Hormisda was d^priued of his seat, imprisoned and affronted by Bin^oes,
whom this ^^ng ^ad kep^ in prison, and that Besta his brother had delivered by
the conspiracy of the ^^^d Bara: ^o as Cosroe, son to Hormisda, was set in
his fathers place, notwithstanding all the protes^ations or persuasions that
this poor captive king could make, who laid before them the good which he had
done unto the Persians, to have defended them against the power of the Romans;
that he had often exposed his life for their preservation, and that he had
newly made the Turks their tributaries: but all this could not alter the
resolution of his mutinous subjects. He in^reated them moreover, that Cosroe
for successor; that he had another son fitter to reign, a mild man, and of
a quiet disposition, whereas this was naturally cruel and ambitious. But this
did advance his total ruin: for Cosroe seeing his father opposite unto him,
embraced the present fortune that was offered him, causing himself to be
crowned king of Persia, in the year of Christ 589, and the factious taking
poor Hormisda, his wife, and other son, showed a Hormisda, who was forced to
behold this pitiful spectacle, and to see his wife and best beloved son
butchered after so strange and cruel a manner; then they put out his eyes, and
condemned him to a perpetual prison, whereas Cosroe entreated him mildly for a
time: but the father not able to forbear to accuse his ambition, treason, and
felony, in the end, this detestable son caused his father to be so beaten
with a cudgel, as the poor prince died.

Cosroe, the second of that name, the two and twentieth king of Persia.
Hormisda, of whose death they had bin the cause. For the same Bara, or Varame,
not able to endure such impiety and wicked^^esse, made a new conspiracy
against Cosroe, who hearing that Bara marched against him with the forces of
his realm, he went to encounter him with another army, which was Cosroe
seeing that his soldiers fled daily to the enemies camp, and that they laid
ambushes to kill him; he first of all slew many of his army whom he
distrusted: wherea^ the whole camp being moved, and taking arms, he fled
suddenly to Corcese, with his wives, three sons, and some of the nobility of
Persia that would accompany him, and (as he himself confessed afterward) he
came unto that place miraculously, having prayed in his heart, and called upon
the God of the Christians, as his Savior, and surest guide. In the end, he
came and cast himself into the hands of the Emperor Mauricius, in whom he
found what he could expect: for he assisted him with such great forces, as he
put his enemy ^o rout, in which, besides the infinite numbers that were slain,
Narses General of the Cosroe: and as for the Turks, he sent them to
Constantinople to the emperor. The History of these Turks is remarkable, who
being sent to the Christian Emperor, were all marked in the forehead with an
iron and black ink, in which mark there was a cross: the emperor enquired
of them why they used this figure, seeing they did not honor it, nor him that
had suffered death thereon: they answered, That some time before there had bin
a strange plague in the Persians country, so as few escaped, but there being
certain Christians among them, they taught them to carry the sign of the
cross after that manner, and that without doubt they should see the plague to
cease, the which they did, and presently they felt the ^ffects of their
delivery, and this was the reason why they did carry the marks of their
Cosroe being restored to his throne, he did no more trust the Persians, but
retained 1000 Christians about his person, whom Narses gave him, of the most
resolute soldiers of his troops. And thus the nec^ssitie of Cosr^^ ended the
wars betwixt the Romans and Persians, the which had continued 16 years, until
that Phocas (having slain Mauricius) seized tyrannously upon the empire, in
the year 604. Gregory, surnamed the Great, being Bishop of Rome, for then
Narses, who had served Mauricius, and done worthy services unto the empire,
seeing it now in the hands of this tyrant, revolted, and seized upon the city
of Edessa in Mesopotamia. The which Ph^^^ understanding, he commanded Germain,
Governor of the East, to besiege it: but Narses had recourse unto Cosroe, whom
he had settled in his throne, entreating him to succor Cosroe finding himself
beholding unto Narses, sent presently all his forces, which gave battle to
Germain, who was defeated, and hurt in the shoulder, of which wound he died
within few days. Cosroe had also another victory against the Romans, Phocas
hearing, he found means to draws Narses unto him, promising by oath not to do
him any harm: but being come, he caused him to be burnt alive.

In the mean time Cosroe made himself master of all Mesopotamia and Syria,
carrying Cosroe invaded the Romans territories again, and seized upon
Palestina, Phenicia, and the provinces of Armenia, Capadocia, Galatia, and
Paphlagonia, and in the end he came to Calcedonia, spoiling, burning, and
carrying away men, women, children, and cattle. The tyranny Phocas, and the
despite of Narses, was the cause of this great loss to Christendom, he
desiring rather to see a Barbarian to ruin all, than his enemy to enjoy the
Empire at liberty.

After the death of Phocas, Heraclius holding the Empire, and Boniface the
fourth sitting at Rome. Cosroe allured with the conquest of the Christians
lands went again to field, in the year of our Lord 613, and came into Syria,
where he took the cities of Edessa, and Capessa, and marched as far as
Antioche, whereas the Romans coming to make head against him, were broken, and
put to flight, and the slaugher was so great, as few Romans escaped their
enemies sword: then Cosroe continuing his conquests, took the city of
Caesaria in Capadocia, and at the same time the Sarrazins began to make
incursions Cosroe took the city of Damas, and carried an infinite number of
people into captivity. This made the Emperor Heraclius to write unto him,
entreating him to forbear the effusion of so much blood, and receiving a
tribute from the provinces which he held, to yield unto a peace. But the
Persian who aspired to the Monarchy would not yield unto it, but came unto the
holy city of Jerusalem in the year 615, the which he took, and Zachary the
Patriarch was led prisoner into Persia, and the ornaments of the temple,
jewels, and riches of holy places carried away, especially the holy Cross
whereon Jesus Christ our Savior suffered death for the redemption of mankind.
After this Cosroe became so feared, as Egypt, Alexandria, and Lybia, even to
Aethyopia obeyed him: he conquered also many towns in Asia; so as many began
to doubt that he would carry the Monarchy of the world.

Heraclius, as making a peace with the Hanares or Henares, and with the Huns,
he went against the Persians being succored by the Sarrazins, and coming to
battle, he defeated them, taking fifty thousand prisoners, the which he
afterward let go without ransom: but Sarbora General of the Persian army,
using the natural infidelity of Barbarians, sent upon the Christians again:
upon this occasion Heraclius went to arms, and recovered all the countries
usurped by the Persians, even to Media: he got the holy Cross again, and
carried it back to Jerusalem. In the end Cosroe having reigned thirty and
nine years, dyed miserably, being slain by his own son, who cast him into
prison with an iron chain about his neck, feeding him with bread and water,

Syroe, the three and twentieth king of Persia.
SYroe having thus miserably slain his father, came unto the crown of Persia:
but his reign was not long, for it continued but one year, during the which
he set at liberty all the Christians that were then captives in Persia, and
sent back the Patriarch of Jerusalem, with the ornaments and jewels of the
Church safe into the country of Palestina.


AFter the death of Syroe, Adhesir his son reigned, but he held the Dyadem
but seven months, for that Sarbara slew him and seized upon the realm, which
he had long affected.

Sarbara, the five and twentieth king of Persia.
SArbara did not long enjoy the thing which he had so much desired: for having
reigned six months, his subjects slew him, for that he was not of the blood
royal.

Bornan, the six and twentieth king of Persia.
THe Persians being thus rid of Sarbara, they did choose in his place Bornan the
son of Cosroe, who enioied the crown but seven months.

Hormisda, the second of that name, seven and twentieth king of Persia.
HOrmisda, the second of that name succeeded him, and was the last of the
Persian kings of the race of Artaxare, from whom the Sarrazins and Mahometans
conquered the country of Persia, in the year of Grace 634, and 413, after
that Artaxare took the Monarchy from the Parthians, having slain Artaban
their sovereign.

Of the kings of Persia that were Mahometans.
TO write the genealogy, and succession of the Arabians, which have held
Persia whenas Agathius. Leaving matters then in their obscurity, this
abridgement not suffering me to dilate upon this subject, as it were fit, it
shall suffice to say that the Arabians having held this province long, the
Turks came and dispossessed them upon their first invasion: who passing on,
entered into the lesser Asia, where afterward they erected the Monarchy which
we see at this day, from whom came those Noradins, and Saladins, who afterward
annoied the Christians so much in the holy land: but these were expelled both
out of their country Zacatay brother to the great Cham of Tartaria, having
taken the countries called in old time Margiana, Sogdia, and Bactria, they were
termed the realm of Zacatay, as it is at this present. After this Ocatacham
usurping the realms of Media, Parthia, and Persia, he would have all this
called Azamie, whence it comes that the Persians are called Azemiens.

This race of Tartarians reigned in Persia since the year 1260, until that
Tamerlan made himself master of the greatest part of the East, having
vanquished Bajazet Emperor of the Turks. For from the children of Tamerlan,
are issued the kings of Persia, which have reigned unto the Sophi, whose reign
was of no long continuance: for Tamberlan Vsunchassan who maintained war so
long against the Turks, was son to Tamerlan, or to one of his sons: but
howsoever the countries of Zacatay have continued without wars, under the
command of the kings of Persia, after that Vsunchassan, had expelled one
called Iausa, who they said was of the ancient race of the Sarrazins.

Vsunchassan, or Assambey king of Persia.
VSunchassan being in quiet possession of his realm, allied himself with the
emperor Despinacaton, whom this Christian Emperor gave him in marriage to
have support against Mahomet, the second of that name, Emperor of the Turks,
who made war against him. This lady had leave from Vsunchassan to live with
liberty of conscience, and to have the exercise of her religion, having
commonly with Vsunchassan one son, and three daughters, the first whereof was
married to Sechaidar, father to Sophie, and the other two lived with their
mother, whenas she retired her self with her husbands leave, to live
solitarily in a town of Assyria, called Iscartibiert, where she continued
long, with her daughters, at the kings charge, who caused her to be richly
furnished with all things necessary until her death, and being dead, she was
interred in the city of Amida, in S. Georges Church, whereas her tomb is yet
to be seeene. Vsunchassan had war against the Turk, both for the Emperor of
Trebisonde his father in law, and for that the Persian pretended a right to the
country of Sylicia, now called Caramania, which the Turk said was his. As he
lost Caramania, the Turk making himself master thereof, so could Mahomet
vanquished, and made himself lord of his countries, as he had done of those of
Caraman, not but that the Persians are as valiant as the Turks, but for that
the use of artillery was not known to them, and the Turk having abundance,
he amazed them, and disordered them with the storm thereof. This made Assambey
entreat the Venetians to make war against the Turk, and that for his part he
would assail him; and whereas the Turks had put him to rou^ with their
artillery, they should do well to succor him, to the end that with equal
forces they might affront their enemy.

Pirohomat king of Caramania, and having past Palestina, and Syria, he crossed
the river of Fraat, and came to the lake of Argis, or Gelucalat, and took the
city of Arsingan, for that it was not strong nor desensible. Into those
quarters came Vsunchassan, with his forces, to encounter him, having his three
sons with him, the first being called Calul, the second Vgurlimehemeht, and
the third Zainel; and his army consisted of diverse nations, as Persians,
Parthians, Albanois, Georgiens, and Tartarians; yet Vsunchassan seeing the
order which the Turks held in camping, he was much amazed, and having been
long silent, in the end he spoke these words, Baycabexem Nederi^dir, which
signifies, O son of a whore, what a Sea is this? for he said that the Turks
Vs^nchassan made a pitiful slaughter; but night approaching, they sounded a
retreat, yet Usunchass^n had the victory, for that he lost few of his men,
either by the sword, or by the violence of the water, neither was there any one
taken prisoner, whereas the Turks lost twelve thousand, among the which there
were many men of mark: for this cause, Mahom^t durst not pass any farther
into the countries of the king of Persia, seeing the difficulty so Vsunchassan
flying upon an Arabian horse, gave an occasion to the rest to do the like; and
in this disorder, Zainel his son was slain. It is true, that the Persians
did fight seven or eight hours, and had made head longer if Vsunchassen,
fearing that Mustapha, Mahomets son, would have compast him in with his
troops, had not fled (as has been said;) which was the cause of the death of
his son, and of ten thousand of his soldiers, and the loss of the city of
Caratsar, which was the chief of the country, subject to the government of
Zainel the son of Vsanchassan, who was slain in the foresaid battle. After
the which, in the year of our Redemption 474, whenas the Persian king was
resolved to change the air (according Vgurlimehemet had revolted against him,
and had taken the city of Syras: whereupon the father leuying his army, went
presently to punish his sons folly: bu^ Ugurlimehemet hearing that his
father came against him, would not attend him, but ^aking his wife, children,
moueables, and jewels, he fled toward the Turk, sending some Bajazet, second
of that name, for a safe conduct; but he presently advertised Mahomet his
father, who commanded that a pasport should be given him, but he forbad his
son to go out of the city of Amasia to meet with the Persian, whom he
desired should be honored, yet would he have him have a care to prevent all
fraud and deceit. Vgurlimehemet doubted of this distrust, and therefore he sent
his wife and children before as hostages: then he arrived with some three
hundred horse, and B^iazet received him very courteously, and feasted him with
great magnificence. After this, the Persians son went to Mahomet the Turk,
who gave him better reception than his son had done, and promised to make him
king of Persia, and to ruin Vsunchassan, Vgurlemehemet marching toward his
country with his Turkish troops, he was no sooner come to Syras, but he made
incursions upon his fathers territories: Vsunchassan sent certain troops of
soldiers to make head against him, but not in such numbers, as he seemed to
regard much what his son had attempted, but these were policies, the sooner
to entrap him, for he caused a bruit to be dispersed, that he was much troubled
for the revolt of this his son, and that he had lost him in that manner, and
they did also feign that he was very sick, and the better to settle a
belief, he kept his Chamber for a time, and no man came unto him but such as
he trusted much: so as the news came to Constantinople, that Vsunchassan was
very sick of melancholy, for that his son had so abandoned him. This bruit
of Vgurlimehemet, that he should come and take possession of the crown, before
that some one of his brethren did prevent him, and to the end he should not
doubt of the fraud, they did celebrat the kings obsequies throughout the
country, the which gave more assurance to Vgurlimehemet, who had received
threescore m^ssag^s which had been sent him to go unto Tauris, where he was
received and conducted to the Palace, in which he found his father healthie,
and without any in^^rmitie, who caused him to be taken and put to death without
any regard that he was his son, and he whom of right he should have appointed
his successor to the crown.

After the death of this poor rebellious prince, Vsunchassan raised a great
army, in the Iberia, for that the Georgians had refused to succor him, whenas
he went against the Turk. But that king, and a neighbor of his, labored to
make an accord, by the means of a sum of money which they gave him, and so
retaining a fort which is upon the passages, called Tiffis, he retired to
Tauris, where he died, in the year of our Lord God 1478, leaving four sons,
whereof three were by one mother, and the fourth by Despinacaton, Princess of
Trebizonde, who, being about the age of one and twenty years, was strangled
by the conspiracy of his brethren, who would not endure that the son of a
Christian, and it may be he himself sauouring of his mothers profession,
should have any command in Persia.

Iacub Patischa, second king of Persia, of the race of Vsun Chassan.
Vsun Chassan, whose name was Iacub Patischa, made an accord, with his third
brother called Mango, whereupon the eldest was forced to fly, so as Iacub made
himself king, in the year of our Salvation 1479. He had war against the
Souldan of Egypt, who sent his Mammeluchs into Assyria, in the year 1482,
where, after long wars, diverse battles, skirmishes, and surprises, the
Persians had the victory, and repulsed the Egyptians, chasing them out of
Assyria, and Mesopotamia, into which they were entered: this happened in the
year of Grace 1487. This Iacub Pat^scha, who Iacub came thither with his
son, being seven or eight years old, and entering into the bath continued
long there; then coming to the palace of ladies, she who knew that her
husbands custom was to drink coming out of the bath, met him, and presented
him this deadly potion in a cup of gold, with a more cheerful countenance
than of custom: yet the trai^eresse had not so good a color, which made the
miserable prince to suspect something, and therefore he would have his wife to
take the essay, the which she durst not refuse, but drunk of it, then the king
took it, and gave also Vsun Cassan usurped the seigneuries that lay fittest
for them.

Iulauer, the third king of Persia of this line.
IVlauer, kinsman to the deceased king succeeded, for the other brother was
dead without heirs: he reigned three years, and did nothing worthy of of
memory.


TO Iulauer succeeded Basingir, he who had conspired the death of Iacub with
his adulterous wife: he reigned but two years.

Rustan, fifth king of Persia, of this line.
AFter him came one called Rustan, a young nobleman about twenty years old,
and he reigned seven years: it was against him that the Sophies father made
war. He Secaidar, and had (as has been said) married the eldest daughter of
Vsun Cassan, being head of the sect, which they have since called Sophies, that
is to say, of those which did not receive the Alcoran, but according to the
interpretation of Haly, Mahomets son in law, who had made a new sect in
Mahomets doctrine.

Under this Secaidar there were many dispersed here and there, which followed
his opinion, and did reverence him as a holy man; who living at Ardeuil, a
city seared not far from the lake of Vasthan, preached his doctrine unto the
people, and drew an infinite number to follow him. He had six children, three
sons, and as many daughters, and was a deadly enemy to the Christians: the
Mahometans thinking to make their perfection appear, the more they hated the
Christians. He made many incursions upon the Circassiens, Alam^t.

Alamut, the sixth king of Persia, of this line.
THis Alamut had succeeded Rustan, and was then at Tauris, whenas they brought
him Secaidar had seized upon the town of Derbent, standing upon the Caspian
sea, and serving as a passage and defense to go from one country to another,
b^ing but a strait. This made Alamut send an army against the Sophians, who
prepared themselves to battle, and ioining, (notwitstanding all the
resistance they could make, having S^^^idar being s^aine, his head was cut off,
and cast unto the dogs; the rest of the Sophians were put to rout, and most of
them cut in pieces, and the hatred they bare them was so great, as wheresoever
they found any one, it was impossible to save his life.

The children of Seca^dar being advertised of this news fled, the one into
Natolia, another to Alep, and the third into an Island called Armining, lying
upon the lake of Va^tham, Ismaell being thirteen or fourteen years old,
exceeding fair, grave, and yet courteous, whose face promised some great
matters to come. The Armenian priest who took this infant into his custody,
was a great Astrologian, and skillful in judgments, who was the more careful
to bring him up, for that he knew by his art that this infant should one day
attain to some great, command: he t^erefore kept him secret, for that they
sought for him in all places to kill him. This priest labored to instruct him
in the Christian law, wherein it may be he had prevailed something, if ambition
had not been of more force in this young princes heart, than piety: but he
who had other intentions demanded leave of his master and governor, whom he
h^ld Secaidar: from thence he did often write to his friends at Ardeuil, with
whom practicing thus by letters and secret messages, in the end thinking they
had disposed well of their affairs, they resolved to revenge both the death of
their prophet Secaidar, and the defeat and slaughter of the Sophians at Derbent
by the soldiers of Alamut.

The first enterprise which Ismaell undertook, was against the castle
Maumutaga standing upon the Caspian Sea, the which he took by surprise, for
that they dreampt not of him, neither were there any forces in the place, nor
the guards careful to keep the gates. Ismaells good fortune was such, as in a
borrough standing under the castle, he found an inestimable treasure with the
which he began to win the hearts of men, to make leuies of soldiers, to send
presents to great men, and to use all the policy that they are accustomed to
do which aspire to the usurpation of Empires, forgetting nothing that might
serve for the advancement of his cause: so as he who before at the taking of
the castle had but two hundred men, was in an instant followed by five or six
thousand Sophians, with the which he began boldly to invade the territories of
Alamut and to win part of his country, pretending the crown to Assambey, and
that he which reigned was not as he said of the blood royal of Persia.

Alamut seeing the impossibility to force Maumutaga, would not send any army
to besiege it: moreover he had a conceit that the Sophi would proceed no
further, but content himself with that piece; and in the mean time holding
him in suspense, and making no show to assail him, he would not stand upon his
guard, and so in time he should have means to entrap him, and to punish him
once for all. But he made his reckoning without his host; for Ismaell having
gathered together a mighty army, went to besiege the city of Sumachia, which
was great and rich, lying betwixt Armenia, and Media. nor far from the Caspian
sea. Sermanglogli king thereof seeing himself too weak to make Ismaell took
Sumachia, and made a pitiful sla^ghter of the inhabitants, where he inricht
himself, and the soldiers of his army; so as he drew them to him by his
bounty and courtesy: and it was bruited over all Asia, that Ismaell was the
most wise, valiant, courteous, and bountiful prince in the world; which made
many become Sophians, only to be partakers of the spoils and conquests of this
prince.

In the mean time Alamut seeing the happy success of his enemy, gathered
his forces together, and the Sophi for his part did not omit any thing, but
sent unto the kings of Iberia or Georgiana, who were three; the first was
called Scenderbey, the second Gargarambey, and the third Mirzambey, to demand
succors, making great promises to free

Either of these princes sent him three thousand Knights, and six thousand
Iberians* all valiant and hardy warriors, and the best soldiers that are in
all the East, who coming Ismael at Sumachia were courteously received ^y him,
giving them great presents of the riches which he had gotten at Sumachia.
Alamut, who was then about sixteen years old, and Ismael nineteen, hea^ing
of the great preparation of his enemy, came to Tauris, and from thence marched
toward Sumachia, with a resolution to fight with him; and Ismael in like
manner went to meet with him, having only, as they say, sixteen or twenty
thousand men: but all choice men and good soldiers. These two young and
courageous princes met betwixt Tauris and Sumachia, where there being a great
riue^ ser^ing as a bar to either of them, the Sophie found out a foord the
which he past in the night unknown to his enemy, and at the break of day
came and charged Alamuts Ismael had cut the greatest part in pieces; so as
Alamut saved himself with difficulty in Tauris, with some small troop that
followed him: for all the rest were put to the sword by Ismael, who having
rested his army four days, he marched toward Tauris, where he entered without
any resistance, for that the city is not able to make head against an army,
having no walls, neither were the people very fit for the wars. Ismael used
great cruelty against all the race of Iacub, of the which he left not any one
alive, but caused the wombes of women with child to be opened, and the fruit to
be drawn forth and muthered; and not content to flesh himself upon the
living, he made war against the dead* for having caused the body of Iacub, and
other noblemen to be sought out, but especially of those which had been at the
battle Secaider his father was slain, he made their bodies to be publicly
burnt on the Market place: and to show how much he was pleased with the
effusion of blo^d, he commanded that three hundred common strumpets should be
brought before him, causing their heads to be cut off. The like he did to four
hundred men that were of king Alamuts train: neither is it known for what
reason he caused all the dogs that were found in Tauris, to be slain. And to
heap up the measure of his wickedness and cruelty, he put to death his own
mother, who (as it has been said) was of the family of Vsunchassan: but the
Sophie detested her, for that, being young, after the death of Secaidar, she ^^d
married again to a great lord of Persia, one of those which had been in the
battle of Derbent: for thereby he conceived that she hated her first husband,
and Vsunchassan.

THE LINE OF THE SOPHIANS.

ISmael being thus settled in the possession of this realm, continued his
victories and rigor Ismael remained at Tauris, feasting with his captains,
behold Muratchan Sultan of Bagadeth, issued from the blood of Assambey, came to
make war against him, the which did much trouble Ismael, yet he M^ratchan did
the like, and all the duties of a good and valiant commander, so as the combat
continued a whole day, with such animositie, and so great slaughter of either
part, as they hold that since Darius, there has not been the like battle
given in Persia, yet Ismael had the victory and honor, the other being forced
to fly to Babylon. This victory happened about the year of our Redemption
1499, Ismael being not yet full nineteen

After this, Ismael resolved to reduce the province of Diarbek, or Mesopotamia,
the which he knew had always been under the sovereignty of the kings of
Persia, and was then under the command of many private men, among others, of
Sultan Cal^b lord of Azanchise, who being advertised of Ismaels dessignes, came
of his own motion, without any Summons, there by to bind him to entreat him
the better; he kissed his hand, took the Gaselbas, and promised to be his
faithful subject and servant: the which Ismael took in so part, a^he
confirmed him in his Estate, and gave him his sister in marriage. He showed
great courtesy to certain Turks come out of Natolia, who offered him their
service, and Vstagial^ Momutbeg, to whom the Sophi gave the government of
Diarbek, except the cities of Aranchef and Amida, which he left to his brother
Sultan Calib, who having exceeded the bounds which were prescribed him by the
Sophi, as the bruit went, he had commandment given him to leave those cities
to Vstagialu, who had notice given him, that although Calib were brother in law
to the king, yet his majesty's meaning was, that he should have the
superintendancie of the province; whereupon Calib refusing to obey this
commandment, for that the Curdes (of whose nation he was) submitted
themselves very unwillingly to the Sophians, was pursued by Vstagialu (whom
the Sophi had also honored with the marriage of another of his sisters) taking
from him the greatest part of his seigneurie, and all by the practices of the
Sophi, who did it of purpose to ruin all the natural princes of the country,
Iacub) leuying great forces in the year of our Salvation 1510, Vstagialu, whom
he had sent before, being not able to prevail, he came himself in person,
having raised a greater power than of custom, or was needful to ruin them
with whom he had to do; but he only feared least the Turk or the Egyptian
should undertake the defense of them whom he meant to punish: he therefore sent
to either of them, entreating them not to meddle with the affairs of the
Carbey son to the Alidulien king, notwithstanding that this Prince was well
accompanied, and the place well furnished with all things necessary, in the
which having taken this young prince, he took a delight to cut off his head
with his own hand; as he did presently after to his predecessor Alamut, who
being betrayed by Amubey, in whom he did wholly trust, being brought before
Ismael, he slew him presently with his

He was of a disposition so impatient of all rest, as having ended the
Alidulien war, and seeing that Muratchan Sultan of Babylon (of whom we have
formerly spoken) might quarrel with him for his crown; he resolved to ruin
him, and took for a subject, that after the death of Alamut he had got
possession of the great city of Syras, the chief and Metropolitan of Persia,
terming himself to be the nearest of the blood royal descended from
Vsunchassan: both these princes had great numbers of men; but Ismael had the
most valiant; and Muratchan made his subjects to follow him rather by force,
than for any good will they had to march under his command, remembering that in
former times Muratchan had fought against the Sophi near unto Tauris with
thirty thousand Ismael, entreating him to receive him for his vasfall; but
Ismael caused the heads of his messengers to be cut off, saying, That if
Muratchan had any desire to acknowledge him for Lord, he would have come
hinse^fe in Mur^tchan, and fearing least he should be entreated like unto king
Alamut, he stole out of his camp, and taking three thousand choice men, whom
he held most faithful, he fled to Alep, but being come unto the river of
Euphrates, he caused the bridges to be broken down, which fell out well for
him: for the Sophi causing him to be purs^ed with twice as great a troop; he
had no sooner past the river but he saw the Sophians at his back, who by this
means returned without any effect, and Muratchen saved himself in Alep, where
with king Aliduli, he was entertained at the charge of the Souldan of Egypt.

Ieselbas, for that they wear a green Turban, desiring to divert the course
of his prosperity, came and invaded the country of Corasan, and took many
fair towns upon the Caspian Sea, as Eye Straui (whereas they make excellent
silks) Amixandaran, and Sare, the which drew the Sophi unto the frontires to
stop the Tartarians passage as he did: but the Tartarian sought to surprise
him, fayning to go visit the Sepulcher of his Prophet Mahomet, and to go the
pilgrimage of Mecque: but the Persian would not hear of it. After this
Sermandali king of Seruan, which is the country of Media, having broken the
accord made betwixt him Ismaell; the Sophi assailed him, ruined his country,
and took from him his Seigneurie: from thence he past into Carabac, where he
made choice of two captains, the one called Dalabey, the other Beyrabey, to
whom he gave the charge of the conquest of Sumachia, the which they took
without any resistance, and the Castle of Calastan was also taken, with all the
forces, which are from Mount Taurus unto the remotest part of the Caspian sea,
and to the city of Derbe^t; so as all the lords of this country took the
Caselb^^ and did homage to the Sophi.

Moreover he was in such reputation amongst his own people, as his soldiers
did in a manner adore him, having such confidence in him, as they went unto the
war for his service without any defensive arms, and fighting bare brested,
they cried Schiac Schi^^* Sch^ach was first given unto the Sophi: for in his
titles at this day they call him Sch^ach Ismaell, and on his coins, he had
caused these words to be graven on the one side, Illahe Illallaha Muhammeduis
sesul allahe, that is, there are no Gods but one only God, and Mahomet is the
messenger of God; and on the other side were these words, Ismaell halife,
hillahe, that is to say, Ismaell is the Vicar of God. If any one would pray
well, he used no other terms, says Leonclauius, but Schiach accomplish thy
desire, and be favorable to thy enterprises. He also changed the form of
p^ayers which Mahomet had instituted, and made others very different: and thus
for the love of him the Persians fell in hatred with the followers of Mahomet,
so as he who had

But having ended this war, he fell presently into another: for the house of
the Ott^mans having been long an enemy, not only to the Sophians, but also
to the fa^^llies of Vsun Cassan, and their predecessors, who only repre^ent
at this day the party of (...) whose descendants did in former times retire
themselves into Persia, they h^^ing been always mortal enemies to the
Turkish Monarchs, whose hatred increased Selim which was Emperor of the
Turks, and the other Ismaell new king of Per^^^, both of them being ambitious,
valiant, undertakers, cruel, and very fortunate in their enterprises. That
which should entertain their wills, and purchase mo^e love, was Ismaell having
sent Ambassadors to Sel^m to congratulate his joyful coming to the crown,
he sent him no other present, but a great Lion. Selim who conceived that this
Hieroglyphick would tax him of cruelty, grew into great choler against the
Ambassador, so as, notwithstanding any excuse, that which his king had done,
was only to present to a great and royal courage the beast that was more
courageous and royal than all others: he could not satisfy him, so as he sent
back again the Ambassador without any honor, to whom (being in his lodging)
he sent certain great dogs which had bloody mouths to carry with him into
Persia, commanding that without any delay this Ambassador should retire home
unto his master,

The Ambassador being returned to his master, he put Ismaell into so great a
fury, as he swear to be revenged, the which he did hope to work by the means
of Amurath Zelebi, nephew to Selim, who after the death of his father Achmet,
had been forced to fl^e into Persia: this was he whom the Sophi armed against
the Turks; so as he first of all invaded his uncles country, who being then
forced to defend himself, he presently led a great army into Persia, whenas
Ismaell least dreamt of him, not thinking his enemy could have used such
expedition; so as being ill informed of their disseignes, he was gone to make
war against the Coraxeans, a people which inhabited upon the Ismaell was
forced to save himself in a moorish fen, loosing the greatest part of his
army, and all his baggage: this battle was given in the year 1513. After
which Selim took the city of Tauris, the which having preserved for a time,
he afterward spoiled, and carried away a great number of the inhabitants to
Constantinople. In his retreat, Ismaell fell upon the rereward, and defeated
many of his men, having the spoil of all the baggage. In the end Ismaell
having reigned twenty years, past to an other life, in the year 1525, having
left four sons with an ample seigneurie,

Schah or Xa Thamas, or Tachmas, the second king of Persia, of the family of
the Sophians.
A Thamas eldest son to Ismaell, came unto the crown of Persia after his
fathers death: having had in a manner during all the time of his reign some
wars with the Turks, a nobleman of the country called Vlama, had been one
of the chief causes of the war, being revolted against his king and fallen
unto the Turks party; so as Soliman Solimans victories, but he made himself
master of all Assyria and Mesopotamia, and particularly of Bagadet which was
the chief of the country, where he was crowned king of Persia by the Calife
of that place, where having stayed some time, he returned back the second time
to Tauris, forcing Thamas to fly: at this time the Turks made a wonderful
spoil, carrying away all that was rare and good, and setting fire upon all the
neighbor places: but Del^ment a Persian captain had his revenge, who taking
his advantage cut them in pieces, and put Vlama to flight: this defeat happened
the thirteenth of October in the Delyment returning full of glory and honor
to his king. Although the Turks had spoiled all these provinces, yet some have
written, that of near 500 thousand so^les which past the river of Euphrates,
there returned not above eighty thousand able men.

Bajazet, the son of Solomon, fled unto the Persians, who for a time made use
of this occasion with advantage, but in the end Solomon fearing that this war
might grow teadious, and that in his old age he might receive some disgrace,
practiced so with T^chmas, as he persuaded him to kill him, who had fled unto
him for refuge, betraying in this manner his guest for money. He reigned 53
years, and died in the year 1576, lea^ing two sons, Schaeh Ismael, and
Mehemet the Blind.

Schaeh Ismael, the third king of Persia of the Sophians Line.
Ismael, eldest son to Tachmas, succeeded his father in the crown of Persia,
but his reign Tachmas children, called Cardar, seized upon the realm, who
having put his brethren in prison, seeing himself assured of the realm, be
showed himself so faint hearted, as the great men of the realm began to
contemn him, and in the end to hate him; so as they mu^thered him, and drew
his brother Ismael out of prison, setting him in the roy^ll throne, who finding
himself not very safe, by the late example of his brothers death, seeking to
make an exact trial of the love of his subjects, he hid himself in his
palace, and did manage his dessigne so secretly, as having caused his death to
be published, it Ismael faithfully, who coming out of his grave like a body
newly risen, appeared to his enemies, not like a ghost, but like a prince
justly incensed; but he carried himself therein so cruelly, as he filled all
with murders, which bred new troubles, and unexpected confusions among his
subjects, the which increased by the publication of his new law, which he would
have embraced at Casbin, putting them to death that would not follow it. His
cruelties were the cause of a great conspira^ie which was made by the Sultans,
that is to say, by the greatest men of the country, which came to that Perca)
who had intelligence with the Sultans, slew him: the which did wholly confound
this empire, so as in show Persia did run to ruin, there being nothing able to
resist the least attempts of her enemies. This weakness and confusion of
State increasing daily, they advanced Codabande to the royal throne, being a
man ignorant of the affairs of State and war, and diseased in his eyes,
which has made some ^ay, that he was blind, fearful, and inconsiderat in his
actions, and that which did most i^port, not esteemed by the Sultans: so as in
regard of these things, this realm which in s^^me^times had bin so much
feared, began to be contemned of her neighbors, and of them that were a far
off.


AFter all these reuolutions which happened (as you have heard) under Ismael,
Mahamed the Blind came unto the crown, who being such (as I have said) it
caused Amur^th, emperor of the Turks, to make many enterprises against
Persia, sending thither one of his Bashas, called Mustapha, who took the fort
of Eres, with the towns of Sumachia, and Dennenopi, and made himself master
of all Seruan, yet the Persians recovered a part of it: All the reign of this
prince, which continued but six years, was spent in the taking and recovering
of places, and in certain defeats which were given of either side.

Scach Abas, the fif^ king of Persia, of the race of the Sophians.
Achmat, emperor of the Turks, which reigns at this present, it was renewed
more bloody than before: he sent certain ambassadors Radolphus, as to the
Archduke of Austria, to cross the conclusion of a peace which was then treated
of betwixt the Christians and the Turks, to the end he might more easily defeat
his enemy: but the affairs of Christendom were so confused, and their forces
so weak, as the emperor was forced to yield to that which was most necessary:
but as for the Persian, he continued the war, and was in the same terms in the
year 1609, having already reigned 33 years. This is all that can be found of
the kings of Persia, as well in ancient as modern Authors; Let us now see a
Catalogue of them, for the ease of the Reader, distinguishing them according to
diverse races.

THE MONARCHS OF PERSIA.
The year of the World. The years of the reign. The Months. 1. Cyrus, and
Ciaxre, or Darius. 2. 3427. 1. Cyrus alone. 2. 2. Cambises, in him ended the
race of Cyrus. 7. 5. 3. Smerdis the Mage. 0. 8. 3463. 4. Darius, son to
Histaspes. 36. 5. Xerxes. 21. 6. Artaxerxes. 44. 7. Xerxes, second of that
name. 0. 2^ 8. Sogdian. 0. 8. 9. Darius the Bastard. 19. 10. Artaxerxes. 36.
11. Darius Artaxerxes, surnamed Occhus. 4. 12. Darius, the fourth of that name.
6.

THE LINE OF THE ARTAXARIDES.
The year of Grace. The year of the reign. The Months. 1. Artaxare or
Artaxerxes. 15. 228. 2. Saporus. 0. 3. Hormisdates. 1. 4. Vardanes. 0. 5.
Vardanes, second of that name. 16. 6. Vardanes the third. 0. 4. 7. N^rseus. 7.
8. Misdates. 7. 9. 9. Saporus. 70. 10. Artaxerxes. 11. 11. Saporus the second.
5. 12. Varannes. 10. 13. Idegertes. 21. 14. Varannes the second. 20. 15.
Varannes the third. 17. 16. Perosus. 20. 17. Valent. 4. 18. Cauades. 11. 19.
Bl^se or Lamase. 2. 20. Cauades again. 44. 21. Hormisda. 15. 22. Cosroe. 39.
23. Siroe. 1. 24. Adhesir. 0. 7. 25. Sarbara. 0. 6. The years of grace. The
years of reign. Months. 26. Bornan 0. 7. 634. 27. Hormisda 4.

THE LINE OF VSVN CASSAN OR ASSAMBEY.
1403. 1. Vsun Cassan 11. 6. 2. Iacub Patischa 12. 10. 3. Iulauer 3. Baysingir
2. 5. Rustan. 7. 6. Alamut and Murat 3.

THE LINE OF THE SOPHIES.
1495. 1. Ismaell Sophi 20: 2. Schach Tachmas 53. 3. Schach Ismaell 1. 10. 4.
Scbach Mahamed the blind 7. Unto the year 1609. 5. Schach Abas. 33.

The Preface.
THis History abridged of the Persians, is so full of memorable actions, as if
they should be set down in particular, according to the Method which has
been held throughout the whole book, it would rather make a relation than an
abridgement: and this long repetition would rather be tedious and unpleasant,
tha^ profitable to the reader, who will sooner have perused this small
abridgement, the reading whereof is so succinct, as it must needs give him
content. It shall suffice then to say for his better satisfaction, that this

Having succinctly described Persia, and the kings which have commanded Cyrus
their first king, unto this present, as it has been written by ancient and
modern authors: it shall be now fit to show the order and succession as it is
found in their Annals written by the Persians themselves, and compiled by
Carick Mircond, as it was promised in the beginning of this short abridgement.

He says, that in the province of Azerbajon or Aderbajon, as it Kayumarras,
who in the beginning excused himself all he could, holding himself too weak
for so great a charge: yet he was so importuned by their entreaties in
general, as in the end he consented to the election they had made of his
person; and then transporting himself to a public place, they that were
deputed to that end, attired him in the presence of all the people with roabes
different from the common sort, and for a mark of royalty they did put upon
his head a kind of little hood, which they call Tage, the which is as much among
Kayumarras, as Mircond reports, was the son of Aram, the son of Sem, the
son of Noe, whom the Persians call Adam Assany, that is to say, second Adam;
for that as soon as he was created king he would be called Adam: hence grew
the error among the Persians in the time of Paganism, who held that their
first king had been Adam the first father of all mankind.

Kayumarras, the first king of Persia.
THis king as he was the first that commanded in Persia, so was he the first
that settled

Kayumarras had one son called Nacek, given to a solitary life, and to the
contemplation of natural things, who retired himself with his wife into the
province of Damaoand, after called Aderbajon, and now Hyerak: and as this
prince was of a good understanding, his father went sometimes to vsit him in
his life time, whenas he had any breathing from his important affairs: but it
is not known why not how he was found dead in his poor retreat, having
received many wounds, and yet neither his wife nor any of his people could
discover who had done the deed. After that he had been mourned for Kayumarras
being adu^rtised, he gathered together all his forces, and went to encounter
them in the country of Mecharek, where he got a victory against them in the
province of Ta^rastam, where after that he had slain a great number, he
carried many captives to his house, who served him afterward for the building
of the city of Balk, the which he founded, as he did those of Stahhar (where
he kept his court) Ardauel, Kabulstan, Komuz, Macron, Nachibem (which is
Niniue) Gerion, Sagiston, and Goms, all which were subject to the demeanes of
Persia: he was also the founder of diverse others in several provinces,


NAchek having at his death left his wife with child, within a certain time
she was delivered of a son called Siamek, whom his grandfather caused to be
bred up, and instructed according to the laws of the country; then being come
to the age of discretion, with the consent of the people, he declared him his
successor. And in the end, renouncing the government, he resigned it into the
hands of Siamek, who within few days after invaded the enemies country, and
having incountred their army, he gave them Kayumarras, who instantly went
against his enemies, which were entered into Persia, vanquished them, and
carried many captives away, among the which there were many which had been the
cause of the deaths of the abouenamed Princes. They ascribe unto this
Kayumarras the invention of most of the arms which they use in those quarters,
and especially their capatisons for horses.


AFter the death of Kayumarras, Ouchangh, the son of Siamek, entered into the
possession of the realm, who governed it to all men's content: Having levied an
army, his enemies being entered into a province, which is near unto Damoand,
he gave them battle, where he was wounded with a stone whereof he died,
leaving one son after him, who was called Thamures, having reigned fifty
years.

Thamures Diuband, the fourth king of Persia.
OVchangh being dead, Thamures his son succeeded him, who was surnamed
Diuband, that is to say in the Persian tongue, a Tamer of the devil, by reason
of the notable victories which he obtained against the Persians enemies, whom
they hated as the devil. And for that his subjects had endured much during the
former war, he freed them of all imposts for three years; and as he was as
great a lover of peace, as inclined to arms, desiring to leave his realm
better ordered than he had found it, he made many goodly ordinances for the
quiet thereof. It was he that first created in Persia a Vizier, or Wazir, which
some by corruption called Guazil, who is the chief and sovereign magistrate
next unto the prince. He also appointed garrisons upon the frontiers of
Ardebajon, which is one of the principal provinces of Persia, and does most
import. The victories Thamures could not be freed, but died in the province of
Vzbek, in the town of Balk, having reigned thirty years.

Iambxed, the fifth king of Persia.
IAambxed succeeded Thamures Diuband in the realm; some say he was son to
the deceased, others affirm he was his brother, and some his cousin: a man of
great wisdom Faelasuf Rabon, and the other Facychagorres: and remembering how
much they had been afflicted with necessity in the time of ^ham^^^s, de^iring

This prince did reside most commonly in the province and city of Sagistam;
and the better to discover what past throughout his provinces, and to give
order of all things necessa^ie, he built the city of Scyraz, which is the
chief of the realm which they properly Iambxed made his ordinary abode
there, where he began to treat of the government, and of matters, which until
that t^me had been confused, and without order: giving to wise men the care
and government of all, he would that men of war should have a distinct
jurisdiction from others, and that laborers, and such as did till the land
should not meddle with any other thing. He did also set down an order for
mechan^ique arts, applying them to the use and profit of all men: so as every
man rested himself contented with his trade as much as was p^ssible.

Moreover, he made good laws, and did procure the good of his people: so as in
his time Persia did enjoy peace health, and riches, but this prosperity was
soon turned into Iambxed seeing these countries so flourishing, and
attributing all to his own knowledge and good government, was so deprived of
understanding, as he caused himself to be worshipped as a god, causing
inscriptions to be set in all the public places of his Estates, that upon
pain of death every man should worship him: but he continued not long
unpunished for this impiety, for in the country of Sagistam there did rise
against him a famous captain called Ahad, his own kinsman: who gathering
together a great army gave the conduct thereof to a cousin of his called
Zoahk, who came near to Scyraz, where he found Iambxed that came to encounter
him with another mighty army, where giving battle, Zoahk had the victory,
and Iambxed was taken prisoner, and carried to his enemy, who caused him to b^
murdered in his prefence. Frayhdun, the which he had by a wife called Framak,
who hid her self with her son, so as she could not be found. It is not
written how long this Prince did reign.

Zoahk, tyran of Persia.
THe tyran Zoahk having caused his king to be murdered, seized upon the
realm. He was cousin to Iambxed, descending from Kayumarras, and son to
Hel^an, a man of great note, who was directly descended from the kings of
Arabia. This Zoah^ was much given to the study of natural things, wherein he
became excellent, and yet he was

Zoahk having dreamt this, like a man distracted, caused all the wise men of
his country to be sent for, who told him that it did signify he should be
deprived both of realm and life; for among the Persians, the girdle is a mark
of honor and dignity, which they had taken from him. He feared his misfortune
should fall upon him by Frayhdun the son of Iambxed: which made him to seek
curiously for him, but his mother Framak had concealed him; where at Zoahk
being much incensed, discharged his choler upon Asp^^^ father to Framak, and
flew him. The mother who fearing she should not be always able to keep her
son so secretly but he should be discovered, gave him to a Neatheard to
keep: the which Zoahk understanding, he came himself unto the Neatheard: but
Zoahk not finding him, he revenged himself upon his kine, whereof he slew a
great number.

In the city of Hispaon the chief of the province of Hyerak in Persia, which
had sometimes been the seat of kings, there was a man of importance and
valor, called K^oh, and surnamed Angar, which in the Persian tongue signifies
Yronmonger or Smith, whose two sons Zoahk had slain, being come to the age
of men, and of great reputation. This man thirsting after revenge, made a
conspiracy with many others that hated Zoahk, and having gathered together
great forces, he took many cities in Persia, which he did ouerrun and
committed great spoils; the armies of Zoahk encountering him many Zoahk kept
his court, and upon the way he took the town of Hrey, in old time the chief
of a realm, and presently after, that of Karason. This town of Hrey is yet
famous, as well for the greatness thereof, as for the rare things which are
found there, among others Manna, the which is more perfect and pure than in any
other place, whereof they transport a great quantity to Ormus or Harmus, and
from thence throughout all the East. Kaoh Angar having thus seized upon Hrey,
he gathered all the people and his soldiers about him, letting them
understand, that the reason which had moved him to this enterprise, was only a
zeal of his countries liberty, thinking himself bound to do his best
endeauours to free it before he departed Frayhdun the son of Iambxed whom he
desired they should acknowledge and obey as their king. This being granted by
the whole assembly, they spoke of nothing but to go and fight with Zoahk, who
came against them, where there was a great and bloody battle given, the
which Zoahk lost, who being taken was carried before Frayhdun, where he was
slain being stroke upon the head with a club: then having undone his girdle
they bound his feet, Amaoand, as he had dreamt. The Persians make great account
of the knowledge of this prince in natural things, and of his long life; yet
they write not how long he reigned. The resemblance of the name has made many
think that this Zoahk was Zoroastes that great and famous Magitian.

Frayhdun, the seventh king of Persia.
FRrayhdun having gotten the victory of Zoahk, he came, by his death, to the
government of the realm, and having brought all things under his obedience, he
made Kaoh General of his armies, giving him a good entertainment, and sent him
toward the country of Magareb which lies upon the West: and to Garchacef his
kinsman another good appointment, sending him to Macharek which is in the
Eastrne parts. Kaoh was twenty years in his enterprise, during the which he
reduced under the obedience of Frayhdun many provinces and realms, at the end
whereof he was countermaunded by Frayhdun Frayhdun, who suffered his kinsfolks
to enjoy his possessions: and in regard of his sons he caused them to remain
in court, honoring them much, and giving them great aduancements. As for
himself he married one of the daughters of Zoahk, whom he had put to death. He
had formerly one son called Irege, by a great Persian lady; afterward he
had two others by this last wife, the one called Salm, and the other Tur, who
were of as bad an inclination as their grandfather Zoahk. As for Irege, he was
exceeding courteous, and therefore beloved, followed, and respect^d of all men:
the which gave great contentment to his father, who affected him above the
rest. Persia did then flourish in Frayhdun seeing himself burdened with
years and infirmities, desiring to dispose of his affairs before his death
called together the greatest men of his realm to understand their wills
touching him whom they desired should be his successor: all which with one
consent demanded Irege. This did nothing displease Frayhdun, who to take away
all s^biects of discontent from the others, gave unto Salm the lands of
Megareb, which lie upon the West; and to Tur, those of Mecharek which lie
toward the East; and to Irege, he left Persia, and Mesopotamia, with the title
of king, to the end his brethren should acknowledge him: and s^tting down the
bounds of eithers jurisdiction, he sent the two youngest into their provinces,
either of them with an army for the

As for Tur, he built a town, which he called by his name Turon, of the which
the realm and region was afterward called Turquestan, as it is yet at this
day. This town is situated near unto the Caspian sea toward the East, and
in the country which they call Mo^re-nahar. Here was the beginning of the
Turks, from whence they came, and from thence they have invaded all these
countries which they now enjoy: so as it is not from the Teucres, Troyans, or
Thracians that they are descended, but from Tur, the son of Frayhdun, who
gave to that country the name of Turquestan, that is to say, the province or
region of Tur. Salm and Tur having their portions, they were much discontented
to see themselves brought under the subjection of their brother, who they said
was a Frayhdun their father, complaining that he had preferred their base
brother, and given him the sovereign authority: that if he would deprive him,
they would return in peace, if not, they should be forced to defend their
right.

Frayhdun did presently advertise Irege, commanding him without any delay to
prepare himself to march against them: but Irege desiring to end this
business by some milder course, propounded to his father to go unto them, who
blamed him very sharply, and would not consent unto it. But Irege who desired
peace, and the case of the r^^^me, Irege left a son called Manucher, whom
Frayhdun seated in his fathers place. This young prince made war against Salm
and Tur, and vanquished them in battle: and they to save themselves, lay
hidden among the dead bodies, but being diligently sought for and found, they
were brought before Manucher, who being on horseback, cut off Turs head at a
blow; whereat Salm was so amazed, as he fell suddenly dead at his feet. Thus
died these two brethren, with above twelve thousand of their army that were
slain, or taken prisoners. At that time, Frayhdun was blind and very sickly,
to whom victorious Manucher went, and for that the good old man could not see
him, he demanded which was he; to whom the other answered, I am your
grandchild Manucher, Irege murdered by Salm and Tur. The which Frayhdun
understanding, he received him in his open arms, with all shows of love and
joy, and taking from his head the tyer of gold which he did wear, he set it
upon his grandchilds, as a confirmation of the royalty which he had given him,
and appointed him for Wazir Some, the son of Narimon, a wise man, and very
valiant. Having performed this act, he died soon after. Frayhdun was a good
king, wise, and a friend to all good men, very valiant, and bountiful. They
report many worthy things of him, the which cannot be related in this brief
abridgement. In the computations of times which the Persians make, they say
that this Frayhdun was in the time of Abraham.


BY the death of Frayhdun, Manucher, the son of Irege, began to govern his
realms alone: And as they were great and spacious, he was forced to send Some
Narimon, his Wazir, toward the Eastern parts. Being in his government, he
had a son borne, which from his mothers womb was all covered with hair that
was long and white. Some Narimon being troubled and amazed at this strange
accident, caused him to be called Zal. This came unto the kings ears, who did
write unto the father to send this young infant that he might see him: the which
having done, the king consulted with all the wise men, of this novelty, who al
assured him that this infant should be very valiant in arms, Zal. Afterward,
recreating himself on a time when he was at rest in his house, he had a desire
to go out of his limits, and to enter into the government of Kabuscam, which
was a dependancie of his fathers; in which he had placed for Governor a
Captain of his own making, called Merabah, who understanding of his coming,
went to receive him with rich presents, and to have the honor to kiss his
hand; bringing him presently unto his house, never ceasing to commend (before
his wife and daughter called Rudabah, who was exceeding beautiful) the virtues
and valor of Zal. This did so please the virgin, Zal, making show to gather
flowers: so as passing that way, he might have occasion to demand whose they
were; these women having wittily performed what they had in charge, they met
with Zal, who having demanded what they were, they answered, That they did
belong to Rudabah the daughter of Merabah, whose beauty and perfection they
described so particularly unto him, as he was no less surprised with the love
of her, than she had been with him. This business was managed so discreetly
of either side, as in the end they found means to see one another, where they
plighted their faiths, with a promise of marriage. Which being done, Zal went
from Merabah, to yield unto this marriage: yet being vanquished in the end by
their oppor^un^ties, he Zal, and Rudabah, who soon after had a son called
R^stam, of whom there shall be often mention made; this history being reported
upon his occasion.

Manucher having governed his realm fifty years, there did rise against him,
in the country of Turquestam, a captain called Afraciab, the son of
Panchangh king of Turquestam, upon pretext to revenge the death of Tur. This
man having gathered all his forces together, raised a mighty army, with the
which he entered into Persia. Manucher understood it, but he made so little
account, as having provided badly for his affairs, he was forced to fight with
great disadvantage, leaving the victory to his enemy, Afraciab sought all
means to draw him to yield it upon some composition. But this prince being
obstinat in resistance, the other was also resolute to force it, and to become
master of the place: yet his soldiers were not of that mind, for seeing
winter drew near, they resolved to leave all, and return into their country.
Wherefore Afraciab being advertised, fearing some worse disgrace, he thought it
better to treat of a peace, than to make a shameful retreat. Some were deputed
of either part to that end: so as a peace was concluded, upon condition, that
the famous river of Iehun should remain as a bound betwixt Persia and
Turquestam.

A peace being thus concluded, and Afraciab retired with his army, Manucher
went Afraciab was scarce gone out of Persia, whenas Manucher did all he could
to levy a great and mighty army, to march against him: whereof the other
being advertised, and having not yet dismissed his troops, he fell upon Persia,
where he committed great spoils: but Manucher more provident than he had
been, having his army ready, charged his enemies with such fury, as he
defeated them, carrying away a great number of captives. This purchased him
peace in the remainder of his reign, which was very long, for they hold that
he reigned not less than twenty years, leaving one son called Naudar, to
whom he gave many good and wise admonitions before his death, touching the
government of this realm.

Naudar, the ninth king of Persia.
THe news of the death of Manucher, and of the new coming of Naudar to the
crown, being carried into Turquestam, Pachangh, king of that province, called
his sons unto him, persuading them not to loose the occasion upon this change
of a prince not yet well settled. Afraciab was he that gave the first consent,
as having more experience of the affairs of Persia than his brethren: so as
setting his hand to work, he levied an army (as they say) of four hundred
thousand foot and horse, with the which he marched directly to Sagistam: Naudar
being advertised hereof, sent presently for Some Narimon, father Zal, who
governed Kabulstam, that without any regard of his great age he should come
unto him, as he did, with goodly troops. Being together, they consulted what
was best to be done: Some went against Afraciab, but not able to endure the
toil by reason of his great age, he fell sick, and died: the which gave very
great contentment to Afraciab.

Naudar, who thought to follow Some with the rest of the army, marching toward
Masandaron, he encountered his enemies unlooked for. Having made a stand, and the
two armies being one against another, a soldier of the Turks stepped forth and
offered combat to any Persian: against whom went one called Kobad, grandchild
to Kaoah Angar, of whom mention has been made in the life of Frayhdun. Kobad
had the advantage, who Basmon, and having disarmed him, retired to his lodging.
The Turks enduring this disgrace impatiently, gathered all their troops
together, and invested Naudars army, giving him battle, during the which
there fell so great a rain, as they were forced to seperat themselves, the
sky was so dark. In this separation, Naudar found that he was not Afraciab;
which made him to send for two of his sons to come to his succors, whereof
the one was called Thus, and the other Gostam, being accompanied by Caren
brother to Kobad, who was come out of Sagestan, from whence he had drawn all
his family and treasure, and had transported them to Albors Kuh (this is a
certain country whereas the Persian Pagans were wont to worship the fire).

Afraciab understood the resolution of Naudar, which made him to send a
captain of his called Karahhon, who meeting with these two brethren, fought
with them. Caren was slain upon the place, and the chief of his troops
escaped as they could. In the mean time Afraciab did fight the second time
against Naudar, and vanquished him with the loss of many Persians, and a great
number of captives, of which Naudar was one, all Afraciab would have had cut in
pieces, if Agarires his brother had not dissuaded him from it, causing the
captains to be carried unto a fort. This famous victory obtained by Afraciab
gave him assurance to send an army of thirty thousand men unto Sagestan,
whereas Naudars court remained, which town did presently yield. The news of
this victory being spread over all the provinces of Persia, came unto the place
whereas Merabeb father in law to Zal remained, who presently prepared a rich
present and sent it to Afraciab, letting him vnderstandand that he descended
from the family of Zoahk, whose kinsman he was: so as not able to avoid it, he
had been forced to yield obedience to the king of Persia: but seeing that he
had now the honor to belong unto him, Zal of what was past: the which he
understanding, made a speedy levy of men, before that any thing was known or
suspected, and seized upon Sagestan. This did much trouble Afraciab, and put
him in such a rage as he caused the head of Naudar to be cut off, having
reigned seven years.

Afraciab, tenth king of Persia.
AFraciab having thus seized upon Persia, he advertised his father Pachangh
king of Turquestan thereof, and how fortunat his affairs had succeeded: after
which he carried himself so tyranously toward his peopled, as all the
Persians conspired against him, demanding Agarires, to whom they did write,
entreating him to assist them: who made answer unto them, that they should
call Zal to their succors, and first begin the wars: the which they did in the
spring following, and Zal who was then at Sagestan, gave order for all that was
necessary for the war, sending Ghechuad a captain of great reputation
toward Tabrastam, to practice something in those countries. These things could
not be managed so secretly, but they came to the knowledge of Afraciab, who
being assured of all that past, and of their intelligences, and that his
brother Agarires held the Zal to revenge his death (which he apprehended with
much impatiencie) persuaded the Persians openly to wars against the Turks,
who being gathered together from all parts, went and presented battle to
their enemies, the which continued a whole day, with great slaughter of either
part; night dividing them, and no man knowing who had the advantage. After this
they retired home and continued their skirmishes six months together, in which
encounters there were many men lost. Then happened a great dearth and famine,
after which followed a contagious sickness, which infected both their camps;
so as they were forced to seek a peace, which was not unpleasing to Afraciab,
who was contented to retire himself to Turon, leaving Persia after that he had
held it twelve years.


AFraciab having thus left the realm, the Persians gave the government to
Bazab, who was of the blood royal, the which he accepted: but being already
eighty years old, he took for companion a cousin of his, called Garchasef.
Moreover Bazab remembering the miseries and afflictions wherein the Persians had
lived during the for^passed wars, he Mirk^nd says was most remarkable in him.

Kaykobad, the twelfth king of Persia.
BY the death of Bazab, Kaykobad nephew to Naudar came unto the crown, and
made Rostan the son of Zal his General: being accompanied by Ghechuad,
Kaharen, and many other captains, they put themselves in ambush before
Afraciab, who came against them with a great army; so as he was defeated, and
the Persians got the victory. Rostan did such deeds of arms, as he forced
Afraciab to demand a truce for two days, being then in great fear, the which
was granted him, upon condition to treat of a peace, the which his subjects did
allow of, sending to Kaykobad to accept thereof: but the Persians would not
yield thereunto; so as the came to a second battle, in the which Afraciab was
vanquished, having fought more obstinatly than before. Being in the heat of the
Rostan demanded which was Afraciab, whom when he saw, he ran furiously at him,
being strong and active, overthrew him, and tied his feet with a cord, which
was the manner of Persia, and is used at this day, to carry a cord with them to
draw water out of the cesterns, which are common in those countries, and so he
dragd him after his horse, and left him among the dead: but Afraciab was
cunning, and found means to unloose himself, putting another in his place, and
so escaped without descouerie. Rostan being joyful, carried these good news to
the king, thinking there was no more to do, but to fetch away Afraciab, the
which he offered to do: but seeing the deceit, he was ashamed, and craved
pardon, swearing that he would not be deceived the second time. As for
Afraciab, Kaykobad, to demand a peace, the which was granted unto him. This
being done, Kaykobad having divided his treasure among his soldiers, retired
into his country, where he administered justice, doing the office of a good
prince during his life. He lost his sight long after, and his indisposition
increased daily: he dyed in Isfaon the chief city of Kyerak, where he held
his court, leaving in his place his son Kaykaus, having reigned one hundred
years.

Kaykaus, or Solomon, the thirteenth king of Persia.
THe occasion of precedent quarrels had given assurance to a Persian captain
to Kaykaus levy a mighty army, and to besiege it. The town was strong and
well furnished with men and good bastions for the defense thereof. This made
Kaykaus devise some stratagem, seeing that force was not able to prevail. He
therefore made show to want provision, and found means to have some
intelligence with the besieged, whom he won by the excessive price he gave
them for their commodities, which they sold without consideration: who having
unfurnished themselves of a great quantity, they found soon by experience,
that for want thereof ^hey should be forced to yield unto Kaykaus; the which he
otherwise held impossible. This town of Masandaron is one of the most famous in
those quarters, beyond the country

M^^^^daron being thus conquered, Kaykaus visiting his countries, entered into
Arabia, Zaulzogar, with his whole army, to fight with (...), in which the
Arabian was vanquished, and fled (leaving his country) into a fort, whereon he
much relied, and where he then kept his family, and a daughter that was rare
^^ beauty. There were some treaties which ended with a peace, upon condition,
that Zaul^^gar should give his daughter Sodaba in marriage to Kaykaus, whom a
brother of hers did ^^ing unto him with a thousand fair slaves, and so the
nuptials were celebrated to the g^nerall content of all men.

Whilst these things past in Arabia, Afraciab entered into the Persians
country with an ^^mie, where he committed great spoils: yet he was repulsed
and beaten, so as he was Kaykaus, having disposed of all things necessary in
the realm of Am^n, and in the best part of the lands which he held in that
country, he returned into ^^rsia with his wife Sodaba, where being arrived, he
gave to Rostan the government of ^^gestam and Kabulstam, with many other
gifts, honors, and aduauncements. This ^^nce, before he went into Arabia, had
one son called Syauex, to whom Rostan had ^^^ed much service and affection;
being virtuous and beloved of all men for his mild^^^se and courtesy: This did
not much please Sodaba, who propounded unto her self ^^ring him into disgrace
with the king; fayning therefore to love him, she acquainted (...) with her
desire; but this young prince detesting her allurements, avoided it all he
Sodaba, desiring to effect her dessigne, on a time whenas the king was ^^^anely
accompanied, she came running into his presence with her hair loose, wee^^^g,
beating her breast, and complaining that Syauex would was forced her: Where^^^
they presently laid hold on him, and put him into a dark prison; but the
mat^^^ having been strictly examined, he was declared innocent, and the king
sent (...) her to have her burnt, but her entreaties, together with the love
which he bare her, (...) the execution.

(...) has been said, that Afraciab returning along the banks of Iehun, went
against (...) ci^ie of Balk, the chief of the province of Vzbec, against the
which Kaykaus sent his Syauex, with twelve thousand horse, and as many foot,
commanding him to (...) by Sagistan, and to join with Rostan, and with all
the forces he could draw toge^^^^ Syauex departed from Isfaon, where his
fathers Court remained, and came to Sa^^^^ whereas Rostan gave him a reception
worthy of his greatness; and they began ^^^nsult what way they should take to
march against the enemy. Being upon their (...), they came within two leagues
of the enemy, and going to discover which way (...) might charge him, they
were assured that Afraciab would give them battle with^^^ (...) nights, in
the which he was put to rout; whereat he was so amazed, as he resol^^^ embrace
a peace, and to free himself from that continual care, employing in this
^^^^iation a cousin of his called Garceues, who managed the business so well,
as (...) Thus, the (...) of Naudar, with sharp letters to Syauex, commanding
him to follow Afraciab ^^^soeuer he went, and to give him battle, and if he
found him not, to spoil the (...) Thus: And as for Rostan, by reason of his
old age, he have him leave to retire (...).

(...), to accomplish his fathers command, and the accord made with Afraciab,
(...) hi^ army to march to Thus, and he himself went to Afraciab. This man
had (...) camp a Captain called Pyrond Vaysa, with whom Syauex had some
familiar (...) ^^taince and friendship, who no sooner saw him a coming, but
went with great (...) Afraciab, who being advertised of his coming, went far
to meet him, ^^anguys. This marriage did not please Garceues, brother to
Afraciab, nor the (...) of his Court, who held it a disgrace unto them: so as
they conspired to (...) Sya^ex, whereof being advertised, he imparted it to his
wife Franguys, who was with child, entreating her if it so fell out, and that
she were delivered of a son, she Pyrond Vaysa defended her. Being afterward
delivered of a son, whom they called Kaykozrrao, whom the said Pyrond caused
to be kept secretly in the camp, until that Guyu, the son of Gudarz,
carried him afterward into Persia, where they were much troubled for the death
of Sya^ex, and especially the father, who desiring to revenge the death of his
son, gave a powerful army unto Rostam, with express commandment to give
battle to Afraciab, the which he did, and defeated him, killing Garceues his
brother: so as Rostam going Chaydah, the son of Afraciab, came to encounter
him with another army. Rostam (in whose company was Frayborz, son to king
Kaykaus, and brother to the deceased Syauex) renewed the fight with more
animositie than before, and knowing Chaydah, he charged him with his lance, and
overthrew him dead upon the place; whereupon, the rest of the Turks were put
to flight. Rostam pursuing his victory, entered into Turon, the place of
Afraciabs Court, and the chief of Turquestan, which the Persians spoiled and
sacked, carrying away all the treasure and wealth of the inhabitants. Franguis,
wife to Syauex, was then in this town, whom Rostam entreated to show him her
son; whereof she excused her self, saying, That she knew not where he was:
so as Rostam returned into Persia, to whom the king did much honor, and gave

King Kaykaus desired much to have his grandchild Kaykozrrao, the son of
Syauex and Franguis, who were then at Teuton, for which cause he sent into
Turquestan, Guyu, the son of Gudarz, a nobleman of Persia, of great
sufficiency, to manage this business, wherein he carried himself so
discreetly as he entered into Turon, and saw Franguis, and little Kaykozrrao,
whom he persuaded to abandon that country, and to come into Persia, the which
they did, being accompanied only by the said Guyu, and Pyrond Vaysa helping
them on the way until they were arrived at the king of Persias Court, where
they were received according to their qualities. After some time, king Kaykaus
seeing many virtues and perfections to shine in his grandchild Kaykozrrao, made
him General of his armies, Guyu for his services. This caused a great
alteration in the kings Court, betwixt Thus (uncle to Kaykaus, in regard of
Frayborz another son to Kaykaus) and Kaykozrrao: for Thus endured with great
impatience; that the descendants of so cruel a race, and so great an enemy
unto Persia, should be preferred before them that were borne in the country;
so as the whole Court was divided into two factions, one for Frayborz, and the
other for Kaykozrrao, to whom Guyu had joined to assist him. These divisions
were contrary to the kings intention, for the preventing whereof he did as
follows:

At that instant, one Bahaman governed the town of Ardauel, who made
incursions into Persia, and did much annoy it: Kaykaus made two camps equal in
numbers of men Frayborz parted first, and did not any thing worthy of memory:
but Kaykozrrao did fight against Bahaman, vanquished him, and subdued the city
of Ardauel, and returning to court, he was declared heir of the realm, and
Guyu his captain general. And as for Kaykaus, he retired himself to a
solitary life, having reigned (as they say) one hundred and fifty years.

This town of Ardauel, or Ardauil, is in Persia, in the province of Ardebajon,
some few days journey distant from Tabris or Taubris, no less great than
famous, for that it was the country of Cheque Aydar, father to Cheque or Cha
Ismael Sophi, whose descendants


KAykozrrao being thus come unto the Monarchy, as well by his own valor and
good fortune, as by the particular affection of his grandfather: at his first
entrance unto the crown, to give his subjects a taste that they had made no bad
choice of him, he reformed justice, which was wholly depraved and corrupted
during the forepassed wars, seeking to repair every man's losses and ruins, by
his bounty and mildness. Then he assembled his Estates, to whom he propounded
a war he pretended against the Turks, in revenge of his fathers death, the
which all men allowed of, and offered to follow him; Frayborz his fathers
brother, and Thus his great uncle, the son of Naudar, with thirty thousand
horse to invade the country of Turquestan. Kaykozrrao had a son called
Syauex, who taking in bad part that his father made war against his
grandfather, ^^ if he had received some great wrong, retired to Turon: Pyrond
Vaysa who (as has ^eene said) was come into Persia with Guyu, whenas he
conducted Kaykozrrao, with his mother Franguys, and had married there, having
had one son whom they called Freud, ^ho being come to age returned into
Turquestan. The king loved this young man, as (...) own son; so as when he
sent Frayborz into Turquestan, hearing that Ferud had the ^^ard of a castle, he
gave special charge to his captains to turn from it: but they being Ferud
sallyed forth, and fought with them; but he was slain upon the place; the
which the king of Persia understanding, he ^as wonderfully grieved, and being
told that Thus was the cause thereof, he caused him to come to court, and put
him in prison. Frayborz and Gudarz continued the wars against the Turk, where
they had bad success, for that Pyrond Vaysa vanquished them with a ^reat
slaughter of the Pesians, among which there were seventy knights all of the
fami^^^ of Gudarz, who with Frayborz retired into Persia. The king was not
daunted at this ^^^grace, but sent Gudarz again with another army; and with
him Thus, who was retur^^^ into favor: they parted then to go to Turon, but
before they were out of the

At the fame of this siege, two neighbor kings to Turquestan came with their
seue^^^ armies to succor the Turks, the one was called Hhakon, and the other
Changal: this (...) much trouble the Persians, holding themselves abandoned of
all succors: but Kay^^^rrao being advertised of the misery whereunto they
were reduced, sent presently to (...), commanding him to march thither with
all possible speed, the which he did, ^^king no stay until he came unto the
enemy. The Persians hearing of his coming; Hhakon one of their allied kings.
^^^kozrrao was not satisfied with this defeat, but sent four other armies into
diverse pla^^^ to ruin Turquestan, the chief which was led by Gudarz going
against Balk, who (...) to encounter with Pyrond Vaysa, he who had the best of
the four armies which Afra^^^^ had sent against the Persians, who had the
honor of the victory by the death of Py^^^^ Vaysa, whose head was sent to
Kaykozrrao, the which he beheld with much grief and ^^^content, for the
breeding he had received from him. They say that in this war there (...)
slain and taken above one hundred thousand Turks, and eleven of their ch^efe
^^^^ains, Kaykozrrao gave great rewards to all such as had done good service in
these (...), Frayborz the country of Kyche or Kache, and Macron, realms which
(...) toward Goadel at the entry of the Persian gulf.

Afraciab having repaired his army entered again with a son of his into the
coun^^^^ of Kaorrazin upon the confines of Turon, whereas then lay the Persian
army, who ^^^quished the Turks, slew Afraciabs son, and forced him to
retire with his family into a fort, whereas not holding himself very safe,
but meaning to go to some other place, he Kaykozrrao with his wife and
daughters, who had been taken some time before, and entreated with much honor
and respect. Within few months after, Afrraciab was taken himself and slain;
making an end by his death of this long and tedious war; the which being thus
ended, Kaykozrrao in imitation of kings his predecessors had a desire to
retire himself from court, and from the government of affairs: who having no
son, he did substitute in his place Lorasph nephew to a brother of Kaykaus
(against which some of the greatest opposed themselves) and then soon after he
died, having first restored all the lands and goods which his predecessors had
taken from their subjects, and paid all their debts. He favored the poor, did
justice equally to all men,

In the time of Kaykozrrao, there were in Persia two famous Philosophers, the
one called Horez, the other Lokmon: of this last there are some workers found
among the Persians, which show that he was of a great spirit: among others they
have a book of comparisons and examples very like to those of Aesope; there is
also great likelihood that they spoke of him, whenas reporting his life they
say that being a great Philosopher, he had been a slave, very faithful, and
gracious, and that he dyed condemned: one thing makes it doubtful, for that
they assure he was a Jew. They have a proverb among them, which says, It is
not needful to teach Lokmon, to show the deep knowledge of

Lorasph, the fifteenth king of Persia.
KAykozrrao having left no issue male, the crown fell into the hands of
Lorasph, according to the election which he had made before his death. This man
as has been said, was nephew to the brother of king Kaykaus, and the nearest
in succession to Kaykozrrao: but for that he was known to be severe and
cruel, his advancement was opposed by the greatest men of the realm, and
especially by Zal the father of Rostan; yet he carried it from them all, and
was declared king: after which he went out of Isfaon, and did Gudars with an
army against Mesopotamia, Syria, and Palestina, who in a short time brought
all the country of Babylon under his subjection, and of Dymeskychan, which is
that of Damas, then he marched against Beyt Almokadas, that is say, Jerusalem,
(for in the Arabian tongue Beyt signifies a house, and Almokadas, saints) the
king whereof yielded upon condition to pay a tr^bute, for the assurance of
which accord, he gave many great personages in hostage, whom Gudars caused to
be slain within few days after, having been assured that the Jews would
rebel against his king, and that they were drawn together with an intent to
make war against him; whereupon Gudars having gathered his forces together
returned against Jerusalem, the which he forced: at the taking whereof, the
Persians used great cruelties against Gudars retired after many other
victories. King Lorasph had two sons, the eldest was called Gustasph, and the
youngest Zarir: Gustasph was proud and high minded, but withal very warlike,
who having disposed some of his friends to certain innouations which he
desired, he prevailed so, ^s they rebelled with him against his father, meaning
to expel him the realm: many of these followed him in the beginning: but the
father having gathered together the greatest forces he could, pursued him,
loosing no time nor opportunity; so as he forced him to fly out of the
realm, finding his forces unable to resist his fathers, or to keep him in the
country; so as he escaped alone and ill appointed, and past into Turquestan,
where being arrived by a certain accident, he married the kings daughter of
that country,

It was an ancient custom in Turquestan, that whenas the king would marry a
daughter, he drew together all the people that were then in Court into an open
field, ^uerie man being appointed the best he could: they all being set in
order, the lady that Gustasph came unto the Court, the king had an intent to
marry one of his daughters, whom this new come guest had a desire upon
courtesy to see: but it happened that he so pleased this princess, as she
gave him the apple, whereat the king was much disconten^^^, for that he knew
not Gustasph, and the great men that were there present made many Gastasph,
they found means (...) make him undertake this charge by the persuasion of his
friends: Wherefore making ^^ew to go a hunting, with a train fit for his
dessigne, he carried himself so politique^^^^ this enterprise, as he took
them, and delivered them into the power of his two bre^^en Gustasph carried
himself so gallantly, as the king ^^^mended him much; to whom he answered,
That he no reason to wonder if he had ^^aued himself well in tilting with a
Reed, seeing he had cleansed the country of them (...) troubled it; the which
the king understanding, and being fully informed how all (...) had past, he
remained much more satisfied.

^^^tasph in the mean time knowing how much his father disliked him, for that
he had (...) to his enemies, and that he sought means to be revenged, thinking
of the great (...) which had been betwixt his father and him, and what reason
he had to dislike of Lorasph, who (...) of the principal cause which had moved
the Turkish king to revolt, and finding the ^^^^ssadours reason too weak for
so important a business, he discovered in the end (...) stranger, a man of
valor, who by an unexpected adventure had married this kings ^^^ghter, was the
cause of all this mischief. This made the Persian king to inform him^^^^^
more particularly what this stranger was, and in the end found that it was his
son (...), whereof being well assured, he sent an Ambassador to his younger
son (...) Gustasph, to the end that they should go unto him, and persuade him
to (...) and take possession of the realm: Gustasph being advertised of this
dispatch, went (...) court to meet with them, before that his father in law had
any knowledge thereof; (...) had conference with his brother Zarir, he received
the tyer which his father sent (...), and put it on his head, after which he
was presently proclaimed king of Persia by (...) whole assembly: which being
done, he caused his father in law to be called, who (...) come, and seeing him
in that Estate, was much amazed, thinking it had been some (...) to
dispossess him of his realm; but hearing how all things had past, he imbra^^^
^im often with great joy. Gustasph having taken leave of his father in law,
returned (...) Persia, carrying with him his wife Katabun (for so the kings
daughter was called after; giving unto his son good and necessary advice for
the government of his Lorasph Balkah, for that he remained the most part of
his time at Balk.

Gustasph, the sixteenth king of Persia.
WHenas Lorasph retired himself from Court, he left his son Gustasph, or
Gustasef, to command the realm, who was a valiant prince in war, and a wise
in peace: he was much given to the idolatry and worship of fire, in which
superstition he was so zealous, as he made war against them that would not
follow his opinion, as he did to Ariasph, or Ariaseph, king of Turon, for that
he had reprehended him in a letter, having been commanded by him to follow
the sect of Zarducht, which was that of fire: This superstition began first in
the province of Aderbaion, or Azarbajon, that is to say, of fire; and he that
was the first inuenter of this sect was called Zarducht, that is to say, a
friend of fire. Gustasph growing into choler, for the little respect which
Ariasph did show him in his reprehensiue letters, went to field, being
accompanied by his brother Zarir, and Sphand^ar his son, with the greatest
forces he could draw together, who marching directly toward Turon, gave
battle to Ariasph, whom he vanquished, killing his sons and brethren, and
without any longer stay he went against Turon, which he took and spoiled, and
from thence returned into Persia: at his arrival he caused his son Sphandiar
Ariasph having levied a a new army, entered the country, and took Balk, which
he sacked, carrying away some of Gustasphs daughters, captives; and not content
therewith, he marched into the country with such speed, as Gustasph, having
not the assurance to attend him alone, called his Council, and resolved to set
his son Sphandiar at liberty, and to give him the charge of this war; the
which he refused to accept, or to go out of prison: yet in the end (at the
entreatie of his brother Iamasph, and upon his fathers promise to leave him the
realm if he returned victor) he went to field with a good army, and marched
against Ariasph, to whom he gave battle, and won the victory, and so
returned into Persia, whom his father Sphandiar being ashamed, and not to fail
of his duty, he made choice of four and twenty thousand men out of the whole
army, of the which there were twelve thousand foot, and twelve thousand horse,
and being accompanied by his younger brother Buchutan, he pursued his enemy:
but they resolved upon the way to seperat themselves, which they did at three
partings or ways which went all to Turon, giving the greatest to Buchutan his
brother, where there were large meadows, and the way more easy: giving him
charge that being come unto a place called Paruindez, he should lie close with
his troops in ambush, least he should be discovered by them of Turon; and that
whenas

As for Sphandiar, taking with him some company, they went by another way
attired like merchants to Aphtkon, that is to say, seven kings, or seven lords,
having carried with him many jewels and stones of great price (for it was the
custom of Persians going to the war, to carry all their wealth with them)
which way was much shorter than that of Buchutan: so as Sphandiar, with his
companions, came to Turon within seven or eight days, presenting himself in
the habit of a merchant before Ariasph, with the jewels which he brought,
carrying himself in such sort in his enterprise, as he was lodged in the kings
palace: being advertised that his brother was come to the Rendez-uous, he
craved Buchutan, who was very watchful, discovered them presently, and then
falling out of his ambush, he seized upon all the passages, Sphandiar delivered
to his brother Buchutan to conduct into Persia; he himself going toward the
Indian sea to force certain nations to follow the superstitious opinion of
fire, from whence he returned into Persia, where he was kindly received by his
father: but in steed of the realm which he had promised him, he caused him to
undertake many great and dangerous enterprises, the which he executed with his
honor. In the end his father would have him seek out Rostan, who had retired
himself to Siston, Sphandiar went, but against his will, only to obey his
father, to whom he said that it was not the accomplishment of his promise, and
that he did ill requite the services which Rostan had done him: yet he went to
Sistan, carrying with him a son of his called Bahaman, who going before his
^^ther, saw Rostan a far off descending down a hill, to whom he went, telling
him what that troop was which he saw coming a far off, whereat Rostan was
much amassed, yet^ ^oing to kiss the hands of Sphandiar, he told him that the
cause of his coming was on^^ to draw him to his fathers court: to whom the
other answered, that his age should ^ow free him from such services, and that
in case of necessity they should find him al^^ies ready. Sphandiar insisted
to the contrary, so as in these disputes they grew to bit^^^ Sphandiar, he was
held ^ne of the hardiest knights of Persia, and had reduced his adversary to
such terms, as (...) did but ward his blows; yet as extreme ^ecessitie does
breed new courage and force, ^^charged Sphandiar in such sort, as he gave him a
mortal wound, whereof he dyed pre^^tly, recommending his son Bahama to Rostan
before his death, and his body to his ^^^ther Buchutan, who carried it into
Persia, where it had a funeral pomp worthy of (...) greatness: his father
Gustaspph was much grieved, thinking to attempt nothing after (...) death, yet
the king of Turquestan coming to invade his country of Persia, he was ^^^ed
to raise a new army, with the which he vanquished his enemy, and so returned
(...), whither he sent for his grandchild Bahaman, who was then at Siston, to
whom he Solomon Ben^^ that is to say, Solomon the son of David, thirty miles
distant from Scyras. Gustasph (...) the city of Asuartah, the which he called
Herbant, and within few years after died, (...) reigned one hundred and twenty
years.

Bahaman Daraz Dast, the seventeenth king of Persia.
^^^er the retreat of Gustasph, Bakaman his grandchild succeeded him, who was
surna^^^ed Daraz Dast, that is to say, long hand: they do also call him
Ardchir, which is the ^^^ordinarie name they give him in the Chronicles of
Persia, the which was upon this ^^^^on: his mother being with child, an
Astrologer came to see his grandfather Gu^^^ and his father Sphandiar, whom
after he had saluted, addressing himself to Sphandi^^ ^^d presenting him with
a little basket, he said it was to put in the son which should (...) of him,
the which being uncovered they found nothing in it, but a vessel full of (...)
a little meal, telling them that his small means would afford no better
present: (...) princes were very well satisfied with the discourse of this wise
man, and took so (...) delight in his present, as they gave name unto their
son of the things which he (...) off^red: for Ard, in the Persian tongue is
meal, and Chir, milk; these two names Ard^hir, which is the same the Greeks
and Latins call Artax^^^ and of him many of his successors would be called
Ardchir.

(...) prince was of a good constitution, having the right arm and hand longer
than (...): he was endowed with all the good parts that can be desired in a
prince, and (...) others, he was so jealous of the commonweal, as when he sent
any officers to visit his realm, he put some among them in whom he had great
trust, to serve as witnesses

Ardchir caused many buildings which had been ruined to be reedified, and gave
order for the government of the realm; which done, he studied how he might be
revenged for the death of Sphandiar his father, which caused him to levy a
great army, with which he marched toward Siston, being upon the way, he was
advertised that Rostan was dead, and that Framarz his son came against him
with great troops, who presented him battle, the which was very bloody; but
Ardchir had the victory which cost the life of many of his men: Framarz was
slain in the fight, and Z^l his grandfather being yet living was taken
prisoner, after which battle Ardchir returned victorious to Persia, bringing
Siston and Kabul under his obedience. He made war by his captains in Syria
and Palestina, Sasan, which was a great Philospher and Astrologer, who to
follow his studies more freely, left the court and all greatness, pretending
not the realm after the death of his father, whereat all the subjects did
generally grieve. He left his wife Homay with child of a son, whereof she was
delivered after his death. In his time Hyppocrates did flourish (whom the
Persians call Bokorat) and Democrites, whose writings they have, with the
works of Plato, whom they call Aphlatum, of Socrates, whom they call So^^^at,
and of Aristotle, whom they term Arasto, or Arastatalis, and those also of
Galien. They make great account of many Greek authors, and it is the manner of
the Persians to esteem learned men, whose company they affect, making use of
their authorities, conceptions, Ardc^ir was wont to say, that a princes palace
should never have the gates shut.

But for that R^stan has been a famous personage in this history, it shall be
fit to understand the cause of his death, the which happened after this manner:
Rostan had one brother called Chagad, to whom he had given charge to visit his
provinces, and to receive the rents and tributes which were due unto him: going
to Kabul to this end he fell in love with the governors daughter, who was
exceeding fair, and demanded her of her father; who seeing the brother of
Rostan to be in love with his daughter, refused him, until he had promised to
free him from the subjection of Rostan his brother, and to kill him; this being
agreed upon, Chagad returned to Siston, where having some conferences with
Rostan being full of choler blamed his brother of little courage, and caused
soldiers to be levied of all parts to punish this Governor. Chagad did ^is
best to cross this resolution, telling him that ^is presence alone was
sufficient to draw him to reason: Rostan was well pleased with this advice, and
went with his brother, a subject of his called Za^ada, and some few servants of
his toward Kabul, whereof Chagad gave secret intelligence unto his father in
law. The Governor of Kabul came forth in show to receive him, and having laid
many of his men in ambush; being come to Rostan, he craved pardon, as one that
repented him of the errors he had committed, and Rostan having pardoned him, he
of Kabul desired him to rest himself in a house of pleasure Rostan fell with
his (...) who seeing plain^ly that he was, deceived by the wickedness of his
guides, and that (...) mis^hiefe was without remedy or hope, having poured
forth a thousand injurious Rostan had them in his hand, he did put two arrows
into his bow, shoo^ing them with such force, as notwithstanding his brother and
his father in law had before them the body of a tree which was ^^ere unto
them, yet he shot them both through, and slew them. It is an ordinary thing
^^ong the Persians, to shoot two or three arrows at one time, which makes this
of Ro^^ to seem less strange; and in this manner they died with him that had
practiced his ^^ath; for he died also with the rest, but the history does not
tell after what manner. As ^or Kabul (whereof mention has been made, to the
end we may inform the Reader

Homay, Queen of Persia, and put in the rank of kings, the eighteenth.
Ardchir, the government of the (...) realm continued in Homay his wife, who
(as has been said) was with child, and at (...) end of five months, delivered
of a son, who was ezceeding fair: whereupon (ac^^ing to the custom) they
presently called Astrologers, to know his Horascope, and (...) should befall
this royal infant; who answered, That he should be the cause of great ^^^^^ies
and ruins to his realms, so as many were of opinion he should be put to
death: (...) ^ender affection of the mother could not yield to the death of her
son, but she (...) him to be put in a little cradle, and then closed up in a
coffer of wood, in the which (...) put many precious stones of great value, to
the end, that if any poor man found (...) might help to feed him, and breed
him up: with which things she committed Darab, framing his name of the little
coffer wherein he Darab grown able (...) ^omething, the launderer (who desired
to have him instructed according to the (...) would have had him learn some
trade, but Darabs inclination could not be drawn (...) the estate of his
fortune could not make him loose the feeling of his extraction: (...) his
supposed father sufficient testimonies that he should be unwillingly drawn
^^^o^e things, and that he was more inclined to arms than any other vocation:
where^^^^ ^he launderer knowing his humor, bought him arms, and furnished him
in the ^^^^^ner he could, giving him some small provision to live by, and
sending him to (...) ^ome preserment by war. At that time, Queen Homay was
in war with the na^^^^ Darab inrold (...), and past his first apprentiship,
the Persians of this army had battle with their (...), in which Darab did
such strange deeds of arms, as it held all his companions (...) ^^azement, who
talked of nothing but of his exploits. The affairs of Rumestan (...) pacified,
the General came to give an account of all things unto Homay, where (among
other things) he made mention of a soldier that was newly come into the army,
Darab, and that he did not acknowledge any other father and mother than a
launderer and his wife, telling the cause of his name, and how he had been
found, as he had understood from them: By this discourse, the Queen came to
know that he was her son, whereof being assured, she delivered the realm
into his hands, the which she had held two and thirty years. She built the
town of Gerbatkon, and set up a thousand Pyramides in Persia of a strange
achitecture, the which Alexander did afterward cause to be ruined.

Darab Kebar, the nineteenth king of Persia.
DArab, the son of Homay, being come to the crown of Persia, entered into the
government with the general content and joy of all his subjects, for the
great opinion they had of him, the which was not in vain; for he exceeded all
his predecessors in bounty and wisdom, yea them that were held for good
princes, so as he was not only beloved of all his subject, but also of
neighbor kings, except Phaylacus king of Yunon, (this is he whom we call
Philip king of Macedon, father to Alexander the Great) who (grown proud by the
victories which he had gotten in Greece) refused to pay the tribute Darab, who
made war against him, first by his Captains, and afterward in person, in
the which Phaylacus was vanquished, and forced to retire himself into a fort,
whereas Darab besieged him: yet there was a peace concluded betwixt them, upon
condition, that Phaylacus, and his descendants, should pay forty thousand
Pesans of gold yearly unto Darab and his successors: and to make this treaty
inviolable, Darab demanded of Phaylacus a daughter of his, who was held for
one of the goodliest princesses of her time, the which was performed: but she
lived not long with Darab, who put her away for that she had an unsavory
breath. About this time, Kari^ah (the wife of Phaylacus) was with child, (not
by her husband, as some say) and delivered Ascand^r, or Alexander. Darab, afer
this war, returned into Persia, and died soon after, leaving his realm to
his son Darab, having reigned four years.

Darab Seguer, or Kuchek, the twentieth king of Persia.
DArab, surnamed the Little, the second of that name, and son to the first
Darab, after the death of his father, came unto the realm: he was of a bad
disposition, without courtesy, disloyal, and of a fierce aspect: so as for
his bad qualities he was as much hated of strangers, as of his own people, as
his father had been beloved; and he did so purchase the disgrace of his
subjects, as they conspired against him, and resolved to deliver Ascandar or
Alexander, the son of Philip, to whom all the Vuazirs or Lords did write,
with a general consent, that he should speedily come into Persia, with all the
forces he could raise, promising him all assistance, and giving him council to
begin the war with some color, to refuse the tribute of forty thousand
Pesans of gold, whereunto his father had bound him.

Ascandar, who was by nature warlike, seeing an offer so conformable to his
desire, lost not the occasion, but followed the counsel which they gave him,
and refused the tribute. Darab, seeing that his subject would shake off the
yoke, sent to demand it by an Ambassador, to whom Alexander answered, That
they which paid the tribute, were Darab dispatched a second embassage unto
him, by the which he sent him a little s^eepehooke, a bag full of sand, and a
cupboord of plate. There are diverse opinions am^^^ the Persian writers what
these things did signify: but the most common is, that by the first he would
say he was a boy without judgment or consideration: by the second

Ascander received this Embassage, being in field with an army, not great in
number, but all choice men, and of great experience in martial affairs; who
making an al^usion of all that which Darab had sent unto him, he converted it
to his advantage for ^^seph, and there the Prophet Moses was borne, and exposed
upon the river of Nile, which does bath the walls of this city: and as for the
name of Caire (which is that we (...) it at this present) Mircond in the fourth
part of his history by the report of Teixeres (...) the relation which he has
made of the Califes of Caire, after sundry and variable ^^ccesse, he says,
That Messera (for so it was then called) came into the power of a king ^^lled
Mohez, who sent from Damas a slave of his, a great Captain and Conqueror
those name was Iauuarkaden to govern this city which was then under his
power, for (...) safety whereof, he caused a fort to be built near unto it,
the which he called Kayrch, honor of one of his Lords wives, who had that
name, and in succession of time this (...) building increased in such sort, as
the name of Mecera was in a manner forgotten, (...) it is no more known in
Europe, but by the name of Kayrch or Caire, the letter (...) little changed.

Alexander passed from thence to Armenia, where he received a letter from
Darab, Alexander answered (...) That realms and empires were not held but of
God, who gave them and took (...) away at his pleasure: and having dispatched
his Ambassadors, he continued his (...) into the province of Aderbajon, where
he encountered one of Darabs captains (...) kept it, and vanquished him, and
from thence he entered into the province of Guey^^^^* This Gueylon was sometimes
a great realm, but now reduced to a province and ^^^ded into five governments:
the Persians call it Gueylon or Guylon; but the natural ^^^^bitants do call it
Endsafet, that is to say, white India, for that it is very cheerful and

(...) to return again to Alexander, leaving the country of Gueylon, he went
into (...) Nacudunia, and coming against the chief city, he caused it to be
burnt down (...) the very foundation: from thence he entered into persia,
whereas Durab came ^^^nst him with a mighty army, betwixt whom there was a
great and bloody bat^^^ in which battle Ascander had the victory, and Durab
fled from his camp, lea^^^g the greatest part of his soldiers dead upon the
place, and all his Treasure, ^^^^ues, and Daughters captives, and in the power
of Alexander. Many of Darabs soul^^^ followed him in this fight, whereof a good
number were drowned at the pas^^^^ of a river, the which being frosen, many
passed before to try the foord, and having (...) it good, Darab past, and then
all the rest of his people followed, whereof many (...) ^edrowned.

Dara^ being in a place of safety, he sent Embassors to Ascandar or Alexander,
promi^^ng

As for Alexander, he mocked at Darabs conditions, and offered him battle
again, where he had the victory, forcing Darab to retire into a fort, whereas
some of his own subjects gave him many wounds with a dagger, and leaving him
almost dead, retired themselves to Alexanders camp, who being advertised of
their treason, went with great Darab lay, where finding him ready to leave his
life, being much grieved (...) him in that estate, he poured forth many tears,
lifting up his eyes to heaven, which ^e ^ooke for witness of his innocence in
that action: Darab answered him with thanks, tha^ he did believe it,
entreating him to punish and take revenge of those traitors, to ^a^^ie his
daughter Ruchanch, and not to suffer his realms to fall into the hands of
strangers. Alexander promised to accomplish all: then Darab having made many
grievous complaints of the misery of man's life, and of the inconstancy of
temporal goods (which (...) describes very amply) died, having reigned
fourteen years.

THE MONARCHY OF THE MACEDONIANS.
Ascander or Alexander, the one and twentieth king of Persia.
AScander or Sacander, so called by the Persians, Arabians, and Turks, and by
another name Zulkarnheh, which is the same we call Alexander, came not only to
the Empire of Persia, but also to that of Greece, India, Tartaria, and a great
part o^ the world. The Arabians speaking of Persia, divide it into two
provinces, both which they call Hierakhen, the one half for the Metropolitan
city Isphaon, and that is called Hie^^kagemy, which is the Hierak of Persia:
the other, Babylon or Bagadet, which makes a

All Persian authors say that Alexander was not the son of Phaylacus or
Philip, but that a vassal of his called Kolus fell in love with his wife, who
thought that the means to enjoy her with more liberty, was to kill king
Philip, the which he put in execution soon after: Alexander understanding
this, being accompanied by one called Barakus his chief captain, found out
the traitor Kolus and slew him with his own hand. After which he went to
Philip breathing out his last where after many complaints Philip knowing his
death to approach, took Alexander, and set him in the midst of all the noble
men that were present; requiring them to receive him for king, and to yield him
obedience: after which he delivered him into the hands of Aristotle, to be
instructed by him,

Alexander having conquered Persia after the death of Darab, married his
daughter R^^b^^ch, the which does signify light, like unto a candle which
burns. He delivered the realm of Persia into the hands of a kinsman of
Darabs, and divided all his monarchy into four score and ten governments, the
which he gave unto so many captains. He caused three books to be translated
out of the Persian into the Greek tongue, the one was called Teb, the which
treated of Physic; the other Noiun, of Astrology, and the Mathematics:
(Noiun signifies stars in the Persian tongue) and the other of Phil^sophie. He
built upon the river of Iehum, a town called Maruoh or Karacon, otherwise
Mircond sets down at large.

AN INTERREGNE OR VACANCIE OF PERSIA.
(...) or the death of Alexander, the affairs fell into confusion touching the
government: so (...) Persia had a vacancie, which continued seventy two
years, during the which it was gouer^^^^ by V^azirs or Satrapes, until it
returned under the power of the descendants of precedent ^^ngs, which continued
as follows:

The Persians are commanded again by them of their own nation.

Chapur, the two and twentieth king of Persia.
^He seventy two years of vacancie being past, after the death of Alexander,
the Persians made a king over them called Chapur, kinsman to Darab, whom
Mircond calls his Chapur there passed nothing that was memorable, whereof they
have made any ^^^tion, and yet he reigned (as they say) sixty years.

Ardchir Babakhon, the three and twentieth king of Persia.
(...) king Chapur succeeded Ardchir B^bakhon, which in the Persian tongue is
the same that Abumalek, that is to say, Father and Lord, or Father King. He was
a good prince, ^^gouerned the country to the content of all men, according to
the opinion of the Ardchir he had any wars, this king having past the
fif^^^es of his reign in peace.

Chapur Zabel Ketaf, the four and twentieth king of Persia.
R^chir left two sons to succeed him in the realm of Persia, the eldest was
called C^^pur, and another younger: And for that they were very young, they
were com^^^^ to the government of one of their uncles called Ardchir, the son
of Hormos, whom Mircond says, that he refused it, and that he governed the
(...) with great wisdom in the midst of many practices and conspiracies;
after some (...), when he saw it fit and convenient, he settled Chapur Zabel
Ketaf in the gouerne^^^^, who swayed that scepter whilst he lived, with great
satisfaction to all men, being (...) with wisdom and virtue, the which never
wants some that envy it; for Cha^^^ ^^eeping one night in the field where his
pauilions were set up: no man can say who (...) into his Tent and strangled
him; but so it is, at their going forth they cut the cords (...) ^upported his
Tent, and so let it fall: They had by chance made choice of a bluste^^^^ and
raynie night, to the end it might be said that some gust of wind had
overthrown

Baharon Kermoncha, the five and twentieth king of Persia.
IT has been formerly said, that Chapur Zabel Ketaf had a younger brother:
his name was Baharon, whom his brother had made governor of Kermon, and
therefore he had the surname of Kermon^ha, as if one should say, king of
Kermon, the which is a great province, and one of the chief of Persia; in the
which is the country of Karachon, famous in the East, for the commodities which
are drawn from thence. Speaking of Chiraz, it has bin observed (...) they
drew from thence great store of Rose Water, as they do also from Yazd, the
which is made by infusion and decoction: the like done in Kermon and Dusgon,
Rose (...) is called by two names in the Persian tongue; some call it Gulap,
and others

In three parts of Persia they make tapestries, which they call Persian, after
the name of the country, and in Persia they call them Kalichey; the richest
and most esteemed are made in the province of Yazd, and they are so excellent,
that some are valued at a thousand ducats: the second in bounty, are those of
the realm of Kermon: and the third, of Ka^^son. In Kermon they have Tutia, the
which is only found in that place, and in the Persian tongue they call it
Tutiah: in a Canton of this province, some six and thirty miles ^istant from
the town, they make it after this manner: They take the earth of that
coun^^ie, Garcia was ill informed, who in diologues which he has made of
Indian simples, says, That Tutia is made of the ashes of a certain tree called
Gune. It is true, that in Persia there is fruit called Gaon, of the form and
bigness of a cherrie stone, covered with a little skin that is green and
yellow, which the Naturalists use in many things as we do the kernel of the
Pine apple: but this has a contrary effect to Tutia, which is made in Kermon,
in which place they do also find another thing no less profitable than the
precedent, that is, Lauronne, or Garderobe, very good against worms, which
they call in

But to return to Baharon, he was of a sound constitution, and of great
judgment and wisdom, which made him to reign with the general content of
all his subjects, whom he governed eleven years, at the end whereof there fell
a great sedition in court, the which was of such importance, as Bahaman was
forced to go in person to pacify. All things being quie^ed, one of his
subjects, who desired but some opportunity to do him a mischief, shot an
arrow at him from out of the press, the which passed through his body, and
slew

Yarzd Gerd, the six and twentieth king of Persia.
THe Persians having lamented the death of Baharon, made choice of Yarzd Gerd
his son. Before his coming to the crown he was much beloved and respected
of all men, taking delight to be affable and courteous to every man. But
whenas he saw himself king, he changed his good inclination into arrogancy,
cruelty, and covetousness, showing himself the more implacable, whenas he
was entreated with tears to show mercy. He was wont to say, There was no hope
of compassion in three things, that is to say, Baharon, who having lived more
than the rest, which not continued above a Neamanben Amara^^^keis, a man of
great trust, who brought up that little infant in that good air, instru^^^g
him in the doctrine which was conformable to the religion whereof he made
pro^^^ion: being come to the age of discretion, Neaman died, leaving in his
place a son ^alled Manzar, as valiant and faithful as his father, who had
reigned fifteen years. In (...) mean time Yarzd Gerd governed his realm
with the general dislike of all his sub^^^^s, for his tyrannies and cruelties,
wherein he persisted to his end, the which was like (...) his life; for in a
time taking view of a horse of great price, the which did much de^^^^ him, the
beast without any apparent occasion, stroke him twice with his hinder feet,
Ba^aron would imitate his father in his perverse and bad dispositions, saying
that (...) should give the realm to some one that might deserve it by his
virtue. So as they (...) were of this party being the stronger, prevailed
against them that would have cho^^^ the son of the deceased king, and gave
the realm to one called Kezere Khozrrao his ^^ere kinsman, who besides the
good parts that were in him, had gotten the realm with

Baharon, who was in Arabia, hearing of his fathers death, and in like manner
of the in^^uations that were in Persia, he imparted it to Manzar the son of
Neaman, in treating (...) to assist him in the recovery of his realm which of
right did belong unto him, and ^^ch Kezere Khozrrao did usurp unjustly. Manzar
yielded willingly to his request, and (...) him ten thousand horse, with the
which he began to march, then he himself follo^^^ after with thirty thousand
men more; all which together made an army of forty ^^^^sand, which being
entered into the country, the Persians were much troubled; so as (...) of the
chief went and joined with him: yet Kezere Khozrrao went to meet him with
Baharon was (...), and obeyed for king; and the first that did acknowledge him
was Kezere Khozr^^ whom many Persian writers put in the number of their kings.

Baharon Gur, seven and twenty king of Persia.
^^haron being thus settled in the possession of the realm, the first thing he
did at the (...) ^^stance of Manzar, was to pardon all in general that had
past during the civil wars, (...) that soever had bin attempted against him.
After this he labored to settle justice Manzar who had bred him (...) and had
been the cause of the recovery of his realm, he sent him many rich pre^^^^
with great and kind thanks, keeping a son of his in his court until he grew
(...).

(...) prince carried himself so wisely and mildly toward his subjects, and
showed such (...), as he was beloved and esteemed of them all; and they blessed
heaven which (...) done him so great a favor, to be come into the world under
so good a prince, and (...) so full of felicity: for he had settled so good an
order for all things, and had so ^^^shed the frontires with strong garrisons,
and wise governors, as they did long en^^^ very happy peace, during the
which, the Persians had no thoughts but of their

(...) in the midst of thy calm, and whenas they thought to enjoy their
tranquillity (...) greater assurance, news came, that Hhakhon Chini king of the
Tartarians, seeeing the (...) wherein the Persians had gotten a habit, and
assuring himself that he should surprise them in the midst of their
delights, levied an army of two hundred and fifty Baharon their king,
representing unto him the present necessity, who answered them very coldly,
as if he had not much regarded what they said: and thereupon he commanded to
prepare all things necessary for his hunting. He had commonly in his court
seven kings his vassalls, whom he let understand that hewould (...) them
accompany him in those sports. These made themselves ready with a reasonable
train, and he himself took but three hundred of the best men of his guard.

The kings and chief lords among the Persians have been always given to
hunting, in which exercise they spend much, holding it for a mark of
greatness. For this cause Baharon was surnamed Gur; which word has a double
signification, and in this place signifies a wild ass. His subjects gave him
this surname, for that he was much given ^o hunt that beast. It does also
signify a pit, wherein they bury dead bodies: so as after the death of
Baharon, Poets which sing his praises, say that he took great delight in this
^ind of chase. And whereas Gur signifies a pit, it agrees well with their
ordinary kind of hunting in Persia. They teach their faulcons, and other kind
of hawks in such sort, as they

In India they do often hunt one wild beast with another: for they keep many
tame in

As for the chase of tygres, whereof they have great numbers in the East, they
of the Island of Zeylan hunt them after this manner: A man arms his left arm
unto the elbow with strong plates well steeled, and in his right hand he holds
a sharp pointed dagger, then leaping against the beast, he gives him many
stabs, and so kills him. There are many men exceeding active, and expert in
this exercise: yet some loose their lives in the practice; for the tygres of
the East are exceeding great, and very cruel. The Nayres of this country
which be the Pagans of Malabar, hold it a great honor to kill tygres.
Teixieres, who has made this observation, and traveled over all the East,
holds that this beast in Teixieres, why they do rather sollow

And to the end we may omit nothing worthy of note, which has been curiously
^^^erued by this Author; (it depending also in some sort of hunting) he says,
That in (...) realm of Champa (which is betwixt Camboya and Cochin China, upon
the South (...) of India, throughout all the coast of Mardel) there are
certain sparrowes somewhat

But to return to Baharon, (being accompanied as we have said) he fell to his
sport of ^^nting, holding a contrary course to Karason whereas the enemy lay,
having left in his (...) for governor a kinsman of his called Narsy, whom some
among the Persians put in (...) rank of kings: he, with the chief noblemen of
the realm, being persuaded that Baharon was fled, sent Ambassadors to Hakhon
Chiny, to treat a peace with him, and to free ^^^selues in some sort from the
dangers wherein they were. Hakhon accepted the of^^^nd being assured of
Baharons flight, he desisted from his first fury, and neglected his ^^^ds. In
the mean time, Baharon took his way to Aderbazon and Armenia, having Baharon,
Hakhon, who began to arm; but giving him no time, he (...) and cut off his
head; then following him that fled, he pursued them to the river of (...),
putting many to the sword. Many write this diversely, but this is held to be the
(...) report. Thus ended the war of Hakhon Chiny, king of the Tartarians: And
(...) ^auing pacified all things in those quarters, returned into Persia, full
of honor and (...) riches, to the great admiration of all his subjects, who
received him with much joy (...) content. Afterward, Baharon had a desire to
see the country of India: the which (...), being accompanied by some few of
his subjects, leaving the government again (...) (who is a gain accounted by
some for king of Persia:) going thus through the Baharon (...) married, and
seeing no further cause of fear, discovered himself to his father in law, to
whom this news was not very pleasing, fearing it would breed some innovation
Baharon having purchased great reputation by his valor, he feared, that being
known, his subjects would affect him the more. But he had another dessigne,
and the better to assure him, he took his wife, offering him certain lands of
Persia, which confined upon his country, and so returned into his realm,
where having rested himself some time, he sent a C^^t^ine of his with a goodly
army to invade the lands of Rumeston, that is to say of the Roman empire,
where he took many places without any resistance. Baharon himself went with
an army into Arabia, and invaded the country subject to the (...) of Hamon:
There is a difference betwixt Hyamon and Hamon, which are (...) in Arabia,
near unto the realm of Sabaah, whereas that lady was Queen Solomon, the
countries being near, and the way short (...) frequented: for she was not of
the country of the Abyssins, or of Aethiopia, as some (...) held, which are
remote countries. Baharon, having in his conquests gotten great ^^^tories,
pursuing the enemies in the night, fell by chance into a poole or moore, where
he was smothered and lost: the which was unknown to his subjects, by reason of
the ^ight; whereof being advertised in the morning, they went to seek him with
great speed, but it was too late. Such was the end of Baharon Gur, having
reigned three and twenty years, leaving for successor a son called Yazd
Gerd.

Yazd Gerd, eight and twentieth king of Persia.
AFter the death of Baharon, Yazd Ger^ being come unto the crown, he made
Narsy his kinsman governor of the realm, as sometime his father had done: so
as he was the third time governor, and is again numbered among the kings of
Persia. This Yazd Gerd was a great lover of justice, wherein he was so strict,
as no respect could make him fail in the execution; in regard whereof, he was
much respected of his subjects during his life. In the foureteenth year of his
reign he levied an army against the king of Rumeston, but they came not to
battle, by reason of an accord made betwixt them upon certain conditions.

Yazd Gerd had two sons, the eldest called Pheruz, and the younger Hormoz,
whom Pheruz to govern the province of Nimrus, to the end, that by his absence
he might not dispute the succession with the other, and the people might affect
him more: Then, having reigned eighteen years, he died, leaving Hormoz for
king. They called him Yazd Gerd Sepabd^xt, that is to say, a friend to
soldiers.

Hormoz, the nine and twentieth king of Persia.
HOrmoz was received for king after the death of his father, by a general
consent of all the people, whereof they repented soon after: for Hormoz being
naturally wicked, Pheruz his elder brother, from whom the father had unjustly
taken the realm, he contemned not the occasion, but made use thereof, and by
the favor of his friends, especially of the king of Abtelah, to whom Pheruz
bound himself to quit the lands of Termed, which lie at the entric of Karason,
betwixt his country and Nimrus, upon condition, that he should assist him with
thirty thousand horse, as he did: so as Pherus, with some other troops which
he gathered together, entered into Persia, whereof Hormoz being advertised, he
went against him, and offered him battle: but the army was defeated, and put
to rout, and himself taken prisoner. Some days after, Pheraz put him to
death, as shall be said, having been Farzand, that is to say, Son.


PHeruz having thus seized upon the realm, and studying for all things
necessary for the well governing thereof, he grew somewhat jealous of his
brother Hormoz, who lived (...) and had certain practices with some of his
subjects, especially with three brethren, (...) familiar friends; whereof being
fully informed, he caused all their heads to be cut off. (...) beginning of
this princes reign was very remarkable, by reason of the great ^^ought that
continued seven years together in Persia, in such sort, as the fountains
Pheruz had a sensible feeling of this general calamity, and did what possibly
he ^^^ld to help it, but the affliction was so great, as neither his travail
nor his bounty (...) able to prevent it. And seeing all providence and care
was fruitless, he drew toge^^^a great multitude of people of all sexes and
ages, with the which he went into the (...), doing penance, and imploring the
divine mercy: wherein they continued madaies until that it rained; so as the
earth began to fructify, and beasts to profit and ^^^iplie.

Pheruz to complain that the king of Abtelah had ^^^led their lands. This was
he to whom Pheruz had restored the lands of Tcrmed, for ^^^ccours of thirty
thousand men which he had given him for the recovery of (...) Athio and
Tornamire write, that this king of Abtelah was called Euthalitas, and that
(...) died in his ditches, whom they call Peruzas: the which is not strange,
for that in (...) Arabian and Persian writing, there is a certain affinity
between P. and F. and also (...) pronuntiation: and as for the word
Euthalitas, it is the same that the Persians call ^^^lah, the one and the other
signifying water of gold. This nation lies upon the North ^^rsia. Pheruz being
advertised of these spoils, prepared to make war against him: (...) which
was soon known to Gox Nauuaz(for so this king of Abtelah was called) that
Pheruz. But a (...) of his, knowing in what perplexity his prince was, offered
to free him of this in^^^brance; so as after his death he would remember the
service which he did him, and (...) his wife and children. This being promised
with all the assurances that the words ^^^rince may give, being reduced unto
that extremity; the Wazir retired (...) and having caused his hands, feet, and
nose to be cut off, he caused himself being (...) maimed to be laid in a wood,
where he knew that Pheruz and his army must of (...) pass. He was found in
this manner by the scouts of the army, who took him (...) thence, and carried
him to Pheruz camp: who being amassed at this cruelty, de^^^ded Gox Nauuaz
king of Abtelah, who preparing ^^^elfe to make war against the king of Persia,
and seeking (according to the duty of ^^^arge) to divert him from the danger
whereinto he did rashly run, for that his en^^^se did seem too difficult to
have any good success, he had taken his sincere (...) affection in so bad
part, as in steed of acknowledging his words to be true, he had (...) him to be
dismembered as he might see, and to be cast into those woods, to the end (...)
having neither feet nor hands, he should have no means to defend himself
against (...) beasts that might tear him in pieces. Pheruz detesting the
cruelty of this prince, (...) holding all for truth that he had reported,
comforted him, giving him hope that Pheruz mea^^^ to continue his intended
course, the Wazir making show to have a great desire of ^^^nge, told him that
if he would follow his directions, he would conduct him a shor^way, by which
the enemy should not discover him, Pheruz commanded presently that he should
be put in the head of the army, and that they should follow him. This man
Pheruz having escaped this danger, fell into the hands of Gox Nau^az, who
entreating them with all clemency, set them at liberty upon certain
conditions, whereof the one was, That Pheruz should bind himself never to make
war against him, neither by himself nor any other; whereunto he agreed to have
his liberty.

Pheruz was no sooner returned into Persia, but he made a great levy of men,
to go against Gox Nauuaz, notwithstanding that his subjects sought by all
means possible to divert him: but their reasons and entreaties were all
fruitless; so as he sent for a kinsman of Sufarah, whom some put twice in the
rank of the kings of Persia: once in this place, and another time before; to
whom he gave the government of his realm and of his two sons, whereof the
one was called Belax, and the other Kobad, prescribing him an order what to do
concerning the government. He led with him a daughter of his that was of rare
beauty: being come near to Abtelah Gox Nauuaz went against him to stop his
passage, yet sending unto him to require him to observe that which was
concluded betwixt them: whereunto Pheruz lent a deaf ear. Gox Nauuaz had
caused many deep ditches full of water to be made upon the way, the which were
covered so artificially, as no man could discern them: and seeing Phe^^z
wilfully bent to war^e, he made a show of flying, the which gave more courage
to Pheruz soldiers to pursue him, who as it were assured of all danger without
any discovery of those places by the which they were to pass, they run rashly
into these ditches where they were all drowned with, Pheruz having reigned six
and twenty years.

Sufarah, who had remained governor in Persia, being assured of this loss,
levied a mighty army with great speed, and began to march toward Abtelah
forcing the king to demand a peace, on condition to yield up the captives and
spoils, with the daughter of Pheruz, the which Gox Nauuaz performed with much
grief, for that he loved her dearly. This being done, Sufarah returned into
Persia, whereof he made Belax the eldest son of Pheruz king. As for Kobad the
younger, who pretended the crown, finding himself wronged and disgraced by
Sufarah, he went to serve the king of Turquestan.

Belax, the one and thirtieth king of Persia.
AFter this manner Belax obtained the quiet possession of the crown of Persia:
and as for Kobad concealing the secret of his intentions, he continued his way
to Turquestan, being accompanied by Bezarmeher the son of Sufarah his great
friend, who was married, and had his house an family in Nichabur. He entreated
Kobad to do him so much honor as to pass that way, to the end he might
receive him in his house, and moderat his discontents by his good reception:
wherein, at length he prevailed. This Bezarmeher had one daughter called
Zarmeher, which was exceeding fair: Kobad having seen her, Bezarmeher
perceiving, and being the thing he most desired, he offered him his daughter,
wherewith the prince was much content, and took her to wife, of whom in time
they had one son, whom some call Anuchiron, and others Nauchiruan.

Kobad having continued there some days after his marriage, he left his wife
in his fathers house, and continued his way to Turquestan, where being arrived,
he presently put himself into the service of Hhak^on Chiny, who at that time
governed this realm, with whom he continued four years, at the end whereof
he demanded a good army of Hhakhon, in recompense of his services, with the
which he marched into Persia against his brother Belax the king thereof, who
governed it to the great content of all men. Kobed Belax his brother was dead,
having reigned but five years.

As for Nichabur it was a province subject to the king of Persia, lying betwixt
Karazon, Tamerlan, or Teym^rlangh, caused four hundred thousand persons to dye
in one day, (as the Histories of Persia report.) In Nichabur grow the stones
which they call Turquestes, so called for that this province confines with
Turquestan, and there are no precious stones found in Persia, but in this
place, except the Bezar stone, which is the most perfect, the which grows in
Persia: this name of stone is called in the Persian tongue Sangh; and in the
Arabian, Ager. But as for the Bezar stone, the Persians call it by excellency
Pazahar, that is to say, an antidote or remedy against poison: for Zahar is a
general name for all Scach Abbas, at this present king of Persia, esteems
them so much, as those which exceed a certain weight belong to him. The
natural cause of this effect is their feeding, for the sneepe being
transported into another soil, yield no such stones. The inhabitants of this
province have no hair upon their head, the which a servant of Scach Abbas
having observed,

Kobad, the two and thirtieth king of Persia.
THe news of Belax death was the cause that Kobad entered more quietly into the
possession of the realm of Persia than he expected, his brother having left no
son to succeed Sufarah, who for his great bounty, and wisdom, was generally
beloved, except of Kobad, who was much discontented to see him in this great
authority, desiring to ruin him, and to make him away, the which he resolved
to put in execution by the means of a hardy and valiant knight which was in
his Court, to whom (having discovered his intention) he made him consent to the
death of Sufarah, whom, within few days after, he went to visit, where
(descoursing of diverse matters) they fell to words, and in the end to arms, so
as Xamo slew him.

About the tenth year of the reign of Kobad there did rise up in Persia a man
called Mezdahk, which came out of the country of Sthahar, who sought to erect
up a new sect touching the veneration of fire, finding out new follies and
superstitions. They called him a Prophet, and he did faigne that the fire spoke
unto him, and did reveal many high and great matters, the which he made the
vulgar people to believe, with some other in^entions which hevsed. He allowed
community in goods, wives, children, and all other things: he did prohibit the
killing of any living creature, propounding many other absurd things unto the
people. Many which had not yet found out the falsehood of his doctrine, followed
him to live dissolutely and in liberty, among which was king Kobad, who
commended him much; and they that followed him, honored him greatly, esteeming
him as a holy man. The chief and wisest men of the realm, who considered the
danger that might ensue, and how much the king was deceived, entreated him to
put him to Ia^asp his near kinsman, who is numbered by some among the kings of
Persia. Kobad being restrained, the Persians sought to put Mezdahk to death,
but they could not effect it, by reason of the great multitude that followed
him, standing still upon his guard; yet in the end they made him away, as you
shall hear. Kobad had a sister exceeding fair, with Mesdahk, who was not
veriescrupulous. She seeing her brother and husband a prisoner, being bound by
such strict bands to affect him more than ordinary, sought all possible means
to free him: In the end, she bethought her self of one which in her opinion
might effect her dessigne: she attired her self therefore in her richest
roabes and most precious jewels to give more luster to her natural beauty,
and then she went into the prison where Kobad was, where, with presents and
promises (which were not very lawful) she had such power over them that kept
him, as they suffered her to sleep that night with him, the which being past,
she caused his bed to be emptied, whereinto he was put, and so carried him to
his Kobad time to retire himself, the which he did so secretly, and with such
speed, as it was not discovered before he was in a place of safety. Being thus
gotten out of Persia, he went into the realm of Abtelah, hoping to draw some
succors from the king, the which he obtained not presently: yet after some
years, assisting him with thittie thousand horse, having drawn some other
forces together, he entered into Persia: This bred a great combustion amongst
them of the country, whether they should receive him as an enemy, or
peaceably, as their king. In the end, they concluded to receive him with all
submission, and the first that did acknowledge him, and subject himself under
his command, was Iamasp, to whom they had committed the government:
whereupon, Kobad requited their obedience by a general

Kesere Anuxiron, the three and thirtieth king of Persia.
KEsere Anuxiron or Nauchiruan (for they call him by either name) the son of
Kobad and of Zarmeher his wife, succeeded in the realm: he was endowed with
many excellent virtues, for the which he was much respected and honored, as
well by his subjects as strangers: having given order for the necessary
reformation of Estates, the first Mezdahk and his followers to death, the which
was executed with such rigor, as in a short time they were all extinct,
although the number were in a manner infinite, freeing Persia of this pernicious
sect. And to the end he might govern his realms with less toil to his
person, he divided them all into four gouernements, the which he committed
unto men of great loyalty and trust, and who were allied unto his majesty.
The first of these governors had the provinces of Karazon, Sagistam, Kermon,
and Maurenahar: the second, Isphaon, Kom, Aderbajon, and Armenia: the third,
had Farc or Parc, which is Persia and Ahuua: and the fourth, Hierak, the which
is about Babylon, and the countries of Rumestam, which is Greece. Having thus
ordered all things, he levied a great army, with the which he conquered
Tacharstar, Zabulstam, Ka Hakhon Chini, king of the Tartarians, invaded his
country, and took from him Barchach, Ferana, Kaich, Nesaf, Samarkand, and
Bokara. This Samarkand is a town of great strength in the country of
Maurenahar, whereas Tamerlan was borne, who was a famous and renouned prince
throughout the world, borne of noble parents, and not descended from a
heardsman or a thief, as some have held, but from the blood of Chinguis Cham,
king of the Tartarians, of whom we will hereafter speak: being come unto the
realm, not for his beauty, for he had but one hand, was lame and blind of one
eye, but for his great valor in arms, he made himself master of a great
part of the habitable earth; he showing himself mild and courteous to such as
yielded unto him, and most cruel to them that made Teimur, and he was surnamed
Langh, that is, limping; whence grew the corruption of the name which, we give
him of Tamberlan. The Persians call him commonly Sahaybkharon, that is to say,
a ruler of fortune. There is a particular book written of his life in the
Persian tongue, in an elegant style.

Gelaladinakbar, and that he is descended from him in the eight degree of the
direct line. The names of these great Monarchs, according unto the opinion of
the Persians, are, he of the Turks, of the Persians, of the Tartarians, of
China, and of Mogol, whose dominions extend from the river of Ganges, unto the
realm of Makron, or the Persian gulf: in which tract of country are
contained many great kingdoms, and rich provinces. He is a Pagan, but
differing from the rest, for that he follows no Sect, pretending to have one
private to himself: he causes

As for Bokara, it is a town in the province of Vsbek, whereas Auicen was
borne, whom the Persians call Boaly; he was very learned in Physic, of whose
writings they make great account; and they call him commonly Chequereis, Boaly
Sina, or Eben Sina, that is to say, the lord Boaly, the son of Sina: he was
nobly borne, but not prince of Vsbek, neither yet of Cordoua, nor a Spaniard.
He did write many things which are to be seen at this day, and especially, a
volume containing twenty books of Music, and he compiled Maho^et. As for
Physicians, this is to be observed in Persia, that all Physicians keep shops,
selling drugs and physic to such as have need of them; they call them Mulah,
that is to say, Master. But to return to Kesere Anuchiron, knowing the entry
of Hakon Chiny into his country, he sent his son Hormoz against him, with
the greatest forces he could raise, who used such diligence, as he came soon
near unto the enemy, to whom he gave so many assaults and skirmishes, and
used such stratagems, as having received great loss, being full of fear and
amasement, he retired into his country, abandoning all that he had conquered;
so as Hormoz returned to Persia with much honor. The Tartarian war Kesere had
presently advertisement that Kaled Beniulas Guasanij a captain to the king of
Rumestan, had invaded the country of Manzar, king of Arabia his vassal, where
he committed great spoils, and put many of his subjects to the sword; whereof
Kesere made complaint to the king of Rumestan, demanding restitution, and to
have Kaled punished, whereof the Greek Emperor (which is the same that
Rumestan) made small account: the which Kesere understanding, he levied a great
army, and entered into the territories of Rumestan by Mesopotamia, which they
call Zazirat, and took Dara Medineyraha Kanserin, and so passing into Syria,
he took Antioch, and other places; so as he forced the Grecian Emperor to
demand peace, the which he granted, paying him a yearly tribute, in regard
whereof he restored unto him the Kesere had some years before married a
Christian woman for her great beauty, who was much persecuted by this king
that was a Pagan, seeking to force her to renounce her religion, wherein she
continued constant. Kesere Anuchiron had a son by her called Nuchzad, who
having suck^ the mothers religion with his milk, notwithstanding all his
fathers threats, would not forsake it, whereat the king being much incensed,
caused him to be put in a dark and strait prison, and to be entreated as one
of the basest of the people, neither could the constant patience and
perseverance of this young prince move him to pity. At that time the people
of the country of Chan, which is Syria, revolted against Anuchiron; so as he
Nuchzad, who was yet a prisoner, he found out means to free himself, and
having gathered together all the Christians that were then in the realm (whose
number was not small) having also drawn unto his part a great number of
soldiers, and (that which did most import) he had seized upon his fathers
treasure, the which he divided liberally among his people, placing Rambarzin a
very famous Captain whom he had left at Hierahk, that with all possible speed
he should Ieuie men, and cross the desseignes of Nuchzad, giving him charge
that he should not kill him, but seek to take him alive, and to put him in
safe custody, yet worthy of his quality.

Nuchzad had a Captain called Chamaz Rumy, who presented battle to
Rambarzin; so as in the beginning the victory seemed to incline unto his side:
but the valor of Rambarzin (who thrust himself into the midst of his
troops, fighting more courageously Nuchzad was wounded upon the stomach with
an arrow, his arms being not able to resist; so as within few days after, he
died, and could not be recovered, to the great grief of Rambarzin, who caused
him to be interred with that pomp and ceremony which was used amongst the
Christians. In the mean time Kesere having recovered his health, and pacified
the troubles of Cham, returned into Persia, whereas he prevented many practices
against his Estate; and then he went to make war in India, and Selandyne or
Seylan, the which is that we call Taprobana, where he made a peace with the
king of that Island, paying him a certain tribute; so as this Anuchiron
commanded over the provinces

In the time of this king, there was brought out of India into Persia two
famous books of Philosophy, the one called Kelilah, and the other Vuademana,
with a chesse board, which the Indians sent unto the Persians, meaning to
represent unto them the inconstancy and mutabilitie of humane things, and of
man's life, which is a continual warfare, and therefore they should govern
themselves wisely. Mirkond says, that for answer the Persians sent them a
pair of tables, letting them understand that as wisdom was very necessary in
this life, so must they be somewhat assisted by hazard, as they might see by
Kesere Anuchiron, he was very Hormoz was best bred among them, and the father
did affect him more than all the rest; so as he caused him to be declared his
successor before his death, the which happened the eight and fortieth year of
his reign, recommending unto him peace, concord, and the love of his subjects.
Mirkond has made a relation of the virtues, wisdom, and great courage of this
king, adding, that in his time Persia did flourish in all kinds of prosperity:
he was surnamed Adel, that is to say, the Iusticer, by reason of his great
integrity in the administration thereof.

Hormoz, the four and thirtieth king of Persia.
THings which are most desired after are not always the best nor most
profitable. Hormoz as you have heard, was held for a good prince; but he
changed his disposition as soon as he had gotten the reins of command into
his hands. He was issued

The Emperor of Constantinople (being advertised of the carriage of this
prince, and how all things past in Persia) would not loose so good an
opportunity, but sought to recover these provinces which the predecessors of
Hormoz had usurped of the Roman Empire, and taking arms, he surprised the
Persians, and entered into the country of Naciben before he was discovered.
This Naciben, according to the tradition of the Persians, is Niniue, the which
they, and the Arabians at this day call Mosul in Diarbek, or Karamite, the
which they hold for certain, saying that the Pehhanber did preach there, for
so they term him whom the Arabians call Naby, and we a Prophet, and they say
that he was swallowed up by a Whale: if this be true, Niniue was never Hormoz,
that if he would restore that which did belong unto the Roman Empire, he would
retire back again without any spoil: but the Persian making no pleasing
answer, he past on, ruining all Armenia and Aderbajon, sending two captains
(whereof the one was called Abas Auual, and the other Homer Azarek) with good
troops of soldiers, to spoil the country of Babylon. At that time Chabacha
Hhakhon Chiny uncle to Hormoz, and brother to his mother, seeing his nephews
distress, levied a great army, the which they say did consist of four
hundred thousand men, not to succor his nephewe, but to seize upon his lands,
as he did; for passing over the river of Iehun, he entered into the country
Hormoz find his own error, having put the chief men of his country to death,
there being few to oppose against his enemies: and in this confusion of mind,
having called them of his Council, it was resolved to quit unto the Emperor
of Rumestan the lands which he demanded, that having some assurance from him,
they might convert all their forces against the Tartarians, as they did: for
king Hormoz having gathered together all his troops, he gave the charge to a
Persian Captain, who was accounted for one of the most valiant at that day in
all the Eastern countries, called Baharon Chuby, who was governor of the
frontires of Armenia: being come to court, and having received his
commandment from the prince, he marched presently with his army against the
Tartarians, having with him only twelve thousand Chabacha, and with such
succe^^e, as the Tartarian king was slain with a great part of his army, and
many of them were taken prisoners. Chabacha being dead, the Tartarians advanced
his son, who continued the war with the like disgrace: for the Persians were
always victors, and especially in a great battle, whereas the Tartarians
where wholly defeated, and the spoil was so great, as Baharon Chuby did send
by a son of his unto king Hormoz twelve hundred and fifty cammells, the
which were laden with gold and silver, with much rich moueables: but the
worthy exploits of this brave and valiant man, were ill rewarded, for they
that were in this princes court, envying his glory and prosperity,
slaundering him in such Hormoz, as growing jealous that he had some enterprise
against his Estate, at his return, he gave him a prison for his welcome: but
Baharon was so sensible of this ingratitude, as having found means to escape,
he entered into practice with Kozrra^ Paruez eldest son to Hormoz, giving him
means to rebel against his father, who presently coined money with his name
and arms, stiling himself king of Persia. He had Ban^u^ye, and the other was
called Bostan. King Hormoz hearing of all his conspiracies, sought by all
means possible to stop the course of his proceedings, the which the others
understanding, and finding themselves to be too weak to resist him, they fled.
Kozrr^o retired into Armenia, and from thence they went unto Aderbajon; and as
for the two brethren of Hormoz, they were put in prison: but finding means to
escape, they gathered together new forces, and surprised Hormoz, whenas he
least thought of them; so as he fell into their power: but they did not entreat
him after the like manner, for they put out his eyes. Kozrrao being advertised
of all these troubles, returned into Persia,

Persia being thus in combustion, Baharon Chuby who had been the chief motive
of these divisions, the which in show he had attemped to revenge an injury,
converted his revenge into ambition, aspiring unto the crown of Persia; so as
with a powerful a^mie, he did ouerrunne the country of Persia, and committed
great spoils: against whom Kozrrao Paraez coming unto battle, he was
vanquished, and forced to fly unto Constantinople; with his two uncles the
which did accompany him, who gave him counsel to take away all pretex^s from
his enemies, and to put his father to Paruez there, they went whereas Hormoz
remained, whom they strangled with a bow-string: such was the end worthy of
the life and cru^ltie of this prince.

As for Kozrrao Paruez, who as we have said had retired himself unto the
Grecians, he married the Emperors daughter, who assisted him with one hundred
thousand men to recover his country, sending with him a son of his the which
was called Ben Athus, in recompense whereof, Kozrrao Paruez gave him a great
piece of the holy cross, the which his father Hormoz had in his custody.
Kozrrao being upon the way with this goodly Baharon in Persia (who by many is
put among the number of kings) and both armies being in battle one against
another, there came out of Baharons camp three captains, who defied the
brauest of the adverse part; Kozrrao seeing the bravery of these men, caused
himself to be armed, and went out of his camp to fight with them against the
will of his brother in law, who dissuaded him to the contrary, in which combat
he carried himself so valiantly, as he vanquished all thr^e one after another;
the which the soldiers of Baharon admiring, they abandoned their captain, and
went to Korzraos party; so as Baharon was forced to fly into Turquestan, and
to leave Persia: after which he went to serve Hhakhon Chiny, where he died
soon after.

Kozrrao Paruez, the five and thirtieth king of Persia.
KOzrrao Paruez being thus freed from all troubles and in quiet possession of
the realm of Persia, he performed that which he had promised to his father,
committing to prison his uncles Boston and Banduhye, who had put him to death,
whom he punished very severely. In the foureteenth year of the government of
this prince, the Grecians revolted against their Emperor, whom they did kill,
with his son Ben Athus who had accompanied Kozrrao, as has been said, in
his recovery of Persia, his younger brother escaped with much difficulty, who
retired himself to Paruez by A^col, or Heraclius, a man of great wisdom and
valor, who hearing of the Persians coming, marched against them, and gave
them battle, in which he vanquished them, and s^ew sixteen thousand Persians
upon the place; but the greatest part of their army turned their backs, and
fled into their country.

About the thirtieth year of the reign of Kozrrao, there did rise at Medina
in Arabia, that false and pernicious Prophet Mahomet, who writ to many princes
and lords of those countries, entreating them as it were from God, to hear and
follow his doctrine: among Kozrrao, who was so far from assenting to him, as he
gave him 1000 curses: yet his accursed sect increased in Arabia and other
neighbor provinces. But to return to Kozrrao, the Grecian war being ended,
he lived in peace; and being in his town of Madahem, he dreamt that he was in a
city environed with strong walls, having eleven towers, all which were ruined
to the foundations successively one after another; so as the city was without
any fortifications: being awake, and much troubled at his dream, he sent for
the Divines and Astrologers, demanding the signification thereof: whereof one
among the rest answered, that the eleven towers did signify eleven kings,
which should govern Persia, after which that Monarchy should have an end.
Korzrrao to prevent this prediction and ruin, thought that this alteration
might grow by the discord Ch^rear, who of all his wives loved one whose name
was Cherin for her great beauty: this word Cherin in the Persian tongue
signifies sweet, and it is found in a book of that language, entitled Kozrrao
Cherin, which a prince of that country (not he whose life we now describe, but
another of less quality) has compounded in elegant verse, whereof the
Persians make great account, as being full of gallant conceptions, wherein they
are great artists. Charear remembering his Cherin, and being strangely
distempered with the loss of his dearest sight (as love never wants invention)
he found means to free himself of this grief, fayning himself to be sick,
and that of necessity he Cherin by the advice which he had given her,
disguised herself in the habit of a surgeon, and came unto him into the
prison, where having remained some time with her husband, she retired himself;
but she was conceived of a son whom she called Yasdgerd, who was bred up in
the house of king Kozrrao his grandfather without his priuitie, unto the age of
five years, the which being made known unto him, he commanded that the child
should be put to death, wherein he showed himself to be so resolute, as
nothing could alter his determination. The which the mother understanding, she
went unto him, and prevailed so by her prayers and entreaties, as he was not
put to death, but carried into some desert or solitary place, and there
exposed to the mercy of wild beasts (the which is related in this place for
Kozrrao gave unto this wizard made him suspicious, covetous, fearful, proud,
and hated of all his subjects, of whom he put many to death without any other
reason but his own fancy; among the which there was one called Neaman, nephew
to Manzar, who had done him great services.

Kozrrao Paruez had reigned eight and thirty years in Persia, whenas his
subjects no longer able to endure his cruelty and tyrannies, by a common
consent deposed him of the crown, delivering it into the hands of a captain,
in whom they had great confidence, and they settled his son called Kobal
Chyruyhe in the royal throne: this happened in the ninth year of the Egyra,
according to the account of the Mahometans, and in the Kozrrao Paruez is he
whom we call Kosdroez.

Kobal Chyruyhe, the six and thirtieth king of Persia.
THe Persians thought that this change had somewhat eased their affections, and
that they should receive all good usage from this prince; but they had soon
cause to repent it, for that seeing himself confirmed in the Royalty, the
first act he did, was to kill his father being a prisoner, the which did soon
purchase him* the general hat^^d of all his subjects; for notwithstanding that
this prince was hated for his bad conditions, yet was not there any one that
would pollute his hands with the blood of his prince: but within few days
after his election, one called Merehe Hormoz (son to Mordomcha whom Paruez
had commanded to be slain) offered himself to Kobal to commit this
parricide, who entering into the prison whereas Kozrrao remained, without any
other respect or complement, he used these terms: It is justice to kill him
that has slain my father, wherewithal he cut off his head. Returning unto
Kobal who was much satisfied with the deed, he demanded of him how he had
proceeded in this action; who expecting some great reward, told him the words
which he had used cutting off his fathers head: to whom Kobal answered
presently, that is was reasonable to kill him that had slain his father. But
not satisfied to have made away him that had given him life, he wrought so with
his Waz^rs and Governors, as he slew his fifteen brethren the which was
suddenly effected. After this there fell a great plague upon Persia, with the
Kobad (whereof the eldest was called Turon Dokt, and the younger Azarmy Dokt)
took occasion to reprehend him, telling him that his sins and impieties
(having put his father and brethren to death) were the cause of all those
miseries, the which the Gods had sent them, threatening him yet with worse, and
therefore he should repent him of the crimes which he had committed, and amend
his future life, as well for the fear of God, as for the shame of men. Such
words spoke his sisters unto him, the which wrought such an impression of the
villainies which he had committed, as the violence of his grief and passion
cast him into a great sickness, whereof he died within three days, having
reigned but eight months: he left a son which succeeded him in the realm.

Ardchir Chyruyhe, the seven and thirtieth king of Persia.
AFter the death of Kobad, the Persians did presently settle Ardchir Chyruyhe
his only son in the royal throne, being yet but seven years old. But a
kinsman of his called Charear or Gher Khan, who was then governor of the
province of Again, hearing of the death of Kobad, and knowing how young his
successor was, thought it a fit opportunity to effect his desseignes:
whereupon he gathered together all the forces he could, and came to court,
where he slew the young king, with many that thought to defend him: and then
being favored by the soldiers, especially by such as he had brought with
Ardchir having carried the title of king but fifty days.

Charear a tyrant, the eight and thirtieth king of Persia.
CHarear having thus seized upon Persia by the death of Ardchir, and of such as
opposed themselves: he did what he could to win the hearts of the noblem^n of
the realm, trying all possible means, but he could not prevail. There were
at that time in court three brethren of a noble family, and very valiant, who
grieuing to see this man reign, could not endure a tyrant should command over
them: so as being of one will,


THe Persians being thus freed from the tyranny of Charear, gave the realm to
Ioon Chir (this word signifies a fair Lion, or a young Lion) kinsman to the
deceased king; he was cousin to Baharon Chuby, who made war against Kozrrao
Paruez. He gave great hopes of a generous prince, if death had not prevented
his intentions, depriving him both of life and kingdom at one instant, the
which he enjoyed but one year.


TO Ioon Chir succeeded in the realm of Persia Turon Dokt, daughter to Kozrrao
Paruez, the eldest of the two which had blamed Kobad their brother: this name
of Turon is the proper name of a woman, and Dokt signifies a damsel or virgin:
she was very wise and of good government, settling her realms in peace, and
punishing such as were seditious severely: she reformed justice, and reedified
many public buildings which had been ruined by injury of time: she made one
of the three brethren which had killed the tyran Charear, supreme Vuazir of
all her realms, and made a strict league with the king of Rumestan, that is to
say, the emperor of Constantinople: but whenas her subjects

Iasancedah, the one and fortieth king of Persia.
AFter the death of Turon Dokt, the Persians made choice of Iasancedah, at
whose election there was great dispute, but in the end he was admitted: some
write, that whenas they did set the Tage upon his head, the which we call a
crown, he said, that it was too ^eightie, and that he would none of it: some
say, that it was to show the burden and

Azarmy Dokt, the two and fortieth queen of Persia.
IAsancedah being thus deposed from the Persian crown, they gave the
government to Azarmy Dokt, second daughter to king Kozrrao Paruez, and younger
sister to Turon Dokt, endowed with singular beauty, and of great
understanding. At that time, there was governor of the province of Karason, and
ever since the reign of Paruez, a renounced captain Ferrok Hormoz, who,
allured by the fame of Azarmys beauty, came to Court, as if he had been
forced to leave his province for some special affairs of the realm, leaving
a son of his in his place to govern, having an intent to court the queen,
and to make love unto her, the which he did with such importunity and
inciuilitie, as she was forced for her honors sake to make him away, causing
him to be put to death: the which being made known unto his son called
Iuego, who was in Karason, he grew into such fury, as having speedily levied
an army, he came suddenly to Court, where he mu^^hered the queen cruelly,
having no regard to her prayers and complaints. She reigned but six months.

Kesere, son to Iasancedah, the three and fortieth king of Persia.
Azarmy Dokt succeeded Kesere, son to Iasancedah, who (as we have form^rl^
said) had been deposed for his insufficiency: but the son being no more
capable, nor of a better life and government than his father, he gave occasion
unto his subjects, by reason of his follies and indiscretions, to kill him,
having reigned but one year.

Ferrogzad, the four and fortieth king of Persia.
SPeaking of the reign of Kobad Kyruyhe, it was said that he slew his fifteen
brethren, the which stroke such a fear and terror into all the rest of his
kindred, as every man desiring to fly the fury of this prince, saved
himself where he could; but after his death, some returned into Persia, among
the which was Ferrogzad, the son of Kozrrao, and nephew to Kozrrao Paruez,
whose quality being well known, he was made king, giving great hope to be a
very good prince, if he had lived longer, but he died within a month being
poisoned by his slave.

Iazdgerd, the five and fortieth and last king of the Persians of their own
nation.
IN the life of Kozrao Paruez it has been observed, that whenas Charear his
son was a prisoner, seeking to hinder the prediction of his dream, he had by
his wife Cherin a son called Iazdgerd, which being afterward known unto his
grandfather, he had caused him to be opposed to wild beasts in a forest, where
having remained some time, certain heardsmen passing by took him up, and
being moved with pity, gave him breeding, not knowing what he was: but as
time discouers all things, this young infant coming Iazdgerd to retire into
the country of Ka^ason, where he had another advertisement that the Arabian
captains of Mahomets sect were entered into his country by another by-way; who
(preparing to march against them, heard that they were near him, and came to
encounter him: whereupon, he rereturned Kayumarraz, in whom ended the Persian
monarchy, which past unto the Califes successors to Mahamet, who first
planted their seat in Kufa, and afterward in Bagaded, as shall be said.

The kings of Persia since that the Arabians began first to command there unto
our days, according to the Persian Historiographer Mirkond.
ALl things are found so confused at this new change of the lords of Persia, as
it is hard to give any beginning to a true and sinsere relation: yet the
Histori^grapher Mirkond, having somewhat explaned the Chronology, the Reader
may find a course of kings continued also in this family of the Kalifes, and
other Arabian princes which have governed Persia, as he has done in that of
Kayumarraz.

He says then, That Mahomet, the false Prophet, having commanded over many
nations for the space often years, at his death he left his Estate much
confused, by reason of the divisions which grew amongst his chief captains:
but after many great disputes, the sovereignty fell into the hands of
Abubakar, who was the first that caused himself Abubakar continued the
conquests of his predecessor; but his time was short, for he governed but two
years and a half.

Homar, the second Calife, and first king of Persia, after that the Arabians
had conquered it.
AFter the death of Abubakar, the Mahome^ans scepter fell into the hands of
Homar, who having hold it ten years and a half, seeing his enterprises to
succeed in all things, and being advertised how much Persia was inf^sted by the
Turks, he thought he Iazdgerd, as has been said, the which succeeded so
happily by the sudden death of the king of Persia, as he made himself absolute
lord of that realm, with more speed and facilit^e than he could imagine,
settling for himself, and his successors, Califes, his royal seat at Bagaded*
He died a year after, about the year of Grace 655, and of the Egyra, or
years of Mahomet, 33.

Osman or Otman, the third Calife.
OTman succeeded Homar, of whom our Historian writes nothing but that he reigned
eleven years and a half; for the Mohammedan wars, and the fury of their
arms were rather turned against Europe than Asia, the which was in a manner
all at their devotion.

Aly, the fourth Calife.
MAhomet the false Prophet, after his death, left a cousin German, who was also
his son in law, called Aly, and by the Persians, Morts Aly, who came unto the
Mohammedan Otman, whose followers tell of his great conquests and speak wonders
of his valor, the which are more ridiculous than true. This was he that began
the first divorce in the Mahometans sect, the which has continued unto the
Sophies, who say they are descended from him; and they have been always
enemies to the Eunis, who hold one belief with the Turks. He reigned but
four years and a half, being treacherously slain by a servant of his in the
city of Cufa in Arabia. His Sectaries say, that finding him dead, they washed
his body, and imbalmed it according to their custom, then they laid it upon
a camel (for they say he had so ordained before his death) suffering it to go
at will, following it continually, until after many turnings, it stayed in a
desert of Arabia near unto Cufa, where they did erect a very stately
sepulcher,

Acem, the fifth Calife.
THe death of Aly bred great dissension among the Arabians for the succession,
for that some would have Acem, son to Aly, succeed his father: others would
have Mauuia, the son of Safion, son to Harb, of the race of Ben Humya; yet
after much Acem, Calife, who enjoyed it but six months.

Mauuia, the sixth Calife.
MAuuia came in the end to be Calife, after the death of his competitor, in the
year of Grace 662, and of the Egyra 41, the which he enjoyed twenty years,
during the which, he did not any thing touching Persia worthy of memory.
During the time of his contention with his predecessor (for he had been well
served and assisted by a great and famous Captain called Abdalazyad, to whom
for recompense Mauuia gave the city of Basora, which is near unto the rivers
of Tygris and Euphrates, about the place where they join together, and so fall
into the Persian gulf. Mauuia died in the year

Yhezid, the seventh Calife.
YHezid, son to Mauuia, succeeded his father in the Califat and seigneurie of
Persia, whereof he had no sooner taken possession, but Ocem, son to Aly,
nephew to Mahomet, and brother to Acem, made war against him, and gave him
battle in the plains of Kalbelah, where there is at this day a town called
Mechet Ocem, built in this desert for the devotion of his sepulcher. Upon the
death of Ocem, an Arabian Captain called Abdalazuber took arms against
Yhezid, upon color to revenge the death of Ocem, Yhezid died in the year of
Grace 685, and of the Egyra 64.

Mauuia, the second of that name, and the eight Calife.
MAuuia the second, nephew to the first Mauuia, and son to the deceased
Yhezid, Maruan, son to Akam Ebenhumya, a kinsman to the Calife who formerly
had been deposed, prevailed against the rest, by the support and favor of
Abdalaz^ad, to whom (as we have formerly ^ayd) Mauuia the first had given the
city of Basora.

Maruan, the ninth Calife.
MAruan, kinsman to Mauuia, and of the same race, came to be Calife at the age
of eighty years, where he was not received so peaceably, but he was forced to
raise a great army to make head against the Arabians of Mecque, who would not
acknowledge him for their Lord, seeking to establish the descendants of Aly in
the empire: for they held them that were not of his race, for tyrants. To this
end they were gathered together from all parts, having chosen a commander over
them, called Soleymon Ben Moncaeb, and came against Cufa, which was then a
famous city in Arabia, and the chief of the Califes empire, but at this day
it is wholly ruined: It was destroyed by them who committed a great slaughter
of all that were of the race of Ben Humya, of the which Maruan was, who being
advertised of his enemies march and dessigne, went to the town of Orfa in
Mesopotamia to encounter them, it is called by another name Raha, and was in
old time the town of Vr, whereas the Chaldeans would have burnt the Patriarch
Abraham, for that he did worship the true God, they being Idolaters. In this
place Maruan gave his enemies battle, where he was victor, having slain
Soleymon their General.

Ater this great victory, Maruan returned home triumphing, but it cost him
dear, for his wife (who was allied to Soleyman) desiring to revenge his death,
and the rest of her kinsfolks and friends, which had been slain in the
battle, strangled him in the night as he slept. Thus he died, being eighty
one years old, in the year of Grace 686, and of the Egyra 65, having reigned
one year.


THe victory obtained by Maruan, gave an easy entry to his son Abdelmalek
to the royal throne, where he lived not long in quiet, for a Captain of the
Chiahis, which hold the party of Aly, called Moktar Eben Ebiabe^ Zakafy,
accompanied by another called Ebrahem Achtar, drew together great troops of
soldiers, and came and spoiled the countries of Aderbajon, Diarbek, Auuas, and
other provinces of Persia and Mesopotamia, making cruel wars where they
past, putting all to the sword that were of the adverse party. Against these,
Abdelmalek leuyed an army of seventy thousand men, and went first against
Abdalaziad, whom he defeated in battle, and also slew, having Abraham Malek,
and he made Mazaeb Benzober, brother to Abdela Zober, governor of Basora:
After which, he made war against Moktar, whom he defeated, and slew in an
encounter. Not long after, the Calife Abdelmalek leuyed another mighty army
against Masaebzober, whom he vanquished, recovering the lands which he had held
in Persia. From thence he went to Damaz, where he sent Os^asge, or Asiasge,
against Abdalazobar, who had revolted, and fortified himself in Mecque, who
was also vanquished and slain, like to the other rebels: after whose death
Abd^lmalek enjoyed his Estates in peace, giving to Osiasge, in recompense of
his services, the government of Ayerakhen, and of Karason. After this,
Abdelmalek did build a great Abdelmalek, having reigned one and twenty years,
and one month, died in the year of our Redemption 706, and of the Egyra 86,
leaving four sons, O^lid, Soleym^n, Yhezid, and Ochon.

Oelid, the eleventh Calife.
AFter the death of Abdelmalek, Oelid succeeded to the crown. He exceeded all
his predecessors in power and wealth, extending his empire by the means of
Captains, Koteybah Eben Moselem, conquered Karason as far as Turquestan,
with all the country of Maurenahar and Koarrazm. On the other side, Moseleima
Ben Abdel Malek entered the territories of the Grecian empire with a mighty
army toward Constantinople, conquering many places, and binding the Emperor
to pay him a certain tribute. If Oelid made himsel^e fearful, and in a
manner invincible by his great deeds of arms, he took no less content to
make public buildings in many places, among the which the most famous was the
Mosque at Damaz, the which he caused to be built with admirable art and
architecture, besides the sumptuousness.

About that time, Osiasge died in Karason, whom Oelid had sent to govern that
country, power. At the end of the same year, which was in the year of our
Redemption 715, Oelid died, being also five and forty years old, having
reigned nine years, and eight months.

Soleyman, the twelfth Calife.
SOleyman, son to Abdelmalek, and brother to Oelid, succeeded him. As Persia
was not yet wholly reduced under the Califes obedience, so there were still
some innouations and subjects of war, sometimes in one province, sometimes in
another. Among others, there were two that were not yet subdued, Gerion, and
Tarbestan, Vezid Eben Mahalep, a brave Captain, with a sufficient army to
conquer them, who made them subject in the time of Soleyman, by the council of
Iafar Barmaki his Vuazir, where he made an order for the value of coins: which
unto that time had been very confused, to the prejudice of the people; and
soon after, he died at Damas, of a pain which he had in his side, having
reigned two years and a half.

Homar, the thirteenth Calife.
TO Soleyman succeeded Hamar or Homar, son to Abdala Aziz, the son of
Maruuan, Soleyman, before his death, seated him in the empire: but by what
means soever it were, it is most certain he succeeded him. This Moore was
verle jealous and superstitious of his sect. It was then in the year of Grace
718, and the 98 of the Egyra, whenas the descendants of Abas, uncle to
Mahomet, did rise against Homar, and made war against him, pretending that
the Califat did by right belong unto them, especially one Aly Eben Abas, who
sent many embassages to diverse princes, persuading them to shake off Homars
yoke, and to acknowledge him, in regard of his just title, which gave him the
empire. But during these treaties, Ochon (son to Abdelmalek, Soleyman)
poisoned Homar, so as he died, being forty years old, having reigned two
years, and five months. This happened in the year of our Redemtion 720, and
of the Egyra 101.

Yezid, the second of that name, the foureteenth Calife.
THe death of Homar gave the empire to Yezid the third, son to Abdel Malek.
In the beginning of his reign, one Aben Mocelem Karasony revolted by the
persuasion of Aly Ben Abas, and they two made war against Yezid for the space
of two years, at the end whereof, this Calife died, having done nothing
worthy of memory, in the year of

Ochon, the second of that name, and the fifteenth Calife.
OChon, he who had poisoned Homar, being brother to the deceased Yezid, came in
his rank to be Calife, during whose time there were some combustions in
Persia, in the which Nacer Sayar, and Yucef Eben Homar el Sacafy, two captains
of great reputation, did him notable services: He recompensed them with good
gouernements, giving to Sayar the countries of Karason; and to Yucef Eben
Homar, those of Hyeraken. The rest of this Califes reign, being nineteen
years and eight months, Persia lived in peace until


AFter the death of Ocem, Oelid the son of Yezid was chosen Calife. He had
great wars against them of the family of Abas, among the which Abdalah Ben
Abas, one of the chief pretendants was slain, by whose death he thought he
should be much fortified in his Empire: and the better to assure himself, he
caused two sons of the deceased Abdala to be acknowledged his successors in
his government, thinking by this means to pacify them of that family, one
of the which was called Ehrahem el Safa: But all his foresight prevailed
little, for he was so cruel, and of so bad a dispositi^n

Yezid, the third of that name and the seventeenth Calife.
YEzid the son of Oelid, commonly called Yezid Nekhes (for that he had taken
away what his ancestors had given) succeeded to the realm at the age of
forty years* the which he enjoyed but six months, at the end whereof he died
in Damas.


EBrahem succeeded his brother Yezid, who having held the Septer but two
months the greatest of his subjects seeing his little industry carried
themselves insolently toward him, and among others, one called Maruuan, who
was of the same family, revolted against him, took him, and put him in
prison, where he detained him three months, at the end whereof he put him
death.

Maruuan, second of that name, and the nineteenth Calife.
Maruuan having seized violently upon the realm, the affairs were in great
confusion, the Moors disagreeing among themselves. The province of Karason was
then governed by Nacer Sayer, who taking arms against Malab, who had the
government of the realm of Kermon: this war was very bloody, and cruel.
Moreover in Maruuo, they of the family of Abas fell to arms, against whom
they of Karason and Kermon joined themselves to resist their fury, and coming
to battle, they of Abas faction vanquished them, and slew above a hundred
thousand men of the troops of Kermon, especially of the family of Ben Humia.
As for them of Karason, such as remained at this conflict fled to Sauua. They
had taken one Abu Mocelem for their captain, who upon color of this defeat,
and not content with his charge, aspiring to greater matters, Katabey Eben
Echabib with a great army to seize upon the country of Hierak, as he did,
from whence he went to a place called Cufa in Arabia, where he met with
Maruuan, who came from Vuacet to encounter him; the which they did at Night,
near unto the river of Euphrates, where without any delay they joined
battle, in which encounter the soldiers of Maruuans army charged their
enemies with such fury, as they forced them to retire to the river to save
themselves by swymming in the which Katabey was drowned without the priuitie of
his soldiers, who taking courage, thinking their General had been among
them, returned to the charge with such resolution, as they defeated Maruuans
army. This happened about the break of day, whenas the victors finding their
General to be wanting, they presently made choice of Acem his son Safa in
their way, who was of the family of Abas, one of the two whom Oelid had caused
to be acknowledged for Prince, as has been said, they declared him Calife
against his will; yet seeing himself to have the command in his hands, he sent
three of his uncles, Safa, Abdula, and Abdsamet, with great forces against the
son of Maruuan, who having gathered all his troops together came to
encounter Ben Humia: They also did break open the sepulchers of such as were
already dead, and burnt their bones, not pardoning any of that line, except
one called by the name of Hamarben Abdala Azis, to whom for his wonderful
great bounty, all his enemies by a general consent gave him life and
liberty, such force has virtue, even among mortal enemies. Thus the Empire
of them of the family of Ben Humia ended Maruuaen, to pass unto that of Ben
Abas, who held the Empire long.

OF THE KINGS OF PERSIA OF THE LINE OF BEN ABAS.
Safa, the twentieth Calife.
Saf^ the son of Abdala, the son of Aly, the son of Abdula, the son of
Abas, being thus rid of his enemy, settled himself in the realm, where seeing
himself peaceable, and without competitor, he sent his two uncles, the one
called Abdula, to govern Surya, Egypt, and Affricke, which were under his
obedience; and the other called Daud, that is to say David, he sent to Medina,
and to Mecque. He sent Safa to Vuacet to his brother Abuiafar to pacify those
countries which were all in cumbustion: From thence he caused him to go to
Karason, one of the most famous Provinces of Persia, for the greatness and
wealth, the chief city whereof is called Mechad, whereas Ismaell Sophi, and
his successors are interred. This city Abusalem, who seeing Abuiafar the
Califes brother to come against him, not only yielded him obedience, but did
also put himself into his hands, serving and assisting him with much
fidelity, the which is the more remarkable both in regard of those times, and
the humor Safa had for Vuazir one ^alled Abuzalemah a man of great
sufficiency, whom he affected much for his good services: yet having
discovered that he treated with certain persons, and conspired against his
life, he put him to death, and gave the charge to Kaleb Barmaqui, who carried
himself very discreetly: In the end Safa having reigned four years and nine
months, he died, in the year of Grade 755, and of the Egyra 136.

Abuiasar the one and twentieth Calif.
ABuiafar brother to the deceased Calife was no sooner come unto the crown,
but Abusalem governor of Karason, (who as we have said had used such respect
unto him, whenas during his brothers life he had been to visit his pouince)
meant to revolt; but this Prince found means to draw him into his presence,
where he caused him to be presently slain, by whose death the affairs of
Abuiafar at the end of this war meant to visit his realm, and parting from
Cufa, he crossed through Mesopotamia, and coming to the banks of the river of
Tygris, he found the situation, bounty of the soil, and commodity of the
place so pleasing unto him, for the visiting of his provinces, as he built a
great city, the which by reason of many pleasant and delightful gardens which
are in that country, the people called Bagadad of Baga a Persian word, which
signifies a garden,

Mahady Bila, the two and twentieth Calife.
A Buiafar after his death left one son behind him called Mahady Bila, who
came unto the Califat, and governed the Empire four year peaceably, without
any great alteration, at the end whereof a Captain of his called by the name
Akemben Ocem (who aforetime had been Secretary unto Abusalem, governor of
Karason, whom Abuiafar had put to death) revolted against his Prince, making
those provinces partakers of his rebellion. This man had but one eye, and was
of a terrible aspect who not only sought to be acknowledged for king, but he
would be worshipped as a God: And to the end they should bear the like sepect
unto him, he covered his face with a veil, saying, that men were vnwortie to
see his face. And as such monsters never want followers, in regard of the
liberties and infolencies which they allow them, many subjected themselves to
this impious and wicked man, either for fear or ignorance, the people being
all naturally inclined to insolences: so as a great number of provinces
received him for king.

Mahady the Calife being advertised of all these practices, sent a mighty
army against Monsaeb, who marching with all possible speed, came into Karason,
the which the kin^men and nearest partisans of Akem understanding, seeing their
forces too weak to resist so great a power, they poisoned him to save their
own lives, thinking by his death to draw somd better commodities from the
Persian Captain, giving it out, that he was ascended up to heaven: But Monsaeb
having subdued all those countries, seeing that he could not get his enemy
neither daed nor alive, took severe punishment of all his kinsfolks and
followers, causing as many to be burnt as he could get, whereof the number was
not small. All this happened in the year of Grace 786, and of the Egyra 169,
in which year Mahady Bila died; being three and forty years old, having
been Calife ten years and one month.


TO Mahady succeeded Elida Baly Musa, but his time was short, to the great
discontentement of all his subjects, for that he was a very affable Prince, and
of a good disposition: but neither his cheerful humor, nor his pleasant
disposition could warrant him from death, having reigned but one year and
three months, in the year of Grace 787, and of the Egyra 170.

Arachid Bila Harun, the four and twentieth Calife.
ARachid, second son to Mahady, by his brothers death succeeded to the
Empire: He had for Vuazir Hyahya Kaled Bermaky, a very wise man in matterts of
government. This Prince in the year of Grace eight hundred and four, and of
the Egyra one hundred eighty seven, sent to massacre the Berameques, who were
of a very noble family, and his Vuazirs being jealous that they would attempt
something against him; three years Rash Eben Nacer of Samarkand had titled
himself King, against whom Arachid would go in person: But death surprised
him upon the way, depriving him of life at Thus, the chief town of a province
of that name, having held the Empire three and twenty years, this happened in
the year of our Redemption eight hundred and ten, and of the Egyra one hundred
nintie three. This Prince had four sons, that is to say, Mamed Hammi, to
whom he gave all that he held in Alep, and thereabouts, toward the West:
Mahamun, to whom Kacem, he gave the government of the provinces of Aderbajon
and Dyarbek: as for the fourth called Matacon, for that he loved him not, he
left him no portion, yet in the end his was not the least.

Mahamed Amin, the fine and twentieth Calife.
ARachid Harun had appointed Mahamed Amin to be his successor in the Califat,
wherein being installed he was very much discontented in mind to see his Empire
so divided, and his part so small; so as with this conceit the first thing he
did was to study Mahamun to whom, as we have said the father had given that
country, not holding himself safe, his brother Amin being in arms, stood
upon his guard, and seeing the storm ready to fall upon him, he levied a
mighty army, whereof he gave the charge to a certain Vuazir of his called by
the name of Taher Ben Ocem, who went presently to charge the enemies, to whom
he gave battle and vanquished them, pursuing them unto Bagader, where he
entered by force, and took the Calife Mahamed Amin, whom he carried away with
him and slew upon the way, having held the Empire four years and seven
months, in the year of Grace 814, and of the Egyra 198.

Mahamun Ben Arun, the six and twentieth Calife.
MAhamun Ben Arun brother to the deceased, whom the Vuazir Taher had put to
death, succeeded in the Califat. He made Fazele Ben Saleh his chief Vuazir, a
wise man, and of great understanding in matters of government: And as the
affairs of his Empire were then quiet, he spent much to have all the books of
Philosophy, the Mathematikes, Astrology, and Physic, which he could recover,
to be translated out of the Grecian, Syrian, and Arabian tongues: But this
peace lasted not long in Persia; for one called Babek Coramdin revolted in
Aderbajon, against whom he sent certain troops: but the war Mahamun sent
Taher Zulemin to govern the country of Karason, but he soon repented him;
for he understood that he aspired to greater matters than the government, and
practiced certain innouations: For which cause he sent Hamed Abichaled to
frustrate his enterprises; but all was presently pacified, by the death of
Taber. Notwithstanding all the practices of the deceased, yet the Calife gave
the government to a son of his called Talahe Ben Taher: But the deceased
Taher had an other son called Abdula, whom the father had sent to make war
against the Vsbeques, for that they would not receive his sect, who returning
victorious, found his father dead, and his brother in possession of the
government. This was troublsome unto him; but Mahamuns life, who died in the
year of Grace 826, and of the Egyra 210 having reigned twelve years, and
seven months.


AFter the death of these two, in the end he came unto the Empire whom the
father had so much contemned, as he left him not any portion in his
Inheritance: For he was son to Harun, and brother to the deceased. At his
coming to the crown he built a town within three miles of Bagadet toward
the North, upon the river of Tygris, calling it Samarrah, the which did
flourish for a time, but it has since so declined, as there is nothing at this
day remaining but ruynes. At the death of Mahamun, Babec Coram, Matacon sent so
great an army against him, as he was defeated and taken prisoner, whose hands
and feet this Prince caused to be cut off, and then to be hanged. Yet there
were some combustions in the country of Karason, by reason of the Province of
Sistom, which is in base Karason and Kermon toward the Persian gulf, and is
joining of the one side, to Persia, to the government whereof Sistom is
subject, and on the other side to the realm of Macron near unto the country
of India: For at that time there did rise a man in this province of Sistom, who
being accompanied by all such as would follow him, seized upon the better part
thereof: and for that it depended upon the jurisdiction of Karason, Talahe, who
commanded there at that time, armed speedily and went to encounter Amzah, (for
so the rebel was called who continued his conquest) fought with him, and won
the victory; from whence he returned to Karason, where he fell sick presently
after, and died, in the year of our Redemption 829, and of the Egyra 213,
leaving in his place Aly Ben Talahe his son, against whom the neighbor
Princes made a long and tedious war, until that in the end Aly was slain in
an encounter; yet the war ended not, but seemed rather to be more and more
inflamed by his death. During all these broils in Karason, Matacon made war
against the Emperor of Greece, of whom he won many victories, after which he
died being forty eight years old, in the year of our Salvation 833, and of
the Egyra 217 having reigned eight years. After his death he left behind

Vuacek, the eight and twentieth Calife.
VVacek succeeded his father Matacon, of which Calife there is nothing found
memorable. This only past in Karason: After the death of Aly Ben Talabe his
uncle, Abdula Ben Taher succeeded him in the government of the realm of
Karason, in whose time (not withstanding that the soil of this country is
very fertile, and yields abundantly) there happened a terrible, and general
famine, by reason of a great and mighty drougth, which continued in a manner
for the space of three years, whereby the whole country was almost unpeopled:
But afterward there fell great store of rain which made the land as fertile
as before, so as every man returned again to his own house. In this reunion
the Persians and Moors gathered together to make war against the Gentiles,
which were yet in that country, and of the same nation; yet they do vulgarly
call them Mayusi, and they do worship the Fire, whereof there are great
numbers at this day in Persia: at which time they made a great and terrible
massacre of them, and them Abdula Taher died in Karason, to whom succeeded
Tahen Ben Abdula his Vuacek, who died two years after, having reigned five
years and nine months, in the year of Grace 838, and of the Egyra 222
leaving Iafar his brother to succeed him.

Almoto Vuakel Bila Iafar, the nine and twentieth Calife.
ALmoto-Vuakel Bila Iafar succeeded his brother Vuacek, during whose reign the
descendants of Aly did rise, for that he sought all means to hinder their
pilgrimages to his Sepulcher, which is in Mecha Ocem, in the deserts of
Kilbelah, as has been said, and the better to effect it, he caused the banks
of Euphrates to be broken in many places, that drowning the fields round about,
he might with little trouble stop their passage by the great plain of this
desert: In the time of this Calife Taher Ben Abdula died in Karason, leaving
his government to his son Mahamet, who gave unto an uncle of his being
Tabarstan to live on, the which he enjoyed but little, as shall be said, as for
the Calife Vuakel, he had one son called Montacer, so desirous to reign, as
his ambition made him so impious and unnatural, as he caused his father to be
slain by his slaves, having reigned twelve years, in the year of Grace 850
and of the Egira 234.

Montacer Bila the thirtieth Calife.
THis execrable Paricide came thus unto the empire; but his joy was short, for
at the end of six months a great sickness deprived him both of life and that
which he had

Abul Abas Hamed, the one and thirtieth Calife.
ABul Abas Hamed son to Mahamed the son of Matacon, as nearest kinsman to
the deceased, succeeded himin the Califat: But having commanded five years, and
nine months with small satisfaction to his subjects, his soldiers took him,
and cast him into a straight prison, where they suffered him to famish. At that
time the affairs of Persia were in some confusion, for that in the province of
Taberstan, which as we have said, had been given by Taher to his uncle
Soleymon, there did rise one called Acem Ben Zeyd Alanuy, that is to say, sent
of God, who seized upon the country of Taberstan, forcing Soleymon to fly to
Bagadet, where he was very courteously entertained by the Calife which then
reigned called Mostahhin, who did him much honor. In the mean time Acem Ben
Zeyd having placed good garrisons throughout all the provinces which he had
conquered, entered into Persia, where he committed great spoils, taking Deylon,
Gueylon, Habar, Zenion, and Casuin: The which happened in the year 856, and of
the Egira 240.

Mostahhin, the two and thirtieth Calife.
THe soldiers having thus famished their king, there was great controversy
among Mostahhin kinsman of the deceased Calife, whom they installed in their
Royal Throne, the which he enjoyed very little, for in the end of sixteen
months, falling sick, he died, in the year of Grace 858, and of the Egira 242.

Almatez Bila, the three and thirtieth Calife.
ALmatez Bila being come unto the Empire, he presently sent a very great army
against Acem Ben Zeyd, under the command of a captain called Mesa Ben Buka,
who entering into Persia fought with his enemies and had the victory,
recovering by this means the Dahe Alauuy brother to Acem Ben Zeyd, to retire
to Taberstan, where he died: So as Acem was constrained to send his other
brother in his place, called Mahamed Eben Zeyd. Matters passing after this sort
in Persia, the Califes soldiers being all discontented and weary of him,
caused him to die

Motady Bila, the four and thirtieth Calife.
AFter the death of Almatez they did choose Motady Bila for Calife, but he
enjoyed his Empire eleven months only, at the end whereof the soldiers slew
him, in the year of our Redemption 863, and of the Egira 247.


ALmat Hamed Bila Hamed Eben Emoto Vuakel was made Calife after the death of
Motady, who to assure himself of his kinsfolks and friends, whom he feared
more than any other, found means to give them diverse charges, and to send them
by the country of Hyaman and Medina into Arabia. And for that throughout the
whole history, there is often mention made of Medina, it shall be fit to
advertise that this word is a common name, which signifies some people:
Wherefore they have been accustomed to add an other word unto it, as in
Spain, they say, Medina Celi, Medina Sidonia, or Medina del Mahomet, Medina el
Naby: that is to say, people of the Prophet: And when as in pilgrimage to his
Sepulcher, although they say, they go to Mecque, yet it is to Medina el Naby,
for these towns are not one, Medina being within the land, and four days
distant from Mecque or Mokah, which is a maritime town standing upon the red
sea, whether the Moors vessels do commonly come, which sail out at that sea
into the East: But for that they which come from the Eastern parts disimbarke
at Mecque, they say they come from Mecque, as they also do which come from the
Western parts, for that having accomplished

Returning now to the affairs of Persia, which were at that time in great
confusion, it happened that a new Captain called Yacub Leys revolted in the
country of Siston, who in the beginning had not many of his party, but
fortune so favored him as with his small troops he took the chief town of
the province, and of the same name, and Mahamed Ben Taher had planted a garson,
with the which Yacub Leys did fight and won the town, the which gave him
assurance to go and charge Mahamed Ben Taher, who was governor of Karason, but
being advertised of his coming, he abandoned his company and fled to Nichabur.
On the other side Acem Ben Zeid Alauuy continued still his conquests, and
seized upon the country of Gerion, by whom Mahamed was stopped in his passage;
so as seeing himself without hope of remedy, gathering together what forces he
could; he resolved to defend himself against Yacub Leys, and to fight with
him, as he did, but he was vanquished: who leaving him a rich spoil, with the
lands of Siston and Karason, and to Acem Ben Zeyd Alauuy, those of Geryon, unto
Rey Charear, he fled being accompanied by few men to Nichabur, Yacub Leys, who
incountered with Abdula Saleh Vuazir to Taher, who talking together, Abdula
demanded of him by what authority he made this war, for that if it were in the
Califes name they should not make any resistance against him: But Yacub drawing
his sword, answered: This is it that gives me power and authority. And when as
Taher sought to draw him unto him upon good assurance, and that Yacub would not
yield unto it, they fought again, in which battle Taher fell into the Yacub,
who put him to death, being the last of that name which held that government.
He was of a more royal disposition and endued with greater virtues th^n all
his ancestors: But for that the deeds of Leys were worthy of admiration, in
whose life there are seen many notable encounters and accidents, it may
happilly seem sitting to relate in more fully, and at length, for that the
knowledge thereof auailes much for the history.

In the province of Siston did liuean officer of the kings, who was as we would
say among us a maker of kettles, called Leys, who had thee sons Yacub, Hamar,
and Aly among the which Yacub learned his fathers art, and being a young
stripling, who went up Yacub having bound them unto him by his liberality,
which has a great power to move men, he found them fully resolved to follow
him, whom he armed after the best manner that he could, and began to keep the
high ways using still his natural liberality to these his companions, by
whom he was called Captain: having withal compassion of the miserable which
fell into his hands, taking from them only Taher Ben Abdula, of whom we have
formerly spoken, was governor in Karason, to whom they repaired that had been
thus robbed, telling him that one called Salekh Ben Asar had drawn into his
company Yacub Leys, and that he entertained him, and given him the title of
Captain; That being entered into the country of Sistom, they had taken the
town and spoiled it. This made Taher Ben Abdula send his forces against them,
who made them to abandon Sistom. Soon after Taher Abdula died, leaving his
son Mahamed Ben Taher in his place, who being entered into the possession of
his government, an other Captain called Dram Ben Nacer drawing Leys unto his
party, made an other incursion into the same province, and seized thereon: But
Dram desiring to pursue his enterprise, left the government of Sistom to Leys.
Taher being advertised of all these intelligences, forced Dram Ben Nacer to
come to battle, in which he took him, and sent him prisoner to Bagader,
whereas the Calife caused him to be put into close prison, and kept him there
long.

In the mean time Yacub Leys loosing no occasion, seeing himself freed from
the bond which he had to Dram, made himself lord of Sistom, governing himself
in such sort as the love of his followers did daily increase: so as he
fortified the town, and put good garrisons therein, and in all parts of the
province for the defense thereof; and then he began to make incursions into the
country of Karason, in the year of our Redemption 763, and of the Egyra 253
with a great army, subiecting all where he past under his power. After which
he took Herat and Fuchangh, and coming to Kerman Yacub Leys: So as,
notwithstanding all the offers which he had made, he sent him word that he
should presently depart out of Sciras, and all the lands of Persia, and that he
should not presume to enter into them, contenting himself with that which he
had tyranously usurped. Leys finding himself unable to resist so great a power
as the Cali^s, Mahamed Ben Taher, and then going to Karason, he past by
Taberstam, and stayed at Sary, whereas Acem Ben Zey Alauuy of (whom mention
has been made) came to encounter Leys with a goodly army, and fought with
him, but he was vanquished, and forced to fly to Delmon, Delymon, or Delon, for
they call this town by all these names, and it is situated in the province of
Gueylon. Leys having pulled this thorn out of his foot, pursued his enemy to
Amal: Winter was then well advanced,

The Calife hearing of this disaster, and desirous to embrace the best occasion
he could to diminish the forces of Leys, sent with all speed into those
countries that were subject to Leys, persuading them that governed for him to
revolt, and to obey him no more: But the contrary succeeded to that which the
Calife pretended, for that Mahamed Ben Vuacel Tamimy a Captain of the Arabians
(whereof there were at that time good numbers in Persia) made an enterprise
against the garrisons which the Calife had at that time in cities and forts,
whereof he slew some, and made the rest revolt: in the mean time Muca Ben
Bugan, Lord of Bacora, Hauuas, and Hiamema, countries of Arabia, and near unto
Persia, being advertised of these cumbustions, levied a goodly army, and gave
the command thereof to Abderramon Ben Mosseh who marched presently againg Maha
Ben Vuasel Tamimy, with whom he joined battle, but he was vanquished by him
and taken. In the mean time Leys stepped not, but during these reuolts stood
upon his guard, being ready to do some great exploit when he should find any
good opportunity, who taking his time entered into Persia so fitly, as he made
himself ^oueraigne, putting all them to death that might have any pre^ence,
then finding himself strong enough to pass on further, he marched toward
Bagader.

Leys to whom he did write, with an intent to divert him, entreating him not to
proceed any farther, and granting him freely whatsoever he held: to whom he
made answer, that a desire to see him, made him come to Bagadet, that nothing
should make him desist from his desseigne. The Calife seeing this his
resolution, levied an army in great have, giving the charge thereof to a
brother of his, who marched against Leys, with an intent to fight with him: but
he had another dessigne, for he dislodged in the night, and went toward
Bagadet by unfrequented ways, leaving the Califes brother very much troubled,
not knowing what course he should take to follow him. Yacub Leys advanced with
all speed, fortifying his army in all places as he past: He was come to the
midst of his journey, when as sixty eight, having commanded eleven years in
Persia: He was very valiant, wise,

Yacub Leys being dead, and his brother Hamer Ben Leys being heir to his
conquests, he thought it best to be in good terms and friendship with the
Calife: Whereupon, he presently sent unto him promising to yield him obedience,
and entreating him to receive Abdula Ben Taher, and from thence he past with
his army to Casuin, and so to the city of Rey, leaving for governor at Scyras
one called Mahamed Ben Leys which was his kinsman, who seeing the other absent
declared himself king, but Hamer Ben Leys returned presently from his intended
journey, against him, the which Mahamed understanding he fled, leaving behind
him a very rich spoil, the which Hamer sent afterward for a great present
Hamer Ben Leys had used, whereupon he made a public Edict, by the which he
deprived him of the lands which he had given him, and gathered forces from all
parts, he gave the charge thereof to Said Ben Mochaled who went against him
with his forces and vanquished him. Hamer had one in his company called Dram,
who had been a long time prisoner at Bagadet, who seeing this bad success fled
from the camp: Hamer did the like with a small train, having afterward
recovered new forces, and gathered together the remainder of his defeated
army, he made a new attempt to enter into Scyras; but Mousek brother to the
Calife, being advertised of his intended desseigne, put himself in great have
into the town, the which Hamer understanding, and altogether Almat Hamed Bila
died, having reigned three and twenty years, in the year of Grace 893, and
of the Egyra 279.

Matazed Bila Hamed, the six and thirtieth Calife^
MAtazed Bila Hamed succeeded his father Almat Hamed in the Califat: He was
wise and valiant, yet very sensual. Hamar Leys having (as has been said)
lost all hope Rafeahy Ben Arsuma, having rebelled against the Calife, followed
the party of Mahamed Ben Z^yd Alauuy, against whom Hamer Ben Leys, with the
permission of the Calife, caused his army to march, vanquished him, and took
him prisoner, and having put him to death, he sent his head to the Calife, who
did much esteem his service, for that Rafeahy had greatly troubled those
provinces, so as to recompense Hamer, he made a new gift of Karason,
Maurenahar, Parcy, Kermor, and Siston, commanding that his name should be
written in their public Ensigns, to the end that his obedience and loyalty
might be known to all men: This happened in the year of grace 898, and of the
Egyra 284 In acknowledgement of all these favors, Hamer Ben Leys sent for a
present unto

The country of Maurenahar had been long in peace, and in a manner shaked off
Ismaell Ben Hamed, against whom Hamer Ben Leys levied an army of soldiers,
and marched against him, who attended him near to the river of Gehun, which
diuides the country of Maurenahar and Karason, where after many and variable
encounters, Hamer was vanquished and taken by Ismaell, who as they say was
assisted with money from the Calife, being glad to be rid of Hamer, yet he
entreated him well, having swo^ne that he should maintain an inviolable peace
and friendship betwixt them, and that he should never make war against him
neither by himself nor any other; which done he carried him with him to
Maurenahar, whereof he advertised the Calife, and of the whole success of the
business, Ismaell per^ormed; being in the Califes power he caused him to be
sl^ine, having been king three and twenty years, he had but one eye, and was
exc^eding choleric. Before this, Ismaell in the year of our Salvation eight
hundred nintie four, and of the Egyra two hundred and eighty went out of
Maurenahar into Turquestan, where having obtained many victories against the
Turks, in the end he took the king of Turquestan in battle, with his
father, wife, and ten thousand men: some write that the spoil of this
victory was so great, as every of Ismaells soldiers had for his share a
thousand deniers of gold, all which did make about one thousand and five
hundred ducats. Having obtained this victory he came unto Samarkand, and from
thence he marched against Hamer Leys, with an army of threescore and ten
thousand men, whom he vanquished as has been Matazed gave him the title of
king of Maurenahar, Karason, Scyras, Siston, and Kermon.

This being done, Ismaell understood that Mahamed Ben Zeyd Alauuy spoiled the
country of Taberstan, whereupon he did write unto him to desist, and in the
mean time prepared a mighty army, the which he sent against him under the
command of Mahamed Ben Aren Somony, who vanquished him; so as he brought under
the power of Ismall, the countries of Gerion and Taberstan, of which provinces
he had the government, under the authority of Ismaell. This happened in the
year our Redemption nine hundred and one, and of the Egyra two hundred eighty
and seven. The Matazed Bila dying within two years after having reigned nine
years and nine months.

Moktafy Bila, the seven and thirtieth Calif.
MOktafy Bila son to Matazed succeeded his father, in whose time many
companies of Arabians, spoiled the country of Arabia, robbing passengers, and
hindering the pilgrimage to Mecca and into Persia. Taher Ben Hamed Ben Hamer
Leys, who in his grandfathers place had been made king of of Siston, entered
Persia at the same time with a mighty army, with an intent to make himself
master thereof, having defeated the garrisons, and reduced all under his
obedience: After which he passed Abdula, who presently demanded succors from
Ismaell, king of Maurenahar, who did write to Taher Leys, entreating him to
desist from his enterprise, whereunto either for love or fear he agreed, so as
Ismaell would obtain from the Calife that he should enjoy the lands which he
and his father had conquered, and that he should confirm him in the possession
thereof, whereunto the Calife consented willingly for the love of Ismaell, and
Taher having news of this donation returned to Scyras, the which happened in
the year of Grace nine hundred and seven, and of the Egyra two hundred nintie
and three in which year the Calife died, of weakness by reason of his excess,
having reigned about four

Moktader Bila, the eight and thirtieth Calife.
MOktafy having left no children, they gave the place of Salife to his brother
M^^tader, under whose reign Mahamed Ben Arun Somony, (who as has been said
had vanquished and slain Ben Zeyd Alauuy, and having recovered the countries
of Gerion and Taberstan, whereof Ismaell had given him the government,
rebelled, and having levied an army by means of the intelligence which he had
with the inhabitants of the town of Rey, he seized thereon, whereof Ismaell
being advertised he went against him, Ben Arun; so as having placed necessary
garrisons for the defense of the country, he past the second time into
Turquestan, conquering many new countries, and new realms, whereas he took an
inestimable booty, with the which he returned to Maurenahar, in the year of
our Redemption 909, and of the Egyra 295 leaving his son Hamed in the realm
to whom the Calife confirmed his gouernements with many prerogatives: For the
Cali^es being held as sovereign both of spiritual and temporal matters, they
were not thought to hold their seigniories and commands with any just title
without their confirmation. In the mean time Taher enjoyed Scyras, and other
lands which the Calife had granted Sanghery a slave to Leys the son of Aly
his uncle, seized suddenly upon Scyras, and Taher coming to dispossess him,
Sanghery gave him battle, and in the same encounter Taher was quite
vanquished and taken prisoner, with a brother of his and sent to Bagadet,
having reigned full six years, and to enjoy his conquest with more security
he also took one of the sons of L^ys called Aly with his brother Madet, and
sent them to Bagadet, the which happened in the year of our Salvation 914, and
of the Egyra 300.

In the mean time Hamer the son of Yacub, grandchilde to L^ys, seeing the
country of Siston revolted and all in cumbustion, invaded it with an army, and
subdued it in nine months, putting to death many of the sediti^^s, but he died
soon after leaving Kalef Ben Hamed his elder brother, who de^^^ing to go in
pilgrimage to Mecca, left a kinsman of his called Taher Benocem for governor,
but he seeing him absent revolted presently, and seized upon his country, so
as the other returning from his pilgrimage he found all the gates shut against
him, so as he was forced to go to Boka^a in Maurenahar to demand succors of
Mansur, who gave him goodly forces, with the which he recovered his country of
Siston, Taher being ^led.

Kalef seeing himself thus restored to the quiet possession of his realm sent
back the troops which Mansur had given him, the which Taher understanding he
came again to Siston, and conquered it again the second time, so as Kalef was
forced to have recourse again to Mansur, who gave him a new army, and as he
approached near unto Siston Taher was dead, and that his son Oc^m had
succeeded him who being advertised of the coming of Kalef into the province of
Siston, he retired himself into a fort, whereas Kalef besieged him so
straightly, as being deprived of all hope and reduced to extremity, he begged
the favor of Mansur to obtain some grace of Kalef, who did write unto him
that for his respect he gave liberty to Ocem and his people, with means to
retire themselves to Bokara, where he would give them lands to live on. All
these realms were tributarie to Mansur; but Kalef seeing himself in quiet
possession of his own, forgetting his forepassed miseries, and succors which
he had drawn from Mansur, he made no great regard to pay the tribute that he
ought him and had been demanded; whereupon Mansur levied a mighty a^mie
whereof he gave Ocem to match against Kalef, who not standing upon his guard
was forced to retire himself into a fort, the which by nature and art was held
impregnable, so as he beseiged it seven years, but seeing him unable to force
it, Mansur Aboaly Ben Seniur, who joined with Ocem all the forces he could draw
together: The arrival of this captain made Kalef to leave his fort which was
called Darek, the which he delivered to Mansurs army, who restored him
afterward to his realm: such was the unconstant and variable fortune of this
Prince, to be often expelled and restored again: but the most sensible
disgrace, was the revolt of a son of his called Tahar, who expelled him his
realm; and seeing no means to reenter, nor to satisfy the ingratitude of
this child, he feigned himself to be sick, causing it to be published abroad
that he was brought to the extremity, and that he desired to see his son
before his death, and to discover certain treasures unto him, his fatherly
love Kalef; who at his arrival embraced him, and for his welcome, slew him
with his own hands, and so reentred into the possession of his realm, the
which he lost afterward twice, and recovered it again: and in the end, he
died, leaving a son of his called Abu Afes.

Hamed, the son of Ismael, who by the death of his father was come into the
possession of the realm with the consent of the Calif Moktader, visited his
country, and coming into Samarkand, he took the Governor thereof, whose
name was Ezach, being his uncle, and put him in prison, suspecting that he had
an inclination to revolt: yet Mansur the eldest son of Ezach. In the year of
our Salvation 914, and of the Egyra 301* being a hunting, news came unto him
that the province of Tabarstan had revolted the third time: whereupon, retiring
into his tent very much discontented, he was slain by his own slaves whilst
he slept; and his body was interred in Bokara, having reigned six years and
four months: he was a prince of great courage, and full of magnanimity, but
wonderful choleric, and subject to his Nacere Benhamet, whom one called
Hamet Benhamet Leys, Governor of Bokara, took upon his shoulders, and being
followed by a great multitude, crying through the city, that it was the king,
he caused him to be so acknowledged: but in the mean time, the young prince
seeing himself carried after that manner, wept bitterly, demanding of them
that were about him, if they would kill him as they had done his father: but
every man assured him, and freed him from that fear.

In the mean time, Ezach, uncle to the deceased king, remained at Samarkand,
who hearing of his nephews death, and the greenenesse of his sons years,
le^yed a great army to seize upon that Estate: Nacere, whom otherwise they
call Amir Said, was advised Hamuyhe, who defeated Ezach twice, and in the last
he was forced to fly before him to Samarkand, where he had left for Governor,
a son of his called by the name of Alyas or Elyas, who abandoned the city,
and fled away: so as Ezach by this means being nearly pursued by Hamuyhe, he
was forced to yield himself at his discretion, who sent him immediately to
Bokara, whereas Nacere put him in prison, in which he died. This death was the
cause that Mansur, his son, who was at that time Governor of Nichabur, took
arms against Nacere, and joined with Ocem Ben Aly, one of Naceres Captains,
who had revolted by reason of some discontents. Hamuyhe prepared to go against
him, but upon the way he understood that Mansur was dead, yet Ocem Ben Aly
continued the wa^re, the which was Nacere had sent a Governor to Kara^on,
called by name Hamet Ben Sal, who being revolted, and in arms with the whole
province, levied troops, and seized upon Gerion and Mar^^o. Hamuyhe went also
to fight with him, whom he vanquished and sent to Bokara, where he died in
prison: This Moktader died, having held the empire seven years.

Iafar Ben Matazed, the nine and thirtieth Calife.
AFter the death of Moktader, they gave the dignity of Calife to Iafar Ben
Metazed his brother, who enjoyed no greater peace than his predecessor had
formerly done: for in the province of Tabarstan did rise one called Leylahe Ben
Neaman, who committed Nacere was forced to send an army against him, and to
give him battle, in the which Leylahe was vanquished, after which victory
his soldiers seeing themselves unfortunate in arms, they began to watch the
highwayes, and to rob the passengers: Whereupon, Naceres subjects gathered
together, and cut them in pieces, taking from them what they had stolen: they
also seized upon Leylahe, and cut off his head. At the same time there was
another rebel in the town of Rey, against whom Nacere went and recovered the
town, leaving therein a captain called Syntur, with a strong garrison, and
then went to Maurenahar: This was in the year of our Redemption 926, and of
the Egyra 313, whenas one called Azfar Ben Scyruyhe made a new combustion in
Persia upon this occasion.

A Persian called Abusuia being very poor, yet of a great and noble family,
as one that was descended from the ancient kings of Persia, had three sons,
the one was called Emaududualeh Aly, Acem, and Akmet: This man dreamt upon a
time, that there came fire out of his privy parts that did inflame a great
part of the country, then dividing it self into three parts, it continued so
very long. Being then full of amazement, he went to impart his dream to an
Astrologer, who told him that it did signify he should command great
provinces, in the which his three sons should afterward succeed him. At that
time Makon Ben Kakt was lord of Tabarstan, into whose service Abusuia put
himself, with his three sons, under the command of Azfar Ben Scyruyhe, and
Mardauuege Benzad, with Vuasmaguir his brother. It fell out in the end, that
Azfar rebelled Makon, making war against him for the space of a whole year
together, at the end whereof Makon died. After whose death, Azfar seized upon
Rostandade, Rey, Casuin, Habar, Zenion, Taromin, and Amedon; committing great
spoils in all those parts, so as Nacera was forced to march against him with a
great army, where, after many and variable encounters, they agreed, upon
condition, that Azfar should enjoy a good part of that which he had conquered.
During the absence of Nicera, there fell out some combustions within his
country, but all things were presently pacified by his presence, yet there was
still war in some one of these provinces during his reign.

During these proceedings in Persia, there did rise great troops in Arabia,
who entered Adam had brought it out of the earthly Paradise, whenas he was
expelled, and that afterward it came into the power of Ismael, the first son
of Abraham, and in succession of time was brought to Mecca or Medina. They say
also, that by nature it is exceeding white, but if it be handled by sinners, it
grows very black, so as it was like unto a touchstone for sins: but all
this being ridiculous, we will return to the Calife Iafor, who having reigned
twenty years, died in the year of Grace 933, and of the Egyra 320, having
been much respected by his soldiers during his reign.


I Afer being dead, the soldiers gave the empire to his brother Kaherbila
Mahamet Ben Mathazed; but they did not suffer him to enjoy it long, for at the
end of eighteen months, they put out his eyes, in the year of Grace 935, and
of the Egyra 322, giving the government to Razibila.



THe soldiers having thus chosen Razibila Mahamed, son to the Calife
Moktader, he made Eben Mokale his Vuazir, whose hand within few month after he
caused to be cut off, and to be hung upon a gibet, for that he had written a
letter in his name of small importance without his priuitie. It was the custom
in those times for the Califes themselves to preach the law unto the people,
but he ordained that the Vuazirs should do it. Razibila reigned four years,
and died in the year of Grace 939, and of the Egyra 326.



MOuktafy Byla Ebrahem, son to Moctader, was created Calife after the death
of his brother Razy, in whose time there was a great famine in Bagadet, the
which was followed by a great plague, whereby a great part of that country was
unpeopled, and as for Mouktafy, the soldiers put out his eyes, in the year of
our Redemption 943, and of the Eygra 330, having reigned but four years, yet
he lived two and forty years after he was blind, but he enjoyed not the
empire, the which they had given unto his son.

Mostachfy Abdela, the two and fortieth king of Persia, and the three
IN the place of Mouktafy Byla, the soldiers advanced his son Mostachfy
Abdela, under whose reign Macera, having made an accord with Azf^r, fell sick
of a Tisike, which the Persians call Cel. This prince (as has been said) had
great wars during his reign, being eight and thirty years, and died in the
year of Grace 944, and of the Egyra 331. He was a very affable and bountiful
prince; during his life he had caused his eldest son Ismael to be declared
prince, and his presumptiue heir, but he dying before his father, the younger
brother, called Nueben, succeeded in his place.

As for Abus^ia, and his sons, who fought for Azfar, this was their success;
Azfar Nacere, he sent Emaudu Daule Aly, the eldest of Abusutas sons, with his
two brethren, and a great number of soldiers, against Hisphaon the chief
city of Hierak, where, at that time, Mozafar Ben Yacut was Governor, who
finding himself unable to encounter them, left the place, and fled to Scyras,
where his father Yacut governed, then joining together, they went to fight with
the enemy, but upon the way they encountered Mardauuege, whom they vanquished,
so as he was forced to fly, and to call unto his succor Emaudu Daule Aly, and
his two brethren, being at Lorestam, against whom Yacut advanced with his
army, causing his footmen to march before with this stratagem; he had given
them certain pots or bottles full of wildfire, and matches light in them, the
which they should cast against their enemies, as they did; but the wind being
contrary, the Yacuts horsemen advancing, it did so terrify there horses, as
they ran away: Emaudu Daule pursued them, who in this rout took many rich
spoils, with store of gold and silver, the which increased the courage and
power of Aly and his followers, with whom he entered into Persia, the which he
made subject without any great effusion of blood, going afterward to lay siege
to Scyras the

Emaudu Daule, having rested sometimes in the house of Yacut, he began to be
careful for the payment of the soldiers, being without money, and seeing
their insolency to be great, and that they would mutine if they were delayed,
being very pensive, he laid him down upon a bed, studying what course to
take, where, lifting up his eyes, he espied an ugly snake at a hole, the which
did often put forth her head, and drew it back again, Aly being amazed
thereat, commanded that they should presently break up the top of the house,
which was fla^, (as they be all in Persia) and kill this snake, the which was
presently Yacut had hidden there, the which was sufficient to pay the
soldiers. Soon after, there happened another accident to Emaudu Daule, the
which was both pleasant and profitable; having an intent to make some apparel,
he caused a tailor to be brought unto him, who being before him, in stead of a
measure he called for a cudgel, the tailor (who had served Yacut) thinking it
had been to beat him, besought him to pardon him, and that without any force
he would confess the truth, which was, that he had seventeen coffers in his
house, the which Yacut had given him in guard; Aly was very joyful of this
good encounter, and having sent for the coffers, they were found ^ul of cloth
of gold, and all sorts of silk of great value, whereof the tailor had his
share.

Matte^s passing thus in Persia, Nue, the son of Nacera, by the death of his
father had succeeded in the government of Maurenahar, Rarason, Nichabur; and
other neighbor countries. Hamuyhe, that famous captain, (of whom mention has
been made) had some coffeehouse against Nue, and seeing him now seated in
the royal throne, and seeking to revenge the injury he had received, had
retired himself secretly out of his country: but Nue writ such gracious
letters unto him, and gave him such assurance, as Hamuyhe returned, to whom Nue
gave the government of Samerkand. After this, Nue made war in many places by
his captains, yet always with unfortunate success: but his fortune meant to
make trial of himself; for having made one called Aboaly Governor Abraham
Ben Siniur to be his successor: whereas Aboaly being discontent, he rebelled
against Nue, who went in person to suppress him, but he was twice vanquished,
and the other came to Bokara, where he entered, and would have burnt and rased
the town, if he had not been entreated to spare it. But Nue having recovered
what he had lost, took a cruel and exemplarie punishment of such as had
revolted; so as many left him and went unto his enemy. Emaudu Daule was then
in the town of Scyras, to whom news came that Mardauuege (under whom he
served) had been slain by his slaves being in a bath. Upon this advice, he
sent with all speed his brother Rokna Daule Acem, to Hierach, and Rey, whereof
he seized, conferring with Aboaly, who was very much discontented Nue. This
man obtained from the Calife of Persia the inuestiture of Karason, the which
being once granted, Aboaly delayed no time, but went immediately to take
possession. Within few days after, Nue died of melancholy, (as they say)
leaving one son called Abdul Malek.

Emaudu Daule having sent his brother Rokna Daule Acem, as has been said, to
conquer Hierach; he also sent his other brother Mohayze Daule Achmet against
Kermon, the which he subdued, where having put good garrisons, he went against
Bagadet, the which yielded by force, where he took the Calife Mostachfy
Abdala, whose eyes he caused to be pulled out, having reigned four years, and
four months, the which happened in the year of our Redemption 947, and of
the Egyra 334.


MOayze Daule Achmet having thus put out the eyes of the Calife Mostachfy, he
seated in his place Motyah Byla Fazele, the son of Moktader: At this time,
they found the stone whereof mention has been made, which the Arabians had
carried to Cufa, but it was brought back again ^o Mecque, giving as much gold
for it as it weighed: This was in the year of Grace 949, and of the Egyra 337,
whenas Emaudu Daule Aly fell sick, he called for his nephew Azudu Daule, son
to his brother Rokna Daule Acem, whom he left

At the same time there died also many princes, as Vuax Maguir going a hunting,
for a boar running betwixt his horse legs, he fell upon him and slew him.
Mohayze Daule Achmet died also in Bagadet, Acem Ben Feruzan in Taberstan, Kafur
Hach^dy in Caire, and the emperor in Constantinople, Aboaly Ben Mahamed Aly in
Bokara, and in Damas, Seyf Daule in the year of our Redemption nine hundred
fifty seven, and of the Egyra three hundred forty five.

Throughout all Karason, Koestam, and many other provinces of Persia, there was
a great and general plague: And moreover, there was the greatest confusion
that had Abdul Malek, the son of Nue, running at tilt (the which is very
usual among the Persians) fell from his horse, and died, having reigned seven
years, and six months, in whose place succeeded Mansur his brother: in his
life time he had for Vuazir one called Albataquin, who opposed himself with
all his means against the election of Mansur, but Mansur prevailed, and
Albataquin, being accompanied with three thousand soldiers, fled to Gazmin,
after whom Mansur sent fifteen thousand soldiers, who fought with him upon
the confines of Balk, and were defeated: he sent also the second time, but they
were no more fortunat Mansur seeing his good success, turned his arms against
Hy^rah, and the town of Rey: Rokna Daule Acem, who enjoyed it, went presently
to field, sending his son with goodly troops to make incursion into the
country of Karason to divert Mansur the General of the army. Rokna Daule
Acem was called Chamguir, who being dead of sickness, they gave his charge to
Abul Ocem. This man seeing either prince disposed to peace, a treaty was
begun, and in the end concluded, upon condition, that Rokna Daule should pay a
yearly tribute of 50000 deniers of gold, which make two and twenty hundred
thousand ducats; and for the better assurance of this accord, Mansur took to
wife the niece of Rokna Daule, daughter to one of his brethren: the which
happened in the year of our Salvation 975, and of the Egyra 363, at what
Motyah Byla died of a palsy, having reigned nine and twenty years, and left
the government two months before to his son Tahaya Abdel Charim. As for
Mansur, he died two years after, in the year of Grace 977, and of the Egyra
395, having reigned fifteen years, leaving his son Nue to succeed him.

Tayaha Abdel Carim, the five and fortieth Calife.
TAyaha Abdel Carim, the son of Motyah, came thus to be Calife by the death
of his father (as has been said;) during whose reign, or rather shadow of
his royalty, (for the Califes began then to be lords in name only) many
memorable things happened in Persia. Two years after his being Calife, Rokna
Daule died, declaring his son Azu du Daule, king of Hyerak, who much
augmented his dominion. As for Nue Ben Mansur, who had succeeded his father in
that of Maurenahar: he found work enough to exercise himself; for
notwithstanding that Albataquin (whom he had cause to fear) were dead; yet
Kabus, the son of Camguir, (a captain to his father Mansur) revolted, and
took the provinces of Geryon and Tabarstan.

At the same time also, there were great controversies betwixt Azudu Daule and
Fako^o Daule, against whom Azudu Daule levied an army, and forced Fakoro to
fly into the province of Kabus, who entertained him with much courtesy and
respect, offering him his person, and whatsoever he had else to serve him.
Azudu Daule, being sorry of this acquaintance, marched against them, vanquished
them, and recovered Gerion and Tabarstan; so as Kabus and Fakor^ Daule were
forced to have recourse to Nue Ben Mansur, who giving them succou^s, they
returned against Azudu Daule, and recovering Gerion, they forced him to retire
into a fort, the which they besieged, but the siege having continued two
months, the besieged finding their munition to fail, got intelligence with
one of their captains, to whom they gave a good sum of money, so as he would
be at Nue, who was then in Nichabur, hearing of the disgrace of his allies,
gave charge to Abul Ocem his Vazir, to levy an army, and to march against
Azudu Daule; but he finding himself too weak, forbear to fight, and Fakoro
Daule dying afterward, his brother came to be lord of all his countries.

At that time died Abul Ocem, Vazir to Nue, whose death is remarkable: for
seeking to have the company of a slave of his whom he loved exceedingly; being
with her, he died Boaly, who succeeded him in the government of Karason and
Nichabur, the other Faech, whom Nue made Vazir of Hyerak: these two brethren,
through envy and jealousy, fell to arms, and made war one against another.
But Boaly, having been more diligent than his brother, marched first against
him to Bokara, who fled to Marno, where he gathered all his forces together:
the which Nue understanding, he sent Innabac and Bakturun, two of his
captains, to force Boaly to come to reason. These, according to his
commandment, pursued him, and defeated him, forcing him to fly to Balk, and
from thence to Tremed, from whence he writ to Bokrakham, king of Turquestan,
persuading him to make war against Nue.

During these dissentions, Aboaly Ben Ocem writ to Nue, demanding, in
recompense of his famous service done unto him and his ancestors, the supreme
government of all the countries of Maurenahar, and Karason, the which Nue
granted without any difficulty, upon condition, that he should hold them as
his vassal: but Aboaly seeing himself in possession of these countries,
carried himself as a tyran, and being often persuaded to be more temperat, he
not only made them no answer to that which was propounded, but prepared
himself secretly to rebel, and writing letters to Bokrakhan king of
Turquestan, he persuaded him that they two together might invade the countries
of Nue, and divide what they should get betwixt them. The king of Turquestan
liked so well of this proposition, as he presently went with an army to field;
and Aboaly did the Nue, who was also in arms, giving the charge of his army
to Innabak, who had vanquished Faech, and presented battle to the rest,
wherein he was vanquished, and sent prisoner into Turquestan.

Nue hearing of this loss, and seeing himself reduced to extremity, seeking
to make friends of his enemies, reconciled himself to Faech, drawing him to
his devotion with all the courtesy and complements he could devise; so as he
sent him for the defense of Samarkand, where being arrived, he understood that
Bokrakhan came against him: so as he abandoned the place, and wen to Bokara in
despigh: of Nue, protesting that he had done him much wrong. This treason made
Nue to faint, who finding no means to make Bokrakham, in the mean time seized
upon Samarkand, and from thence went to Bokara, whereas Faech joined with him,
whom Bokrakham sent with an army against Balk, and the countries depending
thereon. In the mean time Nue passed the river of Gehun as secretly as he
could, and Nue was in some hope of better success: and to try all means he
writ to Aboaly, laying before him the favors and preferments he had received
from him, promising him greater if he would return to his service: but Aboaly
fed him with counterfeit and dissembling hopes, seeking by what means he might
kill him.

In the mean time Bokra^ham fell sick, and finding no amendment, by the
advice of his physicians, he returned into Turquestan, hoping to recover his
health better in his own country, but his infirmity increasing daily, he
died by the way; the which they of Bokara understanding, they sallied forth
upon his army, the which being without a Nue embracing this occasion returned
into his realm, where he was received with a general consent.

Aboaly seeing the king of Turquestan to be dead, he resolved to revenge
himself by the power of Nue, the which Faech his brother understanding,
although he were his capital enemy, he sought to divert him from this
resolution, as he did: they two concluded together to make war against Nue,
who before all these broils, had sent a captain of his called Sabutaquin,
into India to make new conquests, and was then returned rich, and victorious,
having purchased the reputation of a rare man, and of great experience Nue gave
the charge of this war to him, and having made the greatest levy of soldiers
he could, with such as he had under his command, he sent him to Gaznehen a
famous country in Karason. Aboaly knowing the preparation they made against
him, and desiring to prevent his enemies by some good success, he sought the
friendship of Fakoro Daule, whom he won with rich presents which he sent him.
In the meanetime, Nue and Sabutaquin went out of Nichabur, seeking Aboaly,
being accompanied by the governors of Balk, Gerion, and Guergestam. As for
Aboaly, he had received certain companies of old soldiers which Fakoro Daule
had sent him, to whom Darab Kabus had joined with a mighty army, and so going
out of Hyerak, both armies camped one against another, where they stayed not
long before they came to battle. Aboaly disposed of his Faech, and to a
brother of his called Abalkacem Ben Samur the left, putting himself in the
midst.

As for that of Nue, the points of his battle were given to his best
captains, but Amir Sabutaquin, and Seyfa Daule were in the midst: the two
armies being thus fronted, every man showed his valor, but Nues soldiers
behaved themselves in such sort, as they forced the wings of Aboalys battle
to turn their bakes, the which gave such courage unto their enemies, as they
charged the rest with the whole body of their army so furiously, as they made
them to break their ranks, and in the end to fly.

In this conflict, Darab Kabus quiting the party of Aboaly, joined with Nue,
the which was a great help for the defeating of this army, whereof part was
cut in pieces, and the Nue made Mahamud the son of Amir Sabutaquin his
general at his fathers request. As for Nue he went to Bokara, Sabutaquin to
Gaznehem, and Mahamud to Nichabur: and as for the brothers of Aboaly and Faech,
they went to Gerion, which was under the command of Fakoro Daule, who
entertained them with much kindness: but they carried themselves so ill in all
things, as they continued not long in savor, which Aboaly perceiving,
forgetting the benefits he had received from Fakoro, he ^ought means to kill
him: whereunto Faech would not consent, but dissuaded him all he could from
this desseigne, aduising him rather to fall upon Nichabur, and to surprise it
before that the other had discovered their desseigne; whereof notwithstanding
being Sabutaquin understanding, he levied troops with all speed possible, and
went from Siston to come to Nichabur, where he encountered Aboaly at Thus, and
fought with him; being in the heat of the fight, Mahamud arrived with with a
fresh army, who charging the enemy behind, made a terrible slaughter, taking
in a manner all that were Nue, who granted it to Aboaly, upon condition that
he should not depart out of Geriana without his express leave; whereunto he
agreed, contrary to the will of Faech who retired himself to ^echkan king of
Turquestan, who ha^ ^ucceded Bokrakham.

There was one called Abu Abdula governor of Koarrazm, who was enemy to
Aboaly: he giving a sudden assault to Geriana, carried him away prisoner. The
governor of Geriana, who had him in guard by the commandment of king Nue
gathered his forces Aboaly; and being returned into his province, he put the
governor of Koa^razm in prison. As for Aboaly he entreated him very
courteously, feasting him daily. One day among the rest, having drunk freely,
Mahamud who was governor of Geriana, caused the governor of Koarrazm to be
taken out of prison, and his head to be cut off: which done, he writ the whole
discourse to Nue, craving pardon for Aboaly; who made answer that he had long
since pardoned him, charging him to send him, for that he had some matters of
importance to impart unto him: Mahamud sent him, but at his coming to Bokara,
Nue committed him close prisoner, where he died. As for Faech his brother, who
was retired to Ilechkam, he persuaded him to make war against Nue, who being
Sabutaquin to advance with his troops betwixt Rehx and Necaf, commanding also
his son Mahamud who was at Nichabur, to join with his father with all the
forces he could raise; so as both being together, they made a mighty army:
the which the king of Turquestan understanding, fearing the danger, he treated
an accord, the which Nue did not refuse, by whose means they gave the
government of Sama^kand to Faech. By means of this peace, all troubles were
pacified, in the year of Grace 996, and of the Egira 385; Nue remaining in the
peace until his death, which happened two years after, having reigned two and
twenty years, and leaving for successor his son Abul Here Mansur.

Matters passing thus in Vsbek, Maurenahar, and Karason; the base country of
Persia Daules, of whom mention has been made, (whom we have purposely omitted
to avoid confusion by the multiplicitie of affairs, and the better to explane
this narration) continuing their broils, afflicted it much, for that Azuda
Daule succeeding in the realm, sent Abul Fauares his son to Ker, to keep a
governor of his who had revolted, in awe, whom he vanquished. At that time
Moezedu Daule king of Bagadet, and brother to Azudu, died, whom Baktear his
son succeeded, to whom the father gave charge before his death in all things
to follow the counsel of his uncle, and of those prudent Wazirs which he left
him: but he did otherwise than he had charge, for he gave occasion to
Sabutaquin and Albutaquin to enter into his country with great troops of
Turks, who being come to Wacet, did much perplex him. Baktear demanded
succors of Azudu, who came with all speed, fought with the Turks, and put them
to rout, pursuing them to Bagadet, where they were besieged by Baktear. Having
done wonders for their defense, being forced by n^cessitie, they left the
city, and went with the C^life to Tecrit, a town in Diarbek upon the banks
of the river of Tygris: so as the city fell into the hands of Baktear, who
caused the Calife to return and consigned it unto him. Azudu Daule was much
troubled thereat; so as he seized upon his nephew, and put him in prison, yet
he set him soon after at liberty.

Matters being thus ended, Azudu Daule caused his army to march against Hierak
in Arabia, and Baktear seeing him absent, entered presently into his country,
and committed great spoils: the which his uncle understanding at his return,
Baktear was forced to Abusaleb, who came and joined with Ba^t^^r, with an army
of twenty thousand men, and encountering Azudu Daule at Te^rit, he vanquished
them. Abusaleb fled, and Baktear was taken, whose head his uncle caused to be
Azudu Daule, he stayed there, adding diverse other lands unto it, in the year
of Grace 980, and of the Egyra 368, sending to reedi^ie Bagadet, the which was
in a manner ruinated by the former wars. He discharged the people of diverse
tributes which they had formerly paid, and caused many pits to be opened upon
the high ways, and showed himself favorable to the Sages of his Sect, to
Philosophers, to Physicians, and Poets whom he knew to excel others, and
giving leave unto the Christians that were in his countries, to build Churches,
bearing part of the charge. In the year of Grace 982, and of the Egyra 371,
Scerfa Daule, Scams Daule, otherwise called Abul Ganiar Marsabane, and the
third, Bahao Daule. The two first divided the lands betwixt them, yet were not
content. Scerfa Daule went into Persia, and Scams Daule, to Badaget, whom
Scerfa took in an enteruiew they had together; but he died soon after in the
year of Grace 990, and of the Egyra 379. Hereupon they drew his brother Scams
Daule or Abul Ganiar Marsabane out of prison, and set him in his place. This
man did Bahao Daule in the government; but having some iars they fell to arms,
and Scams Daule made war against him with one Boaly Ben Hostad Hormoz,
pursuing him with all rigor: but whenas he had least hope of any succors,
news came unto him that the soldiers having demanded a pay of Scams Daule,
and being refused, they mutined; so as having taken a fort by Scaladoe, in the
which were four sons, and certain kinsfolks of Baktear, they drew them
from thence, and having joined with certain other troops, they gave an
assault to Scyras, whereas Scams Daule remained, who presently fled; but they
followed him, and took him at Dudmon, two leagues from the city, whither they
brought him back, and put him to death with his mother, having been king nine
years, and eight months; in the year of Grace 991, and of Bahao Daule
succeeded without any opposition. At that time Fakoro Daule (as has been
said) was king of Gerion, who made war against one called Saha^d Hebad, being
richer in money than men, whom he vanquished, and became lord of all his
treasure: then having ended this war, and many others which were of no small
continuance; going (in the year of Grace 989, and of the Egyra 378) to Tabarak
a fort of his; being one a day at diner, he fed so freely of salt beef, and
did presently eat such abundance of grapes, as it caused him to have a great
pain in his stomach, whereof he died within few hours after, being little
lamented, by reason of the tyrannies he used in his lifetime.

At the news of this death, there was such a confusion and mutiny in the
town, as Suyda, mention shall be hereafter made. Bahao Daule having succeeded
in the realm, he took Boaly for his general and leader of his armies, having
made war for his brother. He gave him charge to chase the sons of Baktear
out of Persia; the eldest of which called A^u Nacere, went to Kermon with
certain troops, surprising the governor in such sort, as he forced him to
abandon the country, whereon he seized. Bahao Daule sent Mousek against him,
who defeated him; and as he fled, a servant of his stepped before him, and thrust
him through the body with his sword, of which death he had been foretold.
Moufek put trusty governors into all places; and being well pleased with his
victory, he returned to Bahao Daule, the first year of his reign, deposed
the Calife Tayha Abdelcarim Ben Mutia, having enioied the dignity seventeen
years, and two months. Such was then the Estate of this principality, which
being accustomed to command others, was then commanded by all men. Boaly d^ed
also in Badaget in the year of Grace 1012, and of the Egyra 401. Bahao Daule
died a

Kader Bila Hamed, the six and fortieth Cal^fe.
ALthough the Califes affairs were then reduced to that Estate, as these
princes had nothing left but the name, and that their command was rather after
their manner of spiritual things, they having no authority, but what the
princes which then reigned gave them, having even lost that shadow of temporal
jurisdiction which they Daules, of whom we have made mention: yet for that all
began by them, and that Mirkond and Teix^eres do still put them in the rank of
princes, this personal succession serving always as a more certain rule to
avoid confusion: we have followed the same order, considering the great
confusions and alterations which have been in Persia during this age, whereby
the trace of their Chronology is often lost; yet of these Califes we still find
the name B^hao Daule having deposed the Calife Tayha Abdelcarim, he gave his
place to Kader Bila Hamed, the son of Ezach, the son of Moktader: under
whose name matters past after this manner,

Fakoro Daule king of Gerion, being dead by his excess and surfer, his son
Maiudu Daule succeeded him, who was proclaimed king although he were but three
years old. His Sayda governed for him, being a woman of great understanding
and judgment, to maintain this realm in peace and prosperity, du^ing the
minority of her son. But being grown great, he would dispose of the realm
after his own fantasy, and place governors at his pleasure, without the
advice or council of his mother, where with being discontented, she retired
herself into the fort of Tabarak. Her son had made one Aboaly his Vazir,
against her will, who fearing that she would go out of the realm, was the
cause of great trouble, having set guards upon the way to stay her. ^ut all
this could not prevent the princesses departure, who went to Kusest^m, whereof
Badre Acem Nuyhe was governor, who seeing her, and being informed how matters
had past with her son, he levied great forces, which they two led, going to
encounter Matudu Daule, Sayda, and his Vazir Aboaly, whom they vanquished, and
took p^isoners: Matudu Daule being in the town of Rey; so as the realm was
again under the command of Sayda, who governed with great wisdom and
judgment.

At that time Mamud Gasney reigned in Karason and Maur^nahar, who having made
proof of his victorious arms in all the neighbor countries, sent
Ambassadors to Sayda, demanding that there should be no money current in her
realm, but his, and that whatsoever should be coined, should have his name and
arms, giving her to understand that if she did otherwise, he should have cause
of discontent. She made him answer with a manly resolution, that if her
husband lived, she would much fear his threats, for that they being both men,
they might encounter: but being a widow, she was certain Maiudu Daule, but
she gave him not the absolute government of the realm, giving unto the second,
called Scams Daule the government of Amadon, and the third, whose name was
Abuiafar, she put into Hisphaon; so as this queen preserved their realm in
peace and prosperity until her death, the which happened in the year of
Grace 1030, and of the Egira 420. After which their followed great troubles,
for that the Sultan Mam^d Gozney caused his army to march against Hierak, and
being come to Mazandazon, Manucher the son of Kabus, nephew to Vuax Maguir
(of whom mention has been made) holding his Estate uncertain, being in this
company, left the camp, and returned into Mamud: but fearing least the other
should be offended, he sought to pacify him with many great and rich presents
which he sent him, much apparel for his soldiers, and four hundred thousand
deniers of gold coined, which make about six hundred thousand ducats: but for
that we have long forborne to speak

As it has been said, by the death of Nue, his son Abul Hares Mansur
succeeded him in the realm, who had for his captain general, one called
Baktuzun, against whom Abul Ilechkan king of Turquestan made war, as he had
done against his father, and being come to Samarkand, Faech who was governor
thereof, submitted himself unto him, who with sufficient forces for his
desseigne, went against Bokara whereas Mansur remained, who abandoning the
city, fled, and passed to the other side of the river of Ammuye, Faech entered
the town, assuring the inhabitants that he came not to wrong the king, Faechs
intentions, he gave him the charge of Baktusun, and to Baktusun he gave the
government of Karason.

At that time Sabutaquin died, which was the subject of new troubles betwixt
Mamud and Imaell his children; so as Ismaell was forced to fly. After this,
Mamud seized upon Karason, whereof he was governor, having taken it from
Baktusun, to whom the king had given it; whereof he complained to his prince by
letters, beseeching him to interpose his authority, and restore him to his
government: the which was effected, and they gave in recompense to Mamud the
government of Balk, Termed, and Herat: where with Mamud being discontented, he
levied men, with whom he marched against Nixabur, Mamud fearing the name of a
rebel, proceeded no farther in this new combustion. There came one of king
Mansurs subjects unto him call Maktusun; so as this prince seeing himself
supported, returned from his flight. This man complained to Faech, that the
king had not entreated him with the honor he expected: Faech embracing this
occasion opened his heart unto him, discovering upon what terms he stood with
Mansur, and how ill he was affected unto him; so as these two agreeing
together, they conspired against their king, and they gave such order for their
enterprise, as at a banquet they put out his eyes, making king in his place a
young brother of his called Abdel Malek; he having reigned but a year and 7
months. Mamud Maktusun to Nichabur, the king with Faech toward Bokara, and
Abul Kacem Siniur to Keostam; whereby Mamud remained lord of Karason, against
whom the rest did arm, who being joined together, were ready to give him
battle, but the sudden death of Faech stayed the event. Ilechkan king of
Turon or Turquestan, being advertised of these broils, levied a mighty army,
with the which he marched to Bokara, from whence he sent word to king Abdel
Malek, that he desired to succor him, and that he was come to that end; the
which the young prince believing lightly, he sent the best of his captains to
thank him, whom he presently committed to prison: the which did so amase Abbel
Malek, as he sought some place where to retire himself, and Ilechkan being
come into town, he set guards in the high ways, at the ports, and upon the
walls; and then he made a search in the town, whereas he found Abdel Malek,
who was taken thence, and sent to V^kand, whereas he died in prison: his
subjects advanced a young brother of his, who reigned very little. This
happened in the year of Grace 1000, and of the Egyra 389. Ilechkan seeing
himself in possession of Bokara, took king Abul Hares Mansur and put out his
eyes: the like he did to his two brethren Abu Ebrahem Montecer, and Abuyacub,
all sons to Nue, and to his two uncles Abu Zachary, and Abu Salechk, with
others of the royal blood, putting them all into several prisons, where he
had women slaves to serve them, among the which there was one which did much
affect Abu Ebrahem Montecer Arsalon Balu, who fighting with Taquin a captain
to Ilechkan, vanquished him, and took him prisoner: with many other knights of
his company.

As for Arsalon Balu, he ruined all the country unto the lesser Cantarey,
against whom came Taquin Kham governor of Samarkand for Ilechkan who was also
defeated. After this Montecer came to Bokara, where he was received with much
joy, and being joined to Arsalon Balu, they past the river of Gehun, and came
to Nichabur. Amir Nacer the son of Mamud, who was governor, abandoning the
country, went to Herat, where his father remained, who understanding that they
were entered into his country, drew his men to field against Montecer, who not
daring to attend him, retired to Esf^rahen, in the country of Rabus, who sent
unto him presents of inestimable value, if we shall believe Mirkond; for he
says, that he sent him ten horses, with their furniture and caparisons of
gold, thirty with their furniture of silver, and thirty which were but of
silk, thirty camels laden with fine Persian tapistrie, with many other pieces
of great price, many roabs of rich cloth of gold, with a great sum of money,
sending also certain gifts to all his captains* Cabus was desirous he should
aid him when he came to the town of Rey, whither he would send him good
succors, with his two sons Darab and Manucher to help him to take it. Yet
having afterward changed their minds, being past from Rey to Damion, Darab and
Manucher returned to their father Kabus. This happened in the year of Grace
1002, and of the Egyra 391.

At the same time Mamud sent a captain called Altuntax, with his son Amir
Nace^, to Montecer sent against them Abul Kacem and Arsalon Balu, who lost the
battle. Nacer was at Nichabur, and Montecer fled to Iburd, whither Nacer
followed him; but Montecer took his way toward Gerion, the which Kabus
understanding, being discontented with the bad proceedings of Montecer toward
him, he laid two thousand men upon the passage to stop his entry into his
country* ^o as Montecer was forced to take another way, where, upon a light
occasion he caused Arsalon Balu to be slain, the which did purchase him the
hatred of all his people. Afterward the war continued betwixt Nacer and him
with variable success, until that Montecer was wholly defeated in battle,
whereas Nacer won the victory, and the other lost the best part of his men:
then flying with some few that did accompany him, he fell into the hands of
the Turcomans: Ilechkan came against him; but the Turcomans surprising him
suddenly in the night, slew a great number of his soldiers, and put him to
flight, taking the best part of the spoil. They returned to their cabbins, and
Montecer past the river of Gehun; but for that it was in Winter and night (the
which are exceeding cold in that country) it was impossible for him to pass
it without boat or bridge. The Turcomans who had assisted him, being sorry for
the spoils which they had le^t him, prepared themselves to set upon him, and
to take it from him. But coming to the river, at the Montecer, who found
means to retire himself free from them. All this happened in the year of
Grace 1004, and of the Egyra 393.

At that time there was one called Abuiafar, a man of base condition, who of a
r^bber by the high way, was grown to that power, as he commanded the whole
country: Montecer demanded some succors of him, but in steed of gratifying
him, he opposed himself against his proceedings; so as they were forced to
come to battle, where Montecer vanquished him, and going to Iburd, he had
another encounter with Abu Nacer governor of the province, which was very
bloody and cruel, for that it was in the night, whereas Abu Nacer was slain
during the fight: in the mean time Montecer had no place Ilechkan
understanding, he went to encounter him, and fought with him; but he was
vanquished, with whose spoils, the soldiers of Montecer grew rich. This
happened in the year of Grace 1005, and of the Egyra 394: Ilechkan having
repaired his army, came again to charge Montecer, at such time whenas the
soldiers which had assisted him, were retired, and that a captain of his was
gone to Ilechkan with five thousand soldiers: this was the cause of his rout;
for having no power to resist his enemy, he fled, and came to the river of
Gehun, the which not able to wade through, and wanting victuals, he was forced
with his company to stay the night there, and to feed upon the flesh of beasts
that were already dead. After this, he went by unknown Soleymon and Safy
captains to Ilechkan. The Governor of Bokara promised to assist him, but
knowing that these two lay in ambush, he put him out of the town. Mamud who
was then lord of Karason, had rented certain lands to one called Ebenbayg an
Arabian captain, into whose jurisdiction Montecer retired, and hid himself in
a poor cottage, but another called Maruyh hearing it, he came in the night
with certain Arabians, found him out, and slew him. Thus Montecer ended his
troublesome life, in the year of Grace 1006, and of the Egyra 395: Mamud or
Mahamud (although he were his enemy) was much grieved, causing Maruyh to be
put to death with cruel torments.

Kabus Ben Vuax Maquir had enioied certain lands in the country of Karason
quietly eighteen years. He was descended from the ancient kings of Persia,
and had not been an actour in the above mentioned confusions: for being very
wise and rich, he so managed his affairs, as he did bind them unto him who for
their ambition and power would not spare any man. As for Amir Sabutaquin,
having gotten the victory of Aboaly in Karason, he came to Bokara, where he
made a strict league of friendship with Kabus, and desired to do him some
service. At that time Fakoro Daule was lord of Gerion, as has been said, whom
Sabutaquin sought to oppress, and to bring Kabus into that government:
Ilechkan, the which being joined to his own troops, made a great army, the
Rendezuous whereof was at Balk, whereas, whilst Sabutaquin attended his
troops, death surprised him: Fakoro Daule died also, in whose place succeeded
Maiudu Daule his son, under the government of Sayda his mother, as has been
said: Abul Kacem remained at Kumes, who after the death of Sabutaquin went to
Kabus, with whom he made an accord that they should invade the lands of the
deceased Fakoro Daule, and enjoy them both together, and so they brought their
armies unto the field, making entry into this country by diverse ways: Kabus
put himself into Nichabur, from whence he sent a captain called Sfabed
Charear, who being met by Marzabah uncle to the deceased, having an army in
the province Kabus: and in that of Tabarstam, they held Amal a place of
importance, for the recovery whereof Aken Feruzan coming with a good army,
they within the town went out against him with Sfabed Charear, and gave him
battle, the which he lost, being taken prisoner with above twenty of his
captains.

This good success gave still more hope to Kabus, and made him aspire to
greater matters: who to loose no time, came to Gerion, where he was proclaimed
king, in the year 1011, and of the Egyra 400. He had afterward some
encounters with his enemies, but all succeeded fortunatly for him, so as in the
end, he commanded over all Gueylon, Manucher governor, sending great presents
to Mam^d, to the end he might fortify himself in his new Estate by this
acknowledgement.

Kabus had a great respect to justice, and did administer it with such rigor,
that whereas before he was much honored of his people, he was now hated of
them, imputing it to his cruelty; so as not able to endure him any longer,
being one day in his camp, they entered Manucher his son in his place; upon
condition that he should not revenge that which they had done, nor aid his
father against them. But he refused the realm, unless his father would
consent thereunto, preferring the respect of a father, before a royal crown;
so as some of them went unto the father, who much commending the obedience of
his son, would not suffer him to remain in his service, as he desired, but
made him return, giving him the realm freely, and all that did belong unto
him, whereof Manucher took possession, with the general applause of all men,
Kabus retired himself into the fort of Kakek, there to spend the residue of
his days, whereas they of Gerion, fearing that whilst he lived he would be
offensive unto them, found means to kill him, Manucher not knowing who were
the actors thereof: but when he understood it, he punished them severely.

Manucher the son of Kabus otherwise called Malech Almaly, seeing himself
king of those countries, which his father had gotten in Gerion and Gueylon (in
the which Maiudu Daule held a good part) he sent his Ambassadors to the Sultan
Mamud, to dec^are himself his vassal, and to offer him a tribute of 50000
deniers of gold, which are about 60000 ducats, and Mamud gave him a daughter
of his to wife, but within few days after his marriage Manucher died, his
brother Darab remaining in his place.

Darab the son of Kabus, and brother to Manucher, was a great actor (as has
bin said) in the controversies betwixt Nue and Boaly, whose party he followed,
and afterward that of Nue, by whose death his father inuading the realm of
Gerion, he served him, whom he sent with troops to Tarbarstam, for the guard
of those lands which he held in that province, but having been accused of some
crimes in his government, he purged himself before his father: yet this
accusation did so discontent him, as he resolved to retire himself to Mamud,
who entertained him honorably; yet by his own bad carriage, in the end he fell
into disgrace, which he finding, he left him, and went to Schachar king of
Gurgestam, who at the entreatie of Mamud, dismissed him: in the end, he succeeded
his brother, but his time was short.

Mirkond reports in this place the valiant exploits of Sabutaquin in India,
which were too long to relate. There had been many controversies, as has bin
said, betwixt Mamud and Ismaell his brother, after the death of their father,
the which were ended by arms, to the prejudice of Ismaell, who had bin forced
to fly: and Mamud seeing himself at rest, in regard thereof, had made a
peace, and contracted friendship with Ilechkan, for the desire which he had to
go to the conquest of India, as his father had done, where he obtained great
and famous victories, and brought away rich spoils. Ilechkan envying his good
fortune, and without any respect to the faith which he had given him, entered
into his country, and sent Iafar Taquin his kinsman against Balk.

Arsalon Balu held then the government of Herat for Mamud, and of all the
Gaznehen, Il^chkan and Iafar Taquin. Mamud was soon advertised of the
treachery of his allie; so as leaving his conquests of India, h^ returned
speedily for the defense of his own country, giving such order for his
affairs, by the means of Arsalon Balu a captain of very great experience, as
he first defeated Ebu Abdala an Arabian captain, who led Taquins army, which
in the end was wholly overthrown and put to flight: he cut in pieces the
greatest part of his soldiers, the rest escaped by the river of Gehun, which
they past with their general, who lost in this battle many of his kinsmen,
and left a brother of his prisoner.

This defeat touched Ilechkan very near, for he saw it impossible for him to
resist the force and good fortune of his enemy: this caused him to make a
league with Kaderkham Mamuds victories, who made a great levy as well in
Catay, as in Turquestan and Maurenahar, and ioining with the forces of
Ilechkan, they past the river of Gehun together.

Mamud, being at Tabarstam, who went speedily to Balk, where he gathered
together a great army of Turks, Calanges, Gazneys, and Aueganys, and marching
against his enemies, he gave them battle, in which, they of Ilechkans side in
the beginning had the advantage, which Mamud seeing, despairing in a manner of
the victory, he mounted upon an elephant, which he thrust with great fury
into the midst of his enemies, of whom he overthrew many, notwithstanding any
resistance they could make, the elephant being in choler: this gave great
courage to Mamuds soldiers; for seeing their prince in such danger, they did
what they could to free him, and so got the victory, putting their enemies to
flight. They hold

This victory did purchase such peace to Mamud, as no man could hinder his
desseigne, which was yearly either by himself or his captains, to make a
voyage to the Indies, to convert those people to his sect: which the king of
the country perceiving, especially one called Bal, he found means, as well by
his own forces, as by his allies, to levy a mighty army, and came to
encounter Mamud, with whom he did fight a whole day, but Mamud got the victory
of the Indians, where he had a rich spoil, taking forty elephants for the
war: the rest retired to a fort which was held impregnable, for that it stood
in the midst of a Mamud found means to enter it. There was in this fort (as
Mirkond writes) seven millions of dragmes of gold, 700 ingots of gold, waighing
2800 marks, with store of pealre and precious stones, and many other rich
pieces of great value, putting all into a house where they kept this treasure.
Mamud having taken this great prize, returned to Gaznehen, leaving that which
he had conquered to confident persons. This happened in the year of Grace
1011, and of the Egyra 400. He had another battle against the Gaores, which
be they of Guzarate, and whereas one called Mahamed Ben Sury a captain of the
Vaneanes would have taken their quarrel in hand, he was defeated, and a son
of his taken prisoner,

At that time there was a great famine in the country of Karason, so as men
and women did eat on another, without any respect of sex, age, or condition.

After the great battle above mentioned, Ilechkan had retired himself to
Maurenahar, where hearing that Togan Kam his brother, who had been with him in
that battle, would fall to Mamud, he took arms against him; but Mamud
arriving, they agreed. These troubles thus pacified, Mamud went against
Bagadet, which he besieged; so as the Calife Kader Bila being within it, was
forced to yield himself, and to content him with five millions of dragmes,
every dragma being six pence of our money, by means of which sum, he left
him in peace, and retired into Persia.

Nue the son of Mansur, Chachar Abu Nacer, son to Abu Mahamed had his
fathers government, which he had given him, coming to f^ll age, and had
retired himself to a private life, whenas Aboal^ a rebel to Nue, armed against
Chachar, and dispossessed him of his country, whom Amir Sabutaquin father to
Mamud, took into his service: and his lands coming afterward to his hands,
he restored them again. Abu Nacer came afterward to serve Mamud, who
recompensed him with a confirmation of the realm, and other rich presents. Yet
Mamud desiring to return into India, and having a will to lead him with him,
he excused himself from this journey: which Mamud then dissembled, but being
returned, he sent Altuntax against him; and Abu Mahamed the father of Nacer, he
sent to Bagadet, but he deprived his son of the realm, who (flying into a
fort) was taken, and put to the rack, to make him confess where he had hidden
the great treasure whi^^ ^e Mamud, he caused him to be whipped, and com^itto
close prison: then calling the father from Bagadet, he gave him the price of
all that which he had formerly held in Gurges^am and Gaznehen, giving him many
other preferments, to the end he might have means to live honorably about
him, unto the (...) 1016, and of the Egyra 406, when he died.

(...) things thus pacified, Mamud returned again into India, where he won
many Mamun governed the country of (...), who died soon (...)* leaving his
son Aboaly to succeed him: he married a (...) to Mamud, who loved him much;
so as he past the small time he lived in peace, (...) whose ^eath his (...)
called Mamun Ben Mamun came to the succession of the realm, who (...) within
few days after, not without suspicion of poison, which one Neala^^ (...) of
his, was suspected to have given him. One of his sons was (...). But Mamud
being much grieved for the death of Mamun, resolved (...); wherefore he levied
an army, causing it to march to Koarrazm: (...) ^harged him suddenly one
morning, striking a great amasement into the Mamud, (...) being forced to fly,
seeking to pass a river, he fell in quarrel with the (...) the boat (...)
knowing him, dissembled it, until that having given a watchword (...) they
bound ^is hands, and carried him to Mamud, who in the (...) to pardon him: but
he talked with him so boldly, and with such little (...) as he caused him to be
hanged, giving the government of Koarrazm to (...) went again into India,
where he had a famous victory against Gulkand a (...) who* ^eeing himself
vanquished with the loss of fiutie thousand men, fearing (...) a wife which he
loved dearly for her great beauty, should fall into his enemies (...) he flew
her, and himself presently after.

After this Mamud made another voyage into India, where he vanquished two
kings, (...) and Iand^bal, from whence he brought rich spoils: then returning
to Gaznehen, because a stately Mosque or Temple to be built, as a thanks giving
for his victories: and from thence he entered into Persia, where he took the
town of Rey, and that of Hisphaon in Hie^a^* the which did belong to Maiudu
Daule, the government of which he gave to M^sud his son* then having been
sick two years, he died in the year 1031, and of the Egyra (...). Two days
before his death, he caused his chiefest treasure to be brought before him,
which seeing, he poured forth many tears without speaking any word; so as it
is not known upon what consideration: but for that he commanded they should
keep it carefully, it was conceived that his heaviness grew for that he might
no longer enjoy

Matters passing thus in Karason, Maurenahar, and Vsbek, the affairs of Persia
were in no less cofusion: for Magidu Daule being king of Gerion, he governed
himself carelessly, and without judgment. Mamud, a most ambitious prince,
being loath to loose so good an occasion, sent a mighty army against him, led
by one of his best captains, to whom Magidu Daule yielded without blows,
imagining that having not offended Mamud, he Abuzef, Mamud had no sooner
intelligence that he was in the town of Rey, but he caused the treasure of
Magidu to be brought to him, where there was a million of deniers of gold,
which do almost make a million and a half of crowns, 15000 deniers of gold in
jewels, and great store of plate both of gold and silver, with other pieces of
great price, and then he caused Magidu Daule to be brought before him, of whom
he demanded if he had ever read Chanoma, which is the Chronicle of their kings,
to whom he answered (...); then he asked him if he could play at chesse, the
other answered yea. Have you never ^ead then, said Mamud, that two kings did
hold one realm together, or have you not ^^ene at chesse two kings in one
place? whereunto Magidu Daule answered no: Mamud Mamud had a goodly library,
which he cause^ (...) brought to Karason, where he had left his son Masud for
king.

(...) were also great broiles among the Daules, as well in Persia, as in
Kermon, especially betwixt Albufauares and Gelala, brethren to Sulton Daule,
who had succeeded his father Baodaule; but in the end they agreed in the year
1019, and of the Egyra 309. In Di^rb^k reigned Acen Ben Baoda^le, therwise
called Mocharaf Daule, who had intelligence ^ith one of the chief captains of
Sulton Daule the which being discovered, it was hard ^o prevent, but by arms:
after many encounters, they agreed, upon condition that Mo^haraf Daule should
govern the province of Hierak of Arabia, and Sulton Daule should ^aue Auuaz
and Persia: but Sulton Daule being returned home, levied a greater army ^han
before, under the command of Eben Salak, whom he sent against Mocharaf, but he
was vanquished, and besieged in a fort, whither he had retired himself, and in
the end ^orced by necessity to yield to his enemy, to have his life saved;
the which did so puff (...) Mocharaf, as he caused himself to be called king
of kings. This was in the year 1021, and of the Egyra 411: and in the year
after, he put out the eyes of Eben Salak. The same ^eare Gelala Daule was made
king of Bagadet, who had for Wazir Abugaleb, whom the ^ouldiers murdered, for
that he paid them with words. There was afterward a new ac^ord made betwixt
Mocharaf Daule and Sulton Daule, by the means of Sultons son, (...)
condition that Mocharaf should enjoy Hierak of Arabia, and Persia, and Sulton,
Kir^on, who died two years after, in the year of Grace 1023, and of the Egyra
413. After his death Abu Mokarram one of his chief Captains sent his son
Abulganiar with forces to Auuaz: but the Turks or Turcomans the which remained
in Persia, called Abulfauares brother to Sulton who was in Kirmon, and brought
him into Scy^as, before he began to march; the which Abulganiar understanding,
he raised a new ar^ie which he sent against Scyras; which made his competitor
to retire to Kirmon: but ^he country was nothing more quiet, for some
demanded peace, others would have ^ar made against Abulfauares, and the king
having no money, was forced to go to Noa^^ndian, wanting experience (by reason
of his youth) to avoid so many crosses; where^^on they that were of Abulfauares
faction made him return to Scyras, and proclaimed (...) king; and they of the
party of Abul Ganiar did so animate him, as he did arm against (...) uncle,
where after variable events, in the end he forced him to abandon Scyras the
se^^nd time, where the other entered, and was again declared king.

In the year 1026, and of the Egyra 416, Mocharaf Daule died at Bagadet, aged
three (...) twenty years, and three months, having reigned five years, and
five and twenty (...): after his death they sent for Basora Gelala Daule to
succeed him, who coming not (...) such speed as is required in the like
affairs, they gave the government to another; ^^ereof Gelala seeking revenge,
he came against Bagadet, whom the Calife Kader sought (...) ^acifie with
reasons and entreaties; but all this could not keep him from fighting, to
^^lala^ loss, who was defeated and forced to fly to Basora, having lost the
best part of his (...) and a rich booty. The year following, the Turks came
in great troops to Baga^^^ which they took, spoiled, and fired, the which
they did assure themselves against the ^^bians which remained in that country:
this made the inhabitants to call Gelala to (...) succors, whom they
proclaimed king of Bagadet, where entering, he went to the ^^^ifes house to
kiss his foot, who received him courteously, in the year of Grace 1029, (...)
of the Egyra 419: but in the mean time, the Turks which he had brought with
(...) demanded their pay, and Gelala having no money, they committed great
insolen^^ ^specially in the house of Aboaly Ben Mekula Wazir to Gelala, which
they spoiled, car^^^ away all that was within it, which was of no small value,
and they did shut Gelala (...) house, not suffering him to come forth, unless
the Calife would be come aunswe^^ble that they should be paid, as he did; for
the effecting whereof, he sold many pieces (...) great value. It was at the
same time whenas Mamud Gaznay sought to seize upon Per^^^ whereof Abul Ganiar
advertised his uncle Gelala Daule, that they might join toge^^^^, and resist
their common enemy; but the other, in steed of marching against Ma^^^ went and
spoiled Auuaz which did belong unto his cousin, from whence he drew a (...)
sum of money.

^he dissentions were as great at Basora betwixt the Turks, and them of
Dialema, (...) one favoring Malek Azir son to Abu Mansur, and nephew to
Gelala Daule, whom they of Dialema would not receive, but during their discords
Abul Ganiar embracing Gelala sought to hinder by all means possible: but the
soldiers would not march for him before they had their pay; so as for want of
money, he demanded some as it were by way of loan, of the richest men in
Bagadet, the which did purchase him the hatred of all men. In the mean time,
Abulfau^r^e^ who reigned in Kermon, seeing the affairs thus confused in
Persia, levied an army to (...) his profit thereby: but he died upon the way;
so as the great men of Kermon (...) one common consent called in Abul Ganiar,
to whom they gave the gouernme^^* and so he was declared king of Persia and
Kermon: then without loss of any Gelala Daule met him and gave him (...), ^he
which Abul Ganiar lost, and was forced to retire to Auuaz, and Gelala leaving
(...) garrisons at Wacet for the guard thereof, he returned to Bagadet in the
year 103^, and of the Egyra 422, in which year the Calife Kader died, having
held the seat one and forty years, and four months, in whose place they did
set Kahem or Alkahem Bea^^^yla Abuiafar Abdula his son.

Kahem or Alkahem Beamaryla Abuiafar Abdula, the seven and fortieth Calife.
THe time of Kahem or Alkahem the son of Kader was not more peaceable than
the Karason, we have formerly spoken of the death of Mamud, whom Mahamed his
son succeeded. He had a brother to whom his father in his life time had given
the government of Hisphaon; who no sooner heard of his fathers death, but he
armed against his brother: he commanded over his subjects with such rigor, as
all hated him, and seeing him absent, they revolted; but Mamud returned
speedily, and invested the town, the which he took, and punished the rebels:
after which he continued his enterprise against Karason; but before he came
there, he writ to his brother Mahamed, assuring him that his coming was only
to serve him, for that the countries which he enioied were more than sufficient
to make him live happily. Mahamed who was not well pleased with this visit,
sent him word that he desired to be excused, and that he Masud; so as he
declared himself an open enemy to Mahamed, whom they did advise to reconcile
himself, the which he would not harken to, but sent against his brother a
captain called Issuf Sabutaquin, and he himself followed with the greatest
forces he could raise; but he stayed a month at Tanganabat, where he past the
Ramedon of Mohammedan Len^in the end Masud environed ^im, and by the treason of
Issuf, and the villainy of Amir Aly (one of Mahameds chief men) he was taken
and delivered to Masud, who rewarded the traitors as they had deserved: for he
cast Issuf laden with yrons into a dungeon, and caused Amir Aly to be hanged,
and as for his brother Mahamed, he put out his eyes, remaining after this
manner mai^te^ of the realms of Karason and Gazneken, besides the province of
Hierak, which Altuntax governor of Koarrazm against Aly Taquin, who held
Samarkand and Bokara, betwixt whom there was a battle, where Altuntax had the
worst in the beginning, by reason of a stratagem which Taquin used; yet in end
he had the victory, but it cost him dear: for he lost many of his men, and
his own life, who seeing his end draw near, caused his people to make an
accord with the enemy, least they should fall into some danger, being without
a head.

In the year of Grace 1034, and of the Egyra 424, the country of Gibal, and
the (...) w^^e of Rey, revolted against Masud, the like did the garrisons which
his father had l^^t in India; but in recompense thereof, he subdued Gerion and
Tabarstan: And where^^^^ Togotel or Togozelbek, and Iak^^^^^ ^alinquis, did
rise against him, at his return he subdued them, and then he made a (...)
India; but the Turks being but scattered, and not defeated, they made ^^ad
ag^^ne by reason of his absence, and subdued many towns in Karason, forcing
^l^on Daule Ben Kakuya, and Abusale, to go out of their gouernements, for which
cause M^sud came presently to Gerion, and hearing in his passage that a robber
by high ways ^ad retired himself into a fort, with a hundred of his
companions, he caused them to ^ome unto him, upon his safe conduct and
assurance: but when they were before him, he ^^nt them to be hanged, saying,
That such people should be punished in any sort what^oeuer, and so continuing
his way, they made many complaints unto him of Nur Taquin, ^ouernour of Balk,
but he could hardly satisfy their demand, for that it was W^ter, and there
had fallen abundance of rain; yet going on his way, he had news that Daud
(...) Turkish Captain brought great forces to succor Balk, in favor of Nur
Taquin; so as Masud fearing to be compassed in, went to encounter Daud, the
which Nur Taquin vn^erstanding, he pursued him, and charged his men in the
rere, whereas he slew many, and carried away a great booty. Masud being thus
ill entreated, continued his course against Daud, who vanquished him, and
forced him to fly to Gazneken, where he put ^^ny Turks to death which were
his soldiers, having fought but faintly in the bat^^le which he had against
Daud Sailuk; then, having sent his son Maod^d to Balk, with ^^^cer Hamed his
V^azir, and a good number of soldiers, he went toward India, carry^^g his
blind brother, and his children, with him: coming to a passage of the river of
^^nd, (which the Persians call Pang, the which is that of Indus) he went over
with his troops, leaving his blind brother, with his treasure, on the other
side, in the guard of a captain called Nustaquin, who embracing this occasion,
divided the treasure among his ^^^ldiers, and proclaimed the blind man king,
who refused it: but in the end he yeel^^d, for that they had otherwise
threatened to kill him; after which, they past the river with (...), and fell
upon Masuds men, who made no great resistance, expecting no such charge; (...)
Masud was taken, of whom they demanded no other satisfaction, but that he
^^uld content himself to live in peace in some convenient place; the which he
accep^^d, and demanded the fort of Kobrakebir, the which was granted, with a
good guard. ^^sud, at his departure, entreated his brother to send him some
money to defray his ^^rney, but Mahamed (who was very covetous) commanded they
should give him five ^^^dred Dragmes, which make about twelve pounds ten
shillings starling, whereat Ma^^^ was much grieved; but he that brought the
money, gave him of his own one thou^^^d five hundred deniers of gold, which
are about two thousand ducats, the which was ^^^^rwards well paid.

(...) for the blind king, seeing himself unfit to govern, by reason of his
blindness, he (...) his realm to his son Hamed, who by the counsel of a
son of Issuf, and of (...) Aly Kachoand (whose fathers Masud had put to
death, to revenge the blind king) (...) secretly to Kobrakebir, and s^ue Masud,
having been king ten years. He was very (...), and bountiful; who having (as
has been said) sent his son Maodud to Balk: (...) ^earing of his fathers
disgrace, and of the return of Mahamed from India, attended (...) at the
passage of Gazneken, where he took them at such an advantage, as he van^^^ed
them, and took prisoners Mahamed, his son Hamed, and others that were there;
(...) to death Nustaquin, and the two counselors of the death of Masud, with
many (...) blood royal, except one Abderrhayn, son to the blind king, whose
life he saved (...) his occasion: Masud being a prisoner, Abderramon found him
with a crown upon (...), the which in contempt he cast to the ground; Abder
Rhayn finding this deed (...) ^^range, and taking it up, set it upon his
uncles head, with words of great comfort, (...) act of piety coming to the
knowledge of Maodud, in this occasion he requited (...) with his life.

Mao^ud having obtained this victory, he caused a sumptuous building to be
made, (...) they call Fall Habad, and in the language of Karason, the place of
Adogane. The (...) of Masud bred great combustions in Persia and India, from
whence Maodud feared (...) that his brother Maiudud should return and trouble
him: but he died upon the (...) as Maurenahar, and the lands in India, came
into the possession of Maodud: yet (...) ^urkes Salinguis, which were at
Maurenahar and Karason, would not acknowledge (...) against whom he sent his
army, in the year of our Redemption 1045, and of the Egyra 435, against the
which Olob Arsalon, the son of Iakarbek, opposed himself with Maodud
attended them at the passage, and made a great slaughter.

At that time, the kings of India which were vassalls to Maodud, rebelled, and
having made a league among themselves, they came to besiege Lahor, which Maodud
sent speedily to relieve: but the dissentions of these kings among themselves,
was the cause that Maodud pacified all things easily, and m^de the rest return
to their former obedience. Having ^nded this quarrel, he caused his army to
march against the Turks Salinquis, Aly Ben Masud his brother succeed him, but
he did not long enjoy his royalty; for a Wazir of Maoduds set Abd Rachid at
liberty, and proclaimed him king, supporting him in such sort, as the other
was forced to quit the place.

As for Bagadet, matters were still in confusion: for the people revolted
again against G^^^^a Daule, in contempt of whom they proclaimed Abulganiar
king of Bagadet, and sent for him, but he excused himself, wherein he was
happy: for the Turks agreed soon after with Gelala Daule: yet this
reconciliation was not lasting; for they made a new spoil within the town,
the which they fired to have more means to spoil, seeking Gelala, so as these
broils continued all the year of Christ 1037, and of the Egyra 427, and the
next year after, when the cold was so extreme, as the river of Degile, which
is Tygris, was frosen twelve days together, and there fell such abundance of
snow about Bagadet, as it lay three spans deep, the which is worthy of
admiration, considering the climat.

Gelala continued for a time in good terms with the Turks, but in the year
of Grace 1044, and of the Egyra 434, one of their captains called Ebrahem
Nealy Salinqui, entered ^^to Persia, in the province of Hyerak, and took Amedon.

T^^zelbek, another captain, took the town of Rey, and hereupon Gelala Daule
died, having reigned seventeen years. His son Abu Mansur was at Wacet, whom
they Abul Ganiar. Tokzelbek, in the mean time, spoiled all Persia with a
victorious army: whereupon, Abul Ganiar made an alliance with him, and married
his son to the daughter of Daud Salinqui, cousin to Tokzelbek, and in the
year following, which was in the year of our Redemption 1049, and of the
Egyra 440, he died in Kermon, leaving five sons; Abu Mansurfulad Sotun,
Kozrrao Feruz, Abu Taher, Abusayd Aboaly, and Kay Kozrrao. Sotun, as the
eldest, thought to succeed, but Kozrrao Feruz seized upon the realm, who
changing his name, was called Malek Rhaym; so as there was great wars betwixt
these two brethren, with variable success; in the end, Rhaym, with the help
of Tokzelbek, took Scyras, and the better part of Persia, all being in
combustion,

The troubles continued also in Bagadet, the which had lasted since the death
of Gelala, by the means of the Calife of Damas, who was of the family of
Ismael, and sought to expel the Calife Kahem or Alkahem, out of Bagadet, whom
he forced to quit the seat, and to fly to Tokzelbek, with whom he had some
friendship: he entered into Bagadet, and put all to ^^re and sword, sparing
neither quick nor dead; for he opened the sepulchers to see if there were not
some thing hidden in them, and so restored him to his Califeship. In the mean
time, Malek Rhaym came to Bagadet, who notwithstanding all his allegations, and
that he was retired into the Califes house, yet he fell into the hands of
Tokzelbek, who put him in prison, where he died: but this peace did not
reconcile his Mansur, and Abusayd, so as in the end, the last, after many
variable (...), was taken by Mansur, who put him to death: the like he did to a
Wazir of his, (...) served his deceased father, setting in his place Facel Ben
Acen, who seeing (...) ^^^led in his charge, in requital took king Mansur,
and put him prisoner in a

In Kermon there was a Turkish captain called Saliuquy, and otherwise Malek
Kaoerd, ^ho hearing what Pazel had done against Mansur, leuyed a great army
against him; so ^s the other was forced to fly, and to retire to Olob Arselom,
with whom he got great ^ches, yet he was not in such safety, but was taken
prisoner, with a son of his at Na^om of Molk, and they were put into the sort
of Stahhar, where they died, in the year of our Redemption 1057, and of the
Egyra 448. As for Aboaly Kay Kozrrao, the son ^^to Abul Ganiar, to whom the
father had left his government, he did willingly resign it (...) the hands of
Olob Arsalom, who gave him the lands of Naoband, Iun, and Aktak, ^^ere he spent
the remainder of his days; Arsalom entreating him still with much cour^^^^^.
He lived forty years after his brethren, and died in the year of our
Salvation ^^^5, and of the Egyra 487, which was in the end of the Daules
government in (...).

As for Togotel or Tokzelbek, he pursued Abd Rachid, who had retired himself
into a (...) of that strength, as seeing he could not win it by force, he
wrought so by gifts, as he ^^^rupted the guards, so as Abd Rachid was delivered
unto him, with many of his kins^^n, whom he caused to be murdered, and then he
declared himself king, marrying a (...) of the deceased: but within few days
after, being in a public place to receive the salutations which they are
accustomed to make in those quarters, ten of the chief (...) of the country,
combyning together, came to do it, who being round about him, ^^^w their
swords, and slew him. Soon after, Charkir, a captain which came from the
^^^dies, freed Ferrogozad out of prison, who was the son of Masud, and
brother to Abd ^^^hid, and made him king. Daud Saliuqui, of whom Ferrogozad had
gotten the victory, ^^yed an army to go against Karason, against whom
Saliuqui, king of Turquestan, sent ^^ny of his captains, who were vanquished:
in the end, Olob Arsalom did fight with (...), and defeated him, taking many
Gazneys prisoners, who were afterward revenged ^he Turks that were prisoners
in Gaznehen. Ferrogozad having governed six mo^^^^s, died, leaving to succeed
him his brother Kobrahem Ben Masud, at that time also di^^^ ^ahem or Alkahem
the Calife, in the year of our Lord God 1074, and of the Egyra (...), having
held the place four and forty years, and four months.

Almoktady Byla, the eight and fortieth Calife.
After the death of Kahem, Almoktady Byla was set in his place, in whose time
there (...) were many broils in Persia, but of small importance: and as for
Karason, and the ^^^^trie of Maurenahar, Hebrahem, brother to Ferrogozad, who
had succeeded him after ^eath, made an accord with the Turks, and having
settled his realm in peace, he (...) voyage into India, where he got great
conquests, and took great spoils: but (...), king of Turquestan, seeing
Persia to enjoy a secure peace, thought the time fit (...) his profit, for the
effecting whereof, he levied a great army, whereof Ebrahem (...) advertised,
he sent Ambassadors unto him, by whose means he was diuerted (...) his
dessigne, and for the better confirmation of their friendship, Ebrahem married
(...) Masud to the daughter of Malekcha, and then Ebrahem died, in the year of
our (...) 1089, and of the Egyra 481. Six years after, the Calife Almoktady
Byla died, (...) year of our Lord God 1095, and of the Egyra 487, having
governed nineteen (...) and five months.

Almostazer Byla, the nine and fortieth Calife.
^^^ostazer, the son of Almoktady, succeeded his father; in whose time
Bagadet ha^^ng been ruined by the ouerflowing of the river of Tygris, the
situation was (...), and it was new built on the other side of the river
toward the East, where it (...), in a more commodious situation than the
first, having had five and twenty (...) since the first foundation laid by
Abuiafar, and yet not one of them died in it, the which is worthy of
consideration. As for Almostazer Byla, he lived in peace in a

Almostarched Byla Fazele, the fiftieth Calife.
TO this ^^^able Calife succeeded his son Almostarched, who was very
courageous, (...) inclined to war, the which he made against some princes of
Persia, and having se^^ed upon some of the provinces of Masud Saliuqui king of
Karason, they fought Masud had the victory near unto Tabris, whereas
Almostarched was defeated, and escaped by flight, yet he was presently after
taken, and presented to Masud, who caused him to be slain, in the year of
Grace 1136, and of the Egyra 529, having governed seventeen years, and two
months.

Rached Byla, the one and fiftieth Calife.
RAched Byla, son to Almostarched, came to be Calife after the death of his
father, whereof desiring to be revenged, he leuyed all the forces he could, and
went against Masud into Persia, whereof he conquered a great part, but being
encountered by Masud caused him to be slain, in the year of Grace 1139, and of
the Egyra 532, after whose death Masud came to Bagadet, where he entered without
any resistance.

Almoktafy Byla, the two and fiftieth Calife.
MAsud being master of Bagadet in the place of Rached, he seated Almoktafy
Byla, uncle to the deceased, and soon after Masud died in Persia, his
captains contenting themselves with what they had in government: the which
encouraged Almoktafy Masud had usurped, the which having enjoyed the space of
two and forty years, without any notable innovation, he died in the year of
our Redemption 1161, and of the Egyra 555.

Almostanget Byla Issuf, the three and fiftieth Calife.
TO the Calife Almoktafy succeeded his son Almostanget Byla Issuf, Masud
dying in Persia (as has been said) in his fathers life time; Arsalon Chason,
his eldest son, had succeeded him in Gaznehen, who being come unto the
crown, caused all his brethren (which were many in number) to be taken, only
one called Baharoncha escaped. Saniar, and the other of Hierak in Persia, whose
name was Mahamed: these two were brethren: Baharoncha retired himself to
Saniar, who sought to reconcile him to Arsalon; but he refusing it, Saniar made
war against him, and entered into Gaznehen, so as in the end Arsalon was
vanquished: an aunt of his sought to reconcile them, but Saniar by the
persuasion of Baroncha, returned to arms, and having gotten a second victory
of Arsalon, he entered again into Gaznehen, whereas he had a very rich spoil:
then having settled Baharoncha in possession of this country, he returned home.
Arsalon seeing him absent, returned again into Gaznehen, forcing Baharoncha to
fly, whom Saniar restored afterward; and Arsalon Baharon remaining in quiet
possession. He was a very good prince, courteous, and bountiful, loving
learned men, himself being very learned; so as he writ some works in
phylosophie:

Kozrrao his son succeeded him, but there falling out many combustions in
this new royalty, and not holding himself satisfied in his country, he went
into India to the province of Lahor, returning afterward to Gaznehen: but
finding his realm made subject to Saniar king of Karason, and that he was not
able to oppose himself against his power, he returned to Lahor, where he died,
in the year of our Redemption 1161, and for the Egyra 555, having reigned nine
years. His son Kozrrao Malek succeeded him in Lahor, the chief of the
realm of Molton in India: for as for Persia, all his realms were held by
others; and to recover them it required a more warlike spirit and less vicious
than his, which made him hateful to all men, and especially to soldiers. A
part of the country of Gaznehen was held by one Sultan Guaya Cadin Mahamed
Gaury, who made some incursions into India toward Lahor, the which he took,
so as Kozrrao Malek returned into Gaznehen, where he died, in the year of our
Salvation 1169, and of the Egyra 563, and in him the Sabutaquis ended. Three
years after, the Calife Almostanger died, in the year of our Lord God 1172,
and of the Egyra 566, having governed eleven years.

Almostanzy Benur Elah Acen, the four and fiftieth Calife.
ALmostanzy Benur Elah was Calife after the death of his father: he was a good
prince, bountiful, and beloved of his subjects: he governed nine years, and
eight months, and died in the year of Grace 1180, and of the Egyra 575, there
happening nothing memorable during his reign.

Nacer, or Nacere Ladin, the five and fiftieth Calife.
ALmostanzy being dead, his son Nacer, or Nacere Ladin, came to be Calife,
who held it seven and forty years, under whom Bagadet did greatly flourish.
During (...) government, they of Koarrazm came against the Saluiquis,
vanquished them, and ^^de them subject, and the Tartarians, under the leading
of Chinguis Kam, seized upon (...) countries of Turon, and Agem, putting all to
fire and sword, at what time the Calife (...) died, in the year of Christ
1226, and of the Egyra 622.

Alzaher or Altaher Byla Mahamed, the six and fiftieth Calife.
THe son of Nacer called Alzaher or Altaher Byla Mahamed was made Calife in
his fathers place, the which he enjoyed but nine months, for he died in the
year of our ^^^uation 1227, and of the Egyra 623.

Almostancer Byla, the seven and fiftieth Calife.
ALmostancer Byla Mansur succeeded his father Alzaher: he did so much esteem
liberality, as having given away prodigally, he became poor. In his time
Persia en^yed a profound peace: but the Mogoles or Tartarians having made their
first entry, (...) masters of some of the provinces, against whom the Calife
Almostancer oppo^^ himself, forcing them to quit the best part of that which
they had gotten, and ha^^^g defeated them diverse times, he died the seventeenth
year of his government, in (...) year of Grace 1244, and of the Egyra 640.

Almostacem Byla Abdula, the eight and fiftieth and last Calife
THe Tartarians having been vanquished (as you have heard) by Almostancer
Byla, they had their revenge under the government of his son Almostacem, for
Ol^kukan vanquished him, and slew him, having been Calife fifteen years, and
six months: Th^^ (...) Califes of Bagadet ended in him, which town we call
Babylon or Baldak, (...) Tartarians seizing thereon, and on all Persia, there
having been seven and thi^^^ (...) this family, who commanded about five
hundred twenty and three years, Tauarich, as Mirkond. Almostacem died in the
year o^ our Redemption 1258, and of the Egyry 655.

OF THE MOGOLES OR TARTARIANS WHICH HAVE COMMAVNDED IN PERSIA.
Chinguis Kan, first king of Persia of the Tartarians.
CHinguis Kan, who was the first of the Tartarians that showed his arms in
Persia, was son to Sukih Badur, that is to say, the valiant, of whom this is
the Genealogy: Badur was son to Partan Badur, son to Filkam, son to
Thomanahkan, son to Baysongorkan, son to Kaduhkan, son to Tominkan, son
to Bukahkan, son to Buza^^ar, who was the ninth in degree from Chinguis Kan,
Chinguis Kan vanquished all lets, and them that contended with him for the
realm, enjoying in the end whatsoever his father and ancestors had held.
Before they called him Tamachin, but when he was settled in the realm (which
was in the year of Christ 1207, and of the Egyra 602) he was called Chinguis
Kan, that is to say in their language, King of Kings: he was a mighty prince,
reducing under his empire and obedience all the Hordes or families of the
Tartarians, with the realms of Ketaokotan, Helan, Tangar, and others, the
which having subdued in the year of Grace 1219, and Mahomet Koarrazmcha opposed
himself, but seeing his attempts to be of small force against so powerful and
terrible an enemy, he abandoned the countries, and fled to Karason.

Chinguis Kan entered into Maurenahar, in the year of our Lord 1224, and of the
Egyra 620, putting all to the sword that he found living in that country; the
like he did at Balk, from whence he sent thirty thousand men to pursue Mahomet
Koarramzcha, who fled always before him, but in the end he was overtaken at
Abyskon, or in Gueylon, where they slew him, putting all his country to fire
and sword; from thence he went against the town of Rey, in the which, and
therebouts, they write that the Mogoles or Almostancher Byla Mansur Alzaher, at
that time Calife of Bagadet, levied what forces he could to oppose against this
storm, and to keep them out of his country, who being divided into diverse
provinces, he took them at such an advantage, as he forced them to leave
Persia, and to retire into Maurenahar, in the year of Grace 1227, of the Egyra
623.

By the death of Mahamet king of Koarrazm, his son seeing himself unable to
resist the Tartarians, fled into India; he was called Sultan Gelaladin, whom
the Mogoles pursued, and finding him near unto the river of Indus, they gave
him battle, in the which he was vanquished, and forced to retire to Multon, a
country situated in the inmost part of India. As for Chinguis Kan, having
thus made his way, and given the first entry into Persia, he returned to
Ketao-Kotan, where he died, in the year of our Salvation 1228, and of the
Egyra 624, being seventy eight years old: and being in peaceable possession
of his realm, at the age of five and twenty years, he had five sons,
whereof the eldest was called Tuchikhon, to whom the father gave the
government of the realms of Dast, Kapechah Ross; Albugar, who died six
months before his father; Chagataykon, who having the government of
Maurenahar, Aygor, and Koarrazm, having possessed these realms unto the year
1241, and of the Egyra 638; the fourth was Oktaykahon, who succeeded his
father; and the fifth was Tulikhan, to whom the father gave certain provinces,
with all his treasure: he died also, in the year of Christ 1232, and of the
Egyra 628; so as of the Chingui Kan, Oktaykahon only suruiued to enjoy this
great succession: yet the other had some children, of whose succession we shall
make mention hereafter. That which Mirkond reports, should not be past over
with silence, which is, That it was held for certain, that whenas Chinguis Kan
was borne, he had both his hands open, and in either of them a little blood, a
certain prediction of his very great cruelty.

Oktaykahon, the second king of Persia of the Mogoles or Tartarians.
OKtaykahon, the fourth son of Chinguis Kan, succeeded him in the empire, in
the year of our Redemption 1230, and of the Egyra 626: This prince was as good
as Mir^^^d reports, That in gifts, and extraordinary recompenses in his life
time, he spent six ^^ndred sixty six bolses (to speak after the Persian
phrase) of thousands of Tomanis, ^^erie Toman being worth sixteen ducats;
which amount in all to the sum of ten ^^llions, six hundred fifty six
thousand ducats. He had for Vuazir one called Gerbahhon ^^^yn, a great
soldier, and very wise, whom he sent against Gelaladin, who had retired to
^^lton, who having gathered his forces together, went to encounter him, and to
fight ^^th him, but he was vanquished, and slain in the battle, the family
of them of Koarrazm ^^ ending in him. After this, he turned his forces against
Persia, and reduced it all under ^^^ obedience, except Bagadet: Then, having
reigned thirteen years, he died, being all Gayuk Khan, who, by reason of his
^^^age, was under the government of his mother, who governed this empire four
^^res.

Gayuk Khan, the third king of Persia of the Tartarians.
GAyuk Khan, son to Oktaykahon, began to reign in the year of our Lord God
1246, and of the Egyra 643. He gave great hope that he would be a good prince,
being a ^^eat friend to justice, liberal, and no enemy to Christians, which
purchased him the love

Manchukahon, the fourth king of Persia of the Tartarians.
MAnchukahon, eldest son to Tuly Khan, fifth son to Chinguis Khan, came unto
the crown, his cousin having left no children; he was a good prince, valiant,
liberal, and courteous. He much favored the Moors, and yet was not opposite
to the Christians, but he detested the Jews, and persecuted them. He gave to
Kablay Kahon his brother the lands of Ketao Kotan, who increased them much
(:this prince built the famous city of Cambalu, at this day the court of the
great Tartar:) and to his other brother Vlah Kukhan he gave the lands of
Persia; then having reigned thirty years, he died, in the year of

Vlah Kukhan, the fifth king of Persia of the Tartarians.
VLah Kukhan, having had (as has been said) the provinces of Persia in
government, during his brothers life time, he presently set hand to work, and
besieged Ismaelya, a place of importance, the which he carried, leaving not any
one living that he found within it: from thence he went to Hyerak, the which he
subdued, and the year following, he led his army against Bagadet, against whom
there sallied forth Almostacem the Calife, who was vanquished and slain with
his four sons, cutting all in pieces that he found, as well in Bagadet as
thereabouts, so as (they say) he slew at the least a million and Kaptukahon for
Governor of those parts of Suria: then he returned into Persia, into the
province of Aderbajon, to a place called Meragah near to Tabris, where he
died, in the year of our Salvation 1266, and of the Egyra 663. Before his
death, he divided his lands to his three sons; to the eldest, called
Habkaikahon, he gave the realms of Hierak, Mazandaron, and Karason; to the
second, whose name was Hyachemet, he gave Aron, which is Armenia, and
Aderbajon; to Taudon, which was the third, he left the country of Dyarbek, and
Rabyah, which is Mesopotamia: Moreover, he gave Bagadet to Atalmok Iauuiny, to
repair it, as he did; and to another, called Mahynedin Paroaney, certain
lands in Rumeston. At that Nacyradin Tuffy, who has composed a book called
Zych-el-Kony, of judgments and figures, very famous among the Persians.

Besides these three sons above mentioned, Vlah Kukhan had two other sons,
the one called Nycudar Oglan, and the other Targahekhan, to whom the father had
left no portions, as being the youngest, but yet they had their parts, and the
children of the other had also their shares.

Haybkaykhan, the sixth king of Persia of the Tartarians.
HAybkaykhan, the son of Vlah Kukhan, succeeded his father in the seigneurie
of Persia. Borakhan, who drew a great army out of Chagatay, in the year of
Christ 1271, and of the Egyra 668, against whom Haybkaykhan did fight, and
vanquished him, forcing him to retire to Maurenahar. He was king seventeen
years, at the end whereof he died in Amedon, in the year of Grace 1282, and
of the Egyra 680, for that he had no children, they set his brother Nicudar
Oglan in his place, who caused himself to be called Hamed Khan.

Hamed Khan, before Nicudar Oglan, the seventh king of Persia of the Tartarians.
HAmed Khan, who was before called Nicudar Oglan, made himself a Moore, and
changed Haybkaykhan.


ARgon-Khon, eldest son to Haybkaykhan, came to the realm by his uncles
death, the which he enjoyed seven years, and then died, in the year of Grace
1292, and of the Egyra 690, leaving the government to his brother Ganiatukhon.

Ganiatukhon, the ninth king of Persia of the Tartarians.
Five months after the death of Argon, Ganiatukhon was advanced unto the
crown. This prince was very liberal, and had many excellent parts, all which
were blemished by his sensuality. Being very needy, he thought to bring the
use of paper money into Persia, and into the provinces of Ketaokotan, but no
man would yield unto it; and he that d^^ most oppose himself was an uncle of
his called Baydu Kon, who upon this subject ^ade war against him, and slew
him in battle, having been king three years, in the ^^are of Christ 1295,
and of the Egyra 693.

Badu Khan, the tenth king of Persia of the Tartarians.
BAdu Khan, son to Turgahe, the son of Vlah Kukhan, uncle to the last
king, having thus forcibly seized upon the realm, Gazun, the son of Argon
Khon, came against him with a goodly army, consisting all of Moors, and they
met at Badukhem, and at Nakchoan, where he was vanquished, and forced to fly;
but he was taken by a Vuazir to Gazun, who brought him to Tabris, where he put
him to death, in the year of Grace ^296, and of the Egyra 694, having held the
realm but one year.

Gazun, the eleventh king of Persia of the Tartarians.
GAzun, the son of Argon, the son of Haybkaykhon, the son of Vlah Kukhan,
made himself king of Persia by the death of Badu, he was a great Iusticer: in
the year of ^^rist 1298, and of the Egyra 696, they of Damas, and of some
other places of Surya, ma^^^g a league with Bendokdar king of Egypt, revolted
against him: but having led an ^^^ie against them, he vanquished them, and
reduced them under his obedience, retur^^ng thus victorious to Kasuin in
Persia, which was afterward the court of kings: he died ^^^e, in the year of
our Salvation 1305, and of the Egyra 703, having reigned eight or (...) years:
he was buried at Tabris in Zambgazun, in a sumptuous Temple which he (...)
caused to be built in his life time; and of all those of this line, there is
only this tomb ^^nding at this day, the which has been preserved from the
injury of time.


THe government of the realm fell into the hands of Alyaptu, brother to the
deceased king, who having made himself a Moore, caused himself to be called
Sulton Maha^^^ Ben Argon: he was but three and twenty years old when he began
to govern, and (...) his court at Tabris: he was very severe in the execution
of justice, by means where^^ he kept his people in rest and content. He was the
first that brought in a custom to (...) a tribute of the children of
Christians and Jews, to frame them after his own fa^o^s, and to use their
service, in the year of Grace 1306, and of the Egyra 705. He built ^^^ town
of Sultania, and in the year following, he seized upon Gueylon, and Racht.
Cham, or Damas, which had revolted the second time, in the year of ^^^ce 1313,
and of the Egyra 712, but having reduced them to reason, he returned into
^^^ia, and died in the town of Sultania, in the year of Christ 1317, and of
the Egyra (...), having been king twelve years, and nine months.

Abuzayd Bahederkon, the thirteenth king of Persia of the Tartarians.
SVltan Abuzayd Bahederkon, the son of Alyaptu, inherited his fathers realm
at the age of twelve years: he had for his Vayzir one called Amir Chupon, who
had a daughter exceeding fair that was married, of whom the king grew
passionatly in love; so as he demanded her of her father, who excused
himself, and would not give her, saying, That her husband only had power over
her: but Abuzayd full of choler, and transported with affection, took her by
force, putting both father and husband (who sought to hinder him) to death, and
he gave her the name of Kondekar, which is a royal title; she got such power
over him, as in a short time he got the whole government of the realm into
her hands, wherein she carried her self wisely and discreetly, and he in the
mean time Teymurlang, which was about sixty three years.

TARTARIANS WHICH COMMAVNDED
Teymurlang, the first king of Persia of this line.
TEymurlang, whom they commonly called Tamberlan, that is to say, Teymur the
^^^ping, was son to Buiankan, and the fourteenth successor to Chinguis Kan,
from whom he was descended: for he was not as some have affirmed, a Carachar
Nuyon, went out of Tartaria with Chinguis Kan, at such time as the same king
sent Chagatayhkhon, his second son, to govern the realms of Maurenahar,
Ayg^r, and Koarrazm, where he was made his first Vuazir, in which dignity he
and his continued unto Teymur, with other charges fit for his quality and his
great extra^^ion. In the time of Teymur, there reigned in Chagaty Soyorgat
Mechkhom, under whom Teymur did serve, with the title of Vuazir and captain
general; and Soyorgat dying, in the year of Grace 1370, and of the Egyra 7^1.
Teymurlang was proclaimed king with the general consent of all men, then
seeing himself settled in the realm, he went Teymur being advertised of a
certain rebellion which was made (...), the ch^efe city of the province of
Hierak in Persia, he went thither in person to suppress it, as he did, putting
60000 persons to the sword: Toktamechkhon was king of Kapechak by ^he favor of
Teymur, who fought to rebel as others had done: but he got nothing but blows,
for Teymur sent an army against him, the which forced him Teymur led a mighty
army into Surya, took and ruined Alep and Damas, and defeated Sultan Farache
king of Egypt in battle: from thence he returned against Bagadet, the which
he also took, and from thence he went to Kabka near unto Tabris, Bajazet,
whom he fought with and vanquished, carrying him away prisoner, conquering an
spoiling many of his countries: As for Bajazet he died a prisoner the year
after. Whilst that Teymur was thus busied against the Turks, one called Kara
Issuff gave a sudden assault to Bagadet, and forced Weyshelkony (to whom
Teymur had given it) to abandon it: but being returned out of Rumestan, he sent
his nephew Abubakar against Kara Issuf, who recovered the city, and restored
it to Sulton Weys, as shall be said hereafter. Teymur passed afterward to
Ardiuil, where he continued certain days, and in favor of Cheque Safy,
released a great number of captives (as you shall hear hereafter;) then
leaving Persia, he returned into Karason, from whence he went afterward to
Samarkand his own country, where he spent some months in feasts and great
joy, contracting many marriages amongst the citisens. In the end, he went to
Anzar, a country which depends of Catay, where he ended the remainder of his
days, in the year of our Lord God 1405, and of the Egyra 807.

Teymurlang had four sons, the eldest was called Ioon Guyr, who dyed a year
before his father, leaving two sons, Mahamed Sulton, and Pyr Mahamed, whom
Teymur ordained in his will that he should succeed him in his realms of
Gaznehen and India, but Pyr Aly slew him. The second son of Teymur, called
Hamar Cheque, was in his fathers Miruncha, succeeded in the government of
those lands which Vlah Kukhan held in Hyerakhen, and Aderbajon, unto Damas. He
died, in the year of our Salvation 1408, and of the Egyra 810, by the hand of
Kara Issuf Turcoman. The fourth son of Teymur, called Mirzahcharok, who had
always accompanied the father, succeeded him in the empire.

Mirzahcharok, who was the second King of the descendants of Teymurlang.
MIrzahcharok, the youngest of the four sons of Teymurlang, was in Karason
when his father died at Anzar. Being come unto the empire, he found not his
realm so ^eaceable as he expected: for they of Hyron and Turon would not
acknowledge him ^or king, then having pacified all these broils, he led his
army against Kara Issuf in Ader^ajon, who being armed with an intent to defend
himself, died upon the way, leaving ^wo sons, the one called Mirzah Scandar,
and the other Mirzah Iooncha, who came to ^^ght with Charok, but they were
vanquished: yet afterward he received Mirzah Ioon^^^ into his service, and
restored him to the realm of Aderbajon. After this Charok built ^ town in
Maurenahar, which they called by his name Charokya: Then, having raig^^^ Mirzah
Oleghbek, he gave the countries of Turque^^^n and Maurenahar: The second,
Ebrahem Sultan, died before the father, in the year of ^race 1435, and of the
Egyra 838, having governed Persia twenty years, and built ^^ny edefices
worthy of memory. A year before the fathers death, Baesfangor his ^^^^d
son died: the fourth, called Mirzah Soyorgat Mechkhon, who governed the
pro^inces of Gazna or Gaznehen, and of India, died in his fathers life time:
and the fifth, called Mirzah Mahamed Iuguy, died also before Charok. Whenas
Teymurlang died, they of Samarkand saluted a kinsman of his called Sulton Kalil
for king, against whom there re^olted a vassal of his called Kodahdad Hosceny,
and took him, then he called to his succors ^^ama Ioon king of Magolstam or
Tartaria, and gave him entry into this province: but Kodahdad Hosceny to
death, rewarding him in that manner for ^^^ treason, and gave another realm in
exchange to Kalil, where he lived the remainder of his days content.

Mirzah Ologhbek, the third king of the descendants of Teymurlang.
OLoghbek, who in the life of his father Charok was Governor of the countries
of Turquestan and Maurenahar, came to Balk in the year of Grace 1448, and of
the Egy^a 851, where he was advertised that in Herat, and Karason, Mirzah
Alahdaolet his kinsman entitled himself king, he armed against him, and met
him at Morgab, where he fought with him, and defeated him: the other being
forced to fly to a brother of his called Mirzah Baber, in whose company he
returned against Ologhbek, who leaving Herat, went to draw his forces together
at Balk: but he found that a son of his called Mirzah Abdelatife had revolted
against him, so as he was forced to give him battle, the which Ologhbek lost,
with his life, and a sons of his that was with him called Mirzah Abd Razis,
having commanded one and forty years in those countries, and two years only
after the death of his father, having the whole succession, being in the year
of Christ 1450, and of the Egyra 853.

Mirzach Abdelatife, the fourth king of the descendants of Teymurlang.
MIrzach Abdelitife being thus rid of his father and brother, got to himself
the quiet

Mirzach Abdula, who was the fifth King of the descendants of Teymurlang.
MIrzach Abdelatife being justly rewarded for his particide, his brother
Mirzach Abdula had the realm after his death, the which having enjoyed one
year, Mirzah Sulton Abusayd, king of Karason, came and spoiled his country:
against whom Abdula went, but he lost the battle, and his life, in the year
of of our Salvation 1452, and of

Mirzach Sulton Abusayd, the sixth king of the descendants of Teymurlang.
MIrzach Sulton Abusayd, the son of Mahamed, the son of Miromcha, the son
of Teymur, having thus slain Abdula, seized upon the realm. There grew new
wars betwixt Mirzach Ebrahem, and Mirzahcha Mahamud, against whom Mirzah
Iooncha went, from whom these two fled, and he took their countries:
whereupon, they both armed against him, but they came not to fight, for they
were reconciled, making a division Mirzah Saniar, with Mirzah Aladaolet, and
his son Mirzah Ebrahem, private princes, came to fight with Abusayd at Saraks,
but he vanquished them, in which battle Saniar was slain, and the other two
fled. At that time Abusayd held the realm of Badachon, Gaznehen, Kabul,
Sistom, and Koarrazm. In the year of our Redemption 1468, and of the Egyra
872, Mirzach Asemhek Ben Alybek Ben Kara Otman flew Mirzah Iooncha, by reason
of whose death they called Abusayd to the government of Kermon, Hierak, and
Aderbajon, Acembek being hidden, craned a peace of him by an Ambassador, but
he would not yield unto it. Hereupon Acembek retired to Karabag (these are
mountains about Tabris, and upon the way) seizing upon all the passages,
distressing Abusayd in such sort for victuals, as despayring Mirzah Yadigar
Mahamed, who went in the company of Acembek, whom he flew, in the year of our
Redemption 1469, and of the Egyra 873.


ABusayd being thus slain, MirZah Sulton Hamed his son succeeded him in the
realm of Maurenahar, the which he enioied eight and twenty years: at the end
whereof he died, in the year of Grace 1495, and of the Egyra 899.

Mirzah Babor, the eight king of the descendants of Teymurlang.
MIrzah Babor cousin to Hamed, and grandchild to Abusayd, succeeded in the
realm of Maurenahar, by the death of his uncle, in the year of Grace 1500,
and of the Egyra 904: but Ichaybekan came from Vsbek, and dispossessed him of his
realm, where there was no more any king of the blood of Teymurlang: Mirzah
Babor flying out of Maurenahar, went into Gaznehen, and from thence into India,
where he made his abode: and having reigned in the one and in the other county
eight and thirty years, he died, in the year of Grace 1532, and of the Egyra
937, leaving two sons, Homayon Mirzah, and Kamoran Mirzah, who were kings
after the father: Homayon had the best provinces of India. He had a Wazir
called Chyrkan, who revolted against him, forcing him to abandon his realms,
and to fly into Persia, whereas then Chatamas reigned, who assisted him with
Beyramkan, who leading Homayon with him, restored him to his realms, reducing
all under his obedience, with the death of the rebel Chyrkan. Gelaladin Akbar
the great Mogol was the son of this Homayon, who lived in the year 1609.

Mirzah Hiadigar, the ninth king of the descendants of Teymurlang.
Mirzah Hiadigar the son of Mirzah Sulton Mahamed, the son of Mirzah
Baesfangor or Baysangor, the son of Mirzah Charrok, the son of Teymurlang.
Having in the year of the Egyra 873 (being accompanied by Acembek) slain
Abusayd, as has been Ocem Mirzah the son of Mansur, the son of Bahekara,
the son of Hamar Cheque, who was the son of Teymur; who hearing of the
desseigne of Hiadigar, came in great have to succor Strabat, and vanquished
him, in the year of Grace 1470, and of the Egyra 874, who being thus defeated,
returned to Acembek being at Tabris, who supplied him again with a great
army, with the which he charged ^eem Mirzah, and put him to flight, forcing
him to abandon the realm, and to go toward Faryab and Mayman near Balk.
Hiadigar having thus gotten the government of the country, gave himself to
pleasure, and to all sorts of vices; so as his negligence and illlenesse gave
courage to Ocem to come and assail him by night, having with him but a
Hiadigar ended the race of Mir Charrok. And for that heretofore we have counted
the year 1532, and yet the things which happened under this prince were done
in the year 1571, as has been said, and although we have set Hiadigar after
Mirzah Babor; yet the reader shall be advertised that the provinces of Persia
were then divided, and commanded by many kings at one time. And for that they
have sometimes in their turns commanded the whole realm, they are not
therefore all accounted kings, but of the whole country of Persia, at the
least of the provinces which depend there^on,

Mirzah Sultan Ocem, the tenth king of the descendants of Teymurlang.
MIrzah Sultan Ocens the son of Mansur, the son of Bahekara, the son of
Hamer Cheque, the son of Teymur, having thus recovered the realm which
Hadigar had taken from him, he governed his people long in peace, the which he
affected the more, for that he was a lover of justice. He beautified his realm
with many stately buildings, among the which (and the most famous) was a
Madrese, or Hospital to receive poor Pilgrim strangers; a work worthy of a
great prince.

In his time the Vsbekes came into Maurenahar, whereas they took some lands
from Teymurlang, who had inioied them unto that day, against whom Ocem meaning
to oppose himself, levied an army to march against them, who being upon the
way, died at Vuadekis, in the year of Grace 1506, and of the Egyra 911, having
reigned four and thirty years, and been king of all Karason four months:
he lived seventy years, whereof he was twenty continually sick of a palsy,
and could not go to horseback. He had fourteen sons, of which two succeeded
him.

Bahady, or Pedy Amazon, and Musafar Mirzach, the eleventh king of the
descendants of Teymurlang.
BAhady or Pedy Amazon, and Mansafar Mirzach, brethren, and sons to the
deceased Ocem, reigned together after their father, against whom came Chaybek
Vsbek: but they finding themselves unable to resist him, abandoned the
country: Bahady Amazon went to Truchis, where having levied a small army, he
went against Vsbek, by whom he was defeated, and forced to fly into Persia, to
Cha Ismaell who reigned at that time, by whom he was courteously entertained,
giving him the lands of Chambe Gazon in Tabris, whereof he lived, and moreover
ten Serafs of gold by the day, for his diet; every Seraf of gold in Persia is
worth eight Larines, and every Larine is twelve pence sterling, little more or
less. Bahady remained in Tabris seven years, unto the year 1515, and of the
Egyra 920, that Selim the Emperor of the Turks took the town of Tabris, and
carried

Mirzach Homar, the twelfth king of the descendants of Teymurlang.
MIromcha, the third son of Teymurlang, had two sons, the one called
Mirzach Homar, who succeeded him in the government of Aderbajon, and Abubakar
in Bagadet: after the death of Teymur Homar declared himself king, and seizing
upon his brothers country, took him in the town of Sultania: but this
imprisoned prince having found means to corrupt some of his guards, he flew
the rest that thought to hinder his Mirzach Charrok, who gave him Strabat and
Masandaron, whereof he lived: but being of a turbulent and restless spirit, he
made war against Charrok himself, who vanquished him; so as the other having
no place of retreat, he fled to Morgab, and seeking to go from thence to
Samarkand, he died upon the way, in the year 1406, and of the Egyra 809.

Mirzach Abubakar, the thirteenth king of the descendants of Teymurlang.
Mirzach Abubakar son to Homar, brother to Mironcha, and grandchild to
Teymur, Karayssuf Turkimon, who had fled into Mecere in Egypt, fought with him
twice near to the river of Euphrates; in the first he was defeated, and
Chinguis Khan, and of Teymur, Tartarians, who commanded in Persia, whereof* we
shall speak more particularly heareafter.


Karayssuf, the first king of this family.
KArayssuf Ben Kara Mahamet Turkimon went to serve Weys Helkony Sultan of
Badaget, who for the good services which he had done him, made him captain of
the Turkimans, of that band which they call Karaquionla, that is to say, the
Black sheep, to distinguish them from others whom they Kara Mahamet father to
Karayssuf, had been captain of that faction whilst he lived: which charge
was deuolued to his son after his death, who in requital of the favors
which Sultan Weys had done him, gave an assault to his town of Bagader, and
took it from him, the which had been given to Weys by Teymur, who as has
been said, was then in Rumestan against Bajazet: but being returned from his
expedition, seeing the treason of Karayssuf, ^^ sent his nephew Abubakar, who
recovered that which he had taken, and restored Ba^^det to Sulton Weys Helcony:
but he enioied it little, for Mironcha forced him to leave it, Abubakar his
son. ^^arayssuf being thus defeated, not knowing where to find safe retreat,
fled into Egypt, whereas the king caused him to be taken, and put in prison,
in the which he continued until that news came of the death of Teymur,
whereof Karayssuf being advertised, he sought means to escape, as he did, and
taking his way toward Persia, he wrought so by his industry, that he gathered
together an army, with the which he bouldly went to encounter Abubakar.
Helcony, in the mean time, who had been possessed of Bagadet, and who was
watchful to encounter some good occasion, let not this slip; for whilst that
^bubakar went against Karayssuf, he seized upon Bagadet, at the same time
whenas Abubakar and Karayssuf met at Nakchoan, whereas Abubakar was vanquished;
so as Tabris (...) into the hands of Karayssuf, and leaving it furnished with
all things necessary to make ^^^lence, he marched against Kara Osman
Bayandury, who held the country of Dyarbek, (...) which he abandoned, and
fled. Yssuf placed good garrisons therein, and so returned ^^^abris, where
leauying a new army, he marched against Helcony, whom he vanquished ^^^^taile,
and having slain him, he seized upon the city in the year 1413, and of the
(...) 1815. From thence he passed into Scyrnan, or Seruan, entering by the
country of ^^gestam. He slew the king thereof (called Constantine) in
battle, taking Cheque (...) king of Seruan, whom he led prisoner to Tabris,
but afterward he redeemed (...) with a great sum of money. Karayssuf did
also win the towns of Sultania; (...) and Taron: and in the year 1420, and
of the Egyra 822, he went against Anteb (...) of Surya, near to Alep: but
Mirzach Charrok coming from Karason, he desisted Ka^^ssuf died in Oyon about
Tabris, and having neither son, kinsman, nor any true friend (...) him, (for
tyrants have never any) the soldiers having spoiled his tent, left him without
burial, having taken from him his shirt, and cut off his cares to have
certain jewels that were hanged thereat; and thus he lay certain days in
the open field, until Pyr Budah Khan, who died before his father, the second
Amir Scandar, the third Myrzach Iooncha, the fourth Cha Mahamed (who had the
government of Park, and held it three and twenty years, unto the year 1431,
and of the Egyra 833, whenas Hamed Hamadany flew him,) the fifth Amyr Apsal, who
died in his fathers life time, the sixth Abuzayd, who his brother Amyr Scandar
had slain, as you shall presently hear.

Amyr Scandar, son to Karayssuf.
AMyr Scandar, the second son to Karayssuf, succeeded his father, in the
year of Grace 1422, and of the Egyra 822: who being come unto the crown,
continued the war against Myrzah Charrok, by whom he was vanquished in
Mesopotamia; so as he was forced to retire toward the river of Euphrates, and
Charrok marched to Tabris, where they would not receive him, for the love and
respect they bare to Scandar; so as Charrok holding his stay there fruitless,
returned to Karason, and Scandar to Tabris, in the year 1426, and of the Egyra
828: whereas depriving Amyr Chamcadin king of Kala, both of life and kingdom,
in the year 1428, and of the Egyra 830: he did the like to Sultan Hamed Curd
governor of the province of Curdestam. In the year 1430, and of Myrzah
Charrok, who hearing these bad news, came with his army against Scandar, and
Iooncha his brother, who encountered at Salmas near to Tabris, whereas Scandar
lost the bataile, and retired into Rumestam; yet Tabris fell not into the hands
of Charrok, who being returned to Karason, and having repaired his army, he
marched against the town of Key, the which he took: then being reconciled to
Iooncha the brother of Scandar, he gave him Tabris. He by virtue of this
donation (the which the other never held) took arms against his brother,
fought with him, and got the victory, forcing Scandar to retire into Kala
Aleniak, whither Iooncha pursued him, and sought to enuiron him: but a son of
Scandars called Cha Kobad (who was then in disgrace with his father) flew him,
in the year of Grace 1438, and of the Egyra 841. Scandar a little before his
death had slain his brother Abusayd, for some iealousies he had of him.

Io^ncha, the third of them of Kara Kionlu which commanded in Persia.
THe brother of Iooncha being dead, he presently seized upon the realm, where
seeing himself settled, he levied an army to go against the governor of
Gurgestam, from whom he took that province: then making many enterprises upon
the country of Persia, he reduced all under his obedience, chasing away some
garrisons which Myrzah Mamud Baysanger had placed there, he being at that time
dead: this happened in the year 1433, and of the Egyra 856: and in the year
1458 he led his army to Karason, to make war against Myrzah Ebrahem soon to
Aladaolet, whom he vanquished, in which bataile AmyrZudaba Zagatay died. Sultan
Abucayd reigned then at Balk, who went against Iooncha, but he made an accord
soon with him, being advertised that a son of his had revolted in Tabris,
whither he returned speedily, and took him, causing him to be committed to
close prison. This trouble was scarce ended, when he was advertised that
another son of his called Pyr Budak, who governed Bagader, had rebelled; so
as Iooncha was forced to turn his arms against him, besieging him a whole
year in Bagadet, which was in the year of Grace 1466, and of the Egyra 869:
yet by the means of Mahamedy flew him, without the fathers priuitie, who
returned to Tabris, where he commanded soueraignly, and in all Aderbajon,
Hyerakhen of Parc, Kirmon, and a great part of Suria.

Ozun Acembek, and caused his army to dislodge; but the Winter was so sharp,
as he was forced to return, and to give over this expedition until the
Spring, at what time he drew his army to field.

It was the manner of Iooncha (whether it were to make him sleep, or to divert
him from other cares, or for that he was given to wine) to be drunkeeuerie
night, and to sleep long in the morning: and they knowing his custom, the
army did still march, and he followed, having a guard of a thousand horse.
This came to the knowledge of Ozun Acembek, who taking with him five thousand
choice men, charged him at such a time, as Mahamed Myrzah, whom Ozun caused to
be slain, putting out the others eyes, whose name was Issuf Mirzah. Thus
Iooncha died, having reigned three and thirty years, and lived seventy. He
was a bad prince, and the most voluptuous that reigned in those countries in
his time.

Acen Haly, the fourth of them of Karakionlu, which commanded in Persia.
ACen Aly, son to Iooncha, inherited his fathers realm after his death, and
all his treasure which came into his hands, the which being very great, and he
very indiscreet, Abusayd king of Karason, who marched presently against him,
and put him to flight, and his misfortune was such, as he fell into the hands
of Ozun Acembek, against whom he fought, but he was defeated, and slain: the
line of the Karakyonlu ending thus in him, having commanded over Persia; the
which happened in the year 1469, and of the Egyra 873.


Ozun Acembek, the first of the line of the Akuyonlu.
Karakuyonlu having thus taken end by the death of Acem Aly, the party of
Akuyonlu got presently to the royalty, by the means of Ozun Acembek: he was
son to Osmonbek the son of Cotoluk Bek, a Turkoman: and he was so valiant
and generous, as he conquered in a manner the best part of Persia: they do
commonly call him Vsun Casan. Osman or Otmonbek, grandfather to Acembek, held
(as has been said) the countries of Diarbek, the which Karayssuf had left him
by his death, who after the second succession, came into Persia, in the the
time of Iooncha, whom having slain, as has been said, he recovered his
lands, and seized upon Tabris, and Ader^^jon; he slew Mirzah Sulton Abuzayd,
who went from Karason to fight with him. ^^ncha having left two sons, as we
have said, Acembek flew one of them, and put (...) the others eyes, who retired
himself to Scyras, where he was acknowledged by them Acembek having led his
army against the town, ^^oke it by force, putting blind Issuf to death: and
from thence he passed into Kermen, the which he conquered with Bagadet; and
having reduced under his obedience Hyera^^, Aderbajon, Park, Kermon, and other
provinces of Persia, in the year 1472, and of (...) Egyra 876, he went to
fight with Sultan Mahamet king of Ruins, or of Turks, by whom Ozun Acembek
was defeated in Arzenion, with the death of Zeynel B^k his son, Acembek being
defeated, fled to Tabris, and the Tures returned to Constantinople. Soon after
Ozun Acembek died in the year 1478, and of the Egyra 882; and at the same time
died Ogorlu Mahamed the eldest of his seven sons: Sultan Calil was the
second; Yacub Myrzah was the third: the fourth Mactah Myrzah: the fifth Issuf
Mirzah: the sixth Maksuk Bek, who slew Sultan Calil his brother: and the seventh
Zeynel Bek, who died in the Turkish wars.

Sultan Calil, or Hhalil, the second king of Persia, of the family of the
Akuyonlu.
SVltan Calil or Hhalil was in possession of the realm, by reason of the death
of his father Acembek, he sent his brother Yacub Bek to be governor of the
country of Diarbek, and took ar mes against Calil, or Morad Bek, against whom
he fought, and put to flight, forcing him to retire into the fort of Feruz Kuh,
in the which, there was a captain of Ocem Beks called Gelohy, who having
received Morad Bek lovingly into his fort, sent him afterward prisoner to
Calil, who caused him to be slain in Karason, where he then was. At that time
Yacub Bek brother to Calil, and governor of Diarbek, revolted, leading an
army against Tabris, being accompanied by Maksud Bek his brother, who taking
him on the sudden, defeated him, and Maksud slew him with his own hands,
having reigned but six months.

Yacub Bek, the third king of Persia, of the family of the Akuyonlu.
YAcub Bek, son to Ozun Acembek (having dispossessed and slain his brother)
came unto the crown: but in the year 1482, and of the Egyra 886, a captain
of his called Bayandur Bek made war against him, whom Yacub Bek vanquished,
and slew in Sauah near to Kom. The same year Sultan Mahamet the son of
Sultan Murat, died at Constantinople, and there succeeded in the Empire, Sultan
Barazet his son. At that time also Sultan Aydar of Ardouel, made war against
them of Gurgestam, and taking the way to Scyruan, with an intent to seize upon
that realm; Farrok Tacar king of Scyruan prevented him, and fortified himself
by Yacub Bek, from whom he demanded succors, Soleymon Bek B^gen, a very
famous captain, who encountering Aydar in Tabasaron, vanquished him, and slew
him upon the field; taking two of his sons which were very young, whereof the
eldest was called Aly Myrah, and the second Cha Ismaell, the which were put
into the fort of Sterkfac, of whom mention shall be made hereafter. As for
Yacub Bek, having reigned twelve years, he died in Rarabage, near to Tabris,
in the year 1492, and of the Egyra 896.

Baysangor Mirzah, the fourth king of Persia, of the family of the Akuyonlu.
BAsangor Myrzah son to Yacub Bek, came unto the crown by the death of his
father; Zufy Calil Masulu: at his coming to the crown, there grew great
factions, for that they of the part of Bayonduriah, pretended to make Mactah
Myrzah uncle to the young king, and brother to his father king, and ioining
with him, they made war against Zufy Calil, who going to field, won a
battle of them, in the which, Maciah was slain upon the place, and his
nephew Kostan Bek, the son of Maksud his brother, was taken prisoner, and
carried into the fort of Aleniak. At that time Soleymon Bigen came out of
Dyarbek, who (as we have said) had vanquished and slain Cheque or Sultan
Aydar, in favor of Farrok Yacar king of Sciruan, of whom Calil had the
victory, and slew him at

During these combustions, Sultan Bayondur taking some captains with him, gave
an assault to Aleniak, whereas Rostan Bek was a prisoner, and ^etting him at
liberty, proclaimed him king: these, with others which revolted, took
presently their way to Tabris, to Baysangor, who was forced to abandon the
country with Calil, and to go to Diarbek, whither they were pursued by Rostan,
sending his army against Calil, who was defeated and slain. As for Baysangor,
he escaped, the realm remaining then in the possession of Rostan Bek. This
happened in the year 1493, and of the Egyra 897.

Rostan Bek, the fifth king of Persia, of the family of the Akuyonlu.
BAysangor being thus put to flight, Rostan Bek the son of Madsud Bek began
to enjoy the realm, who as soon as they entered into Tabris, he set at
liberty Aly Myrzah or Aly Patcha, and Cha Ismaell the sons of Aydar, and
putting an army to field, he took with him Aly Myrzah to pursue Basangor, who
came to encounter them in Guania and Bardah, whereas he gave them battle, in
which he was vanquished and slain fighting.

After this victory Rostan returned to Tabris, and Aly Mirzah with his
permission retired to Ardiuel his country, and the ancient abode of his
father. Rostan Bek repented himself soon to have let him go, fearing that his
presence, and the remembrance of his deceased father, would breed some
innouations in that country: without any further con^ideration, he caused him
to be followed, who neglecting his own safety, was soon overtaken and slain:
his brother Cha Ismaell escaped as he could, and fled to Gueylon, where at that
time Karkya Myrzah Aly reigned, to whom Rostan Bek sent his Ambassadors to
entreat him to deliver Ismael into his hands, but he would not do it: it was
then in the year Hagmet Bek the son of Ogorlu Mahamet and grandchild to Ozun
Acembek, came with a goodly army which he levied in Diarbek, to fight with
Kostan; the battle was given near to Tabris, in which Hagmet Bek had the
victory, forcing Rostan to fly into Gurgestam, where he died the same year,
having reigned five years, and six months.

Hegmet Bek, the sixth king of Persia, of the family of the Akuyonlu.
THe death of Rostan Bek gave the realm peaceably to Hagmet Bek grandchild, as
has Ozun Acembek: he made Haybe Sulton governor of the realm of Kermon; and
to Kacem Bek Pernaque he gave the government of Persia: these 2 conspired
against him, and made war, where, after some encounters, he lost a battle
near to Hisphaon in ^yerak, in which he died; so as there reigned no more of
the house of Ozun Acembek but three young grandchildren, that is to say, Sultan
Morat the son of Yacub in Scyruan, Alu^^n Bek the son of Yssuf Bek in
Aderbajon, and his brother Mahamed Mirzah in Yazd: these three divided betwixt
them all the lands which they of the Akuyonlu held in Persia.

Aluuan Bek, the seventh king of Persia, of the family of the Akuyonlu.
DErnaque having thus dispossessed his benefactor, he caused Aluuan Bek the
son of Yssuf Bek, and grandchild to Ozun Acembek to be declared king, who
with the help of ^^zybek Bayondur, and other his captains and kinsmen, came
to Tabris, to join with Haybe ^^ton. Mahamed Mirzah brother to Aluuan which
was in Yazd, called himself king of His^haon or Hyerak, against whom Aluuan
caused his army to march, who without any longer stay, retired himself into
the fort of Stha, whereof Ocem Quyah Gelohy was captain, who ioining with
Mahamed, they went against Aluuan, who was then returned, who encountering them,
there was a cruel battle given, which Aluuan lost, and retired to Ta^^is,
whither Mahamed followed him: Aluuan went the second time against him; but he
^^s again put to rout. In this battle Haybe Sultan died, and as for Aluuan
he fled to Di^^^bek. During all these reuolts, two brethren of Haybe Sultan did
rise against Sultan Morad, Mahamed Myrzah, and met near to Hisphaon, whereas a
battle was given, which Mahamed (...), with his life, in the year of Grace
1500, and of the Egyra 905, having reigned but the year.

Sultan Morat, the eight king of Persia, of the family of the Akuyonlu.
SVltan Morat the son of Y^c^b Bek had by the death of Mahamed Myrzah the
realms of Parc and Hyerak, and Alu^an enioied the seigneurie of Tabris and
Aderbajon, but in the year 1501, and of the Egyra 906, they both levied
soldiers, to usurp their companions right; so as drawing their men to field,
they met at Cazuin, but they fought not by means of certain men, who made an
accord, that either of them should hold that which he had. At that time Persia
was full of robbing, violence, hunger, death, and mortality, with a general
resolution. In the year 1502, and of the Egyra 907, Cha Ismaell the Cheque
Aydar going out of Nakchoan, levied an army, and came against Tabris, whereas
Aluuan remained, who soon abandoned the country, and sled to Bagadet, and
from thence passed to Diarbek, where he died soon after, in the year 1505, and
of the Egira 910, so as Tabris came into the power of Cha Ismaell, who in the
year 1513, and of the Egyra 918, took arms against Sultan Morat, who went out
of Scyras, and came to fight with him in Amadon, but Morat lost the battle,
and retired to Scyras, and from thence to Bagadet, whereof Barbiek was
governor, who entertained him and took him to his protection: the year
following, Ismael came against them, who were forced to quit the country, and
retired to Karamania, from thence Morat returned to Diarbek, where Kazelbach or
Casselbas slew him, in the year 1515, and of the Egyra 920; so as in him ended
the government of the Akuyonlu in Persia.

OF THE DESCENDANTS OF CHINGVIS KAN WHICH COMMANDED IN VSBEK AND MAVRENAHAR
Chaybek Khon, king of Maurenahar.
Whilst that matters were managed in Persia, as has been said, the
descendants Tuchykon the son of Chinguis Kan commanded in Vsbek, and held
all those lands, which are of a very great extent. In the year 1496, and of
the Egyra 900, Chabek Khon the son of Budak Sulton parted from Vsbek with
great forces, and came and spoiled the countries of Maurenahar and Karason, all
which in a manner he held four years, unto the year 1500, and of the Egyra
904, when he was forced to quit them to the descendants of Teymurlang, and in
the year 1508, and of the Egyra 913, Sultan Ocem Myrzah having met with Chaybek
Khon toward Herat in Maurenahar, where he reigned; and being slain in the
field, he gave his place to his son Pady Azamon Myrzah, who not able to make
resistance, fled to Kandar, where Chayhek, who got the victory, forcing Pady
to fly into Persia, and to make use of the favor of Cha Ismaell Sufy, who
entreated him honorably: then in the year 1511, and of the Egyra 916, Cha
Ismaell went against Chaybek, and they both met at Maruuo, where they fought;
but Chaybek Khon was vanquished, and died fighting, having held his seigneurie
twelve years.

Kuchengy Khon, king of Maurenahar, of the descendants of Chinguis Kan.
KVchengy Khon remained in Maurenahar, in the place of Chabek, in the year
1513, and of the Egyra 918, Cha Ismaell sent a mighty army into Maurenahar,
under the command Nagemy Sony, who joined with Babor king of India, and then
they came together to fight with the Vsbekes in Gagydaon; but they were
vanquished, Nagemy Sony being slain upon the place; and as for Babor being
wholly defeated, he was forced to retire into India: Kuchengy Khon meaning
afterward to have his revenge in the year 1530, Cha Thamas the son of Cha
Ismaell then reigned, who opposed himself against his forces, fought with him,
and won the victory; so as he of Vsbek retired vanquished into Maurenahar,
from whence he came the second time into Maruuo, with an intent to enter into
Persia: but a peace was concluded betwixt them which stayed the passage of
Kuchengy, and made him return into Maurenahar, where he died the same year,
having reigned twenty years.

Abuzayd Khon, king of Maurenahar, of the descendants of Chinguis Kan.
ABuzayd Khon, the son of Kuchengy by the death of his father came unto the
crown the which he held four years, at the end whereof he died, having done
nothing memorable, in the year 1533, and of the Egyra 939.

Obeyed Khon king of Mau^enahar, of the descendants of Chinguis Kan.
Obeyed Khon, eldest brother to the deceased Abuzaid, son to Kuchengy Khon,
brother to Cheybek, as soon as he was declared king, sent a mighty army into
Karason, meaning to enter into Persia: but he was stayed by Cha Thamas, who
forced him to quit the lands of Karason, and Cha Thamas being retired, he
returned the second time, and spoiled them with his army; unto the year 1540,
and of the Egyra 946, whenas he died, having

Abdula Khon, king of Maurenahar, of the descendants of Chinguis Kan.
ABdula Khon, the son of Kuchengy Khon, had the realm of Maurenahar, by the
death of Obeyed Khon, where he continued but six months, at the end whereof, he
died, in the year 1541, and of the Egyra 947.

Adelatife Khon, king of Maurenahar, of the descendants of Chinguis Kan.
Delatise Khon, the son of Abdula Khon, succeeded in the realm, the which he
held unto the end of the year 1542, and of the Egyra 948, the government of the
descendants of Chinguis Kan in Maurenahar ending in him.

THE BEGINNING OF SACHACH
COntinuing now with the kings of Persia, it shall be fit before we speak of
the actions of Ismaell Sophy to treat of his beginning as briefly as we may:
he was son to Cheque Aydar, the son of Sultan Iuneyd, the son of Cheque
Ebrahem the son of Cheque Aly, the son of Cheque Mucha, the son of Cheque
^afy; and in the end, the thirteenth grandchild of the descendants of Morts
Aly, cousin Mahomet. When Teymurlang returned into Persia after the defeat of
Bajazet, he carried with him a great number of slaves, as well of Caramania, as
of other ^ations, whom he had resolved to put to death, and with this
resolution, he entered into ^^deuel, where he stayed some days: there was in
this town one Cheque Safy, who was held by all men to be a holy man; so as he
was generally honored and respected: the Teymurlang, who was d^^^^ous to know
him, and to have his friendship; so as he himself went often to his house to
visit him, and meaning to go from Ardeuell, he offered him whatsoever he would
demand; Cheque Safy knowing the intention of Teymur, in regard of his
prisoners, taking hold of the offer which this prince had made him, entreated
him to pardon them: Teymur who desired to gratify him, did not only pardon
them, but delivered them into his hands, to dispose at his pleasure. Cheque
Safy received them, and furnished them all, as well as he could, with garments,
and other things necessary, sending them free home to their houses, for the
which not only the captives, but also the nations Safy, and in sign of
requital of so great a favor, there past few days but he was visited with
many gifts and presents, continuing still this acknowledgement to the
descendants of Safy, even unto Sultan Iuneyd his thirteenth grandchild, or some
of his sons, who lived in the time of Iooncha the son of Chara Issuf, of
whom there has been mention made. This prince seeing the continual
visitations which were made to Iuneya, and the great number of men, both of
foot and horseback, the which were commonly at his gate, with the great
authority which he had; all which things together gave him subject to be
jealous of him; so as he told him that he would not have him any more visited
by so many men: wherewith Iuneyd holding himself to be very much wronged, went
presently out of Ozun Acembek, who was then king of this province, received him
very courteously, and giving him to wife a sister of his the which was called
Kadija Katun, by whom he had one son called Aydar. This Iuneyd had commonly
about him certain light horsemen, the which did infest all the country of
Gurgestam under the title of zealous of his sect, forcing all such as they
took to receive it; and continuing their courses, it happened that entering
into the realm of Trebrisonde, they slew the king, and seized upon the
country, placing Aydar his son there who was with him. It chanced
afterward, that Acenibek s^ew Iooncha, as has bean said, whereupon Aydar
went to Ardeuel, where he married with a daughter to Acembek called Alemcha,
who brought him Aly Patcha, and Ch^ Ismaell, who was borne in the year 1488,
and of the Egyra 892: he was called Sofy, for the reason that has been spoken.

The year following, Aydar being entered into the realm of Scyruan, Farrok
Yassur king of that province, with the aid of Yacub Bek defeated his army,
Aydar being slain upon the place, and his two sons Aly Patcha and Cha
Ismaell taken prisoners, whom Sultan Rostan Bek did set at liberty: yet having
afterward caused Aly Patcha the eldest brother to be put to death, Cha Ismaell
retired to Gueylon, where he continued for the space of six years, in the end,
Persia being in combustion by the reuolts of the Akuyonlu, he went to Arzenion,
where having gathered together seven thousand men Caramanes, all Sophyens, of
the families of Estayalu, Caml^^, Takaluh, Versaltu, Romlu, Zulkadurlu, Auchur,
Kayar, Sufiah, Karayadak, and many others which followed him, in the Farrok
Yassur, who had slain his father, got the victory of him, and made him loose
his life; so as he put himself into the possession of this realm, and the
year following he made war against Aluuan in Nachoan, and forcing him to
fly, Ismaell took Tabris: having obtained this victory, he instituted the
Tage, the which is a Turban or red Hood, with twelve bands about it, the which
he caused his followers to wear, in rem^mbrance of the twelve sons of Oc^^,
the son of Aly, held among them for Saints, and from whom he bragged he was
descended, calling this new institution Cazel Back, that is to say, a Redhead.
Aluuan came against Tabris, to the succor whereof, Ismaell went presently, and
forced the other to fly to Bagadet, and from Ismaell having rested some time
at Tabris, he led his army into Persia against Morad Bek, who was defeated by
him, with the l^sse of ten thousand soldiers, in the year 1504, and of the
Egyra 909, to whom he abandoned Persia and Kermon, which became subject to
Ismaell, who went to spend the Winter at Kom, from whence he sent Eliasbek with
an army against the town of Rey, whereas Ocembek Gelohay captain of Kalat
Ferus Kuh (lying in ambush upon the way) presented him battle, which the
other lost, with his life. Ismaell hearing of this defeat, went against Ocembek
Gelohay, who retired to Feruz Kuh a fort, strong as well by nature as art, the
which Ismaell understanding and seeing no means to take it, he cut off their
water; so as the soldiers Ismaell took his way toward Karason; but being
gone, a king called Mahamed Karrahy having certain troops with him, entered
into the country of Yazd, and became miaster thereof: Ismaell came against him,
who defended himself valiantly; yet in the end, he entered the town, and took
Karrahy, whom Ismaell caused to be burnt, in the year 1506, and of the Egyra
911.

From thence Ismaell went to Scyras, where he made an edict in form of
prescription, by the which he commanded that all such as had carried arms in
the battle where his Aydar was slain, should die; so as this was the death of
above thirty or forty thousand men. And whilst the Wintered at Taron, he was
advertised that Sultan Ocem Myrzad king of Karason was dead, on whose country
Chaybek Khon Vsbek seized, and the sons of the deceased retired to Ismaell,
who presently went with his army, whereas he gave him battle, the which
Chaybek Khon lost, with his life, and by this means Karason came i^to the
power of Ismaell.

In this year Ba^azet king of Rumy or Turkey died, and Sultan his son
succeeded him at the Empire, and in the year 1514, Cha Thamas the son of
Ismaell Sophy was borne. The year following Selim came with a powerful army
to Arzenion, causing Ismaell to ^bandon Hisphaon, who came and encountered his
enemy at Chalderon, where there Ismaell lost, and retired to Tabris, and from
thence (...) Gazin. Sultan Selim entered into Tabris, where he remained fifteen
days; after which ^e went into Amasiah. This year the Caselbas slew Sultan
Morad in Diarb^k, and sent his head to Sophy: and the year following, Selim
took Kemak, a place of great impor^a^ce in Saladulia, and Zulkadel, and Alep
in Suria; then in the year 1517, and of the ^gyra 922, he subdued Damas and
Egypt, and in the year following, Diarbek, and Mesopotamia: in the end he died
in the year 1521, and of the Egyra 626, to whom succeeded his son Soleymon.
As for Ismaell Sophy, having commanded over all Persia for the space of
twenty years, he died in the year 1525, and of the Egyra 930, being eight
and thirty years old. He was terrible in war, resolute, and without fear,
more cruel and se^e^e Cha Thamas, Aleas or Elias Myrzah, the third Son Myrzah,
and the fourth Bathon ^^rzah.

Cha Thamas, the second king of Persia, of the race of the Sophians.
CHa Thamas succeeded Ismaell Sophy his father: he had much war during his
reign, which continued three and fifty years: the most important were against
the Turks. He died in the year 1576, and of the Egyra 983, leaving two
sons, Cha Ismaell, and Ma^amed the Blind.

Cha Ismaell, the third king of Persia, of the Sophyes race.
CHa Ismaell, eldest son to Cha Thamas, was king of Persia but a year, and
ten months: Mahamed the Blind, in the year 1578, and of the Egyra 985.

Cha Mahamed, the fourth king of Persia, of the Sophyes race.
ISmaell leaving no-children, his brother Mahamed second son to Cha Thamas
succeeded him, who, although he were blind, yet he governed seven years: at the
end whereof he died, in the year of Grace 1585, and of the Egyra 992, leaving
Cha Abas his son for successor.

Cha Abas, the fifth king of Persia.
BY the death of Mahamed the Blind, Cha Abas took possession of the realm of
Persia, the which he holds at this day: during his reign, he had much war, in
the which he has given many battles, the most famous whereof, were those of
Gueylon, which had rebelled, reducing it under his obedience, not without
manifest danger to him and his. He besieged Balk in Vsbek, the which he
continued certain months; but in the end was forced to rise. He ruined the
realm of Lar or Lara in Persia, and took the king, whom he put to death, by
reason of the thefts and spoils which he did to the Carauanes Cha Thamas his
great grandfather. Many memorable things have past during the reign of this
prince, especially, against the Turks, who have since lost Tauris, and most of
the places which they held of the Persian: but the shortness of this
abridgement will not allow of a mo^e ample narration: moreover, in so remote a
country, matters cannot be discovered but with time, whereby the truth will
appear.

Kings which have commanded in Persia, until that the Arabians entered the
country, according to Mirkond: the general suppu^a^ion is in the margent.
Where the letter G is added, it shows that they have been Governors; and yet
some put them in the number of kings. The mark number, it shows includes the
king under whom they have governed. Where there is no they doubt of the time of
their reign: on the side we have set the years of Grace, and of the Egyra,
wherein they have governed, as writers have observed.

The years. Months. Kay^m^rras 40. 0 Syamek. 0. 0 Ou^hangh. 50. 0 Thamur^s
Diuband. 30. 0 Iambched. 0. 0 Zo^hk. 0. 0 Fraydhun. 0. 0 Manucher. 120. 0
Naudar. 7. 0 Afraciab. 12. 0 Zaab or B^zad. 5. 0 Kay Kobad. 100. 0 Kay Kaus.
150. 0 Kay Kozrao. 60. 0 Lorasph or Loraseph. 120. 0 Gustasph or Gustaseph.
120. 0 Bahaman Darast Dast or Ardchir. 112. 0 Aomay, a Queen. 30. 0 Darab. 12.
0 Darab. 14. 0 Schander or Aschander. 14. 0 An inter^egne or vacancie. 72. 0
Chapur. 60. 0 Ardchir Babakhon. 50. 0 Chapur Zabel Ketaf. G. 0. 0 Ardchir
Furzand Hormoz. 0. 0 Chapur. 60. 0 Baharon Kermon Cha. 15. 0 Yazdgerd. 22. 0
Kesere Kozrrao. 0. 0 Babaron Gur. 0. 0 Narsy or Narsa. G. 0. 0 Baharon Gur. 0.
0 Narsy. G. 0. 0 Baharon Gur. 23. 0 Yazd Gerd. 0. 0 Narsy. G. 0. 0 Yazd Gerd.
18. 0 Yazd Gerd. 21. 0 Hormos Farzand. 1. 0 Feruz. 0. 0 Sufara. G. 0. 0 Feruz.
0. 0 Sufara. G. 0. 0 Feruz. 26. 0 Belax. 5. 0 Iamasp. G. 0. 0 Kobad. 43. 0
Kesere Anuchiron or Nauchiruan. 48. 0 Hormoz. 12: 0 Baharon Chuby. 0. 0
Khozrrao Paruez. 38. 0 Kobad Chyruyhe. 0. 8 Ardchir Chyruyhe. 0. 2 Charear. 1.
0 Ioon Chir. 1. 0 Turon Dokt, a Queen. 1. 4 Iasanceda. 0. 0 Azarmy Dokt, a
Queen. 0. 6 Kesere. 1. 0 Ferroghzad. 0. 1 Yazd Gerd. 20. 0

^HE CALIE^^ OF BAGADET, WHICH
(...) (...) The Years. The Months. (...) (...) Abubaker. 2. 0 ^^^ ^^^ Homar.
1. 0 ^^^ ^^^ Osman or Otman. 11. 6 ^^^ ^^^ Morts Aly. 4. 6 ^^^ ^^^ Acem. 0. 6
^^^ ^^^

OF THE FAMILY OF BEN HVMIA.
^^^ 41. Mauuya. 20. 0 ^^^ 61. Yezid. 3. 0 ^^^ 64. Mauuya the second. 0. 1.
month. 2. days. ^^^ 66. Maruuan. 1. 0 ^^^ 67. Abdel Malek. 21. 1 ^^^ 86.
Oelid. 9. 8 ^^^ 96. Soleyman. 2. 6 ^^^ 98. Hamar or Homer. 2. 5 ^^^ ^^^ Yezid
the second. 4. 8 ^^^ ^^^ Ochon. 19. 8 ^^^ 124. Oelid the second. 1. 2 ^^^ ^25.
Yezid the third. 0. 6 ^^^ 125. Ebrahem. 0. 2 ^^^ 12^. Mar^nan the second. 5. 0

OF THE FAMILY OF EBEN ABAS.
^^^ 13^ Safa. 4. 9 7^^. 136. Abu Iafar. 23. 0 777. 1^9. Mahady By^a^ 10. 0 ^^^
169. Elady Byla M^sa. 1. 3 ^^^ 17^. Arachid Bylo Harun. 23. 0 ^^^ 193. Mahomed
Amin. 4. 7 ^^^ 1^8. Maham^n. 12. 7 ^^^ ^^^ (...) Ezach Matacon. 8. 0 ^^^ ^^^
(...) 5. 9 ^^^ 22^. (...) W^k^l Byla Iafar. 12. 6 ^^^ 234. Monta^e^. 0. 6 ^^^
235. Abul Ab^^ H^^ed. 5. 9

VACANCIE OF CALIFES.
^he years (...) Grace. The years of the Egy^a. The Years. The Months. ^60.
243. Mostabhin. 1. 4 ^62. 247. Almatez Byla. 3. 6 ^65. 250. Motady Byla. 0. 11
^66. 251. Almat Hamed Byla Hamed. 23. 0 ^^^. 279. Matazed Byla Hamed. 9. 9 ^^^.
289. Moktafy Byla. 4. 0 ^^^. 293. Moktader Byla. 7. 0 ^^^. 301. Iafar. 20. 0
^^^. 320. Kaher Byla Mahamed. 1. 6 ^^^. 322. Razi Byla Mahamed. 4. 0 ^^^. 326.
Moktafy Byla Ebrahem 11. 4. 0 ^^^. 330. Mostachfy Abdala. 4. 4 ^^^. 334. Mutya
Byla Fazele. 29. 6 ^^7. 365. Tahya Abel Karim. 17. 2 ^013. 403. Kadar Byla
Hamed. 21. 4 ^032. 422. Kahem or Alkahem Beamaryla Abu Iafar Abdula. 44. 4
^^74. 467. Almoktady Byla. 19. 5 ^^^5. 487. Almostazer Byla. 25. 6 ^^^9. 512.
Almostacherd Byla Fezele. 17. 2 ^^^6. 529. Rachet Byla. 2. 0 ^^^9. 531.
Almoktafy Byla the third. 24 0 ^^^1. 555. Almostanger Byla Issuff. 11. 0 ^^^2.
566. Almostanzy Benur Elah Acen. 9. 8 ^^^0. 575. Nacer or Nacera Ladinla* 47. 0
^^^6. 622. Alzaher or Altaher* Byla Mahamed. 0. 9 ^^^^. 623. Almostanzer* Byla
Mansur. 7. 0 ^^^^. 640. Almostacem Byla Abdula. 15. 7

^HE MOGOLES OR TARTAIANS ^ESCENDING FROM CHINGVIS KAN, WHICH COMMANDED IN
PERSIA.
(...) 602. Chinguis Kan. 23. 0 (...) 626. Otkay Khaon. 13. 0 (...) 643. Gayuk
Khaon. 1. 0 (...) 644. Manchu Khaon. 13. 0 (...) 657. Vlachu Khaon. 6. 0 (...)
663. Haybkay Khaon. 17. 0 (...) 680. Hamed Khan or Nichudar Oglan. 2. 2 (...)
683. Argan Khon. 7. 0 (...) 690. ^aniatu Khon. 3. 0 (...) 693. (...) 1. 0 (...)
694. (...) Khan. 8. 0 1305. 703. (...) Khan, who was afterward called Sultan
Hamed. 12. 9 1317. (...) Sulton Abuzayd Bahader Khan. 19. 0

^HE MOGOLES OR TARTARIANS
^^^^. 789. Teymurlang. 36. 0 ^405. 807. Mirzah Karrok. 43. 0 ^447. 850.
Ologhbek. 2. 0 ^450. 853. Mizah Abdelatife. 0. 6 1451. 854. Mirzah Abdula. 1. 0
In Maurenahar. 1452. ^55. Mirzah Sulton Abusayd. 18. 0 1469. 873. Mirzah Sulton
Hamad. 28. 4 1532. 91^. Mirzah Babor. 38. 0 In Karason. 1469. 873. Mirzah
Hyadigar. 2. 0 1471. 875. Mirzah Sultan Ocen. 38. 4 1556. 911. Bahady or Pedy
Azam^n, and Muzafa Mirzah, brethren together. 1. 0 In Aderbajon. 1406. 8^9.
Mironcha. 1. 0 1407. 810. Mirzah Abubakar. 0. 0

TVR KOMANS OF THE FAMILY OF THE AKVYONLVS WHICH COMMAVNDED IN PERSIA.
1413. 815. Kara Iss^^. 14. 0 ^^21. 823. Amir Scand^. 16. 0 ^^^^. ^41. Iooncha.
32. 0 ^^^^. 872. Acem Aly. 1. 0

TVRKOMANS OF THE FAMILY OF THE AKVYONLVS WHICH COMMAVNDED IN PERSIA.
^he years (...). The years of the Egyra. The Years. The Months. ^^^^. 876.
Ozun Acembek. 11: 0 ^^^8. 882. Sulton Kalil. 0. 6 ^^82. 886. Yacub Bek
Buysang^r. 12. 10 ^^92. 896. Mirzah. 1. 0 ^^93. 897. Rostam Bek. 5. 6 ^^98.
902. Hagmet Bek. 1. 0 ^^99. 903. Aluuan Bek. 1. 0 1^00. 905. Morat Bek. 1. 0

THE RACE OF THE SOPHIES DESCENDING FROM ISMAEL SOPHY, WHICH HAVE COMMAVNDED IN
PERSIA.
^^^5. 906. Cha Ismael Sophy. 20. 0 ^^^5. 930. Cha Thamas. 53. 0 ^^^6. 983. Cha
Ismael. 1. 10 ^^^8. 985. Cha Mahamed the Blind. 7. 0 ^^^^. 992. Cha Abas. 33. 0

The Estate of the Turk in Europe.
A DISCOVRSE
The Contents.
1. THe extention of the Turks empire described, and the countries that it
compre^ends in the three parts of the world, Europe, Asia, and Afric. 2. A
(...) kingdoms and provinces of Europe, subject to the (...) empire: and
first, of Thrace, or Romania: why it was so called; the (...) thereof, under
what degree of the Poles elevation it stands; with the (...) cities in the
same. 3. A typographie and ample relation of the foundation, (...) of the name,
seat, magnificence, and special singularities of the city of Constantinople.
5. The rude and barbarous names of the ancient Tartarians, who were reformed
and made civil by Zamolxis, the Law-gi^er, whom they honored as a god, and to
whom they were wont to sacrifice men living. 6. Their custom of shooting
arrows against the thunder, and mourning at the birth of their children; the
sacrifising of their best esteemed and loved wives, upon the tombs of their
husbands: Their (...) lusts, with the exposing of their daughters to him that
offered most; and (...) of theft. 7. Of such deities as they adored: of the
election of their kings: of 8. Their modern manners, and customs of life in
their eating and drinking* in their habits, and marriages: their arrogancy,
(...) and avarice* their (...) hatred against the Christians, together with
(...) 9. What ceremonies they use upon those festival dates, (...). 10. Of the
manners, conversation, and vsu^^^ (...) amongst the Turks. 11. A description of
the (...) of heigt^, and longitude thereof: and first, of ^acedonia, the
situation and limits of the (...)* the six several provinces it comprehends;
the (...) mountains of Olympus, and Ossa, (...) inhabited, and consecrated to
the ancient 12. Of Aepyrus, with the bounds, (...) towns thereof. 13. Of
Achaya, divided into nine regions or provinces, with (...) the same. 14. Of
Peloponnesus, or Moreea, the situation, limits, and ^^ength of the the same;
the principal rivers, provinces, or regions; the towns, and most renowned
(...) ^ountains thereof. 15. Of the quality of the air, the fertility, and
sterilitie of Greece, and first of (...) Macedonia, which abounds in mines of
gold, silver, and of the Asphalt stone: Thessalie, in horse: (...) and Mount
Oly^pus in box and bay trees: Athos, in fruit trees, vines, and olives: and the
valley (...) of Tempe in mines of salt. 16. The sterilitie of the countries of
Aepyrus, and Attica. 17. The (...) fertility of Peloponnesus, the roughness
and of the soil of Arcadie, where a wine was made which (...) women to be
fruitful, and men mad; and where the Ife grows, a tree whose very fruit and
(...) are venomous, causing men to die which make any use of the same. 18. Of
the natural (...) of the ancient inhabitants of Greece, and first of the
Macedonian warriors, who were (...) addicted to sciences, and very sumptuous
in their feasts and banquets: the Thessalians (...) ^itfull, great gluttons,
whoremongers, and very warlike: but they of the valley of Tempe were (...)
religious, loving sacrifices and public feasts, and so successively in order
of the inclination (...) manners of each particular people. 19. Of the
wonderful oracle of Dodon, with the wood or (...) ^rest adjacent thereunto:
the antiquity of the people, called Dorians and Pelagians: the Cloli^^^^s
valor: and the Phocians rusticitie and barbarism. 20. Of the Athenians
subtlety of wit, (...) of the people of Attica; their deities, solemn feasts,
mysteries, and sacrifices. 21. Of the (...) and noble courage of the
Lacedemoniaus, their ceremonies in marriages, with other noble customs. 22. Of
the barbarism which reigns at this day amongst the modern Greeks; their
language, which approaches nearer to the ancient Greek, than either to the
Italian o^ (...); their manner of eating and drinking together, with their
usual habits, and other (...) 23. What the ancient policy and government of
Athens was; their beginning; the three ^rders or Estates whereof their
Commonweal consisted; and the laws which Solon the Law-^i^er (...) brought in
amongst them. 24. Of the first institution of Tribes in Athens; of the election
(...) magistrates which was made of three sorts: of the Senate of the
Arcopagites, and of the rigor their sentences and judgments: of the
Nomothetes, and the difference betwixt them and the ^omophilactes: of the
jurisdiction of the five hundred in civil causes and trialls: of the (...)
Iliaca, and Iliacis: of the Logists, Demarkes, Creostes, Sitofilaces, with
other magistracies and ^^nities in very great number, established over sundry
parts of that Commonweal. 25. Of the ^^cient policy of Sparta, and how it was
governed by Lycurgus laws: of their marriages; the ^^inging forth of their
children, and their austere and barbarous custom in instructing and (...) them
up to theft: of the manner of courting and making love to the Lacedemonian
maid^ (...) virgins: the instruction and breeding up of young men: of the
virile age, and of their (...) exercises: what kind of money they used: of the
military order and discipline of this ^^^monwealth: of their Infanterie and
cauallerie; of their several arms, and how they used to (...) and to incampe:
of the authority of the king in their armies, and elsewhere: Finally, the
(...) of their public feasts, and what proportion and allowance was made to
the king in (...) ^olem^^ and public feasts. 26. What religion the Greeks of
this present age do profess. (...) all the Islands within the Archipelagus
which are subject to the Turk, and what (...) possesses in Sclauonia: their
situation, circuit, and chief towns: the fertility of these (...), and what
other singularities there are: their manners, fashions, and customs of life,
as ^^ncient as modern. 28. Of the Isle of Cyprus, divided into four parts,
with the situation; (...) limits thereof: the natural disposition and
manners, with the policy and religion of (...). 29. Of the Isle of Rhodes, the
circuit, and situation; as also, of that famous (...) able Colossus of brass,
which was sometimes erected in the town of Rhodes, being (...) in height. 30.
A description of the countries of Bossina, Bulgaria, Seruia, and (...) that the
Turk holds in Hungary: the names of the principal cities and towns, and
(...) and private fashions the inhabitants of these countries do use. 31. Of
the (...), Tunes, and Tre^^esen, lying in Afric. 32. Of Egypt, and the
Trogloditick (...) thereunto: Further, an ample relation of the countries which
the Turk enioyes, (...) and in the conclusion, a discourse of the Turks in
general, describing their manners, (...) go^er^ement: with a List or Catalogue
of all the Emperors of Constantinople, both (...)* since the division and
separation grew of the Eastern, from the Western or (...). (...), which was
conferred upon Charlemagne of France.

THis mighty (...) who is become such a terror to all Christendom, Postels
opinion. Now (...) more inward within the bosom of the European continent,
(...) to Constantinople; all this ground and territory (...) best part of high
Hungary, Thrace, otherwise called Romeli, or (...) of Greece, that is,
Macedonia, Epyrus or Albania, Acharia, (...) called Morea, with all the Islands
of the Aegean sea, now named the (...) excepted some certain fortifications
and places subject to the (...)

(...) the town of Velez de Gomera, even to the

(...) in many parts, being full of defart places, (...) that are not subject
to the Turk, we may (...) the superficies of country, the moity (...) way
square.

(...) in the first table of this part of the (...) they call Turquie, and that
part which (...) Asia, at this day (...) by the name of Narolia; Phrygia,
called (...) and (...); Lycia, named vulgarly Briquia; Paphlagonia, ^alacia,
Pamphilis, Cappadocia, Armenia the less, called Anudula, and Cilicia named
^^^ramania, all which countries are at this day comprehended in that part,
which bears (...) general name of Natolia, whose proper countries and
provinces have all changed ^^eir name but especially, the cities and towns. The
circuit of this Peninsula of Asia the ^^^esse, or of Natolia, reckoning it from
Alexandretta to Trebesonda, called by Ptolome Trapezus, come to two thousand
and four hundred miles, or thereabout.

(...) The Turk also holds a good part of that which Ptolome refers to the
third table of Asia, (...) and Tartarians possessing and retaining the rest;
and this part is Armenia (...) great, which the Turks usually call Turcomania.

^urthermore, he commands over that part which Ptolome describes in his fourth
table (...), that is to say, the Isle of Cyprus, Syria (now called Soria)
Palestina; Indea, (...) with the Maritime parts of Soria; which being
considered, from Firamide to (...) rises to about 430 miles: Arabia the
stony, called at this day Baraab Mesopotamia (...) Diarbech, Arabia the
desert, and Babylonia or Bagdet, which was the habitation the ancient Chaldees.

He enioies also a part of that which Ptolome refers to the fifth table of Asia,
which is ^^nia, called by the proper inhabitants Asmia. In leaving therefore
Trebisonda, his do^nion stretches toward the North, even to that strait which
the ancients called Bos^^orus Cimmerius, and the Italians term it Bocca di
S. Giouanni, or the sea of the (...) which ioines with the Chersonesus, called
Gazaria, on the North side, that is, even (...), which it may be, is the same
that Ptolome calls Hermanassa, and these parts (...) in shore or coastage,
about 450 miles: then parting from Sues, which (...) Ptolome expresses, by the
name of Clismi Presidium, and enuyroning Arabia Feelix, (...) happy, to the
fall and discharge of the river of Tygris, or Tigil, into the sea, it con^^^es
all along the sea shore, three thousand seven hundred and fifty miles in
length.

And so ioining all these Maritime parts which the Turk holds in Asia, we find
that it ^^^es to 7030 miles or thereabout in length, and the superfices of all
that country, which ^^^raignes over in Asia amounts to 710640 miles every way
square.

But because in all this tract of country, a good part of it is desert and
disinhabited, or (...) they live not in subjection to the Turk, as in Arabia
Foelix they do not; for this rea^^n I say, substracting for this maine
quantity, but a fourth part, which is of 177660 miles ^^^are, there will
remain 532980 miles every way square.

^ll the Turks possessions in Asia are bordered on the East with the Persian
gulf, or (...) sea of Elcalif by the river of Tygris, called Tigil, and by a
part of the coast of the (...) sea, which otherwise is now called the sea of
Baccu: on the West, with the gulf of ^^^bia, or the red sea, with the
Archipelagus, or strait of Constantinople, and the Euxine (...) on the North,
with the Euxine sea, and a part of the Marrish Meotis, otherwise (...) the sea
of Zabaques, and with a part of Sarmalia Asiaticke: on the South, with (...)
^outh, or Indian Ocean, with the Mediterranean and Euxine seas.

(...) as if we put all that together which the Turk commands on the sea
coast within (...) named three parts, we shall find that it all amounts to
eleven thousand two ^^^ed and four score miles, and the superfices of all his
dominions in the above (...) three parts, comes to a million two hundred three
thousand two hundred and (...) miles every way square.

Of Thrace or Romania.
(...) the head city of the Romish Empire lies in Thrace, which men at this
day call (...) only Romeli, or Romania; I thought good to begin with this part:
wherefore (...) Romania is a province near to Pontus Euxinus, so called by
reason the (...) thereof, which is Constantinople, was sometimes called new
Rome. This (...) in like manner called Aria, Perse, Odrysa, Emonia, Bistonia,
Crestonia, and (...) as also in Hebrew, Thyras, according to Josephus his
testimony. The inhabitants of (...), were sometimes Strimonians, Bardes,
Dolonges, Brigians, and Sythines.

(...) bordered on the East, with the Euxine sea, which the Turks call
Maurotolassa, (...) of Constantinople the Marmorean sea, and with Hellisp ont,
or

(...) degree of the poles elevation, and

(...) places within this province are Abdera, which some (...) country, being
now named (...) Sophian, and Astrizza, as many others affirm. Nicopolis,
seated on (...) the side of a Hill, whose ruins are as admirable (...)
whatsoever. There is also to be seen a very good (...) whole and entire, even
to this day, and might also (...), if the Turks did not daily take up the
stones of the degrees (...); and it is of a spherical form. There are also
many other

(...) which the Turks call Endrem, is a greater town than either (...) but
it is not walled about, and the buildings thereof are (...) the chief place
and prerogative, next to Constantinople, (...) it having been here to (...)
the proper seat and residence of (...) was of Am^rath the first, in the year
1363.

(...) is even at this day indifferently well peopled. (...) of Propontides, is
a port capable enough of small vessels, and it

Pausa^^^ king of Sparta, in the year of the (...) the incarnation of our Lord,
five hundred and seventy years, (...), or new Rome.

This (...) unto Constantines time, under whom it came to be called (...) This
was first the seat of the Roman Emperors, when they Mahomet (...) of the
Turks, in the year 1453, it was made choice of for the royal (...) of the
Ottomans.

(...) is now very rich, wonderfully well peopled, and as it were the (...) and
commerce of the Turkish Empire. The circuit of this (...) as many affirm; yea
there are some which (...) compass. It is supposed there are 700000 (...)
within the same. The Turks call this city Stambul, or Stambolda: on (...) by
the great sea: on the South, by the Archipelagus, and a

The seat of the whole city is so fair and pleasant and in so commodious and
fit a place, it seems to have been naturally made to command, and to be the
peculiar resi^^nce of some great prince. It is built upon the hanging of a
little hill, almost in a tri^^gular form (...) side thereof running along the
port even to the Seraglio; the se^ond lies outright from this place to the
castle, where prisoners are kept: being called the Seven (...) and these two
sides are environed with the Sea, the Seraglio making (...) The third side lies
toward the firm land, compassed about with a (...) wall, and certain towers,
as also with a ditch without, which is of no great (...) or moment. All this
city yields wonderful contentment to the view, both by (...) of this
bountiful sight, as also for that there are seven little hills, upon each of
(...), you may discorne a goodly Mosque, or Turkish Temple, whereof we will
speak (...) hereafter.

^he most magnificent place in all Constantinople, is the Seraglio, being the
court or ^^^tation of the great Turk, seated on that head or point of the
city which lies (...) the Sea, being separated as it were from all the rest,
and containing some miles in (...) compass or circuit thereof. On the Sea
side, you may see many little turrets and ^^leries supported upon pillars of
marble, where the grand Seignior sometimes does (...) create himself.

When you are entered within the first court of the Seraglio; on the left hand
you may (...) certain structure, like to a Turkish Mosquee, which in ancient
time was some (...); but at this day the great Turk makes use thereof for a
kind of arcenall, reser^^^g and keeping therein great store of arms for the
defense of his house and Court. (...) somewhat above that, there is a little
Tower, wherein are hewn out fifty or sixty ^^^dows, where the great Turks
commandments are given out; and on the right (...) thereof, you may see the
Court kitchens.

When you go out of this Court, you enter into another made like a cloister,
with a ^^^rie round about it, supported upon pillras of marble, being covered
with lead, in (...) (on the left hand) you shall see a fountain, where the
great Turk many times ^^^seth some of the greatest men's heads of his Court to
be cut off.

from thence you go into the Diuant, which is a little chamber, and beyond
that, is the ^^mber of the treasury.

And so you have heard of all the particular places of note of the grear Turks
(...) which have come to our knowledge. Departing from hence, you may see a
fair (...), which is near at hand; this was in old time the Church of S.
Sophia, built by (...) the Emperor: but in his time it was far greater, with
an Abbey adjoining (...) unto, which extended far into that very place where
now the Seraglio stands; (...) the Turks coming to be masters of the city,
did ruin it, leaving nothing (...) the same but the Quire, which they reserved
to make a Mosquee. There are also (...) many high and great collumnes, or
pillars, whereof eight be of porphirie, (...) of serpentine, and four of white
marble: and above the same, a very beautiful ^^^lerie, paued with transparent
marble, with many other little pillars of marble and (...).

^ongst the rest, there is one stone of marble, upon which the Turks believe
and (...) that our Lady did wash our Saviors linen, and therefore they give
it great (...) and honor, for that they hold Jesus Christ to have been a
very great Prophet. (...) of the Church is embellisht with goodly old Mosaic
work, made in the (...) time.

(...) your coming forth, you shall see many Cubees, which are places made all
(...) of Chapels, or covered like Domoes, or Cathedral Churches, all of (...)
the great Turks sons are interred.

(...) and chief Mosquees, are those which are erected upon the Seven hills,
(...) say that of S. Sophia, whereof we have formerly made mention; that of
Alliba^^^other of Sultan Bajazet, one of Sultan Solomon, that of Sultan
Mahomet, that of (...) Selymus, and another of Selymus the son of Solomon: but
the fairest and most stately (...) a Mosquee, is that of Sultan Solomon.

(...) has four great gates, each of them adorned with a goodly fair (...)
on marble, and at the four corners thereof there are also foureverie high
(...) but somewhat narrow (...), a gallerie, which runs round about, and within
(...) made white, with (...) of marble.

Before the (...) of the Mosquee, there is a great court paued with marble,
compast (...) and some collumnes of the same stuff and matter, and in the
midst (...) fair fountain, covered with lead, as also, the gallerie and
(...).

(...) Mosquee of Sultan Mahomet, there is a great place like unto an Hospital
(...)

(...) S. Sophia, you may discern the lodging of Lasuadar, from whence you
(...) ground, and by water, the which is fresh and sweet, even into the (...).

And not far from this place, you may behold an ancient Hippodrome, called
by (...), containing about five hundred paces in length, and an hundred in
(...) the midst whereof stands a Pyramide, gra^en all over with
Hieroglificall

(...) little beyond this, there stands three serpents of copper, higher than
two men, and (...) fast together. The Turks say, that in former times, when
three serpents (...) them of the city, the people at last humbled themselves
in prayers to heaven, and (...) means being delivered from these devouring
monsters, they left these forms cast (...) a memory thereof.

(...) in the same place, a very fair column of rustic work, the stones
whereof are all joined together without lime, or mortar, and having within the
same a pair of (...) In this place the Turkish caualliers exercise themselves
on Frydaies, and on other

Hard by this Hyppodrome you may see the Bisistam, which is like the palace of
(...) in this place, men fell all precious stones, rich gold-smith-workes, and
all sorts of beautiful and stately ornaments, as cloth of silk, and also
slaves, men, women, maids, and boys.

In another street not far off, there is a great pillar of Porphitie to be
seen, cross barred (...) parts, with circled hoopes of iron; and on another
side thereof, there is another pillar, called (...), very high, being all of
marble, graven and cut with the Images of many(...)s, like to that of S. Peter
and S. Paul, which is at Rome. Within the (...) a staire case, which mounts up
to the top, but they are all broken, so as were

From thence, men usually go to see a very fair open place, greater than that
of the (...) being peculiar for the Ianissaries, built round about with
lodgings and (...) soldiers.

(...) come to an old Palace of Constantines, which has no great beauty in
it, the best thing to be noted is, that it is seated in a very good air.

There are also within the city two Christian Churches, one consecrated to S.
(...), and the other to our Lady, surnamed of Constantinople, which is very
little, but standing whole and entire: And thus I have related unto you the
most remarkable things

(...) shall see, at the end of the c^tie, on the other side of the Port, near
to the Aioug Sultan, wherein the great Turk, when he comes to the Empire, goes
to receive his sword. And in another part, you may discern the quirries, with
a certain garden, which belongs to the great Turk. A little before, close by
the entry of the port, is the Arcenall, where there lies about the number of a
hundred and fifty galleys on shore disarmed, and some sixty riding at anchor,
all ready furnished, upon any sudden occasion: and somewhat beyond this,
there is a place called Topana, where you may see a great number of dismounted
canons, whereof some are turned and leuelled against the port.

I may not by any means omit to speak of a little Island of rock which is at
the end of the channel, two miles within the black sea, being all desert, but
yet very worthy of observation, for a goodly column of white marble erected
on the top thereof, by Pompey the Great, after his discomfiting of Mithridates.

As you return again toward Constantinople, there is to be seen upon the
channel of the same sea, two towers, the one of this side, the other of the
other side, which guard (...) keep this mouth or entry. And in this place
they use to imprison the knights of ^alta, and other Christians of quality,
and calling, which are taken in the wars. It is (...) thence to the city, some
eighteen miles, and on both sides of the channel, you ^ay see a great many
houses of pleasure, and sundry fair gardens: then right over the (...), on
Asia side, is Galata, called at this day Pera, lying between the Arcenall, and
the place Topana, inhabited for the most part by free Christians, and Greeks;
and both the one and the other have many churches, of which the fairest, and
wherein our faith is preached, is that of S. Francis; the others are called S.
Mary's, S. John's, S. Anthony, S. Bene^ict, S. Peter, and S. Anne, all of them
using the Roman worship, and ceremonies. About ^his place there are many
houses, and villages, as Casanbacha, Besictar, and the residences (...) the
Ambassadors, both of France, England, and Venice.

Somewhat further off, on the same side you may see a great village named
Scutary, which did belong to the Sultana, mother to Mahomet, who caused a very
sumptuous ^osquee to be built there, together with a great and goodly house,
where all passengers (...) what religion soever may be lodged, and entertained
for three days: the Turks call ^is place Caruaserat. And this is as much as I
am able to deliver of the neighbor and ^^iacent parts to Constantinople.

Near to this province, lies that Chersonesus surnamed of Thrace, but commonly
S. ^^ges arms, where the town of Gallipoli stands, four days journey from
Constan^^ople. This was the first place of Europe that Amurath the first took,
in the year 1363. (...) has no walls, and the port thereof is not capable of
any great shipping; and yet there (...) bay or gulf, which may harbor many.
This town is inhabited by Greeks, Jews, (...) Turks, and is a great passage
from Europe into Asia.

All that strait of sea, from Gallipoli, where Propontides ends, to the
Archipelagus, is (...) the Hellespont; where is the strait or channel of the
castles, being a quarter of a (...) breadth: here it is, where these two
ancient castles of Sestos and Abydos stand (...) owned by the love of Leander
and Hero) called commonly the Dardanells, and by (...) Turks Bogozasser.
Sestos is in this Chersonese, seated upon the hanging of a hill, in (...) of a
trefle. Abydos is in Natolia.

(...) for Propontides, it is the sea that is enclosed between the two
straits, I mean that (...) or Constantinople, and that of Gallipolis, but at
this day, it is called (as (...) told you) the Marmorean sea.

The Quality, and nature of the soil.
THe country is for the most part cold, and full of people: you may discover
in the and strength. But within the country, and far from the sea side, Thrace
is more

The mountains of this province, are those of Hemur, and Rhodope, which is
very rough, and always covered with snow; Orbele, and Pangee, which have at
this day mines of silver, as heretofore they had; and then Messape, not far
from the sea side, which is admirable for the roughness of the rocks.

The rivers hereof are Heber, called at this day Marisa, according to Mercator,
or Valisa, Nicolas de Nicolai would have it: Nesse, called now Carason,
according to Belon: Melas, now Gensui, and Strymon, which is the bound and
limit of Macedonia.

The river of Heber, as report goes, has gold intermingled with the sand or
gravel thereof, and it is so slow of course, as a man can hardly discern
which way the stream runs: the water thereof is troubled, and thick, but
sweet; and in Summer it is so cold, (...) man would think it to be dissolved
ice: but then in Winter, there descends such a fall of waters from the near
mountains, as it grows more swift and violent, ouerflowing a great large
meadow which in precedent ages was called Dorisca, where men erect no
buildings, only in Summer they feed a number of horses: and there are also
certain orchards, or gardens which bring forth great store of Summer fruits.

The river of Heber receives into her stream the river Theara, which is the
best water of all this country against any kind of disease or infirmity, and
especially against scabs both of men and horse. It has thirty and eight
fountains or bathes, part hot, part cold, which flow out of one and the self
same rock. Darius taking great delight in the pleasant taste of this clear
water, erected a pillar near unto it, with an inscription thereon in Greek
letters, in praise and commendation of the same.

The river of Nesse, or Charason, descending from mount Hemur, is very flow of
stream, and somewhat less than the Strymon, or Stromon, and yet it casts up
much gravel and sand. We may here in like manner observe the lake of Biston or
Bouron, which is maritime, and affords much good fish.

The Thracian Bosphorus comprehends thirty good ports, part in Asia, and part
in Europe, but more on Europe side, than on Asia. It changes the stream and
course, being exceeding swift, in seven places of special note, where beating
upon some capes, and forelandes, the sea comes to be wonderfully enraged, and
rough; so as they pass with great difficulty in diverse straits toward the
black sea, but by a violent haling of the boats along the shoreside, or else
changing their course from one place to another.

In the days of Copronymus the Emperor, all the Bosphorus, and a part of the
great sea, was so frosen, as the ice was five and twenty cubits thick, and a
great quantity of snow falling thereupon, the ice also was encreast twenty
cubits high above the face and superfices of the sea; so as men might travel,
and go most securely on the same, and beasts;

Afterward, in February, when the ice came to dissolve and melt, breaking out
into many great flakes and pieces, which seemed like little Islands, full of
many creatures, some dead, and some alive: the flakes of ice with the wind and
stream, were driven forcibly on Constantinople side, where they overthrew many
buildings of great moment and importance, that were built to the sea side ward.

There is no part of the Mediteranean sea more abundant in all sort of fish,
than the Bosphorus. In the beginning of Winter, there depart infinite schools of
them from thence

The ancient manners and customs of the Thracians.
Herodotus said; if they had been governed by one prince alone, and being
united, and of accord within themselves, it had been impossible to vanquish
them, for they were the strongest men of all the world: but whithall he adds,
that they were but weak, by reason of their great divisions and fa^^ions. And
although they could not agree and love together, yet they had all the same
manners and customs of life, except the Thracians, and those which dwelt above
the Grestones.

The Getes were persuaded that they did never die, but in departing out of this
Zamolxis.

This Zamolxis was one of Pythagoras scholars, who being returned into his
country, and perceiving that the Thracians lived barbarously, and in a manner
after a brutish fashion, he gave them laws, teaching those of the country the
use of them; afterward also he printed in them this firm persuasion, that if
they strictly observed them, when they left this world they should go to a
place where they were to enjoy all manner of pleasure and contentment.

When he had obtained some reputation of divinity amongst the Thracians, he
estranged himself, and left them quite, no man knowing whether he went, but
thus he left them, with a very ardent desire to see him again.



They enjoined some certain man amongst them to hold three darts fixed firm
on the ground, with the points upward, and then they commanded others to take
this man with his feet and hands bound, and to hoyse him on high, to the end he
might fall upon the darts, and to be pierced through: of which, if he died at
the same instant, they supposed their god to be propitious and favorable to
them; but if he still continued alive, they would accuse this messenger to be
but a wicked and impious man. If he were thus accused and blamed, they would
presently send another, informing him by this messenger

When it either thundered or lightened, the Thracians would shoot their arrows
^^ainst heaven, and threaten God, seeing they believed in no other god but
their own Zamolxis.

The Thracians practiced the same customs: but at the birth or death of any
one of their countriemen, they used a particular ceremony by themselves. When
the infant was borne, all the parents sitting round about the same, lamented
bitterly his coming into the world, ripping up all the miseries and
afflictions whereunto he should be exposed, and thus deploring his condition as
absolutely miserable and unhappy. But if to be ^y one amongst them did die,
they would bury him with all joy and alacrity, highly re^oycing

Many of those that inhabited beyond the Crestones, had many wives, and when
any (...) of them died, their wives would grow to a wonderful debate and
strife, seeing each (...) them would be very forward to affirm that she of
all the rest was best beloved of her husband: a solemn assembly was made, and
every ones reasons duly heard, then she

The other Thracians accustomed to sell their children, following the ancient
manner and fashion of the country, and the fathers, mothers, or nearest
kinsmen, never kept in or restrained their daughters or kinswomen, but suffered
them to entertain loving embracements with any one they had best liking to.

But then they had always a very special care of their wives chastity, whom
they bought at a dear and high rate. They had certain marks and impressions
on their foreheads, and they which had none were esteemed but base and common
stuff.

They were sold to the frankest chapman, and he that did rise to the highest
price: and the fairest were first exposed to sale, and did carry home the
price whereat they were set and taxed it but the soul were feign to buy those
men with whom they would marry. The men and women made good cheer together,
near to a fire side, casting the grains and seeds of certain herbs upon
the imbers; and so being intoxicated with the scent and some thereof, they
took it for a solemn rejoicing to appear as it were drunk, having their
senses by this means dulled and stupefied.

They reputed it for an honorable course of life to be idle and do nothing,
but to live of pilleries and thefts; as on the contrary they that sowed and
tilled the earth were contemned, and reputed for villains and base in the most
abject degree.

Mars, Bacchus, Diana, and Mercury, swearing always by the last, from whom
they supposed themselves to be lineally descended.

All the Thracians houses were very low built: their provisions and victuals
were always at one point; and as for vines, they neither used nor planted them.

When they were called to any election of a king, nobility swayed not therein
above the rest of the vulgar people, but whosoever had most voices on his side,
was preferred to the dignity before all others. The people always made choice
of such an one whose

Although the king were very just and upright, yet would they not suffer him
to do all things freely without control: so that a magistracy of forty were
appointed him the which were as his assistants, to the end he might not be sole
Judge in criminal causes. And when he was found culpable in any thing, they
condemned him presently to

They solemnised the obsequies of their great Lords and Princes after this
manner: The corpse was carried into a public and open place, where for the
space of three days, killing diverse sorts of beasts for a sacrifice, they made
exceeding great cheer; afterward having lamented some time over the dead
corpse, they either buried or burned it, burying the ashes in the earth, and
erecting a tomb upon the same, where they devised many kinds of combats,
amongst which the most common and ordinary was the Duel, betwixt man and man.

The arms which they used when Darius made his expedition and enterprise (as
Herod^^^^ affirms) were these: They wore morrions on their heads made of foxes
skins, and certain shirts, upon which they wore cassockes or gabberdines of
diverse fashions, and upon their legs they did wear buskins of kidds skins,
and besides this, they used darts,

They were very expert archers, whereof they affirmed themselves to be the
inuentors. They spoke the same language that the Scithians did. Pliny writes
that all Thrace was sometimes divided into fifty hundreds, or quarters. And
this is all I am able to deliver of the ancient customs and manners of the
people of Thrace: now let us see and examine how they live in this our
presentage.

The Manners and Fashions of this present time.
THe modern inhabitants of this country, wear their hair very thick on the
tops of Mahomet made for the Turks drinking of wine, out of doubt, many other
dissolutions would be put in practice within this province. But because Thrace
is inhabited by diverse sorts of people, especially, Constantinople, as by
Turks, Jews, and Christians; so as in this respect, we cannot generally
discourse of them all three, because they have different manners and customs,
which distinguish them one from another, I will undertake every one of these
three apart, that so we may best judge and consider what is in them most
remarkable, and worthy of observation.



There is none of them that eats sitting on a bench, chair, or stool, but
they all take their repasts sitting cross legd on the ground, as tailors do
ordinarily here within their shops, when they work many together upon a shop
board. Their table cloth and table is ^or the most part of an ox hide, or of a
stags not curried, but having still the hair upon

In what place soever they sit down, whither in their houses, or in their
moschees, they ^^^red certain tapistrie couerlets, or mats of reeds; and there
are some places which they ^^ancher with board, as being otherwise either too
low, or too foul. They never use any ^^lls, neither permit they those
Christians that dwell in their countries to use any.

Both men and women wear their garments long and large, and open before, to
the end that in stooping, they may the better cover themselves, and hide the
parts of shame from

The Turks eat of gelt dear more than of any other meat, and that is the
reason why so many good Turkish skins come over into our parts. They feed also
upon mutton, and spend great numbers of kid and lamb, but little beef, and
these meats are rather roasted than prepared in any other manner. Finally, they
put all the flesh pell mell together into a ^reat platter, or rather if I may
so say, into a great boule, not having many several platters as we use to set
each meat on the table by it self. But they never eat any swines flesh, and
their sauces of greatest appetite are made of garlic and onyons, wherein even
their ^oblemen and princes take great content. Their ordinary bread is very
brown, and the mason is, for that they put many seeds into it; so as it cannot
be so well sifted and (...) as it should be.

But to come to other of their manners and kinds of life, there is not a nation
in the

They are as treacherous and disloyal as may be, and make no scruple of
breaking their promises; so as this their infidelity has been the ruin of
many Christians, which trusting

This nation is not naturally inclined to learning, but only to arms, in which
their obedience and assurance of Mahomets paradise, and their opinion of
destiny, are of more Mahomets doctrine, upon which subject infinite volumes
have been compiled full of disputations and controversies. They do by nature
so mortally hate and detest Christians, as they can no sooner name them, but
they will term them dogs, as I saw with mine own eyes, being one day with a
Chious, which belonged to the viceroy of Argier, with whom I was very
familiar; for though he professed great love and kindness to me, and gave me
as much respect, as the little humanity and courtesy of this nation can
afford: yet when any occasion was offered but to discourse of Christians, he
could not abstain from calling them dogs upon any speech,

They are so covetous, as they make profit and gain of all things, and the
reason why they heap up money with such greediness and care, is, because the
great Turk gives no land nor possessions to the Turks, but for term of
life; so as they which mean to leave any thing to their children, make all the
ready money they possibly can, to the end they may have sufficient to
maintain their estates without abating their show and condition: although
commonly when fathers have done good service, and that the children show some
generositie and courage, they are suffered to enjoy that which their fathers
formerly held, expecting that with time and years they may likewise attain to
their fathers place and charge. I must needs also tell you thus much, that the
Turks would never

The Turkish women are modest in their garments, and they are commonly so well
fitted and made, as a man cannot behold any thing more modest and comely. The
attire of

Married men never sport nor dally at all with their wives before others, as
also they seldom use to talk or confer with them, for that the man does
ever retain the same severity and gravity toward his wife, who likewise
fails not to bear her self very respectively and humbly on his behalf.

Their great Lords and Princes which cannot be daily resident with their wives,
leave them under the charge and keeping of certain Eunuchs, who are so
vigilant and watchful over them, as it is impossible any other should
entertain them or enjoy their company besides their husbands, or come to
those effects which might disgrace and dishonor

But to the end I may speak somewhat of that which the Turks ordinarily
practice in

In that place where the Ianissaries lodgings are, these kind of soldiers
commonly use (...) exercise the bow, the harquebuse, and other such like arms.

In all Constantinople they never use any wagons or carts, for they employ the
Arme^ns as porters, to carry whatsoever is necessary or behoosfull, and these
be Christians (...) belief not much differing from that of the Gre^kes.

You shall sometimes see Turks that be drunk, go through the streets of
Constantinople

As for the Christians which live amongst the Turks, they are in a manner
confor^^ble by some attire on the head, a little differing from that of the
Turks; I mean this

The women of Persia go so handsomely or rather sumptuously attired, as in the
chastest minds they excite some amorous cogitations, by reason of the glances
they will many times reflect upon men for the kindling and enflaming of their
hearts: and these Frankes do freely entertain all amorous allurements, and
seem to live in the world for no other end but to please the wanton, who find
matter of contentment enough in conuersing with them, because their
entertainements are free, and much more familiar than that of the Turkish
women.

The Jews are only greedy and attentive of gain, applying themselves
principally to merchandise, which they practice with that usury and deceit, as
they appear to have absolutely set their consciences to sale, retayning no
other study nor care, but how to become rich, an to live at their ease. Some
there are amongst them that follow the practice of physic, in which they
attain to that skill and judgment, as both princes and great Lords, together
with other of the meaner sort of Turks, do willingly employ such persons.

Their Riches, Forces, Government, and Religion.
FOr that we have undertaken in the end to discourse at large of all these
things; we

Greece.
Ptolome calls Attica, in which the famous city of Athens stood: then, in the
second place, extending this nomination further, they comprehend under the
same, four provinces, which be, Macedonia, Epyrus,

But to take it as ordinary men understand the same, it is watered by three
seas that beat upon her coasts; on the West, by the Ionick; by the Libick on
the South; and by the Aegean on the Leuant; as for the Septentrionall part
thereof, it is limited by the

This Greece, understood in the sense formerly mentioned (comprising therein
also the I^le of Candie, whereof we spoke in our discourse of the Venetian
State) is enclosed within the parallel of 34 degrees high, which is the tenth
where the longest day consists but of fourteen hours and a quarter, and the
parallel of 43 degrees of latitude or eleuarion, which is the foureteenth,
where the longest day has but fifteen hours and a quarter: so as in all this
tract, the artificial day has no greater diversity and difference than of an
hour.

As for the longitude, it is contained within the Meridian degree, and that of
55, or at least wants but little thereof. The Venetians hold several pieces of
territory in the same,

Macedonia, according to Pliny, was aunciently called Emathia, and Peonia, and
then Emonia, as Titus Liuius affirms: but Gerbell and Niger hold at this day,
that it is called Albania; and yet Magins opinion is, that the same part of
Macedonia which lies upon the Ionicke sea, is only so called. The Oriental
part thereof, between the Strymonian bay, now called the gulf of Contesa, and
the bay of Thermaca, now the gulf of Sal^nica,

This country lies betwixt two great seas, that is to say, between the Aegean
sea, or Archipelagus, where it makes two points or capes on the East part, and
the Ionike sea; ^n the West, between the rivers of Drilon, now Drino, or
Lodrina, and Cylidnus, which ^ome falsely term Salnich; on the North,
Macedonia is bounded by Dalmatia, high Misia, and a part of Thrace, separated
by the rivers of Drylon, and Strimon; andon the South part, by Epyrus, properly
called Albania, and Achaia Gerbele sets down six provinces in Macedonia, on
that part, where it ioines upon Greece, that is Emathia, Pieria, Pelagia,
Estiota, Thessalia and Phitiotia among which, Thessalia, now called
Comenolitari, in Castaldus opinion, is the best. There lie in it the mountains
of Olympus, now called La^ha, as Castaldus writes, which is exceeding high,
seeing according to Pliny, it is more than ten stadia to the top thereof, and
so taking eight stadia for a mile, it is more than a mile upright in height,
and therefore the country inhabitants call the top thereof hea^^n, because no
winds blow there, nor are of force. There is also Pelon, now Petras as ^^me
will have it. This mountain is so high, as Dicearcus (as Pliny does witness)
having ^^^ueied the height thereof, found, that it was a thousand two hundred
and fifty paces ^^gh. The mountain of Ossa, which Sophian calls Colonno, and
Pinet, Ollira, is also in (...) country, as also that of Pinde, now called
Mezzono, at the foot of which, the river ^^nea has his source.

Alexander the Great, who notwithstanding gave no great care to this his
glorious and famous desseigne. This mountain was heretofore consecrated
Basil, (...) had certain privileges and exemptions granted, which they also
hold at this day, ^^that is, That no Greek nor Turk may inhabit there, if he
be not a Greek Caloyer. ^^^^^ers parts of this mountain, there remain yet
about six thousand Caloyers, where ^hey had some four and twenty great and
ancient monasteries enclosed with good and ^trongwalls: but two above all the
rest are most famous and renowned, that of Vnto^edi, and that of Agias laura.

Macedonia has four principal gulfes on the coast of the Aegean sea, which
are the ^^lfe of Contessa, the Syngitica, otherwise surnamed the gulf of the
holy mount, the ^^roniaca, now called the gulf of Aiomama, and that of
Thessalonica, or Salonica, be^^es

The most renowed rivers of Macedonia (besides that of Strimon or Stromon, vp^^
^he frontires of Thrace (are that of Axius, which some call Bardara, others
Vardari, (...) it is the fairest stream of all the rest, being a pleasant and
sweet water, which flow^^^ from mount Scandia, after a long course, falls
into the gulf of Salonica, and the ancients were wont to affirm, That the
sheep which drunk of this water became Sophian, and Deuodus according to
Mercutor. This river issuing from the hills of Illiria, or Sclauonia, and
running along by Peonia, and close by the towns of Heraclea, and Edese, vents
it self into the Vardari.

Alya^mon, now Pelecas, as Sophian writes; and Platamon, by Mercators opinion,
springs from the mountains Canaluies in Peonia, and seperates Macedonia from
Thrace: The banks thereof are much broken and ruinous; some suppose that he that
would have white sheep, must cause them to drink of this water.

The river of Penea, called now Salenpira, and Lycostoma by Sophians relation,
Pezin Theuets opinion, and Azababa as Mercator writes, and some other writers,
being enlarged by four rivers running into the same, voideth it self within
the gulf of Thessalonica.

There is also to be seen in Thessalie, that same famous place of pleasure and
delight, which ancient writers called Tempe, which is five thousand paces
long, and almost five hundred broad, being seated between the two mountains,
Ossa, and Oylmpus, and it is watered in the midst and center thereof, by the
beautiful river of Penea, or Azababa.

There is furthermore the Chersonesus of Patalena, to the extremity whereof
you may see the Promontorie Canestrea, now known by the name of Capo Canistro,
and this place was in former times separated from the rest of Macedonia by a
wall.

The most famous towns of Macedonia were aunciently Thessalonia, Pellis,
Stragira, Appollonia, Dirrachium, and Aulon, all which are inhabited at this
present. In Augustus days, Thessalonica flourished above all the rest, and was
the head city of all Macedonia, comprehending a great number of inhabitants,
and being seated in a very good place, between the rivers of Chabris and
Euchedorus. At this present it is called Salonica, this town is great and
famous, and moreover, so rich and traffickeable, that it may well be compared to
Naples in Italy: but that which is more remarkable than all the rest, there
are many merchants which have all kind of Indian commodities and merchandise.
It was for a while in the Venetians hands, but at last, Amurath the son of
Mahomet took it from this commonweal. Not far from thence, you may see the
village of Syderocapsis, Belon says, which shows like a great town. It was
heretofore called Christl^es.

Pella, now known by the name of Ieniza, as Sophian writes, and Zuchria
according to Niger, very famous for the breeding and bringing up of Philip, and
Alexander the Great, his son, the which has heretofore been very famous.
Stagira, a town where that great Philosoper Aristotle was borne, it is
situated near to mount Athos, upon the shore of the gulf Contesa, where many
ruins thereof may yet be descerned. It is now called Stelar, as Niger
affirms, but Libanoua according to Sophian, as also Macra by Nicetas report.
Appollonia was sometimes a very famous town, upon the river Euchedorus. Here
it was where Caesar Augustus learned Greek: Niger calls it Ceres, and some
others Piergo.

Dy^rachium, which is likewise called Epidaumia, and which men commonly term
at this day Durazzo, is a town situated on the coast of the Ionicke sea. It
is but weakly inhabited by reason of the evil air which arises out of the
marshes that lie round about it. Bajazet took this town also from the
venetians, in the year 1749. It is distant from Brindezi, in former times
called Brundusium, a town of Puglia, within the kingdom of Naples: about on
hundred miles. The town of Aulon, which has also a port, lies upon the
Ionicke sea, being now called by the name of Valona: there is a strong castle,
but the rest of the town is unwalled. This town is about sixty miles by sea
distant from the firm land of Italy, that is from the towns of Hydronte or
Otranto.

Belon also accounts the town of Cauale to be in Macedonia, the which he
improperly Abrahin Basha caused to be repaired enuironing the town at the same
time with new walls, and building an hospital called Charbacara Sophian takes
for the ancient Antigonia; but it is thought he is much deceived, because
Antigonia lay in the country of Epytus, upon the river of Celidaa, so as this
seems more probably to be ^pycaria, as we may conjecture by the situation
which Ptolome ascribes to it. This town was straightly besieged by the Turks,
as well before Scanderbeg, or George Castriot, as after his revolt, but at last
it came under their subjection, having endured a thousand miseries.

Epyrus is a part of Albania, and the rest is comprehended in that part of
Macedonia Castaldus is of opinion, that Epyrus is now the country of Ianne;
but the mere situation thereof gives evident testimony that the province of
Ianne, so called of the town of Ianne, lies beyond Mount Pyndus in Thessalie.
Ritcher, and Aeneas Syluius, or rather Pope Pyus the second, call it Epyrus
La^tis: but this country is but a part of Epyrus. This province is bordered on
the East by the river of Achelois, otherwise termed Aspri, according to
Sophian, Cathochi, according to Nigers opinion, and Aracheus by Castaldus and
Mercators consent; and also conformable to the supposition of many others,
Aspropotamo: on the South, the Adriatic Sea: and on the West, the Ionick, even
to the river of Celidnus, or Pepylychnus, which Castaldus erroniously names
Salnich; for that Salnich is rather that river of Lous, mentioned by Ptolome:
for Celidnus is a little river, near to the Port of Raguzi, betwixt Valona,
and the Acroceraunian hills, called now Chimare: and upon the North, this
province buts upon Macedonia

It extends toward the Mediterranean Sea some two hundred and twenty thousand
paces, between the rivers of Celidnus, and Achelois. This province was
heretofore divided into Chaonia, which was properly called Epyrus, which bends
toward the West, and Acarnania, which now is called the Duchy, or despotate
or little Greece, and this part lies out toward the East as far as the river
of Achelois.

Gerbele (besides the above mentioned provinces) makes mention of Thesprotia,
Amphilochia, and Ambracia; and Ptolome, Cassiopea, Dolopia, and Almenia, all
which Mercator diuides Epyrus into old and new, calling that old Epyrus which
was so styled by the Latins, and taking that part of Macedonia for the new
which now is high Albania.

The ports within this land, are Panormo, Onchesmus, Cassiope, commonly called
Cassiopo, and Buthiro, where the town of Butrinte stands: but the gulf of
Larte in former times called the bay of Ambracia is better than all the rest.

The town of Ambracia was in former ages the capital town of the country,
and where the kings of Epyrus held their royal residence: it is now called
Larte, assuming this name from a river so called that runs near hand.
Nicopolis was likewise heretofore a very good town, and well peopled: it has
now the name of Preuese. Augustus Marcus Antonius. Gerbele also accounts Actium
one of Augustus colonies amongst the towns of Acarnania: but the later maps
decipher it by the name of Capo Figalo.

Achaia, which Ptolome calls Hellade, is now in the newer maps called Liuadia.
It is Neptunes Temple: then, on the South, it frontiers upon Peloponnesus, or
Morea, the which is annexed unto it by an Isthmus or strait five miles broad
about the midst thereof. In Authors, I find mention to be made of these nine
regions, Doridis, Helladis, Etolia, the countries of the Locrentians, and
Opuntians, Phocides, Beotia, Attica, and Megaris.

Dorides lies near to Mount Parnassus, where the Do^ick tongue was spoken,
which was esteemed very elegant and fluent above all the rest: Gerbele says
that Helladis is

Aetolia has his proper site between Mount Callidromus, and the Ionick sea.
There were sometimes many fair towns within this country, the principal of
which was Calydon, which at this day lies ruined like all the rest.

The Locrians, and Opuntians country, had Amphissa for their chief city,
which is also specified in the newer maps by the same name, though Niger says
that it is called Lam^ino. Naupactum is also held to be in this province, which
others place in Aetolia, there where the Port of Lepanto is. The Turk took
this town violently from the Venetians,

The country of Phocidis is near to Mount Parnassus: the principal town
thereof was Delphos, by reason of Appollos Oracle, which invited multitudes of
people to go thither for to understand what should befall them in their
attempts and enterprises: and this was also the reason why so many persons sent
continually thither such inestimable presents.

Thebes was the principal town of Beotia, which lay between the rivers of
Ismena and Asope, and now the ruins thereof is called Stibes or Thiua.

Attica runs along the Sea side, toward which it bears out with two capes or
promontories, Minerua.

The country of Megaris, which takes the name from he town Megara, lies close
upon the strait. The most famous mountains of Achaia, were Parnassus,
Citheron, Helicon, and Hymetta. Parnassus is all environed with forests, and
has two tops. Citheron is an high mountain, rough, and inaccessible near to
the mountains of Megara, and Attica.

The rivers of greatest fame in this country are Ismena, which Strabo calls
Cnope, and

There are likewise many bays and gulfes, of which the most worthy of note
lie on the South part toward Morea, I mean the bay Naupactum, or gulf of
Lepanto, and the Corinthian bay. Then, toward the Aegean sea, there is the
Pelasgick bay, now the gulf of Armira, and Maliac bay, now called the gulf of
Ziton.

Demetrius, Julius Caesar, Caligula, Nero, and some other, had a great desire
to seperat it

This wall was called Hexamites, being about five miles in length. Amurath the
Turkish Emperor overthrew it, and sacked in a manner all this Island: but in
the year of our Redemption 1453 it was reedified by the Venetian Seigneurie,
who sent expressly 30000 men thither, to labor in this work, notwithstanding
it was once more utterly ruined by the Turks. This Isthmus is called
Corinthiaca, by reason the town of Corinthus

Finally, Morea has on the East, the Candian sea; on the West, the Io^ian or
Adriatic; on the North, the Corinthian bay, which Strabo terms the Chrissian
and Alcyonian seas; and Solphiem the gulf of Patras, and also the Saronick
bay, called the gulf Castaldus, and it is between these gulfes that this
strait or Isthmus naturally runs out: and upon the South part, Peloponnesus,
lies upon the Mediterranea sea.

The length thereof from the Isthmus to Modon, is a hundred seventy and five
miles, and the circuit thereof, about six hundred. It is very capable by reason
of the form and proportion thereof, being almost round, for inform it
resembles much a palm lease.

The Arcadians, Cynurians, Dryopes, Lemnians, and Corinthians, have inhabited
this country.

This Peninsula is in a manner the rampire and bulwark of all Greece, being
also at this day the best peopled part thereof. It was in ancient times very
famous through the

The principal rivers in this country, are Asope, now A^bon, according to
Theuet, Eneia, now Igliac, Alphea, now Rophea, or Orpheau, as Sophian, Niger,
and Carbon affirm: if we may rely on the judgment of Italian nauigators,
above an hundred and forty small streams make their fall into this river.

Panisa, which Niger calls Stromio, and Castaldus and Mercator Pirnaza;
Eurotus, now Sophian, Mercator, and some other men's opinions; and Iris as Niger
affirms and Inachus, that men now call Planizze.

The country of Corinth lies all along the Isthmus, and Corinthus was the head
city thereof, which was eleven miles in circuit: this town was then very
strong, by reason of a castle which was built upon the Ionian, and Aegean seas.

The country of Argia is next to that of Corinthia, on the East part where the
Cretan seas water the skirts of that province. Ortelius says, that at this
present men call it Romania.

The river of Inaca, or of Planizze runs along thereby, and so disgorgeth into
the Argolicke bay, or gulf of Naples, so called by reason of a coast town
called Napoli, or

The town of Argos was in ages past the most renowned seat within this
province; it is so called also at this present time, being ^eated in a
healthful and pleasant situation, which is watered with the river of Planizze.

The town of Epidauris stood likewise here, and it was the same which was so
famous throughout the world for Aesculapius temple, where so many sick persons
received present help and cure.

The country of Laconia which regards the South, is the goodliest province of
all the rest, and extends toward the Promontories of Malia, and Tenazie, now
called Capo Malio, and Capo Matapan, and it contains many spacious baies or
gulfes, the longest of

The river of Eurotas, now called Vasilopotamo, passes through the midst of
this province, and so falls into the Laconicke bay.

Lacedemon was sometimes the chief and capital city of this province: it was
also called Sparta, and at this present Misithra. There is moreover another
town of Epidauris in the Argolicke bay, besides that which lies in the
Varonicke. It is also at this time very well inhabited and peopled, and is
called Maluasia.

The Messenians country is enclosed between the M^ssenian bay, now the gulf
of Coron, and the Ionicke sea. It stretches out in length toward the South,
and the Lybian sea. The principal town thereof was Messenes, which Castaldus
calls Martagia, and

In this country stand the famous towns o^ Methon, now Modon, the residence
of a Turkish Saniack, and Coron, both which town^s were taken by the Turks,
from the Venetians: then you may see Pyla, now Nauarino; Cyparissi, now
Arcadie, which gives the same name to the gulf also that runs hard by, being
called the gulf of Arcadie. Out of this province there bears a very difficult
and dangerous cape called heretofore Coryphasis,

Elides looks toward the West, and lies in the midst between Messenia,
Achaia, and Arcadia.

The best towns in it, are Elis, which some unfitly affirm to have the name
at this day of Beluedere: Olimpia, now Lareganico, and Pisa, which many would
have to be one and the same thing with Olimpia.

The Promontorie Chelonites belongs also to this province. It is called at this
day Capo Tornese, by reason of a town of that name, which is hard by.

There is another country of Peloponnesus, which properly is called Achaia, to
distinguish

You may here likewise discern the town of Egia, called Vostizie or Bostisan
by the modernes, but wholly razed by the Turks.

You may likewise in this province see the town of Patras; and as for Dyma, it
is now defaced, and called Chiarenza, communicating her name to the next cape,
which heretofore was called the Promontorie of Araxis.

Here likewise is to be seen the Promontorie of Rhia, and right over against
it, that of

The little country of Sycionia lies between that which is properly called
Achaia, and the river of Asope. The chief town thereof was Sycion, now
Basilika, as Sophian writes; but Mercator in his tables sets down Vasilicon,
with a distinction from Sycion, in that he severally names and points them out.

Arcadia, heretofore called Pelasgia, stands in the midst of Peloponnesus.
The mountains of greatest name, were Cyllenus, Pholoa, Lycea, Menalis, and
Par^henia. The principal city of this country was Megalopolis, now called
Leontari, if we may believe Sophian; and Londario, if we shall give credit to
some others.

The Quality and Property of the soil.


In times past, this province exceeded all others of Europe for temperature and
goodness of air, and the soil thereof is very delightsome and pleasant,
producing all sorts of fruits, and nourishing many herds of cattle: fish did
abound and ^warme in the seas and

Macedonia is fertile in every part or place, and environed with great
mountains; that part which aunsweres to the Ionian sea, is champian, but
covered all over with thick forests.

All that part which is called Albania, is great, but fertile and pleasant.
Moreover it has mines of gold and silver, and according to Aristotle's
testimony, in old time they did find a

The Asphalt stone is also found in diverse mines and veins of the earth, near
to the towns of Apollonia, and Aulon, or Valonna.

Thessalie, or Comenolitari, is the best country in Macedonia, for it is a
very fair and

Mount Olympus bears a mighty quantity of box and bay trees, and the common
opinion is, that there are no wolu^s in all this mountain.

Mount Ossa, Collono, or Ollira, is continually covered with snow, and there
are great forests, but especially there are such numbers of Pine trees, that
there very bows, when it blows stiff make a noyce like to thunder. Mount
Pyndus is also ordinarily subject to be covered with snow.

As for Mount Athos, the top thereof is perpetually white, and the snow never
melts

But the valley of Tempe is always exceeding delightsome: the Chersonese of
Patalena was in times past so fertile, that seven towns were maintained in it,
but now it is all over grown with woods, and yields but few things. Near to
Valona they dig great store of mynerall salt, and the soil yields as good
wine as in any other part of Europe.

As for Epyrus, at this day it is much unpeopled, and the soil is but barren,
and full of

To speak of Attica, the soil thereof is now but dry and barren: but whenas
the country was inhabited and governed by the original people of the same,
this natural defect was repaired by the industry and diligence of the
country people, who wrought out of their soil much good necessary provisions
for humane life: the air is wonderful

The country of Persia is of a very moist and moorish soil, but fat and
fertile: for it stands in the midst of mountains, from which many lakes,
rivers, and fens take their springs, and the air is marvelous thick and
gross.

The province of Dorides has a reasonable good air, and the soil would bring
forth many things if it were but carefully manured: but now the Turks are
masters thereof, all goes to havoc, and the greatest part of the land lies
wast.

As for the region of Megara, the ground is rough and stony. Mount Parnassus
is covered all over with forests, and the tops thereof with snow. Mount
Cytheron bears Alexander Aphrodisius.

Peloponnesus abounds in all things necessary for man's life, and may also
serve for for delicacie and contentment: for there are many goodly plains, and
hangings of hills, which bear all sorts of fruits: and therefore it is at this
day the best peopled part of all Greece.

The country of Licaonia is simply the most beautiful of all the other
quarters of Morea: there are many arrable fields, which are fertile, yet hard
to be manured, because the Pliny affirms, that the earth shakes very often
in this province, which is a manifest testimony that here are many concauities
and hollow parts.

The promontorie of Mallea is so dangerous, and the adjacent sea so
wonderfully enraged

As for the country of Arcadia, it is more rough and barren than any other
part of Morea: it is likewise very cold, and subject to great fogges. Pliny
says, that in this country they made a certain kind of wine which made women
fruitful, and men stark mad; and the fruit and grain of the yew tree which
were gathered in this country were so venomous, as whosoever did but sleep
under the shade of this tree, or did eat of that mortiferous fruit, he
forthwith died.

The ancient manners.


The Macedonians were always great warriors, even as we may easily conjecture
by the great conquests they made under Philip, but much more under Alexander
the great his son. If this realm therefore did produce many valiant and
warlicke men, learning and good letters, were also amongst them in no less
esteem; which we may evidently conceive by those epithites which the learned
(especially the Poets) ascribe to the Muses: Aristotle alone, who was borne in
the town of Stagira in Macedonia, may be a sufficient warrant for what we
auerre, seeing there never lived any man more accomplished in all sciences and
knowledge.

The Macedonians were ^oont to be very sumptuous in their feasts and banquets,
as we may plainly see in Atheneus, when he makes mention of Carans nuptials,
who was the first king of Macedonia, wherein every stranger at his departure
received a piece of silver plate in free gift: and this was a very
extraordinary matter in those days, when

As for the Thessalians, whom some place in this kingdom, ancient writers
have generally observed that they were ever very deceitful, and never
observed their oaths or promises. Furthermore, they were noted for the most
dissolute people in all Greece, not only in their habits, but in feasts, and
their only desire to live licentiously, and without having any neighbors that
might tax or reprehend them; the cause that they were so inclined to receive
the Persians into their country, whom they followed and imitated in all their
delights and effeminacies: and therefore I say, they labored by all means to
bring them into Greece.

They were likewise accused for wonderful gourmandise and gluttony, and held
for

This the Peloponnesians made good trial of, when they fought against them in
fa^our of the Athenians: but it was accompanied with this ill quality and
disposition,



In the town of Dyon, as Polibius relates, there were very fair schools, and
colleges, Adonis, and this gives infallible testimony how much these citisens
esteemed amourous dalliances.

At Tricalis men worshipped Aesculapius, and there is to be seen a marvelous
stately temple, erected to his honor and name, and within the temple an
infinite number of tables, wherein were the names and portraits of such as had
been delivered from diverse infirmities, by this wicked fiend: God permitting
the devil to work some kind of miracles within his own kingdom, and amongst
those who were planted in a blind and superstitious belief of his power and
virtue.

As for Epyrus, men think that the Chaonians came in former times out of
Thrace, and

The Acarnanians wore continually long hair or locks, and would never in any
wise poll or cut them. They were reputed good runners, and good driuers of
charriots, upon which they then used to fight, and wherein they went to the
Olympian games, as we may see in Pausanias, who sets forth an Acarnanian
winning the prise, whose name was Polycles, and this not only in the games of
Olympus, but also at the Pythian, Isthmi^n, and Nemean runnings. These people
also were much commended for throwing out of a sling. And the Acarnanians were
reputed discreet and wise, as these who had laid a good political foundation;
so as some affirm that Aristotle made one hundred

There was also at Epyrus the oracle of Dodon to be seen, to which they came
from all Herodotus writes upon this point, that the priests of Dodon affirmed
how in old time there came two black pigeons out of Egypt, whereof one flew
toward Afric, and the other made toward Epyrus, and how this last spoke in
a humane voice, and said, That they must consecrat an oracle in that place, and
the same would declare unto them the will of the gods, even as afterward it
did. Moreover he adds that they were women, and that the Dodoneans by them
received answer from their gods. The wood of Dodon

They of Ambracia had a Lioness for their goddess, whom they worshipped, for
that when Periander the Corinthian did tyrannize in old time over this city:
he was slain by a woman that he entertained, whose name was Lyonna; and so by
her means the Ambracians were delivered from that tyrants fury and cruelty.
They were also very curious and excellent artisans, as Pliny tells us in his
natural history, when he reports that Fului^^ Flaccus a Roman general,
having taken Ambracia, carried away with him the portraitures Zeuxis, a rare
and excellent painter of that age.

But now let us come to Achaia. Next the Pelasgians, the Dorians are esteemed
the most ancient people of all Greece; so as Pliny is so bold to term all
the rest which carries the name Greece, barbarous, except the Ionians, Dorians,
and the inhabitants of Aetolia* For the Ionians and Dorians were the people
which eternized their names more than

The Dorians sentsome of their citisens to Chalcedonia, a town upon the mouth
or entry of the great sea, or Pontus Euxinus: they were ever adicted to the
wars, valiant, and hardy, above all the rest of the Greeks: they had crests
on the top of their burguenets and morrions, where they ware horse tails
hanging down, the which they accommodated in such sort, as they might appear
more terrible, and strike the greater amasements into their enemies in all
encounters and conflicts.

^ To speak of the Opuntine Locrians, following Pausanias intimations, the
first inhabitants of their country being ignorant of the use of garments, they
defended themselves against the cold with the raw hides and skins of such
beasts as they had killed, even as at this day also the people nearest to the
North do, and the hairie side they turned toward their skin, that so they
might have more heat and comfort.

These Locrians adored Minerua Zosteria, above all other deities, by reason of
the belts and baudricks which they did wear, like to Minerua, fastening them at
their shoulders like a scarf, and hanging their swords thereat, even as we may
yet see in all the statues of soldiers and captains, as well Greeks and
Barbarians, as Romans. The same people were in ancient times highly
recommended for their valor, being very well armed, as Pausanias Homer says,
that this people was in the war undertaken against the Trojans, with their bows
and slings.

The Actolians were also reputed for very valiant men; so as Pausanias says,
that when the Gauls passed into Greece, under the conduct of Brennus, the
Actolians were the first that made head against them: and so he commends them
for the most valorous amongst all the Greeks at that time, he testifying that
they had the most flourishing and lusty youth of all Greece. They used slings
in the wars, and did better service with them, than with bows or arrows, as
Eustathius likewise affirms upon Homer. Whenas they went to the war, their
tight foot was coueted with some sandale or buskin, and the left

Touching the Photentians, though writers place mount Helicon in their
country, where they say the Muses had their residence, as if this province had
been the proper habitation of men of learning and knowledge, yet Strabo,
following Ephorus opinion, affirms, that they were a rusticall and gross
people, utterly abhorring all learning and liberal sciences; which was the
reason, that how valiant soever they were, yet could they never preserve and
maintain that greatness and power which their general Epaminondus had gotten
them; so as war was their only practice and exercise.

But to the end we may further observe what their natural fury and heat was,
the same is related of them, which we also read of the inhabitants of the Isles
Baleares, that Amrpion one of the most ancient Amphiaraus, and besides these,
the famous, and admirable Poet Pyndarus.

Minerua planted and produced the Olive tree, giving her name unto the town of
Athens, because the sweetness and abundance of the fruit of this tree holds a
lively similitude with the flowing streams of eloquence, and the sweetness of
learning and sciences. They were the first inuentors of cloth, and the use of
wool, they also taught the Greeks the commodity of corn and wine, and so
informed them how to till the earth, and cast seed thereinto: whereas before
they used nothing but wild fruits. Cecrops king of Athens was the first in
those parts that instituted the conjunction of man and woman in lawful

Within the Temple of Minerua in Athens, there were certain veiled virgins
which were consecrated to the observation and worship of this goddess, and
which maintained a perpetual fire near to her statue, which they firmly
believed was sent from heaven. This statue was in figure like a fair and
goodly woman, wearing a roabe which reached down to her heels, and upon her
head a kind of Burguenet, and upon the top of the crest was seen the monster
Sphinx engraven, and many griffons all over the Burguenet: Then, upon her
breast, she ware Medusaes head, a lance in her hand, and at her feet her
buckler, and a dragon which stood hard by her lance, as also some hold opinion,
that she had an Owl upon the crest of her head piece, because this bird was
specially Demosthenes was sent into exile, he said, That Pallas took great
pleasure in three deformed and unseemly creatures, in a dragon, in an owl,
and in a multitude.

The Athenians are also held to be inuentors of oil, for that there were no
olive trees to be found in all Greece, but only at Athens. It cannot be denied
but that the Athenians were sometimes very valiant, seeing many important
wars, undertaken both by sea and land, give an ample and sufficient
testimony thereof.

In the towns of Athens and Eleusis they did particularly worship Ceres, who
had amongst them her solemn feast called the Thesmophories. During this
solemnity (as Plutarch reports) the women abstained from all meat, and lay
prostrat on the earth in Ovid, they continued nine days without the company
of any men. Elianus does witness, that during this feast the women laid a
certain hear be called Hanea in their beds, both for that it drove away
serpents, as also, that it qualified and ass^aged the ardent flames of love,
freeing them from being tormented with that violent passion.

As for the mysteries of Eleusis, different from the Thesmophories, the
publication of them was generally prohibited upon pain of death: and
therefore, when Alcibiades was accused for discovering them, he was constrained
voluntarily to betake himself to exile, for if he could have been found in
Athens, question less he had been very severely punished. And therefore he
was excommunicated (if it be lawful to use that phrase) Eumolpes: so as
Hercules once desiring to be admitted to the same, he could not obtain this
suit before he was made a free denizen of that country, being adopted by an
Athenian gentleman of that province called Pilea. These sacrifices were so full
of superstitious abominations, that the devil no doubt perceiving if they
came to be published, they would soon be abolisht, he cunningly by visions
expressly Pausanias confesses, that the goddess admonished him in a dream not
to profane her mysteries in publishing or making them known to all the world.

But that we may the better understand what can be further said touching this
point, it will not be much impertinent to examine this matter a little farther.
Hear therefore Clement Alexandrinus speaks of these matters in his oration to
the Gentiles: The infants of the earth, Baube, Disaulis, and Triptolemus, as
also, Eumolpes, and Eubuleeus, dwelt in Eleusis: Triptolemus was a neatheard,
and Eumolpes a shepherd, from whom came the Eumolpides, whose office was to
proclaim and summon the feasts of Ceres: Baube once lodging the goddess in
her house, presented to her of a kind of composed drink, the which she would
not accept of, for that she was griued and full of tears for the loss of her
daughters: Baube taking this refusal in great disdain, and verily believing
that this woman required no great observance or respect, for that she was but
in very mean show and accoutraments, she shamelesly discovered her privy
parts, Ceres: she taking pleasure in this sight, took the cup and put it into
her flasket; so as all the ceremony and solemnity of this feast consisted
only in the representation of this foolerie; seeing the words of devotion in
these miseries, were nothing else, but I have feasted, I have drunk some of
the broth, I have got some of the basket, and have put it into my flasket.

And to the end we may more particularly specify all these fooleries, they
used to bring two baskets, in one of which there were flowers, and in the other
ears of corn, (the one signifying the Spring time, and the other Summer and
Harvest) besides this, they brought thither the figure or representation of a
woman's priuitie, by reason that this foolish Baube had showed her forepart to
Ceres.

And even as this woman used all the diligence possible in the pursuit and
search of her daughter, so do they at this feast light an infinite number of
lamps and torches, laying upon a chariot all such things as these
Pannyerbearers worshipped: and in these panniers thus laid upon the chariot,
there was nothing but spindles and distaffes, wool ready carded, little
cakes, an handful of salt, the figure of a dragon dedicated to Bacchus,
pomegranets, and the heart of Iuie, and also Poppie. These high mysteries of
Eleusina were celebrated in the Month of June, and the lesser solemnity in
the Month of November.

The Opuntynes worshipped Hercules, in whose honor they every year
celebrated a solemn feast, wherein they sacrificed to him a Goat, a Ram, and
six Bulls. They also Plutarch makes mention after this manner: What is he that
the Opuntynes call Crithologus? this word signifies one that heaps up barley;
for that the Grecians in their ancient sacrifices made use of this grain, and
each of the citisens offered up of the first ears of barley: and hereupon it
came that the Priest, whose office and function it was to take away these first
fruits, was called Chrithologus. The Opuntynes had two sacrificers, one whose
office was to sacrifice to the gods; and another to Demons and unclean
spirits. And therefore to this purpose I may boldly assume, that the first
Grecians, yea and some amongst the Romans, detested the effusion of blood in
their sacrifices: so as the Opuntynes originally were contented with this
simplicity, barley loaves, or cakes made of the same grain, with a Terea,
used in stead of barley little stones, as if their god had been of no
understanding, being contented and satisfied with every small trifle: but the
women Priests of Eleusina, which served before Propilea, durst not offer to
their Idol any other barley cakes, but such as came out of the territory of
Eleusis. Near to the city of Calydon is to be seen the Temple of Apollo
Lathrea, and within the town, that of Diana, to whom they sacrificed after
this manner: first they laid together about the Altar, whereon they meant to
sacrifice, green wood, every piece of which was sixteen cubits long, and
upon the harth of the Altar, they laid a great deal of dry wood cut very
small. When the day of the solemnity drew near, there were certain steps
made of soft earth, to mount up unto to the Altar, then upon the day and hour
they

At Lepanto, or Naupactum, in former times they worshipped Neptune, and
likewise Diana, as also Venus, in grots, and subterranean vauts.

There was also a temple dedicated to Aesculapius.

The Orchomenians which lived in Phocides, were great warriors, and very strong
in Hercules was the means to free them from this servitude. They had also a
temple devoted to the Graces.

The Lebadians above all other, were ever more famous for their superstition,
than for any other special respect; so as these Greeks were of that humor, as
they supposed the best means to make them immortal, was to invent some strange
adoration and ceremony.

There was the den of Trophonia, into which none might descend before they were
detained for a time in a lodging that stood at the entry of the den, (and this
lodge was dedicated to Genia, or good Fortune) and while the party remained
there, he must live chastely, washing him in hot bathes, and he must sacrifice
to Trophonia and her children; besides this to Jupiter, surnamed the king, to
Apollo, to Saturn, and to Ceres, whom they call Europa, and Trophonia. The
priest was to be present at the sacrificing of every beast, that so he might
peruse and observe his entraills, and make known to the party descending,
whether Trophonia were favorable or no.

The same night that any one was to enter into the cave, he was to sacrifice a
ram in the ditch, calling on the name of Agamedes, and whatsoever good fortune
the precedent sacrifices prefaged, if the entrails of this ram were not
correspondent to the same, nothing at all was obtained: but if they were alike,
then they might descend with all security.

The party that was to descend was first conducted to the river Hercynna,
where the priests anointed him with oil, and two boys about thirteen years
old, the sons of some Lebadian citisens, whom they termed Mercures, washed
him in the water of that

They came out at the same place where they entered, and with their feet first.
Then the priests received him, and set him on a seat called the seat of
memory, not far from the entry, where they enquired of him, what he had heard
or seen with in the grot.

When this was done, they recommended him to their charge and care who were to
look to him until he were come to himself. These conducted him to the lodge
of Genia, or good Fortune, being yet so distracted and weak of sense, as he
neither knew himself, nor the persons that attended him, and they which entered
after this manner into the vaut, left behind them a table, where all that which
they had heard or seen, was to be graven, that there might remain some
remembrance thereof to all posterity.

Vulcan had forged it for Jupiter, and that he having given it to Mercury, he
presented the same to Pelops, after which it came to Atreus, then to Thyestes,
and last of all to Agamemnon. It is true, that they erected no temple to the
same, but he only that was chosen priest (the same year, for the honor and
ceremony of this ridiculous god) kept this Scepter in his house, and offered
daily sacrifices unto it, preparing a table whereon they set all kind

At Cheronea also (a town very famous for the death of Plutarch) they made
certain odours of flowers incorporated together, as of roses, lillies, and
orice; and this composition did ease many dolors: as also by the means of an
ointment made of roses, they preserved their wooden statues from worm eating.

Moreover, the Cheroneans had this custom, that wen they sacrificed to
Leucothea a marine goddess, and nurse to Bacchus, the Sexton stood at the gate
of the temple with a whip in his hand, crying out with a loud voice that not
any man, or woman slave that was an Etolian, should presume to enter into those
holy places, while the sacrifices were

At Platea, was ordained for a perpetual memory of the famous victory
obtained against the Persians, the feast of deliverance, and the image of
Jupiter Elutherius, or liberator, was erected in the place where the battle
was fought, where the Grecians assembled every year, and practiced all martial
exercises, in honor of their Preseruor, and a high prize was assigned to such
as were victors in their courses.

They first worshipped at Orope, that Thebane Amphiaraus, who was swallowed
into the earth alive, and after the Oropians had defied him, all the Grecians
yielded divine honors to this god, to whom they dedicated a temple, with
triumphant sports and combats, that were commonly called the Amphiaraes.

They of Megara adored the idol of Jupiter, where they placed the hours, and
the destinies, as also they built a temple to the Night, which they honored as
a goddess. They worshipped likewise Jupiter the Dustie, whose oratorie had no
roof, no more than that at Rome had, which was dedicated to the god Terms.

Touching Morea, it is well known to the world how valiant the citisens of
Corinth were, and how dearly they loved, and resolutely defended their
liberty. They worshipped the goddess Venus, and Isis was there also adored in
a wood where sacrifices were offered to him. They yielded in like manner divine
honors to the Cyclopes, to whom the Corinthians erected a temple, and built an
altar, upon which they sacrificed. Moreover, they had a subterranean cave or
vaut, dedicated to Palemon, where they constantly Pausanias) whether he were
Corinthian or stranger, he could not avoid a condign punishment for his
perjury. But to return to Venus, who, as I told you, was there honored, they
might commit whoredom in her temple without fear of any punishment; and the
custom of those times was such, as a thousand light strumpets were there
maintained, which exposed themselves to all those that desired to have the use
of their bodies.

The Corinthians, although they were reputed for good warriors, yet were they
so addicted to sensualities and pleasures, as their effeminacie was the
occasion of a law published at Lacedemon, importing that no stranger should be
entertained into that government,

The Trizenians had a wood, and a temple consecrated to Hyppolitus, where men
sacrificed to him. There was not any maid among them ready to marry, which
was not bound by the Trizenians laws to go and offer up tresses of her hair
in this temple before her marriage: and Lucian goes a little further, saying,
that those youths which were come to man's age, offered the first cuttings of
their beards.

The Lacedaemonians were exceeding courageous and valiant, as it did plainly
appear by Apollo. They worshipped the destinies, to whom they erected a temple
in the most apparent place of their city. There was in Mars a little dog,
they supposing that this oblation was very pleasing to him, and this sacrifice
they ever performed in the night. While these young men did attend their
sacrifice, they caused wild boares to fight together, which they had made tame
for that purpose, and then they fought in the place of public exercises: it
oftentimes fell out that he whose boar had overcome the others, proved
likewise victorious over the rest of his companions.

The place where these young men fought, was compassed round about with water,
like an Island, whereunto they went by two bridges, upon the one of which stood
the effigies of Hercules, and on the other part, that of Lycurgus. They came
thither in several

They had a statue of Mars, which had setters on his legs, to the end (said
they) that he should not run away from their city, and favor and protect
their enemies. They were not much addicted to learning, and though they had
amongst them a Temple of the Muses, this was only because they loved music,
using to march to their encounters by sound of Flutes. They married rather for
issue, and that they might have citisens to follow and profess arms, than for
any care they had of religious chastity, and women were so respected and
honored amongst them, that their husbands would call them by

They practiced themselves in these exercises all naked, like young boys,
dancing and singing in certain solemnities before young men of their own age:
and yet for all they were thus naked and uncovered, yet could they not observe
any lascivious or wanton gestures in them. From hence grew that same
actiue^esse and dexterity of the Lacedemonian dames, who were better enured
and acquainted with all labor and travel than

Their daughters being ready to marry, they were ravished by those that
should espouse them, and on the nuptial day, the espoused being conducted into
the chamber of her spouse, they had their hair shaven off, then when the
bridegroom came, they took off his girdle, and so he only was permitted to
continue with her all night.

Such old men as found themselves unable to get children, might assign over
their wives to some virtuous and good young man to have line and issue, and
although she grew with child by another act, yet these children were fathered
upon the husband, and they suffered herein no reproach or dishonor. They used
to mock at other nations, who did couple, sometimes with money, otherwhiles by
other means, their bitches and

The women washed not their children with water, but wine performed this
office, for that water dislolues and debilitats the members. They never swadled
their infants, nor kept them in cradles or clouts, but enured them to
darkness and solitude: and this was the reason why many strangers sought to
have nurses from Sparta, to nurse and bring up their children.

The whole people were divided into three several ranckes and orders: each
order had their particular motto or saying: for in solemn feasts, the most
ancient said singing, Heretofore we were both strong and young: then they that
were in perfect years, and full of strength followed, saying, We are both
fresh and young, ready to try our force: then last of all the children came,
and said, We one day shall be lusty and strong like you. Plutarch makes
mention, that even in his time the Lacedaemonians sung certain songs upon their
flutes, when they marched onward to any battle or encounter. Now concerning
this use of Flutes in fights, they were not brought in for the exciting

If I should here set down whatsoever might be spoken of the ancient manners
and fashions of the Greeks, I should but annoy and discontent the Reader in
seeking to satisfy him: so as I think it fittest to omit the rest, seeing I
have expressed the principal points, and let us now descend to their manners
and customs which at this day have

The Manners of the present times.


They which are subject to the Venetians, live more peaceably for their
religion and Belon says) than the rest that obey the Turk: and if we do but
duly observe them both, we shall find that they which live under the
Venetians, lead a life after the manner of their lords and masters, as also,
they that are engaged under the Turkish power and tyranny, live like their
masters and governors, imitating them in their manners and fashions. But I
must needs speak thus much, that barbarism does so reign both in the one and
the other, that a man cannot meet with a schole-man of their towns, and none
amongst them take any care for the bringing up of their children, nor to give
them the knowledge or understanding of learning.

They also use one kind of language, drawn from the ancient Greek,
corrupted, but some of them speak more eloquently and regularly than the rest:
and yet their

The inhabitants of those towns which are subject to the Venetians, speak
Italian as perfectly as Greek: and so the like may be supposed of those that
live under the Turks government: for they that are resident in good towns,
speak indifferently Greek or Turkish: but those that lead their lives in
hamlets and villages, retain only the knowledge and understanding of the
Greek tongue. They also still reserve the proper names of things, except it be
in those places where other nations have often intruded and crept in, and this
is more to be observed in coast towns than in any other seated further within
the country: for they have practiced so long with the Turkish and Italian
tongues, as

And although the Greeks do not ever use the self same word in all provinces
to express one and the self same thing, yet do they all draw near to the
ancient words, but principally in those things which have their peculiar and
proper nominations.

The nobler and richer sort are apparelled after their manner whom they
acknowledge for superiors: but the common people both under the Venetian and
Turkish gouernements,

The Macedonians, especially those that live in Albania, which we have placed
in Macedonia, are rude, and like to the Scythians: they are very valiant, but
principally in foot encounters. There are no men in the world more delighted in
boothaling than they. These Albanois have a particular language by themselves,
different both from the Turkish and Sclauonian.



From this province it is, that the Aydones, Vscocques, Martelosses, and
Morlaques come, which are men as swift of foot as may be, untamed, and apt to
undergo any toil or pains, and as valiant and resolute as can be, who bend
their minds to nothing else, but

The ancient government of Athens.
BEcause we mean to refer the full discourse of the riches, forces, and
government of

The city of Athens was heretofore highly reputed of, and governed by very
sage and prudent men, who framed her commonweal. The foundation and beginning
of this city, is attributed to Minerua: intimating hereby, how it was prudence
and wisdom that first built it. Theseus was her restorer, but Solon was the
man that conferred greatest good upon her, seeing he enacted such laws amongst
the Athenians, that other nations disdained not to follow the same laws; yea,
and when the Romans laid the foundation of their Estate, they sent Ambassadors
to make suit for Solons laws, aduowing them by

The Athenians, who took it for a great honor to be termed originaries of
this country, and not descended from any other nation, nor coming from any
other place, were distinguished by three special names: the first were called
Eupatrides, that is to say, Nobles, being the same in Athens, that the
Patricians were in Rome: the second, were the Geomores, that is to say,
Rusticke, so called, for that in ancient times, they obtained a part of the
Atticke territory, to manure and till the same: the third were all sorts of
Artizans, that practiced within the city all mechanical trades and mysteries:
but this word Dimiourge, signifying an artizan, had likewise the same sense and
meaning

They which excelled the rest in honor and in years, were called
Demogerontes, as it were Senators, that received from the people sovereign
authority and respect. The first name of Indigina was not given to the soil,
in steed of the people, nor yet to the city, but only to those whose
predecessors by a common and general consent had lead their lives in Athens,
and could give apparent testimony, that they derived their original Draco
ordained Magistrates, (...) caused the Athenians to establish an Oligarchie,
that is to say, a form of government consisting of few. Their names were
Pedians, Diacrians, Parales, and Etimorians. The first sort, with their riches
and wealth, as being the mightier, favored the Oligarchie. The Diacrians
affected popular government, being much grieved that the more powerful sort
should hold the greatest places and commands in the commonweal. The Parales
backing sometimes one, and then another party, took ever that side they
thought fittest for

But that we may the better understand the people of Athens, and what
vigilancie and care the magistrates used, to retain it in duty and obedience,
I think it fit and convenient to relate here that which Polybius mentions in
his sixth book.

The people of Athens says he were like to a Pylot of some abandond and driven
ship: Polybius says

But to come to the mutinies of this seditious sort: these men were of such
opposite humors, and contrary wills, as they could devise no other means,
but to seek after a monarchy, or to constitut a head that might suppress or
keep under so many discordant and iarring spirits. By general consent
therefore of all, especially of the inferior people, Solon was called to the
government, both for his integrity, and honesty, as also, in that he never
had yielded his consent to any of those proceedings which were attempted in
prejudice of the people.

Now though ingeniously he refused this dignity, yet would he not fail to
succor and relieve the commonweal, being now in decaying and in a desperate
estate; and therefore by his singular wisdom and counsel, he labored to
reform and reestablish it. And first of all, he thought it expedient to
restore and set up those who had been overwhelmed by the power and authority
of the great men; so as to this end he enacted a law, by which he disannulled
and made void all those obligations, and bonds which the poor had signed and
past to the rich, even to the submitting of their bodies to slavish servitude:
and he decreed, that no man should usurp upon other men's liberties, for any
other interests or respects how due and just soever. They to whom he
communicated this law, before the promulgation thereof, were termed
Creocopides, which is to say, cutters off of

But both these things are no ways supportable the one without the other, for
such cutting off of debts would have been as burdensome to creditors, as
pleasing to the poorer sort: so as it would have been no means to extinguish
the fire of those factions, but rather an occasion to increase it: for the
augmentation and addition of these mines could not serve the poores turn for
payment of their debts: but we must needs suppose that Solon performed both
these points at the same time; my meaning is, he augmented and added to the
rich, what by course of law they could never otherwise have recovered of the
poor. And for that all Lawgiuers ought to begin with themselves for a pattern

When matters hung upon the point of alteration and change, the law ordained
could not please, for the rich stood out that they were hardly entreated, and
the poor were put to labor and till the Attick soil; yet notwithstanding in
time, and by reason of the general peace and accord that did grow from such a
law, it was so approved and applauded by every one, as they gave it the title
of Sisachtia, and laid it up amongst holy and sacred things.

When the affairs were thus by little and little accommodated, he resolved
like a good physician to prevent a second relapse into the former disorders and
miseries, and therefore he made an estimate of all the peoples goods, that so
every one (according to his ability

And so by this means he united those of eminent condition, with the others of
poorer and baser quality, and so much the rather, for that before none of the
common people were permitted to execute any charge in the Commonwealth.

Then he divided the people into four parts, by the invention of this tribute
which they were to pay, and their names were Pentacosiomidymnes, Hippians,
Zeftites, and

The valor of the first men in dignity was rated at five hundred muys, every
muys is about five quarters. This was the first and chiefest rate; and these
were the principallest men in all Athens next to the Senators: the
Pentacosiomidymnes charge was, when need required, to do that which was
necessary for the Commonwealth.

These were followed by those whom they rated at three hundred muys, and they
were called Hippians, because they were able to keep horses, and in time of
war they were bound to allow as much as would maintain a man and a horse in
service for a whole year. The Zestites came next, who were valued at five
hundred medimnes, that is to

Aristotle makes mention of them in the institutions of Solon, whereof he
speaks in his Politickes. Then the Thites, they were goldsmiths, dyers, and
other such mechanical trades, and these paid but one crown to the
Commonwealth, which was called Thitick. The later sort could never attain to
any magistracy, while (through the poverty of their state) they continued in
this mean degree.

Solon having ordained matters in this sort, he made the Commonwealth whole and
found again, which before was but in doubtful and declining estate: and to
the end that these laws might be ratified with the greater approofe and
authority, they being imposed both upon the nobles and the people, he drew a
liking from the first, promising

And when they felt the true benefit and commodity, they were so pleased
therewith, as they consecrated this law to immortality.

Now you have heard how peace and accord was settled among the people, I hold it
fit to look a little into the first beginning of Tribes. All nations and
cities (as Titus ^uius says) were accustomed to draw their extractions from
some famous men, or el^e from those whom fond antiquity has put in the number
of gods, and therefore many of them pretend, Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, Pallas,
Vulcan, and other such like monstrous de^ties to be their founders and
protectors.

The Athenians were of the number of those which did content themselves with
one only nobility of stock, that is to say, with the protection of Pallas,
but further they imposed many names and titles on diverse parts of their people,
whom they called Tribes: and these nominations were derived from the Eponomes,
or Heroes, whose memorial yet continued amongst men, for they had their
several statues erected, not so much for

There were at the first, four Tribes: one was called Cecropides, of old
Cecrops: another Autochton, that is to say, indigenarie, or original: the
third Actee: and the fourth Paralia. Cranaus making further search of these
names, he constitutes four differences. One of these Tribes he names Cranaides
of himself: another Attida: the third Diacrites: and the fourth Mezogena.
Attida, of the name of the country; Diacrites, of a high place in Athens; and
Mezogena of the part in the midst.

The mother of Ericthonius, to cover her adultery, made show that he was
Jupiters son, and this son sayning to give thanks to his father, removing
all the ancient Jupiters name; another Athenaides, from that of Minerua; the
third Ephestiades, from Vulcan; and the fourth Possidonia, from Neptune, then
subdiuiding each of these into three parts, the number did arise to twelve.

These parts thus divided, did continue till Alemeons time, which was about six
hundred and sixty years: Then he, from an answer of Apollos Oracle,
nominated ten Tribes, in consideration of the princes of great reputation that
reigned before him.

Their names and several titles were, Cecropia, Erecta, Egea, Pandionia,
Acamantes, Leontes, Eneides, Hippotoontes, Antioches, and Eantes, to which they
add Antigonia, and Demetria, to make up the number twelve, and each of these
was subdivided into

Their magistrates therefore were chosen three manner of ways, that is, either
by lot, by voice of the people, and by election for wealth and dignities sake.
All magistrates elected for trialls and judgments, were chosen by lot; and the
Senate thus elected, was termed the Council of five hundred men: the peoples
voice took place in the choice of Captains, Camp-maisters, and Generals of
armies.

They who were chosen for nobility, dignity, and riches, were called
Chorages, and assisted at public pompes and sacrifices, wherein they spent
bountifully, and these were of the number of Ten. We see therefore that the
Commonwealth was knit and united together by these three bands: for the Judges
defended the city, by equity and right, against the insolences and injuries
of citisens, neighbors, and strangers: the soldiers maintained and augmented
the extent of their dominion and territory: and religion held men's souls in
purity and integrity. I will therefore treat of these several dignities in
order, beginning first with the Areopagites.

The Senate of Areopagites, for their strict and severe justice, was very
famous, and of great note amongst all those of whom Histories have made
mention. And as it was of Solon, with the severity of the Efetans, who were to
the number of one and fifty, before Solons government, and determined of
capital and criminal offenses; this being an employment which was discharged
by the kings person before they were established: wherefore by these men's
authority and reputation, Solon established a Senate of sovereign dignity in
the commonweal, for they did not only judge and sentence matters criminal,
but they did also determine of other things of far greater moment and
importance. The magistrate of the Areopagites, was called by the Grecians,
Adiadoxon, that is to say, perpetual, and full of care. And though they
imposed public punishments upon all criminal offenders, yet the proper
subject and

Their judgments were denounced in this manner: When the accused stood before
them after the first interrogatories, accompanied with conjectures,
testimonies, and pregnant proofs, they presently pronounced sentence without
using any long delays, to cut off all prevention. It was not lawful for the
Areopagites to be moved with any compassion. In their rigor and severity they
resembled the Efetes, for that they punished the crime according to the
proportion and quality of the offense.

Orators also were generally prohibited to persuade or move the Judges to
compassion. When the offender was imprisoned, (as put the case it were for a
murder committed)

But as the Areopagites were very careful and circumspect in denouncing these
judgments, so it fell out but seldom, that they had charge to perform the
same: for they fate only three days in a month, and never assembled but in
very needful cases, and about trialls of great importance. Lucian says, that
the Areopagites were wont to judge in the night, and with great silence, to
the end they might not be ouerreacht by their subtilitie, which spoke in the
presence of many, as also that other men's plees and trials might

Valerius the Great, auerres how this Senate had the charge to know whatsoever
any particular Athenian did, and how he lived: and furthermore they provided
that men might take honest courses, and daily carried in mind, that they should
yield an account of their living, and conversation. The same Senate likewise
decreed, that good citisens might be

Let us now come to the Nomothetes, which title comprehends many sorts of
dignities, the which I will express before I proceed any further. I find in
Suydas that there were three Nomothetes or Law giuers in Athens* Draco was one,
Solon another, and Aeschyles the third, not the Poet, but another borne in
Athens.

Besides this, the Athenians by the word Nomothete, understood a convocation or
assembly of a thousand citisens, who had power and authority to see the laws
observed, to peruse and renew, to change and accommodate them, even as they
judged it most fit and necessary.

These had authority to deliver unto the people whether any laws propounded
did like them or no; and all motions or propositions were of no force, except
the magistracy of the Nomothetes did sign and subscribe to the same.

These also were assistant at the trials and judgments of cases of
importance, and if the plaintiff or defendant obeyed not their sentence, they
condemned him to three Pollux: but Buda relates it more at large, and after
what manner these laws were usually propounded. Mark his words:

Demosthenes reports that Solon, among other things, ordained that when any law
should be propounded to the people, it should first be recited by the
Lawgiver, then set up in writing in some eminent place within the city much
frequented by the people; and when the Secretary of State had given it to read
to the assembly, to the end if any circumstance were amiss it might be
reformed, and that last of all it had been showed to the Nomothetes to be
confirmed and approved by them, that then it should become a ratified law.

The Nomothetes were different from the Nomophilactes or gardians of the laws;
for Cicero describes their office and function in his third book of laws, in
these words: The most diligent among the Grecians who created the Nomophylactes
did not only observe the words and letters, but also the actions of men,
reducing them under a law.

The Nomophilactes were in the second rank of dignity, the chief of which
order did wear a bonnet or cap of linen cloth, and although the Areopagites
were sometimes careful to see the laws observed, yet this no ways abridged
the authority of the Nomophilactes,

After these, there were the five hundred who took knowledge of civil causes,
and of such criminal actions as fell out amongst men. These were many times
the Areopagites lieutenants, and the great number of them was the cause that in
their society, no impiety or corruption could take place. And because so
great a multitude assembled together in one place, could hardly execute that
which was fit and convenient, they were distributed into ten parts, according
to the number of the Tribes, and every fifty had special days allotted them
to judge and give sentence, and there were five and thirty days, on which

But we shall have occasion to speak more of this hereafter. When the term of
these five hundred grew to be expired, the assembly or convocation of these
was these called

The Pritani paid the Judges with such sums of money as were collected upon
the

Policles the prince: the sixth of Iulie, the Judges of the Commonwealth being
of the tribe of Pandion, Demostbenes Peatronian made the decree; and he that
was there named, was Arcon, of whose office we will further treat in its proper
place, and the tribe named was of the fifty men, who being drawn out of those
five hundred, governed the Commonweal.

For that the number of civil causes increased daily more and more, and the
fifty were not sufficient to hear them, they took forty four arbitrators
to assist them, part by lot, and part by election. But they were all to be
above threescore years old, and men reputed of honest life and conversation:
They were always in such places where the pleaders might find out a convenient
number at an instant, and these carried themselves after

The Zitietes, that is to say, Inquisitors, differed very little from the
Dietetes, whose office (according to Pollux) was to enquire after those causes
and controversies, whose nature and quality did not evidently appear, and so
to deliver the sincere truth to the Senate. As for the elected arbitrators, if
any of them committed a fault unworthy of his

All judgments and trialls of sacred matters were heard before them, as before
holy men. Pollux writes also, that they could not sit upon any cause which
exceeded the value of ten Drachmaes.

Furthermore they had certain captains of galleys, called Trierarques, whose
number Authors do not set down, for that as necessity required, the number
was diminisht or augmented: only thus much is known, that there were twelve
deputed to this charge, who in times of peace were governors of the place
where the ships lay moord. In time of war, they obeyed their Generals and
Captains. The Trierarques had also charge

This magistracy was not imposed, but the charge thereof was committed to a
certain number of citisens: but this office by little and little declining,
Demosthenes reduced it to a better state, who made a law concerning them that
should be elected to this charge, as in many places we may perceive, but more
particularly in his oration against Aeschines: Behold you Athenians (says he)
what benefit and commodity I have brought unto you, in governing the
Commonwealth? for seeing the want of all things which concerned provisions for
the sea, and the citisens exempted from contributions, having paid little
money, as also, they that took upon them the charge were but of weak estates,

By the first constitution of laws, they used to defray all together the
charge of a gallie,

We read in Pollux, that there were eleven men termed Nomophylacts, and
Eparques, that is to say, Presidents. The ten men, says he, were chosen out of
every Tribe, and the Chauncellor made up the full number. These men's charge
was to convict thieves, and to judge and punish those that remained in prisons,
as well as other malefactors, Suidas observes, that these Nomophylactes were
different from the former, because they forced the Judges to live according to
the laws, and these only constrained the meaner people.

As for the ten men, which were Presidents, though they should be ranckt among
the five hundred men, out of whom they were chosen, yet because I have followed
the greater

They therefore used to draw fifty men, out of the five hundred that were in
the ten Tribes, and out of the fifty, ten, which governed the Commonwealth.
But some one may peradventure demand of me how they could elect and choose one,
whom his own virtue made illustrious and worthy. To the which I answer, that
this might easily be: even as we see it happens among the Venetians, who first
constitute electors by lot, which nominate the parties competitors, and then
their names being put into a vessel or urine, the lots are drawn according to
voices. I told you before, that after they had chosen fifty of this society,
ten out of these were elected by lot, with dead voices, I mean

Harpocration says this of the Epithetes, speaking of the sentence denounced
by Isea against Espagores: There are (says he) two Epithetes in Athens, one
chosen by lot by the Pritani, and the other by the Proedres, whose office
Aristotle declares.

Hiperides observes, that every man which had the hearing and comprimitting of
any affair, was called an Epithete. The Proedra was as it were the chief and
head of the policy Demostenes we may perceive.

The eleventh day of the first month, after that the public crier had given
notice that they should assemble to give up their voices, for approbation of
the laws: first those

That the first part of those who were to give up their voices, must be chosen
out of their number, who as it seems were to ratify and confirm such laws
as they enacted touching the Council, and the Senate: and the second of those,
they thought fit to contradict and oppose.

The second lotterie of voices shall be prescribed; and if it so fall out that
any laws are to be abrogated, which before were preferred, the Pritani (whose
authority then comes in) shall sit the last day of the election with the Senate
for this purpose, as also the Proedre Pallas, and each of the Proedres gives
four hundred to the same goddess, and they deliver their accusation into the
office of the Tesmothetes. That examination be made, whether during their
magistracy they owe any thing to the public coffers: if they be convicted of
any such crime, let the Tesmothetes imprison them, and refusing to do it, let
them be subject to

We have spoken sufficiently of the laws: now we must express the form of
their oaths, collected out of the same author; it was therefore performed in
this manner.

Jupiter, by Neptune, and by Ceres, let them destroy me, together with my
family and children, if I do not observe the articles above mentioned. Thus
you have heard Demosthenes words.

Having spoken sufficiently of the ten men, and their office; it is now fit
time to relate their assemblies and conuocations, for giving up of voices and
suffrages.

Ilaque, or Iliasis was their highest Tribunal* before whom public causes
were heard by a thousand or fifteen hundred citisens of greatest note and
mark in the city. There Lysias uses these two words in one and the self
same signification.

The ballottes which they used for giving up of their voices, were of two
sorts, one was whole and entire, the other pierced and hollow, and with these
they used to absolve or Demosthenes oration for Timocrates is very different,
for he says, that instead of stones they used black and white beans, to the
end they might the better be distinguished; as also that one of the stones was
whole, and the other hollow; where Chiamastetai signifies to choose a magistrate
with beans: and therefore we read that Pythagoras advised men to refrain from
beans, not so much because they are windy, but to intimate that he who would
live peaceably, free from ambition, and no ways subject to the crosses of
fortune, must not encumber himself with any magistracy, nor affect dignities,

There were also ten Apodects that is to say, one for each Tribe: these were
much like to those whom we do now call Collectors of taxes and subsidies. The
charge and function of the Apodectes was, when he received letters from the
commonweal (as the elected in France do, when they would exact or raise a
sum upon a province for some important affairs of the king) they compelled
all those people that were thus indebted unto the commonweal to pay according
unto their means. The Antigreffier, or Controller, was present at the receipt
of the money, and upon the receipt, every particular man's rate was recorded, and
the distributions of other accounts were referred to the Logists.

If after the account made, there remained any thing to pay, the officers paid
it out of

The Apodectes differed only in this point from these, in that they might only
receive, but not constrain them. After these, the Treasurers were established:
the captains of war: those that had the oversight of public huntings, then
the receivers of presents, and others, whose charge was to look to many
necessary works.

After these were the Logists or masters of the accounts, to the number of
ten, drawn out of the Tribes. All those that approached near to the
accomplishment of their magistracy, were bound within the thirty days
preceding this expiration, to give up an Aristotle writes, that these differed
from the Eutines, who had another kind of accounts.

The Eutines sat with the nine princes, and took notice of all that was taken
from the public, when any one came to the end of his magistracy.

There was two Logists (says Pollux) in Athens, one that managed the affairs
of the Senate, and another that discharged necessary negotiations out of the
Senate, these were chosen by the Senate, to the end that they might view the
accounts of all the managements of the commonweal.

This office of Logists is plainly to be observed in the oration of Aeschines
against Demosthenes and Ctesiphon. First the law commands, says he, that the
Senate of the Areopagites Demosthenes, to have diuulged it by the voice of the
public crier, according to the custom of the country, if any man would have
accused him. Thus you see what Aeschines says.



Aeschines says, that these Antigraphes were first chosen by suffrages or
voices, and they upon all commissions of the Pritani, were to declare unto the
people the revenues of the Commonwealth.

Suidus says, that there was one Antigraphe belonging to the Senate, another
constituted for public administrations. Furthermore (according to the same
Author) there

The Greeks say, that there was one in every tribe, which is very probable,
because it is almost impossible that so weighty a burden of the Commonwealth,
growing at first from popular sedition, should be supported by three
Secretaries, seeing there were so many Judges, and that they were distributed
into so many several orders.

Aeschynes makes a further addition, and says, that the Secretaries kept their
names enrolled in books, who had not yielded an account to the Commonwealth of
their public employments.

The Athenians had also Demarkes or Tribunes of the people, but not absolutely
such, and of that nature, as you shall perceive in considering their offices
and duties.

Pollux says, that they succeeded in stead in the Naicraires, and that there
was in every tribe twelve parts, every one of which was named a Nacraire,
over which a Demarke commanded.

The Nacraires were bound to furnish the Commonwealth in time of war, with
two horses and a ship. There were therefore six score Nacraires, as many
Demarkes, as many ships, and two hundred and forty horse raised by this means
in time of war, besides those that were entertained out of the public
coffers: first they took care of all things belonging to naual preparation*
and therefore they were very burdensome to the poor, for that each of them
paid according to the ground, houses, or merchandise that they possessed, or to
the mystery and trade they exercised; and if they paid not, they might be

To the end that the Demarkes might more easily recover money of the people
with less oppression, they set down in writing, what ground every man held
in the provinces, and Attick territory, barren or fruitful, and so exacted
these payments according to their means, and the mysteries which they
professed.

When the Demarkes had received this money, their second office was to enroll
the names of all such young men as were fit for their years to govern their
own Estates, and enheritances, which did redound to the great benefit of the
Commonwealth: for the younger sort, and such as wanted experience, were not
permitted to enjoy and dispose of their estates, while they were in years apt
to wast and consume the same. Moreover,

The third benefit which accrewed from this, was the election of apt and able
men for the wars, the which custom being imitated by the Turks, is an
occasion that they abound in soldiers, as lusty and sufficient men as may be.

There were furthermore ten Ephtines or Creostes for to recover debts, and to
streighten and make up accounts. These being elected by the nine principal men,
in their countries most urgent necessities, augmented subsidies and taxes, and
exacted whatsoever was due or imposed. To them the money was paid in, after
accounts past with the Logistes.

There fate ordinarily with them a Secretary, or Notarie, that informed them
of every man's name, that so they might be charged according to their means.
And when any process came before them which concerned public treasure, they
carried the defe^^^^ts Isocrates makes mention toward the end of his
Trapezitica. This register kept an inventory of all the corn which every one
was to contribute and furnish, that so it might be stored up in the public
garnier. They which vnladed or housed this corn, were termed Sytiometres,
they which kept it, Sitophylaces, and the place where it was thus reserved, was
called the Barophylacium: They whose charge and office it was to see it carried
and distributed over all the town, were called Sytones, or chief Purueyours.
To which purpose let me tell you, that the Romans had so great a care of that
which concerned provision and victuals, as at the public charge they
conveyed



Besides these, there were also six men termed Lysiarches: these men
whenever the great Councels were assembled, had authority to choose out
thirty coadjutors, who marked all them with a red thread which were slack to
give ear to the laws, or to come unto the Senate, procuring in such sort as
they were condignely punished.

The Tribunal of the Eliees, was supplied with the Tesmothetes, and the king
commanded

There were nine principal men that could be elected by none but by this
office, who after an oath taken that they were borne of an Athenian father and
mother, and that their predecessors were inhabitants of the city of Athens;
they were afterward demanded of the Judges whether they were indignearies of
that place, or whether they took their beginning from some other people; then,
whether Jupiter Tutelaris was their god, and Apollo their founder. They were
examined of their life past, and whether they had been beneficial to their
parents, or no, whether they had ever borne arms for their country

The Areopagites propounded to them all these interrogatories: having taken
this first oath, they added: how they would perpetually obey the laws, that
they would never

When they were within the sort, though they were all called Arcontes, yet six
of them specially were entitled Tesmothetes: and as for the others, one was
called Arcon Eponime, the other King, and the third Polemarch, or master of
the war.

The Eponime governed the Bacchanalls, and the feasts of Apollo, and of Diana.
He

As for the king, his first charge was to see that Bacchus and Ceres sacrifices
might be Harpocration reports also, That Iseus pleading in his oration for
Appollodorus inheritance, calls them Genetes, of whom I now made mention.
Besides this, they brought in criminal inditements, wherein the Areopagites
decyded of life and death, being the first that gave judgment conformable to
the quality of the crime.

Furthermore they determined of controversies touching senseless things, as of
the

The third prince was the Polimarke, who did preside over the sacred rites and
ceremonies of Diana, and Mars Aenialian, for that they believed these two
deities had a peculiar intendancie and disposition of war. They had also the
charge of all duells that were performed within the lists for their countries
honor.

There was in ancient times an excellent custom in Athens, That all they
which died fighting for their country, being recorded in a iournal, were many
times made mention of with publik joy; so as their names were specified, and
their brave deeds of arms, with a thousand praises, and then the young men
made a conflict called Epytaphicall, or of the sepulcher, wherein they animated
and encouraged one another to prefer the honor

Besides all this, the Polimarkes place was to look to the verses, and sonnets
which were distributed to the young men, that they might sing them in public
games. Furthermore, he conuented those before the Areopagires, who had forsaken
and abandoned their ranks in the wars, or fled away in the midst of
dangers, requiring that they might be condemned: and to conclude, he had to do
in the conduct of military affairs.

Many write that he kept every night the keys of the city gates, and had the
charge of the said gates, as the Majors and chiefest have in the towns of
France: and because the Polimarke was superintendant over martial affairs, I
desire now to speak somewhat of captains.

The Polimarkes were followed by two Hipparks, or colonells of the cauallerie,
to whom, as Aristotle says, not only the horsemen obeyed, but all the whole
army besides, and these punished offenders, and all such as contemned their
commanders and leaders.

They were also to look that none fled from their ranks or files, or the
captain whom

The Testmothetes used to choose the colonells of horse, as also their office
was to procure that the Judges might observe written decrees, and judge
conformable to the laws: they might assemble the Senate at their pleasure: they
were to denounce to the people whatsoever the Senate had resolved upon: they did
set a penalty upon those magistrates heads which published laws, whereunto no
general consent was given: as also it was

At the Counsels of the Tribunal, where the king, (of whom we have spoken)
the councillors, and the kings friends sat, when they were about to give
sentence upon a trial criminal, if they could not find out the author of any
offense, they brake off the indictment, and cast it into the water for a mark
of punishment.

In more solemn judgments the Paredres did assist, all which were to be men
of singular good life, and spotless reputation; and therefore before they
could sit down with the rest, they were to give an account of all their
actions past, the first time before

The reason of this severe inquisition was, because matters of great danger
and wonderful importance, went through their hands, wherein sincere integrity
and honesty was repuired. They ouersaw all the Secretaries, and those that
registered what the Judges decreed, to the end nothing might be changed.

Furthermore they had certain captains of colonies, which called out and sent
forth those that were chosen to people and inhabit places, either in the
ancient Athenian territory, or in others by them lately conquered: and these
distributed the lands and possessions of the countries or cities, according as
every man's lot fell out.

There were also ten men named Tamies, who were gardians of the public
treasure, and that in the Senators absence took out of the common treasure
what was behooffull and necessary for public use, especially to maintain
the navy in good state, and all things belonging to sea service, whereupon, we
have many times seen, that not only the preservation of Athens, but of all
Greece has many times solely depended.

But they had a more particular care and respect to two vessels of wonderful
greatness, the one of which was called Paralia, and the other Ammon; although
some authors add unto the Paralia the Salaminia also.

Besides all these above mentioned, when they came before the Senate for
public supplications and suits, they used to wear an image of Pallas in
gold, the ensigns of victories Harpocrations opinion.

The Tamies have reduced to my memory the Ellinotamies, whose office was to
keep and employ the money raised on that part of Greece which was under the
Athenians jurisdiction P^ll^x says also, that they were accustomed to demand
and gather together the money and revenues of the Islands. Greek authors give
a reason of this title after this so^t: After the king of Persia had been
vanquished at sea by the Athenians, this victorious people being careful to
maintain and preserve their authority, commanded that all other parts of
Greece should pay them tribute to defray the charges of the nauall war, by
means whereof their common enemy had been discomfited, because the greatest
part of the charge was by them formerly defraied, and therefore they named
those deputed to raise and bring in these sums, Ellinotamies, that is

Unto these we may well add the Hellanodices, who had the command and
oversight of all sacred things within the countries subject to the Athenians,
even as the others had of preserving and keeping the public treasure.
Wherefore they received all such money as was allotted for sacred uses,
committing them afterward to the Chorages, for the expense and disbursements
of sacrifices, the which they were wont to do at sacrifices and solemn games
of the city, they exacting these contributions at those times of the
inhabitants and citisens of Athens.

The Ginaiconomes did decree first of the ornaments of gentlewomen, and then of
all other women, that so no woman might wear any thing unbeseeming her rank,
but every one to be apparrelled and adorned conformable to her estate and
means. These

There was also a certain law enacted, for going and passing along in the
streets, by one of Philips sons: This law decreed, that if any woman showed
her self very immodest in her gate, she should be condemned in a thousand
drachmacs fine. Pollux writes, that these officers were to the number of
twenty.

The Ginaicon omes were also accustomed to be overseers at feasts and banquets,
and to take notice of the number of the invited. I do in this point hold with
Atheneus, who says that the Ginaiconomes, with the Areopagites, observed what
numbers of men came from each house, as well at nuptials as at sacrifices,
because they did first eat excessiuely, Plato, touching the number of the
guests invited; seeing he affirms, that there were but ten persons allowed at
nuptials, that is to say, five men, and as many women; but he writes a matter
acted and done: and this is a thing imagined, like to the rest of his
Commonweal.

Those which Authors term the Oinottes, that is to say, overseers of the
wine, are by Plato in his Commonwealth called Mnamones: because (as I suppose)
that amidst their carrouses, they put them in mind of the laws: for as the
Ginaiconomes hindered women from exceeding the bounds of modesty in their
habits and ornaments, and looked

But these Oinottes were not men of any great reputation: there were also three
which they termed Oftalmes, because by their aduertisments they opened the
eyes of their understandings, who by profound drinking had distempered
themselves. The Symposiarkes differed from these men in nothing but in name
only.

There were also ten men which had the ca^e and charge of the palace, setting a
price on things, that men might buy, not at the will and pleasure of the
seller, but at an equal should be laid up in public places, to the behoof
of the Commonwealth: and there

The Episcopes, or Bishops, were those that took care of the affairs and
proceedings of provinces. They being ordained as arbitrators in all the
provinces, enquiring after all matters, whereupon any process or suit might be
commenced, after public offenses, and the jurisdictions and immunities of
places: if any would contest before them, they pronounced sentence, the which
they must as duly obey, as if it had been decreed by the principal magistrate.

The Lawyers affirm, that the Episcopes, or Bishops, were established over all
things

The ancient government of the Lacedaemonians.
Lycurgus, ruling and governing it by his laws, was a principal cause that it
continued many ages in authority and force: but when she

Lycurgus followed not herein the opinion of others, but being rather of a
contrary opinion and advise to many, he was a means that his country
surmounted and excelled all others in worldly happiness. As for multiplication
of children and progeny, there be some which nourish and feed these maids
with a little, but dainty and delicat meats, which they think fit, to have
issue: They either absolutely forbid them wine, or make them drink it much
tempered and qualified. But can we ever hope for any great fruit Lycurgus
thought it sufficient for women slaves only to make habilliments, and all
sorts of needle works: and therefore observing how important a matter it was
to have children of a woman of free and liberal condition, he principally
ordained that women should exercise their bodies after the same manner as men
did. After this, he instituted races, and combats, to be run and sought, both
betwixt man and man, and woman and woman, because his opinion was, that the
children of such parents would be very lusty and strong.

Whenas men and women were married together, the husband was enjoined (as I
observed in passing through the manners of the Greeks) to view, and depart
from his wife in such sort that no man might see him: wherein Lycurgus had
very good reason, for that

Furthermore he ordained, that every one might not be permitted to marry at
his own pleasure and will, and no man was to assume this state and condition,
before he had attained to a mature and full age, because he supposed that this
course would be of great avail and furtherance for fruitful and bodily
vigor. And if it so fell out, that any old man match with a young woman (for
that the people of those times were wont to reserve

Many such like matters as these, are contained in Lycurgus laws, for they
allowed men to keep two wives, and that the fathers might seek out other
brethren to the children borne of them, who were to have equal part in the
house or family, but not in the means and enheritance: by these institutions,
for the begetting of children, differing from any law or custom of the other
Grecians, every one may easily perceive how it made the Lacedaemonians more
excellent in stature and force than the rest of the

Now, having discoursed of the birth of infants, I will speak of the manner of
their bringing up, as well amongst the Lacedaemonians, as the other Grecians:
for they which inhabited in other parts of Greece, and especially, such as
desired to educate and instruct their children noblely, as soon as they were
capable of instructions, they were first committed to their learned slaves, and
then presently after, they sent them to masters, to learn the sciences,
music, and tricks that belonged to wrestling. They made their childrens feet
tender with shoes, they provided them of diverse habits, and fed them according
to the digestion and appetite of their stomachs. But in steed of these slavish
Pedants, to whom every one in particular committed his children to be governed
and taught, Lycurgus would have them to be brought up under the eye and conduct
of one of those, out of whose society and company the greatest magistrates
were elected, and because he instructed children, they termed him Piadonome.
This man had authority to assemble their children, and to chastise such as he
found doing of any thing knauishly or lewdly.

Out of the number of these (grown to riper years) he elected some to carry
rodds, when there was need, and to whip the other children: and hereupon it
came to pass that the children were ashamed of these corrections, easily
obeying whatsoever they were enioined and commanded.

In steed of wearing neatherstockes, he ordained that they should go bear
legged, for

Furthermore, he commanded that men should be dietted in such sort, as they
might not be crammed with more meat than they could well digest, enuring them
to suffer many discommodities, because he knew those who were hardened and
enabled to this kind of life, would be much more able to support, in time of
need, long labor and toil without

We may therefore evidently perceive that he who would have children more
active and nimble, touching things necessary for man's life, than coragious, he
must bring them up after this manner.

But some will say, why did he then decree to the contrary, that he who was
taken in

His will also was, that they who were thus beaten should rob in a craggie
and rough place, some great number of cheeses, infer^rig by this, that he which
had suffered hardness and discommoditie for a little time, is accustomed to
rejoice long, when he has any

We see also that in this, a man that is slow and delicate is no ways apt to
use labor and diligence when need requires, but on the contrary he falls into
many inconueniencies.

If it happened that the Paidonome departed, to the end the children might not
in this time be destitute of a master, he appointed the citisen that was
present to command the children what so ever he thought good, and to punish
them if they failed in any thing: by this means he procured, that children
carried themselves with more respect, and lived with more fear and modesty;
for both men and children fear no body more than their masters. And to the
end, that when no body was near hand, there might be

It is now fit time that I should speak somewhat of the love of maidens,
because this point also comes within the compass of discipline and
instruction. The other Grecians, as namely the Beotians, accustomed their
youths and maids generally to live and converse together: but there were some
others which would not suffer young men in love to talk and confer with
maidens: Lycurgus was of a contrary opinion; for if any young man were
surprised with the love of a maid, having understood the excellency of his
spirit and mind, he permitted them to come together, and reputed it for a very
honestact

But if it were found that he was only sensually in love with the maids
person, he ordained that he should abstain from this maid as strictly as the
father refraines from the son, and one brother from another, in that which
concerns Venus pleasures and delights.

We have sufficiently discoursed of the nurture and discipline of children, and
every one may easily discern by himself with what discipline of the Grecians,
their children became more obedient and honest, and finally, wherein it was
that men showed themselves more continent in necessary things. For after that
others which had attained unto the years of Adolescencie, had left the schools
of their youth and childhood, presently

But Lycurgus conceiving that young men were naturally of a lofty and proud
spirit, joined with strange licentiousness, and a violent inclination to all
sorts of pleasures, he then enioined them to great labors and trauells,
devising how he might always keep them occupied and employed: whereunto he
also added, that if any one refused to do that he was enioined, he should
never attain to any honorable place, and he ordained that not only public
persons appointed to these governments, but also parents should look to their
children, to the end that living without any fear within the city, they did
not become vagabonds and insolents abroad.

Furthermore being desirous to plant in them a certain natural modesty, he
commanded that as they walked in the streets, they should hold their hands
under their cloakes, not discoursing nor gaping round about, but casting their
eyes downward. And certainly we see that the nature of man is more harsh and
rough in that which concerns

When they were at any banquet, they held it sufficient to answer to demands.
His desire also was, that an especial care should be had touching the
institution and government of young men, for he thought, if they became such
men as they ought to be, there would undoubtedly redound a maruailous benefit
to the Commonwealth.

He therefore perceiving that all they which were naturally exercised in
proofs and trialls were heard with great attention, and the sport of wrestling
beheld with much contentment: he thought good by this means to excite and
encourage young men to the

The Ephores chose out three of the most flourishing young men, called
Hippagrites, to assemble the whole cauallerie. Each of these made choice of an
hundred men, declaclaring for what respect he preferred some to honor, and
refused others. They that found themselves dishonored, came to the combat,
being opposed against the others that were preferred before them, and the one
would narrowly look to the other, whether he did any thing that was base or
dishonest.

Hereupon grew a debate very profitable for the Commonwealth, where they
showed

While they fought after this manner, every one that was present, or had any
authority, might part them: and if there were any man which would not obey
the, Paidonomi cited them to a trial and judgment before the Ephores, by whom
they were severely punished, as they who had formerly ordained that no man
should suffer himself to be

When they were come to more mature age, and risen to great magistracies, some
Greeks, no ways regarding their bodily force, charged them with some warlike
stratagem and enterprise. But Lycurgus made a law to this effect, that is was a
commendable thing for men of those years to use hunting, if it were not at
such times when any public administrations were hindered thereby, to the end
they might also be able to support the travails of war as well as young men.

Lycurgus conceiving that the Lacedaemonians made feasts in their private houses,
as the other Greeks did, and considering how much these customs tended unto
vice, he drew

Idle men do oftentimes many things unfitly and ill, and the rich do
sometimes resemble herein those that are idle: hereupon it grew, that while
they fate at the table, it never was wholly void, nor yet sumptuously
furnished; for removing all such superfluous drinks as offended the body and
spirit, he permitted every one to drink only when he was a thirst, knowing
that it was a very healthful and pleasing thing to drink after this manner:
for when they were thus assembled altogether, who durst be so hardy as to wast
or consume his means, or distemper his body, by immoderat eating and drinking.

Lycurgus mixed the courage and force of youth with the experience and
discipline of the ancient. And it is a thing that concerns the countries good
to permit men to speak freely of that which they have honorably or virtuously
performed in the city: and therefore you should never see any villainies
committed, nor drunkenness, nor any dishonest act:

This worthy personage likewise considering, how they that labor and travail
after their repasts, come to be well complexioned and of a good color, being
lusty and strong,

Besides all these laws above mentioned, (whereas in other towns, and cities,
every one was master of his own children, slaves, or coin) Lycurgus
(desirous to procure that citisens, without offending one another, might enjoy
a reciprocal good amongst themselves) did ordain, That every one might
command his own, and another man's children, in all matters reasonable. And if
any child that was beaten by another, complained

His will was likewise, that hounds should be kennelled and kept together. They
called therefore such as were vnweeldie and unfit for hunting, and if any man
were unwilling, he would readily send out his dogs. The like service and use
they made of horses: for if any man could not go on foot, or had no chariot, or
were constrained to go any whether speedily, he took freely the first horse he
found, and when he had done, he as thankefully restored him again. In all
places, where they that came from hunting had need of

In other cities, every one is attentive according to the proportion of his
ability, to gather together and lay up money, and therefore one applies
himself to tillage, another to merchandise, another to navigations, and some
live by arts and trades. But Lycurgus forbad all free men to touch any thing
which tended to the heaping up of money, and only enacted, that they should
employ themselves in those things that wrought and procured

By this institution also he procured, that none desired money to take pleasure
or delight therein. But which is more, they needed not so much as to think of
gain and profit for the brave apparelling of themselves, seeing they used no
garments of any glorious show. They needed not to gather money to maintain
expenses in company, for that he supposed men might better serve their friends
turns with bodily travail than with charge and expense, as he which saw that
the one proceeded from wit and industry, and the other from riches and wealth.
Notwithstanding in all these proceedings he would have no man enrich himself
by another man's hurt and prejudice. He also coined

By this we may plainly see that the Lacedaemonians were obedient to the
magistrates and laws: and I think Lycurgus did never attempt to frame his
commonweal so exactly without having first accorded all the gentlemen that
were in Sparta, I make this conjecture, for that in other cities the mightier
sort would not have men think that they fear the magistrates; but in Sparta
the princes themselves, above others, observed and yielded to the magistrates,
esteeming it a great glory to be humble and obsequious, and supposing

But it is likely and probable that he constituted the authority and power of
the Ephores, knowing how singular a benefit obedience was in the commonweal,
during the times both of war and peace; for he thought that with the greater
men the magistracy was discharged and executed, the more the citisens would be
afraid to disobey.

The Ephores therefore might punish whom they would, as also, the term of
their office expired, deprive such of their places as executed any magistracy,
put them in prison, convent them before the judgment seat, yea and draw them
in hazard of their lives, if they were culpable. But they who had so high
authority, permitted not such as were settled in any office to domineere at
their pleasures, but rather as those that did ouersee the Gymnicke combats,
they forth with punished them that did any thing contrary to the laws.

Lycurgus practiced, to make citisens obedient to laws: For he never published
any laws to the people til he had bin with the princes at Delphos, to know of
the Oracle whether the city of Sparta should not continue prosperous in
observing those laws which he had constituted: when the Oracle answered that
they would be very profitable for the Lacedaemonians, he published them, judging
that men would take it for a impious and wicked thing not to be subject to
those laws which were confirmed by the Oracle of Apollo.

Lycurgus was also admirable in one thing, which was, that he enioined the
Lacedaemonians to prefer an honorable death before an ignominious life: he
therefore by these statutes and ordinances so wrought, that good men lived
happily, and the wicked miserably; Lycurgus, who perceiving that they who

Lycurgus also would have him no less punished, who manifestly showed that he
affected not to be exceeding good: for he thought that they which stole any
thing, did only wrong them from whom they had taken it; but he held opinion,
that commonweales were betrayed by idle persons, and loiterers. And therefore
it seems he had special reason

Unto this he further added a necessary ornament of civil life: for he would
that all those which had not failed in their duties, should have equal parts
in the honors of the commonweal, taking no exception either to bodily
debilitie, or want of means. But if any one showed himself sluggish and
careless in his office, he would not have him so much as reckoned in the
number of citisens.

As for martial affairs, the Ephores were to give advice of the time when they
should send out their armies, as well to the horse, as to others heavily armed,
and first to the foot men, then to mysteries and tradsmen. He likewise ordained
that all engines necessary for

First he appointed the soldiers to wear a vermillion cassocke, and a copper
shield; because he knew this habiliment was properly fit for the wars; and no
ways resembling woman's ornaments, because it was sooner made clean, and
hardlier fouled than theirs: he permitted those also that were past their
younger years, to wear long locks of hair, judging that by this means, they
would appear to be greater and more fortunat.

When all things were thus ordained, he distributed his foot and horse into six
tribes: every one of these city tribes had a tribune, four ensign bearers,
eight commanders of fifty, and sixteen heads of squadrons: but for that many
are of oppinion, that the Lacedaemonians Lycurgus discipline.

The Lacedaemonians also found those things to be easy in fight, which other
people thought difficult; for when they advanced forward in file, the squadrons
followed close in the rear, and if the enemies maine battle came onward in
the same order, they commanded the head of the squadron to place himself in
front on the left hand, in form of a shield, standing firm in this equypage
while the enemies battallion were at a stand: but if the enemies in the mean
time charged them in the rear, all the ranks turned head, that so the
lustiest and strongest men might be ready to confront the enemy.

When the prince marched in the left wing, they did not think he had the less
honorable place, for when any went to enuiron them, they had this advantage,
that they should

As for their manner of encamping, Lycurgus judging the points or corners of a
square camp altogether fruitless, he would have the Lacedaemonians to camp in
a round form, unless they were not secure, by reason of some mountains. He
appointed a corpse Lycurgus gave to the king in the army.

First, the city maintained the king estate, and those of his train. He had
for his guard such companions as did eat together, and with them the tribunes
of the soldiers, to the end that being ever present, if need required, they
might the better counsel and direct. These companions above mentioned, were
three men of one and the same rank. These

When the king meant to march forth with an army, he first sacrificed within
the city to Jupiter the conductor* and to the other Deities: and if he
sacrificed any thing there, the Priest (who was called Pyrphorus, by reason of
the fire he carried about him, which was taken from the Altar) marched before,
even to the borders and confines of the country, where the king sacrificed
again to Jupiter, and to Minerua. The sacrifice being made to these two before
named, they passed along the frontiers, and the perpetual fire taken from
these sacrifices, marched before, and oblations of all kinds came after; to
sacrifice when need required. The like they did also at break of day, seeking
first to

There were present also two Ephores, which did nothing except the king called
them; but rather observing what others did, they punished those that were in
any fault. The sacrifices being once finished, the king called a Council,
commanding what should be done.

Whenas the king led his army forth, if there appeared no enemy to oppose
himself, none marched before him but the Scirites, and such horsemen as they
had sent before to discover. But if they thought to come to battle, the king
choosing out the squadron of the first tribe, conducted it, wheeling about with
it, while he was in the midst of the

Whenas they killed a goat in sight of the enemy, the laws ordained that all
the trumpets should sound, and that no Lacedemonian should be without a crown:
and the same law enjoined them to keep their arms neet and clean. But
Lycurgus willed that the king should appoint the time when they should encampe,
and the place where the army should lodge.

The authority of sending Ambassadors to treat of alliances, or to make a
war, did also belong unto the king, whom they also repaired unto when any
matter of weight was to be consulted of: and when any difference grew, the king
referred it to the Judges and arbitrators of debates: if it were a money
matter, to the treasurers; and if for any boot or

Lycurgus also assigned to the king, the gifts that were given toward public
oblations and sacrifices; and after this, he constituted certain lands and
freeholds for his maintenance, in such a proportion as he might not want any
thing convenient or necessary, nor through superaboundance grow haughty and
insolent. And to the end that the kings might eat in public, he appointed
certain solemn feasts, and at supper he honored them with a double portion,
not that they should eat twice as much as the rest, but to the end they might
give and bestow that which was superfluous, upon whomsoever they thought good.
Furthermore, he allotted them two associats, whom they might make choice of at
their pleasure, and these were called Pities.

an oath every month one before another, the Ephores in the behalf of the
city, and the Lycurgus laws did ordain, that they should be honored not as
men, but as demy-gods.

The Religion.


There are also many Caloyers, that is, Priests, or Greek Monks, which are
dispersed all over Greece, where, paying tribute, every one is allowed the
free use and exercise of his religion, but not without a thousand indignities
done them by the Barbarians, who dominere and command with insupportable
tyranny and cruelty.

But to speak something hereof in particular, Mount Athos was heretofore
ordained for the residence of the Caloyers of S. Basils order, who had a
privilege (as Belon writes) which they hold and keep even to this day, which
was, that none might dwell or abide there, except he were a Greek Caloyer.
There are about six thousand Caloyers which dwell in diverse parts of this
mountain, where they have amongst them about four and twenty Ancients, and
very great Monasteries enclosed with strong walls, to resist an


The Contents.


THe Aegean sea is a part of the Mediterranean sea, which seperats Isydorus
reports; although some other writers

The Isle of Taxus or Thasse, which Ptolome calls Thalassia, being aunciently
called Aeria, Eusebius, and Pliny, is near to Thrace, between the mouth of
the river Nessus, and mount Athos: it is some forty miles in compass as Niger
writes, or fifty as some others affirm. There is a town which carries
likewise the name of Taxus, seated in a plain near to the great gulf toward
the North, and the port thereof is some two miles from the firm land of
Macedonia: on the South part, it has two towns built on the hanging of a
hill; for this part of the country is very mountainous.

The Island of Samothracia is about ten miles from the firm land of Thrace,
Pliny says, it was called heretofore Dardania, but now they name it
Samandrachi. There are

The Island of Imbre, now Embre, as Sophian will have it, runs out in length
North and South, being more long than broad: the circuit thereof is about
thirty miles. It lies almost in the midst between the Thracian Chersonese,
and the Island of Samothracia, being equally ten miles distant from the one and
the other. There is also a town built at the foot of the mountains.

The Isle of Lemnos anciently called Ophiusa, by reason of the multitude of
serpents were found there, that killed almost all the inhabitants, as some
affirm, was afterward called by the name of Diospolis, by reason of two
towns that were in it; but now it is Pliny says, that there was a Labyrinth
in Belon affirms, that there remains no sign nor testimony of any such
thing.

But the Island of Euboa, now termed Negrepont, exceeds all the other within
this sea in greatness, and is as it were the Queen of the Archipelagus. It is
separated from the Atticke coast only by a little strait, and it almost
equalleth all the coast of Attica, and Beotia, in length. It is some twenty
miles broad, and the whole circuit thereof is three hundred sixty and five
miles: heretofore men called it Macra, and Macris, Abantia, Chalcis,
Chalcodontis, and Assopis, as Pliny reports: we do now commonly call it
Wegrepont, and the Turks, Egribos, as Melius thinks. The ancients were of
opinion, that this Island was sometimes joined to the firm land of Greece, and
that it was cut off by an Mahomet the second, in the year 1451, with a great
slaughter of the Christians, and now the Turks inhabit it pell mell with
them. There is also the town of Carysta, in former times called Chironia, and
Egea. Here you may see the promontorie of Caphara, famous for the many Grecian
shipwracks named Fygera by Niger, and Chimi by Sophian.

Melos rises high into the sea, right against Cape Malia, a foreland of
Peloponnesus. It



After this, we may discover that which sometimes was called Phelocandra, being
at this instant also named Policandra. Near to this Island lies that of
Lagusa, now Chrestienna, and that of Sychin, sometimes Oenos, and now Sicandra;
all of them being near of equal greatness, having toward the South, the
Island Therasia, at this present Thera; that of Saturnia, otherwhiles called
Callista, that is to say, very fair, renowned for the Callimachus.

Near to Therasia, toward the East, you shall discern Anaphe, which the
modernes call Numphio, in the very midst of the sea, having a town seated
in a rock, and at the foot thereof a river which waters all the plain.

Near to the same, rises the little Island of Iues, now Palma, where diverse
affirm, that the Poet Homer was heretofore interred. This Island has a fair
port, but it is ill inhabited by reason of the pirates that land there
continually.

The Island of Zia, heretofore Cea, is distant from the promontorie Suria, or
cape of Corquonnes, about ten leagues, being some thirteen in circuit. It is
hollow on the North side, and shaped in form of a new Moon. It was also named
Ceos, of a certain Tytan, which first there inhabited. The port of this Island
lies on the West part, and in former times it was also called Hydrusa.

Not far from this Island, you may behold that of ^irmenia, which the
Ancients called Scytia, and Oenos, being not much less than Zia; and then
Zephena, which was called Seripha, having a town of the same name toward the
South, and a large field which extends it self to the Sea side. It is some
thirty French leagues in circuit.

Beneath the Island of Zerphena, that of Siphanolies, called in former times
Sipha, or Syphan, Acis, and Meropia, very fair, and delightsome to behold. It
is ten French leagues in compass, and has a reasonable fair town built in
the East part; and on the West side, you may see the gulf called Schinost; and
on the South, the Port, where sometimes stood the chief town of all the
Island.

All the above mentioned islands, are for the most part of the number of the
Cyclades, which lie about the Island of Delos. But amongst them toward the
East, you may also behold the Island of Paros, which retains still the
ancient name: It was in other times called Demetriades, Zacynta, as also
Zanta, Hyria, Heliessa, Cabarnis, and Minoc. It is fifty miles in circuit,
which make about twenty leagues; stretching out in length from the West to the
East, and in the midst thereof you may see a fair and large plain, with
many goodly buildings, and an ancient Temple which stands yet whole and
en^i^e. You may also see there Mount Campiese, which is very high, at the foot
whereof lies a town, built with stones of a wonderful bigness. This
mountain was called in former times Marphesia. The town of Paro lies on the
West part, although the old town was seated on the Sea side, along the banks
of the river Asopis. The port there^^ is toward the North, near to a castle
called Cephalo, and the ports name is Bon. The rest upon the North coast, is
environed all with mountains. This Island came in^^ the Venetians hands in the
days of Henry the Emperor, brother to Baldouin earl of Flanders: but when
Mahomet took in Negropout, he seized likewise on this Island.

The Island of Nixia, heretofore Naxos, is twenty good French leagues in
compass, and ha^^ duke not long since, as also Candie had under the Venetian
government; but ^elym, Soly^ans father, took it from the Venetians. The town
which commands all ^he rest of the country, and whereof the Island takes the
name of Nixia, is seated toward the South, upon an high mountain, it was in
former times called the Isle of Venus, Dia, and Dionisia, as also little
Sicile, and Calipolis.

Toward the East of Nixia, there lies the Island of Amurge, sometimes Brutora,
being twenty leagues about, and has three ports, whereof the one is named S.
Anne, the (...) Calors, and the third Catapla.

Bending toward the coast of Asia the less, near to Amurgospolis, or
Brutora, you

Very near to these Islands stands Pathmos, now called Palmosa, whether S.
John the Domitian. And although both these Islands, and many other adjacent to
the same, be of Asia side, yet I cannot but comprehend them with the Greek,
both because they spoke the Greek language, and obeyed her Emperors, as also
being more commodi^us for me to describe them now, lying so near hand, than if
I should make an exact discovery of them, amongst the rest that belong to
Europe; and notwithstanding any pain I should take, little benefit or ease
would redound thereby to the Reader.

This Island is not above seven or eight French leagues in compass, and is
numbered among the Islands Sporades, as well by the ancients, as by our modern
writers. The Isle of Coos, now called Lango, is one of the last of all bending
toward the East, along Hippocrates, who was borne in this Island, as also
Apelles, that excellent painter. Furthermore, you may there behold the town of
Coa, which the Turk calls by the name of Stancou, as also, they do the whole
Island, which is not far distant from the lesser Asia, being right over
against that of Cypres.

About Lango you may see many little Islands of no great fame, as Hiali,
Nisari, Chiraua, Lesindra, Piscopia, Lira, Carchi, Limone, Lenita, and Zinara,
of all which we will pass over the description, as being no ways fruitful or
profitable.

The Island of Samos retains still the ancient name, and is more famous than
great, stretching out from the East unto the West, and having twenty leagues
in the circuit thereof. After that the Carians abandoned it, they called it
Dryusa, Antemusa, Melamphylis, Cyparissa, and Stephana, which is as much to
say, as crowned. There was heretofore in it a very good town, the ruins of
which do yet appear along the Sea side, there being a Port, and an Arcenall,
which are very large and capalbe, with a very high causey.

Mycone, one of the Cyclades, toward the West, called now Mycole, is some
eight leagues in circuit. It has a Port, with a Peer or Wharfe, and an
Arcenall, being well inhabited, and having for confines toward the Leuant, the
Port and Bourough of S. Anne; toward the South, S. Stephens; and between the
East and the North, the port of Panderma.

Hard by lies the Isle of Giara, now called Stopodia, which is not very great,
being environed with rocks. The Romans sent all those thither into exile that
were condemned as worthy of death, as also the other desert Islands among the
Cyclades, serve to the fame end and purpose.

Delos is the most renowned among all the Cyclades, by reason of the oracle of
Apol^o. At this day it is called Dile. It was sometimes named Ortygia, by
reason of the many O^ailes that are there more than in other places. Men called
it also in former times A^^etia, Lagia, Cerhe, Mydia, Cynetha, and Pyropila, as
also, Cinthia, because of a mountain that is there. This Island was divided by
means of a little channel into two Apollo, whereof some ruins and pieces do
yet remain.

Near to Dela appears the Island of Rhena, sometime Celadusa, and Arthemita,
at this day it is called Dele, as well as the Isle Delos.

Andro is also one of the Cyclades, being at the least twenty French leagues
in compass: it was in ancient times named, as My^seles the Lesbian says,
Ca^ron, Antandra, Laffia, Nouagria, and Epaga. The town lies toward the East,
and the fort is built upon a rock, and to enter into the same, you must pass
over a draw bridge.

The Isle of Chios is opposite to the Ionian Chersonesus, now called Smirna,
there Solomon in the year 1566.

Opposite to the country of Phrygia, which the Turks now call Sarcum, you may
see the fair Island of Lesbos, at this day Mytelen, so called of the name of
the principal town thereof, which heretofore was named Mytelene. It was in
former times also termed Antissa, then Pelasgia, and afterward Macarea, of
the name of one of Jupiters Cyrnaces: it also had the names of Emertha,
Ethalasia, and Egyra, as Pliny testifies. The circuit thereof is about forty
of our leagues.

As for those places which belong to the Turk in Sclauonia, they do first
upon the firm land reckon Castlenouo or Newcastle, seated on a low hill, near
to the bay Rizonica, called now the gulf of Cataro. The Turks not long since
took it from the Spaniards.

The town of Scodra, which we commonly call Scuttari, was heretofore under the
Venetian dominion, but now it is subject to the Turks. It is some eighteen
miles distant from the sea, built upon a steep rock, there lying underneath
it in the East side a lake one hundred and thirty miles about, and mountains
enuiron it all round except

The Turk also possesses there the little and dispeopled towns of Budua,
Antiuara, and Dulcigno, which Ptolome calls Vlcinium, and some others
Olchinium, the which were taken out of the Venetians hands by Selym the second,
Emperor of the Turks.

The Nature and Quality of the country.
AS for the Isle of Taffa, it abounds in white marble, whereof the Romans made
great account: and on the mountains there also grows a marvelous company of
pines, and fur trees: and by the mineral foame that lies on the tops of many
small hills, we Philip king of Macedon four score ta^^uts.

The Island of Samothracia is plentiful in honey and dear: and that of Lemnos
is more fertile than ever it was, bearing flax, hemp, corn, all sorts of
roots or hearbage, wine in abundance: there is also great quantity of flesh,
of wool, and of many other things: but it wants wood, especially toward the
East part, which is more dry: but that part which lies toward the West and
the South, more moist and flourishing.

The moist and humyd places, lying between the hill, bring forth figs, nuts,
almonds, and some olives. There is never a river in this Island, but the
inhabitants use much fish^ing at the sea side, where they find great store of
fish, but especially the oysters, which are called Gaideropedes, that is to
say, asses feet, being far different from ours. There ^re also springs of hot
water, the which notwithstanding are nothing so hot as many ^^hers are.

Men find in this Island, and no where else, the earth which we term
sigillata, or sealed which is very good and medicinable, principally against
the plague, and all fluxes.

For Negropont, the sea is very swift within that strait, and as some say,
there is ebb and flo^ld four, but as others affirm, six times every day; so
as ships oftentimes that come Aristotle could not discover the cause and reason
thereof, he died of grief.

This Island in other respect, abounds with corn, herbage, or roots, wine, and
oil, and there you may also see great store of trees, especially, such as are
good and fit to build ships withal. Men say that the sheep of this Island
have no galls, but I know not whether it be a fiction or true.

Near to the town of Carista great quarriers of marble are found, as also the
amiant stone, whereof thread may be may be made as of flax: they make a cloth
hereof, which whitens, being cast into the fire, when it is foul.

In the Island of Melo, they find many springs of sulpherous waters, good for
men's recovery Lucullus first brought of them to Rome. Men report of a certain
place within this Island, that when you come to dig it, the earth presently
increases, and the hollow places fill of themselves, without the help of any
man's hand.

The Isle of Policandra is barren and stony, being hard to till: and that of
Sparta, or Serfena, brings forth frogs that never croake nor cry, and if you
carry them any where Pliny says, they make anoise as well as others.

In the Island of Sifano, the calamite is found; but no man can tell where the
mines of gold and silver are, for which it was in old time so renowned, seeing
there is now no mark nor sign of any such matter.

As for Paros, there has been found much white marble that was called
Lychnitis, because in the beginning they cut lamps out of it. Solinus says,
that there grows in Paros a kind of stone which he calls Sardis, the which was
more excellent than marble, and yet it could not be put in the number of
precious stones. But Pliny (whose ape Solinus is) makes no mention of the
sardis stone in the Isle of Paros. They say, that if a man cast any white thing
into the sea, on that side where the Arcenall stands, it becomes presently

The Isle of Nixia or Naxus, has yet great store of vines in it, as well as it
had in times past. They find there a stone which the Greeks call ophitis, and
we call it serpentine or craupadina, or toad stone, which grows not in
quarries, but within the bowels of the earth. There is also great numbers of
waspes, or rather of hornets, whose sting is mortal, as well as that of the
Scorpion, if it be not cured speedily. You have there also many good veins of
gold: but whether the inhabitants are not in dustrious enough to dig it, or
that the Turk expressly prohibits it, no reckoning is made of them no more than
in diverse other parts of Greece.

In the Isle of Lero, or Lerta, there is great abundance of marble, and the
country is marvelous fertile. Men gather Aloes there, which our druggists so
much esteem, for the good it brings to men. That of Coos or Longo, abounds in
fruits, and nourishes a Pline says) there are likewise many silk worms
bred. It has a lake toward the West part, which is very prejudicial to the
country, because the vapors and exhalations thereof are so infectious as they
cannot possibly be endured: so that the Island is wholly desert on that part,
and these vapors are more offensive in Summer than in any other season of the
year.

The Island of Samos bears no vines, though the neighbor countries about it
are very Strabo reports) all other things are there in abundance, yet some
say that wheat prospers not very well, but Olives to their hearts desire. They
report, there were once so many rats in the Isle of Nicola, as they drove away
all the inhabitants.

In the Isle of Chio they find great store of Orange trees, the juice of which
fruits they press into hogsheads and pipes, and convey them to Constantinople,
and other places, to mingle with their meats, and to make the same use of them,
as they do here of verjuyce. The trees that bring forth masticke are along the
sea side, very little and low, but the leaf thereof is like to box or
le^tiske. They cut them thirteen times in a year near to the stock, to make
the masticke distill, which issues forth like tears. They do also cut many
other trees, which yield the turpentine, and they say it is found in no other
place

The Isle of Lesbos, or of Mytelin, is of great fame, and the fruits that grow
there are good in taste. The air likewise is good and heathfull. There are
very many mountains, out of which heretofore they dug marble, which was
not altogether so fair as that of

The wine of this Island is held for the best that grows in all Greece at this
day; It feeds also a number of good horse which are little, but strong, well
set, and proportioned.

They make much cheese there, and have corn in great abundance. They make two
sorts of drugges which the Turks use in their pottage and brothes: the one is
called in the Turkish tongue Thrachana; and the other, Bouhort, which the
Romans called aun^ently Crimnon, and Maza.

There is in the Isle of Samothracia great store of honey, and abundance of
fallow Dear. Concerning those places within Sclauonia, the discourse of
Ragouse, and of

Their ancient Manners.
IN the Island of Zia, or Cea, when old folks were weary of living, they
willingly poisoned themselves, that so they might not be subject to the
debilities and infirmities of ^ld decrepit age; and moreover, the magistrates
also permitted every one to procure their own deaths. This custom was
specially observed in the town of Iulier; for there was Elianus testifies as
much, affirming, That they which were broken with age used to make a solemn
sacrifice, during the which being crowned with flowers, they drunk the juice of
h^mblocke, as finding themselves now at these years unable any ways to profit

The Island of Zerphena worshipped Apollo for their tut^larie god, who was
there adorned with great reverence.

Those of the Isle of Siph^a, or Siphano, were heretofore so mighty, as they
dared to contest with the Lacedaemonians about the sovereignty of all Greece,
whereby we may easily conceive that they were a courageous people, and full of
great resolution.

The inhabitants of Paros were sometimes accused of disloyalty, and to be no
men of their words, because M^ltiades, General of the Athenians army, having
subdued them,

Those of Nixia, or Naxus, were not very witty. Many ladies in former times
retired into this Island, where (in memory of the wrong done to Ariadne, and
detesting men's disloyalty) they lived in perpetual chastity.

There was heretofore in the Isle of Cos a Temple dedicated to Aesculapius,
because Hippocrates affirmed himself to have descended of his race. And people
resorted thither, as they did to other Temples, to this imagined god, to
receive cure of their infirmities.

The Samiens carried a particular reverence to the goddess Juno, whom they
worshipped Juno was born in this Island, where she was brought up during her
virginity, being afterward married to Jupiter. They also dedicated unto her a
wood, wherein they nourished peacocks brought from beyond the seas. In this
Island they made in times past the fairest earthen vessels that could be seen.

The Athenians did so honor and reverence the Isle of Delos (besides the
Persians) as they removed all the tombs and carcases of dead men, which they
sent to the Isle of Rhene near unto it; which should serve but as a Churchyard
to Delos, being dedicated to this effect by Polycrates tyran of Samos; whenas
he had the full power and command Apollo. It was not lawful to keep any
dog in this Island.

The Chians have been heretofore very powerful by sea, being infranchised,
and having established as honorable a communaltie and republique as any of
their other rich neighbors. But at last they were enforced to come under the
Athenians government, afterward they were subject to the Macedonians, then to
the Romans, and last of all once more to the Grecians, which ruled in
Constantinople. There were many worthy Theophrastus came out of this place,
and Pittacus, one of the Sages of Greece, and in like manner the Poet Alceus,
as also Sappho the Poetesse, whose verses are yet found to be so delightsome.
It was also the country of the Orator Diophantes, and of Theophanes the
Historiographer, and further, of Arion the great Poet and Harpe-player, as also
of Te^pander that excellent Poet and Musician.

The Lesbians did in former times adore the god Ba^chus, because as Pausanias
writes, the fishermen of Methymna, having drawn out of the Sea an head made of
the wood of the Olive tree, and finding that it presaged some extraordinary
and potentiall effects, though the form was very strange, and far differing
from that of the Grecian gods, (...) ^ent to demand of the Pythian oracle,
what god, or else what Heroes was represent^^ by this head? and the answer was,
That they should honor Bacchus, surnamed (...).



The Manners of the present time.
THough in all these Islands men live for the most part after the Greekish
manner, yet it will not be altogether impertinent to declare some
particularities of their manners and customs which inhabit their at this day.





The Isle of Patmos, or Palmosa, is inhabited by Greek Christians, living in
all liberty, by paying only a tribute to the Turk, and having ordinarily
amongst them Turkish magistrates. The soil is tilled by the Christians, and
there are a great number of Caloyers amongst them.

The Islanders of Cos maintain a foolish superstition; for they affirm that a
serpent Hyppocrates daughter, who is yet alive, as she who was in former ages a
wonderful inchauntresse.

The Turks dwell only in the town of Stancou, not having one christian
amongst them, no more than in any other place within this Island, except it be
in two villages, which are within the Champian country, where some Greek
Christians are suffered to inhabit.

In the Island of Lesbos, there be Turks which dwell in the town of Mytelin,
or else some others professing the Mohammedan religion; but the Grecians live in
the country to plant and labor in the vines.



As for the Island of Chio, the Turks will not permit any Christian to lodge
within the town, which is of the same name. Although the Bishop of the
Franckes did not forbear to go and celebrate Mass in his diocese within the
town, where there is also a certain place that harbors poor Christians
and passengers three days, and three nights, without costing them a^^ thing.

Near unto the town ditch one may see diverse of their sepulchers, with great
stones and inscriptions upon them.

About fifteen miles from the town there are certain great farm houses,
where fifty ^or threescore peasants lodge, who at some times of the year do
nothing but feed partrid^es, and they have the art to take them three days
after they are hatched.

They are so well beaten and acquainted with their houses, as they suffer them
all day long to range over the fields; and then to bring them in again in the
evening, every one

THE ISLAND OF
The Contents.
THis discourse declares who were the first inhabitants of this Island, and the
princes that commanded over it, before it was taken by Selym, and reduced
under the Turkish subjection. The situation, circuit, breadth, length, in what
climat, and under

THis Island which was in ancient times first inhabited, as men judge, by
Iaphet, Noahes son, coming afterward under the dominion of Greekish
tyrants, when the Assyrian monarchy was extinguished fell at last into the
Romans hands, and by their means, it obeyed the Ptolomees who were kings of
Egypt, and then it returned again under the Roman power. After that, the
Emperors of Constantinople Lusignan of France. After this it came under the
Venetian subjection, in the year 1473, continuing in their hands unto the year
1570, whenas Selym the Turkish Emperor took it by force.

This Island was called in former times Crypta, or Crypton, as Volaterranus
writes, that is to say, subterranean, because it lies so low, that a man would
think the waves of the sea did hide and cover it. It was also named Cerastis,
for the great number of mountains therein, whose points or tops are sharp
like horns: i^ had also the names of Cethoine, then of Amathusia, according to
Strabo, as likewise of Paphia, Salaminia, Macaria, or fortunate, of Achamantis,
Asperia, Collinia, and Erosa.

It is seated as Ptolome relates, in the midst of the Issicke bay, commonly
called the (...) of Lajazza, being near to the Egyptian sea, and lying
between the coasts of Cilicia, and Syria. On the South part, it buts upon the
Egyptian sea, and that of Syria: on the Leuant, it is beaten upon by the same
Syrian sea, and the Issicke bay: upon the

That part which looks toward the East, lies from Syria or Suria, about one
hundred miles, which passage may be well gone in one night. That part which
bends toward the South, is about three or four days sailing from Alexandria;
and as much from the Island of Rhodes upon the West. It lies sixty miles from
Cilicia, or Caramania.

The length of this Island is from West to East, and sometimes it makes straits
of land, which cut off the breadth. It lies in the beginning of the fourth
climat, under the tenth Strabo writes) three thousand four hundred and twenty
Stades, which (according to our computation) make four hundred twenty seven
miles. Pliny says, that it is three hundred seventy five miles about. Others
affirm, that sailing about it by Sea, it has five hundred miles, and that the
length is two hundred miles, and the greatest breadth fifty or sixty. But
there are some which give it five hundred and fifty miles in circuit, two
hundred and twenty in length, and one hundred and thirty in breadth.

Elbe has many promontories or capes, as upon the West, the promontorie
Achamas,

Ptolome teaches us, that this Island was divided in former times into four
parts, that is to say; into the Eastern part, which they gave to Salaminia;
into the Western part, which Paphia comprehended; into the Southern part,
which was Amathusia; and into the Northern part, which was Lapathia. But at
this day it is divided into twelve parts, which they commonly call countries,
and those be Nicotia, Famagosta, Paphia, Audime, Limisse, Massota, Salina,
Messaria, or Sauori, Crusoc, Pentalia, Cerina, and Carpasla.

Diodorus, Pliny, and Mela affirm, That it contained nine goodly kingdoms,
and fifteen good towns, whereof some have been ruined by great earthquakes.
The chief towns were Paphos, in the region of Paphia: it carries at this day
the title of a town, and is commonly called by the name of Bapho, as Niger
writes: old Paphos, which was in the same province: Cythera, which gave name to
the whole Island, and is no mo^e at this day; but in the place thereof is the
town of Conuclia, which is one of the (...) in that Island. There was also
Curias, whereas now the town of Piscobia stands, which is also accounted one
of the chiefest. There was also Amathus, which is now ruined. Moreover, the
town of Ceraunia, now called by the name of Cerines, built by Cyrus ^hen he
had subdued the nine kings of the Island. This town (as Authors af^irme)
stands in the North part of the Island. But Nicosia (which was sometimes called
Lettre, then Leuocote, and the abode of kings) is seated in the plain of
Massara. Thirty six miles from Nicosia, stands Famagosta, sometimes called
Salamis, then tear^^ed Constantienna, a famous town. Some affirm, that
Famagosta was in former ^^^mes called Tamasse, and others hold that it was one
of the four towns which had (...) common name of Arsinoe.

Besides these towns, they did number about eight hundred and fifty villages
or open

There are many mountains in this Island, but that of Olympus is the greatest:
the Basile.

The Quality.
ALl this Island in former times was so full of wood, as they could not manure
it; and although the inhabitants had consumed a great part of this wood in
refining and melting of metalls, and making of ships; yet could they not easily
lay the land bare, the wood grew so fast. In the end they ordained, that
whosoever would cut up any trees, might lawfully do it; and that every man
should enjoy, as his own inheritance, the Strabo says, That the Island of
Cypres in his time did not yield to any other, for that it bare abundance of
wine and oil, and had wheat sufficient to feed the inhabitants. But at this
day it is exceeding fertile, and abounds in all things necessary for the life
of man: for, besides the great store of wheat, and other grain and fruits of
the earth which it bears, it yields excellent wine, the which they may keep
eighty years, and in this time, of black it becomes white; they are of a
good and pleasing taste.

They bring from Cypres that goodly great black grape or Raysin, which they
commonly call Zibile; and they are accustomed to gather in this Island all
kinds of fruit which grow in other places, especially, Lymons, Citrons, and
Oranges, which excel all Constantine, this Island was abandoned by the
inhabitants for the space of six and thirty years, during the which, there
was never any rain seen. There is but one port fit for the approach of ships,
near to Famagosta. It is true that in former times there were many, but they
are now filled up, by reason of the raging of the sea.

The Manners of the Ancient.
Venus was borne of the skumme of the sea; yet the common oppinion was that she
had her beginning in this Island of Cypres: and they believe that this goodly
goddess of love was sometimes lady of this country; and that to cover her
wantonness and incontinencie, she ordained that the women might play the
whores without any fear. Hence also grew the custom, that the maidens of
Cypres, before they married, came upon certain days to the sea shore, to
present themselves to the first stranger that would use them for money; and
with this kind of gain they gathered together a certain sum to pay their
dowries, and to satisfy the goddess Venus for the rauishing of their honors.
Moreover the Cypriots had learned the cruel customs of the Barbarians Teucer
having taught them to sacrifice men, and to shed humane blood in worshipping
the devil under the name of Jupiter, they continued it until that the
Emperor Adrian abolished that custom.

The kings of this Island did sometimes wear attires on their heads like to a
Bishops Miter, and they had long robes like unto the kings of Persia, and as we
see the Turks wear at this day: as for the rest, they lived after the Grecian
manner. The inhabitants in old time were so rich and powerful, as they have
sent colonies into diverse places, and have long commanded over all the
Mediterranean sea, and have built many towns in Spain.

The Manners at this day.


They that remain in this Island are of diverse nations, yet there are far more
Grecians than other. The greatest part of these inhabitans came into this
Island in the time of Constantine the Great, from Egypt, India, Syria,
Cilicia, Cappadocia, Pamphylia, Thrace, and from many parts of Greece, after
that the Island had been abandoned for want of water. But in regard of the
gentlemen of Cypres, they are for the most part come out of France: for after
the loss of the Holy Land, there were many Frenchmen which retired Guy of
Lusignan, about the year 1193. But since that the Venetians became masters,
not only the noblemen of Venice which remained in Cypres, were acknowledged
for gentlemen of this Island: but also all the citisens of any towns belonging
to the Seigneurie of Venice, became gentlemen Cypriots, having continued five
years in the town of Nicosia.

In this Island, as in all others, they are of mixed manners, for that some live
after the Venetian fashion, having not forgotten their ancient manners: others
which are Turks live after the Turkish fashion, and by little and little they
all begin to frame themselves to their fashions which command over them.


ALl the Cypriots which remain without the towns, are divided into five diverse
conditions, that is to say, into Parices, Leissteres, Perpiaires, Albanois, and
white Venetians. The condition of the Parisians was the most miserable, for
that they were entreated like slaves: for in old time they paid a certain
sum unto their masters yearly, and

The Perpiaires are some among the Parices which obtained liberty in the times
of the kings of Cypres, with all their children and successors, upon condition
to pay yearly fifteen perpirs, which are certain pieces of money of
Constantinople: but their lands remained subject as before.

The Albanois are certain people receiving pay, being in former times brought
into this Island to guard it, and these begot children in Cypres, who received
pay as well as they that bare arms, until that the Island was taken by the
Turks.

The white Venetians are certain inhabitants of the Island which were free,
both they and their children, paying only unto the king, or to the commonweal
of Venice a certain sum of money. This Island came to be subject to the
Venetians, in the year of Grace 1473, and remained in this estate unto the
year 1570, when it was taken by Solomon Emperor of the Turks. Touching the
Turks government, we will treat thereof in the general discourse of his
Empire.

The Religion.
IN former time there were fourteen Bishoprics in this Island, which were
all Grecians: Innocent the third, in favor of Queen Aliz. He left the
Archbishopricke of Nicosia double, the one Greek, and the other Latin: the
Bishopric of Famagosta was also double: the Bishopric of Paphee was also
double, and in like manner that of Lymissa. The Latin Bishoprics have their
bourroughes and their tithes: but the Greek Bishops did exact yearly a
certain sum of the Priests and Deacons which were subject unto him, after
the manner of Greek Prelates of other provinces. The Greek Archbishops and
Bishops did acknowledge the Latin Bishops for their superiors, yea in such
sort as after that the Grecians had been chosen Bishops by the kings Council;
they were confirmed by the Latin Bishops and

The Greek Bishops did not remain in the abouementioned towns, but Pope
Alexander the fourth assigned them other seats, as we may read in Somma
Alexandrina, for the Greek Archbishop of Nicosia had his seat in the ancient
town of Solia, and was called Bishop of Solia, and head of the Grecians of
Nicosia: the Bishop of Paphee remained in the town of Arzos: he of Lymisse had
Amathonte for his abode; but for that this town was not inhabited, he lived in
Lescare: Finally, the Bishop of Famagosta made his residence at Carpasse; yet
in time they are returned to the aforesaid towns, only the Bishop of Lymisse
continues still at Lescare. We may not omit that the Latin Pius the fourth,
the Signiours of Venice became Patrons of

Besides the Greek and Latin Churches, there are other sects in this Island,
as Armenians, Coftes, Maronites, Indians, Nestoriens, Georgiens, and Iacobites,
which were all expelled by Saladine, after the taking of Jerusalem, and either
of these sects has his Bishop.

The Turks suffer every man to live with liberty of conscience, as in other
countries where they rule, for that they demand nothing but the sovereignty,
and the payment of the tribute which they exact yearly.


The Contents.
RHodes is an Island, called in old time by diverse names, and famous for the
great Colosse of brass. What the situation is, and how many miles it
contains. The famous city of Rhodes fortified with three walls, thirteen
towers, and five castles:



This Island lies twenty miles from the maine land of Asia, and contains
about one hundred and forty, or (as some write) one hundred thirty five
miles. At this day there is a good town which is called Rhodes, of the name of
the Island. It stands toward the Sun rising, and is partly situated upon
the side of a hill, and part upon the Sea shore. There are three walls,
thirteen high towers, five castles, and some other forts which Solomon,
emperor of the Turks, made himself master thereof, having taken the town

The Quality.
Near unto the town of Rhodes there is a plain, lying upon the North side
(for the other is hilly) the which is stony and narrow; but it is of a
reasonable length: and

This Island has been much subject to the ouerflowing of waters: but they
have labored to draine out the waters, and to dry up the Moors; so as the
country has been made fertile, and no more subject to such inundations,
where with it has been afflicted, especially three times: the last happened
whenas king Antigones had vanquished Eumenes, at which time the whole Island
was covered with water, and the inhabitants drowned. This happened not by any
swelling of the Sea, but by continual storms of reign, which beginning with
hail at the entrance of the Spring, were so violent, as bearing down many
houses, and killing many persons, the town was in a manner ruined in those

The manners of the Ancients.
THe victories which the Romans have gotten by means of the nauall armies of
the Rhodians, and the courageous defense of the same Islanders against the
Romans, before that they were made subject to their command, may sufficiently
show how valiant these people were, and bred to arms. The Rhodians did also
fight furiously against Cassius: but long before, they employed their forces
diversely, sometimes for the Lacedaemonians against the Athenians, and sometimes
for the later against the first, as they could practice their loves: for it was
a free people, whose succors they did sue for, as they do at this day unto
the Suisses. According to an ancient law the rich were bound to bear the
charges of the poorer sort.

There were men also appointed for public works, who did furnish victuals to
them that labored, and had a care that no necessaries should be wanting,
especially in matters which concerned the Sea. Moreover, there were some
secrets in their Arcenall, which was not lawful for any man to see, and if any
one did presume to cast his eye thereon, or

The inhabitants of this Island, although they were very civil, yet they did
sacrifice (as Eusebius writes) a man every year unto Saturn. They were in
the beginning great sorcerers, and so dangerous, as within the infusion of
certain water charmed, they spoiled the seed of the earth, and did kill their
cattle. They were great fencers, subtle Artizans, quick witted, and full of
excellent inventions.


THe town is inhabited by Turks which live after the manner of their nation,
and of the Jews which are come out of Spain. But as for Christians, they may
not live there in the night, for that the Turk suspects them, and fears some
sedition or treason. In the day time it is lawful for them to continue in the
town as long as they please, and no man takes exception. They that live in
villages are for the most part Christians, Greeks, which trim their vines
and gardens, and manure their grounds. These live for

BOSSINA, BVLGARIA, SERVIA, RASCIA, AND THAT WHICH THE TVRKE HOLDS IN HVNGARIE.
Orosus, and by others high Misia. It takes the name of the river Bosne, which
falls into Stephen, who was also Despot of Rascia and Seruia to be flead.

The duchy of Bosne contained the High Country ioining to Ragousa, and the
duke was called duke of S. Saba, or of Herzegouina, or of the Black mountain.
This duchy fell also into the hands of the Turks the same year 1464; so as
all Bossina at this day is but one government. The abode of the B^glierbei is
at Bagnialuca. There are also

Seruia, which many men take for the ancient country of the Triballes, and
High Misia, lies betwixt the realm of Bosne and Bulgaria. The chief town of
Sernia was Senderouia, which some call Spenderobe, others Simandria, or
Semendria, the Turks Semunder, and the Hungarians Zendrem. This place stands
near to Belgrada upon the banks of Danou, or Danubius. It was taken by
Amurath Emperor of the Turks in the year 1438. There is also Prisdens,
whereas the Emperor Justinian was borne. The other towns of note in this
country are Vidina, called by the Turks Kyratouu,

Bulgaria, as if we should say, Volgaria, is so called of certain people which
parting from the river of Volga, about the year 666, seized upon this
country, which some hold was in old time Base Misia. It lies betwixt Seruia,
Romania, and the river of Danou. The chief town is Sophia, which Niger takes
to be the town of Ptolomees Tibisque. It stands in a very commodious
situation, and it is great and well peopled, but nothing strong. There is also
Nicopolis, which the Turks call Nigebolis.

Rascia lies betwixt the river of Terms and Danou. The chief town are
Zarnouia, Crusoueccia, Couin, Nouebarda, Seuerin, Calambes, Columbesta, and
Bodon. This Amurath.

The Turk does also hold in Bessarabia, which they hold to be one of the
provinces of Moldauia, the towns of Kilem and Bermen, or Moncastre, whereas ^
Sangiac remains, who is subject to the Beglierbey of Greece. These towns were
taken by the Turk with the country, in the year 1485.

As for Hongarie, the Turk holds Buda the royal town, the which was taken by
Mathias who was put in possession of the realm of Hongarie, holds nothing but
that which lies toward the river of Danou, upon the frontires of Polonia and
Cassouia.

The Quality.
THe realm of Bosne is full of rough mountains which yield little. All the
advantage

Bulgaria, is for the most part full of mountains, and extends sometimes
toward the river of Danou, and sometimes toward Romania: the middle part of
the country is more stony and rough than the rest. And although that the
lower parts have some plains and valleys, yet the greatest part is full of
thickewoods, or else these plains are desert: here Ladslaus king of Poland
consumed his army.

Seruia and Rascia are of the same quality: but Seruia exceeds the rest in
that it has mines of gold, and is like to that of Bossina, in regard of those
of silver. As for the country

The Manners.
THe manners of these people are for the most part like unto those of the
Sclauonians, which we have already described. They have little taste of the
neighborhood of the Polonians. These nations are in a manner all given to
wine, very rude and gross. There is no great trust in their words, for that
they break their faith upon any light occasion.

The Estate of the Turk in Afric.
THE REALMS OF ALGIERS,
The Contents.
THe author having discoursed of the countries which the Turk holds in Europe,
becomes

THe realm of Tremisen, or Telensin, has Mauritania, Tingitana, (in the which
are comprehended the realms of Fez and Morroco) upon the West, divided by the
river of Muluia: upon the East, that of Ampsaga: upon the South, lie the
Numidians Getuliens: and upon the North part, lies the Mediterranean Sea, which
looks toward the Island of Sardinia. Johannes Leo, of Afric, comes very
near unto Ptolome in his description which he made of

This country was called Mauritania Caesaria, in the Romans time. It extends
from East to West three hundred and eighty miles, but the breadth is not above
five and twenty miles, that is to say, from the Mediterranean Sea, unto the
deserts of Numidia; by reason whereof it is subject to the continual
incursions and invasions of the Arabians which dwell in the Deserts: for this
cause, the kings of this country have always

This realm of Tremisen did, in ancient time, (as Authors affirm)
comprehend four provinces, which carried the names of their chief and
principal towns, that is to say, of Tremisen, Tenez, Bugia, and Algier: but
at this day there remains none but Tenez, and Tremisen. This last town had in
former times sixteen or seventeen thousand households; but (first of all by
reason of the wars of Joseph king of Fez, who besieged it seueen years; then
by the war which was made by the Emperor Charles the fifth, who had taken it
under his protection; and of the Turks, who in the end made themselves
masters thereof; and in like manner by reason of the war betwixt the Serif
and

The town of Algier was in former times under the realm of Tremisen; but, by
reason of the insupportable charges it was at, it revolted, and gave it self
to the king of Bugia. It did afterward belong to the king of Spain, from whom
Barbaroussa took it in the year of our Lord God 1515. Now it is reduced under
the Turk, and is grown both rich and famous, being a retreat for an infinite
company of Pirates which bring their prizes thither, for which reason the great
Turk has a Lieutenant remaining there. It stands upon the declining of
certain hills, being three miles in circuit, and contains eighty thousand
persons. A small Island makes the Port, the which is little, and subject to the
Northern winds. The Turks have continually fortified this place, and made it

The realm of Tunes comprehends all that which lies betwixt the great river,
and the river of the country of Mesrat; so as it does contain all the
country which the Ancients did properly call Afric, or the lesser Afric,
and in like manner the ancient

The province of Bugia begins at the great river, and extends unto the
mountains of Constantine, near unto the Mediterranean Sea, the which is about
one hundred and fifty miles, and the breadth is near forty miles. There are
also some towns which are small, but well peopled, as Necaus upon the frontier
of Numidia, and Chollo, near to the Mediterranean Sea. But Bugia is the chief
town, which gives her name unto the whole country. It is very ancient, and
was built by the Romans upon a high mountain near unto the Sea, Falzal, which
some hold to be that which Ptolome calls Thabuaque. Sabellicus takes it for
Vzaeat; Sannutus for Salde; but Castaldus (upon whose judgment Peter of
Navarre, since which time it has continued without ornament or beauty.

The country of Constantine lies betwixt the mountain of Constantine, upon
the frontier of the country of Bugia, and the territory of Tunes, near to
the river of Guadilbarbar: the chief town is Constantine, which Marmolius
takes to be that which Ptolome calls Culcue, putting it in new Numidia: yet
Paulus Iouius, with Oliver, who has commented upon Mela, and some others, hold
that it is rather Certe, the abode of Massinissa, which Ptolome calls Iulia:
The town is environed with high and strong mountains, the which are very
ancient. It is in a manner compassed about with very high rocks; they do
now account in it about eight thousand families. There are many fair houses,
and without the town there are to be seen a great number of goodly ancient
buildings, amongst the which there is a triumphall arch, after the manner of
the Romans. They do also place in this country the town of Bosne, otherwise
called Hippona, built by the Romans, one hundred miles or thereabouts from the
Sea, the which has been famous by reason of S. Augustine, who was bishop of
that place.

The country of Tunes lies betwixt the river Guadilbarbar, which the Ancients
have called the poole of Hipponita (in which is the length of the country of
Constantine)

There are many fair towns in this country, whereof the chief is that of
Tunes, whereof we have made mention, called by Ptolome, Themise or Thunise. In
the beginning it was a small town, but after the ruin of Carthage, it began
to be wonderfully well peopled and inricht: so that at this day it is held for
the chief town of the whole country: for they number in it about ten
thousand families, and it is near five miles in circuit. Goulette was seated
near unto Tunes, upon the strait of a poole, near ten miles

Carthage, the most ancient town of this country, and sometime the chief of
all Afric, was built by the Phenicians, as some hold, seventy two years
before the city of Rome. Some say that it was two and twenty miles in
circuit: it was in a manner environed of all sides by the Sea. There was in the
midst of it a fort called Byrses, which contained little less than two
thousand paces. This town was taken and burnt by Scipio, in the year of Grace
602, after the foundation of Rome; but having been afterward reedified by
Caesar, who transported a Colonie thither, it did afterward flour^sh, and
received much annoyance by the Vandales, Goths, and Sarrazins, and has been
so ill entreated, as there scarce remains a twentieth part of the town
inhabited. There is but

Biserte, or Bensert, is a very ancient town, seated upon the Mediterranean
Sea, and Cato. In this country, they do also reckon the great town of
Cairoan, seated in a plain which is desert and sandy, and famous by reason of
the study of the law, according to the laws of the land, and the superstition
of the Arabians, the which are carefully observed there.

The country of Tripoli begins at the river and gulf of Capes, and extends
near unto the country of Mesrat, beyond the town of Tripoli. Some say that
this province

Ezzabe, the last province of the realm of Tunes, lies beyond that of Tripoli
toward the East. It comprehends some towns which are of no great importance.
The chief country of this province is called Mesrat, the which lies near to
the Mediterranean sea, and

The Quality.
IF we shall observe in general the realm of Tunes, we must confess that it
is fertile enough, and fit to breed up much cattle, and to bear great numbers
of trees, the which are commonly seen toward the South: for upon the East, it
is not very fruitful, neither have they much water: but to examine every thing
in particular, the country of Bugia is in some places pleasant and fruitful,
for that it yields good store of grain and fruit* but in some other places, it
is so barr^n, as there can be nothing seen more miserable.

In the country of Constantin there is store of oil and corn, with great
plenty of butter, by reason of the troops of ca^tell which they feed. Near
unto Bone, there is a very great plain, the which is forty miles long, and
five and twenty broad, the which yields abundance of corn.

In the province of Tunes near unto the chief town, and within four or five
miles round about, there are plains full of olive trees: but they want wheat,
and all other

The province of Tripoli yields great store of dates, and fruits of all sorts:
but it is not fit to bear corn; yet they have good plenty of wheat. The
province of Ezzab has goodly plains, but nothing fit to bear wheat, nor any
other grain: but in recompense thereof, there is abundance of olives, dates,
and many other fruits.

The Manners of the ancient.
THe women of this country did in^old time wear upon either thigh a hoope of
to marry, to their king, who defloured her that best pleased him, and took
say before the

They which lived near to the Marish Tritonides, did shave the forepart of
their head, and did wear their hair long behind: on the other side, the Auses
did suffer their hair to grow before, like as time is described. The virgins
of this country do every year prepare a combat on the day of Mineruas feast,
in honor of that goddess, and they did fight with stones and staves with
great eagerness. They that died in this combat were held for corrupted
virgins, and she that had carried herself valiantly in the fight, was always
honored by other virgins, who arm her with all pieces, especial, with a
bourgognet made after the Corinthian manner, with a crest like unto our
morrions, and setting

The people of this country did cohabite confusedly with women, and as for the
children which were borne of such conjunctions, whenas they come to age, they
were brought to the assembly of men, where they made choice of him they would
remain with, and he was held for their father^ and every three months they
meet upon this occasion. They were held treacherous and disloyal, yea in such
sort as it grew to a proverb, That whenas any one had fasified his faith, and
broken his oath, it was sufficient to say that he was a Poenian. They were
always subtle, whereof their captain Hanniball has given sufficient
testimony to the Romans: as for courage they wanted not any; but they were
full of factions and envy: and this division, with the effeminatnesse which
they learned Hanniballs total ruin.

The king of Tremisen was not accustomed to speak to any but to the greatest
persons of his court, who were afterward dispatched according to his fancy.
He had for his officers a Lieutenant General, who in time of war has as
great authority as the king: a chief Secretary, who did write an answer in
the kings name: a Treasurer, and another which did distribute the treasure
according to the kings commanndement and pleasure: the fifth was the Captain of
the port, or rather the lord Steward, who commanded the kings guard: and as for
Chamberlaines, although he had some, yet they did no service but when the king
gave audience, for that in his chamber he was served only by slaves, and by
his women and cunuches.

The Manners at this day.
THe inhabitants of these countries live for the most part like unto them of
the realms of Fesse and Morrocco, of whom we have elsewhere made mention. True
it is, they apply themselves something to live after the manner of the Turks,
who command over them. The Arabians do also live like unto them of whom we have
spoken, treating of the Empire of Morrocco.

They that are borne in the country do not greatly love the Turks, who have
authority over them, and if there should grow any combustions or troubles
among them, they

The inhabitants of this country are of a good complexion, endure labor
willingly, and grow most commonly to be old, if the end of their days be not
advanced by some violent death. They are seldom sick, neither do they much
fear it.

They that live in the province of Bugia are rich, noble, and courteous, and as
civil as any that live in the rest of Barbary. They have an ancient custom
to paint a black cross upon their iawbones.

The inhabitants of the country called particularly Tunes, are not very rich,
especially the noblemen and gentlemen, who use no kind of traffic. Their
manners are like unto those of other provinces; yet they are more studious and
given to learning than others:

Finally, all the country which lies near unto the sea is full of pirates, who
do continually rob and spoil such as they encounter. There are many Christians
which be all slaves,

The Riches.
THese countries must needs be rich, seeing that Merchants come thither from
all parts, except to Tripoli, which is an ordinary harbor for Pirates, by
reason whereof the Venetians and Geneuois, who were accustomed to come thither
in regard of their

There are great numbers of merchants to be seen at Constantinople, who sell
cloth, wool, oil, silk, linen cloth, and many other things. The Gencuois,
and some others, go to Bona to make their traffic of corn and butter; and
many of them also go to Tunes in regard of traffic, and in like manner the
Venetians, and many merchants of other Nations.

The town of Algier has two ports, the one at Sea, the other at land, whereof
the entry yields near a million of gold. The feeding of cattle yields great
benefit to the inhabitants of these countries, and the great number of slaves
whom they force to labor, yields them an inestimable profit.


ALl they that dwell in these countries make open profession of Mahomets law,
whereof we will speak more at large in the end, when we shall treat in
general of the Turks religion. And as for Christian slaves, they live there
in their religion with infinite numbers of miseries, being more roughly used
than in the countries of the emperor of Morroco.

EGYPT, AND
The Contents.
IN the country of Egypt there are many things as worthy of note as be in
the world: but before the Author comes unto them, he sets down the situation
of the country, and the diverse names wherewith the Ancients have baptized
Egypt. Whence the Egyptians have drawn their beginning. The extention of
this province in length and breadth. The figure resembling a hand stretched out
at length, under what climat, and in what parallel. The sever all divisions
which the Ancients have made of these countries, and how in old time it was
divided into high and low. The great number of towns, amounting to six and
twenty thousand, of the reign of Amasis: the name of the most renowned,
amongst

Ptolome, and many others who have taken the Arabian gulf, or the red sea for
a more commodious bound of these two parts, have placed Egypt in Afric.

It was sometimes called Aerya, Aetia, Potamia, Ogygia, Melambola, Hefestia,
Miare, and also Aethiopia, by reason of the Aethiopians which lived there, as
Stephen and Eustathius do witness. But the name of Egypt comes from one of
their kings, brother to Danaus, or from the river of Nile, which was sometimes
called Egypt: or from the people of Merseu, descending from the race of Cham,
who according to the testimony of Josephus, Apolodorus calls it the region of
the Melampodes, by reason of the great fertility; and according unto Plutarch
in Osiris, they gave it the name of Shemia, in the sacred ceremonies of the
Egyptians. And it may be, they spoke this word in steed of Shamea, as Ortelius
has wittily observed, by reason of Cham the son of Noah.

In the sacred book of the Hebrews, this country was called Mesraim, as
Josephus does witness, and Chus, if we shall believe Arias Montanus. Whereupon
I will not omit to say that the Egyptians have drawn their beginning from
Mesraim the son of Chus, who came from Cham the son of Noah. The Arabians
call this country Mezre, and the Pinet reports, or Elquibet, according to
Marmolius.

This province runs a great tract of country from South to North. It has for
bounds upon the West, the deserts of Barze, of Lybia, and Numidia, and the
realm of Nubia; upon the South, the country of Bugia, and the river of Nile,
as Leo Africanus affirms, for that in this place it winds about something from
the West unto the East. But Pliny (who was followed by many in that respect)
sets the end of Egypt upon that side near unto the town of Siena, which they
now call Asne. Others say, that upon the South side lie the Cataractes, which
are very strait precipes, by the which the Nile falling with great abundance
of waters, seems not to flow, but to pour down with Strabo writes, which are
very many.

But from Caire or near unto it, this river divides it self into two maine
branche^, and Strabo writes, or according unto some others of one hundred and
seventy thousand paces: so as the most Northertherly part of Egypt, which
they call base Egypt, has the form of an Island, compast in by the sea, and
those two channells of Nile, and was comprehended under the name

This Island has in circuit, as Strabo does write, about three thousand
stades, which make three hundred seventy and five Italian miles: yet the
modern writers say, that this Delta contains about three hundred miles; for
that from the town of Rosetta unto Damiette they account one hundred and
forty miles, and every channel is seventy miles long. Ptolome calls this the
great Delta, the which he diuides into the lesser, and the third, calling the
lesser Delta, that which lies betwixt the rivers of Bubastes and Busiris; and
the third, is that which is contained betwixt the rivers of Bubastes and
Atribe. All in a manner take the length of Egypt, from the town of Asne, unto
the Mediterranean Pliny, is of five hundred eighty and five thousand paces;
but some modern writers say, that it contains about five hundred thousand.

Leo of Afric extends the length of this country beyond Asne, unto the great
and ancient Asne, which is distant from the river of Nile about eighty miles
toward the East, and to the South, upon the frontires of the realm of Nubia,
and the inhabitants of Bugia. The same author makes it four hundred and fifty
Italian miles long: but for that he makes them longer than he should, it is fit
according to the opinion, of some to add a fourth part; so as it would make
about five hundred sixty and two ordinary miles.

It is situated near to the Tropicke of Cancer, bending toward the Articke
circle, betwixt the seventh and tenth parallel, especially under the second
climat: by reason whereof the longest day in Summer is not above thirteen
hours and a half, and in the most Northerly parts, it exceeds not fourteen
hours. It lies betwixt the Meridean of Alexandria and Tenesse or Teneze,
whereof the first passes by the one hundred and sixtieth degree and a half,
and the other near to the sixty three degree and one quarter. We find in
authors diverse divisions of this country, for that they which distinguish Asia
from Afric by the river of Nile, divide this province into three parts, that
is to say, into Egypt of Asia, otherwise called Thebayde, and now Seid or
Said; into Egypt of Afric, which is that part which lies toward the West;
and into base Egypt contained

Egypt was also divided in old time into high and low. They call that part
high Egypt which is long and straight, and begins at the Cataractes beyond
Siena upon the frontires of Aethyopia, and ends near unto Caire. Base Egypt
contains that which is enclosed betwixt the two channells of Nile, from Caire
unto the Mediterranean sea, under the form of the letter Delta, or of a
Triangle.

There are others who divide this province into high, middle, and base, the
base they take from the frontires of Aethiopia, and extend it only unto
Antinoe, a town seated upon the Nile, which Leo Africanus calls Anthius; and
it is the same with Thebayde or the country of Sahid. For the middle Egypt,
they take that part which is betwixt the I^stinian diuides it in his new
constitutions into the first and second.

Leo Affricanus makes mention of the division of Egypt, which was made when
the Mahometans became masters thereof. He diuides it into three regions, that
is to say, into that of Sahid, which is earthly, the which runs from the
countries of Bugia, unto Caire, and this is high Egypt: Into I^^ifia, which is
in the West country of Nile, from Caire unto Rosette; and into Bechria, or
Merennua, which is upon the East part near unto the river of Nile.

We must also understand, that Egypt was in former times divided by Alexander
into diverse gouernements; and that the Romans did afterward practice the like.
Herodotus makes mention of eighteen gouernements, or Nomes; Strabo nineteen;
Ptolome Pliny about fifty; but Ort^lins has gathered out of diverse Authors
about sixty six Nomes.

As for the towns, some have written that in former times there were about six
and twenty thousand, whenas Amasis reigned* and Diodorus says, That in his
time there were above three thousand. But Ortelius could never find but three
hundred, notwithstanding all his care and diligence in this search: so as we
must conceive that ancient writers comprehended these bouroughs and villages
in this computation: yet we deny not but the Scyrian, Ethiopian, and Roman
wars, have ruined many towns. But leaving this dispute, I say, that the most
famous of Egypt, were Siena and Thebes, which was also called Diospolis,
Tentyra, Heliopolis, Memphis, Babylon, Alexandria, Pelusim,

Siena, now called Asne, is precisely under the tropicke of Cancer. In this
place (as Pliny does witness) they made a very great pit, where th^re is no
shadow to be seen whenas the Sun enters into Cancer. The town of Memphis,
seated beyond the river of Nile toward the West, was in old time the abode of
the princes of Egypt, and the Pyramides (whereof writers make so great
mention) are not far from it. Caire succeeded in the place of this ancient
town, and was the ordinary abode of the Soldans of Egypt. It is true, that
many hold that the Caire is in the same place where in old time Babylon stood:
For Belon, who has been in all those countries, seems to assure that the
town, called Babylon by the Ancients, was a little above Caire. And in truth

The town of Caire is more long than broad, and of a triangular form. It is
very great, and walled about, but not of all sides, for that the river of Nile
borders the greatest part, which serves as a wall. Without the circuit of the
walls, there are many buildings, and a fo^t which is in one of the corners like
a rock whereas certain stairs were cut out, the abode whereof is wholesome
and pleasant: for that, taking view from the Palernes in his peregrination
says, That they go and observe the height of this river, in an Island near
unto Caire, whereof we will make mention, speaking of the quality of Egypt.

There is also within the city of Caire, a place walled about called Basestan,
whereas they sell much silver vessel, cloth of gold and silver, silks, and
some rare spices. Multitudes of people flock thither continually, for that
whatsoever is rare within the city, is

As for the Pyramides of Egypt (as Belon reports) they stand in an eminent
place, and

The Baron of Beauueau (from whom I have drawn this relation) says, That
entering into it, he first descended some fifty paces, then mounting about
forty, he went into an alley that was four foot broad, and five high, and
some thirty paces long, the which had at the foot of it a little chamber, some
eight paces square, but all ruined, and full of ordure; and returning by the
same alley, he saw upon the right hand the mouth of a very great and deep
Cesterne, then mounting 68 steps, he entered into a very high chamber,
garnished with marble, the which was forty foot long, and one and twenty
broad, where there was to be seen a great hollow stone of Thebain marble, the
which was three or four fingers thick, twelve spans long, and five broad.
This stone is of such

Belon says, That it has steps without, and three hundred twenty four paces
upon either side. Moreover, from the basis or foot, unto the top, there are two
hundred and fifty degrees, whereof every one is five foot high, reckoning
nine inches to the foot. He says, That the breadth is such, that a good archer
being upon the top, and shooting an arrow into the air, it would fall upon the
steps, and not pass the foundation. He reports, That the top is plain, and
has two paces in Dyameter, and that fifty men may easily stand thereon.

I will not speak of the rest, for that were a superfluous curiosity: but I
will only say, that, a little beneath the Pyramides, the great Colosse of
Sphinx is to be seen, near unto the channel of Nile. I will omit the
description, for that Pliny, Herodotus, and some others, have done it
sufficiently.

The town of Alexandria was in former times one of the chief cities of the
world; for for that it yielded not unto Rome, in regard of the number of the
inhabitants. It is seated (as the Baron of Beauueau reports) in a sandy
country, and upon the Sea shore, built like a half Moon, more broad than
long, and is divided into old and new. The first is three miles long, having
within it (besides many rare things) two mountains of sand that are enclosed.
Her ancient walls are yet standing, but within it is little inhabited. Costs,
father to S. Katherine, and near unto it six pillars of marble, the which are
twenty spans about, and three fadomes high without the ground. There is also
to be seen in a street, the place where S. Mark was beheaded, and a church
where the Cofites keep the stone upon the which his head was cut off, and the
pulpit wherein he preached. There is also a church dedicated to S. Katherine,
where there is a square pillar to be seen, upon the which the head of this
virgin was cut off.

Near unto the walls of the port, there are two spires to be seen, almost a
like, both Cleopatras palace, where she had a gallerie which advanced over the
sea, as may be seen by the ruins.

Without the town stands a pillar which Caesar caused to be erected in memory
of Pompeis defeat, the which is of marble, and of a reasonable height: the
basis and top are eighty foot, and it has eight and twenty in circuit. As
for the new town, it is somewhat more pleasant, seated in a plain, having
upon the left hand the old port, the which is defended by a castle of the old
town: but by reason of the difficulty, they do no

Upon the right hand is the new port, the which is nothing but an open road,
subject to the Northern winds: but it is defended on either side by two
castles, which they call Farilos, whereof the one stands upon a little
Peninsula, and has no other fresh water, but what is brought to it by the
town cesterns: the other is right against it; so as all ships must of
necessity pass within the shoot of these two castles, and without these two
ports the town would be soon abandoned by reason of the bad air.

The Island of Pharos, which they set right against Alexandria, is no more an
Island, as in the time of Caesar and Ptolome: for this place ioines now to the
firm land, and has a castle very incommodious, for that that they are forced
daily to carry water upon cammells,

The town of Damietta is also very famous, and seated near to the
Miditerranean sea. The ancients called it Pelusium, and it had also the name
of Eliopolis, of the prince Elie or Aly who had environed it with three walls,
Suidas calls it the key of Egypt: but Ortelius thinks that Pelusium is that
which at this day we call Teneze. Besides these towns, there are also others
of good note, as Michacle, which is almost as big as Caire; and Fuca, or Foua,
which next unto Caire is bigger than any of the rest, and right against

As for villages, if they be far from Nile, the inhabitants have built them in
high places to avoid the ouerflowing of the water. Their houses are built of a
thick fat slime or mire, the which is very binding; and their couerings are
pointed, yet there are some which are made flat.

As for the Troglodites, they held the country which lies beyond the bank of
the red sea, upon the right hand of Egypt. Polome calls them Arabians
Ichthiophages: and Caftoldus says that this country is now called Sci^fia;
but it seems that the modernes call

The chief places of this country are Grondal or Corandal, with a reasonable
good port. Alcosser or Chozair, which some take for the ancient Berenice of
Ptolome. There the mountains open to give passage to the fruits which are
brought out of the Abyssines country.

There is also Suaquen which is the Ptolomais of Mela, according to the opinion
of Ortelius. Pliny calls it Epytheras, and Ptolome Thereon. Near unto this
town, there is a very good port. The Turk does commonly entertain a Bassa
there, who commands all the country.

Near unto the red sea, and as it were in the head of the Arabian gulf,
stands the town of Suez, which Peter Gilliez, and Belon take for Arsinoe,
mentioned by Ptolome. Zieglerius holds it to be Potidia, according to Strabo:
but some others think that it is Hero, or the city of Heroes, which did
flourish exceedingly in the time of the Ptolomees, and of the Romans, by
reason of the abundance of merchandise which was brought thither from the
Indies, and Arabia, and transported from thence by Caire and Alexandria

The Quality.
Egypt is only watered by the river of Nile, which makes the soil very
fruitful. There have been many names given unto this river, for the which
they give diverse reasons: for Diodorus has called it Aetos, that is to say,
Eagle, by reason of the swiftness of her course toward the Cataractes. It
has also been called Egypt, of a king of that Festus says that it was
called Melus; and Eustathius and Plutarch, Mela: Cedren and Epiphanius term
it Chrysorrhoas, that is to say, flowing in gold; and Denis gives it the name
of Siena: it was also in old time called Syris, Triton, Diris, Astepe, and
Astaboras. In holy writ it is called Sihor or Seor, that is to say, trouble,
by reason of the slime and mud which it carries with it into Egypt; and it
also gives it the name of Gehon, and of Phison.

The Egyptians have called it Noym: the Abyssins, Tacui, according to Barius,
or Abanhi, as Martian writes; the Africans, Nile; and they of the country,
Taccasij, and Abanhi. There are diverse opinions touching the spring of this
river, and all are very uncertain. But at this day it is certainly known
that it comes not from the mountains Ptolome assures, but from a very great
lake called Zaire, the which is in high Aethiopia, betwixt the realm of Congo
or Manicongo, and the country of Monimotapa or Benimotapa, under the eleventh
degree, or the height of the Pole Antartick and it is most certain, that this
river flowing through many countries with sundry turnings serpent wise, make a
great number of Islands, whereof the greatest is that of Meroe. But when it
enters into Egypt, it runs betwixt the mountains which restraines it of
either side, then it makes the Delta, having spread it self abroad by many
straits and valleis: for as far as the mountains extend themselves, and are
distant one from another; so much does the river extend it self, or grows
narrower, and makes the habitable country of a diverse form, and then again
it dilates it self over the champian fields, taking

The river of Nile, whilst it runs along Egypt, is very like to the river of
Po, especially from Ferrara unto the mouth of it; for they may easily pass
both upon the one and the other with full sails both upward and downward.

Ancient authors do not agree touching the mouths of Nile: for some will
have seven, as Mela, Strabo, Diodorus, and Herodotus: others nine, with
Ptolome, and Pliny eleven. But the Moderns assure that there are but three or
four, as William of Tier, and Peter Belon, who report what they have seen,
and in like manner some others: for it diuides it self into four branches
four miles from Caire, whereof two make the two chief and nauigable mouths,
that is to say, the one Damietta, and the other of Rosetta:

Some report, that Nile written in Greek, expressing the number which every
Letter is valued at, contaynes the whole number of the days of the year,
after this manner: N. 50, E. 5, 1. 10, l. 30, O. 70, s. 200.

The ouerflowing of Egypt begins about the seventeenth of June, at what time
the river

There are some which hold, (according to the testimony of Strabo) That Egypt
was in former times drowned by the Sea, unto the ma^shes near unto Pelusium,
and to the mountains of Cassia, and Serbonides; but by the means of Nile,
which did continually bring slime and mud with her innundation, it became as we
now see it. And the reason which confirms this opinion, is, that a great
number of shells are found in the sand.

The country of Egypt is plain, low, and without mountains; so as they
cannot see far. The air is hot and offensive; so as to avoid the
insupportable heat in Summer, and Leo Affricanus reports) to build very high
Towers in all their towns, which have both above and below a door right
against their houses; so as the wind comes both from below, and from the top:
yet this province is not subject to the Southern winds, which are ho^test,
like unto the rest of Afric; but it is chiefly exposed to the Southern
winds, the which are moist there, whereas in other countries they dry.

The country is not subject to Earthquakes, not to rain, whereof they have
not any need, for that the land is every year fattened with the ouerflowing
of the river of Nile. And if it happens to rain, the which is very seldom,
it causes diseases, as Catharres, Trogus makes mention, that the country of
Egypt is so fertile, as there is not any one that yields so great abundance
of all things necessary for the life of man. Therefore many of the Ancients
have called Egypt, the Storehouse of the earth; and Pliny assures, that the
greatness of the Roman empire could not long continue without the come and
wealth of Egypt; for that the plenty or famine of the people of Rome depended
upon the river of Nile. He says also, That the country of Egypt does so
abound

This province abounds with all sorts of grains, and pulses. It has good
pastures in every place, and abundance of Olive trees: yet high Egypt, or the
country of Sahid, exceeds Belon reports) are full of Rice, and Canes of Sugar.
But beyond the banks of Nile, they have some difficulty to trim and
entertain their gardens, for that they are forced, with certain vessels that
their oxen carry, to bring water continually for the watering of them.

Besides their herbs and corn, there is very good wine, and great
abundance in diverse places; for that near unto the Lake called Meotides, they
gather excellent good wine, which keeps very long: but they have no great
store of Oil, nor underwoods; and they have little other timber but Palm
trees, which are not worth any thing for building. These Palm Trees grow
wonderful high throughout all the country of Aegyt, and there has been
seen (as Belon makes mention) coming out of one body, twenty great trees
separated. Besides these Palm trees, their gardens are replenished with
Siccamores, Cassia, Pomegranets, Oranges, and Tamaris; whereof the greatest
part grow exceeding high: but the Tamaris comes not but when it is sowed, and
it grows as well in dry as moist ground, as for Siccamores, they are so
green, as they exceed all other trees in greenenesse.

They have also carefully maintained a shrubbe called Alcana, whereof there are
underwoods: The leaves are of a yellow color when they are dried, wherewith
the women that live in the Turks country, die their hands and feet, and a
part of their hair. There is also great store of sweet smelling flowers; for
that Plime does also give precious perfumes to Egypt, yet he affirms, That
their flowers do not commonly smell very well, for that the air is full of
fogges, by reason of the neerenesse of the river of Nile.

Besides cruel and hurtful beasts, wherewith the country abounds, it does
breed a great number of tame cattle, as Bugles, Oxen, Camells, Horses, Asses,
Sheep, and Goats; all which grow very great, by reason of the temperature of
the air, the abundance Belon writes, the which are found among the shrubs,
and live not of the wind, as many have written; yet they will continue a whole
year together without eating any kind of sustenance.

The hens do not use to hatch or discover their chickins in any part of
Egypt, and therefore they use the heat of furnaces. Moreover, this country
has always abounded in mettalls, especially in those places which are near
unto Aethiopia; and the Amethyste, with many other precious stones, grow there.
They do also find great store of the Eagle stone, called Actites, near unto
Alexandria, wherewith they may lade whole ships; and these stones have this
special virtue, to cause thieves to be discovered and surprised, as Belon
notes in his observations.

The women of Egypt are very fruitful for the procreation of children,
insomuch as many times they have three or four at a birth, and it has been
observed, that the children which were borne in that country, in the eighth
month, are not in danger of death,

Near unto Caire, and in a place called Materea, they find a tree which bears
balm; and about Alexandria, they have a great number of a certain kind of
goats which they call Gazelles; they have also many Pomegranets, Lymons,
Oranges, Citrons, Figs,

The Island of Edibeb abounds in canes of sugar, siccamores, palm trees, all
sorts of pulses, and rice. As for Arabia Trogloditica, it is a barren country,
sandy, desert, and not manured, and also little inhabited, by reason that they
recover water with great difficulty. And touching the town of Suez, there is
not any water within two miles compass

The Manners of the ancient.
THe Egyptians have been always very ingenious and witty; so as Macrobius
calls Egypt the mother of arts; for that the inhabitants of this country
have invented Geometry, Arithmaticke, Physic, and other arts. They were
first of all given to the observation of the stars, to Negromancie, and
Sorcerie.

Diodorus Sicilus reports.

The women of Egypt did in old time use the trade of merchandise, keep
tauernes, and did all offices belonging to men; whereas their husbands were
idle, and kept their houses, and if there were any burdens to be borne, the men
set them upon their heads, and the women upon their shoulders. The men sat
down to make water, and the women on the other side stood right up; they went
to do their business in their houses, and

No woman of Egypt might be a priest in the Temple of any of their gods or
goddesses. And as for the Egyptians they were never consecrated to any
particular god, but to all together. They had a sovereign Bishop chosen from
among the priests, who at his decease left his son to succeed him in his
dignity and sovereign priesthood. The legitimate children, according to the
law of the country, did not refuse to nourish their parents, whereunto they
were not forced, whereas the women were constrained, if by chance they were
unwilling thereunto.

There have been many other people whose custom has been in mourning and
lamenting for the dead, to cover their heads with dyrt, and to suffer their
beards and hair

They did write from the right hand to the left, like unto the Hebrews,
Arabians, Turks, and Persians. The women did carry but one single roabe, and
the men, as more delicate and effeminate, had two. They used also two kinds of
letters, the one was sacred, and the other common and allowed to all men: but
this latter was drawn from the Ethyopians. The priests were bound to shave all
their body every three days, to the end they might not carry any filthiness
into the temple and sacrifice. They did wear garments

They did not sow any beans in Egypt, neither was it lawful for any one of
them to eat any if by chance they were brought thither from any other country:
yea the priests were forbidden to look on them, for that they held an opinion
that this kind of

All the Egyptians did sacrifice oxen, bulls, and calves: but is was forbidden
to sacrifice any kine or heyfers; for that they were dedicated to the goddess
Isis, to whom they bare a particular honor. They did live of dry bread and
used beer, for that they had

Whenas they met at any feast, and the banquet ended, some brought in a dead
body made of wood, or otherwise exceedingly well represented being about two
fadomes long, which figure was showed to every one that assisted at the feast,
saying, eat, and drink, and behold this; for having lived at thine ease, thou
shall be like unto him after thy death. Whenas young men met with any that were
more advanced with age, they went out of the way to let them pass, and seeing
them to come into any assembly, they

They were very sober, for they did never set any thing upon the table, but a
piece of veale and a goose, and there was a certain measure of wine appointed
for every one, to the end they should not fill their bellies more than were
fit, nor drink until they were drunk.

Their kings carried themselves so mildly unto their subjects, as they did
win the hearts and love of all men; so as not only the priests, but all
others were more careful of the preservation and the prosperity of their
king, than of themselves, their wives, and children. Whenas the king died, it
was a pitiful thing to see their general lamentation, tearing their
garments, and shutting up their Temples, going neither to faires nor markets,
nor solemnising any feast, defiling their heads with dyrt, for the space of two
months, and twelve days, carrying a linen cloth bound about their arms, and
in this manner twice a day there met two or three hundred men and women to
renew their mournings and complaints, singing in verse the virtues and holy
life of their king who was dead.

During all this time, they did not eat any meat that was roasted, and they did
abstain from wine, and from all kinds of dainty meats. They did not wash nor
anoint themselves, neither did they lie in any bed, nor had the company of
their wives, but during all this time they went and lamented very much for
their king, as if their own children had been dead. During all this time,
they prepared the funeral pomp, and the last day, the body was carried
before the door, and to the entry of the Tomb or Sepuchre, where they did
repeat an Abridgement or Sommarie of the life and actions of the deceased king,
and then it was lawful for every man to accuse him.

The sacrificers did also assist in that place, and did commend the forepassed
life of him,

Finally, the Egyptians have been the most superstitious, or rather the most
ridiculous of all the Idolaters, for that not content with the statues or
images of men, they have worshipped beasts both alive and dead, as Cats,
Dogs, Rats, Sparrow-hawkes, Goats, Wolves, Crocodiles, and a great number of
other beasts. And they were so void of shame to make public profession of
this folly and beastliness, as contrariwise they

The charge of feeding these beastly gods was given to men of quality, who
carried themselves carefully, and entertained them with great charges, for that
their food was a kind of delicat drink made of a certain grain, and broth
composed of wheat flower, and they had also for these beasts, other meats made
with milk, and besides that, they did set before them geese, both boiled and
roasted, to satisfy them. They gave to them that lived, raw flesh, and birds
taken with nets or otherwise, and to be short, they employed much money, and a
great deal of toil, to entertain them.

Ptolome, surnamed Lagus king of Egypt, an ox being dead at Memphys of mere
age, he that had the charge to feed him, spent in his funerals a great sum
of money which he had received for his feeding; and moreover, he borrowed of
the king fifty talents of silver to furnish the charge of these ridiculous
obsequies.

As for the honors which they performed to dead men, the Egyptians did also
exceed in that charge, for as soon as any one was dead, the friends and
kinsfolks of the deceased coming together, covered their heads with dyrt, and
went about the town lamenting that he which had thus opened the body of any
man, had some secret hatred against the

The body being embalmed after this manner, they delivered it unto his
kinsfolks, having first so placed every part and member of the body, even
the eye brows, as it might be taken for a sleeping man. After this, they began
the discourse of his life from his infancy, and related his pieties toward
the gods, his knowledge, the innocence of his manners; then coming to his
perfect age, his religion, his justice, his integrity, his continency, and
his wisdom. Which done, they did call upon the infernal gods, entreating them
to place the dead body in the rank of the happy. The people made answer to
those prayers, much commending the dead, as he that enjoyed the happiness of
fortun at souls. Every man did interre his dead body in his own Sepulcher:
As for such as had no particular place, they put them in their houses in the
strongest walls there was, setting the coffin right up, and walling it with
masons work, to the end that the successors

Whenas they borrowed any money, they were accustomed to lay the bodies of
their kinsfolks in pawn; and if they failed to redeem them, it was a great
infamy unto them; and moreover, they themselves were deprived of burial.

To conclude this discourse, the Egyptians held themselves to be all
gentlemen, and were in former times very slothful, delicat, inconstant,
braggers, great talkers, and of little truth in their discourses. They were
naturally proud, furious, and more fitter for mutinies and innouasions than to
execute any thing well. They were injurious, and nothing

The manners at this day.
THere are few remaining at this day of the right Egyptians, being reduced to
a handful of Christians, and the rest following Mahomets law, are mixed among
the Affricanes, and the Arabians: for the ancient nobility of Egypt, who had
retired themselves into maritime places, after that the Roman empire was
transported into Greece, they

Leo Africanus says that they do often use for their meat new cheese and very
salt, sower milk, and hardened after some sort, the which although they hold
for one of their greatest dainties, yet strangers cannot endure the taste of it;
and the greatest inconvenience is, for them that come amongst them, that they
do most commonly mingle that

They are exceeding good swimmers, and become such by constraint: for that
whenas the country is all covered with the water of the river of Nile, they
are forced to pass from village to village to do their business, or else use
small boats as many do. They of Alexandria, and many other towns of Egypt do
naturally speak the Arabian tongue of Afric: but the Turks which are
mingled amongst them do use a very different

As for the Troglodites, they are commonly rude, barbarous, and exceeding
poor: but besides the originaries, there are many Mohammedan Turks and
Arabians which dwell in this province.

The ancient Government.
ALI the country of Egypt was in old time divided into diverse parts and
governments, and either had a governor, who took care of all that was
requisite for the managing of affairs. The revenue, demeasnes, and tribute was
divided into three

They distributed this revenue unto the priests to be employed in sacrifices
and ornaments of Temples, and to relieve such as were in necessity, and had
need of some assistance. For the Egyptians did not forget any thing that might
serve for the ceremonies of their gods, and they held it unfit to leave them
without support and entertainment, who imparted knowledge unto them, and did
assist them with counsel, for the profit and advantage of the commonweal:
they were always called to counsel, and to the conclusion

The Egyptians did not follow the custom of the Grecians, who would have but
one man or one woman precide over sacred things: for that many had the same
honor, and gave themselves to the service of the gods, leaving the same charge
to their children by enheritance. These persons were freed from all taxes and
subsidies, and were honored above all others in the realm next unto the king.

to the end they should the more willingly expose themselves to all dangers and
hazards

Their common weal was also divided into three Estates, for the service and
support of the whole body, that is to say, into laborers, sheepheards, and
artisans. The first h^uing taken to farmeatan under rate the lands of the king,
priests, or soldiers, employed themselves from their youth in tillage, wherein
continually they spent the remainder of their days; whereby they proved the
best husbandmen in the world, whether it were by nature, or that they had it by
succession from their ancestors, or that long experience had made them so
perfect.

The sheepheards busied themselves in no other thing but to govern their
troops,

As for the artisans, without doubt mechanicke arts were brought to perfection
in Egypt, for that they meddled with no other thing but what the law did allow
them, and what they had learned and received from their ancestors, and they
were not admitted to the managing of public affairs: so as neither the
troublesomenesse of him under whom they had passed their apprentiship, nor the
ambition of honors, could hinder them from attaining to a perfect knowledge of
that which they sought.

Their judgments were not rashly given, but with great discretion, believing
that good deeds were of great consequence for the public good. They held an
opinion that the true means to root out wickedness, was to punish the wicked,
support the afflicted,

A decree being drawn upon any point, and the image of truth laid before,
they brought the books of the laws, being eight in number, least they should
stray from justice in the case propounded: and the custom was, that whosoever
did accuse any one of a crime, he should deliver it in writing, and set down
in particular how it had been done, and how prejudicial he held the offense
to be.

They gave unto the accused a sufficient time to make answer to every one of
the accusers articles, the which he did set down in writing before the Judges;
and then he denied the fact, or alleged reasons to justify himself, or did
show that his offense did

And for that we have spoken of the laws and ordinances in general, it shall
not be unfit to examine in particular the ancient statutes of this people, to
the end we may know how much they exceed all others in the well managing of
affairs, and whether their order were not better and more profitable.

First of all, he that did take an oath and forswear himself, was without
remission put to death, as convicted of a double crime, for that he did not
observe the respect which he ought unto the gods, and had broken his faith,
which is a strict and great bond to entertain humane society. He that seeing
any passenger stripped and robbed, and did not

The Egyptians were forced by the law to deliver their names in writing to the
president, and also to declare unto him the course of their lives; and if any
one were found

The Law-giuers of the Egyptians had ordained no punishment against fathers
that should kill their children; but they were only enjoined to remain
continually three days and three nights by the dead body; and to the end they
should not fail therein, they set men to guard them. They used this mild kind
of judgment, for that they held

Whenas any woman condemned to die was with child, they attended the time of
her

They that discovered any secrets unto the enemy, and practiced with them, had
by virtue of the law their tongues cut out; and whosoever did clip or
counterfeit any coin, change or spoil weights or measures, falsify
signatures, and counterfeit writings, or corrupt

The laws proceeded very rigorously against them that forgot themselves to
women, for that he that forced a woman of a free condition, was gelt, and
deprived of his priuities; for that, in doing this wrong, he had committed
three great and strange offenses, that is to say, the outrage, the rape, and
the corruption of another man's wife, and withal, had caused a confusion and
mixture of bastards with legitimat and lawful children. He that was surprised
in adultery, without violence, was condemned and doomed to have a thousand
blows with rodds, and the woman was censured to have her nose cut off, to

As for laws and ordinances made touching traffic and commerce, they hold
that Baccorides was the Author. These laws did infer, that if any one did
deny the receipt of money which had been lent him without bill, the lender
should be credited upon his simple oath; for that the Egyptian made great
account of the solemnity of oaths, as of a

It was in like manner ordained, That it should not be held reasonable, to
believe him, who had borrowed without bill, whenas he should swear in his own
cause. The Lawgiuer would not that usury, promised by writing, should equal
the moytie of that which had been lent; and he ordained, That the payment
should only be taken upon the debtors goods, and that his person should not be
arrested and put in prison, nor yet made a

The Egyptians had another law touching theft, which was, That whosoever had
resolved to practice it, should cause himself to be enrolled in the Register
of the sacrificing Priests, and carry the thing stolen unto him, as soon as
ever the theft was committed; and on the other side, he that had lost any
thing, must come and set down before the same Judge, the day, and hour of his
loss: by this means, thefts were easily discovered,

The Egyptian priests did marry one only wife: others had as many as they
would or could maintain. At that time there was not any among them held a
bastard, although he were begotten of some slave; for that they held the father
to be the only Autho^r of the generation, and the mother did serve but to
receive the seed, and to give it nourishment, which was of no great charge, for
that they fed their children with roots of reeds, and other things which they
boiled upon the embers; or else they gave them certain

The Priests instructed their children in learning, both sacred and profane,
and especially Geometry, and Arithmeticke: as for fencing and wrestling, they
would not have them practice it, for that those exercises were too violent and
dangerous, if they should therein exercise their bodies being yet so tender.

They which traveled or went to the war, were entertained without any
charge, if they fell sick, for that physicians had their wages from the
Commonweal, and were bound by the law to have a care of sick persons and to
cure them, following the ordinances, receipts, and writings of the Ancients of
that art, who were in authority and reputation among them. If the physician,
having followed the rules of the sacred Book, could not cure the sick person,
he was not accused of his death; but if he recovered him by other remedies or
medicaments, he was put to death without remission: for that they held, that
the order to physic a sick person, which had been long before observed by
physicians, and invented with much pain by the Ancients, was far better
than any new receipts.

As for the kings of Egypt, they did not abuse their power and authority so
licentiously, as the princes of other nations, who had nothing but their own
will (as a man may term it) for a law; for that they were forced in all
things to govern themselves according to the laws and statutes of the
country, as Diodorus writes in his second book.

There were certain hours appointed both by day and night, wherein the law
allowed the king to treat of affairs; for that in the morning he received
letters, petitions, and other memorialls of that which was to be done, to the
end that making answer to all,

In the end, the king having sacrificed a bull unto his gods, the priests
reading the memorable deeds and sayings of the most famous men, he exhorted the
king to govern the people with all mildness and justice, after their example,
and not to give himself to covetousness and to heap up treasures. His most
private actions also, as to walk, wash, lie with his wife, and such like were
limited according unto the law, the which he might in no sort exceed.


Egypt is peopled by Mahometans, Christians, and Jews, in some small number.
As for the Mahometans and Jews, we will leave the discourse of their belief
to another place; but to speak something of that of the Christians, they of
Egypt are either strangers, or borne in the country. The strangers come
thither by reason of traffic, especially in the towns of Alexandria and
Caire: for this realm being seated betwixt the red sea and the Mediterranean,
sees both East and Westby reason of the great traffic, and is as it were a
ladder by the which the wealth and treasures of the Indies, and the Francis,
who remain in Jerusalem, employ their spiritual assistance, and go to
administer the sacraments, and to preach the word of God to the Christians
which traffic into Egypt.

The Christians borne in Egypt, which have remained since the inundation of
Barbarians, and the cruelty of the Sarrazins, Mammeluz, and Turks, do not
exceed the number of fifty thousand persons, which dwell dispersed here and
there, especially in the towns of Caire, Messia, Montfalut, Buque, and
Elchiase, all situated upon the river of Nile. There are also many at Minia,
in which territory there are diverse monasteries; Antonie, S. Paul, and of S.
Machaire. The first is in the country of the Troglodites, upon a mountain,
whereas they say S. Anthony was beaten by devils: the second is not far from
it, in the midst of the defarts: and the third is in the defarts of Boulacca,
toward the West. This monastery is called Nitria, in the Histories of the
holy fathers: the reason is, as I suppose, for that in this country the
waters of Nile being made thick by the heat of the Sun in low grounds,
George. There has been two hundred Monks in it, the which was a great
commodity to passengers who were received there, and entreated very
courteously: but all the Monks being dead of the plague, about one hundred and
fifty years since, the place was abandoned.

But to speak something of the quality of the Christians, they are called
Cofires, and Christians of the girdle; for that although they be baptized like
unto us, yet are they circumcised like unto the Jews; so as it seems their
belief does not pass beneath the girdle: but that which is worse, for these
thousand years they have followed Eutiches, who admitted but one nature in
Jesus Christ; so as by the means of this heresy, they seperat themselves from
the union of the Church. The occasion of this Schism was the bad Council of
Ephesus, assembled by Dyoscores for the defense of E^tiches, who had been
already condemned at the council of Calcedonia, by six hundred and thirty
fathers assembled by the authority of Leo the first: and the Cofites fearing
that they should maintain two Hipostases, to attribute two natures to Christ,
became Eurichians, for that they would not fall in the error of Nestorius.

They say Mass in the Chaldean tongue, saying often, Alleluya. They read the
Gospel first in the Chaldean tongue, and then in the Arabian. Whenas the
priest faith, Peace be with you, or peace be given you, the youngest amongst
them goes and touches the hand of Prete Ian.

The Estate of the Turk in Asia.


1 Having described all the provinces and countries which the Turk holds in
Europe and Afric, it is fit we should now see what he enjoys in Asia,
before we enter into a distinct discourse, which the Author has made of the
Turks in general, describing their manners, riches, forces, government, and
religion. He begins his description with Asia the Less, which is at this day
called Natolia, or High Turkey, the which contains many provinces; and he
declares the bounds under what climat, in what parallel, and of what breadth the
country is. 2. A particular description of the provinces of High Turkey, and
first of Pontus and Bythinia, sometimes divided, their bounds, and chief
towns. 3 Asia, her bounds, and chief towns. 4. Phrygia, high and low, where
are yet to be seen the ruins of the great city of Troy. 5. Caria, Missia,
Ionia, Dorida, Lydia, and Lycia; their limits and towns. 6. Galacia, or
Gaulegrecia, her bounds, and extent. 7. Pamphylia. 8. Capadocia. 9. Cilicia.
10. Base Armenia. 11. Turcomania. 12. Georgia. 13. Arabia, divided into Desert
and Stony. 14. Arabia the Happy, her form and chief towns, amongst the
which is Mecca, whereas Mahomet was borne. 15. Idumea. 16. Syria, divided into
five provinces, of the which the first is Palestina. 17. Mesopotamia, or
Diarbek. 18. The quality and bounty of the air and soil of the said
provinces, and wherein they abound: first of all they are remarkable for the
great and goodly rivers of Natolia: The woods of Bythinia fit for shipping: The
Synnadike stone like unto the Alablaster of Asia: The hot waters of Hyerapolis
which turns to stone: The Adamant stone of Caria: The Vermilion of Ionia: The
golden sand of the rivers of Lydia, and the Saffron of Tmole. The three kinds
of 19. The Nature, Manners, Customs, and Laws of the ancient Arabians,
Sabeans, Nabatheans, Jews, and Cappad^cians. 20. Description of the manner of
living prescribed by 21. A relation of the manners, disposition, and kind of
living of the Turks, Arabians, Jews, and other nations inhabiting the
provinces of Asia: Their manner of habit, their meat, their arms, their
lodging in Tents, under Palm trees, and 22. Their wealth, consisting in the
traffic of Cotton, the Adamant stone, in mines of Copper, Chamlets, Iron,
Alume, Crystal, Iospis the Onix stone, Alablaster; The tribute of Pilgrims to
the Holy Sepulcher, and to Medina: Spices, precious stones, pearls, and
In^nse, 23. The number of the forts and places of most importance of all the
provinces of Asia subject to the Turk. 24. Of what religion and sects they be,
which inhabit these countries: and first of the Christians, Latins, and
Greeks, divided into many sects, that is to say, Melchites, Nestorians,
Dioscoriens, Armeniens, Iacobites, Maronites, and Costs; Their beginning, and
their errors in the faith 25. A discourse of the Turks in genera^l,
containing an ample relation of their manners, riches, forces, government or
policy, and religion. 26. The

Pliny writes) is about two hundred thousand paces, that is to say, from the
Isfike Baye, or gulf of Lajazze, unto Trebisonda, which is in the country of
Pontus. Wherein he agrees with Herodotus, who says, That the Istmus of Asia
the Less, contains about five days journey of a man that trauelleth well.

Giraua writes, or Becsangial, according to Castaldus, and some others. This
province is bounded upon the West, by the mouth of Pontus, by the Bosphorus of
Thrace, and by a part of the Propontides: upon the North by a part of the Euxin
Sea: on the South, by the province called particularly Asia, near to the river
of Rhindace: and on the East, Galacia, near to Paphlagonia. In this province
in old time were to be seen the famous towns of Chalcedonia, Nicomedia,
Apamia, Prusia, Nicea, and Heraclea of Pontus. Chalcedonia, a colonie of them
of Megara, has been famous by reason of the fourth Council that was held
there; but it is now ruined: yet some say, that it is standing right against
Constantinople,

Niger, and Isnich as others affirm, was in old time the chief city of
Bithinia: it is seated nerre to the lake of Isnich.

The province called particularly Asia, now Sabrum, or Sarcum, has for her
bounds Ptolome) upon the West, a part of the Propontides, Hellespont, and the

Phrygia is divided into high and low: the high lies toward the East, and base
Phrygia upon the West, and this is called Hellespontica, and Troada: Castaldus
says, that they nowcall it Sarcum. High Phrygia has at this day, as in former
times, more villages than towns. In it they reckon the town of Mydaia,
sometimes the abode of king Mydus near to the river of Sangar. Appamia, called
also in former times Sibotis, was the greatest town in Phrygia.

Belon, who says also that the rivers of Symois, Xante, and Scamandra are
small brooks, which dry up in Summer, and have no great store of water in
Winter. The city of Pergama was also in Troada, Galen. There they found out
the use of parchment. There remains nothing at this day but certain ruins;
yet they do still call this place Pergama.

Caria, lying betwixt Ionia and Licia, had in former times for her chief city
Halicarnassa,

Missia is divided by Ptolome into high and low. In old time there was a town
in this country, the which was called Lampsaca, and it is seated upon the
Hellespont right against Callipolis; butit has been ruined, and the place
where it stood is at this day called Niger writes, and according to Sophian,
Lampsica. Abidos, now Aueo, was a colonie of the Milesians. There is the strait
of Hellespont, being but seven stades broad. This town continues to this day,
and is seated in the midst of a moore, and well fortified, and her castle,
with that of Seste, which is right against it are two keys of the Turks
Empire: for from these two castles, they play with their canons upon all ships
that come into Hellespont, or attempt to go forth without the Turks
permission. There was also in former times to be seen the town of Adramisium,
a colonie of the Athenians, now called Landermitti. The river of Granica is in
this country, the which Niger calls Lassara, whereas Alexander vanquished
Darius Lieutenants.

The country of Eolia lies upon the coast of the Aegean sea, and the maritime
towns Tytus Liuius reports. Ionia has in length in a straight line forty
miles, and two hundred along the coast, whereas the town of Ephesus stands,
now called Figena or Fiena, according to Castaldus, but retaining the old names
as Sophian writes. It is famous by reason of the Council which was held there,
and of the Temple of Diana, numbering among

Dorida runs into the sea like a point, and contains the town of Guidos,
famous by reason of Venus statue: the place where it was, is called Capo Chio,
or Crio. Some do also put Hallicarnasse in this country, which is now called
Mesi, as we have said, according unto Sophian, and S. Peter's castle, as Nyger
and Vadianus writes. It was in this city that Mausolus king of Caria did
reign, for whom Artemesia caused that stately tomb to be built.

Lydia was also called Meonia. The chief town was Sardis, whereas Cressus
made his abode. It was ruined by an Earthquake, and built again by Tyberius.
Lycia was in old Stephanus writes. Gyraua affirms, that at this day they have
given it the name of Brichia. And Castaldus ascribes unto it that of Aldinelli:
but Theuet says, that the Arabians call it Bensaacam: this province
stretches to the sea which is called Lycian, by reason of the country; and it
has for bounds upon the West and North, Caria; upon the East, Pamphylia; and
upon the South, it is limited by the Lycian sea, about two hundred thousand
paces of Navigations. There were in former times sixty towns, whereof there
were six and thirty standing in the time of S. Paul. The chief were Xanthe,
Patara, Pinara, Olympe, Myrrha, and Lamyra: whereof the chief was Patara.
There was also the town of Telmesa, near unto a Cape or Promontorie of the
same name. Ancient authors place here the mountain of Chimera

Pyrrhus king of the Epyrotes, is at this day called Chiangara, according to
Castaldus. It has for bounds upon the West Bythinia and Phrygia: upon the
East, Capadocia: upon the South, Pamphylia: and upon the North, the Euxin sea,
whereas the shore runs two hundred and fifty thousand paces. The most famous
town is Ancyra, commonly called Angoure, famous by reason of the chamlets both
watered and others which are made there. In this province is the country of
Paphlagonia, whereas Synope is seated upon a little hill of a Peninsula of

Pliny Popsopia, carries at this day the name of Setilia, as Gyrana, and some
others affirm. Theuet says that the Arabians do call it, Zina; but Belon
assures that they have given to this province, and to Cilicia, the name of
Caramania, whereas the Turk has seven Sangiacs remaining. It is frontired
upon the East by Cilicia, and a part of Capadocia: upon the West, by Lycia, and
a part of the province of Asia: upon the North, Gallacia: and to the South, the
sea of Pamphylia, which is always raging. The coast is about one hundred and
fifty thousand paces. Her towns are Perga, which is in the midst of the
country upon the river of Cataracte,

Strabo, and some others (now Almasia, or Amasia, as Castaldus affirms, and
Genech, according unto Theuet, otherwise it is called Toccatu Allelujen, as
Spinet reports) extends unto the Euxin sea: and it is bounded in upon the West
by Paphlagonia, a part of Pamphylia, and Gallacia: upon the South, by a part of
Cilicia: upon the East, by the Antitaurus, a great mountain near to base
Armenia, by the mountain of Moschia, and a part of the river of Euphrates: and
on the North by the Euxin sea. Her rivers are Halis, now called Ottomagiuch,
sometimes the limit Cressus: then Iris, now called Casalmach, and Thermodon, now
Pormon. Her best towns are Trebyzonde, called Machomach by the Barbarians,
sometimes the seat of an Empire. Some make Amasia the chief of Paphlagonia;
but Ptolome and many others teach that it belongs to this province. This town
retains the name unto this day, Strabos country, and at this day the Turk
has a Beglia^bey remaining there, who is called the B^gliarbey of Amasia and
Cappadocia. Some put the town of Iconium in Cilicia; but (according to
Ptoleme) it belongs to this country, and is called Conia, or Cogna, it stands
near unto certain high mountains, and is watered by diverse small rivers
which flow from them. Her form is round, and the walls are ancient, and her
Towers square. There are eight gates, and a good number of fair Mosques and
Stoues.

Cilicia, which Josephus calls Tarses, is by the Hebrews termed Chalah. Niger
holds, that

Caramania, who does also comprehend some part of other provinces, besides
Silicia, and especially Pamphylia: it has for bounds upon the West, Pamphylia;
upon the North, Mount Taurus; upon the East, Mount Aman, vulgarly called Monte
Negro, or the Black mountain; and upon the South, the Sea of Cilicia, being
about three hundred thousand paces sailing. The chief town was Hama, or
Hamla, in old time Tarses, situated in a goodly valley, and watered by the
river of Cydne. There is also the town of Adena, called by Ptolome, Adana, the
which is great, but lies open, and has a castle with four square Towers.
Belon says, that in Cilicia, there is a town called Heraclea, the which is
very great, situated near to Mount Taurus in a goody plain, and

Base Armenia carries the same name at this day, as Niger writes: but Giraua
gives it Castaldus, Pegian, and some others call it Geneh. In the Book of
Notices, it has the name of Perme. Her bounds are upon the East, the river of
Euphrates, by the which it is divided from Turcomania, or high Armenia; upon
the West, Cappadocia; upon the Southern part, Cilicia, beyond Mount Taurus,
and a part of Syria to Mount Aman; and upon the North part, Pontus, at which
place they say it ends with an angle, which the river of Euphrates and
Antitaurus make; but the Turk is not absolute master.

To end the description of that which the Turk holds in Asia, let us now come
to a Castaldus gives it the name

Georgia, otherwise called Gurgestan, comprehends the ancient Iberia, with a
part of

into the Desert, the Stony, and the Happy.

Arabia the Desert, called Aspre by Aristides, Base by Seruius, and Hollow and
Deep by Lucian, is called by the Hebrews, Cedar. The bounds are upon the East,
the mountains of Babylon, and a part of the Persian gulf; upon the North,
Mesopotamia, near to the river of Euphrates; upon the West, Syria, and Arabia
the Stony; and upon the South, the Happy mountains.

Arabia Petrea, or the Stony, joins to Syria upon the West and North; and
confines with the Desert upon the East; and upon the South, it borders with
Arabia the Happy. Pliny, Strabo, and Ptolome, call it Nabathea; Tyrius gives
it the name of the Second, and some others call it Base Arabia. But it has the
name of Petrea, of the town Petra, Ziglerus writes; Bangaucal, according to
Castaldus, and Battha Calha. Mount Sinay, so famous in the Holy Scripture,
whereas the law was given unto Moses, is in this country. This mountain is
very high and troublesome to ascend, and therefore they have cut stairs in
the rock, to the end that Camells and other beasts might pass more easily. In
this mountain there is a Convent of Christian Monks, called Maronites, which
live after the Grecian manner: they are fifty in number, and receive Christian
Pilgrims which go thither for devotion. There is also in this country,
another famous mountain called Oreb, and now Orel, the which is not so high as
that of Sinay. These two mountains are by Ptolome called Melanes. The chief
town of the country was called Petra, which Mahomet was borne: the which is
not probable, but it seems rather to be that which the Maps call Petra of Est.
And moreover, they hold that Mecca is in Arabia the Happy.

Solynus and some others call it Happy; and Virgil, Panchaia, but at this
present it carries the name of Yaman, or Gyamen. The chief towns are Medina
Tanalbi, Mecca, Ziden, Zibi, and Aden; besides others which are not come to our
knowledge.

Medina Tanalbi, that is to say, the City of the Prophet, is situated near
to Arabia Petrea, and it is well peopled. Mahomets coffin is there, near unto
which there are continually about three thousand lamps burning. Mecca, in the
which Mahomet was borne, is not far from the ancient Petra; yet it is not
the same, but it may rather be the town of Mechara, mentioned by Ptolome. This
place is reasonably pleasant, but restrained betwixt mountains and deserts,
and without any walls, having in it near six thousand families. There come
yearly three Carauannes, which part from Caire, Damas, and the Indies, and go
to Mecca for devotion, in honor of Mahomet who was borne there, then they go
to a place called Medina, whereas (they say) the coffin of this false Prophet
remains.

Ziden is a Sea town, forty miles distant from Mecca. It has no walls, but
the houses are reasonable fair. Zebeth, or Zibit, is a good town, and the
chief of that part of Arabia. It stands in a plain, betwixt two mountains,
and upon a river of the same name, half a days journey from the Red Sea. It
was taken after Aden by the Turk, who sent a Begliarbey thither with great
forces.

Aden is a royal town, seated upon the borders of the Red Sea, near unto the
strait of Babel Mandel: it is the fairest town of Arabia, and not only strong
by situation, but also by art; where there are two Bostians, a good fort, and
a port well defended. It contains about six thousand households, and is well
peopled. The Turks took this town and the whole realm by policy, in the
year of our Lord God 1538, and they lost their

At this present time they have a Begliarbey there, with good troops of
soldiers for the war.



Syria, which is a very great province betwixt the river of Euphrates, Sil^cia,
Arabia, and the Mediterranean sea, begins in the two and thirtieth degr^^e, and
e^ds in the six and thirtieth. It is divided into five provinces, which be
Palestina, Phenicia, Celosyria, Suria, and Comagena: Palestina, which lies
betwixt the Mediterranean sea and Arabia, is divided into two parts by the
river of Jordan. The Tribe of Ruben, and half the Tribe of Manasses dwelt
beyond this river, and the others on this side. This latter is subdivided David
caused to be Benjamin: but now she is stripped of all her ornaments, except the
beauty and bounty of the soi^e.

Ierusal^m, at the siege of which there died above a million of persons, and
one hundred thousand taken prisoners, has not at this day above five thousand
inhabitants, and if the holiness of the pla^e did not continually draw a great
number of Christians thither, this town would be of no fame. This province is
crossed by the river of Jordan, which rising at the foot of Mount Lybanus, from
two fountains, whereof, the one is called Ior, and the other Dan, passes by
two lakes, whereof the first is that of Gallile, and the other of Tyberiades,
the which is the greater: finally, it falls into the dead sea,

Phenicia lies all upon the sea right against Judea. Her chief towns were
Tire and Sydon, at this day Sait and Sur. Tire was an Island, but so near unto
the firm land, as Alexander filled up the sea with earth whenas he besieged
the town. The Prophet Ezechiell speaks much of her greatness, wealth, and
state. Sydon was in a manner equal to Tire in beauty and power. Both were
famous by reason of the dying of purple, which the Poets do sometimes call
Tyrien, sometimes Sydonien. There are ^^arce any remainders to be seen at this
day, no more than of Ioppa, or of Acre.

Suria extends from Tire unto the gulf of Lajazze, in which tract are
contained the towns of ^arut, Tripoli, and To^^o^a, where of Barut and Tripol
are places of great

Celosyria, is properly the country betwixt Lybanon, and Antilybanon, from
whence springs the river of Orontes now called Farfara, upon the banks whereof
stands the famous city of Antioche, which is now a sepulcher of it self, and
a heap of ruins, rather than any other thing. But the walls are yet standing,
the which are very fair, and so Peter kept, with a little place where he
baptized many. At the mouth of the river of Orontes stands Seleucia Pieria, at
this day Soldin.

Camogena is that part of Syria, which follows the course of the river of
Euphrates, unto the frontires of Armenia. Aleppo is the chief town, and holds
the third place

Semiramis, and he also is master of Chaldea, which is a portion of Assyria,
in which is the town of Bagdet or Bagade^ built upon the ruins of Babylon, by
a Calife of the Mahometans. Some confound it ancient Babylon, and maintain
that it is the same. He has Balze^e yet in his power, whereas he maintains a
great garrison, and has always certain galleys ready to make head against
the Portugal.

But for that we have made a description of all these countries, discoursing of
the estates of the kings of Persia, and that the Sophy does daily win something
from the Turk,

The Quality.
C^staldus calls Chaici, and Ortelius Chias, and the river Meander, which

Bythinia yields much corn, and does furnish the great Turks court with
meal, especially that which is near unto Bursa. This country does so abound
in wood and timber for the making of ships, as it seems galleys fall ready
made into that sea, they are so soon finished. Near unto Nicea they find good
store of Orpiment or Arcenick.

The particular province of Asia was in old time famous for the Sinnadicke
stone, like in a manner to Alablaster, the which they carried to Rome to make
pillars.

In Troada the country near unto Troy is very lean and barren, and withal
it wants water: ^ut the soil near unto Pergama is very good and fruitful.
There are also quarries of stone, whereas in former times they have found men
which had hidden themselves during the wars, converted into stone. Strabo
writes, that near to Hierapolis,

As for Caria, in former times they have much esteemed the soil near unto
Magnesia, for that it did bear abundance of wheat, and near unto this city
they do also find the Adamant stone, called by the Latins, Magnes. There are
also mountains in Curia, whereas they dig a kind of white stone for
building, the which shines much. This province has been in former times much
shaken with earthquakes.

Touching Missia, some hold that the vines which are in the territory of
Aspic, or Lampsic,

Lydia had in former times many rivers which fall from Mount Tmolus, which
carried gold among the sand, and it did also yield silver; and moreover, the
country was very fertile, and well manured. The mountain of Tmolus has
been much esteemed for the fertility thereof: And among other things, there
are great store of vines, and abundance of Saffron.

Lycia is very rough and troublesome by reason of Mount Taurus, which has his
beginning there. The top of Mount Chimera, was in old time full of Lions, the
midst with goats, by reason of the good pastures, and the foot with Serpents.
This was the

Cappadocia abounds with all sorts of grain, wines, fruit, and also with
Silver, Copper, Iron, Alume, Crystal, Iaspis, Onix, and Allablaster, which is
not very saire: And this country does breed great store of horses. The^e are
others which say that this country is rough, and defective of many things
necessary for the life of man. Pliny writes, that near unto the river of
Thermodon, there are two kinds of Bees, whereof the one

Cilicia is divided into two: one part is called Rough, which lies toward the
West; and the other, Champian or Plain, upon the East. This has goodly
rivers, yields store of fruit, and all kind of commodities, and does feed great
numbers of horses. The greatest part of Cilicia is reasonably well manured, by
reason of the commodity of rivers wherewith it is watered: yet the soil is
full of clay, and wants wood, so as they are feign Pliny has written that the
water is good to cure the gout. They find also little Wolves there, which go in
troops, the which the Grecians do vulgarly call Squilaques, the which are so
theeuish as they fear not to go in the night to them that sleep, and to
steal from them whatsoever they find, as caps, shoes, and such like. Belon
says, That near to Heraclea, there is a goodly plain, which bears all kind
of (...)

High Armenia is full of mountains and hills, yet there are valleys which
yeel^ great store of fruit. Some hold that this country is very fertile, and
abouns in cattle; but it is very subject to snow, the which lies sometimes
very deep. Georgia has many mountains and forests; by reason whereof it is
in a manner inaccessible for any enemy: yet it is fertile, and has some
plains, and pleasant valleys, watered by diverse rivers, whereof the principal
are Cyre, and Araxis.

Arabia the Desert, has great Wildernesses, and yet there are many bouroughs
and inhabitants, especially near to the river of Euphrates, and the mountains
of Arabia the

Arabia the Happy is better manured and tilled than the two other, and is
watered by many rivers, whereof some make lakes. It bears barley, and other
grain, honey, vax, and diverse fruits, as Apples, Pears, Citrons, and such
like: and here they sow twice, as at

Palestina is very pleasant, diuersified with hills and goodly plains, and
watered with many rivers. It raines often, and therefore the land is very
fruitful; for it yields abundance of wheat, and other grains, and fruits.
The Roses have an excellent smell, and there grows store of Rue, Fennel,
Sage, and other good herbs. There are also many

There is store of Goats, Hares, Partridges, Quails, and such like: but
although I have

The lake of Samachonita is most commonly dry in the Summer time, in the which
there grows little trees and shrubs, whereas Lions and other beasts hid
themselves. The plains near adjacent unto the lake of Genezareth, are desert,
by reason of a tree full of thorns, which grow there in such exceeding
abundance, as they cannot sow any thing to prosper.

The Dead Sea, which is five days journey long from North to South, and five
leagues broad from East to West, and as some write, seventy miles long, and
nineteen broad, casts forth a great fume, and such fogges, as it makes all the
land barren half a league about. This sea has no fish, neither are there any
soul seen near unto it, and

Galilee is naturally fertile, and yields all sortsof trees, and is very well
manured; yet the base country which lies beyond Jordan is in some places
stony and desert.

Samaria is part hilly and part plain. The country is pleasant, fertile, and
abounds with fountains and fresh waters. There are many gardens, and places
full of olive trees, and all other things necessary for the life of man. The
hills ne^re to Naplos are covered with fruit trees, and the olive trees are
exceeding big, as Belon writes.

As for Judea, the country which is near to Jerusalem is well manured, and
bears store

Near unto the town of Rama, the soil is good, but there are few
inhabitants, by reason whereof the fields are not well ti^led, and the Grecians
which live there sow wheat, barley, and some pulses, but there are few vines.
The soil which is near to the town of Gaza is fertile, and abounds with
olive trees figgs, oranges, and vines. there grow also some palm trees, but
the dates do seldom ripen, for that the country is somewhat cold.



The soil of Phenicia near unto Sydon is fertile, and brings forth plenty of
canes of honey. That about Acon, or Ptolomaida is also fruitful, where they
have good pastures, store of vines, and many orchards, whereas they gather
diverse fruits. The river of Belo, which passes near unto this town, is
famous by reason of the sand which they use for

The country about Emissa or Haman, has plenty of waters, and yields all
things necessary for the life of man, being full of fruit trees.

The Manners of the ancient.
THe Arabians made no esteem of arts and sciences. They suffered their hair
to grow;

Adultery among them was punished with death, and he was held an adulterer
which enioied a woman that was not his kinswoman. All that were borne in the
family were held for lawful husbands. They had no care of dead bodies: and as
for their d^ce^^ed kings, they sent them to be bur^ed in a dunghill. They kept
their promise and faith very strictly; and when they would promise any thing
upon their faith, a third person interposed himself betwixt the two which
contracted, and stroke the palm or his hand, to Denis and Urania: this done
the mediator cau^^^ one of one of them to promise, that he was bound by the
accord to appea^e before a (...) Judge which he named unto him, whether that he
which was bound were of the country

There were some amongst the Arabians called Ophiophages, for that they lived
only of se^^ents. Some there were that used camells, as well to fight on, as
to bear

Among the Sabians it did belong only to the king to judge of controversies.
Their kings were chosen by the favor of the people, who gave this honor to
them that were of some noble family, out of which they found that some kings
had been formerly chosen. These kings did confidently believe that if they had
gone out of their royal palace,

The Gareenesw, ho were other Arabians, had all their furnitures of gold and
silver, and the entries of their houses, the walls, and couerings were of
Iuorie. The Nabatheans were not so stately as the rest. He among them that had
diminished his estate was noted with infamy. The Panchaiens used chariots in
war, and they divided their realm into three parts: in the first rank they
put the priests of their law: in the second, the laborers, and men of travel:
and in the third, the soldiers, among whom were comprehended

The laborers having gathered in the fruits of the earth, laid them in common,
and they that were found the best laborers, were deputed to the number of ten
at the request of the rest, and by the resolution of the priests, to distribute
the fruits to every one.

The laborers were bound to use diligence to bring in public those things
which concerned the sacrifices, and other things which were distributed
particularly by number and weight, and they had nothing private to themselves,
but their houses and gardens. As for tributes and other things all was
delivered unto the priests, who distributed equally

They suffered their soldiers to defend the country. Their priests lived in
great pleasure, yet chastely. They did use long albes of very fine linen, and
some did wear gowns of exceeding fine wool. Their head were covered with
myters made of goldsmiths work, and they used all ornaments of gold like to
women, except their ear rings. They did

They bragged that they were descended from Jupiter, saying that he came into
their country, whenas conuersing amongst men, he governed the Empire of the
world.

It was not lawful to transport their gold, silver, or other mettalls out of
the country,

The Jews which did sometimes inhabit Judea, Samaria, Galile, and some other
countries, received precepts for their course of living from Moses, to whom
God prescribed Josephus has written.

First of all, he ordained, That children in their youth should be instructed
in the law, as in that which contained all good precepts and instructions: That
he which blasphemed the name of God, should be hanged, and left unburied: That
nothing that had been gotten by fornication, should be offered in the temple.
He instituted in every town seven men, excellent in justice and wisdom, to
whom he gave authority to judge of all controversies, calling two Levites unto
them, and if there were any great difficulty, he would have it decided by the
chief priest of the law. He would not have credit given to one Moses
commanded that they should then begin to pay the tyth. He would have them
distribute some part of the fruits gathered (the tyth being paid) unto their
nearest kinsfolks, and to strangers that were their guests, and that the rest
should be his that had planted or sown it. He did forbid them to hinder
passengers, to enter into another man's ground, to gather the fruits, where of
they had need for their present necessity. He did forbid them to marry those
maids who had publicly exposed themselves, or such as had been formerly
married. He ordained, That an unchaste maid, which had been M^yses did also
ordain, That things taken by force from his people by foreign nations, or by
any of the same nation, should first be demanded by Heralds, and in case of
refus^ll, they Lepers, and such as had an issue of blood, were expelled out of
towns. They in whose

The Israelites above all other people have bin very religious, and given to
ceremonies. Aries, they made the sacrifice of the Paschallambe, for that they
came out of Egypt at the same time. They did observe certain days of the
Azimes, or unleavened bread, and during every one of these days, they burnt in
their sacrifices, two bulls, a ram, and seven lambs, with a goat. The second
kind of sacrifice of the Azimes, was at the first coming of new fruits, and
corn, which they presented in the temple, with a certain measure of oil, and
a lamb for a Holocaust. Much more may be spoken of this subject, but it would
require a whole volume: wherefore it shall suffice to have touched the
principal points.

Sacred and profane Authors agree not touching the Jews: for Cornelius
Tacitus (who refers not the going of the children of Israel out of Egypt, and
their passage to Judea to the will of God) writes, That there happened a kind
of scabbe at that time in Bochoris was forced to demand a remedy of Jupiter
Hammon; to whom the oracle made answer, That he must pourge his realm of the
Jews, who were unpleasing unto the gods, and send them to live in some other
place: the which he did, and in the end an infinite company of people infected
Moses, prevailed so with them, as he persuaded them not to believe either in
God or man, but in him only, and in this sort they took the first way which
fortune offered them, and went by hazard; that during their travel, they had
no trouble, but only thirst, wherewith they had perished, if they had not
discovered a troop of wild asses, the which having fed, drew toward a rock,
covered with a forest that was round about it, where having found water, they
received from Moses ceremonies quite contrary to those of other men. He says
also, that in the holiest places of their Temple, they did set up the image of
an affe, by the which they had found the place where they quenched their thirst,
and had Jupiter Hammon, and an ox in contempt of the Egyptians, who
worshipped this beast under the name of the god Apis. He says moreover, that
the Jews abstain from eating of swines flesh, to avoid scabs and leprosy,
whereunto this beast is subject, and that they forbear all work upon the
seventh day, for that they were at rest upon that day, and for the same reason
they pass the seventh year without doing any thing, and that some affirm it
was in honor of Saturn, by reason of the hunger which they had endured.
According to the same author, they did never banquet one with another: they
lodged apart, and were inclined to whoredom. They first thing they, did was to
contemn the gods. They were of opinion, that those which died in battle,

There were three sects among the Jews, who had a different kind of living
from the common sort. The first was of Pharasies, the second of Saduces, and
the third of Esseniens. The Pharisees led an austere life in show, interpreting
the law of Moses according to their own will. They carried papers upon their
foreheads and left arms, wherein the ten commandments of the law were
written. These papers were called Phylacteries. They also ware greater
imbroderies upon their gowns, and they sowed thorns in them, to the end their
pricking might put them in mind of the commandments of the law. They did
attribute all things to God, and predestination. It is true, they confess that
Moses. They were very severe, and did confer little among themselves. The
Esseniens lived altogether like unto Monks, and they did abstain from
marriage, and from the company of women, not in detestation of marriage, or
for any desire they had that mankind should perish, but only for fear of the
lightness and incontinencie of women, whom they hold to be faithless and
unconstant to their husbands. Theybrought all their goods in common, and held
it a dishonor to use ointments and stones; and contrariwise, they held it for
an honorable thing to be careless of their persons, and that it was sufficient
to have their white gowns. They did not speak of any worldly thing before the
rising of the Sun, but they prayed unto God that the Sun might years
trial to know his manners: if they found him in sin, they chased him from

They of Cappadocia were of that disposition, as they could not live without
kings,


IN Natolia, the middle part of the country is inhabited by people which are
of base condition. The natural Turks which do remain in all this country
are more simple and rude than any other neither are they so cruel, as they
which have left the Christian religion. There is not any nobility by race, but
they are all equal, and are held by the Turks in manner of slaves. The
contrie men are altogether idle and slothful, taking little pains to till
and manure the ground, especially, they which are of the richer sort; and if
their slaves did not the labor, the land would be soon desert and Belon
reports, are neither given to the taking of fish, nor to make voiages by sea,
and they leave their land ill husbandred and manured, although it be very good,
and ^^th many rivers to water it. In Idumea, the inhabitants of Catia use
pigeons to send advice to Caire of that which passes. They tie letters under
their wings, and they never stay until they come to the pigeon house of the
castle, whereas they find their companions. It is six days journey from one
place unto another, and by desert countries.

Palestina has inhabitants in a manner of all nations, as of Arabians, Turks,
Jews, Grecians, Syrians, Armenians, Georgians, Nubiens, Abissines, Indians,

As for Judea, there are many people of all nations which go to I^rusalem, and
which dwell there, and whosoever will enter into the Holy Sepulcher, must pay
nine crowns. Pilgrims which come thither are received according to the
religion whereof they make profession. The Latins are entertained by the
religious of the order of S. Francis, who live without the town upon Mount
Syon; the Grecians are received by the Caloyers which live within the city,
near to the Holy Sepulcher, and the rest, as Abissins, Georgians, Armenians,
Nestorians, Maronites, and others, lodge with them of their sect, Francis, who
are for the most part Italians, have been accustomed to create knights of the
Holy Sepulcher, and their great masters give patents to Pilgrims, which are
sent thither to certify that they have been there. Near unto Rama, there are
none but Greeks, Turks, and Arabians, who are very careful to manure and
trim their vines. The Idumeans are in a manner like to the Arabians, their
neighbors, in behavior.

The Arabians are swart, witty, subtle, superstitious, given to traffic,
desirous of revenge and troubles, loving innouations, and the change of
affairs. They are all in a manner thieves, and do much annoy travelers. They
have more subtlety and industry than force; they fight without order, and
trusting in their numbers, they charge their enemies

Those that are right Arabians, lodge under Tents, and they that live in towns
are called Moors, they live most commonly of cakes roasted upon the embers.
Oil is one of their greatest delights. Their treasure consists in camells, in
some horses, and in their arms, which they leave for an inheritance. They
never shoe their horses, and use very light saddles. They have a great
conceit of their nobility.

The inhabitants of Turcomania are great thieves, who draw their beginning from
the Tattarians, and spend their lives under Tents, keeping their flocks: yet
there are some borne in the country which give themselves to tillage, and to
mechannique arts. There

The Curdes use the like manners. The Georgians are many in number, and
exceeding valiant, especially they that live in the mountains. They are very
strong, and have maintained their liberty unto our days among the Mahometans,
but they have been forced in the end to yield unto the Turks.

The Riches.
THe principal revenue of Natolia, consists in Cotton, which grows there
abundantly. store of Chamlets of Goats hair, for the which they receive much
money from strangers.

The Forces.


As for Syria, the castle of Damas is exceeding good, and that of Antioch is
not to be contemned. In Comagena, the town of Aleppo is of great importance,
and the castle buil^ on the side of a hill, makes it more strong. The rest that
is to be seen in all these

The Religion.
Francis, which dwell in Jerusalem, and at Bethelem, they find few that live
among the Armenians after the manner of the Latin Church. Alangiacana is a
castle, two days journey from Tauris, the which has five and twenty villages
under her jurisdiction, that acknowledge the Romish Church, although they
speak the Armenian tongue.

The inhabitants of these places were converted by father Bartholomew of
Bolonia, of the order of S. Dominick, who was made Bishop of Armenia, in the
year of our Lord John the twelfth. At that time (as we have said) there were
five (...) ^wentie villages; but at this day there are but twelve that persist
in the obedience of the C^u^ch of Rome, and of the other thirteen. Some have
submitted themselves to the Patriarch of High Armenia, and the others have
been ruined during the wars which Dominicke, under an Archbishop of the same
order, who is made by their Chapter, and by the chief of the villages, and
then confirmed by the Pope.

It is not long since that the Latins had Churches at Bursia and Trebysonde:
but for want of priests, the Churches, and Latin ceremonies have been lost: so
as the religion of the Armenians, or that of the Grecians has succeeded them.

Let us now come to the other Christians, which are divided into three sects,
that is to Basil, of which order there are many conuents through out all the
Leuant: but the most famous are those of S. Sabe in Jerusalem, of S. Katherine
upon Mount Sinay, and of the holy mountain upon the Archipelagus. These
Melchites retain all the errors which were in old time condemned by the
Grecians at the Council of Florence, and it is thought their are more of this
sect in the East, than of all the rest; for all Natolia is full, and in like
manner Suria, and it extends into Egypt, and beyond it into Corazzan, a
province of Persia. They do also put the Georgians among the Melchites, who
acknowledge under, one Metropolitan, the George, as their Advocate. There are
some among them which have made themselves Mahometans.

There are also Nestorians in this part which we have described, of whose
errors we have spoken in the discourse of the Sophies Estate. These Nestorians
speak the Chaldean, Arabian, and the Turkish tongues, with that of Curdestan,
according to the places whereas they live; but they celebrat divine service in
the Chaldean tongue.

Moreover there are Dioscoriens, which are divided into three sects, that is to
say, Armeni^ns, Iacobites, and Costs. The Armeniens give the title of
Patriarch to many of their Prelates, made partly by the Turks favor, (for
these farm the impositions and tributes which the Armenian houses pay unto the
Turk) and are chosen by Coadiutors Mahomet, who did recommend them passionatly
to his successors; so as they have enioied great privileges, by means
whereof, they traffic freely with the Mahometans. The Armenians dwell at Sis
in Ad, at Matas, and thereabouts, at Tharsis, at Lajazze in Aleppo, and at
D^randa. There are about twenty thousand families of them. They have eighteen
monasteries, and four and twenty

There is to be seen at Sis, the palace, and ruins of the king of Armenias
castle, with two Churches which are near unto it, the one of S. Saviors,
which was the kings, and the other of S. Sophia, which did belong unto the
patriarch. They have no other images but crosses of brass and iron, yet they
have diverse relickes in shrines of silver. The patriarch was woon^ to take a
maidin, which is the value of a penny, of every household: but the Turk has
taken this right from him; so as he now lives of offerings and alms: and to
maintain himself more easy, he does visit the province continually, and
entertaines (...) family with amerciaments which he imposes upon them that
offend. The Pater (...) in the Armenian.

They have many errors which are common to them and to the Dioscoriens; but
those which they have particular to themselves, are, that they consecrat with
pure wine: they eat figgs and milk, on the Saturday at night before Easter,
and flesh every Friday, from Easter unto the Ascension. They celebrat the
Annunciation of the Virgin the sixth of April, and the Nativity of our Lord,
the sixth of January, the Purification, the fourteenth of February. They
assure that Jesus Christ was exempt from passions, and the necessities of
humane nature. They abstain during five Saturdaies of the year to kill Julian
the Apostat. Yet they think themselves to be conformable to the Roman Church,
for that they alone, of all the Eastern sectaries, celebrat the sacrament with
unleavened bread: and whereas they put no water in their wine, they say that
the Latin Church used it in old time. They also make the sign of the Cross
with two fingers, and not with one like unto the Iacobites; and they make it
first on the Siluester, and of the Emperor Constantin.

To come unto the Iacobites, you must understand that Dioscores and Eutyches
dissenting from the Council of Chalcedonia, had followers who divided
themselves, as Leoncius writes, into twelve sects, among which, was that of the
Iacobites, so called of one Jacob a Syrian, who lived in the time of Pelagius
the second, and of the Emperor Mauricius. They comprehended under this name a
part of the Chaldeans, which dwell in the towns and villages of Mesopotamia,
Babylon, and Suria, to the number of one hundred and sixty thousand families,
or thereabouts, and the principal are in Aleppo, at Caramit, and

They were in former times subject to two Patriarchs, whereof the one remained
in the foresaid mountain of Tur, and the other in the monastery of Gifran,
near to the town of Mordin, which stands upon so high a mountain, as they
that live there (as the Turks say) never see any birds flying over their
heads. But at this day, the Iacobites have but one Patriarch, which is he of
Gifran, who for his greater commodity lives at Caramit. This Patriarch has
under him a Metropolitan in Jerusalem, and another at Musali, and Archbishops
at Damas, Or^e, Saur, Caramit, and in Cypres; and he has other Archbishops in
the aforesaid provinces, with many monasteries of religious men of the order of
S. Antonie.

The Iacobites celebrat in the Chaldean tongue, and speak Arabian, Turkish,
and Armenian. Besides their errors common with the Armenians, they have others.
They make the sign of the Cross with the singer next unto their thumbs, to
signify an unity of nature of will, and of operation in Jesus Christ. They
eat (contrary to the rule and general

Some think that the Maronits are a branch of the Iacobites: for these two
sects were in old time subject to the Patriarch of Antioch, the which is now in
the hands of the Melchites, Ignatius, and they of the Maronits, that of Peter,
and both call themselves Patriarchs of Antioch. They derive the name of
Maronits, either from Marona a village of Mount Lybanon, or from the Abbot
Maron, or as it is generally held, from Maron the Arch heretic. It is the
least sect among all the Christians of the East, there being not above twelve
thousand households, and most of them poor. They live in the villages of Mount
Lybanon, and in the towns of Surya: yet this sect is most affected to the Sea
of Rome, whereof it has made profession these four hundred Peter, Patriarch
of the Maronits, sent Ambassadors to the Council of Latran, in the year of
our Lord God 1515, Pope Gregory sent two Jesuits unto them, who having caused
a Synod to be called, whereas the Patriarch and his Bishops met, they brought
them to a full profession of the Catholic faith: so as they burnt their
books, which were full of errors, and drew their religious men into two
monasteries, being dispersed here and there, giving order that children might
be instructed in the Christian religion.

The Patriarch of the Maronits is of the order of S. Anthony. He is chosen by
the Bishops and religious men, and then confirmed by the Pope. His residence is
at Tripoli of Surya. There are some Conuents of S. Anthony, and a small number
of Bishops, who Maron; but they say that it is not that Arch-hereticke, but an
Abbot of a very holy life. Among the Maronits they find some which are called
white, who not being baptized, call themselves Christians, and are confessed, and
do communicate in secret, and yet in outward show they live like Mahometans.

The Curdes are for the most part Iocobits and Nestorians, but with many other
errors, and a wonderful ignorance of divine things. There are also many
Mahometans among them.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE TVRKES IN GENERAL.
The manners at this day.
THe Turks are partly Origina^ies, and draw their beginning from the Scythians
or Tartarians, and part of them descend from Christians Apostotats. and love
money above all the nations of the world: for justice is sold in Turkey (as a
man

The Turks haues permission to marry as many wives as they can entertain.
After a Turkish woman is great with child, the husband touches her no more
until she be delivered, but he lies with his ^laues, out of the house where
his wife remains. The Turks have a kind of marriage made at pleasure, which
they call Kebin, the which is often practiced by strangers, who being out of
their country, make an agreement with certain women, whom they enjoy during
their pleasure, and when they cast them off, they are bound to give them a
certain sum of Aspres, and to keep the children. The Judges, whom they call
Cadis, forbid this Kebin, especially amongst Christians, unless it be with an
oath of marriage. A Turk having had the use of a Christian woman, is condemned
to die, and in like manner the woman, unless she receive the law of Mahomet:

The Turks play neither at cards nor dice. They are charitable, and give great
alms, not only to them of their own sect, but also to Christians, and to men
of all professions: Mahomet, wear it green. They never take off their Turban
whenas they will salute any one, and do him honor; and with them the left
hand is most honorable. They that are rich, and hold any rank among them, go
most commonly on horseback. They are slouenly in their feeding, and have not
those delights and dainties that are among us. They eat thrice a day, that is
to say, at the break of day, at noone, and at

They eat all kind of flesh except it be swines flesh, which is forbidden by
their law.

Their houses are for the most part of timber and earth, and are little and and
ill built, and they hold it for a great sin to build any houses that last
above a man's life: yet they

They always study how to have the advantage of their neighbors, and what
they cannot get by force, they seek to obtain it by subtlety and treachery.
If their enterprises succeed not happily, they are not ashamed to run away: yet
they are reasonable good soldiers, and their best property is, they are
careful to observe military discipline. They



They use no kind of seal, either in the kings patents, or in any other
letters, neither do they mark them with any figure. They have no bells,
neither do they suffer the Christians which live in their country to have any.
They put off their shoes whenas they

As for the princes children, they are-taught by an old doctor called Hogea, to
read the that during a princes life, no man speaks truth of him, and that
being dead, his memory

The Emperor of the Turks has a great number of them in diverse Serrails, and
many times there are above three hundred in that of Constantinople: the which
number increases or decreaseth according to his wars; for that the fairest
women that can be found are brought unto the Turk: of all these, the Sultania
is lady and mistress, which is she whom the great Turk favors most, and
having had issue by her, she is held for the first, and chiefest of all his
women: the rest as they are in grace with the prince, are brought unto him to
have his pleasure of them, and then they are sent back again: if happily they
be with child, they are put into the number of the Sultanias, and much
countenanced by the prince, who does greatly augment their means and revenues.
They that are not pleasing to the prince (for that they are not beautiful)
learn to low,

The Turkish women are never seen in any assemblies of men, and they are
strictly forbidden to go to market to buy or fell in any sort whatsoever: and
in the great Mosquee, they have a place separated from that of men, and so
close, that no man may see

Great noblemen which cannot remain continually with their wives, leave them
under the charge of certain eunuchs, who keep them in such sort, as it is
impossible for them to do wrong unto their honors, or that any one should have
their companies, but their husbands.

The Turks do not circumcise their children the eight day after their birth,
but when the infant is come to the age of knowledge, to make confession of his
faith after this Mahomet is, one God, and equal Prophets. The circumcision
being ended, they feast three days together, and then the circumcised is
carried to a bath with great pomp, and the guests carry him back to the
house, where they present him with gifts. Some give him apparel of silk,
others silver vessel, some money, and some horses, according to the quality
of the circumcised. The women give shirts, handkerchefs, and such like, and
every one gives according to their will and means. The women are not
circumcised, but only speak the foresaid words. If any Christian does
willingly confess Mahomet, and endure circumcision, the which does often
happen by reason of the insupportable yoke, and charge of tributes,


THe Turks empire comprehends countries that abound in all things: for there
is not any country richer in wheat, and all other grain, than Egypt,
Afric, Surya, and Asia; nor that is more plentiful of all other things, than
Hungary, Greece, and Thrace. In all his countries, he has towns whose wealth
is inestimable, as Constantinople, Caire, Aleppo, and many others.
Constantinople is a city whether merchants come from all parts, and in a
manner all the silver of the Turks empire is employed there. Aleppo is

As for the great Turks revenues, some are of opinion, that he has but eight
millions of gold for his ordinary revenues; and they say, that although in
appearance he should have much more, by reason of his great and large dominions,
yet it proves otherwise; for that the Turks have no care but of arms, which
(in all men's judgments) are fitter to ruin and destroy, than to preserve and
enrich a country: and moreover, the

Moreover, all traffic and commerce is in a manner in the hands of Jews, and
Christians of Europe, as Ragousans, Venetians, French, and English; and in so
great a country, as they hold in Europe, they have no other towns of great
traffic, than Constantinople, Caffa, Salonica, or Thessalonica: in Asia,
Aleppo, Damas, Tripoli, and Aden:

But although the ordinary revenues be no greater, or more copious, than we
have formerly said, (some write that he has fifteen millions of gold yearly,
whereof five are put up in his coffers and the other ten employed for the
entertainment of his Estate) yet does he make great account of his
extraordinary profits, and especially of confiscations, and presents: for the
Bashas, and other chief officers of that crown, which suck the blood of the
Turks subjects, gather together inestimable treasures, which in the end fall
Abrahim Basha did carry out of that famous city of Caire, the value of above
six millions: Mehemet Visir had a greater sum: Occh^ali, besides his other
wealth, had five thousand slaves: Selymus the seconds sister, called Sultana,
had 2500 Chequines of rent every day, and she was so rich, as she began an
aqueduct which should go from Caire to Mecca, for the ease of pilgrims, which
was an enterprise worthy of a great prince, and of an infinite charge.
Moreover,

The Vayuodes of Moldauia, Valachia, and Transiluania, maintain themselves in
their principalities by means of their presents and gifts, and they of
Valachia, and

The Forces.
THe forces of the great Turk consist in treasure, horsemen, footmen, fleets
at Sea, and munition. As for his treasure, we have already spoken of it: But
notwithstanding that we have said that his revenues are not so great as his
large dominions might well require, yet he draws a profit from his Estate,
which is of far greater importance than his revenues. This profit is nothing
else but the great number of his Tymarets; for the Turkish Emperors make
themselves immediate masters and lords of all the lands Georgieuiz
Ierosolimitamus has written, That there is not any Governor or Basha that
enjoys any province or town by right of inheritance, or can leave it to his
children and successors after his death, without the princes favor and
consent: If any great man will have any certain possessions, it is lawful
upon these conditions: They look very exactly and narrowly to the price and
revenues of the said possessions: And the Turk does also know how many
soldiers may be fed and entertained of this yearly Tacitus writes, that the
choice they made of young men to that effect made the Flemings to revolt. In
the same Roman Empire, there were Timarets given for life unto soldiers, in
recompense of their services: Alexander Seuerus granted to the heirs of
soldiers that they might enjoy those provisions, so as they went to the
wars, and not otherwise. Constantin the Great gave unto his captains (which
had well deserved) the lands which until that time had been only enioied for
life: and in France the fees which were but for a certain time, are become
perpetual under some of their kings, desiring to content such as might trouble
their Estates.

But to return to our discourse, this Turkish cauallarie works two important
effects, whereof the one is, that it does so keep the Turks subjects in awe,
as they cannot stir,

The Salichtaires are in like manner horsemen, the which do amount unto the
number of three thousand, or there abouts, and they do lodge always upon the
left hand of the prince: they have their breeding like unto the Spahi, and
there is no difference,

The other part of his forces is his infanterie, which consists chiefly in
Ianissaries, in whom are two things to be considered, the nation, and
disposition in the mannaging of arms. As for the nation, they do not commonly
receive into the roll of Ianissaries, any are called Rumy, that is to say,
Romans. As for the disposition, they send every three

These children are brought unto Constantinople, where they are visited by the
Aga, and there they loose both their names, and the knowledge of their parents,
yea and of their country. After this, some of them are sent into Natolia, and
some of them toward Bursia, Caramania, and other provinces, to dig and weed
the ground, that they may the better accustom themselves to industry and
labor, where learning

After a certain time the are called into the Serrail of the Azamoglain (for
so they are called until they be Ianissaries) under their Governors and
Masters, who do commonly teach and instruct them in diverse manual and
painful exercises, and with all they have bare feeding, and very mean
clothing: they for the most part lie in great and spacious rooms, like unto
those of religious men, having a light continually burning, and guards about
them, without whose leave they may not go forth. Afterward they learn the
exercise of shooting both with a bow and hurquebuze, wherein growing perfect,
they are made Ianissaries, or Spahis, whereof the one has no less then five
Aspres, nor above eight a day, and the Spahis have ten.

Being Ianissaries, they are either sent unto the war, or put into garrisons,
or else they

It is generally held that the sinews of the Turks forces consist in these
Ianisaries; besides the which, there are other kinds of foot men, as the
Acouizes, which is a forlorn hope, and receive no pay, but march before the
army, and (when they see opportunity) have permission to ransacke and spoil,
conditionally, that that they give the fifth part of their booty unto the
prince. There is also another sort called Azapi, which be footmen

Whenas the Emperor of the Turks, leaving Constantinople, goes to the wars,
they carry two pauillions or tents for him, called Sartorlar, whereof, the
same day that they set up the one, the other is planted whereas he shall march
the next day. These pauillions are so great, as seeing them a far off, they
seem a town, or some huge building. The princes camp near unto it, and
enuiron the emperor pauillions: and then the kinghts, who either a part, or
three and three, or two and two, have their pauillions set up. The soldiers
have also tents, for that by their discipline they may not lie abroad.

Moreover, there are captains with battle axes to keep the press far off
from the the Emperor, and withal, there are great numbers of guards and
archers about the princes person.

The great Turks army is accompanied with an infinite number, both of souldies
without pay and of pyoners, and of other people necessary for the war, which
serve to make

But leaving any more to speak of their land forces, let us now come to their
Sea provisions and fortitude: first of all, there is not any prince that has
greater commodity to make nauies at sea than the Turk: for the forests of
Albania, and Caramania, but above all, those of Nicomedia, and Trebizonde, are
so great, so thick, and withal so full of he put an army to Sea, which had
the courage to affront the Christians. He has also

The Turks have three things which amaze and terrify: an infinite number of
men, good discipline, and store of munition. Multitude does naturally breed
confusion, by reason whereof, many times great armies have been vanquished by
small numbers; but

He confines with the Persian upon the East, where you must draw an imaginary
line from Tauris unto Balzera. He makes war against the Sophi with
advantage, by reason of his infantarie, which this king wants, and in like
manner of his artillery and munition. If the Persians have at any time
vanquished the Turk in the field, they have on the other side lost much of
their country, until the time they began to recover themselves. Solomon took
Mesopotamia, or Diarbeck, from them; Amurath, Media, and not only they
themselves have sustained great loss, but also their friends; for that Selimus
the first dispossessed the Mammelus of the empire of Egypt, and Surya: and
Amurath the third did in a manner quite ruin and extirpe the Georgians, who
were confederats with the Sophi.

He makes war against the Portugalls, who confine with him upon the South by
means of the Red Sea with great disadvantage; for that all their quarrels
must be decided by Nauall forces: wherein the Portugalls have as much
advantage over him, as the Indian Ocean has of the Persian gulf, or the Red
Sea: for as the Indies they have

He confines upon the South by the red sea with Priest or Presbiter Ian, or the
great Neguz, and without doubt he has an advantage over him, as well in regard
of captains and soldiers, as of arms and munition: for it is most certain
that this prince has his countries unfurnished of strong towns, and his
soldiers are without arms: by reason

He has much more country in Afric than in Xerif, for that he enioieth all
that lies betwixt the red sea, and Velez de la Gomera: yet that which the Xerif
holds is more fertile, richer, better united, and stronger; but they make not
war one against another, by reason of the neighborhood of the king of Spain.

We must now look unto the Christian princes which confine with him. The first
is the king of Poland: we have seen what these two princes can do one against
another in former enterprises. Of the one side, it seems the Turk does
esteem, and in a manner fear the Polonians, for that having many times been
subject to make war against them, Henry king of Poland, during the war which
John Vayuoda of Mold^uia had against the the Turks, whereas many Polonians
fought against them, and under Sigismond the third, for the incursions of the
Cosaques, and the sturs raised by John Siamoschi general of the realm: he did
not seem to have any feeling thereof with his ordinary pride, nor sought
revenge of the wrongs which he had endured.

On the other side, the Polonians have not attempted any thing against the
Turk since Ladislaus, nor they have not relieved the Moldauians, and
Valachians their allies, and they have lost that which they held upon the
Euxine sea; the which has happened rather through want of courage in their
kings, than in the nobility. Stephen Battori (although a valiant and
courageous prince) held the enterprise very dangerous to encounter

The princes of Austria confine with the Turk, more than any other toward the
North: for which cause they spend much in the garrisons of their sorts, whereas
they entertain above twenty thousand men, part horsemen, part footmen, and
with the succors of Germany joined to their particular forces, they are more
careful to defend and ^^epe, than to recover their own, or to extend their
limits: and Ferdinand attempted the enterprises of Buda, and of Possegue, with
more courage than good fortune. It is ture that the cause thereof did not
proceed from the weakness of men, but for want

The Venetians confine also with the Turk both by sea and land, for many
hundreds of miles, and they maintain themselves against them in fortifying
their places exceeding

As for the king of Spain, who confines in like manner with him, there is no
great difference betwixt his forces, and those of the Ottomans: for as for his
treasure, we may easily jugde by the discourse of this Monarch, that it yields
nothing to the Turk, althoug they add^ thereunto the value of his Timarets,
accounting in like manner on the other side, those which are bound to serve the
king at their own charge within his dominions. Moreover the cauallarie which
the Turk entertaines by means of his Timarets

Moreover it is certain that this cauallarie entertained by the means of
Tymarets, has rather been instituted to keep people subdued in awe, than to
go to war against

Experience of things past do show that their forces are equal, for that they
oppose

The Government.
THe government of the Ottomans is absolute, for that the great Turk is
master in such sort of all that is within his Estates, as the inhabitants
term themselves his slaves: and there is not any one that can say, he is
master of the house where he dwells, nor of the lands which he tills, no nor
of himself, except some families which were privileged by Mahomet the second,
at Constantinople: and there is not any one in Turkey, how great soever, that
can assure himself of the Estate wherein he lives, or of his own

The first seat of the Turkish Emperors was at Bursia, or Prussia, a town in
Bythinia, and since it was transported to Adrianopolis, and last of all, to
Constantinople, where it now remains. This Emperor has for his guard about
four thousand Ianissaries, whose colonel is called Aga: And besides these,
there are fifteen thousand horsemen which receive pay from the great Turk,
and they are divided into Spahi, Vlosages, Cilistares, besides those horsemen
which are under the Begliarbeys. All these are paid out of the

The Turks Court is vulgarly called Capi, that is to say, Port, where there
are many offices, to number the which would be teadious. There are offices in
the great Serrail for the princes service, and these are executed by Eunuchs,
who have under them other men that be gelt. But before we proceed in the
description of officers, we will speak something of their laws and Judges.



The Turks make trial of the knowledge and sufficiency of their Judges,
before they elect or choose them, and to this end there are two Cadilesquiers
Talismans, that is to say, Doctors of the law, and Examiners, at
Constantinople, or else wheresoever the prince remains: These examine the
particular Judges or Cadis of diverse provinces subject to the Turk: the one
does choose and examine the Judges of Europe or Greece, and is called
Cadilesquer Romly, before whom the Judge, after due and sufficient information
of his life, study, and knowledge, swears upon the laws, that he will do
right and justice to every man, submitting himself to yield an account of his
charge to the said Cadilesquier,

The other Cadilesquier is for Natolia, and other provinces, who gouernes
himself like unto the first, in regard of the Judges of the country: and
Selymus the first added a third for Egypt, Syria, Arabia, and Armenia. These
Cadilesquiers are sovereign Judges in all causes, and as it were Patriarchs,
before whom they do appeal; and they have authority over the other Caldis,
which are particular Judges of provinces. Their office is very honorable, and
are much esteemed by the great Turk. They are called to the princes Council,
called Diuan, with the Bashas, to consult of matters of importance. Among the
Bashas, which in former times were but four, but now is augmented to the
number of nine or more, there is one superior, called the Grand Visir, whom
the Turks has power over the rest, and they are bound to give him an account
of their employments:

His charge is tou^^^^g matters of justice to keep Court openly four days in
the week that is Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday; and this Court or
Di^an is held whereas the prince remains: If he be at Constantinople, in the
Serrail; if at the wars, in his pau^^ion near unto the prince: And to this
Court or great Council, the other Bashas ^oute, if they be with the prince;
and the Cadilesquiers are also called if the business

Next unto the Basha in honor, follow the Begliarbeys, which are men of great
authority and reputation and have places in Court next unto the Bashas. They
have the command

There are also six Begliarbeys in Asia, and one distinct from Egypt:the first
of the six is called Begliarbey of Natolia, which was called in old time Asia
the Less. He gouernes Pontus, Bythinia, the province of Asia, Lydia, Caria,
and Lycia, all which provinces are now called Natolia. His place in Court is
next to the Begliarbey of Greece, and he commands over twelve Sangiacs. The
Begliarbey of Caramania, which was in old time Cilicia, and Pamphylia, has
under him seven Sangiacs.

The Begliarbey of Aladule, which is a place betwixt Sutya, Caramania, and
Tocca to which in former times was called Paphlagonia, and is a moytie of Asia
the Less, has the command of seven Sangiacs. Some say that this province of
Aladule, whenas the prince was there, besides such as had entertainment, made
thirty thousand men, which were bound to serve on horseback for the prince,
without any pay, having only their charges and victuals of the countriemen.

The Begliarbey of Amasia, and Toccato, which was Cappadocia, and Gallatia,
has under him four Sangiacs. The Begliarbey of Mesopotamia, or Dyarbeck,
under whose government is the rest of Armenia the Less, and part of the
Greater, whereof the other part belongs unto the Sophi, and to the Curdi, to
the confines of Bagader, has under his

The Begliarbey of Damas, Surya, and Judea, has under him twelve Sangiacs. And
the Begliarbey of Caire, whose power and charge extends unto Amech, that is to
say, to the Arabias, the which are subject to the Turkish empire, and enjoyed
by him, but they

The Turk has a Begliarbey of the sea, who is Admiral and Commander in all
marine causes. This office has been created of late years, for that in
former times, the Sangiac of Galipoli was wont to be Admiral at sea, and
Barbarouse was the first that had this charge. The Turk has four Arcenalls:
the one is at Pera, the which has one hundred thirty and three places, or
lodgings for so many galleis: the second is at Galipoli of twenty lodgings,
and the Admiral or General of the sea has charge of these two, with some of
his Sangiacs: the third is at Suez, near to the Red sea, where there

As for his treasure, he has two officers called Desterdari, the which many
rightly be called governors of the revenues: the one has the charge of the
revenues which are raised in Europe, and the other in Natolia. They are offices
of great dignity, and they keep an account of the Casna, that is to say, the
princes treasure.

The Turks have this custom, after they have once seized upon any province,
to root out all the nobility, especially, such as are of the blood royal: and
as for rich and mighty families, they transport them into other places, which
are accustomed to their government. Yet they suffer every man to follow what
religion he lists, and they force not any one to abjure his: but they do not
suffer their subjects to fight, and go to war under any

The Religion.
MAhomet the son of Abdala, an idolater, of the race of Ismaell, and of
Hennina a Jew, both of base condition, was borne in the year 562. Being grown
to some years, the Arabians Scenites accustomed to make incursions, and to
steal, took him, and sold him to a merchant of Persia, who finding him fit
for traffic, affected him, and made so great account of him, as after his
masters death, he married the widow. Being thus rich he raised his spirit to
higher matters, and made use of the time being then fit for innouations.
Heraclius. The heresies of Arrius and Nestorius had miserably torn and
dismembered the Church: the Jews made a great number: the Sarrazins were
powerful; and the Roman Empire was full of slaves. Mahomet seeing this
opportunity, framed a law, in which every one had his share. He was assisted
therein by two Jews Apostates, and two heretics, whereof the one was called
John a Nestorian, and the other Sergius of the Arrian sect. The chief end of
this law, was to overthrow the divinity of Jesus Christ, wickedly opposed by
the Jews and Arabians. First he persuaded his wife, and by her means his
neighbors, that the Angel Gabriell spoke unto him, so as he imputed the
falling sickness whereunto he was subject, Mahomet, than the multitude of his
victories, who defeated the Persians, made himself master of Arabia, and
chased the Romans out of Suria: and his successors did afterward enlarge their
Empire from the river of Euphrates, to the Atlanticke sea: they held Spain,
Sicile, and many other provinces, and almost with a continual course of
victories they

But to return to the law of Mahomet, it maintains circumcision and the
distinction of clean and unclean meats, to content the jews: it denies the
divinity of Jesus Christ to please the Arrians, who were then powerful: it is
full of fables, to content idolaters, and it gives liberty to the flesh
wherein most men take delight.

They confess one God, and honor Jesus Christ, not as the son of God, but
as a Marie the Virgin; but they believe not that he died upon the Cross. They
do not honor images, and will not have any. Friday is their day of rest, as
Sunday is ours. They observe a Lent of thirty days, which they call Ramadan,
or Romodan, during the which they eat not any thing in the day time; but whenas
night comes, all meats are indifferent, but swines flesh, and in like manner
they abstain from wine and women. After which they have their Easter, called
Bayran, which continues three days, during which, they have all sorts of
pleasures: but this feast falls not out always at one prefixed time; but it is
sometimes in Summer, sometimes in Winter, sometimes the Spring, and sometiues in
Autumn, the which happens for that they account not the day according

They are circumcised, after the manner of the Jews, but not after the eight
day, but after the eight year. They have no bells, but their priests go to the
top of high towers, from whence they call the Turks with a loud voice, five
times a day and night to come to prayers. The Mahometans will not be called
Turks, for that this name in the Hebrew tongue signifies banished, but
Musulmans, that is to say, believing well.

There are four sects, which are as it were four orders of religious men
among the Turks, which differ in manner of living, habit, and ceremonies.
These be the Torlaques,

The Turks not only forbear to blaspheme the name of God, and Mahomet, but
also that of Jesus Christ, and the Virgin Marie, or of any of the Saints, and
they punish blasphemers grievously, of what sect or condition soever.

They assure themselves, that he that shall strictly observe the laws of their
Mahomet shall enjoy eternal life, and a Paradise full of delights, which shall
be a garden environed with two goodly rivers, seated under a clear heaven, and
a very temperat air, where they shall have all the contents they can desire or
wish for, that is to say, store of all kinds of exquisit meats, and fair
wom^n, which shall serve them in vessels of gold and silver. They hold also
that the Angels shall be their cupbearers, and bring them milk in cups of
gold, and wine in boules of silver. Contrariwise, they that shall break the
laws of the Alcaron, are threatened with hell, and eternal death. Yet to
molifie this fear, they have an opinion that he shall firmly believe in the
Alcaron when he dies, how great a sinner soever he has been, shall be saved
without all doubt.

The Emperors of Constantinople, as well Christians, as Turks, since the
Empire of the West was divided from that of the East, and given to Charlemaigne.
COnstantin the sixth, son of Leo the fourth, was Emperor after his father,
in the year of Grace 780. He reigned nine years, being very young, with his
Irene, and both being persuaded by Therasius, Patriarch of Constantinople,
caused a Council to be held of three hundred and fifty Bishops, by the which
it was decreed, that images should be restored into Churches, the which
Constantin the fifth had taken away. Some time after, Constantin deprived his
mother of the Nicephorus, finding that he had a secret dessigne to make
himself Emperor. He also put Marie his wife, daughter to Charlemaigne into a
Monastery, and then he took a Concubine by the advice of his mother, who
desired to make her son hateful unto the people. Soon after, she caused his
eyes to be pulled out, and cast him into prison, where he died, in the year
798. Then she reigned alone five years, or thereabouts. In her time
Charlemaigne was crowned Emperor of the West, in the year of Christ 801.

Nicephorus, a Patrician, usurped the empire from Irene, in the year of Grace
803. He was good in the beginning, but afterward he grew wicked, and was
slain fighting against

Stauratius, his son, was wounded in the same battle, and deposed from the
empire three months after, by Michael Curopalata, who had married Procopia his
sister, and they sent him to end his days in a Monastery.

Michael Curopalata, called Rangaba, was Emperor in the year of our Lord God
811. He was faint hearted, and a very coward, so as in the first battle
which he had against the Bulgarians, he fled, and became a Monk, refusing to
hold the imperial dignity any longer.

Leo, an Armenian, the fifth of that name, was made Emperor, in the year of
our Redemption 813. He was before colonel of the horsemen to Michael
Curopalata. He caused Michaels sons to be cut off, and banished them. He
would not restore the images which he had beaten down, and was slain in the
Church during divine service, in the eight year of his empire. His wife was
put into a monastery, and his children were hidden.

Michael, the Stuttering, or Thraule, a wicked man, and murderer of Leo the
fifth, was emperor in the year 820. He died of a bloody flix.

Theophilus, son to Michael the Stuttering, came unto the empire in the year
of Christ 829. He was a good Iusticer, but he hated images, and punished such
as worshipped them. He grew into an exceeding melancholy, by reason of his
continual losses in battle, so as leaving his meat, and drinking nothing but
water, he fell into a looseness of body, whereof he died.

Theodora, after the decease of Theophilus her husband, as tutrix to her son
Michael, governed the empire happily, in the year of Grace 842, and she
restored the images of Saints to Churches. In the end, Michael being capable of
the government, his mother became a Nun, and left him the government of the
empire, in the year of our Redemption 856.

Michael, the son of Theophilus, succeeded his father from his infancy. He
made Basil of Macedonie his companion in the empire, and was presently slain
by this ungrateful wretch, having reigned eleven years, nine months, and
five days, after the time his mother devoted her self a Nun, and in all,
five and twenty years, ten months, and fourteen

Basil of Macedonie was received emperor in the year 867. He was slain by a
stagge which ran him into the belly with his brow anklers.

Leo the sixth, surnamed the Philosopher, began to govern in the year of
Christ 886. He went sometimes all alone in a disguised habit, in the night, to
see if they kept a good guard: but once the soldiers beat him, and carried him
to prison, for the which he gave them money in recompense.

Alexander, brother to Leo the sixth, succeeded him in the year of our
Redemption 904. He was given to pleasure, and died of bleeding at his nose, and
yard, having gormandised and played excessiuely at Tennis; for going hot to
horseback, he brake a vain, whereof

Constantin the seventh, son to Leo the sixth, was at the age of seven years
left by his father under the charge and government of his mother Zoa, and
began to hold the empire after his uncle Alexander, in the year of Christ 906.
He restored learning in Greece, and left unto his son a book treating of the
affairs of the empire, which the Venetians keep as a great treasure. He
reigned fourteen years with his mother Zoa, five and Romain Lecapen, who
thought to chase him out of the empire, and about fifteen years alone, which
was in all near fifty five years.

Romain Lecapen did so trouble Constantin in the empire, as he was forced to
make him his companion or partaker, in the year of our Lord God 920. He gave
his daughter Helen in marriage to the said Constantin, and would have usurped
the empire for himself, and his son Christopher: but he was taken in the
wars which he had made against Symeon the Duke of Bulgaria, by his sons
Stephen and Constantin, who dispossessed him of the empire, and put him into a
monastery: who seeking to do the like unto Constantin, they were taken and
shut up themselves. Thus Constantin remained peaceable and sole

Romain the Young, son to Constantin the seventh, was Emperor in the year
959, under the government of Nicephorus Phocas. He chased away his mother and
sisters, who got their lining lewdly, and as for himself, being given to play
and gluttony, he dyed of poison.

Nicephorus Phocas was Emperor in the year of our Redemption 963. He
recovered Cilicia, and the greatest part of Natolia, from the Sarrazins, and
presently after, he took Antioch by night: but for that he laid many
impositions upon his people, by reason of the wars, and caused base money to
be coined, and diminisht the weight, he was hated of the subjects, and slain
in the night sleeping in his chamber, by John Zimisces: Theophania the wife of
Nicephorus gave entry unto the murderer, and to them that were with him.

John Zimisces was Emperor in the year of Christ 969. He was valiant, and
recovered all Bulgaria which the Roxolains held, after which he was poisoned.
He made his companions in the empire, Basil and Constantin, brethren, sons to
Romain, predecessors to Nicephorus Phocas.

Basile the second, and Constantin the eight, were Emperors in the year of
Grace 976, under whom all Bulgaria was made subject to the empire of
Constantinople, having always before revolted. Constantin was companion in the
empire with his brother Basile; and after his death was Emperor almost three
years, and died wallowing in his delights.

Romain Argyre, or Argyropiles, son in law to Constantin the eight, succeeded
him, in the year of Christ 1034. He was drowned in a bath by the treason of
his wife Zoa, and her adulterer.

Michael Paphlagon, adulterer to Zoa, and who had smothered her husband
Argyropiles in a bath, was by her made Emperor of Constantinople, in the year
1034. He had the falling sickness, foaming at the mouth. Being somewhat fair,
he was beloved of Zoa, but he had no great understanding. In the end, he died
of a dropsy.

Michael Calaphas, adoptiue son to Zoa, having sworn unto her that he would
not hold the empire but from her, was made Emperor in the year of our
Redemption 1042: Zoa, saying, that she sought to poison him: whereupon, he put
her into a Monastery, and cut off her hair. But the people mutining against
him made Theodora, sister to Zoa, Empress: They drew Zoa out of the cloister,
pursued Calaphat, and put out his eyes, together with his brothers.

Zoa being drawn out of the Monastery, was restored to the government of the
empire, with her sister Theodora. The same year that Michael Calaphat had
reigned four months, Zoa being sixty years old, yet full of amarous
passions, called Constantin Monomache from exile; and taking him to be her
husband, she made him Emperor, these two women having scarce held the empire
two months.

Constantin the ninth, surnamed Monomache, being of the imperial race, was made
emperor Zoa, in the year 1042. He was effeminat, and given to his pleasures,
and kept a fair Concubine in stead of his wife; and yet he surmounted two
great civil wars, and some others. Zoa died, being seventy years old, and he
being full of the gout, and surprised with a pluresie, died within few years
after.

Theodora sister to Zoa, they having jointly held the Empire about three
months, she governed it all alone after the death of Monomache, in the year
1055, about two years. She managed the affairs, so well, as all was in quiet
during her government. But for that infirmities oppressed her with age, by the
persuasion of her servants, she made an old man called Michaell, partaker of
the Empire, and lived not long after.

Michael the ancient was Emperor of Constantinople, with, and after Theodora.
Having scarce reigned a year, Isaac Commenes deposed him; so as living a
private life, he died soon after.

Isaac Commenes was Emperor in the year 1058, having deprived Michael the
Ancient. Constantin Ducas Emperor, with the consent of the Senate and people.

Constantin Ducas the tenth of that name, came unto the Empire in the year
1060. He was devout, and a great justicer; but very covetous, and therefore
hated of his subjects, and contemned of his enemies. He died being sixty years
old, leaving his wife Eudoxia, and three of his sons, heirs of the Empire.

Eudoxia and her sons held the Empire after Constantin Ducas. This woman
might well have governed the State, if foreign wars had not troubled her.
But for that strangers Eudoxia contrary to the promise made to her dying
husband, having reigned seven months, and certain days, married again to
Roman Diogines, whereof she soon repented, being discontented at the
arrogancy of this man, who would govern all.

Romain Diogines held the Empire of Constantinople in the year 1068. He was
taken in war by the Turks and the Sultan Azan, who did him honor, and sent
him back with presents, having concluded a peace with him. But in the mean
time all was in combustion at Constantinople: Eudoxia was expelled, Diogines
deposed, and Michael of Constantin made Emperor, who put out the cies of
Diogines, and then sent him into exile, in Eudoxia.

Michael surnamed Parapinace, by reason of the great famine which was in his
time, a man unfit for such a charge, was made Emperor, in the year 1071.
Whilst that he busied himself to make verses under his master Psellus, the
Turks invaded the Empire in many places, especially toward Asia. It was then
thought fit to choose another Emperor, and Michael was put into a Monastery
with his wife and son.

Nycephorus Botaniat of the family of the Phocas, was chosen in the place of
Michael Parapynace, in the year 1078. He was dejected by the Commenes, and put
into a monastery, where he lived not long.

Alexius Commenes, son to the Emperor Isaac, held the Empire in the year
1081.

Caiolan, son to Alexius, held the Empire, in the year 1118. He died having
hurt himself with a dart, the which he himself had poisoned, meaning to cast
it at a wild boar,

Manuell brother, or as some say, son to Caiolan, obtained the Empire in the
year 1142. He was a very treacherous prince, and full of wickedness. He made
war against the Turks, and having reigned near eight and thirty years, he
lived a Monk, and died of sickness.

Alexius, son to Manuell, came to the Empire in the year 1180, which he
governed under Adronic his cousin german, who was his tutor, then his companion
in the Empire, and in the end his murderer: for he caused his head secretly to
be cut off, and his body to be cast into the sea, Alexius being then but
fifteen years old.

Andronic Commenes son to Isaac, held the Empire in the year one thousand
one hundred eighty and three: William king of Sicile made war against him to
revenge the Alexius, and being assailed of all sides, Isaac Ange came against
him, vanquishe^ ^^m, expelled him the Empire, took him, and pulled out one of
his eyes: he then (...) him to be put upon a she ass backward, crowned him
with garlic or leekes, and gave him the asses tail in his hand in steed of a
scepter: and in this sort, he caused him to be led through Constantinople, the
people reuiling him, casting dyrt in his face, and bea^ng him with (...). Being
thus bruised and broken, he died, and was hanged, and the women with hooks tare
him in pieces.

Isaac (...) unto the Empire in the year 1185. His younger brother Alexius
pulled (...), took away the Empire from him, and kept him in prison, until
such Isaac obtained succors from the French and Venetians, and fr^^ (...)
^^ther, who died soon after, having taken the air too boldly, after his long
re^^^^ in prison.

(...) Ange brother to Isaac, was Emperor after him, in the year 1195. But in
the end (...) expelled, as has been said by Alexius son to Isaac, by the
help of Baldwin and the Veneti^ns.

Alexius the younger son to Isaac Ange, was restored to the imperial seat in
the year 1204: but as he began to govern, Murzyphile issued from a base
family, and aduanc^d by him, slew him. This Murzyphile finding afterward some
resistance, fled away by night with his wife, whores, and treasure, and within
short space after, he was Baldwin was the first Emperor of the French nation in
the East.

Baldwin Earl of Flaunders, was made Emperor in the year 1205. He recovered
all that did belong unto the Empire of Constantinople, except Adrianopolis, the
which was taken by Theodore son in law to Alexius the murderer, for the
dowry of his wife, and this Adrianopolis was the seat of his Empire. And as
the French besieged it, and were ready to take it, Baldwin was taken, and put
to death, having rainged scarce a year.

Henry, brother to Baldwin, was Emperor after him, in the year 1206. He left
his daughter Yoland his heir, who was married to Peter of Auxerre.

Peter of Courtenay, grandchild to Lewis the Gross, King of France, Earl of
Auxetre, succeeded in the Empire, by the means of Yoland his wife, in the
year 1216, whose head was cut off at a banquet by Theodore Lascares, who
termed himself Emperor of Adrianopolis, and of Greece, having drawn him unto
it under a color of peace, and by a false oath. Some others write that
Lascares had laid ambushes in the forests of Thessalia, at a place called
Tempe, and that he surprised Peter, carried him away, and caused him to die in
captivity. His wife Yoland held the Empire two years, during his imprisonment.

Robert, son to Peter, hearing news of his fathers misfortune, went out of
France

Baldwin the second, son to Robert, succeeded his father, in the year 1228.
In the end Michaell Paleologus entered the city by intelligence, Baldwin being
then at the strait of Constantinople with a great army. At that time the
Grecians recovered the Empire of Constantinople, which the French had held
near sixty years.

Michaell Peleologus (to whom Theodore Lascares dying, left John Lascares his
son in (...), as a sheep unto the wolf) surprised Constantinople in the
year 1259, having fi^^^ expelled William king of Achaia, with the help of the
Geneuois, and usurped his realm. He came to the Council of Lions, whereas
Pope Gregory and he became

Andronic the second, eldest son to Paleologus, succeeded his father in the
year of our Lord God 1283. He made his son Michael (whom some hold to be his
son in law) companion or partaker in the empire, but he died in the year of
our Redemption 1319 so as he then called another, named Andronic Constantin
Despot, to have part of the empire, in the place of the forenamed Michael;
whereat, Andronic, the son of Michael, being incensed, took arms against
the Emperor his Grandfather, and vanquished him

Andronic the third, son to Michael, continued the wars six years together
against his grandfather. They did often make a peace, by the means of their
friends; but it held not, until the year of Grace 1332, whenas young Andronic
entered by policy into Constantinople, where being entered, he did no harm unto
his grandfather, but suffered him to reign with him during his life. After the
death of his grandfather, he got the victory of his enemies: then, being about
fifty years old, he was surprised with a fever, and a pain in his head,
whereof he died within four days.

John Cantacuzen was tutor to John Paleologus, and his companion in the empire,
in the

John Paleologus, called also Caloian, succeeded his father in the year of our
Salvation 1341. His tutor John Cantacuzen was expelled; but five years after,
he made war against Paleologus, and his mother. He was the first which
brought the Turks armed into Europe. In the end, Constantinople yielded unto
him, and having it, he did no harm to any man, carrying himself only for
companion of the empire to John, to whom he gave his daughter in marriage*
After this, John Paleologus being banished, he made war, being assisted by the
Turks, to whom he gave the first habitation in Europe, and he entered into
Constantinople in the year of our Salvation 1357. Then Cantacuzen left the
empire, and retired himself into a Monastery, and Matthew his son, seeking
to be companion Paleologus, was forced to desist. John Paleologus died in the
year of Christ 1384, having reigned sixteen years with Cantacuzen, and seven
and twenty alone, being in all three and forty years; and Andronic, his
eldest son, who, notwithstanding is not put in the number of Emperors, held
the empire three years.

Manuel, the son of John Paleologus, came unto the empire, in the year of
our Lord God 1387, and the most remarkable thing of his life, was, that he left
seven sons, whereof the eldest, called John, succeeded in the empire.

John, eldest son to Manuel, succeeded in the empire, in the year of our
Salvation 1422. He was more addicted to peace than war; and being accompanied
by all the princes and Prelates of Greece, he assisted at the Council of
Ferrara, under the authority of Pope Eugenius the fourth, the which was
afterward transported to Florence. Then the two Churches, Greek, and Latin,
were united. Being returned to Constantinople, he lived not long after, and
died without any children, in the year of our Redemtion 1445.

Constantine the eleventh, son to Manuel, after the death of his brother
John, came unto the empire, in the year of Grace 1445. Being before king of
Morea, he was called Dragon, for the cruelty he used against the Turks. But
whenas Constantinople was taken by Mahomet the second, son to Amurath the
second, retiring himself to the city gate to fly away, he was smothered in
the press, the nine and twentieth of May, in the year of our Lord God 1453.
His head was carried throughout the enemies camp vpa Lance. Thus
Constantinople, raised and inricht by Constantine the son of Hellen, under
Constantine the son of another Hellen, was taken, and brought under the
Turks subjection.

Although it seems fit to follow with those Turkish Emperors which have
succeeded him that first made himself master of Constantinople; yet, for that
I discourse here of the empire of these princes, I have held it more convenient
to set them all down in this Ottomans.

Ottoman then, the son of Orthog^le, was Emperor of the Turks, in the year
of our ^^^mption 1200. He was the first that received the glory of his nation,
which had taken ^ierusalem, in the year of our Salvation 1008; but they had
been vanquished by the Christians, under (...) of Boulloin; so as they which
remained, retired to Nicea, after which, they had (...) of ^ame, until this,
who made himself monarch, and holds the first (...) History. He subdued a
great part of Bythinia, and took many (...) unto the Pontike Sea. But that
which got him most honor, was, the Philip of Valois.

(...), the son of Ottoman, was Emperor of the Turks after his father, in
the (...) Christ 1328. He was more valiant than his father, bountiful, and of
a good grace. He conquered the countries of Misia, Lycaonia, Phrygia, and
Caria: he took (...), now called Bursia, the ancient abode of the kings of
Bythinia, and there received a wound whereof he died, the first year of John
the French king. He reigned two and twenty years.

Sol^m^n, the son of Orchanes, reigned two years after the death of his
father: he made war against the Grecians, and past out of Asia into Europe,
where he defeated the Bulgarians, and took in Thrace the town of
Adrianopolis, and Philippolis. Some

Amurath the first, the son of Orchanes, was Emperor of the Turks in the
year of our Lord God 13^0. He being incited by John Paleologus, sent two
thousand Turks to his succor, the which was the fountain of the ruin of
Constantinople: for being (...) with the wealth of Europe, he transported at
another time six thousand Turks in the galleys of Genoa, under color to
succor the Emperor of Constantinople; but his dessigne was to usurp Greece.
Thus he crossed the arm of Hellespont at Abide: he Lazare Despote of Seruia, to
revenge his master who was dead, flue Amurath, in the year of Christ 1378.

^^^^zeth, Emperor of the Turks, the first of that name, after the death of
his father Amurath, slew Solomon his elder brother by treason, and enjoyed the
empire alone, in the year of our Redemption 1378. In revenge of his fathers
death, he made war against Mar^ Lord of Bulgaria, whom he vanquished, and put
to death, and subdued a great part of his country. He was called Ba^azeth
Hildrin, that is to say, Lightning, he was so sudden in all his affairs. He
subdued in a manner all Greece, and besieged Constantinople, Tamerlane, who put
him into a cage of iron, and carried him in that sort over all Asia and Syria,
and in the end Baiazeth died in this misery. After his death, some hold there
was a vacancie unto Mahomet, who was one of his sons.

Joshua, or Cyriscelebes, which some improperly call Calapin, eldest son to
Baiazeth, after the defeat of his father, was dispossessed of Asia by
Tamerlane, and carried captive to the Emperor of Constantinople, who entreated
him beseeming a prince, and then he suffered him to go into Asia, where he
recovered his fathers realm. He was slain by his brother Mustapha, otherwise
called Musulman, in the flower of his age, in the year of Christ 1407.

Mustapha, or Musulman, was Emperor of the Turks a very short time, for his
brother Moses seized upon the State, and expelled him. Some call this man
Mustapha Orcha^^^ the second, and they say, that he was son and heir to
Joshua, and that he was slain by (...) his uncle by the fathers side: but
Moses did soon suffer the punishment which Mahomet. There are some which
write that Mahomet reigned immediately after Baiazeth his father, and they make
no mention of Joshua nor of Mustapha, but after Baiazeth they place his son
Mahomet. Moses expelled and slew his brother Mahomet, or as some say, his
nephew Orchanes, and afterward he was also slain by his brother Mahomet.
These two are not by some put among the Emperors of the Turks, for that they
reigned little.

Mahomet the first, brother to Joshua, Mustapha, and Moses, was Emperor, in
the year 1407* Some attribute to him that which is spoken of Joshua: he
recovered all the places which Ta^erlan had taken from his father, and he
expelled his own kinsfolks out of Galacia,

Amurath the second, son to Mahomet the first, succeeded his father in the
year 1418. He first instituted the Ianissaries, which were Christians
renegados, for the guard of his person. He invaded Hongarie, Bosnia, Albania,
Valachia, and Greece. He took Thessalonica from the Venetians. Having held the
Empire two and thirty years, he left it to his son Mahomet the second, in
the year 1450.

Mahomet the second, caused his younger brother to be presently slain. He was
most wicked, and did not believe in any God: he said that Mahomet was a false
Prophet, and Peter of Aubusson, or of Amboise, a Frenchman. In the end he died
of the chollicke, being eight and fifty years old, and having reigned one and
thirty.

Baiazeth the second, son to Mahomet the second, was Emperor by means of the
Ianissaries, in the year 1481. He subdued Valachia, then he went against the
Sultan of Egypt, who was the stronger. He took Lepanto, Modon, and Duras from
the Venetians. Selim his younger son, whom by the Ianissaries means, he had
preferred before his elder, and declared Emperor in his lifetime, first
expelled him, and then poisoned him, in the year 1512.

Selim was Emperor in the year 1512. He added to his fathers murder, that of
his brethren Achmet and Corcut, and he caused seven of his brothers children to
be strangled. He vanquished and expelled the Sophy of Persia, and he defeated
the two Souldans of Egypt, Campson and Tomumbeye, with the Mamm^^us, and
Arabians. He added Egypt and Arabia to his Empire, and took^ the great Caire*
then returning into Greece, he had an ulcer in the raines of his back, the
which increasing daily, was the cause of his death,

Solomon, which some say to be the second of that name, Emperor of the Turks,
recovered Syria, defeated Gazel, who had revolted, took Belgrada, Rhodes, and
Buda twice. In the year 1543 he took Strigonia, and Alba Regale in Hongarie.
He conquered the realms of Assyria, and Mesopotamia, with the city of
Babylon. He spoiled the frontires of Armenia, Media, and Persia, and took
Tauris, the chief city of Persia twice. He caused his eldest son Mustapha
to be strangled, to please his concubine Rosa, who desired that her son Selim
might be Emperor after his father. He besieged the Island of Malta, and Vienna
in Austria; but he was repulsed by the great Master called Peter Parisot or La
Valette a Frenchman, and by Charles the fifth, Emperor. And Solomon died

Selim the second, entered into possession of the Empire by the means of
Mehemet Bassa, before the death of his father was discovered. He took the
Island of Cypres in the year 1571: but he lost his nauall army the same year,
at the battle of Lepanto, which he had against the Christians; but he
repaired it soon, and having recovered Tunes and

(...) the third, son to (...), enioied the Empire eight days after his
fathers death, in the year 1574. (...) brethren to be slain, and two of his
fathers ^^^^^bines th^^ (...) ^^began to govern at the age of eight and
twenty years, being (...) religion, and a great justieer. He was much gi^en
to w^^ (...). He was father to one hundred and twenty children, and g^ew
(...). He died in January 1595, the one and twentieth year of his Empi^^,

(...) the third, succeeded his father Amurath in the year 1595. He slew
nineteen (...) ^^^thren, and drowned some of his fathers concubi^es, whom he
found with child (...) of his death. He put to death his eldest son with his
mother, for that they (...) of Astrologers how long he should reign. In the
year 1603, the Sophy of (...) covered P^^^ls and Bages from him with a great
part of his country, which Se^^^ the first, and Solomon the seconh had
usurped. He died of the plague in January 1604, (...) ^^igned nine years.

(...), who reigns this year 1612, succeeded to his fathers Empire in the
year 1604, ^^ing but sixteen or seventeen years old. In the year 1605, he
took Strigonia, and Rodolphus, and them of the house of Austria, for fifteen
years, and has turned all his forces against the Sophy. He is ^ co^^teous
prince, and of great hope.

The Estate of the Empire of Presbiter John.

The Contents.
1 THe opinion of diverse Geographers touching the length, breadth, and limits of
the empire of Presbiter John. 2. Titles and qualities which this prince gives
himself. 3. Description of the provinces subject to Presbiter John, and first
of Barnagas, the extent, limits of this country, and situation of the chief
town called Beroe or Barue: and of other Cities, Islands, Lakes, Ports, and
famous Promontories. 4. Another description of the country which he holds upon
the firm land, and of his principal abode, and city of Beimalechi, where he
keeps his Court. 5. Fertility of this country, abounding in Barley, Millet,
Pease, Beans, and other unknown pulses: Sugar, Wine, Oranges, Citrons,
Lymons, Oil of Goue, Honey, Wax, Flax, and Cotton: four footed beasts, and
foul of all sorts, Camells, Elephants, Lions, Tygres (except Bears, Conies,
and Goldfinches) Apes, Patridges, Geese, and Hares: mines of gold, silver,
iron, and brass. This country is also remarkable for that it has two
Winters, and two Summers in the year. 6. The beginning of these Aethi^pians,
inuenters of the ceremonies of sacrifices, and of the Hieroglyficall letters:
Idolaters to their kings, esteeming gold little in regard of Copper:
worshipping the Sun rising, and cursing the setting: putting their dead
bodies in vessels of glass, and believing two deities, the one immortal, the
other mortal. 7. Description of Presbiter John's Court, his lodging commonly
under tents, his apparel, and baggage when he trauells. 8. Of the
disposition, complexion, garments, and manner of building of the modern
inhabitants of this empire: their ordinary meat, and their custom of feasting
upon carpets, without table cloth, upon the ground. Their drink made of the
fruit of Tamerins. Their language, characters, and letters: Their ceremonies in
mourning: Their navigations. 9. Their riches rising from mines of gold, silver,
copper, iron, sugar, cotton, etc. And what his revenues be. 10. The forces of
this emperor, what numbers of men he may arm, and with what princes he
confines, his allies, and his neighbor enemies. 11. His rigorous and imperious
manner of government, whom his subjects honor and respect as God. His
beginning and extraction from one of Salomans sons, and the Queen of Saba.
Of the succession to the crown. Of Ecclesiastical benefices, and
administration of the sacraments. Of common women and strumpets. Of the many
officers of the crown, divided into three ranks. Of the punishment of
adulterous women. 12. Two sorts of religion brought into the dominions of
Presbiter John, the Christian, and Mahometisme, and after what sort the
Christian faith has crept into those countries. 13. Of the error and false
belief of the Abyssins retayning circumcision. Their parishes made like
Conuents. The form of their Churches, into the which it is not lawful to
enter with shoes, nor to spit in them: Of their Churchyard, Baptism,
Sacramental confessions, and marriages. Of the austere penance of the
religious of the order S. Anthony, and of another order called Cestifanes; and
their ceremonies in the celebration of the holy Week: and of two 14.
Embassages for the (...) of the Abyssins, and Presbiter John, with the Church
of Rome.

Belforest and Mercator have set down after other Geographers. Others confine
it almost after the like manner, giving Magin, and some others. Hugh of
Linscot, in his nauigations faith, That this empire stretches from the entry
of the Red Sea unto the Island of Sye^^a, under the Tropic of Cancer, except
the side of this gulf, which the Turk has held seventy years: so as (in
his opinion) Presbiter John should have upon the East, the Red Sea, toward the
North, Egypt, and the deserts of Nubia; and to the South, the realm of
Monoemugi; so as this Emperor should have about four hundred Italian miles
under his command.

John de Baros, being followed by Boterus, says, That at this day the lake of
Barcena is the center of his Estate, which extends upon the East, by the Red
sea unto Suaquem, for the space of one hundred twenty two leagues: but betwixt
the Sea and his dominions, there is a ridge of mountains inhabited by Moors,
which command also upon the Sea coast, except it be in the port of Ercocco,
which belongs to Presbiter John. Upon the West, there is another rank of
mountains along the current of Nyle, inhabited by Idolaters which pay him
tribute: we must make the bounds of this empire upon the North, by an
imaginary line drawn from Suaquem unto the beginning of the Island of Mero^,
called in ourtime Nobe, which shall extend for the space of one hundred twenty
five leagues. Then must you make a bow, but not much bent toward the South,
unto the realm of Adea, (from the mountains whereof, flows the river which
Ptolome calls Ratto, and falls into the Sea beneath Melinda) for the space of
two hundred fifty nine leagues, there bordering upon it certain idolatrous
black Moors, with curled hair: from thence it turns and ends at the realm
of Adel, whereof Arar is the chief town, and is in the ninth degree of
altitude: so as all this empire should not have in circuit above six hundred
seventy two leagues.

This prince, who says that he is issued from David, gives himself the titles
of emperor of high and base Aethiopia, king of Go, of the Caffoetes, Fatigar,
Angola, Barn, and Baliguaze, of Adea, Vangue, Goyame, (where the springs of
Nyle are) of Amare, Baguamodri, Ambea, Vanguci, Tygremahon, Sabaim, the
country of the Queen of Saba, and also of Barnagas, and Lord unto the town
of Nubia, which does extend toward Egypt.

Presbiter John, there is not any one better known unto us, than that which
they call Barnagas, by reason of the neighborhood of the red sea, right
against the which, it extends from Suaquem almost unto the entry of the
strait: yet it has not any port upon the sea but that of Ercocco. The chief
town of this country is called Beroe or Barue, and stands upon a very
pleasant river. Not many years since, the Turks made a great spoil in this
country, ruining many places, and carrying away a great number of prisoners;
but in the end he made an accord with the Bassa (which they call of Abassia,
who makes his residence at Suaquem) paying him a thousand ounces of gold.

Pesbiter John's Estate, from the realm of Adel.



Having past the town of Ercocco, which has opposite unto it the Island of
Mazua, they come to Zagnani and Zama, which are of the province of Lacca, then
unto the port of Velle, sometimes Antifila. Beyond the point of Ercocco, there
are two lakes where crocodiles live as in Nile, and beyond it, they come unto
the port and promontorie called sometimes Mosylon, and now the Cape of Docono,
which is in the realm and country of Dangali. In this place of Dangali and
Docono, the sea makes a little gulf, and suddenly it straitens it self again;
so as the channel cannot be above ten or twelve good leagues broad: and upon
this channel are five or six Islands which hinder the passage, so as sailors
must have good experience to avoid the rocks which lie near unto these
Islands.

Next unto the country of Dangali, they come unto the port of Zeiloi, or
Zeila, and then to Daphne, an ancient port, whereas the town of Barbara
stands, near to Mount Fellez, after which is the Cape or Promontorie of Guarda
Funi, whereas the town of Met (in former times called Acanne) is situated:
here they double the cape, and from the East, they turn along the coast
toward the South, and the inward Aethiopia. Upon this coast they first find
Carfur, sometimes called Opene, and the cape of Zingi, and running along this
gulf, they find a bending of the sea toward Azun and Zazel^^, in old time
Essina and Tonica: then they come to Magadazo, wehreas the Portugals traffic,
and after that to the last maritime prouine, which is Barris, comprehended in
the titles of Presbiter John, having upon the sea, the two towns of Pate and
Brave, whose lands divide the countries of the king of great Aethiopia, and of
the king of Melinde: but having thus run along the coast, and it may be
surueied more places than was needful, for the description of the Empire of
Presbiter John, let us take some view of that which he holds on the firm land.

The realm of Tigremahon lies betwixt the rivers of Marabo, Nile, the red sea,
and the realm of Angote. They put this realm among the countries subject to
Presbiter John, for that their king is his tributarie. The realm of Tygri has
the good town of Caxumo, ^he which they say, was the abode of the queen of
Saba, who as the Aethiopian^ Saloman a son whose name was Meilec. T^^ (...)
was also the place of residence for queen Candace.

(...) realm of Angote is set (...) the realms of Tygremahon, and Amaran. The
p^ouinces of Abug^ne, (...), and others, are in this realm. There stand also
upon the river of Saba (...) of Angotine, Bachle, Corcore, and Betmaria, and
upon the river of (...) the chief town of Angote, near to the which stands
another town, whi^^ (...) name of S. Peter.

The (...) of A^ara has for bounds upon the North, the realms of Angote; to
the (...) Xoa; and upon the South, that of Damut; and toward the West, it
exte^^^ (...) to the river of Nile. The realm of Xoa lies betwixt the realms
of

(...) is greater than any other of this Aethiopia, for that (...) the cour^^
o^ the river of Nile, it extends it self from of the realm Gayame, (...)
Island of Gueguere, in old time called Meroe, and this tract of country
contai^e^ (...) hundred miles.

(...) of Meroe, or of Gueguere, is not subject to Presbiter John, as some
think, (...) inhabited by Mahometans, who are sworn enemies to the Abyssins.

The realm of Fatigar lies betwixt the realms of Adel and Xoa; and that of
Damut is near unto Xoa, and enclosed betwixt the lake of Barcena, and the
country of Zanq^^bara. Some others hold that the realm of Damut lies beyond
the realm of Vang^^,

This is all that can be said concerning this Empire, in the description
whereof, the greatest part of Cosmographers speak by conjectures; for that the
reports which have (...) by the Abyssins, which have left their countries, are
full of (...), as the most patient man in the world would find them
distasteful. Finally, they tha^ have appointed the chief abode of this Emperor
in the town of (...) for that it is most certain, according to the report of
them of the (...) he makes his ordinary, and in a manner his continual abode
in the town of (...), as Hugh of Linscot (who has run along all the coast of
Aethiopia, and

The Quality.
THe whole Estate of this great Monarch, to speak in general, is very
fertile: for although it yields little wheat, yet it has store of barley,
millet, pease, beans, and other pulses, whereof some are unknown to us. It
yields also abundance of sugar: but the Abyssins know not the manner how to
boil it, nor to refine it. They have great store of vn^^^s, and there grows
such abundance of oranges, cytrons, and lymons, as it almost exceeds belief:
but they have no melons, roots, nor olives; yet they make oil

Moreover, this country has in a manner all sorts of four footed beasts, and
all foul that we have in Europe or elsewhere, as oxen, sheep, asses, horses,
cammells, and besides (...) elephants, lions, tygres, o^ces, and stags: but
they have no bears, cunnies, nor (...). These countries have this
inconvenience, that there comes sometimes such

The (...) of the country are small, but they have many races of Arabia and
Egypt,

These countries want no mines of gold, silver, iron, and brass: but the
inhabitants know not how to draw it. In the realm of Zagamedra, they find
mines of very pure silver, the which they cannot draw but by fire, the which
does make it run like long rods. Goyama abounds in gold, and in the realm of
Damut they draw it, and refine it something better.

Their fields are full of partridges, geese, and hares, for that the Abyssins
never hunt. To conclude, there is no country fitter for the generation and
multiplication of beasts,

The inhabitants of these countries have two Summers, and two Winters, which
they do not distinguish by the heat or cold, but by the continual showers, or
by the fair weather, and clear sky.

The manners of the Ancients.
THe Ancients have believed, that the Aethiopians came not from any other
place to

They did hold him most holy among their priests, that did run as if he were
frantic: And when they had chosen their king, they did worship him as if he
had some divinity in him, or at the least that he was given them by the divine
providence; and he that was advanced to this dignity, was bound to live
according to the laws, and to do all things after the custom of the
country. He might not recompense nor punish any one that was under his power:
but whenas he desired to have any one punished for some offense, or crime, he
sent a Sargeant, who carried him the mark or sign of his death, and presently
he to whom it was brought, upon the sight thereof, was the executioner of his
own death.

They did so honor their king, as if by chance he were blind of one of his
eyes, or lame, or had any other imperfection or disabilitie of body, they put
out one of their eyes, or brake a leg, or some other part of the body,
thinking they should perform their duties very ill, if they should remain in
good estate, whenas their king was mayhemed in any part or member. They hold
also, that they which were beloved of the king, killed themselves at his death,
believing that this death would bring them glory, and that it was a certain
testimony of true friendship.

The Island of Meroe was in ancient time the place of residence or abode of
the kings of Aethiopia, and it was inhabited by shepherds, which gave
themselves to hunting, and by laborers which manured the ground. Herodotus
writes, That the Ethiopian Macrouies did more esteem brass than gold, the
which was held for vile among them, as the ambassadors of Cambises, going into
that country, saw fountains all environed, and as it were bound with chains
of gold; others say, that it was Latten. The women practiced arms, and went to
the war, and making holes in their lips, they put in hoopes of brass.

Some did worship the Sun rising, and did curse the setting thereof with a
thousand imprecations. Some did cast their dead bodies into rivers, others did
put them into vessels of earth, and some laid them in glass, where they kept
them a year in their houses* and did worship them with very great devotion,
offering the first fruits unto them. Some hold that they declared him king
which did exceed the rest in beauty, and in

The manners at this day.
(...) or Presbiter John) and others call them Acegue, which signifies
Emperor, or (...) which is to say, King, according to an ancient custom,
has no certain abode; ^^^ re^^ines sometimes in one place, sometimes in
another, and he lives most common^^ in the open fields under Tents, which they
carry with him to the number of 6000, so as his Court contains ten or twelve
miles in compass, when every man is lodged.

He has great store of vessel of gold and silver, and other rich moueables.
Some say, that he is not black, like unto the other Aethiopians, but inclining
something to white. His ordinary days journey when he trauells, as also his
subjects, is twelve miles. When he trauells the country, he is compassed about
with certain red curtains, which are very

The inhabitants of these countries are black, ignorant, and without all
knowledge of lear^^^^ as some report; yet that great scholar Escala, who has
left us so great cause to commend him, does witness, in his book of the
Correction of times, That they are not so ignorant, as some hold them. They
have no use of physic. Their ordinary garments are of beasts ski^^, or of
cloth made of cotton: but the better and richer sort wear sheep skins, and
they that are in greatest dignity, Lions, Tygres, and Onces.

Their houses are low, and of no worth, for they are built of chalk, and of
straw, and they remain in the lowest room. Their doors are always open, but
not any one enters into another man's house. They neither have tables, nor
tablecloths, and when they eat, they sit on the ground upon carpets, or some
other cloth: There are many among them that eat fresh beef raw. They use no
manner of coin, but in stead thereof, they give gold by weight. They use
trucking or changing in all things, and that whereof they make greatest use
therein, is salt and pepper. They are not much given to hunting nor fishing,
and there are few handicrafts men among them. They call all the people of
Europe, Francs, for that the French have in former times extended their names
over all the world, especially in the conquest of the Holy land. But they call
all other people that be white, Ghlibetes.

They are for the most part dull witted, and exceeding slow, for they have
flax, and can make no cloth: They have canes of sugar, and cannot draw it:
iron, and have not the wit to work it, yea they hold smiths to be sorcerers
and wicked men.

Great men entreat the poorer sort very roughly, so as they sow but what will
serve their necessities; for that the mightier take it from them. Their
language is without rule, and to write a letter, they must have many days: yet
they have goodly characters, much more pleasing than the Arabians and Turks;
as we may see in the book of the Correction of Joseph Escala, and in the
Onomasticke of Turnerus. The Noblemen, Bur^^^^^, and Common people, have their
dwellings distinct, and the meanest may purchase hi^^e^^e the title of a
gentleman, by some famous exploit.

There is no town in all the Abyssins country that has above 2000 households,
and



They serve in this trade for little money, and they are ready for all kind of
drudgeries, enduring whipping, and other outrages very patiently, differing
very little from slaves. They have for the most part their families in these
ships, and they seem properly borne to be slaves. If any one suffers that
which he carries upon his head to fall into the sea, or any other thing of
less price, yea when their ships are under sail, there is one amongst them
that casts himself into the sea, and swimming recouers the thing that was
lost. They sing in a manner continually when they travel. And when they have
nothing

The Riches.
THe gold and silver which is found in this country, will sufficiently prove
that there

This prince has three sorts of revenues: the first consists in the fruits of
his land and demeanes, the which he causes to be tilled and manured by oxen
and slaves, which multiply continually, for that they marry among themselves,
and the children are of their fathers condition: the second kind of his
revenues, grow from his subjects, who pay him so much for every fire, and the
tenth part of all the mineralls which are drawn by any other than himself:
the latter sort comes from princes which are his subjects, whereof some give
him horses, others oxen, and some send him cotton, or other things* and these
give him the revenues of one of their towns; so as it be not that whereas they
make their ordinary abode.

Alexander, they did not lay up so much gold, for that they knew not how to
purge it, and refine it: but in recompense, they laid up great store of
p^^tious stones, and pieces of gold. The viceroy of Barnagas gives yearly to
Presbi^en John one hundred and fifty good horses, with great store of silks
wrought. The king of Tygrema on sends him yearly two hundred Arabian horses,
with many pieces of silk

The Forces.
Presbiter John's country, in regard of their strength or otherwise, the
Portugals discoursing sometimes with the Abyssins, have told them, that it were
better) to avoid the great spoils which the Mahometans and some other
Idolaters do continually make in those countries, carrying away both goods
Francis Aluares does write, that this Monarch may raise a great many hundred
thousands of men: yet it has not been seen in his greatest necessity, that
he has drawn together such great numbers. He has a military religion, under
the protection of Saint Anthony, to the which every father of a family that
is a gentleman must appoint one of his sons if he have three, but not the
eldest; and of these they make about the number of twelve thousand horse, the
which are appointed for the kings guard. The end of this religion, is to defend
the frontires Presbiter John confines with three potent and mighty princes,
whereof the one is the king of Bourne, the other the Turk, and the third the
king of Adel. The king of Bourne does command in that country, the which does
extend from Guangale toward the East about five hundred miles, betwixt the
deserts of Set and Barca, the which country is unequally divided into plains
and mountains. The king of Bourne has a great number of subjects, the which
he does charge with no other impositions than the tenth of their fruits. Their
trade is to steal, and rob their neighbors, and to make them slaves, and
then to exchange them for horses with the merchants of Barbary. He has under
him many kingdoms, and does much annoy the Abyssins, taking all that

The Turk which confines with the Abyssins upon the East, and the king of Adel
which enuirons their country betwixt the East and the South, infest Presbiter
John much, and have restrained the bounds of his Empire, and reduced this
country to great misery: for besides that the Turks have spoiled a part of
Barnagas, whereas they entered in the ye^re 1558, and were repulsed, yet they
have taken from Presbiter John, all that he held along the coast, and
especially, the ports of Suaquem, and Ercocco, at which two places, Presbiter
John's countries, has purchased himself the name of Holy among the
Barbarians. He attends until the Abyssins are grown weak and consumed, by
that long and strict fast of fifty days; and whenas they are scarce able to
do any necessary business in their houses, he enters the country, spoils
the villages, carries away many Abyssins captives, and commits a thousand
outrages. The Abyssin slaves are of great profit out of their country:
wherefore Presbiter John, did fill Egypt and Arabia with slaves Claudius, king
of the Abyssins, finding himself pressed, in the year of our Lord God 1550, by
Gradaamed king of Adel, who had much annoyed him by the space of fourteen
years, by his continual incursions; and seeing himself forced to abandon the
frontiers, and to retire into the heart of his Estates, he demanded succors
of Stephen de Gama, Lieutenant to John the third, king of Portugal, at the
Indies, who was then in the Red Sea, with a good army. Gama sent Christopher
his brother unto him with four hundred Portugalls, and a good number of
Harquebuzes, and other arms. With these he defeated his enemy twice, by
reason of the advantage of his shot: but in the third battle, the king of
Adel having received a thousand Turkish Harquebuziers, Claudius, who had sixty
thousand foot, five thousand Abyssin horses, and the Portugals which remained
of the last defeat, whereof one of them wounded Gradaamed very ^ore. But in
the year of our Redemption 1559, king Claudius coming to fight with the
Moors, was slain upon the field, and the king of his enemies did triumph upon
an Ass. He had for successor Adamas his brother, against whom (for that he
was half a Mohammedan) a great part of the Abyssin nobility revolted; so as
the viceroy of Barnagas defeated him, in the year of our Lord God 1562: but
the affairs of Aethiopia wavering Alexander, by the help of the Portugals,
who brought them offensive and defensive arms, and stirred up the spirits and
courages of the Abyssins by their example in the war: for all they that
remained of the defeat of Christopher de Gama, and many others which have come
since, are settled and married there: so as they have brought in our order and
discipline of war, the use of arms, and the manner how to fortify the
country, and places of importance. Some

The Emperor of the Abyssins does use to cherish and give kind entertainment
to the Francs (so they call all the people of Europe) and will hardly suffer
them to go out of his country, when they are once entered. Presbiter John has
many enemies, besides those of whom we have made mention; as the king of
Dancali, to whom belongs the port of Suela, upon the Red Sea. Moreover, the
Moors, which are in the province of Dobe, divided into fourteen Seigneuries,
do much annoy him: for although they remain within the confines of Fresbiter
John's country, yet they revolt often. There Termides prince of the Negros,
toward the West; and vanquished the king of Manicongo, which is right against
the Island of S. Thomas, under the Equinoctial line; and afterward, one of
his Captains put Azamur, Basha to the great Turk at Suaquem, thrice to rout,
and in the third, he took his son prisoner, and cut off his head, taking
from him many pieces of ordnance.

He holds Egypt in great fear, and many Arabian princes, by reason of the
water which he may take from them, for the which they pay him tribute. He may
famish Pius the second and other Authors write, taking from it the river of
Nile: the which the Abyssins know well; but they say, they forbear to do it,
least the Turks should ruin the Holy Sepulcher of our Lord and Savior
Christ. To conclude all in a word, there is no doubt-but if Presbiter John had
men out of Europe, which could fortify his countries in diverse places, fill it
with arms after our manner, and instruct the Abyssins, and train them in our
kind of fighting; he should not only be able to chase the Turk out of all the
countries which his predecessors held in old time, but also to give a law to
all his neighbors that assail him; considering the great abundance of gold,
and silver, that he has, and also the great numbers of men that live in his
kingdoms and territories.

The Government.


The king takes away and gives Seigneuries to whom he pleases, and it is not
lawful for him that is deprived, to show any discontent. He disposes both of
religious and lay men, and of their goods, of the collation of holy orders,
and the administration of Sacraments. There is not any one among them that has
vassalls, but the King himself, to whom the kings that are his subjects come
every year to do their homage, and to promise obedience.

This prince descends (as they hold opinion) from a son of Saloman, called
Meilech, and the Queen of Saba, and these people received the Christian faith
under Queen Canda^es, in whose time the house of Gaspar began to reign in
Aethiopia, and from him there descended thirteen generations. John the Holy,
about the time of the Emperor Constans having no children, left the empire to
the eldest son of Caie his brother, and he invested Baltazar in the realm of
Fatigar, and Melchior in that of Goyame: by reason Gaspar, Melchior, and
Baltazar. He ordained that the Empire should be given by election to one of
those three families, although he were not the eldest, for that the particular
realms remained to the eldest. And to avoid all troubles, he ordained that the
Emperors brethren, and his nearest kinsfolks should be shut up in the castle
of Mount Amara, and carefully kept; willing also that the Emperors sons
should be put there, except the eldest, in whose place, if he dies, the next is
always drawn forth.

This Monarch gives and takes away benefices at his pleasure, and makes no
difference betwixt the Clergy and Laymen, but the administration of sacraments
belongs to the

The eldest succeed in the fathers goods, according to the laws of the
country. It is ordained by an ancient law, that the king shall not keep
himself retired above two days, for that if he should stay longer in one
place, there would be great want of victuals, considering the infinite number
of noblemen, officers, and others which follow the court.

The first rank of dignity, and the greatest is that of Bishops, and the
Clergy; the second,

Although that Judges take knowledge of crimes worthy of death, yet they are
bound to make their report to the governor of the place where they remain,
who carries the title, and is in effect the kings lieutenant, and represents
his person. They have no written law, but all things are decided according unto
natural reason.

If a woman be accused of adultery, the punishment belongs to them that are
interessed, and find themselves as it were wronged in their honor. The viceroy
of Batnagas remains in the town of Barue, and has under him the governments
of Danfile, and

The Religion.
THe subjects of Presbiter John are for the most part Christians, who remain
very obedient, and well affected to their prince. There are also some
Mahometans which are his tributaries; but these continually seek means to
revolt. But to speak of them that follow the Christian religion, and to
disconrse of their belief, which differs something from ours, although we all
ackowledge one Savior, it shall be fit in my opinion to relate after what
manner the faith crept into these countries.

The Abyssins in the beginning received Iudaisme, which extended unto the
neighbor Meilech the son of Saloman, of queen Maqueda his mother, and of
the Jews which accompany him. At the least, the Abyssins say, that this is
found in an old chronicle, the which is kept in the town of Caxume. They
received the Christian faith by the means of queen Candaces eunuch, who was
baptized by Philip, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles. The first place
which was converted to the faith, was that of Tygia, and at this day, they make
all their public instruments and writings in the Tygian tongue. They fell
afterward with the Cosites of Egypt into the error of Eutiches, for that they
depend of the Patriarch of Alexandria, whom they acknowledge for their head,
and from whom they receive their Abuna or Patriarch: for this people following
the authority of this Patriarch of Alexandria, and his doctrine, came

(...) that the mischief does still increase, the Abyssins hold with the
errors of the Cosites, many other impertinencies. Their ignorance and error
augments by the commerce

Moses, they eat not any beast that is not cloven footed; and for this cause
they abhor hares, geese, and duckes. They do reverence Saturday more than
Sunday, following therein the Jews, who were so zealous in the observation of
the Sabbath day.

Lay men wear their hair long, and shave the chin and upper lip, wearing a
little cross about their necks. Contrariwise the priests shave their heads,
and wear their beards long, having a cross in their hands, (the which is not
allowed among the Laytie, but only with the Lords) and a vessel of holy
water, to give unto those that shall require it, with a blessing; and they are
accustomed to cast of this holy water into the meat they eat, and into their
drink.

King John ordained that there should be but four parishes in every town.
These parishes are made like unto conuents, and in either of them there are
thirteen priests to say Mass: and these judge of civil causes, as the Judges
do of criminal in the kings name. Of all the number of priests, they choose
twelve canons, the which do continually assist

The Monks wear a long garment unto the ground, the which for the most part
is yellow and very hairie: Nuns use also a long gown, their heads are shaven,
and they are gyrt with a leather belt. They are not shut up in the Monasteries,
but in certain villages, under the obedience of the nearest Convent.

Their Churches have two curtains, the one near unto the Altar; and no man
enters into this place but the priests: the other in the midst where the
clerks remain, at the least, they that have the meanest orders: wherefore
many seek to be admitted, to the end they may have access unto this place.

Every Church has but one Altar, on which they say but one Mass a day. The
walls of these Churches are covered with the pictures of our Lady, and of
Saints, especially, of S. George on horseback. They have no graven images, and
some think the only reason is for that they have not wit enough to make them.
They will not allow any to paint Jesus Christ crucified, saying, that they are
not worthy to see him in that passion and torment.

They make the bread and wine, which the priests do afterward consecrat at
Mass, with wonderful care and ceremony. They put off their shoes when they
enter into their Churches, and they spit not in them, neither do they suffer
any beasts to enter into them. If any one passes on horseback before a
Church, he lights, to witness the honor he

They do not baptize their male children but forty days after their birth,
and females after sixty; and if any die in the mean time without baptism,
they say that the mothers receiving of the communion during the time of her
being with child suffiseth: they baptize not but upon Saturday and Sunday, and
they presently give the Eucharist to them that are baptized. In remembrance of
our Saviors baptism, then cause themselves to bebaptised every year upon
Twelfth day: and to this end, there are pooles, and little lakes,

They confess themselves standing, and they keep not much secret in their
confession. They communicate under both kinds, and they consecrate bread
without leaven. They go to the communion with their hands open, and lifted up
before their shoulders, and

Marriages are made by the means of priests, but they are not firm. Priests
may marie, but they can have but one wife, and if she dies, they may marie no
more, or if they do, they become lay men (the which is practiced also among
the Muscouites) even as if they had layen with another woman. All the religious
men are of the order of S. Anthony. It is true, that from this there is
another sprung, called Cestifanez, which is rather held for Jewish than
Christian.

There reigns an heresy in this empire, which holds, that they ought not to
worship

Their Monks and Nuns do very austere penances, as to wear a girdle of
iron upon their flesh; to pass the whole Lent, and never sit; to remain in
the coldest weather

In the Holy week they never say Mass, but on Thursday and Saturday, and
during all this week, the Abyssins salute not one another, and if they meet,
they pass by, and lift not up their eyes: and men of quality, go attired in
black or blew, and they light no candles in their Churches. Upon Maundie
Thursday they use the ceremony to wash the poores feet. On good Friday they
do acts so full of piety, and give such testimonies

They hold seven Churches to be most ancient, for that (say they) they were
built whenas they received the Gospel. They will have that of Caxumo under the
name of S. Mary of Syon, to be the first, for that the first stone of the Altar
was sent them from this mountain. There are one hundred and fifty Channons,
and as many Monks. Women enter not into their Churches, unless it be at the
town of Bazua, where there are two, one for men, under the name of S. Michael,
and the other for women, under the Peter, and S. Paul. There are very many
Monasteries: twelve miles from Chaxune, there is one, among the rest, which is
called Alleluya; for that (as they say) a religious man being attentive at his
ordinary prayers, heard the Angels sing Alleluya in the place.

Monks may not marie, and women may not enter into the cloisters of men, nor
any beast of that sex. There are many among them that marie two wives, yea
more, at one time, which are not punished: yet it is not lawful for them to
enter into the Church, but they may be divorced. They fear excommunication
wonderfully, and they are so devout, as many come yearly to the holy
Sepulcher.

They confess and hold the Church of Rome to be the first in the world, and
the Pope Peter, and their seat, which they call of David, from whom they say
they are descended, the second. They have prophesies which import, that they
should not have above one hundred Abunes, that is to say, Patriarchs, from the
Church of Alexandria, and that he which they had in the year of our Lord God
1520, was the last, after which they had a Mahomet has his Sepulcher, shall be
ruined by the Aethiopians. They have not the heresy of the Monothelites
amongst them, but they hold two natures in Jesus Christ, as we do: the which
appears in their Ethiopian Mass, translated into Latin.

Presbiter John says, in a letter sent unto the Pope, that it is written in
the life of S. Victor,

Now that we have set down the Abyssins Estate touching spiritual matters, it
shall be fit to make some mention of that which has been done in our time
touching their reconciliation with the Church of Rome, and first we will begin
with a famous embassage. A little before our time, David king of the Abyssins,
being yet but young, and under the government of Hellen his grandmother, moved
with the same of the happy success of the Portugals at the Indies, sent one
called Matthew, an Armenian by nation, with an Abyssin Lord, to Alphonso of
Albuquerque, viceroy at the Indies, to contract friendship with king D.
Emanuel, to whom they brought letters from their prince in a little pipe of
gold, and among other things, they presented unto him a piece of the true

These being afterward returned from Portugal to the Indies, were ten years
after their departure conducted to Ercocco, by Sequeira General of the
Portugals: And there, by the means of the kind reception they gave unto
Matthew, and of the joy that the Abyssins did show for his return, the
Portugals were assured of that whereof they doubted, that he was ambassador
unto the great Neguz. With this occasion, Sequeira contracted a league, and
made a pepetuall peace, in his kings name, with this monarch, in whose name the
viceroy of Barnagas swear the league.

At the same time, Sequeira sent Roderick de Lima Ambassador to this Princes
Court, Francis Aluares, who afterward writ all this History. He returned from
his embassage six years after his departure, that is to say, in the year of
Christ 1526; bringing with him Zagazabe, an ambassador sent by Presbiter John
to the king of Portugal, and Francis Aluares with presents and letters which he
sent unto the Pope. The letters were presented at Bolonia, at the coronation of
the Emperor Charles the fifth. The emperor of the Abyssins made mention in his
letters, of Pope Eugenius the fourth, who had sent the Council of Florence to
his predecessors, and he remembered the union of the Eastern Church with the
Roman.

In the year of our Redemption 1555, John the third, king of Portugal, had a
dessigne to try all possible means to reconcile Presbiter John wholly to the
Church of Rome: for David's Ambassador had done his obedience to Clement the
seventh in his kings name, yet they doubted (as it was likely) that for want of
spiritual help, it would be unprofitable; seeing they still followed the
heresies of Eutiches and Dioscores, and depended of the authority of the
Patriarchs of Alexandria, and received the Abuna from him which was the
arbitratour of Ecclesiastical things, and administratour of the Sacraments,
who gave orders throughout all Aethiopia, and was master of the ceremonies,
and Doctor of the faith. Whereupon, they thought they could not do any thing
more profitable, nor more necessary than to send a lawful Patriarch from
Rome, to govern those souls, and with him certain Priests of good life, and
great learning, to convert and maintain those people in the true faith, by
disputation, preaching, public and private

It seemed there was a good ouerture for this effect, for that Claude, king of
the Abyssins had some years before received important succors from the
Portugals against Gradaamet king of Adel, who had reduced him to extremity,
and in a letter written to Stephen governor at the Indies, he had called his
brother Christopher de Gama Martyr, for that he died in that war. Having
therefore imparted this desseigne, first to Pope Iulio the third, and then to
Pope Paul the fourth; they concluded to send thirteen Jesuit Priests into
Aethiopia, men held to be of great piety and learning. John Nugnez Barette was
made Patriarch, and they gave him two Bishops for coadiutors, Melchior Carnee,
and Andrew Oueido, with the titles of Bishops of Nicea, and Hierapolis. King
John did furnish this Embassage not only with things necessary for their
voyage, but with all that might be destred concerning sacred things, and with
rich presents for Pesbiter John.

But to make the matter more easy, they sent James Diaz before, from the town
of Goa, Gonsaluo Rodrigues to discover the humor and disposition of the great
Neguz, and of his subjects. They having ^ad audience of this prince, they
delivered him king John's letter, by which he did congratulat with him in the
name of all Christians, for that following the example of his father and
grandfather, he had embraced the faith and Catholic religion: whereat this
Monarch was amazed, as a matter he had never dreamt of; and having examined why
the king of Portugal had written those words, he excused himself upon his
secretaries, or the interpreter of the letters; adding, that although he did
much esteem this king, as his good brother, yet he had never any desseigne to
stray from the faith of his ancestors. Rodrigues did not faint, but first of
all did what he could to draw Claude to the

Seeing then that the great Neguz gave him no willing audience, he composed and
published a book in the Chaldean tongue, wherein confuting plainly the errors
of the Abyssins, he showed the sovereign authorie of the Church of Rome; and
this bred a great rumor, so as the king was forced to suppress it cunningly,
to free himsele from danger.

James Diaz seeing that he lost his labor, and that the time of his return
grew near, took leave of Presbiter John, and having given an account at Goa,
in what estate he had left the business, it was not thought convenient, that
the Patriarch should with his person Rodrigues had treated of with so small
fruit. This Bishop having embraced this enterprise with much content, went on
his way with father Emanuell Fernandes, and some few others. Being come into
the Abyssins country, he had more subject to suffer, than to dispute, for that
king Claude having been vanquished and slain, he had for successor Adamas his
brother, a sworn enemy to the holy See. This prince drew the bishop and his
companions after him to the wars, and entreated them very cruelly, using no
less rigor to the Abyssins that were converted. He was afterward defeated in
battle by the Turks, who stripped the Bishop and his companions of all they
had: so as they fell into so great misery

The Realm of Monomotapa.
A DISCOVRSE OF THE KING OF MONOMOTAPA.
The Contents.
1. A Description of the situation, form, and circuit of the realm of
Benomotana, 2. Temperature of the air of this country, abounding in rivers,
carrying gold in their sand, in forests, corn, and elephants, in pastures,
and mines of gold. 3. Complexion and good disposition of body of these people,
being of a mean stature, and black of hue, their apparel, and cotton cloth,
their manner of living, of flesh, rice, fish, millet, and oil of Susyman:
their manner of serving their king upon the knee, his guards and arms. The
generositie of the women which go to the war like Amazones. 4. Wherein the
revenue of this prince consists. 5. Policy of this nation, and their speedy
execution of justice, which decides all causes presently by witnesses, and
without prisons, and punishes three crimes severely, sorcerie, theft, and
adultery. 6. Apostacy of this people

ALthough we have no great knowledge of this Estate, yet we must speak
something according to that small relation which has been made unto us:
whereby we may make some probable conjecture of diverse other neighbor princes,
as of the kings of Adel, Monoemugi, Angola, and Matama, which are not so great
and powerful princes, as this whereof we now treat.



The principal town of this country is called Benomotaxa, whereas the king
makes his ordinary abode, and there is another called Simbas. Besides this
Island, this king commands over other places; for that his Empire extends
far, as well within the land, as along the sea coast, unto the capes of
Mozambique, and Bonne Esperance, and many Ptolome, as well by reason of the
situation, as for the neerenesse of their names.

The Quality.


The Manners.
THese people are of a mean stature, black, of a good complexion, and
active. They

The Riches, and Forces.
IT is most certain, that seeing they have so great store of that metal
which every man

The Government.


The Religion.
Sebastian, king of Portugal, the king of Inanior, a vassal to Monomotapa, was
converted by Gonsaluo de Silua, a Jesuit, who soon after baptized the king of
Monomotapa, and his wife; the king was called Sebastian, and the Queen, Marie;
after which there were three hundred of the chief baptized. But it happened
that four Mahometans, beloved and favored of the king, gave him to
understand, that Gonsaluo was a Magitian, and that he ruined kingdoms with his
inchauntments, and that he was come as a spy into his Estate, to make his
subjects revolt: so as the king being young, persuaded by these wretches,
resolved to put Gonsalua to death, who Francis Barret. The king of Monomotapa,
being full of fear at the noise of this war, which threatened him, sent to
demand a peace of Barret: but this general aspiring to the gold of this
realm, contemned all conditions that were offered him: The event of this
enterprise, was, that this army, which was fearful to so puissant a monarch,
was consumed by the intemperature of the air, which is insupportable to them
of Europe. Since some few Christians remained, but the rest live at this
present in darkness.

The Realm of Congo.
A DISCOVRSE OF THE REALM OF CONGO.
The Contents.
1 THe extent and bounds of the realm of Congo, divided into six provinces,
and a particular description of either of them, with their chief towns. 2.
The temperature of the air of these countries, held inhabitable by the
ancients: the equality of days and nights throughout the year, and
continual rain during Winter, being then Summer in our Horizon. 3.
Description of the chief rivers of those countries, whereof the most famous
are Zaire, and Lelonde, the which engender crocodiles, and hippopotames, 4. A
particular mention of the singularities which are found in every province: as
elephants and tygres in that of Bamba, zebre, a beast like unto a mule,
empalanges, wild bugles, ciuit cats, serpents five and twenty foot long, which
the inhabitants of the country eat, rams with wings, camelions, parrats, and
pelicans. In the province of Congo, elephants, apes, and crystal. In the
countri of Pemba, luco, a kind of grain, white millet, Indian figs or
barnanes, and certain palm trees, from which they draw oil, wine, vinegar,
fruit, and bread: mountains of Iaspe and Porphire. In the Island of Loande,
gray cockle shells very glistring and transparent; and that wonderful tree
called Ensanda, which bears a certain kind of cloth, whereof the people make
garments: black whales, and pilchards. 5. The color, countenance, and
disposition of body of the inhabitants of this country, the form of their
houses and buildings: their money for traffic, and their boats of war wherein
they fight: of their fishing for cockles; 6. Their riches, consisting in the
traffic of mettalls, elephants, ciuit cats, fishing of cockles, cloth of
Songo, which they draw from palm trees, and Crystal. 7. The forces of this
realm, their arms, and how many thousand men he may arm. 8. What order the
king observes for the government of his realm, his laws, and the governors
which he appoints in every province to do justice: their military discipline,
and in what order their armies march, and the three instruments which a
general of an army does use, as signs to make them march or stand, and to
signify his will to all the squadrons. 9. Of the idolatry of the inhabitants
of the realm of Congo: in what time, and by whom the Christian faith was
denounced unto them, and how it is at this day received by means of the
Jesuits which are planted there.



It extends from Saint Katherines Cape, which is two degrees and a half from
the Equinoctial, bending toward the South, unto the Cape of Leo. It has for
bounds

The king of Congo does also command in the Island of Loande, which lies
betwixt a branch of the river of Dande, the which is now called by the name of
Bengo, and the river of Coanze. There are moreover certain Islands which are
upon the river of Zaire, whose inhabitants are feudataries to the king of
Congo. This realm is

The province of Bamba, lies upon the sea coast, from the river of Ambrisi,
unto that of Coanze, and this country contains many seigneuries. The town of
greatest note in this province, is called Bamba, for the chief towns give
their names to all the rest of the country. It stands betwixt the rivers of
Lose and Ambrisi, and it is about one hundred Italian miles from the sea.

The second province of the realm of Congo, is called Songo, and lies about
the rivers of Zaire and Loango, extending it self unto the river of Ambrisi,
toward the North, in the seventh degree and a half, and it ends near to the
red rocks of the frontire of

The province of Sunde is seated about the town of Congo, to which the
Portugals have given the name of S. Savior, and from thence it extends for the
space of forty Italian miles, or eight Germane leagues, taking five miles for
every league, to the river of Zaire. The principal town is also called Sunde.

The province of Pango was in former times a realm by it self, and was not
subject to the king of Congo. It confines upon the North, with the province of
Sunde; to the South, with that of Batte; toward the West, with the country of
Congo; and upon the East, with the mountains of the Sun. The capital town
of the country is called Pango,

The province of Batte confines upon the North, with that of Pango: and toward
the East, with the river of Barbela; and extending it self to the mountains
of the Sun, and to the foot of the mountains of Aphronitre: upon the South
part of these mountains it ioines to Barbela, as far as the burnt mountain.
The chief town is Batta, which gives name unto the province like unto the
rest.

In the province of Pemba stands the town of Congo, sometimes called Banze,
that is to say, Court, and now S. Savior. It is situated upon a mountain,
and it is about one hundred and fifty Italian miles from the sea. There is a
mountain of a reasonable height, the


ACcording to the opinion of the Ancients, this country was inhabitable, for
that Edward Loup a Portugal does witness, who lived long in those parts, with
many other Portugals. This Author reports, That the air is so temperat, as
Winter is like unto Autumn, at Rome; so as they change not their garments,
neither do they

The night is in a manner equal to the day, and throughout the year they
observe very little difference. They have their Winter when we have the
Spring: it begins the fifteenth day of March, and Summer in the midst of
September. The rain continues five months, during April, May, June, Iulie,
and August: you shall seldom see a clear day during that time; and rain
poures down so abundantly, as it is in a manner admirable;

In Summer, they have the winds, whic Julius Caesar, and Hippocrates before
him, called Etesies: the Portugals give it the name of Mestro, or General, for
that they be common to that country, and we take them for the Easterly winds.
This wind causes rain by the agitation of mists upon the tops of mountains,
for being encountered, they dissolve into rain, and fall to the ground: And
commonly they see mists upon the tops of mountains, whenas rain approaches.
This continual rain causes the swelling of the rivers of Nyle, and Nyger, or
Senega, and others of this country, which discharge themselves Presbiter John,
it is no wonder at the swelling and inundation of the rivers: yet in Egypt,
and in the driest countries which are never watered with rain, except the
country which is about Alexandria, they hold the swelling of Nyle for
admirable, which never fails at a certain time of the year to come and
fatten their lands with a slime and muddie water, the which otherwise would
yield no fruit, unless they are watered after this manner: by reason whereof,
in former times they did sacrifice to Nyle, giving it the name of good Angel,
Prolome does witnesses; and the Christians at this day which dwell in those
countries, hold the inundation of Nyle for a myraculous thing, without the
which they should be famished. Wherefore, the West and North-West, which blows
here in the Summer season, during the which they have their Winter, gathers
mists and vapors together upon the tops of mountains, and calls the rain,
which there does temper the Winter, by reason of their hot vapors. It is the
rain therefore that does commonly cause the swelling of Nyle, and of other
rivers of those countries.

But whenas those people have their Summer, their winds are contrary, being
South-East or North East, the which are cold winds, and refresh the grounds as
they do in our countries: for it makes their sky clear, whereas they cause
mists with us* and threatens

You must all observe, that no snow falls upon the mountains of Aethiopia,
Congo, and the neighbor countries, but upon those which are toward the Cape of
good Hope,



The principal are Coanze, which bounds the realm of Congo, and Angola: and
Lelonde, which ingenders Crocodiles, and Sea-horses, from the which the Island
of horses has taken her name. It does also engender a fish called Hog, which
are so great and fat, as there are some of five hundred weight, or more.

The Hippopotame, or horse of the river, is tawnie, has little hair, and
leapes to land to feed, and in the day time returns to the water. The Afrikans
make some of them tame, and they are exceeding swift, but they must not pass
over deep rivers, for they

But let us come to the particularities of the provinces which we have
described, having discoursed in general of all these countries.

In the province of Bamba, there is a mountain, where they find many mines of
silver, and other mettalls. They have also in this country many Elephants, by
reason of the many forests, and rivers. These Elephants are exceeding great,
for that they grow unto the midst of their age, and they live commonly unto
the age of one hundred and fifty years.

Those which we have seen in Portugal, and elsewhere in Europe, were less,
for that they were brought away too young. The greatness of these beasts may
be conceived by their teeth, which have been gathered up, whereof some have
been two hundred weight. In the language of Congo, the Elephants tooth is
called Mean Manzao. The young Elephants are called Moana Manzo. Their ears are
not less than the greatest Turkish targets; the greatest are six foot long,
fanshioned like an egg, and they are narrow toward the shoulder. With the
motion of their ears and tail, they drive away flies, and they kill them when
they rest upon them, drawing together their skin. The hair of their tail is
very thick, and like to little black shining reeds, and those of the younger
are the fairest and strongest, and of greater price.

Without doubt the Ancients did not know the nature of the Elephant, whenas
they said they could not bend their hammes, and therefore they did lean
against some tree to sleep, and by this means were easy to be taken: for the
Portugals and Flemings have seen the contrary, for they get up into trees
drawing up their haunches to gather leaves orboughes, or stoop easily down
when they drink in any place where the water is low, the which they could not
do if they had no joints.

This province has Tygres of the same form we see them painted in these
parts. These beasts, as Edward does witness, do never set upon white men, but
they often assail the Negroes; so as at a time finding two men, the one white,
and the other black, sleeping together, these beasts did furiously fall upon
the black man, and never offered to





They do also find other beasts, whereof some are as big as an ox, others are
less, which they call Empalanges: then they have wild bugles or oxen, woolues
which smell very far off, and which do exceedingly love a certain oil
which they draw out of palm trees. Moreover, they have foxes, stags, goats,
conies, and hares, in great abundance, for that they pursue them not to death
when they hunt, as they do in Europe. They

There are diverse sorts of serpents and vipers, whereof some are five and
twenty foot long. and five broad, having the belly very large, and the throat
so wide, as they will devour a stag, or any other beast of the like bigness.
They live as well upon the land as in the water. When they are full they sleep
willingly, and then the inhabitants kill them, and feed upon their flesh, which
they hold to be better than that of any foul. Finally, there are vipers whose
poison is so strong, as when they have bitten any one, he dies within five and
twenty hours. There are also to be seen certain beasts as big as a ram,

The same province has also camelions, with great store of hens, turkies,
peacocks, geese, ducks, tame and wild partridges, phesants, pigeons, turtles,
eagles, faulcons, sparrowhaukes, and pelicans: and this country abounds in
parrats both green and gray; and there are great numbers of red birds, which
are exceeding fair, with many other kinds of small birds, which sing like unto
them of the Canaries.

The province of Congo breeds many elephants, and there are diverse sorts of
apes,

In the country of Pemba, they find iron in that great mountain whereof we
have made mention in the description of provinces. The soil of this mountain
is very fruitful, by reason of the bounty of the air. It has excellent good
water, which never hurts any man that drinks it. There is store of grass, and
abundance of cattle, and fruit trees, which are continually green. This
soil yields all kind of grain that is ordinary in those countries,
especially, that which they call Luco, the which they esteem as from the
country whereas Nile has her spring, especially from that, whereas Nile
filles

This province does also bear abundance of white millet, which they call
mazze, that is to say, grain of Congo. It does also yield meaz or Turkey
wheat, which they esteem but little, and the inhabitants call it Mazza
Mamprito, that is to say, corn of Portugal. There is store of rice, but they
esteem it not. The same province has diverse fruit trees, whereof the poor
people live, as cytron and lymon trees, which bear fruit of a wonderful
pleasing taste. There grow bananes, which some hold to be the same that the
Egyptians and Syrians call muse, and some others Indian figs: there taste is
very good and pleasing, having a sweetness mixed with sharpness, and it is a
good food, and has

The fields are full of diverse sorts of palm trees, wereof the one bears
dates, and the other nuts. There is also another kind of palm tree, unlike
unto the other two, from the which, they draw oil, wine, vinegar, fruit, and
bread. They dray oil from the fruit, as from olives, and this oil has the
color and substance of our butter: yet it is somewhat green tending to
yellow. They use it in steed of oil and butter, putting it in their lamps, and
rubbing their bodies, that they may run more nimbly. To conclude, it is of
great use in time of necessity, for that they of these countries which have
traveled thither, had died for hunger without this oil. They draw wine from
the tops of the trees which they pierce, and then there runs out liquor which
is white, clear, and fresh. First of all it

There is moreover great store of stone, and mountains of as goodly marble as
can be seen, which were sufficient to build a whole Temple: and besides there
are mountains of Iaspis and Porphyrie, as also of white marble, and of many
other colors, and it is this marble which at Rome they call of Numidia, and of
Afric. And in some there grow Iacinth stones, which may easily be separated
from the rest. They may make whole pillars, obeliskes, and other works, which
would be very fair, yea admirable, by reason of the Iacinths which are mixed
among the stone. There are other rocks, in which they find mettalls, as brass
which is green and yellow, whereof they may make goodly statues, and other
things.

But I am resolved in the conclusion hereof to speak something of the river of
Zaire, which is the greatest river of the realm of Congo, and comes partly
from the same lake, from whence Nile has her spring. This river has such
abundance of water, as

As for the river of Lelonde, which runs at the foot of the mountain, where
the royal town of Congo is built, whenas the rain cease, it dries up, and
one may easily wade over it.



In that part which is nearest to the firm land, there grows certain trees,
at the foot whereof salt water springs up. There they find oysters as big as
a man's hand, of a very good taste, the which are well known to the
inhabitants, who call them Ambizimitare,

The Manners.


They of the province of Bamba, are so strong, as they will cut a slave a
sunder in the midst, and they will strike off the head of an ox at one blow.
They of the province

In the province of Pemba, in which the town of Congo stands, the inhabitants
cut the branches of certain trees called Ogegues, and make hedges, alleys, and
arbours, to keep them from the Sun. They carry Tamarinde in their mouths,
to prevent thirst. The houses of the inhabitants of Congo, are low, and very
narrow; not for want of materials, (as we have showed discoursing of their
quarries of stone and marble, besides the

The Islanders of the river of Zaire have in former times had great wars
against them, and they did fight in boats which they made of the bodies of
trees made hollow. This

As for them of the Island of Loande, they fish for their cockles after this
manner. The women go a little into the sea, and bring forth baskets full of
sand, the which they lay upon the shore, and then they take the sand from the
cockles, which are very small, and of diverse forms: for there be some males,
and some females, and these have the best color,

But to speak in general of the manners of all the inhabitants of Congo, they
participat Fuio, Fuio, Fuio, with the which they wish them good luck.

They steal willingly from strangers, but they use no theft among themselves.
The women are all given to make love, especially with strangers, not caring for
their reputations,

The inhabitants of Congo do honor unto their kings, sweeping all the way
very carefully where he is to pass. I have said that the men went clothed
with mats: but now they imitat the Portugals much. And as for the women, they
have three jupes one upon another, wherewith they cover the lower part of their
bodies. Every jupe has a

The king eats after the Portugal manner, and does justice publickely without
any great formalitie; for that all things are debated before him in few words.
The courtiers use flutes, by the sound whereof they dance a la moresco,
keeping time with great gravity, and an active disposition that is very
pleasing. They all know the virtues of many herbs, so as every one is his own
physician and Chyrurgeon. They cure the fever with

The Riches.
WE may easily conjecture of the wealth of the inhabitants of the realm of
Congo,

The fishing of sea cockles in the Island of Loande, is very beneficial to
this prince: and he does commonly entertain a governor in this Island, who
has a care of this fishing. He draws much from the province of Pemba, which
is held to be very rich, by reason


THis monarch has so many men in his dominions, and so apt to arms, as he
will



These men (who are exceeding strong, as has been said) wear swords (...)

The governor of Batta has hargue busiers, for that near unto the mountains
of the S^nne and Aphronitre, toward the East and West countries of Nile, there
are certain men called Giaquas, among them of Congo, and in their own
language, they are called Agag, who are furious and watchful to get some
spoil; so as they make daily incursions into the neighbor provinces,
especially, into that of Batta, by reason whereof the inhabitants are always
watchful, and ready to arm upon the least bruit of their coming.

The Government.


The inhabitants of Cong observe these orders in time of war: they are all
footmen, and they strech themselves out, or march close together, according to
the commodity of the place, or they divide themselves into diverse squadron^.
The army does march, and

The general of the army is forced to carry a great number of these kinds of
instruments, both great and small: for whenas he gives a sign to the whole
army, he must use the great instrument: if to a part, then he uses a less;
so as every troop has a particular sign, the which they understand. The
soldiers have also signals amongst themselves; for the foremost are for the
most part men exceeding active, who in the midst of the fight, give courage
to the rest with little bells, and instruct them how to avoid dangers.

Whenas they begin to fight, they open their ranks, that they may the more
eas^y



The Governor of the province of Batta, who is of the blood royal, sits
always nearest unto the king, and has such authority in consultations, as no
man dares contradict him. He eats sometime at the kings table, but standing,
and no man receives this honor, no not the kings own children. He carries
with him flute players, and other musitions

They seldom put any criminal offender to death, and if any one of Congo has
a suit against one of Portugal, it is decided according to the laws of Portugal.

The Religion.
ALthough that the faith and Christian religion be crept into this realm, yet
it is full of

The realm of Congo was converted unto the Christian faith by the means of D.
John the second, king of Portugal, after this manner: James Cano, a Captain to
this king, coasting Afric by his commandment, after a long voyage came unto
the great river

John sent them into their countries, with an honorable embassage, and
withal, three Friars of the order of S. Dominicke, men of integrity, and of
great learning, to instruct that nation. Being arrived at Congo, they first
converted the kings uncle together with a son of his. The King and Queen
were afterward baptized, and this prince in short time caused a goodly Church
to be built under the name of the Holy Cross.

The king was christened by the name of John, his queen by that of Elinor, and
their eldest son was called Alphonso. This prince was excellent in bounty
and liberality, Dominicke, besides the malignitie of the air, and
insupportable heat which consumed and wasted them, were also ill entreated by
them of Congo: for although that when they spoke of the holy ceremonies and
divine mysteries, they seemed tractable, for that they thought that those
things which Panse Aquitime, the kings second son, who would not be baptized;
by reason whereof, there grew great hatred betwixt him and his elder brother,
who was wonderfully affected to the Christian religion, and maintained Christ's
cause as much as might be.

Upon these contrarieties the king died, and the brethren fell to arms. The
event was, that Alphonso, with six and thirty soldiers, calling upon the name
of Jesus Christ, and that of S. Jacques, after the Portugal manner, defeated his
enemy, who was taken, and died in his detestable opinion. Doubtless God
favored Alphonso in this war^e with apparent miracles; for they say, that
being ready to give battle, there was so great a light, as his eyes, and his
companions, were dazeled for a time, wherewith they conceived

After the victory, he drew all the noblemen of his kingdom together,
commanding them to cause all their Idols to be brought into one place, the
which he burnt upon the topof a high mountain. He reigned fifty years in
peace, during the which, he advanced the Christian faith wonderfully, by his
authority, example, yea and by his preaching. D. Emanuel did not abandon the
enterprise, for he sent out of Portugal into Congo, twelve Friars, of those
which the Portugals call Blew, of the which father John Marien was the chief,
with Architects, Carpenters, and Masons to build Churches, and with a rich
furniture for divine service: And king Alphonso sent his son Henry, with
many princes of his realm, to Rome, where they were received with very much
honor. King Alphonso had his son Peter for successor, in whose time they
sent an Eunuch into the Island of S. Thomas, who had the care of Congo, where
they erected a College in the town of S. Savior, of eight and twenty
Channoins, in the Church of the holy Cross. The second bishop was of the
royal house of Congo, who went to Rome, and died in his return. Peter had
Francis for his successor in the realm, who reigned little, Diego his kinsman
succeeded him. In his time, John the third, king of Portugal, hearing that the
king cared not much for religion, and that the Merchants and Priests of Europe
did not much advance it, but did scandalize the new Christians by their bad
lives, sent four Jesuits thither to repair all disorders. These religious men
coming first to S. Thomas, and then to Congo, were received courteously by the
king, and employing themselves presently in the work for the which they were
sent, one of them began to instruct six hundred children in learning, and in
the Christian doctrine, and the rest went into the country, preaching with
admirable fruit, for in five months they converted above five thousand
persons, and built three Churches. But falling afterward one after another
into troublesome and languishing diseases, they were forced

In the mean time, king Diego died, and after his decease, there grew great
contention Henry brother to Diego obtained the crown, and after him (who died
soon after in barraile against the Anziques) Aluaro his son reigned. He to
reconcile himself unto the Portugois, assembled them altogether that lived
dispersedly throughout the realm, as well religious, as lay men, and he wrat for
his discharge unto the king and the bishops of S. Thomas. The bishop having
seen the letters, past into the realm of Congo, where having set some order
for the discipline of the clergy, he returned to S. Thomas, where he ended his
days.

It happened partly through the absence, and partly for the want of bishops,
that the Francis, a man of great authority, both in regard of his house, as of
his wealth, began to say openly that it was a vain thing to have but one wife,
and in the end he abandoned the Christian faith, and was the cause that the
king lost much of his former zeal,

They say, that this Francis being dead and buried in the Church of the holy
Cross, the devils uncovered a part of the Church, and with a fearful noise
drew him out of his grave, and carried him away, the which did much trouble the
king: but he was moved more by an accident which happened afterward: for the
Giaguas leaving their country entered by great numbers into the realm of
Congo, and coming to fight with this king, Don S^bastian king of Portugal,
from whom he obtained six hundred soldiers, by whose valor he chased his
enemies out of the realm, and was restored to his former estate within one
year and a half. In his time the Bishopric of S. Thomas was given to
Anthony of Glioue a Castillian, who after many difficulties propounded by the
governor of that Island, was in the end conducted to Congo, with two religious
Aluaro died, and had for successor his son bearing the same name, who failed
not to solicit D. Sebastian, and D. Henry kings of Portugal, and after them
the Catholic king, to send him preachers, and other church men to maintain
and augment the faith in his realm. And amiddest these goodly desseignes he
died, leaving for successor his son bearing the name of Aluaro.

In the midst of these troubles, certain Jesuits past into Congo, and began
to preach unto the people. These religious men have built a house in the Island
of Loande, where there remains six or seven priests, who go up and down where
necessity calls them. For the number of the baptized being very great, there
are so few men to entertain them Aluaro, who for that he was not borne of
lawful marriage was little esteemed of the most part of his subjects, would
have near unto his person one of these fathers, by whose means and authority
he purchased himself reputation, and came to be honored. And God favored his
intention, for that having against him a sister of his by the fathers side,
with a brother of hers, he gave them battle with a great army, and carried
himself so valiantly in the fight, as he not only def^ated the army, but also
slew the general. After which, he ordained that in the place where he was
slain, they should build a church in honor of our lady: and to encourage
others by his example, he first of all laid hand to work, and by very
favorable edicts advanced the preaching of the Gospel, and the enterprise of
these

The Estate of the Emperor of Marocco.
OF THE ESTATE OF THE EMPEROR OF MAROCCO.
The Contents.
1. THe discourse of an Estate which comprehends two famous kingdoms here
follows: 2. A description of the province of Sus, the situation, limits, and
towns. 3. Of Marocco. 4. Of Guzale. 5. Ducale. 6. H^scora. 7. Tedle. 8. The
realm of Fezdiuided into seven provinces, the bounds, and extent in general.
9. Of Tenesme, the first province of the realm of Fez, and the chief towns.
10. Of the province of Fez, her length, and breadth, and her towns, with an
ample relation of the great and stately city of Fez, the Mosques and stately
Temples to the number of seven hundred Hosptitalls, Stoues, Colleges, Innes
built like palaces, with diverse other sumptuous buildings. 11. Of the province
of Asgar, 12. Of Elhabet, or Ellabat, and her towns. 13. Of Errif. 14. Garet.
15. Chauz. 16. Of the quality of the air of these provinces, and of their
soil abounding in oils, honey, wax, sugar, cotton, goats hair whereof they
make chamlets, goats skins, with the which they make Spanish leather, and mines
of gold: and what diseases reign in these countries. 17. Diverse opinions of
the beginning and descent of these Barbarians, always commended for their
subtle wits, and great learning, and knowledge in physic, excellent in the
art of riding a la Genette, and at Ioco de Canna, living in old time of the
flesh of apes, and clothing themselves in goats skins; worshipping the Sun
and Moon as Dieties: and their abominable sacrifising in the night, where the
lights being put out, they committed adultery with the first woman that came.
18. The disposition of the inhabitants of Fez and Marocco, 19. Of the abode of
the Arabians in the deserts of these countries, living under tents an
pauillions, given to labor, runting, and poesy. Of the apparel of the women,
and painting of their faces. 20. The manner and kind of life of the provinces
of the realm of Marocco, and first of all what meat they of He use, their
apparel, and kind of bedding etc. 21. The manners and life of the inhabitants
of the realm of Fez, and especially of the civility of them of Fez, their
goodly stoues, innes, traffic of mills, distinct dwellings for mechanicke
arts, and places, whereas they make their traffic of all kinds of
merchandise. Their ceremonies, and feasts at marriages, the fashion of their
apparel, and of their eating and drinking, their dances, and solemn feasts,
and the manner of their mourning at the death of their parents. Their sports
and ordinary 22. Of three sorts of divines, Philosophers, Alchim^sts, Charmers
and Sorcerers of this realm. 23. The riches of the country, abounding in
corn and fruit, cytrons, oranges, sugar, olives, chamlets, spanish leather,
and cotton cloth: and of the great revenues of their prince, which consists in
the first fruits and tenths of 24. His forces consisting in foot and horse, and
his men at arms of many sorts, composed of diverse parts, by the consideration
whereof, we may e^sily consider what number of men this monarch may draw to
field. 25. Of what family he is that commands at this day in the realm of
Marocco, and Fez; and by what means it came unto this empire. 26. The kings
Council, and the Chamber of Justice erected in Marocco. 27. Of the creation
and Court of the kings of Fez, his officers, captains of horsemen, governors
in every 28. Of the Governor, Judges, Customers, Apothecaries, and policy of
the city of Fez. 29. Of Mahometisme divided into diverse sects: and who it was
that brought the law of Mahomet into Barbary. 30. Of the bringing in, and
settling of the Jews in the realm of Marocco: and of the miserable estate of
Christian slaves in these countries.

I Come now to discourse of an Estate which cannot remain in one estate and
being, and which has of late years endured so many changes and alterations,
as it would seem incredible unto him Muley Cydan, who is at this day emperor
of Marocco, was some few years past driven away, and now Muley Cheq, who had
seized thereon, is a fugitive in Algarbe in Portugal, with a certain number of
Moors, and his son Abd^lla is now in the mountains to draw the Arabians
together, to come in arms against Muley Cydan, and to serve him, as he had
done them. But for that the matter is too well known, and that they are like
to have new stirs and combustions Muley Cydan, Muley Abdalla, and Muley Bousers
live, I will forbear this discourse to come unto the description of the
Estates which are held by this prince. The Xerifes estate, which comprehends

To come to the description of the realm of Marocco, it lies betwixt Mount
Atlas, and the Atlanticke sea, and takes his name of the chief town which is
so called. This realm is divided into seven great provinces, which are, He,
Suz, Guzale, Marocco, Ducale, Hascore, and Tedle.

The province of He has for bounds upon the West and North, the Ocean; to the

Besides these places, you may see Te^elgdet, Tagtesse, Denet, and Culeihat
Elmuridin, Mahomets law, kept there with his Disciples, preached his doctrine,
and defended it against the king of Marocco.

There is also in the province of He, the town of Iguilinguiguil, seated upon
the top, of a hill, whereas the natural inhabitants of Afric fortify
themselves against the Arabians,





The province of Marocco has for bounds upon the West, the mountain of
Nefise, which extends toward the East to Mount Hadimei, and declines toward
the North



D. Emanuel of Portugal.



Tedle is the last of the provinces of Marocco, and has for bounds upon the
West,

As for the realm of Fez, it is divided into seven provinces, the which are
Tenesme, Fez, Marin, made it a realm.

This whole realm has for bounds upon the West, the Atlanticke sea, and on
that side

The province of Teneseme begins upon the Antlanticke Ocean toward the West,
Ptolome calls Cauues. Her other bounds are upon the East, the river of
Buragrag; and to the North, the Ocean. This country is more long than broad,
being forty leagues long, and it is no broader than from Atlas unto the Ocean.
In old time it was the flower of all Mauritania and Tingitana, for it contained
above four hundred towns, and three hundred castles and villages. The first
town of

The town of Tegeyet stands upon the coast, inhabited only by certain poor
people and some smiths, whom the Arabians force to live there, to work for the
laborers that Mansor or Almansor was founder. It is seated at the mouth of the
river of Burugrug, and is nothing to that it has been in former times; for
that there are not above five hundred households, whereas in the time of Mansor,
it was one of the best peopled of Afric: at this day there is nothing within
the walls, but gardens, vines, and meadows.

Bending toward the strait of Gibraltar stands the town of Sala, which
carries the ancient name, yet the Barbarians call it Zale. There is a palace
which did serve for the interring of the kings of the country, and the princes
of their blood. Near to Zale are Upon this river stands the town of Macnase
in a goodly plain, the which is very well



But to make a description thereof, Fez is a very great town, and at this day
the greatest of all Mauritania. It is situated in a manner all upon mountains
and hills, so as there (...) no part but the heart and the midst of the town
that is plain. The water enters by two currents, by reason that the river
diuides it self into two channells, whereof the one running toward the South,
waters the walls of the new town of Fez, and the other which is toward the
West washes the streets of the old. The water being within the town, it

All the houses of Fez are in a manner built of brick and free stone, and
richly painted in leaves and small trees, with azure, and other colors. There
is not any lodging but has his court, about the which they build, making
galleries to go from one lodging unto another, and there is not any house but
has a high tower, and within it many little

There are about seven hundred Temples or Oratories, among the which they do
number fifty which are great, and stately built, with pillars of marble, and
other ornaments. There is not any Mosque or Temple, but has his fountain made
of marble and other rare stones, and a tower to cry Ala. The chief Mosque of
Fez is called Carruuen or Caruen, the which is wonderful great, being about a
mile and a half in circuit, and has one and thirty great doors to enter in
by. There are eight and thirty arches in the vault in length, and some twenty
in breadth. Round about it, upon the East, West, and North, there are certain
galleries and porches, the which are very broad and long, and

There are in Fez many colleges, among the which there are two exceeding well
built, Murin. Whereof there is one that is admirable both for greatness and
beauty, the which king Habu Henon caused to be built, and spent therein four
hundred and eighty thousand crowns. There are also many hospitals and stoues,
which yield nothing in beauty to the foresaid Colleges. In former times,
strangers did use to lodge in them: There are also many without the gates,
which are no less beautiful than the rest within the town. These hospitalls
were very rich; but during the war of Sahid, the king having use of a great
sum of money, he was advised to sell the revenues thereof: whereunto the
people refusing to yield, the kings Attorney let them understand that the said
hospitals had been built and founded with the alms which had

There are one hundred stoues, well built, and beautified, whereof some are
little, and others great; but all made after one form, and every one has
four chambers. Without them, are certain galleries, some five or six steps
high, whereas the men strip themselves, and put off their clothes. There are
also above two hundred Innes in Fez, exceedingly well built, like unto palaces,
or the lodgings of some princes; for some are very great, and built three
stories high, as those near unto the great Temple, whereof some

As for the new town of Fez, it is environed with two fair, strong, and high
walls, and is built upon a goodly plain near unto the river, and about half
a league from the old town, betwixt the West and the South. A part of the
river enters betwixt the two Abuttiman. Iacub, son to Abdula, the first king
of the family of Marin, having conquered the realm of Marocco, and expelled
the kings, he resolved to build this city, and to transport the royal seat
thither, calling it, the White town, but since the vulgar people have given it
the name of New Fez. This king divided it into three parts distinct one from
another. In the one, he caused his royal palace to be built,

As for the towns of this province, there is Macarmeda upon the river of
Inauen, in a goodly plain: but it is in a manner all ruined but the walls.
Three leagues from Fez, stands Bauia upon the same river; but the civil wars
have ruined it. Upon Mount Idris, who lies buried there, and honored as a
holy man. Near unto it stands another ancient town called the palace of
Pharao, and yet the Egyptians never commanded over this province. There is
also Maquille, an ancient place, and then the villages of Bemignariben, and
Af^is.



The towns and places of this province are Giumba, the which was built by the
ancient Affricanes, and is nothing at this day, for that there is not any
thing to be seen but the ditches. Upon the Sea stands Lorache, or Laras, built
upon the river of Luccus, where there is a good port, although the entry be
very difficult. Then they find the town built by Mansor king of Marocco,
called Caesar Elcabir, which signifies the great palace of the foundation.



Ptolome, which is above

The first town is Terga, then Belis standing betwixt two mountains, and
having a good port, near unto which are the town of Tegassa, Gebba, and
Mezemme, seated upon a mountain.

Marin. All this province of Ga^et is divided into three parts; in the one are
towns, in the other mountains, and in the third the desert, which extends
from the Mediterranean sea unto the desert of Chauz.



The^p^^ among her towns Teure^t, built upon a hill in a large plain, and it
is environed


SPeaking generally of the realm of Marocco, it abounds in corn, fruit, oil,
honey,





Leo Affricanus does witness.

Guzule yields great store of barley, and feeds much cattle: there are also
mines of iron and brass.

As for Ducale, some part of the country is good, but it is all they can do to
entertain the inhabitants with that it yields. There is a lake near to the
green mountain, which does feed the whole country with fish.

Hascora abounds wonderfully in oil and goats, whose hair they employ for the
making of chamlets, and their skins for leather. The fields are very fruitful,
and there are

The Champian country of Tedles yields all good things necessatie for the life
of man, and the bill^ abound in batley, and feed great herds of goats.

As f^^ the realm of Fez, the air in some places is very temperate, and in
others (...) ^^oublesome. For although the country be altogether rough, and
has in many pla^^^^^ cold mountains, and some deserts: yet to consider it in
general, it is very fruit^^^^ ^ut in one place more than another; for it
abounds so in corn, and fruit, as in that ^espect, it yields to few others.
There are many vines, and olive trees, and great store of ^gges, almonds, and
c^tton. It feeds great numbers cattle of all sorts: likewise there are many
horses, cammells, goats, and hares. But let us examine in particular all these
provinces.

The province of Fez is altogether plain, and the air is very temperate.
There are

In the province of Temesne, which is in a manner all plain, and fruitful,
there is along the river of Odera great and thick forests full of Lions, the
which are the fiercest in all Afric; so as they of Tefelfelt dare not go
abroad but in great troops, and travelers which are sometimes forced to lie
in the field all night, entrench themselves, and also they do keep a guard
upon necessity, if they will not be devoured by these beasts.

The province of Azgar is great and fertile, seated in a large plain. They of
Gumera draw their victuals out of this country. This province is very
pleasing, and the air wholesome. There grows store of cotton, and it has like
commodities to the province of Tez.

As for the country of Elhabat, it is wonderful fertile, and yields all sorts
of fruit: yet the soil about Tanger is not very good, but in certain places
where the find some fountains, and make gardens, the rest is nothing but sand.

There are many mountains, and among others, eight, that is to say, Rabona,
Bemifenseca^e, Beniharos, Chebib, Benichessen, Angera, Quadrez, and
Beniguedarfeth, which are exceeding fertile; and among the mountains of this
country there are some excecding

The country of Erif, is altogether rough, and full of cold mountains, where
there are great deserts stored with thick trees, the which are exceeding fair
and straight. It yields no wheat, but there is abundance of vines, figs,
olives, and almonds. There are few oxen and sheep, but it has great numbers
of goats, asses, and apes.

The country of Garet is dry, sandy, and unpleasant, and in a manner like to
the deserts of Numidia, and these deserts are wholly without water. There are
many wild beasts of diverse sorts, so as travelers dare not pass that way but
in great troops. The mountain of Sahid which is in this country, abounds
with iron and ba^ley, and in the mountain of Guardan there are many horses.

As for Chauz, the country for the most part is rough and stony, and there
are many deserts. The mountain of Dubdu is exceeding fertile, by reason of the
great number of fountains which flow from thence: but this fertility extends
but to gardens, for that they of Dubdu are forced to fetch their other
victuals out of the territory of Tezze, whereas they find very good wines,
and abundance of all things necessary.

In the mountain of Magara, which is near unto Tezze, there are many woods,
and a soi^e, which yields store of grain, flax, oil, and troops of cattle,
especially goats. In the mountain of Gauara they find great store of leopards
and apes in the woods and elsewhere, and there grows abundance of wheat and
barley. Upon Mount Baronis, there grow grapes, but the inhabitants which
drink no wine have no care to multiply

But to conclude this point, and to say all that concerns the quality of
these two realms, having considered the one and the other, it shall be
convenient to show in gross, all that is necessary for a general knowledge
of both together.

I say therefore, that all the country which is environed by Mount Atlas, is
more subject to cold than heat, and that there is sufficient of fruit and
grain, except wheat; but they have little good water. Mount Atlas is cold, and
always covered with snow, and the valleys which lie near unto it, are very
fertile, but more toward the Ocean than the Mediterranean Sea. In these
countries, the cold begins in October, but more by rain

The weather is inconstant in February, and the winds are very strong and
loud in the month of March, yet very necessary for the corn and trees. But
in April, all things grow; so as in middle May, they eat ripe figs, and in
June, grapes, and betwixt June and Iulie, apples, pears, plums, and such like
fruit, are in their season, and maturitie. In the time of October, they gather
quinces, pomegranets, and certain apples, and in November, olives. From the
end of February unto May, the weather is exceeding fair; yet if it rain not
from the five and twentieth of April until the fifth of May, they have no hope
of any good year, and the inhabitants call this rain, Nasan, as one should
say, Holy water. Summer is exceeding hot, the time being always clear; but
if it chance to

The manners of the Ancients.
THe country of Barbary was destitute of inhabitants for many ages, like unto
Numidia. Almansor or Mansor, Marin, and Huceph, men excellent in their
superstitions. Auicenna, Rasis, Albumazar, Auerroes, with many others, all bred
up by the kings of Marocco, who held Barbary, and a part of Spain. The
Colleges which are in some towns, show how much they esteemed learning.
Finally, there was not any nation more witty to invent a thousand gallant
devices for turneys, and such like; they brought them into Spain, and there
practiced them with much wit and dexterity, the which the Romans have also
used. They brought in the manner of riding a^la Genette, with short stirrops,
and their Ioco de Canna, wherein they yet excel. They made themselves fearful
to all their neighbors, and gave proofs in all places, that they were full of
courage. Some ancient Authors have rightly said,

At Ham Lisnan, in the countries of Chauz, they did assemble at a certain
season of the year in the beginning of the night, and having done their
sacrifice, they put out their

The manners at this day.


The inhabitants of Fez and Marocco are somewhat tawnie, but the one more than
the other. These people are almost like in conditions and qualities to the
Arabians, but they are somewhat more civil. They are wonderful ambitious of
honor, and they are as inconstant and subtle as any people in the world.
Treachery is as much practiced among them, as in any other place of the earth.
There are none more choleric than the inhabitants of this country, and they
are great braggers, suspicious, and exceeding jealous.

Moreover, they are wonderful nimble, and active, especially in fights on
horseback, where they show their readiness: but they cannot long endure
labor, and their disposition



These Arabians are industrious, and given to manual labor, and dwell in a
fertile country, whereas they reap abundance of corn, and have infinite
troops of cattle, and oxen without number; and for this cause they are forced
every day to change the place of their abode, and to remove their pauillions
to seek new pasture, and these use great liberality and courtesy to
strangers which pass through their country, whereas the other Arabians are
very cruel. Some of them pay tribute to the Emperor of Marocco: others have
lived long, and never acknowledged any lord, nor paid any tribute: but since
that the Portugois have held Azamor and Asaphi, they have been forced to
receive a law from them.

Finally, they are much given to hunting, and keep many dogs, and although
they lodge passengers courteously, yet are they so accustomed to theft, as a
man can hardly escape without some loss, but they never attempt any thing
against their persons. They are much given to poesy in their own language,
but it has no more that ancient quickness, yet they have a singular grace in
their verses, and they that can make them best, are countenanced by their
commanders, and recompensed for their invention. As for the Arabians wives,
they are reasonably well attired after their country fashion, having for their
garments, black smockes, with great and large sleeves, upon the which they
carry as it were a mantle of the same color, or Turkish blew, and they wrap
themselves so pretily in it, putting it into diverse plaits, as it joins
together upon the shoulder, where

They of the province of Heez, eat bread made of barley without leaven, like
unto

They have bands of the same wool upon their heads, being five foot long, and
a foot broad, the which they die black, and wreath them so about their heads,
as the crow^e is always bare, and there is not any man that wears a cap, but
he that is aged, or learned, if there be any such; and these caps are round and
double, such as Churchmen were wont



The inhabitants of Mount Ideuacall are gross, but very valiant.

In the country of Suz, and near to the town of Teijeut, they use no other
money but gold, as it is drawn out of the ground, and for small money they use
certain pieces of

The people of the province of Marocco are courteous and liberal. They read
Mahomets law in the chief town, and there are colleges rented to that end,
and hospitalls for passengers that (...) of their sect. They that live in the
Champian country are so brutish, as having no sufficient man among them to
decide their controversies, they use to stay strangers as they pass to give
sentence of that which is in question, and this Arbitrator must be both
Register and Judge. Their feeding is not very dainty, for their food is barley
flower mixed with boiling water, and the flesh of the oldest he goat that they

As for them of Guzule, they are wonderful brutish, and yet they make of the
iron of their mines artificial vessels, which they exchange for cloth,
horses, spices, and other things they need, at the faires and markets of the
neighbor countries, whether they commonly go. In a manner in all the country
they do not acknowledge any Superior by reason whereof they are in continual
war; so as their truce does never last above three days in the week,
whereunto they are forced by reason of their traffic. But whenas they meet,
the truce being expired, they murder one another without any respect of age or
sex. For their apparel, they have shirts of wool without sleeves, and strait
at the neck, and upon their heads they wear hats of the leaves of palm

The days of their Faires and Markets are so strictly and solemnly kept, as
one dares not offend another were he his enemy, for that they have a captain
chosen by all parts, who takes knowledge of crimes which are committed during
the traffic. Thest is punished with death, without any other form of
process, and they put the thief to death with a kind of Partuisan, then they
leave the dead body for an example, and for food to beasts and birds.

The inhabitants of Ducale are rude and uncivil, and void of all courtesy.
And as for them of Hafcora, there are many tanners of leather, where they make
the best skins of Afric. The women are fair and white, and take great
delight in strangers, but the Africans

In the country of Tedle, there are many rich merchants in towns, and
citisens which are ^xceeding courteous. The women spinne wool very well, the
which is excellent to make rare works. They are white in some places of this
province, and we are much silver in their apparel. But if we consider the
inhabitants of Mount Dedez in the same countrie^, we shall find that they have
neither towns nor villages, but live in houses dispersed here and there, and
most part remain in caves, and are thieves and traitors, and they are so
wicked, as they will kill a man for a small matter. And as for their women,
they are the foulest of all Afric.



The people of the country of Elhabat are very valiant and hardy, in whom the
king of Marocco puts very great confidence, drawing great services from them by
the incursions they make upon the Christians lands.

The inhabitants of Errif are but uncivil, yet they are exceeding valiant and
strong. They go ill attired, and are much given to drunkenness. They of the
mountains have lumpes of flesh under their throats like unto them that dwell
in the Alps. The inhabitan^^ of Belis of Gomera are great pirates, and do much
annoy the Christians upon the

(...) the country of Garet, the inhabitants of Mount Sahid pay not any
tribute, and are all (...) and given to polish iron, the which is carried to
Fez in round bullets, for that they cannot draw it into bars, as they do in
Europe.



The people of Mount Baronis are reasonable white: the women are fair, and
lovely, but their husbands are wonderful jealous. The inhabitants of Mount
Iesseten are very poor, miserable, and the dullest witted in all Afric. And
the dwellers upon the mountains

I come now to the manners of them of the town of Fez, who (in my opinion)
have exceeded all the other inhabitants of these realms in neatness. First of
all, I say that they have very fair stoues or hot houses, where they observe
an excellent order. Without the halls, there are certain lodgings whereas men
disroabe themselves, and leave their apparel, as I have formerly noted. Whenas
a man will go into one of these stoues, having past the first door, he enters
into a chamber which is cold, whereas they keep water

There are many barbers for every stoue, which pay a certain sum unto the
master of the stoue, that their instruments may remain there, and that they
may work. Most of these stoues belong to the Mosquees and Colleges, and are
rented out, some for one hundred ducats, some more, and some less.

The boys which serve in these stoues, are accustomed to have a certain feast
once in the year, after this manner: They inuit all their friends, and go out
of the town with trumpets and physes: then they take an onyon, and put it into
a fair vessel of Latten,

There are goodly Innes in the same town, but they have no beds; for they give
you nothing to sleep on, but a piece of a mat and covering. If any man will
eat, he must

There are certain merchants which take mills to farm, who buy corn, and
grind it; and then they sell the meal unto shops, whereby they reap a great
commodity; for that handicrafts men, who have not means to make their
provision of corn, buy this meal, and make bread in their houses: but men of
quality buy corn, and have it ground in certain mills appointed for the
citisens. Most of these mills belong unto Temples and Colleges, and are rented
out, as has bee^e said.

Arts and trades in this city are separated one from another, and the most
noble are about the great Mosquee, as Notaries, of which there are about
eighty shops, part whereof are joining to the walls of the Temple, and the
rest are right against it, and in every

There are also many porters and bearers of burdens, who live together like
brethren, for whenas any one of them dies, and leaves young children, they
entertain his wife in common, until she be married again, and have a care of
the children until they be of age fit to learn some trade. Whenas any one
marries, or has a child borne, he makes a feast to all the company, and
every one in requital presents him with something, and no man may be of the
troop until he has feasted the rest; and if he enters otherwise,

They also sell certain flesh fried, and fish after the same manner, and
another sort of fine bread, which they eat with butter and honey. The butchers
weigh their flesh, and sell it by the pound, and they kill not their beasts in
the shambles, but in a place a part near unto the river, whereas they flea
them. As for clothes, they that will sell any, give them unto criers, who take
them upon their shoulders, and go up and down crying the price, and this they
do from noone until night. There are many which make cages of

There are sellers of wool who buy the skins from the butchers, keeping boys
to wash them, then they draw off the wool, and dress the skins, but of none
but sheep; for there are others which tanne bullocks hides. There are some
which make bonds to tie horses by the leg. There are many places in the
town, whereas they saw timber of diverse sorts; in which work they employ
Christian slaves, whom their masters feed with part of the money they get of
their labor, and they never give them any rest, but on Friday, from noone till
night, and some eight days at diverse seasons of the year. There are public
stews, whereas common women abandon themselves for a small price: and

They keep their corn in certain deep holes, the which will hold a very
great quantity some write, above a thousand quarters: and the inhabitants of
this place whereas

The inhabitants of the town are civil. In Winter they wear woollen cloth
made out of the country. Their habit is a jupe upon a shirt, with very strait
sleeves, and the^ on they wear a certain large roabe sewed together before,
and upon all they have their cloakes, made after the Moresco manner, which they
call Albornoz. Upon their heads they wear single bonnets made like unto some
which they wear by night in Italy, but without ears: and upon them they put
certain bands of linen cloth wreathed about their heads and beards. They
wear long breeches of linen cloth like unto mariners,

The Doctors and Gentlemen wear gowns which have wide sleeves, like unto the
gentlemen of Venice, which have some honorable charge. To conclude, they that
are of base condition wear course white cloth, made of the country wool, and
their cloaks are of the same stuff.

The women are reasonably well apparelled, but in Summer they wear nothing but
a smock, and they bind their foreheads about with certain bands which are not
very pleasing. In Winter they use gowns with wide sleeves, and sewed together
before like unto

As for their diet, the common people are accustomed to eat fresh meat two
days in the week, but gentlemen eat every day at their pleasure, and they
make three meals in the day. That in the morning is very light, for they eat
nothing but bread and fruit, and certain

As for their marriages, if any one intends to take a wife, whenas the father
has pro^^fed



Some hold opinion, that in Afric the men give a certain dowry unto women,
but they are abused. Whenas the bridegroom is to conduct his wife home unto
his house, he first makes her enter into a lodge made of wood, eight square,
and covered with goodly tapestrie of silk, or cloth of gold, and she is
carried by porters upon their heads, being accompanied by her friends and
father, (if she has any) and her husband, with physes, drums, and many
trumpets, and torches; and the husbands friends go before with torches, and the
fathers follow after, and all this troop does commonly pass by the great
place, near to the Mosquee. When they are come unto the place, the bridegroom
salutes and whole sheep. Whenas the husband goes out of his lodging, which is
after seven

The women dance a part, having women for their musicians and singers. They
^^serue

They also make a feast on the day of the circumcision of a male child, which
is the seventh day after his birth; at what time the father having called the
Barber, and invited

They have in Fez some remainders of certain feasts left by the Christians.
They have a custom, upon the day of the Nativity of our Savior, to eat a
certain pottage made with seven several so^ts of herbs; nd they sees all
kind of pulses whole, as beans, pease, and such like, the which they eat that
night, as a delicat meat. And on the first day John Baptists day, they make
great bonefires of straw in all the streets. Whenas an infants teeth begins to
put forth, the parents make a feast for other children. They have many other
customs and means to take their diuinations, the which are yet observed in
some places of Italy.

Whenas the husband, father, mother, or brother of any woman dies, the women
gather together, and leaving their ordinary apparel, they cover themselves
with course sackes, then they take the soot of their pots, and rub their faces,
and they have before them those wicked men which go attired like women, who
carry certain square drums, which they found, and then they sing pitiful
verses in praise of the dead, and at the end people: but gentlemen mourn after
a more modest manner, and beat not themselves. Old men come to comfort them,
and all their nearest kinsmen send them presents of something that is good to
eat, for it is not their custom to dress any meat in a dead man's house
whilst the body is within it, and women do not accompany the course, were
he their father or brother.

There are many in Fez which take delight to feed pigeons, and they are very
fair, and of diverse colors. They keep them upon the tops of their houses in
certain cages, made like Apothecaries boxes, the which they open twice a day,
that is, once in the morning, and once at night, taking great delight to see
them fly, and that pigeon which maintains

As for play, men of quality use none but chesse. They have other games, but
they are gross, and none but the common people play at them. At certain
seasons of the year, the young men meet together, and they of one quarter
encounter another with staves, and sometimes both parties grow into choler, and
fall to arms; so as many are slain upon the place, especially at those
feasts, whenas the young men meet without the town, and when their encounter
is ended, they cast stones one at another; so as sometimes the

There are very many poets which make verses in their vulgar tongue upon diverse
subjects, but especially of love: some describe the love they bear to women,
and others how they affect children, and many times they blush not to name them
whom they love. These poets do every year make verses in the praise of
Mahomet, upon the day of his birth, who meeting in the morning in one place go
up into a pulpit, where one after Marin, the king invited all the learned men
of the town, into his palace, where making a solemn feast to all the good
poets, he ordained that every one should recite his song in the praise of
Mahomet in his presence, and of his whole court; the which was done upon a high
scaffold, and according to the judgment of some that were learned in that art,
the king gave to him that was held to be the best Poet one hundred ducats, a
woman slave, a horse, and the cloak he then ware. And as for the rest, he gave
to every one fifty ducats; so as they all went away with some recompense.

Mahomet: after which they feast these children, and all the fathers friends,
every one of which gives something to the master, and the child gives him a
new suit of cloths. These children do also make a feast at the birth of
Mahomet, and their fathers are bound to send a torch unto the college, so as
every scholar has one, whereof some weigh thirty

They burn from the break of day until Sun rising. The Master is
accustomed to have certain singers, who commonly sing the praises of Mahomet,
and when the Sun arises, the feast is ended. This is the greatest profit
that the Masters have, for that sometimes they sell the wax for one hundred
ducats, and there is not any one but paies a certain rent, for that the
colleges are made of alms, and given by diverse persons for their souls. The
fruits and flowers of torches are the presents which they giu^ to singing men
and children: and the scholars in colleges have two days of vacation



There are also many which taking pleasure in this sport, put themselves into
their company; so as counterfeiting themselves sick, they send for one of
these women, and many times the foolish husband does the message: presently
they discover their desires unto these diuiners, who inform the husband that a
spirit is entered into his wives body, and that if he love her health, he must
suffer her to be of the number of the diuiners, and to practice secretly with
them: the husband belieues what they say, and making a stately

There is another sort of Southsaiers, which they call Muhahazzimin, that is to
say, inchaunters. These are held able to free one that is possessed, not for any
reason, but for that sometimes it succeeds, and if they fail, they say the
devil is faithless, or that it is a celestial spirit. Their manner of
coniuring is to make certain characters and circles, then certain marks upon
the hand or forehead of the possessed, and they perfume him with certain
perfumes: after which they make the charm, and demand of the spirit how he
entered into that body, and by whose means, and what his name is, and in the
end, they Mahomet has made: These men are held by some for the true obseruers
of the law, and by some, otherwise: but the people hold them for Saints, and
yet they will have many things allowed which are forbidden by the law of
Mahomet. It is not lawful by this law to sing any love song by the rule of
music. There are certain men in Fez, called Elcanesin, who busy themselves
to seek for treasures, which they believe lie buried in the foundations of
ancient ruins. These foolish men go out of the town, and enter into many
caves and deep places under ground, to find these treasures, believing
confidently, that whenas the Romans lost the dominion of Afric, and fled to
the province of Betica in Geber, the which we have in Latin, who was one
hundred years after Mahomet, and they say he was a Grecian Renegado. They have
another Author, called Attrogrehi, Secretary to the Souldan of Bagadet, who
has made another great work: And there is another composed by Canticles,
containing all the articles of this art, and the Author was called Mugairiti,
borne at Granado, and his book was commented on by a Mamalu of Damas, a very
learned man in that art; but the commentari^ is more obscure than the text.
There are two sorts or kinds of Alchimists; whereof

There are also many charmers which stand singing in Market places, and playing
upon certain drums, violons, harpes, and other instruments, and these sell
certain briefes unto the ignorant people, the which are good, as they say,
against diverse infirmities. There

The inhabitants of ^his town are proud, and do not much affect strangers:
but the noblemen and gentlemen are the most arrogant and insupportable people
in the world; so as few men frequent them, nor the Doctors and Judges in like
manner, who, to keep their reputations, will not converse with any.

The Riches.


But to speak of the revenues and riches of the Emperor of Marocco, he is
master of all his subjects goods, yea and of their persons, for that no men
dares impugn any charges or impositions that he lays upon them: yet the
usurpation of the empire, the fear of an accident like unto that of Muley
Cheq, and the continual wavering of affairs, are the cause why this man
seeks to govern his subjects with mildness, and to settle in them a desire
to live always under his command.

He draws from his subjects that are liable unto taxes, the tenths and first
fruits of cattle and fruit. It is true, that touching the tenths, he takes but
one for twenty; and if there be one hundred and more, he has never but two.
He has for every acre of ground, five It seems they divide the duckat into
ten parts.
and the other five for every fire, and as much for all that have past the age
of fifteen years, be they males or females; and at need he exacts a greater
sum. And to the end the people may pay more willingly that which is imposed,
he always demands a moytie more than he shall exact; for that by this means,
his subjects think they have a favor done them, when they are not forced to
pay all. It is true, that in the mountains there live people which are not
under command, whom they cannot force to pay any thing, by reason of the
strong situation of the places where they live; and they only receive the
tenths of their fruits and harvest, the which they pay that they may have leave
to descend into the plains. Besides these revenues, this monarch has all the
customs and imposts of Fez, and other towns, for that the citisens of Fez pay
two in the


THe Emperor of Marocco has no forts of importance, but upon the seashore,
where

In the year 1569, fire took his Arcenall with such fury, as a great part of
the town was ruined. As for his men of war, they are of diverse sorts: the
first is of 2700 horse, and 2000 harguebuziers, whereof part remain at Fez,
and part at Marocco, but most in the latter place, where he makes his abode,
and these are in a manner all for his guard: the second, is a battallion of
6000 horse, all gentlemen of note. These show themselves bravely mounted upon
horses richly furnished, with their arms, and it is a gallant thing to see
them, as well for the diverse colors of their garments, as for the richness of
their arms; for that they have store of gold, silver, pearl, and precious
stones, and all that may content the eyes, and please the curiosity of them
that behold them. These (besides the provision

The third kind of horsemen is his Timarets; for that the Emperor of Marocco
does use to give unto his sons, brethren, and other men of mark and
authority among the people of Afric, as also to the princes of the Arabians,
and to the greatest men among them, the profits of lands. These manure the
ground, and reap the fruits, the which they keep for the entertainment of the
horsemen: and the governors draw rice, oats, oil, butter, sheep, foul, and
silver, and they distribute all things monthly unto the soldiers according to
the quality of the persons. They give them moreover both woollen and linen
cloth, silk to cloth them, arms, and horses, with the which they serve in the
war,

Muley Abdala in the year 1562, besieged Magazan with two hundred thousand men,
he filled up the ditch with a mountain of earth, and made the walls plain
with his artillery: but for all this he was forced to abandon the enterprise
by the valor of the Portugois, and by the loss he received by their mines.
Moreover this prince has this discommoditie, that he cannot Muley Moluc, who
defeated Don Sebastian king of Portugal, had about forty thousand horse, and
four score thousand foot, besides Arabians and voluntaries: but some hold
opinion, that he might have drawn together three score and ten thousand horse,
and more foot than he had at that time.

The Government.


And for that it seems the reader is not well satisfied, whenas they discourse
to him of an Estate whereas any one does rule, if withal he does not
understand what he is that gouerns: I thought that I should give some
contentment to such as had this expectation, if I did let them understand what
family commands now in the realms of Marocco and Fez, and by what means it
came unto this Empire. There was an Alfaqui or high Priest of Mahomets law,
borne at Tigumedet a town in the province of Dara, a subtle and an ambitious
man, and well instructed in the sciences whereunto the Mahometans give
themselves. This man whom they called Mahomet and Benamet, and who called
himself Xerif, began to be in some reputation about the year 1508: he said,
that he was issued from the race of Mahomet, and he propounded in his mind
(seeing the division Abdala, Hamet, and Mahomet in pilgrimage to Mecca, and to
Medina, to visit and honor the Sepulcher of Mahomet their false Prophet. These
young men made their voyage with such reputation of sanctity and religion, as
at their return, the people went to meet them, kissed their garments, and
honored them as holy men. These abusers faining to be drawn to some high
contemplation, went through the country, sighing or calling Ala or God, with
cries interrupted with sighs and groans, living only of alms. The father
having received them into his house with unspeakable joy, and being loath to
suffer the applause and credit which they had gotten by this pilgrimage to grow
cold, Hamet and Mahomet to Fez, where having been very courteously received by
the king, the one of them became reader of the Amorodache, a famous college in
that town, and the younger was scholemaister to the kings children. Finding
themselves in good grace with the king, and well respected by the people; being
thrust on by their father, taking for their subject the losses, which the
Arabians did unto them of their law under the Portugals ensigns, under which
they did fight, being entertained by them: they demanded leave of the king to
display a banner against the Christians, promising him (as it fell out in
effect) that they would easily draw the Moors, which followed the Portugals,
unto them, and by that means assure the provinces of Suz, He, Ducale,
Marocco, and others which were continually molested by the Portugals.

Muley Nazzer the kings brother opposed himself against this proposition and
demand, saying, that if the brethren, under pretext of religion, made any
progress with their armies, it would be impossible to stay them, and to make
them lay them down as before; for that arms make men hardy, victories
insolent, and being followed by the people,

With these beginnings, much people flocking unto them at the bruit of their
enterprise, they entered the country of Ducale, and came unto the cape of
Aguero, which was then held by the Portugals, and seeing themselves well
followed, and in good esteem, they required the people (who lived for the most
in liberty, and joined with whom they liked best) that seeing they made war
against the Christians for the law of Mahomet, to assist them, giving them the
tenths due unto God: the which was presently granted by the people of Dara,
and by this means by little and little they seized upon Tarudant, (whereof
their father was made Governor) and of Suz, He, Ducale, and the neighbor
places. They stayed first at Tednest, and afterward at Tesarota, and defeated
Lope Barriga, a famous Captain of the Portugals, in fight: but they lost their
eldest brother, then entering with many good words into the town of Marocco,
they poisoned the king, and Hamet Xerif called himself king of Marocco in his
place, and seized upon the realm.

In the mean time, the Arabians of Ducale and Xarque came to arms against
them of Garbie, either party assuring himself of the Xerifes favor: but they
seeing many slain Hamet his son, who had been disciple to the younger
Xerif, was not only pacified, but also confirmed Hamet Xerif in the imperial
dignity of the realm of Marocco, so as he made some acknowledgement to the
kings of Fez, as sovereign princes. But on the other side, the Xerifes (whose
power and reputation increased daily) whenas the time to pay the tribute was
come, sent the king word, That being lawful successors to Mahomet, they

The king incensed at this answer, proclaimed war presently against them, and
went in person to besiege Marocco: but he was forced at the first to dislodge,
and to raise the siege; then returning with eighteen thousand horse, among
which were two thousand harquebuziers and crossebows, he was defeated by the
Xerifs, at the passage of a river, they having but seven thousand horse, and
one hundred and twenty harquebuziers. By the Xerifs exacted tribute of this
country; and passing Mount Atlas, they took Tasilet a town of importance,
and partly by love, and partly by force, they brought under their obedience
diverse people of Numidia, and of the mountains. In the year 1536, the young
Xerif, who called himself king of Suz, having levied a mighty army, and
drawn many canons to field, whereof part he took from the king of Fez, and
part were made by Christian Renegados, went to the enterprise of Cape d'Aguero,
a place of great importance, held then by the Portugals, who had fortified it
much, first at the charge of Lopez Seguere, and afterward (finding the
commodity of the situation) by Emanuel king of Portugal, the which he
assailed valiantly In the end, fire falling into their munition of war within
the town, and the soldiers who defended it, being amazed Xerif entered, and
took most of them that were in garri^on. With this victory, all Mount Atlas,
the realm of Marocco, and the Arabians who had joined with the Portugal,
yielded obedience to the Xerif; by reason whereof, John the third, king of
Portugal, seeing that the charge did much exceed the profit, willingly
abandoned the towns of Safin, Azamor, A^zi^la, and Alcazar, which he held upon
the coast of Barbary.

These prosperities were the cause of a great dissension betwixt the two
brethren, and

First, they know not what it is to do justice in the country of He, and
especially in the mountains, and the gentlemen can hardly keep any order in
the towns. In the country of Suz, the inhabitants of the town of Tedfy lived
in former times at liberty, and they governed themselves after the manner of a
Commonweal; but now the Emperor of Marocco has his Chauncerie there. We must
observe, that in the mountains of the province of Marocco, and in the country
of Guzule, the inhabitants do seldom yield obedience freely unto their
prince, and so in like manner in many other places.



Among all the lords of Afric, they find not that ever any one was created
king or prince by the election of the people; and by the law of Mahomet, no
temporal lord can term himself lawful, but their high priests: But since the
authority of their high priests decayed, all the leaders of people which lived
in deserts, began to come into the inhabited countries, and by force of arms
made diverse lords, against the law of Mahomet, and against their Bishops, as it
happened in the East, whereas the Turks, Tartarians, and Lontuna and Marin
reigned in Afric. It is true, that they of Lon^nna came to succor the people
of the West. Wherefore, for this cause, they make no lords by succession, nor
by the election of the people, nor of great men, nor by the General of the
army; but every prince before his death makes the greatest men of his court
to promise, that after his decease they will create his son or brother for
their head: yet many times they break their oath, for that most commonly they
choose him whom

He had also a purueiour whose charge was to furnish, keep, and distribute the
victuals,

The king had near unto his person a Chancellor, who kept his seals, and
wrat such letters as were needful, and sealed them. He had a great number of
footmen, which had a Captain, who received them, put them away, and gave them
wages according to their sufficiencies: and whenas the king gave audience, this
captain was always present. He had also a Captain of the baggage, whose
office was to see the tents carried, whereas the kings light horsemen lodged:
and you must understand that the kings tents were carried

He had a Master of the ceremonies, who was always at the kings feet whenas
he called a Council, or gave audience, appointing places, and making them
speak one after another according to their ranks and dignities. The kings
house was full of women slaves Negros, who served in the queens chamber: and
there were also some Christian slaves, which for the most part were Spaniards
and Portugals: and all these women were under the guard of certain eunuchs
that were Negro sl^ues.

Whenas the king would go to any place, the Master of the ceremonies did first
advertise the posts and messengers, and these made it known to the kings
kinsmen, to the captains, guards, and other horsemen, all which came unto a
place without the palace, ceremonies, the kings secretaries, the treasuror,
judge, and captain of the army: the

Whenas the king kept the field, they did first of all set up a great tent in
the midst

First of all in Fez, there were customs imposed, for that cloth was sold as
it were at

The Apothecaries had a quarter which was shut up of both sides with two very
fair gates, and they entertained guards at their own proper costs and
charges, who went about in the night with lanthornes, dogs, and arms. There
were people which made the measures of corn, which the Council added, taking
a double of every one. Within the town there are only certain petty
Officers and Magistrates, whose charge Mahomet, and another Judge, who was as it
were Lieutenant to the first, and decided matters which did belong to marriage:
he had authority to examine witnesses, and did justice to all men. There was
an Advocate, with whom they did consult touching the law, and before whom they
did appeal from the Judges sentences, either when they had been deceived, or
when they had given sentence upon the authority of some Judge that was not so
excellent. The Governor did draw great sums from condemnations, and in a
manner all their criminal punishment was whipping in the Governors presence,
and they gave one hundred or two hundred stripes. After this Mahomet, had no
wages, for that it was defended by his law to give any thing unto a Judge: but
they lived of other fees or recompenses, as of lectures, or the Priesthood of
some Mosquee. Their Proctors and Aduocats were for the most part full of
ignorance. The Judges had a certain place whereas they did imprison debtors,
and others, for matters of small importance. There were four captains of the
watch within the town, who went up and down two hours when night was come,
and these had no wages, but some small matter from them they took, the which
was taken out of the fine wherein they were condemned: but either of

The Governor, who was chief of the Consulls, had commonly twelve Sargeants,
and went often on horseback about the town, to view the bread, and to try
the butchers weights, and to see what they sold. He caused the bread to be
weighed, and if he found it not just, he pulled it in pieces, and gave him that
stood to ^ell it many blows upon his neck with his fist, yea sometime he
caused him to be whipped, if he found it too light.

The king has given this office for these hundred years to gentlemen which
have demanded it: but in former times they gave it only to learned men who
were much esteemed

The Religion.
Mahomet, which have their heads and doctors to defend them: for there are many
which have commented upon the Alcaron, and do not directly allow of that which
it has prescribed, but proceed farther, and contradict it in many things.

Among others, there is one who began some eighty years after Mahomet, and
the first and most famous Author was called Elhes^mbnu Abilhasen of the town
of Basra, who gave certain precepts to his disciples, but left nothing in
writing. A hundred years after, there was another, a sufficient man in that
matter, called Elharit Ibnu Esed, of the Mahomet. The same sect was revived
some eighty years after by another sufficient man, who was followed by many
disciples, and preached his doctrine publicly, so as all Lawyers and high
Priests condemned him to death, with all his disciples, and concluded

This sect continued about two hundred years, until that Malicsach, an
Emperor of the Turkish race, came out of Asia, who persecuted this sect: so as
some fled to Chair, and others into Arabia, and they remained twenty years
in this estate, unto the reign of Caselhab, nephew to Malicsach, whose
Councellor called Nidam Elmule, a man of great spirit, who was of this sect,
revived it again, and did so strengthen it, as by the means of a very
learned man, called Elgazzuli, who composed a great volume, divided into seven
Books, reconciled the Lawyers with these Sectaries, in such sort, as the
Lawyers had the title of Doctors, and preseruers of the law of the Prophet; and
these were called Reformers of the same law.

This union continued until that Bagadet was ruined by the Tartarians, which
happened Mahomet: but this division did not in any sort hurt it, for that
Afric and Asia were full of people which followed this doctrine. At that
time, they admitted none into this sect, but men learned in all the sciences,
but especially which understood the law well, that they might defend it against
the adverse party. But for some hundreds of years, the ignorant have sought
to enter, saying, that there was not any need of learning, seeing the holy
spirit gives knowledge of the truth to them that have pure and clean hearts;
to prove the which, they produce certain weak reasons. Whereupon, leaving as
well the superfluous as necessary commandments of the order, they only observe
the same thing that the Legists, touching offices; but otherwise they take all
the pleasures which they think are allowed in their sect, for they make many

Wherefore at Fez they say in a common proverb of this vice: That it is the
feast of Pilgrims, meaning thereby, that after the banquet every one of these
children becomes spouse to his master, and they whom they call Pilgrims may
not marry.

Amidst these sects, there are some orders which the doctors of both opinions
hold for heretics, for that they not only differ from the rest in law, but
also in faith.

There are some which hold for certain that man may purchase to himself a
divine and Angelical nature, by the means of his good works, feasts, and
abstinence; for that they say fasting cleanses the heart and understanding of
man; so as he cannot sin, although

Essehrauard of Sehrauard a town in Corasan. There is another author called
Ibnul Farid, who put all his doctrine into goodly verses, the which
notwithstanding are full of allegories, and it seems they treat of nothing but
love. For this cause one called Elfargani commented upon his work, and made a
rule, and the degrees they are to pass. He was so good a Poet, as they of this
sect sing no other verses in their feasts, for that no man for these four
hundred years has written so well. These people hold an oponion that the
Planets, Firmament, Element, and all the Stars make one God, and that no faith
nor law can err, for that all men think in their souls, and hold for
certain that they worship him which desires to

There are forty other men among them which are called Elauted, that is to
say, the Stocks, for that they are of the basest degree, and of the least
knowledge. When the Elcorb dies, they create another out of the number of the
forty; and he is chosen by lot out of seventy. There are also other 765, out
of which number they take one to put among the seventy, whenas any one of that
troop dies. Their law commands that they go unknown throughout the world
either like fools, or great sinners, or the most basest men upon the earth. It
is the only reason why many men wander about Afric all naked, showing their
privy parts; and they are so dissolute and impudent, as they sometimes

We must now see who first brought the impiety of Mahomet into Barbary. This
wicked and cursed doctrine entered into Egypt in the year 637, by the means of
the conquests of Omar: and a captain to Odman past first into Afric, in the
year 650, with eighty thousand men, and defeated Gregory Patricius. They
chased the Romans for ever out of Afric, and the troops of Absimacus, and of
Leo the Emperor, in the year 699, and made themselves absolute Masters of
Barbary. But the Arabians increased this mischief, first by their arms, and
whereas arms could not come and prevail, they have advanced it by preaching
and traffic.

Arrius, with which the Vandales and Goths inhabiting Afric were infected,
did much favor their enterprise. To make their dess^igne easy, they brought
in the Arabian language and letters: they built universities and colleges, and
added great revenues to the stately buildings, which they made to that end at
Marocco and Fez. But there is nothing that has more advanced the sect of
Mahomet than the victories of the Miramamolins of Afric, since which time
this infection has continued.

There are Jews also in this Empire, who having greatly multiplied in Spain,
past by Mahomet, and practiced much by the Jews, as well as d^u^^s others,
especially that of smiths, as we see in the mountain of Sessaue, in the
province of Marocco. They say, David, (as they affirm) who by little and
little are become Mahom^tans. The Jews increased afterward in Afric, whenas
Ferdinand king of Spain, surnamed the Catholic and Emanuell king of
Portugal, chased them out of their realms, whereof many past into the
countries of Fez and Marocco, and brought the arts and trades of Europe, which
before were unknown to these Barbarians. At this day the streets are full of
them at Belis, Teza, Elmedin^, Tezza, and Segemessa.

As for the Christians which are in realms of Fez and Marocco, (excepting such
as live in places held by the Portugals) there are few but slaves, and their
number is very great, yea greater than can be imagined. Their estate is worthy
of compassion and pity, not only for hardened, and with hoopes, and they bast
them with scalding oil, and with lard. But if Mahomet, and among other things
they subject themselves to the Calise of Bagadet, leaving him of the great
Caire, to whom the Turks yield obedience.

Of the Knights of Malta.
A DISCOVRSE OF THE ESTATE OF THE KNIGHTS OF MALTA.

1 THe diverse aboads of the knights of the order of S. John of Jerusalem,
before they were settled at Malta, the which they had by guist from the Emperor
Charles the fifth. 2. A description of the Island of Malta, sometimes called
M^lita, how many leagues it has in circuit, the length and breadth, situation,
climat, parallel, and ports. 3. A description of the Island of Goza, near to
Malta. 4. The soil of Malta stony, and yet bearing fruit trees, as Figs,
Apples, Almonds, Vines, and Palm trees: Cotton, Roses, Tynne, and F^nnell: it
feeds Sheep, Goats, Oxen, Asses, Mules, Conies, and Partridges: They make salt
and honey. It wants fresh water. In old time it was much esteemed in regard of
5. The manners of the ancient inhabitants of this Island, and their Temples,
dedicated to Hercules, and the goddess Juno. 6. The disposition of the Maltois
at this d^y, like to them of Afric. The manner of their garments, and the
humor of the women of that country. Their sports at Shrouetide: Their
devotion, and religious ceremonies in time of Lent. 7. The revenues of the
great Master of this Island: and the riches of the order consisting in
treasure and commandaries dispersed over all Christendom. 8. The forces
consisting in strong places and the valor of knights. 9. A distinction and
division of the order of knights into three ranks: The laws and ordinances of
this order, and the ceremonies which are used in the reception of knights. 10.
After what manner they deprive a knight of the habit, when he has committed
any great 11. Of the great Cloak of the order, and upon what days the knights
ought to wear it. 12. Of the Hospital, and the commander of the lesser
Hospital: Physicians and other persons entertained to tend the sick: of their
burialls and funerals. 13. Of the receivers of the Revenues, Keepers of the
treasure, Auditors of accounts, their power and offices. 14. Of the general
Chapter, and to whom it belongs to call it, what the ceremonies be, and whereon
they treat. 15. Of Provincial Chapters which are held yearly, and how they
proceed. 16. Of the order of justice and judgment, and of two sorts of
Counsels, and what Judges precide and assist. Of lots, public audience, and
of the form of judgment called Esgard. 17. Of the obedience which all they of
the order yield unto the great Master: his dignity, greatness, and power:
18. Of the office of Bailifes, great Conseruator, Mars^all, and great Prior of
the Church of Malta, their wages, and to what end they are instituted. 19. Of
the election of the great Master, and the ceremonies observed at that act. 20.
Of the capacity or incapacitie to hold commaundaries: and to whom purchases
made by commanders belong. 21. Of the visitation which is made of commandaries
every five year. 22. Traffic of merchandise, making of wills, donations,
and many other things forbidden to knights. 23. For what crimes a knight may be
deprived of his habit. 24. Of the Bishop of Malta, subject to the Archbishop of
Palermo: of the divine service, and of the feasts and abstinences, whereunto
the knights of Malta, and the brethren of the order, are bound.

John of Jerusalem, having been put out of Rhodes by the Turks, in the year
of Grace 1522, upon Christmas eve, after that they had held this Island for the
space of 212 years, came first into Candie, whereas they remained some Charles
the fifth gave them the Island of Malta to live in, as a place commodious to
hinder the Turks incursions into these countries, and to cross the success



This Island has many ports, but among the rest, two are capable of much
shipping, whereof one was called Marzamusetto, and the other, Marzasirocco. The
ports are made by gulfes which advance into the Island, the which in the
beginning are strait, then they enlarge themselves having past the mouth, and
make Peninsulas of some parts of the Island, which stretching far into the
Sea, are joined to the Island by some little piece of ground. Moreover, it has
also the ports of S. George, Benarat, S. Paul, Antofegue, Mugiar, and that of
Marzascala, which are not very safe. There, upon a point of land which extends
betwixt two little gulfes, (which makes diverse others less) the Elm or Herme
stood, and they have given it the name of the great Master la Valette, who
defended this place very valiantly against the Turks. Upon another point,
stands S. Michael, and the Bourg. In the midst of the Island, and among those
Peninsulas, is the Old city, which Diodorus writes had been built by the
Carthaginians, and which in old time was famous for the fine cloth that was
made there.

Strabo, Gaudos. Her port lies betwixt the West and South, and it is above a
league from Malta. It has in circuit about twenty miles: and there is a
castle belonging to the knights of Malta. The Turks carried away three
thousand souls out of this


THe soil of this Island is in a manner all stony, but the stone is soft and
easy to work,

In ancient times this Island was much esteemed for the little dogs which
were Paul's being there, there were never any serpents seen, although there
were some before, as may be gathered by the Acts of the Apostles, and
scorpions, which in other places are very hurtful, and should be as much or
rather more in this Island by reason of the excessive heat, do no harm to
them that handle them. And moreover they say, that God has given force and
virtue to insencible things which have had the happiness to lodge the Saints,
and that the stones which were drawn out of the cave whereas S. Paul was a
prisoner, are carried over all Europe, and have a great virtue against the
biting of serpents, and especially against the poison of scorpions and vipers;
and these pieces of the rock are called the grace of Paul.

The manners of the Ancients.
WHenas the Romans conquered this Island from the Carthaginians; the Maltois
Cicero did never object unto Verro the excess and daintiness of Malta, but in
regard of the garments which he ware. And it is most certain that the Maltois
were wonderful delicate, and their women Batta entertained Dido, and her sister
Anna: and Phalaris tyrant of Agrigentum in Sicile was a great friend to the
Maltois, and went often to visit them.

Appian Alexandrinus writes, that the Maltois being revolted, Caesar vanquished
them by a long and tedious war, for that they held the sea, and made roads into
all places, killing the little children, and exposing the rest to sale. And
seeing he had such difficulty to vanquish them, we must believe that the
Maltois were rich and powerful, and that although they had been subdued
whenas the Romans vanquished the Charthaginians; yet they had gotten new
courage, and finding themselves strong, rejected the Roman servitude.

Juno, and there was a very ancient temple, whither all the neighbor people
carried gifts of great price. They had also a temple dedicated to Hercules,
whereof the ruins are yet to be seen: and it is most certain that they of
this Island were always friends to the Sicilians.

The manners at this day.
Paul.

The women are fair and lovely, and remain shut up in their lodgings,
according to the ancient custom of the country, for that the men are
exceeding suspicious and jealous.

The language which they of Malta use is like unto the Africans, at the least
there is little difference, and both are nothing but the Arabian corrupted, or
the vulgar Arabian, which does very much differ from that which is printed, the
which they speak only about Mecca. There are many Mohammedan slaves which are
but rudely entreated, but not equal to that which they of their sect make the
Christians to suffer that are under their power.

The knights who are of diverse nations have also diverse manners, and it
suffiseth to say, that they are very absolute, and that they dispose very
freely of all that is within the Island, especially they that have any
authority, who give themselves content when they desire it, and find no great
resistance. I will say in a word, that at Shrouetide they invent a thousand
honest pastimes: some make maskes, others make parties to run at the ring, or
to fight at barriers, and some make forts, and have men to defend them, and
others to assail them. But Lent being come, there can be nothing seen more
devout than all this company.

Upon Maundie Thursday, the great master washes the feet of many poor men,
which done, they are set at a table, and are served with eighteen dishes of
several meats,

The Riches.


As for the order it is exceeding rich, considering the good Commaundaries they
hold in Christendom: and without doubt, the treasure of the order grows
great, both by the revenues, and also by the spoils which the Knights make in
their incursions. And seeing they are to maintain war continually, it is
convenient they should enjoy goodly John Baptist. You must understand, that no
man is received to the profession of this order, but he must pay a duty, which
they call the passage of the public treasure, which amounts to the v^^ue of
above one hundred and fifty crowns for knights, and a hundred for those that
are called brothers servants, and if after his passage, he has not given them,
he that receives them for the order, must make them good, notwithstanding any
dispensation, and whe^as any one has satisfied this duty, they cannot deny
him his right of antiquity. The goods of knights dying, come also to the
public treasure, unless they have any gold Deodat de Gozon. But whenas the
officers which follow the great master, as the Seneshal, Chastelain, and other
knights which serve him, die, their goods go not to the public treasure, but
they come to the great master.

The Forces.
THe Island of Malta has all the approaches so well fortified, as it is not
only a difficult Elm, they being but a handful. Finally, they are so far
from being assailed in their Island, as contrariwise, they make daily
incursions into Greece, toward Rhodes and Barbary, yea many times they go
near to Constantinople. They have commonly many galleys, either of which is
able to contain five hundred soldiers, and sixteen good pieces of ordnance
wherewith they furnish them; so as they want no munition of war. To conclude,
they have made themselves so fearful, as for a long time they have suffered
them to enjoy their Island

The Government.
THere are three ranks of them which make profession of this order; the first,
is of

By the ordinances of Hugh Revel the great master, no bastards might be
received into observed, for the Chanoins of the holy sepulcher have been
joined to this order by the

In like manner, they may not receive a man that has committed a murder, or
any infamous crime. It is not lawful to give the habit to any one that is not
eighteen years old: yet the great master may choose eight children of what
nation soever, and make them knights, so as they be gentlemen; if they be
otherwise, he may make them brothers servants, to exercise them in arms, and
dispense with them for all services, but they must be at the least fourteen
years old, and they cannot take from them their right of antiquity in the
rank of commaunderies. He that will be admitted into this order, must be
Raymond du Puy: yet he adds, that according to the time and place they are
dispensed Marie, and to S. John Baptist, that with the grace and succors of
God, I shall be always obedient to the superiors which God and the religion
shall give me, and that hereafter I will live chastely, and not enjoy any thing
proper to my self. After which, he is received kisseth the Mass book, and
taking it, carries it to the Altar, the which he kisseth; then he takes up the
book again, and brings it in sign of obedience to him that receives him, who
taking the black cloak; shows the white cross to him that is professed,

He confesses it, and kisseth the Cross, then he that receives him takes the
cloak, and sets the cross upon his breast on the left side, and kissing it,
faith unto him: Receive this sign in the name of the Holy Trinity, of the
blessed virgin Marie mother of God, and of S. John Baptist, for the increase of
the faith, defense of the Christian name, and s^ruice of the poor: And we set
the cross upon this side, to the end thou may love it with all thy heart,
and that with the right hand thou may defend it, and having defended it,
preserve it whole: for if fighting against the enemy of Jesus Christ, thou
flyest away, and do abandon the cross, and his holie-ensigne, then shall be
justly deprived of this sacred

There are also fellows of the same order which do not vow the same things
that the brethren do, but they only promise to love the order, and that which
depends thereon, and to defend the good of the religion with all their power,
and to discover unto the superiors such as shall annoy it or betray it, as
much as in them lies. These contribute to the order according to their
devotion, as companions do in a brotherhood, to participate of that which shall
be given. And yet it is not lawful for any Priors, Chastelins, Bailifes, or
any other Commanders and Knights to receive any of these companions Anthony,
whereas the upper part of the cross is taken away: and if they do otherwise,
they shall not enjoy their privilege.

As for the deprivation of the habit, it is made after this manner. The great
Master or his Lieutenant enquires carfully of the crime whereof any one is
accused, and having drawn the proof, and seen that he must proceed to
extremities, he frames a complaint

After this, the great Master appoints a chief of the Esgard, and an upright
man which is his Attorney General, to plead the cause before him that has the
Esgard delivered unto him; and the prisoner has power to answer and to defend
himself, and then he must either confess or deny the crime: if he confesses
it, he presently demands grace,

But if the offender denies the fact, they come to witnesses, proofs, and
informations, so as being convicted, either by his own mouth, or by proofs, he
is condemned in Council to loose the habit. This done, they send for the
Attorney General, to whom they declare what they have decreed, and he exhorts
the offender to follow the Esgard, who goes before the great Master, and the
assembly, whereas the accused comes full of tears, beseeching them to do him
grace, and the Esgard in like manner entreats the great Master, of the crime
whereof he had been accused. The party condemned, to purchase

Then the Usher attending the great Master, takes away the offenders habit
after this manner: at the first command, he does only lay his hand upon the
offenders ^loake: at the second, he unties the string, and opens the cloak
before: and at the third, he takes it quite away, saying, Using the authority
which the superior has given me, ^vntie this knot, and take from thee the
pleasing yoke of the Lord, whereof thou have made thy self unworthy. This
done, according to the statute and ordinance of the great Master, he leads the
offender to prison, where he remains perpetually, being once thus degraded.

They use in a manner the like ceremonies against one that is absent, and has
refused to appear. It is true that they proceed not but with great
deliberation and apparent

Then the great Master aunswers him: although thy offense has made us to take
thy habit from thee, yet upon hope of thy amendment, we restore thy habit,
pardon thy crime, and admit thee again into the company of our brethren; be
therefore an honest man, and do so as hereafter we may have no cause to use the
rigor of our justice with all extremity against thee. Then the chief Usher
puts on his cloak with the like ceremony, as he had taken it from him; but
being thus restored, he does not enjoy the right of his antiquity nor
residence, according to a law made by the great Master Sangle.

When as they go upon any enterprise, they are bound to make a declaration of
all their goods, as if they did presently leave them, and this they call by a
proper word disproprying, or a renouncing of that they had. They give all
sealed and signed to the Prior of the Church, upon pain to fast forty days,
to have the discipline of the Chapter, and to loose the revenues for one year,
the which is applied to the profit of the treasure for them that are
commanders.

John's day at Mass, the day of the Circumcision at Mass, and to be short,
upon all principal feasts of our Savior, of the Virgin Marie, of S. John
Baptist, and of the blessed Apostles,

There is a commander of the little hospital, and a register, with two honest
men,

There are physicians and chirurgions entertained by the order, for the
brethren, as well knights, clerks, as servants, and if they die, they are
interred as they ought with their habit and white cross, and there are four
clothed in black, which carries them to the ground, and it is not lawful for
any other to wear a mourning weed, no not at the death of the great master,
according to the ordinance of Claude de la Sangle: wherein he would show, that
it was a vanity to mourn for them that were held happy, or else that the
pomp of mourning robes was not sitting for them that made profession of

The hospital of this order serves as a sanctuary, so as it is not lawful to
draw out an offender. It is true, they do not enjoy this liberty in all
cases, but they look whether the fact deserves this freedom. If it merits,
they send the offender out of the Island by the first ship; and he may no more
return to any place that is under the jurisdiction of the order. But this
privilege does not avail the eues, nor them that spoil the Champian country
in the night, nor fierers of houses, Sodomites, robbers, conspirators, nor such
as have wilfully slain or poisoned any man, nor the household servants to
knights which commit any crime. They also that strike or wound any of the
order, or any one of the Judges and officers shall not enjoy this privilege,
nor they that are indebted, nor

As for the receiuors and proctors of money, they must swear in the hands of
the great Master, the Prior, or the Conuentuall Bailife, that they will do
their duties in the receipt, and they are bound every year to carry their
accounts to the provincial Chapter, with the names of such as have paid, and
of them that owe.

To the end the accounts may be heard, and a care had of the treasure, there is
one who

Moreover, they have a conseruator or protector of the treasure, who has
charge to distribute the money, according to the will of the great Master, and
with the leave of the great Commander; and this Conseruator is but one year
in charge, and is changed every year in the Chapter, and chosen of any tongue
whatsoever. But they have this observation, That when any one goes out of
charge, they choose not another of the same tongue within ten years.

common treasury, without their assistance, to the end that so many witnesses
may prevent

They give unto the Conseruator an adjunct, chosen from among the most expert
of the order, and that best understands matters of accounts, and he assists at
all the receipts of the Conseruator general, and also at the giving up of his
accounts; and of two books of the receipts, the Conseruator has one, and he
another, setting down that which has been received, to the end it might be
certainly known, and he is in charge as long as it pleases the great
Master, and the ordinary Council.





But for that it is impossible that amidst so great a troop, so different of
humors, of



In the Council of the Accomply, besides the abouenamed, there are two knights
of every nation, and the Vice-Chauncellor must be called to both, but no other
are necessariely bound to assist, but the Conuentuall Bailifes, without whom
they cannot hold Baptista Vrsino.

The parties before they come to the Council, must go unto the Chauncerie to
deliver their names in writing, and the cause why they contend, and to be
enrolled: after which every one is called in his rank and order by the
Vice-Chauncellor. And for that they judge definitiuely in this order, it is not
lawful for any other to meddle with the deciding of any causes which concern
the religious. It is true that secular men which have to deal with knights,
may have Attourneys and Aduocats to defend them, whereas

They have also a good order to cast lots whenas two pretend for one office,
and therein they have regard to antiquity, unless one were of the great
Cross, for then he is always preferred, and they proceed in their choice
after this manner: After an oath taken by the Competitors, the Vice Chauncellor
takes two vessels in his hands, whereof the one is white, and the other
black; then he goes first to the great Master, and then to every one of the
Counselors in their order, offering them these vessels, to the end they may
put their lots into which they please: for if they will favor him that has
moved the suit, they will put them into the white, and contrariwise into the
black. This done, they tell the lots publickely, and the Vice Chauncellor puts
the white in writing, and he does

The knights do also use this casting of lots every one in their nation, when
there

They have ^ public audience which is held every Friday at Malta, whereas
they of the ordinary Council assist, and in like manner the Judges of
appeals, the Vice Chancellor, the Captain of the Island of Malta, and the
Judge of the town. They do justice

(...) knight may convent any one before any other Judge than him of his order
for ^^at cause soever, and whosoever does the contrary loses his right of
antiquity, is deprived of all administration in this order for the space of
five years, loses his cause, and may not enjoy that which he pretended,
although he had obtained it by sentence. And without doubt they have reason,
for that such appellations derogate much from the right of sovereignty, and if
they suffered such appellations and sentences to go before other Judges, they
should in time be deprived of their ancient authority, like unto some others,
who could not preserve that which was gotten for them.

These knights have also another form of judgment, which they call Esgard,
the which is fit to decide their controversies speedily which have not leisure
to attend long suits. They choose a knight of every language, and they add a
ninth man to this number of what nation soever. This is made President of the
Esgard by the great Master, or by the Marshal of the order, when as the
brethren are of his jurisdiction; and the other eight are named by the
Conuentuall Bailifes, to whom the Usher gives notice, but with this condition,
that the bailifes of nations may not name any other but such as the parties
shall willingly receive for Judges. For this Esgard they have recourse to other
Judges called the Rentfort of the Esgard, where the number of the Judges is
double, and also to the Rentfort of the Rentforts, whereas they take three of
every nation



There have been always a good number of Commaunderies appointed for the
great

In the great Priorie of S. Giles, the commaunderie of Pezenas is affected unto
him: in that of Tolousa, that of Poysubran: In that of Auuergne, the
commaunderie of Salins: in the grand Priorie of France, that of Haynault: in
that of Aquitaine, the commanderie of the Temple of Rochell: in the Priorie of
Champagne, that of Merz: in the Priorie

The great Master chooses a Lieutenant whom he pleases, and he gives leave to
all

But you must observe, that before that any brother which is accused, be
condemned, the great Master cannot give him pardon for his offense, nor to
them that are deprived of the habit for ever, without the consent of a general
Chapter: yet he may change the punishment to one that is lighter: but the
Bailifes must first entreat him. And this is done whenas one brother has hurt
another, for that the antiquity is taken from him that is in the wrong, and
given to them that are new come, who are called brothers Arnauds, unless he
die, or be may hemed of some member, for then they must follow the rigor of
the law.



As for the Bailifes, they were instituted to assist the great Master, as
Counselors, and

There is moreover he whom they call Drappier, which is one of the Bailifes
whom they now call great Conseruator; and also, one whom they call Turcopolier,
which signifies Captain of the light horse, in the time of the holy war;
and this office did belong to the English nation. It belongs unto the Marshall
to call and command assemblies, whereas the grand Prior of the Cl^rgie is
bound to assist. He also makes Gonfalonnier, or Standard bearer of the order,
whom soever he pleases, but not without the council and consent of the great
Master, or his Lieutenant. But neither the Marshall, Admiral, nor any
Baylife, may displace any officer which they have; but this honor is due to
the great Master and the ordinary Council, who shall judge of the crimes for
the which they are to be deposed.

Peter, which stood in the town of Halicarnasses: but this charge was lost
whenas the Turks took Rhodes.

The Marshall has charge of the tower whereas they put their prisoners, yet he
may

The Drappier has care of their garments that wear the Cross, who may not
make any without his permission. The Bailifes have only sixty crowns wages
yearly, whenas they live in the Convent: but whenas they are absent, they have
not any. As for their Lieutenants, they have forty to bear the charge of the
houses: The Prior of the Church,

The Treasurer may not be chosen of any other nation but of that of France, and
he is numbered among the capitularie Baylifes, having in his custody the Iron
Bull of the order, under the seals of the great Master and Bailifes. He
assists at Counsels, and at the giving up of accounts, and is chosen as well
of the knights, as of the servants at arms, and Chaplains. True it is, his
wages are greater if he be a knight, than if he were of a meaner quality.

Then follows the Chancellor, who makes the eighth Baylife, and he must
always be of the Spanish nation: he has under him a Vice-Chauncellor, who
makes the dispatches in his absence, and seals patents freely, reserving only
the rights which are due Giles, the Prior of Tolousa, and the Bailife
capitularie of Monosco: They of the nation of Auuergne, are the Marshall, the
great Prior of Auuergne; the Bailife of Lion, whom in old time they called
Lureoil: Those of the nation of France, are the great Hospitalier, the great
Prior of France, Aquitaine, and Champagne, the Bailife capitularie of Morea,
and the Treasurer general: Of the nation of Italy, are the Admiral, the
great Priors of Rome, Lumbardie, and Venice, Eufeinia, of S. Stephen near to
Monopoli, of the Trinity, of Venouse, and of S. John of Naples: the Bailifes
of the nation of Aragon, Cartelogne, and Navarre, are the great Conseruator, in
old time called Drappier, the Castelain of Emposta, the great Priors of
Cartelogne, and Navarre, and the Bailifes capitularie of Majorca: Those of the
English nation, were in old time, the Turcopolier, the great Priors of England
and Ireland, and the Baylife capitularie of Aigle: The Bailifes of the nations
of Castile, Lion, and Portugal, are the Chancellor, the great Priors of
Castile, Lion, and Portugal, and the Bailife capitularie of Bouedo. Finally,
the capitularie Bailifes, the great Prior of the Church of the order, and the
commanders of Cypres, and Langon, are common to all nations; but he of
Negrepont belongs only to the



Eight of these brethren chosen out of the nations, go and take an oath for the
choice of a knight president of the election, and he being chosen, the
lieutenant gives over his charge. This president of the election being in his
seat, the foresaid eight come before him, and take an oath to name the 3
electors without any favor: and these must choose them to whom the election of
the great master must concern. This done, they enter into the conclaue, and
they secretly name among them these 3 electors, and then they name them to the
assembly, and so Presently leave their charge. Then the three electors take an
oath in the hands of the president of the election, that they will name a
fourth which shall not be of their nation; and he being received, they swear
to choose a fifth, and so of the rest, till they

This oath being taken, the commander of the election and all the assistants
swear also that they will hold for firm and stable whatsoever they shall do
in that respect, and obey the great Master that shall be chosen by them. Being
thus entered into the conclaue, they

During the time of the election it is not lawful for any knight to wear any
arms in the place where it is made, for he should loose his voice, and if any
one should complain, they would take away his habit. As for bailifes, and
conuentuall priors, the election is made before the great master, who
disposes, having the ordinary council with him, the which is also observed
in the election of the prior of the church of Malta.

The knights of Malta have commonly a procurator, or agent in the court of
Rome, who is created at a general chapter, and many times the great master
and the council may dismiss him, and put another in his place, upon certain
reasons, making his insufficiency them with all rigor, and shall give advice
to the great Master of matters which



He that before he takes the habit, having been married, has children, cannot
obtain nor hold any Commaunderie whilst they live: neither may any man have a
Commanderie by grace or by cabiment: that is to say, coming according to the
order of his antiquity, if he has not served five years at the least, after
he took the habit, and he cannot enjoy any pension, or any member, if he has
not served three years. To conclude, no man may hold a Commaunderie either by
grace, order, or melioration, if he has not been in the convent, and if he
has not had his antiquity, or expectatiue: and the lette^s of these
expectatiues must be taken within the year of the execution by the

All purchases and acquisitions made by Commanders, belong unto the order; if
they he immoueables, they fall to the Commaunderie that is nearest to the
purchased lands; and if they be moueables, all come to the public treasure.
All places where there are nominations of benefices or provisions, or
presentations depending upon fees of Commanderies the Commander disposes, if
the custom and privilege of the place be not otherwise* and the said priors,
bailifes, and commanders cannot dispose, if those benefices fall void during
the time that the great Master is upon the place where this vacancie



If the grand Priors neglect to do their d^^^es in that behalf, they do by
the custom loose their rank, jurisdiction, and pre-eminence of prioritie, and
if the visitors deputed by the chapter favor the in^ringers of the laws, they
shall loose one years revenues of their commaundaries.



And for that it happens many times that the knights have great numbers of
slaves, Moors, and Turks, by reason of their prizes at Sea, they are
forbidden to infranchise and set them at liberty without the permission of the
great Master, and a general Chapter.

All knights are forbidden to solicit for the crimes of secular men which are
subject to the jurisdictions of this order, for that they must as
ecclesiastical persons leave them to the secular power; and in like manner, in
civil causes they may not solicit neither openly nor secretly. Moreover, if
any knight, or other of the Cross, has committed an offense. It is not
lawful for any of his friends or companions to entreat for him, until that
sentence be given, and then they may sue unto the great Master to moderat his
punishment.

All knights are forbidden to swear fealty and homage, or to make a league
with any prince, without the leave of the great Master, or his Prior; and in
like manner to make any assembly without the like permission. This is in
regard of the jealousy of princes, in whose countries these knights live; for
if they did follow one more than another, it would hinder the good of the
order. It is not lawful for them of the Cross to be wanderers up and down,
and to go out of the limits of their provinces and commaunderies, without the
express leave of their superior. If they be found thus wandering, and without
any leave in writing, all commanders are enjoyed to seize upon them, and to put
them in prison, and then to advertise the grand Prior, to the end he may do
justice.









The Religion.
Pater nosters in stead of the Canonical hours: but the Priests, Deacons, and
others of the Clergy, are bound to say the service every day, according to
the order and custom of the Church of Jerusalem. They are all bound to fast
the time of Lent, from Ashwednesday unto Easter, at the Rogations, S. John
Baptist, S. Mark, at Whitsuntide, the four Ember weeks, the Apostles eues,
S. Laurence, at the Assumption, Nativity, Conception, Purification, and
Annunciation of our Lady, at the feast of all Saints, and nativity of our
Savior. They are in like manner bound to communicate at Christmas, Easter, and
Whitsuntide. Whenas they go to any enterprise, Pater nosters. It is ordained,
that there should be a learned man feed to instruct young Clo^kes, and to teach
them the Latin tongue, and another to teach them to sing, and no man shall be
admitted a Subdeacon before the age of eighteen years, nor a Deacon before
five and twenty, and every Priest must be six and twenty years old; and
they must all have made profession of their order.

Of the great Masters of S. John of Jersualem.

John Baptist. And these were entertained by the care and charge of those which
had founded them, unto the time that the Christian princes had conquered the
city from the Infidells, and that Godfrey of Bouillon was chosen king, which
was in the year 1099.

Gerrard was rector or governor of the hospital of S. John, who (during the
Christians siege) was ill entreated by the Infidells, who kept him long in
prison, for that they feared he had some secret intelligence with the
Christians, who besieged it: but the Christians being Masters, he was set at
liberty, and governed the hospital of S. John carefully, persuading Christian
kings and princes to endow it, the which they did bountifully; so as in France,
Italy, Spain, and other countries of Christendom, the hospital of S. John
had in short time great possessions. In the year 1113, Pope Paschall the
second received Gerrard, and the Knights of S. John into the protection of the
Apostolic See, and gave them great privileges, ordaining that after the
decease of Gerrard they should proceed canonically to the election of another
Rector John of Jerusalem, a name which has continued five hundred years till
this day, and the knights were called hospitaliers, or knights of the hospital
of S. John of Jerusalem, afterward they were called knights of Rhodes, and now
knights of Malta. Gerrard died in the year 1118.

2. Raymond du Puy or Podio succeeded by election: in his time the order of the
Templers began. He called a general Chapter in Jerusalem with the advice of
the knights, where he made the statutes of the order, and instituted the rule
and form of life which the knights should use: he was called great Master of
the order; and qualified himself by his titles, Servant of the poor of Jesus
Christ, and guardian of the hospital of Jerusalem. Calixtus the second, and his
successors, who ordained that the knights should live according to the rule of
S. Agustine. This great Master seeing the revenues of the hospital to
increase daily, and that he could not better employ it than in making war
against the Infidells, he offered himself with his religious men, and all
their forces to the king of Jerusalem, carrying in their ensigns a Cross
Argent in a field Gueles, by the order of Pope Innocent the second, in the
year 1130. From that time the Raymond the great Master continued the siege of
Ascalon, the which the Infidells had defended above fifty years against the
Christians, and in the end took it in the year 1154, for which worthy prise.
Pope Anastatius the fourth, gave great privileges to the order of the
hospital John, and freed them from the jurisdiction of the Ecelesiasticall
Prelates of the East, the which bred great troubles betwixt the Bishops of that
country, and the knights of this order, who were always supported and
favored by the Sea of Rome, and the Car^inalls. Some hold that Raymond was a
Florentine, but the most certain is, that he was a Frenchman borne in Dauphine
of a noble family, called du Puy. He died in the year 1160; being reputed a
religious, wise, and valiant man.

3. Auger of Balben was chosen great Master in the place of Raymond, in whose
time there was nothing done worthy of memory, but that Baldouin the third,
king of Jerusalem dyed, who was much lamented by the Christians, yea by the
Infidells, who said that the Christians had great cause to complain for his
death, having lost a prince, who had not his equal in all the world. Auger
having governed the order in peace about three

4. Arnold of Comps succeeded him: he was a man of great valor and council,
who soon after his election entered into Egypt with Amolry the new king of
Jerusalem, who made war against the Calife of Egypt, for that he refused to
pay the yearly tribute, having bound himself to Baldo^in the third to pay it
continually to the kings of Jerusalem. This Arnold having governed four years
with great wisdom and valor, died in the year 1167, and there succeeded him

5. Gilbert of Assalyor Sailly, who was of a great courage, and so liberal, as
he inclined to prodigality, especially to soldiers; so as he exhausted all
the treasure of the religion,

6. Gastus or Castus was chosen great Master by the resignation of the other,
of whom there is nothing found memorable, his government being so short; for he
died in the same year of his election.

7. Ioubert, a very religious man, was his successor, who in the year 1176,
joined with Philip Earl of Flaunders, who was come into Syria to succor king
Baldwin the fourth, against Saladin, who had a mighty army defeated by the
Christians being few in number, in the year 1177. In the end Saladin retired
out of the country of Damas in the year 1179, whenas Ioubert Master of the
hospitalliers died, being very charitable and bountiful unto the poor
diseased: some write that grieuing to see the affairs of Christendom go
manifestly to ruin in Syria, and the dishonorable and prejudicial truce
which was made by the king of Jerusalem, and the Earl of Tripoli, with
Saladin, it shortened his days, having governed the order of S. John ten
yerares or thereabouts.

8. In his place Roger of Molins a man of great valor and judgment, was
chosen in the same year 1179. In his time there grew great dissension betwixt
the prince of Antioc he and the Patriarch of that place, and Roger was chosen
mediator of a peace and accord betwixt them, in the year 1181. Soon after,
Roger with Heracleus Patriarch of Arnold of Troge Master of the Templers, were
sent Ambassadors by the king of Jerusalem into the West, to demand succors
of Christian princes; who were well received by the Pope, Emperor, Philip
Augustus the French king, the kings of England, Sicile, and Hungary, and then
they returned into Syria, only the master of the Templers dyed upon the way.
In the year of our Redemption 1187, the Earl of Tripoli entering into league
with Saladin, he gave him passage, and relieved his army with victuals, who
besieging the town of Ptolemaide, the knights of S. John, and the Templers,
put his army to rout, and Roger the great Master fighting valiantly, dyed,
his horse falling upon him, being bruised with the weight of his arms, and
trodden on by the enemies horse, his body was found among the dead, and buried
with much grief:

9. Garnier of Naples in Syria (which was the ancient town of Sichem in
Canaan) was chosen great Master, in whose time a bloody battle was given
betwixt the Christians and Infidels, in which Guy of Lusignan king of Jerusalem
was taken prisoner, with the chief in his realm, and the true Cross which
the Christians carried in battle, was taken by the Infidels, and almost all
the knights of S. John, and the Templers, were slain, some in the battle, and
others were beheaded in cold blood, and Garnier the great Master fighting
valiantly, and being wounded mortally in many places of his body, escaped by
the ^wiftnesse of his horse, and fled to Ascalon, where he died within ten
days after,

10. Ermengard of Aps was chosen great Master by the knights that were in
Jerusalem, in the year of our Lord God 1187, the same year, upon the second
of October, the city of Jerusalem was made subject to the power of Saladin,
eighty eight years, two months, and seventeen days, after it had been
taken from them by Godfrey of Bouillon, from whence all the Knights,
Hospitaliers, and Templers, with all the Christians Latins, were chased, the
Hospitaliers redeeming one thousand captives with their own money from the
Barbarians. After the loss of Jerusalem, the Hospitaliers were always in
arms, assisting faithfully the Christian princes, which had crossed themselves
for the recovery John made their residence, and ordinary abode, and the same
year the Christians obtained a famous victory against the Infidel and
Saladin, wherein they were much assisted by the knights of S. John, and the
Templers. The year after, in Winter, in the year of Christ 1192, the great
Master of Aps died in the city of Ptolemaide, and in his place was chosen

11. Geoffrey Duisson; in his time there was a truce made for five years
betwixt the Christians and Saladin, whereupon many noblemen and gentlemen of
diverse nations, which John, the which did much augment the revenues, and after
the decease of Henry Earl of Champagne, the Hospitaliers, and Templers,
remained governors of the realm of Jerusalem, or at the least of that small
part which remained to the Christians, who chose Amaulry of Lusignan (who had
succeeded in the realm of Cypres) king of Jerusalem, with the consent of the
Patriarchs, Prelates, and Barons of the realm, in the year of Grace 1194, and
soon after the great Master died, to whom succeeded

12. Alphonso of Portugal, a knight of the order, issued from the house of
Portugal, but it is not known for certain what kings son he was;
notwithstanding, he made very John, which made him renounce the Maistership,
and to imbarke for Portugal in the same year that he was chosen, which was in
the year 1194, where he died, in the year of Christ 1207.

13. Geoffrey le Rat, who was grand Prior of France, was chosen great Master
by the Alphonso; and Saladin died, to whom succeeded his son Noradin, lord of
Al^ppo: In his time, Simon, earl of Montfort, was sent by king Philip Augustus
with ^^ army into Syria, where finding great disorders, he made truce with the
Infidells for ten years, in the year of our Redemption 1198: during the
which, there was great dissension betwixt the Hospitaliers and Templers, the
first, complaining that the Templers had attempted upon their jurisdiction, and
contemned them which quarrel, after many ^kirmishes and furious incounters,
was pacified and reconciled by the means of king Amaulry, the patriarchs of
Antioch and Jerusalem, and other Christian Princes and Prelates, who made them
refer it to Pope Innocent the third, the which was the cause of great good,
for next unto God, the only hope and support of the affairs of the Holy le
Rat died, to whom succeeded

14 Guerin of Montagu, of the nation of Auuergne, who with the knights of his
order relieved Liuon, king of Armenia, against the Barbarians, who had invaded
his realm, and for recompense, he gave them the town of Salef, with the
castles of Camard and Chasteaneuf, and their dependances, and recommended
himself, with his heir and realm, to the knights of the Hospital of S.
John, which gift was confirmed by Pope Innocent the third, about the year of
our Salvation 1209, whenas John of Brienna and Marie his wife, herre to the
realm, were crowned King of Jerusalem: The same Pope confirmed and augmented
the statutes and privileges of the order of S. John: Soon after, by the
persuasion Honorius the third, the king of Hungary, and the Archduke of
Austria, crossed themselves, and were recommended by him to the great Master
Guerin, and the knights of S. John, to assist them in the recovery of the
Holy Land. Andrew king of Hungary lodged in their palace, and entreated them
to receive him into the number of the brethren of their religion, giving them
five hundred marks of yearly rent, the which he assigned upon the Salt Pits
of his realm. In the year of our Redemption 1222, the great Master Guerin
pacified a great discord betwixt Isabel Queen of Cypres, and king Henry her
son, and the Lords and Barons of the realm of the one part: and the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Prelates of the realm of the other, in regard of
their tenths and possessions. Guerin died in the city of Ptolemaide, who for
his wisdom and great valor was much esteemed by the Christian princes, and
greatly lamented by the knights and religious of his order, in whose place was
chosen

15. Bertrand of Texi: during his government the Christian affairs depended
wholly upon the Hospitaliers and Templers, who although they had great
quarrels among themselves; yet they agreed well, for that which concerned the
good and advancement of the Christians against the Infidells. In the year of
our Lord God 1240, Bertrand died at Ptolemaide soon after the arrival of
Richard earl of Cornwell, brother to Henry king of England into Palestina,
with an army of forty thousand men, to whom succeeded

16. Gerin, whose surname is not known; he gave to the earl of Cornwall a
small portion of the blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the which was
kept in Jerusalem by the Master of the Hospiaall of S. John, the which he
brought into England. The great Master Gerin fighting valiantly against the
Corasmins Infidells, was taken prisoner, and sent to the Souldan of Egypt,
where he ended his mortal life, in the year of our Lord God 1244, in whose
place the knights of S. John did choose for their great Master

17. Bertrand of Comps, who being in a furious battle which was given against
the ^urcomans, who spoiled the country about Antioch, in the year of our
Redemption

18. Peter of Villebride, in whose time S. Lewis the French king came into
Syria, with many Princes and Prelates of France, and besieged Damiette, where,
being assisted by the Lewis was taken prisoner with his brethren Charles and
Alphonso, and the king of Cypres, with the great Master of S. John, and
Templers, and the greatest part of their knights: whereupon there was an accord
made betwixt the king S. Lewis and the Souldan, and the knights of S. John lent
S. Lewis money to pay his ransom. In the year 1251, the great Master
Villebride died in the city of Ptolemaide, to whom succeeded by election

19. William of Chasteau-neuf or Castelnau, of the nation of Auuergne, who was
a great obseruer of justice. In his time the Christians of the holy Land lost
all hope to be relieved

20. Hugh Revel, in whose time Pope Vrbain the fourth gave unto the knights of
S. John Mount Tabor, in the year 1261, and soon after they took the Castle
of Lilion from the Sa^azins, and defeated two of their colonels, which made the
Souldan of Egypt resolve to ruin the knights of S. John; so as in the year
1265, he took from them the Castle of Assure, at the which there were ninety
knights of the order slain. This did much weaken the religion of S. John, and
in the year 1267 the hospitaliers and templers were defeated in battle by
the Sarrazins near to the city of Ptolemaide. In the year 1270, the Souldan
took the Castle of Crac by assault from the hospitaliers, whereas all the
knights were put to the sword. Some hold that the great Master Revel assisted
the Lewis in his voyage toward Tunis, where he died of the plague. In the
year 1278, the great Master ended his days, having held five Chapters of the
religion of S. John, where there were goodly statutes made for the government
and reformation of the order.

21. Nicholas Lorgue was chosen after him, who not to yield to his predecessor,
knowing that nothing did more ruin commonweales and states, than discord and
dissension, he labored in such sort, as he reconciled the knights of S. John,
and the templers, and made them good friends. In the year 1282, the knights of
S. John obtained a famous victory against the Sarrazins, who were come to
besiege the Castle of Margat, which was their chief fort, the which moved the
Souldan to besiege it, in the year 1285; but it was valiantly defended by the
knights, who in the end yielded it by composition, and Lorgue died of grief,
to see the Christians affairs so decline in the holy Land.

22. John of Villiers of the nation of France was chosen great Master. In his
time the towns of Tripoli, Sydonia, Barut, and Tire were taken from the
Christians, and reduced under the power of the Souldan, with whom the
Christians of Ptolemaide made a truce, and in the mean time the great Masters
of S. John and of the Templers, came to Brundusium to solicit Christian
princes to undertake the conquest of the holy Land. In the year 1291, the
Souldan came and besieged Ptolemaide, the which was valiantly Godfrey of
Bouillon had conquered it. The great Master with the rest of the knights
retired by sea into the Island of Cypres, where they were well entertained by
the king, who gave to them and the templers the town of Limisson, which is a
sea port to dwell in, whereas the great Master called two general Chapters,
one in the year one thousand two hundred ninety and two, and the other was in
the year following, where he made new statutes for the order: and in the year
1294 he died at Limisson, and there

23. Odo des Pins of the nation of Prouence. He incurred the hatred and
disgrace of the knights of his order, who had an intent to deprive him by
reason of his negligence and covetousness, but it was stayed by Pope Boniface
the eight to avoid scandal, and in the end he was cited to appear personally
at Rome to answer the complaints of the hospitaliers, but he died upon the
way before the came into Italy in the year 1296.

24. The knights hearing of the death of their great Master des Pins, chose
William of Villaret at Limisson, the four and twentieth of March 1296, to
succeed him. He was also of Prouence, and prior of Saint Gilles, where he was
at the time of his election; but being advertised thereof, he went presently
into the realm of Cypres, and governed in this charge very wisely. In his time
Vssum Cassan king of the Tartarians became a Christian, and recovered the city
of Jerusalem, in the year 1300, into the which he put the knights of the
hospital and temple in Garrison, but it was soon taken again by the
Infidels, and the knights returned into Cypres, whereas the great Master past
to a better life, in the year 1308, having held five general Chapters at
Limisson, and seen the total ruin of the knights of the temple.

25. Folquet of Villaret, of the same nation of Pouence, was chosen in his
place, being a man of a quick spirit, and of great courage. Seeing himself
advanced to this soueraign dignity, he resolved to put that in exeution which
had been often treated of in his predecessors time, but could not be effected,
which was to retire out of the Island of Cypres, and dwell in some other place,
the which he brought happily to pass: for in the year of his election, being
1308, he made a voyage to Constantinople, and afterward into France, whereas
the Pope gave him the Island of Rhodes, the which he conquered with his
knights, in the year 1309, and seven Islands near unto it, into which was
transferred the abode of the order of S. John; so as they were afterward
called the knights of Rhodes. Presently after Ottoman, who was the first
Emperor of the Turks, came and Amedee the fourth, Earl of Sauoy, and Ottoman
was forced to raise the siege. The templers having been suppressed by a general
Council held at Vienna in Dauphine, most of their possessions were given to
the religion of S. John by Pope Clement the fifth. In the year 1314, the
knights of Rhodes conquered the Island of Lango, and other Islands of the
Archipelagus, and in the year 1317, the great Master Folquet pleasing himself
in his victories and conquests became glorious and proud, which purchased him
the hatred of the religion, and the knights of the order revolted against him,
and had seized upon his person if he had not fled into a Castle, but not being
able to take him, they deposed him of his dignity,

26. Maurice of Pagnac, whereof Pope John the two and twentieth, being
advertised, he was much troubled, deputing two prelates to go to Rhodes, and to
inform themselves of the fact, and to cite the great Masters of Villaret and
Pagnac to appear personally at Auignon, whereunto they obeyed, and the Pope in
the mean time created Gerard des Pins lieutenant general of the order of S.
John; in whose time Orcanes Emperor of the Turks made preparation to besiege
the Island of Rhodes, of whom the knights of Rhodes obtained a wonderful
victory in the year 1321, where there were ten thousand Turks cut in pieces.
In the mean time Maurice of Pagnac died at Mountpelier, in the year one
thousand three hundred twenty and two, and Folquet of Villaret was restored

27. The year of his renunciation the knights of Rhodes presented unto Pope
John, Elion of Villeneufe of the nation of Prouence, and prior of S. Gilles, to
be their great Master, whereat his holiness, and all the Cardinals, and
Knights of Rhodes were much contented, for that he had the reputation to be
honorable, virtuous, and honest. This great Master held a general Capter at
Montpelier, in the year 1330, and going toward Rhodes, he fell very sick at
Marceilles, but he recovered his health in the year 1332, and came in the end
to Rhodes, and the same year he held a general Chapter, where John, and

28. Presently after the death of Villeneufue, Deodate of Gozon, a knight also
of Prouence, was chosen great Master. About four years before he was
advanced to this sovereign dignity, he had fought with a monstrous Dragon,
which afflicted the Island of Rhodes, and had slain it, for the which he was
so much honored, as his memory will be for ever commendable to posterity. In
the year 1347, he relieved the king of Armenia against the Souldan of Egypt:
Pope Clement the sixth did so esteem the knights of John Cantacuzen, emperor
of Constantinople, came to Rhodes to demand succors of the great Master, who
having governed the religion of S. John seven years, six months, and ten
days, died, in the year 1353, and was buried in the Church of S. John of
Rhodes, having caused the peer there to be built, and the bourough of Rhodes
to be walled about: He had held two general Chapters, one in the year 1346,
and the other 1362.

29. Peter de Cornilian, Prior of S. Gilles, of the nation of Prouence, was
chosen great Master, the which he held but a year, eight months, and
seventeen days; for falling sick in the town of Rhodes, he died, in the
year 1355. He was a man of an exemplarie

30. After the great Masters decease, according to their accustomed form,
Roger des Pius, of the nation of Prouence, was chosen great Master. In his
time the Pope persuaded the religion of S. John to purchase the principality
of Achaia of James of Sauoy, Prince of Piedmont; and there was a general
assembly of the knights of Rhodes in the town of Auignon, to treat of this
purchase, and to reform certain abuses which were crept into this order. In
the year of our Lord God one thousand three hundred sixty five, the great
Master died, and was much lamented, especially of the poor, to whom he

31. Raymond Berengier, of the same nation of Prouence, was chosen great
Master, having been before commander of castle Sarrazin: He presently sent
his Ambassador to Auignon to the Pope, to yield him obedience and fealty. In
his time, the king of Cypres, and the religion of S. John, made a league
together, and took the town of Alexandria in Egypt by force, the which they
spoiled, and burnt; and in the year of our Redemption 1366, the Pope wrote to
all Christian Princes, persuading them to succor the religion of S. John, and
the king of Cypres, giving great indulgences to such as should relieve them.
The Armenians being expelled their houses by the Satrazins, were charitably
Gregory the eleventh would not grant, but commanded him to continue in that
charge for the good of Christendom. Soon after, he died, having governed the
order about eighteen years and a half, during the which he had held two
general Chapters at Rhodes,

32. Robert of Iuliac, or Iuli, great Prior of France, was chosen great Master
when he was in the government of his Priorie, who hearing the news of his
election went presently to Auignon to kiss the Popes feet, whereas he was
very well entertained, and much honored, and there he held a general
assembly of the order, and the Pope gave the government of the town of
Smyrne to the order of S. John, commanding the

33. John Fernandes of Heredia, of the nation of Aragon, borne at Valencia, who
had been Prior of Cattalogne, and Chastelain of Embosta, and had been twice
married, who being a widower, took the habit, and was made knight of Rhodes in
the time of the great Master of Villeneufue; being a simple knight, with the
leave of the great Master, he went to visit the holy Sepulcher. When he was
great Master, he went toward Rhodes, in the year 1377, and being required by
the General of the Venetian army to join with him, and to go into Morea, in
the year 1378, they besieged the town of Patras, Clement the seventh was
acknowledged by him, and the whole order of S. John, for the true Vicar of
Jesus Christ: whereupon, Pope Urban the sixth, who lived then at Rome, deprived
Richard Caracciola, a Neopolitan, in 1383; but the order would never
acknowledge him for great Master, who died at Rome, in the life time of
Heredia. In the year 1395, Bajazet, emperor of the Turks, made some
preparations to besiege Rhodes; whereupon, Philibert of Naillac, prior of
Aquitaine, was sent from the Convent of Rhodes, to the great Master, being at
Auignon, with letters to demand succors against Bajazet, from whence he
returned to Rhodes in 1396, in which year the great Master Heredia died, and
was buried in Caspe.

34. News of the great Masters decease being come to Rhodes, Philibert of
Naillac, of the nation of France, and grand Prior of Aquitaine, was chosen
great Master, in the year 1396. He was entreated by Sigismond, king of
Hungary, to succor him against Bajazet, Bajazet had the victory, from the
which the king of Hungary escaped, and retired himself, with the great
Master, to Rhodes, whither the Emperor of Constantinople sent his most
precious jewels to keep, fearing least Bajazet should take Constantinople,
but he was hindered by Tamberlan, who defeated Bajazet, and took him captive;
and the siege of Constantinople being raised, the great Master sent back the
Emperors jewels. After the defeat of Bajazet, the great Master sailed with
an army into Caria, where he built an inexpugnable fort, which he called the
castle of S. Peter. In the year 1399, there was war betwixt the king of
Cypres and the Geneuois, the which was pacified, and they reconciled by the
authority and wisdom of the great Master of

35. Anthony Fluuiano, or Riuiere, of the nation of Aragon. In his time there
was a general Chapter held at Rhodes, in the year of Christ 1430, where there
were Ambassadors deputed by the order of S. John to assist at the Council of
Basil. In the year of our Lord 1434, the Souldan of Egypt grown proud with
the victory which he had gotten at Cypres, brake the truce, and made great
preparations with an intent to besiege Rhodes, but hearing that the great
master had made good provisions to defend himself, he gave over the
enterprise, so as the order lived in peace. In the year 1437, the great

36. Nicholas of Lastic, of the nation of Auuergne, was chosen great Master in
his place, who at the time of his election was absent, and remained in
Auuergne, where Amurath Emperor of the Turks, with an intent to take Rhodes,
and to chase away the knights: and in the year one thousand four hundred
forty four, he came to besiege Rhodes, the which Amurath, and in the year
one thousand four hundred forty and six, there was a peace concluded betwixt
the religion and the Souldan. In the year one thousand four hundred fifty
and one, a general Chapter was held at Rhodes, where the government of the
treasure, and convent was given to the great master, who, in the year 1452,
after the death of Amurath, renewed the peace with Mahomet the second, his
son. And the year following, having taken the city of Constantinople, he
grew proud of this happy success, and sent word to the great master, that he
should pay him two thousand ducats tribute yearly, otherwise he meant not to
entertain the peace which he had sworn, to whom the great Master made a
Mahomet: and in the year 1454, the great Master died, having valiantly
governed the religion sixteen years, six months, and thirteen days.

47. James of Milly, of the nation of Auuergne, whereof he was prior, succeeded
him, being in his priorie at the time of his election, whereof his nephew
George of Boisrond, brought him the first news, whereupon he went presently to
Rhodes, where he held a Mahomet besieged the Island of Lango, and the Castle of
the Island of Apes, but he was valiantly repulsed, and the knights won a
famous victory: and the same year Charles the seventh, the French king, gave
sixteen thousand crowns to the order. In the year of our salvation 1460,
there was a general Chapter held at Rhodes, to the which there were many
Priors, Bailifes, and Commanders of the order, cited for the defense of the
religion; and the year following, the great Master died, having

38. Peter Reymond Zacosta, of the nation of Arragon, Chastellain of Emposta,
was chosen great Master, being then absent in Spain, from whence he parted in
the year one thousand four hundred sixty and two, and passing by Rome, he
came to Rhodes, where he held a general chapter, during the which, the eight
tongue or nation of Castile and Portugal was erected in the order, there being
but seven nations, which were France, Auuergne, Prouence, Italy, Arragon,
England, and Germany. In the year of Nicholas to be built at the mouth of the
port of Rhodes, in the same place, whereas in old time did stand that great
Colosse of the Sun, numbered among the wonders of the world: toward which
building Philip duke of Bourgandie gave ten Peter's Church.

39. Baptista Orsino prior of Rome, of the nation of Italy, succeeded him, and
was advanced to this dignity by the Pope, for that it was void in the court of
Rome, but it was with the advice and consent of all the religious of the order
of S. John which were then Mahomet took the town of Negrepont by force, where
he committed horrible cruelties, killing all the Latins in cold blood, and
proclaiming war against them which were of the order, by the sound of a
trumpet, upon which occasion the great master sent to demand succors from
the Pope, and the Rhodians began to fast to make vows, prayers, and public
processions to implore the aid of heaven, making all the preparations Sixtus
the fourth, who came to Rhodes to that end. In the year one thousand four
hundred seventy and six, the great master died of a long and tedious
sickness which had held him a whole year, having governed the order with
great authority, gravity, and wisdom, nine years, three months, and three
days.

40. Peter of Aubusson, prior of Auuergne, and of that nation, and captain of
the town of Rhodes was chosen great master, who swear solemnly, according to
the custom, to keep the statutes of the order, sending an Ambassador to Rome
to advertise Lewis the eleventh, obtained a Iubile in France of the Pope, in
favor of the knights of Rhodes, whereby they raised great sums of money, the
which was wholly employed in the fortification of the Island. In the year of
our salvation one thousand four hundred seventy and eight, the great master
held a general Chapter, where the administration of the treasure was given
him, and the religion of the holy John. The year following, it was resolved
in Mahomets Council, that Rhodes should be besieged, whereof, the great master
being advertised, he sent presently advice unto the Pope, and demanded
succors, and in the year one thousand four hundred and eighty, the great
Turk came before the town of Rhodes with a mighty army: at this siege there
were many sallies made, and the Turks were still repulsed, having in their
army one hundred thousand fighting men, and one hundred and sixty sail: the
great master was relieved by Anthony of Aubusson, vicount of Montelis, his
brother, who was a great soldier, and was made general of the army of the
besieged. The Turks had in few days discharged three thousand and seven
hundred cannon shot against the walls, and gave a furious assault with 40000
Mahomet the second resolved to come in person to Rhodes, and there was a
general assembly made of knights, but the death of Mahomet disappointed this
dessigne, and his children, Bajazet and Zizime, were in war after their
fathers decease, the which gave some rests to the knights of Rhodes; yea Zizime
fled to Rhodes to the great Master for aid, in the year of our Lord God 1482,
where he was received with much honor, and so conducted into France. In the
time of this great master of Aubusson, the statutes of the order were
reformed, and reduced into one volume, and a peace was concluded betwixt the
knights of the order of S. John, and the great Turk Bajazet, the Pope having
given the great master power to treat. He was made a Cardinal Innocent the
eighth, in the year 1488, who sent him a Cardinals hat, and made him his
Legate in Asia; and in the year 1500, Pope Alexander the sixth made him Legate and
General of the army of the league against the Turk: Finally, he died at
Rhodes, in the year 1503, full of honor and reputation, and was interred with
a great funeral pomp: He had lived eighty years, three months, and four
days, and governed the order seven and twenty years, and sixteen days. In
his time there were five general Chapters held at Rhodes, in which many
commendable statutes were made.

41. There were 387 knights assembled at Rhodes when he died, who chose to
succeed him Emery of Amboyse, brother to George of Amboyse, Cardinal and Legate
in France, and Archbishop of Rouen. He was of the French nation, and great
Prior in France, Philip of Villiers of Lisle Adam, a French knight, who was
afterward great master. In the year 1512, the great master died, having
governed nine years, four months, and three days, being above seventy
eight years old.

42. Guy of Branchfort, Prior of Auuergne, nephew to the deceased great master
of Aubusson, being resident at in his priorie the time of his election. In the
year 1513, the great master of Blanchfort imbarking himself at Nice in
Prouence to go to Rhodes, he was surprised with sickness upon the way, whereof
he died a year and two days after his election.

43. Fabricio of Caretto, a Geneuois, of the nation of Italy, was chosen to
succeed him in a general assembly held at Rhodes, where there were five
hundred and fifty knights, Caretto himself being present, having before been
Admiral of the order. The body of the deceased great master of Blanchfort
was brought to Rhodes, and honorably interred John's Church. In the year 1514,
a general Chapter was held at Rhodes, after which, Philip of Villiers of Lisle
Adam, Seneshal to the great master, was sent into France with sovereign
authority over all the priories of the realm, with the quality of Visitor,
Corrector, Lieutenant, and Ambassador to the great Master and Convent. In the
year 1516, a peace was made betwixt them of the religion of S. John, and
Tomombey Souldan of Egypt, successor to Campson Gauri, who a little before had
been slain in battle by Selym Emperor of the Turks; but Tomombey was
unfortunate, for in the year 1517, he was taken and hanged in one of the gates
of the great Caire, by the commandment of Selym: Whereupon, the great master
fortified the Island of Rhodes, and sent Ambassadors to the Pope, and
Christian Princes, to advertise them of Selyms victories, and to crave aid:
but, in the year 1520, Selym died, and Sultan Solymon his son succeeded

44. Philip of Villiers, of Lisle Adam, grand Prior of France, where he was at
the time Gabriel of Pomereux, great Commander, was chosen Lieutenant to the
great Master, whom he presently advertised of the death of Caretto, and that
he had succeeded him by election, entreating him to come presently to Rhodes,
where he arrived soon after, and made a solemn entry, swearing to observe
the statutes of the order. The same year of his election, Sultan Solomon
resolved to besiege Rhodes, and to execute the last will of his father Selym,
whereof the great Master of Villiers being advertised, he made all the
preparations he could to defend himself against the Turks enterprises,
fortifying the town of Rhodes with all speed, and sending an Ambassador to
Pope Adrian the sixth, to congratulat his election, and to demand Francis the
first, and the Emperor Charles the fifth. In June, in the year of our Lord
1522, began that memorable siege of the town of Rhodes, before which there was
an army of two hundred thousand Turks, the which was afterward increased to
300000: They defended themselves most valiantly, and there were brave exploits
of war done, especially by the great Master, who was continually armed: The
enemy was repulsed in many assaults, in one of which there were twenty
thousand Turks slain upon the place, and Solomon was resolved to raise the
siege, but there were trayt^rs which stayed him, and those were punished; yet
in the end, the great Master having no succors, was forced to yield the town
by composition, the four and twentieth of December, in Solomon would needs see
the great Master, whom when he saw, tears fell from his eyes for compassion.
Upon the first of January, in the year of our Redemption 1523, the great
Master parted from Rhodes with fifty sail, and bent his course toward
Candie, after that the Island of Rhodes had been in the power of the knights
of the Hospital two hundred and thirteen years. After the loss of Rhodes,
the great Master and his knights had no certain abode, until that the Island
of Malta was given them by the Emperor Charles the fifth: for they retired
first into Candie, from thence they came into Sicile and Italy, whereas the
Pope did furnish them with the town of Viterbe, in which they held a general
Chapter: Afterward, they stayed some time at Cornette, and then Philibert
Emanuel son to Charles duke of Sauoy, and so returned to Nice, from whence he
parted with the army of the religion, and all the Convent, to go to Malta,
where he arrived the six and twentieth of October, in the year of Christ 1530,
and there he built a palace in the castle of S. Ange for him and his
successors, where, having made a solemn entry, he caused another palace to
be built in the old city of Malta; and finally, having governed the religion
thirteen years, and seven months, being seventy years old, he died at
Malta, the one and twentieth of August, in the year 1534, and was buried in a
Chapel which he had caused to be built Ange, and there succeeded by election.

45. Pierrin of Pont, borne at Ast, of the nation of Italy. Before the taking
of Rhodes, he was governor of the Island of Lango, and after the loss
thereof, he parted with all the knights of his government, and came and joined
with the army of the religion in the Island of Candie. He was made Seneshall
to the great Master, and Baylife of Lango, and was sent in embassage to the
Lord of Lautrec: He was chosen Baylife of S. Eufemia in the Convent of Nice,
where remaining, he was chosen great Master, after the decease of his
predecessor, the which he much lamented, showing little joy of his election:
He embarked in the galleys of the religion, and came to Malta the tenth of
November, the same year 1534. In his time, the Emperor Charles the fifth went
in person to Tunes of Villiers.

46. Dydier of S. Iaille of Tolon, prior of Tolousa, of the nation of Prouence,
was chosen great Master: being in his priorie at the time of his election, and
being advertised thereof, the good old man lifting up his hands to heaven,
said, God, God, if it be necessary for thy people, I will not refuse this
pain and toil; and soon after he began his journey to go to Malta being very
old, and coming to Montpelier, he sell exceeding sick, whereof he died the
six and twentieth of September 1536, and was buried with great honor in the
Church of the Commaunderie of S. Gilles without the gates of

47. John of Homedes, of the nation of Arragon, who was then in Spain, from
whence he parted, and came to Malta in January 1538, where he was received
with great joy; but he was discontented, for that they had not sent the
galleys, nor the carracke of the religion to conduct him, whereupon he caused
the great carracke to be disarmed and broken, for the which there was some
complaints made against him. He discoursed willingly of the siege of Rhodes, to
let the world know that he had lost an eye there. He made a park for beasts,
and a goodly garden in the Island of of S. Michaell, which ministered occasion
to murmr against him, saying that he was forgetful of the government of the
Ange. In his time the town of Tripoli in Batbarie, was taken by the Turks
from them of the religion, whereat he was much amassed. In the year 1552, Leo
Strozzi prior of Cap^ua made an enterprise upon the Island of Zoara, the which
succeeded ill, for there were many knights slain of all nations, especially,
French, Auuergnacs, and Prouencals, whereof the great Master being advertised,
he was much grieved, saying, that it was the greatest loss that came to the
religion since the taking of Rhodes. He caused the forts of S. Elm, and S.
Michaell to be built, and being eighty years old, he died in the year 1558,
having governed sixteen years, ten months, and fifteen days, and was
interred in the

48. Claude de la Sangle was chosen great Master, at whose election there
assisted about four hundred knights and religious men which were then in
Malta: he was of the nation of France, and Ambassador at Rome for the
religion, where he received news of his election, whereof he advertised the
Pope, and yielded him personal obedience: soon after, diverse knights were
sent expressly unto him, to accompany him to Malta, where he arrived in
January 1554. He governed the order very wisely by the advice of five worthy
knights his household officers, the which were his Seneschall, Steward, Esquire,
Receiuor, and Secretary; so as the Estate of the order was very happy during
his government, Henry the second, the French king, and the Emperor Charles the
fifth, who were in arms: he was very religious, and governed the revenues of
the order frugally, leaving a great treasure, being sixty and three years
old, he died of a Catharre in the year 1557, having been great Master three
years, eleven months, and seven days, to whom succeeded

49. John of Valette called Parisot of the nation of Prouence. This election
was most pleasing to all the order of S. John, for that he was generally
beloved of all the nations, and desired as most worthy of that great charge and
dignity. In less than two years, he was general of the galleys, bailife of
Lango, great commander, prior of S. Gilles, and lieutenant to the great
Master, and in the end came to the great Maistership. He so loved Elm,
knowing that all the other forts were not able to withstand the battery of a
powerful enemy, but this desseigne Ange, he came to dwell in the bourough of
Malta, the which he defended most valiantly against the siege of the Emperor
Sultan Soliman, where he was grievously wounded in the leg, in the year 1565;
but the siege being raised to the shame and confusion of the Turks, he
fortified the Island of Malta, began to build the new city, which was called
by his surname Valette, whereof the first stone was solemnly laid by him upon
the eight and twentieth of March 1566, and by his care they continued still the
building, yea upon festival days, for the which Pope Pius the fifth gave a
dispensation to the workmen, being to the number of eight thousand;

50. After the obsequies of the great Master Valette, they proceeded to the
election of a successor, which was Peter de Monte, of the nation of Italy,
being then prior of Capo^a. Presently after his promotion, he caused the body
of his predecessor to be brought Ange at Rome, he was admiral, then general
of the galleis, and ambassador for the order to Pope Pius the fourth, and Pope
Pius the fifth: coming from Rome to Malta, he was soon after chosen great
Master, where he caused the new city to be finished, resolving to transfer
the convent thither; for this good old man thought to win as much glory in
causing Pius the fifth, to that end, and beseeching him to suffer him to retire
to mount Cassin there to end his days, the which he could not obtain, but
soon after he died at Malta, in the year one thousand five hundred seventy

51. John l' Euesque of Cassiere, of the nation of Auuergne, who before his
election had showed his valor in many goodly charges; for at the enterprise of
Zoara, he was ensign bearer to the religion, whose standard he defended
valiantly, and carried it back to Malta, having cast himself therewith into
the sea, and recovering one of the galleys of the religion, after that he had
fought long against the Infidells. He was afterward chosen captain general
of the horse, commissarie of the fortifications, and marshall of the order, and
in the end he came to the sovereign degree of great master, where he lived
very religiously, there passing no day but he did assist at divine service, and
fed thirteen poor folks with his own hands: he caused the church dedicated
to S. John Baptist, in Ange, the sixth of Iulie 1581, the which he endured very
patiently and virtuously, and complaining to Pope Gregory the thirteenth, and
to Christian kings and princes, the Pope sent Gasper Visconte, Auditor of the
Rota, and afterward Archbishop of Milan, to Malta, to govern the religion in
the absence of the great Master, whom he sent for to Rome; but the knights had
chosen Mathurin of Escut, called Romegus, a Frenchman, to be lieutenant to the
great Master, who excused himself, for that he had accepted this charge by
force, and against his will. Visconte being come to Malta, the great master
embarked in the galleys of the religion, being accompanied by four of the
great Cross, and two hundred knights, and Lewis, where his obsequies were
made, and his funeral oration pronounced by Anthony Muret; his heart was
interred there, and his body carried to Malta, and buried in the new sepulcher
which he had made for the great masters. After his death, the Pope declared
the suspension of the said great master to be void and unjust, and ordained,
that the decree should be enrolled in the Registers

52. Hugh of Loubeux, Verdale of the nation of Prouence, was chosen great
Master, in the year of our Salvation 1582, who had joined learning to arms
from his youth: He was very young when he was made a knight, and was at the
enterprise of Zoara, where, having fought valiantly, he escaped, and afterward
past many honorable charges. He was deputed Ambassador to Pope Gregory the
thirteenth, whereof he discharged himself very worthily, and was so pleasing
unto the knights, as they jointly chose him great Master, having news of the
decease of Cassiera. He soon pacified the divisions which were among the
knights, and governed the order with much wisdom. Pope Sixtus the fifth made
him a Cardinal Deacon, in the year of our Lord God 1587, and returning James
Bosius, and freed it of debt, which amounted to above two hundred thousand
crowns; yet he was accused to Pope Clement the eighth, to have governed the
treasure ill: whereupon, he sent his nephew to Rome to purge himself of this
imputation, but the matter being undecided, the great master and Cardinal
Verdale died at Malta upon the Ascension day, in the year of our Redemption
1595, being sixty four years old, and having governed thirteen years,
three months, and one and twenty days, leaving in the public treasure a
great mass of money: He was buried in the Cathedral Church of S. John, with
great honor and funeral pomp.

Martin Garzes, of the nation of Aragon, was chosen to succeed him: He was a
knight of great bounty, and generally beloved and respected, who although he
had passed the age of sixty years, yet was he of a strong and vigorous
complexion. He soon pacified the disorder of the knights which had banded
against his predecessor: He abolished the imposts which had been imposed, and
forbad all the officers of the religion to give any new form to their
gouernements, and that which was most pleasing unto the knights, he did
expressly prohibit any knight, yea the great master himself, to have any
particular galley or vessel at Sea to make any enterprise to his own profit:
and in the end, having governed the religion five years, and nine months, he
died at Malta, in the year of our Lord God 1601, and was buried in the
sepulcher ordained for the

54. After the decease of the great Master, the knights assembled to choose a
new, and on the tenth of February, in the year of our Redemption 1601. Aloph
of Vignacourt, of the nation of France, was installed in this sovereign
dignity: He came to Malta, in the year of our Salvation 1566, with many other
French gentlemen, upon a bruit that the Island should soon be besieged by the
Turks army, where he took the habit

Of the beginning of Military Orders.
THE BEGINNING OF
Having discoursed in the former treaty of the religious order of the knights
of Malta, it is now fit to speak something of the orders of knighthood, as
well Regular as Secular; who like unto other

He then, to whom all power was given both in heaven and earth, meaning to have
the effects of his triumphant victories seen, as well of spiritual as
corporal things, presently Constantin the Great, Valentinian the Theodosy,
with many other Emperors, who began to carry the Cross in their Blazons and
Armories, yet all of diverse colors, some white, some green, some red, and in
a manner of the same form that it appeared to Constantin the Great. And for
that there are few realms or commonwealths, but had some order of knighthood,
it Constantin the Great, the order of the knights of the holy sepulcher of our
Savior began: for S. Hellen his mother going to Jerusalem to find out the
holy Cross, and Sepulcher, and Augustine. But at that time the guard of the
holy Sepuchre was committed to certain gentlemen of her train, who were the
first knights of this order, which was continued in that place; so as, even
when the Sarazins and Turks had seized upon all the East, and particularly of
Palestina, tyrannising the Christians in Jerusalem, against whom they used all
sorts of cruelty: these were tolerated, paying a yearly tribute; yet feeling
of the common miseries of the faithful, these Barbarians crossing them all
they could. Their chief charge was to guard the holy Sepulcher, James Bishop
of Jerusalem, who suffered death for the faith, in the year 63: and it seems
that in consideration thereof, the knights of this order are under the
obedience of the patriarch of that city.

The order of the knights of S. Maurice, and S. Lazare among the Sauoyards.
Lazare began in the time of the great S. Basil, by the report of Gregory of
Nazianzene, which S. Basil built an hospital under the title of S. Lazare,
which afterward gave name unto this order: whereof so many lazar houses
dispersed into all parts of Christendom serve to bear witness. But this
first institution having been as it were smothered in the cradle by the
incursions of Barbarians and other injuries of those former times, it seemed to
revive and spring up again in that happy age, whenas Christian princes united
into one holy league, took from the Sarazins the city of Jerusalem, and
other places of the holy Land. The knights of this order receiving charitably
into their hospitalls the faithful which did run from all parts of Europe to
so glorious a conquest, yea furnishing them toward the charge of this happy
Alexander the fourth, Nicholas the fifth, Clement the fourth, John the two and
twentieth, and Gregor^e the tenth.

They make profession of the rule of S. Augustine, and bear for the blazons of
their order a green Cross, which Emanuell Philibert duke of Sauoy being
confirmed their great Master by Gregory the thirteenth, and ioining this
order with that of Saint Maurice, he environed it about with a white border, in
the midst of the which, that of S. Maurice was enclosed.

As for the order of S. Maurice, the ancient Aunalists of Sauoy say, that this
was the beginning: Amedee duke of Sauoy (who, after his promotion to be Pope,
took upon Felix the fifth) having abandoned the world, he confined himself to
Ripalle near to the lake Leman, being accompanied by ten knights of noble
families, where he embraced a Hermites life in a monastery built by his
ancestors in honor of S. Maurice, being attired in a long roabe of an ashie
color, having a girdle imbroithered with gold, with a cloak upon it of the
color of his roabe; upon the which was sewed a cross imbroithered with gold.
Francis Modius in his Pandectes, affirms that these Hermites, whom he calls
knights of S. Maurice, assisted in this habit at the consecration of Felix the
fifth, their founder, in the year 1440, showing thereby what their religion had
been, and what ordinary apparel this new bishop had worn in former times.


AVthors have written nothing certain touching the institution of these two
orders; yet they do attribute them to the house of Montmorencie, both for that
they of this house carry a dog upon their crest, as also for that Philip
Morcus in his tables of the armories Bouchard of Montmorency came to the court
to Philip the first, king of France, being followed by many other knights,
every one of which did wear a collar full of stags heads, whereat did hang the
image of a dog, to signify the fidelity and sincere affection which they had,
and would always carry to the service, protection, and defense of the
Christian commonweal, and especially of France, and also to note thereby their
ancient nobility, the dog having been the Symbol with all nations, as
Lipsius has observed in his four and fortieth Epist. of the first Centurie.

As for the order of the knights of the Cock, all that can be said is, that
they which have written the genealogy of that famous house report, that one
Peter of Montmorency Mars his bird: it has been sometimes taken for an
Hieroglyfike of victory and vigilance; these knights inferring thereby that
they were warlike, vigilent, and victorious.

The order of the knights of the Genette in France.
HE who made the use of rings most common in France, was Charles Martell that
great and valiant prince, who in his time raised the languishing scepter of our
kings, making both Rebels and Infidells to feel his redoubted valor. As this
prince was naturally du Haillan writes, for that her name being Ieanne, he
commonly called her Iannette, commanding they should all carry a figure of a
Genette or Wesell graven upon their arms: but du Bellay is of another opinion,
and holds that this invincible prince having defeated the Sarazins in that
memorable battle, near to the city of Tours, in the year 738, to eternize
the memory, and to let future ages know the valor and courage of the French
nobility, by whom he was particularly assisted, instituted this order, and
gave it the surname of Genette, for that he had ruined that nation which did
inhabit that part of Spain, which was so called, by reason of the multitude
of such like beasts, the which is a kind of wesell, or rather fox, having the
skin pied, Lewis.

The order of the knights of the Lilly in the realm of Navarre.
DVring the reign of Garcias the sixth, king of Navarre, surnamed Navarre, a
place memorable for the birth, breeding, ordinary abode, and burial of this
prince. The ancient Historians of Spain write, that the image of our Lady
which is in the Church of the royal monastery of that town was miraculously
found, and that in honor thereof, this good king, and Tiennette his wife, issued
from the houses of Foix and Candelle built Bennet; but that Garcias alone
instituted the order of the knights of the Lilly, carrying for their Blazon a
pot of lillies, upon the which was painted the image of our Lady, ordaining
that the roabs of these knights should be very rich and stately. The infants of
the royal blood entered into this order, with many great noblemen, both French,
Nauarrois, and strangers.

The knights of this order are bound by the ordinance of Garcias their first
founder, to maintain and defend the faith against all the enemies thereof, and
to increase it with all their power, and they must repeat daily certain
prayers, with a certain number of Pater nosters, and Aue Mary's. Ferdinand of
Arragon, who was called the Infant of Antiquera,

The order of the Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, called of Malta.
THe beginning and first institution of this order is attributed to diverse, but
chiefly and more likely to one Gerrard, who, before the time of Godfrey of
Boulloin, being come to visit the holy places of Jerusalem, moved with an
extraordinary devotion, and assisted by some other gentlemen who had the like
dessigne, they began to build the Hospital of S. John of Jerusalem, and so
gave beginning to this order of knights, who were called by the name of their
first abode Hospitaliers. Pope Gelacius the second did Henorius the second. The
duty of their profession was, to receive with all charity such as came from
any part of the world to visit the holy places, to assist them upon the way,
and to secure them against the Arabians and all other Infidells, against the
which, with the assistance and succor of Christian princes, they have raised
whole armies, and incountered them happily. They conquered from them the Island
and town of Rhodes, the which they held above two hundred years, during the
which, they were called knights of Rhodes; but in the end, Solomon the second,
Emperor of the Turks, dispossessed them. Since, the Emperor Charles the
Solomon the second, and the other under Selymus the second, both Monarchs of
the Turks, and have forced their enemies to rise with much loss and
dishonor. They are at this day called knights of Malta, of the name of the
Island No man may come to this degree unless he be of a noble extraction.
Their first great master was Raymond de Podio, who afterward composed and
published the constitutions by the which the knights are now governed. They
observe the rule of S. Augustine, and say certain numbers of Pater Nosters in
stead of the Canonical hours, and they promise faith, obedience, and
chastity. They carry arms in the honor of God, and of S. John Baptist (whom
they hold for their patron) for

The order of Knights called Templers.
THe expedition of the holy war, having been as happily performed, as it
was religiously undertaken under the victorious conduct of Godfrey of Bouillon,
the order of the knights of the Temple, or Templers (whose institution is
referred to the time of Galacius the second) was erected by the princes of
France, to preserve that which they had conquered in the Holy Land, from the
Sarazins. The two first Authors of this institution were Hugon of Payennes, and
Godfrey of S. Aumard, knights. And for that king Baldwin Grandmont, who did
then govern the Church of Jerusalem, assigned them certain lands and
revenues for their entertainment. They were bound by the Patriarch and the
Bishops, that for the remission of their sins, they must keep the ways free
from thieves, for the safety of Pilgrims, whom they were to guard. After this
first institution, they continued nine years in a secular habit, the which the
people gave them of cha^i^ie and alms. But afterward, in a Council held at
Troyes in Champagne, there was a rule given them, which some hold was set down
by S. Bernard, without any Cross, by the Honorius, and of Stephen Patriarch of
Jerusalem. They continued some years in this habit, after which they began to
multiply, as they grew rich. In the time of Pope Eugenius the third, and by
his authority, they began to wear a red Cross on their cloakes, to be known
from others, and to show that they have consecrated their blood for the
protection of the Holy Land, and other places of Christendom against
infidel^^. This Cross had eight points, like unto that of the knights of S.
John; but Ierosme Romain, Clement the fifth to abolish this order of Templers
for the foul crimes, and great offenses which they said they had committed:
Their possessions were distributed to diverse orders of knights, as to them of
Rhodes, of S. James, of Calatraua, and Alcantara in Spain.

The order of the Teuton Knights, of the Hospital of S. Marie in Jerusalem,
ABout the same time, Frederick the second, at the instance of Pope Gregory the
seventh, having conducted an army into Syria, to advance the progress of the
holy war, he was the means to institute this order, and to install it in
the Hospital and Church of S. Marie in Jerusalem; the which was confirmed by
Pope Celestin the third, under the rule of S. Augustine. These, with the Knights
of the Temple, and S. John, aspired to one end and intent, being as it were
associated in one profession, differing in nothing but their black Cross,
which they wear upon their cloakes, being white. Henry Walpot was their first
master: Afterward, they added the Rosarie, or our Ladies Psalter, to
Frederick transported them into Germany, and placed them in the Province of
Prussia, being at that time enemy to our religion, to the end they might
conquer it, and make it subject to Christianisme, the which was done by the
authority of Gregory the ninth. In the year of our Salvation 1279, this
province having been subdued, they were called Teutoniks and Prussians. This
conquest was made under the conduct of Herman Saltza, who first planted the
ensign of the Cross in this province, the which purchased them the love and
favor of all Christian princes. Afterward, they had great Maximilian of
Austria is now their great master, who carries the arms of Austria, quartered
with them of the order. And although that Prussia be now subject to the king of
Poland, yet they choose a great master, who with his knights enioyes the
revenues which they have in Germany.

The order of the knights of S. John of Accon, and of S. Thomas.
IN imitation of the aforesaid orders, they have instituted many others,
amongst the Thomas, of whose beginning and institution although we find nothing
certain, yet we find that in the beginning they employed themselves to assist
them charitably with all needful things that came to visit the holy places:
but in time they added arms in imitation of the knights of S. John: for which
cause they have been inserted among military orders. Ierosme Romain says,
That they flourished in Spain during the reign of Alphonso, surnamed the
Wise, and that this King bequeathed unto him all his moueables, with a certain
sum of money. But Tostat upon Joshua says, That there is scarce any memory
left of them. As for the order of S. Thomas, which marched under the rule of S.
Augustine, it was united with the former by Pope Alexander the fourth.

Palestina has also given us some other orders, as that of S. Bleise, of S.
Marie, and that of the Repentance of holy Martyrs. Ierosme Romain affirms,
That he had seen brethren of this last order, who carried a red Cross, and
held the rule of S. Augustine.


ABout the year 1118, Alphonso king of Spain, Navarre, Arragon, Castile, and
Toledo by his wife Vrraca, desiring to root out the Moors of Sarragossa and
Arragon, and seeing how well the neighbor provinces had prevailed by the
military orders which they had made, he instituted the order of the knights of
S. Savior, in the town of Montreal, after the taking of Calatraua, promising
to favor, and be a support to those that should carry themselves most
valiantly in the war, which he pretended to make against the Infidels: which
succeeded so happily, as in the year 1120, he forced them to leave the

The order of the knights of Mont-Ioy in Syria, which in Castile they call of
Monfiac, and in Cattelonia of Mongoia.
WHenas the Christian princes conquered Syria, the order of the knights of
MontIoy was instituted, who took their name of a mountain so called near to
the city of Jerusalem, as the Bull of their approbation, given by Pope
Alexander the third, in the year 1180, and kept in the records of Calatraua,
does witness. This order received great favors and aduancements from
Christian princes, in regard of the assistance which

Ierosme Romain makes mention of another order of knights, which he calls of
Truxillo, having taken this name of the town where they began this order, the
which was inricht with many great gifts by king Alphonso, who in the year 1233,
gave unto them the towns of S. Croix, Zuforle, Cabime, Albate, and some others.

The order of knights called Port-Glaiue, or men at arms of Christ in Liuonia.
Innocent the third, taking for their blazon two swords of a red color, in
form of a S. Andrews cross, the which they did sew upon their cloakes. Their
first great master was called Vniuus, with whom they did great exploits, and
conquered many places in Russia. Afterward they joined themselves unto the
Teutons: but there falling great quarrels betwixt them, they separated
themselves again in consideration of a good sum of money which they paid,
about the year 1348. In the end, the profession of Luther coming into this
province, this order was quite extinct, having flourished three hundred fifty

The order of the knights of S. James in Spain.
THe Sepulcher of the Apostle S. James, having, as they write, been discovered
in Spain, and the same of the miracles which were done daily in that place,
spread over all, it caused great devotion not only in the people of Spain,
but in others of remote provinces. But for that the way by reason of the rocks
and barrenness of the soil was very difficult, and that the Moors did rob
and spoil the Pilgrims, the fear of danger kept many from undertaking the
voyage. This was the cause that made the regular Eloy, whose abode was near
unto Compostella, to build many lodgings upon the way coming from France, for
the lodging of Pilgrims, and to defend them from dangers: the principal and
most excellent was that which was built in the suburbs of the town of Leon,
under the name and title of Saint Mark, the which did purchase them such love
generally, as many kings and princes sent them great presents in requital of
that good deed. Soon after, in imitation of these Chanoins,

These gentlemen then by the care and diligence of Cardinal Iacinth, having
taken a resolution to join with the said Chanoins, they propounded to set
down a course of life, such as they desired to observe afterward, according
to the rule of S. Augustine, the which these Chanoins followed, and they sent
it to Pope Alexander the third, making Peter Fernandez of Pont Eucalate, chief
of this Embassage, who obtained a Bull from the Pope, dated the fifth of Iulie
1175, with a rule of life which they should observe. Their first great Master
was this Fernandes, and the house of S. Mark at Lion was given to John
Mariana, in the second book of his history of Spain: but others hold this
order to be more ancient, drawing the beginning from the time of king Alphonso
the Chaste: others refer it to the year 848, whenas D. Ramire king of
Castile, defeated sixty thousand Moors near unto Clauige, for that in this
battle the soldiers cried, God and S. James help us, whom they saw on
horseback, carrying a white banner charged with a red cross. But the Bull
whereon they ground, the which was given to the Nuns of the cloister of the
holy Ghost in Salamanca, is not autenticke, as the said Mariana has observed:
and Francis Rados Dandrada, who has written the Chronicle of the three orders
of S. James, Calatraua, and D. Fernand king of the said countries: and that
long before, there had been a company or brotherhood of knights of S. James
without any form of religion. He says moreover, that this order was brought
into Castile by king D. Alphonso the ninth, and approved in the year 1175; so
as the founders of this military order, are this king D. Fernand, and D. Peter
Fernandez the first great master. Onufrius Pauuinus in his Chronicle refers
this beginning to the year 1170. The statutes of this order are newly printed
by Plantin at Antuerpe.

The order of the knights of Calatraua in Spain.
CAlatraua having been taken from the Moors by king Sancio the third,
surnamed Raymond Pilterius Abbot of Pisorius, and the other Didacus Velesons,
both valiant, having left the profession of arms; yet for the service of God,
they resolved to enter into this place, and to defend it with all their power:
the which being imparted to king Sancio, he was well satisfied, as also John
Archbishop of Toledo, who furnished them with men and Mary, patroness of the
order of Cisteaux. The Abbot gave to his companions the habit and rule of
Cisteaux. The Blazon of this order was first a red cross, adn two shakles
under it, whereto in time were added 4 flowers de Luce by Benet 13. Alexander 3,
in the year 1164, approved this institution by his Bull, and their first great
master was called Garsia. When these knights are in any assembly they wear a
white roab, and Sancho king of Gastile, and Raymond Abbot of Filtere.


THe counties of of Tolousa and Lumbardie being in a manner all infected with
the opinion of the Albigois, S. Dominick preached against them, where he
profited in such sort, as they say he converted one hundred thousand persons,
choosing certain devout men to root out them by the material sword, that would
not believe his spiritual doctrine: To these he ordained a certain rule to
live by, more spiritual than the common Dominick.

The Albigois being rooted out, they which had dedicated themselves to that
end, continued this course of life unto their death; and their wives suruiuing
them, they lived continently, and the men did the like if they suruiued their
wives. Some time afterward, people, married or not married, embraced this
order, and in the end, they were called the brethren or sistren of the
repentance of S. Dominick. Innocent the sixth approved their rule, in the year
1360.

The order of the Knights of Alcantara, in the kingdom of Lion.
GOmesius Ferdinand, a knight, and great lord among them of Lion, under the
reign of Ferdinand king of that realm, and of Galicia, instituted this order
against the Moors; which in the beginning had the name of S. Julian of
Pirario, for that the first house they had, was in a bourough of that name. The
king declared himself protector of this order, by his letters patents, in the
year 1176; and Pope Alexander the third approved it; and, in the year 1183,
Pope Lucius the third exempted it from the jurisdiction of the Diocesains.
Their arms were a green Pear tree in a field Or, until that Alphonso the
eighth gave unto the knights of this order, Alcantara, a place situated upon
the banks of the river of Tagus, (remarkable for the artificial structure of
the bridge) by the incorporation which he made with them of the order of
Calatraua, to whom this Bennet the thirteenth, who called himself Pope in
Spain, to carry upon their breast, toward the left side, a green cross made
like a lilly. They live under the rule of S. Bennet, and promise in their
profession, obedience to their Superiors, conjugall chastity, and to live as
holy as they can all the days of their lives. Pope Adrian the sixth did
afterward, in favor of Charles the fifth, who had been his scholar, annex
James, Calatraua, and Alcantara, to the crown of Castile, and Lion forever.

The order of the knights of the glorious Virgin Marie in Italy.
IN the year 1233, Bartholomew of Viceney, of the order of the Preaching
Friars, was the Author of these knight, the which he instituted to purchase a
peace in the towns of Italy, and to root out all discord and division. Pope
Vrbain the fourth, in the year 1262, approved it. Their habit was a white robe,
and a russet cloak, and they carried for their device a purple Cross in a
field Argent, with certain stars over it. Their duty was to Sigonius and
others reports.

The order of the Knights of Montese, in the realm
THe knights of Montese were so called of the chief place of their abode,
having been instituted at the same time that the Templers were suppressed; so as
all the possessions which they held in the realm of Valencia, were given to
them of Montese, upon condition, to defend and keep the frontiers of Valencia
against the Moors. Their order was approved by Bennet the thirteenth, and
Martin the fifth. They ware a white habit, and upon it a plain red Cross.

The order of the Knights of Jesus Christ in Portugal.
DEny^, surnamed Perioca, king of Portugal, nephew to Alphonso the tenth, king
of Castile and Lion, instituted this order, commonly called of Portugal, or of
Christ. He ordained, That their Blazons should be a black robe, and a black
Cross cut upon one of white. Pope John the two and twentieth, in the year of
our Redemption 1321, prescribed them the rule of S. Bennet. Their duty was to
make war against the Moors which did inhabit Betica. By their virtue, the
Portugals empire has extended it self far into the East, into Afric,
Brasil, and other parts of the West.

The order of the Knights of la Banca, and la Scama in Spain, and of la Calza
at Venice.
IN the year of our Lord God 1332, Alphonso the eleventh, king of Castile,
before he came to the crown instituted the order of the Knights of the Band,
in the town of Victoria, so called, for that upon the day of their creation by
the king, as great Master, he hung about them a red Band four fingers broad,
baudricke wife, from the top of the right shoulder under the left arm. The
children of noble men, except the eldest, were admitted into this order, having
served at the least ten years in the war. It was sometimes much esteemed,
but in the end, to show the inconstancy and alteration of humane John the
second, king of Castile, was the Author, and it was much honored during his
reign, by the report of Ierosme Romain, who says, That he could never truly
understand what la Scama was, notwithstanding any search which he had made.

In imitation of the Knights of the Band, the Venetians instituted at the same
time them of la Calza, in a manner with the same laws. No man might be
received by the Duke, or Senate, unless he were of a noble extraction. This
order was renewed, in the year of our Salvation 1562, and was favored with
new privileges. Andrew Etten, excellent in an Annotomie and physic, and well
studied in all sciences, does not find Mark, or a winged Lion, with this
Motto, Pax tibi Marce, and this he speaks but by conjecture, grounding it, for
that the Duke and Senate of Venice, desiring to give some worthy recompense to
many great personages among them, which had bound the common weal by some
notable services, they made them Knights, and gave them this collar of Gold,
with this device.

The orders of the Knights Auesiens, commonly called of Auis, in Portugal.
THe Christians being masters of the town of Ebora, famous in Portugal for
the or^^^arie Alphonso finding that both for the situation and strength it was
fit to make war against the Moors, he made it the chief abode of the
Knights which in the realm of Castile are called of Calatraua, and in Portugal
of Auis, Ferdinand Monteyro, their first great master, in the honor of the
virgin Mary, patroness of the order of Cisteaux, to the end that by their
continual incursions upon the Barbarians, they should force them in the end to
leave the country.

The third great master, who was called Alphonso Auensis, having conquered the
castle of Auisin; he gave it to the company which he transported thither, to
the end they might be nearer to their enemies, and annoy them more, since which
time they have retained the name of this castle. This order was confirmed by
Pope Innocent the third, Roderigo Garzia the eight, great master of Calatraua,
having inricht these knights Auisins with many great revenues, they submitted
themselves to the laws and reformations of this order, under the government
whereof they continued unto the time of John their great master, who was base
son to Peter the eight, king of Portugal: for this king at the instance (as
it is credible) of his son, divided this order of the Auesiens from that of
Calatraua, ordaining that they should carry in their Blazons a green cross
upon a long stock, having taken away the Pear tree to distinguish them from
the knights of Alcantara; yet before they carried a red cross like the knights
of Alcantara, as may be seen in the ancient seal of the order, where, at the
foot of the cross (as Francis Radosius says) were two little birds. They
follow the rule of Cisteaux: Radosius confounds these two orders of Auesiens
and Calatraua; for that in tract of time they are made but one: whereas
contrariwise, Volateranus is deceived, who ioines them with the knights of
Alcantara, as Ierosme Romain, and Gonsalue Argotes of Melina in the first
Book, chap. thirty and two, of the nobility of Spain have observed.

The order of the knights of the round Table.
THey say, that Arthure king of England having chosen four and twenty of the
most warlicke gentlemen he could find, and best experienced in arms, he made
them Camden holds this institution to be of a latter time, and refers it to a
custom which they had to make tourneys, and to exercise themselves in arms;
for to the end the first or last places should give no occasion of quarrel to
great men which did assist, they used round tables, where they did sit
indifferently,

The Order of the knights of the Garter in England.
EDward the third, king of England, instituted this order of the gartar, in the
year 1350, to purge the supition which some had of the countess of Salisburie,
whom he loved honorably, having taken up a blew garter which fell from her in
dancing, and he added for his motto, Honey soit qui mal y peuse, for that the
gentlemen which were present began to laugh, saying, that he would make that
garter honor them that should wear it; the which happened by the institution
of this order of knights, to whom he gave the Edward the third gave unto his
knights for a perpetual memory of the victory which he had gotten at
Poictiers against the French king. They wear this band or garter under the
left knee, the which is fastened with a buckle, in sign of the love and concord
which should be in this society, whereon was graven his motto: upon their
cloakes they wear a S. Georges cross in a scutchion. The great collar of
their order which they use to wear upon George, whom he would have their
patron, in whose honor he had built a stately Church in the castle of Winsor.
Upon ordinary days these knights wear a blew ribon above their necks, with
the image of S. George hanging thereon. Others refer the (...) of this order
to Richard the first, and say, that Edward did but renew it; but this (...)
uncertain. The solemnities of this order are celebrated yearly upon S. George
(...), the king being head and president.

The order of the knights of the Bath in England.
WE have nothing certain of these knights, but that Henry the fourth, king of
England, upon the day of his coronation in the town of London, created six and
forty (...), knights having watched the night before and bathed themselves,
giving to (...) a green coat with long sleeves hanging down to the ground,
and a furred mantle the which was fastened upon their left shoulder with a
double cord of white silk.

In former times two of the nobility, who had not received knighthood, were
chosen to be admitted into this order with much ceremony. These knights were
made upon the

These new knights being thus made, they were accustomed in old time to cover
the kings table, and to dine there altogether being set of one side. The hour
of Euensong being come, they went unto the chapel, and there offered their
swords upon the altar, the Camden sets down particularly touching these
knights. The Blazon of this order, is three crowns Or, in a circle of gold,
with this device, Tria in vnum, hanging at a carnation ribon.


John of Valois, the French king, in the month of October, in the year of our
Lord God 1352, instituted an order of Knights, in remembrance of the Star
which conducted the Kings of the East to Bethelem, to worship the Savior of
the world newly borne, who were called the brethren of our Lady of S. Audoen,
for that that the place of their residence was so called, which was a league
from Paris, and was in former times called the palace of Cheley, and was given
them with all the dependances. In the beginning, they did not admit any into
this order but the greatest of the realm. Their Blazon was a Monstrant regibus
astra viam. But whenas many base and unworthy persons had crept into this
society upon false suggestions, it soon lost her beauty; so as Charles the
son of John, ordained, That his guards should wear the ensigns to make it
more contemptible. At this day, the archers of the watch of the city of Paris,
have a Star upon their cassockes.

The order of the Annonciado in Sauoy.
AMedee the sixth, Earl of Sauoy, having instituted this order, he made it
famous by the F.E.R.T. The image of the Virgin Marie, and the history of the
Annunciation hanging in the midst, of which this order took the name. As for
the four letters, they signified, Fortitudo eius Rhodum tenuit, the which was
spoken in honor of Amedee, who as the Annals of Sauoy say, took this town
from the Turks, and conquered it to Jesus Christ, or rather defended it
against their forces: so as after that time, the Knights of Rhodes took the
arms of Sauoy, the which were quartered with them of the dukes of Saxony, for
that the first princes of this duchy are descended from that house, the which
they added to the Cross Argent of their order, F.E.R.T. remained to Amedee,
and his successors, in remembrance of his valor. The ceremonies of this order
are reiterated yearly upon the day of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin
Marie, and those were made Knights whom the prince did choose. As for Count
Amedee, he was not content to institute this order, but he would be also
himself enrolled with fourteen of the chief noblemen of his countries, with
the which he made fifteen, in honor of the fifteen mysteries of the holy
Virgin.


PHilip, surnamed the Good, Duke of Bourgondie, for the love he bare to
nobility, in the month of January, in the year of our Lord God 1430,
erected this order upon the day of his marriage with Elizabeth, daughter to
John king of Portugal, to the glory Andrew the Apostle; and the more to stir
up their hearts to virtue, and to the advancement of the holy faith: He gave
to this order, the title of the Golden Fleece, making an allusion to Gedeons
fleece which was found in the air, which was full of dew on the one side, and
dry on the other, as we may see in the tapestries of his time, which are hung
up at the feast of S. Andrew, a day ded^cated to the solemnities of this order.
It is true, that some say these Knights had their beginning from the Thebain
Legion: but that is too obscure to ground any good foundation. Duke Philip
having erected this order, he declared himself great Master, and gave unto
these new Knights, a robe of scarlet, the which his son Charles the Hardy
changed Paradin, in his Symboles, interprets the Blazon after this manner, to
the iron, he gives this device, Ante ferit quam flamma miscet: And to the
fleece, Pretium non vile laboris. The first dignities of this institution, are
the Chancellor, the Treasurer, the King at arms, and Register, who judge
without appeal of all controversies that fall out among them, and of crimes,
if there happen any. Philip, in the beginning, made but five and twenty, but
three years after, he added six, so as they were one and thirty. Afterward,
Charles the Gregory the thirteenth, it was granted to Philip the second, king
of Spain, and confirmed since to Philip the third, by Pope Clement the eighth,
that they might create Knights out of Chapter when they lift. These Knights
must be of such houses as in Spain they do call Grandes.

Richard of Vuassebourg, in his Antiquities of Belgia, makes mention of the
ancient Knights of the Swan, instituted by one Suluius Brabon, of whom (as
some hold opinion) Brabant took the name; giving them this bird for an
Hieroglifike, of the love and concord he would have among them.

The order of the Knights of the Porcupine, in the house of Orleans.
CHarles, Duke of Orleans, in imitation of Philip Duke of Bourgondie, erected
the order of the Knights of the Porcupine, carrying upon their baudricks or
belts, the figure of this beast, with this Symbol, Cominus and Eminus, as
Paulus Iouius says. No man was enrolled into this company, unless he were of
a very noble extraction, and of great perfection in arms. Afterward, Lewis
the twelfth, the French king, duke of Orleans, and Earl of Bloys, as his
heir, took the device of a Porcupine crowned, with this inscription, Vitus
Auos Troiae: He also caused that figure to be graven upon his coin, the which,
with that of the Wolf, were the ancient arms of the Earls of Bloys. Charles

The order of the Knights of the Thistle, of the Virgin Marie, in the house of
Bourbon.
LEwis the second, Duke of Bourbon, surnamed the Good, son to Peter the
first, who John lost against the enemies. Having served king Charles the fifth,
and Charles the fixed, against that nation, and being returned from Afric,
whither he had conducted an army against the Infidells, whenas by the factions
of the houses of Orleans and Bourgondie, the realm seemed to be in a manner
Charles duke of Orleans, Philip Earl of Eureux, and John Earl of Angolesme,
pupils to Lewis duke of Orleans his nephew, against the Bourgondian, who had
miserably slain him. The color of this order was of gold, wouen with flowers
de Luces, with the which were interlaced the leaves of thistles by equal
distances, at which did hang a cross, and about it this devise, Esperance.
This prince honored those gentlemen with this order, which had done some
notable service to the house of Bourbon, and he declared himself great
master. In sign whereof, he added the collar unto his arms, which was all
pouldered with flower de Luces in a field Argent, and Gules on a scutchion
Azure, with this inscription Esperence. As for this Emblem composed of lillies
and thistles, duke Lewis would thereby signify his constancy against all
crosses that might happen, and that he did hope for better fortune: the thistle
by his pricking leaves, signifying affliction; and the lilly whose leaves are
always green, hope, whereof it has been ever the Hierogliphicke among the
ancients.

The order of the knights of S. Andrew, of the Thistle, and of the Rue, in the
realm of Scotland.
HVngus king of Scotland, being ready to give battle to Athelstan king of
the English, there appeared unto him in the firmament a bright shining cross,
in form like unto that whereon S. Andrew died a Martyr for the faith of
Christ: the which he having taken for a good sign, he charged his enemy,
vanquished him, and cut in a manner all his army in pieces. In memory of
which victory, the king would that this cross should be graven upon his
arms, and painted in the ensigns which they used in their armies, the which
the kings of Scotland observe to this day. Hence the order of the knights of S.
Andrew (famous in that realm) took his beginning, being commonly called the
knights of the Thistle. The kings arms and coin are environed with the collar
of this order, being Nemo me impune lacessit: for that no man can handle a
thistle, but he shall prick himself. This collar is made of gold with many
knots, in the which are grafted the flowers of thistles, whereat does hang the
image of S. Andrew holding before him the cross of his Martyrdom. The arms
environed with the collar, are a Lion Gules, the ancient and first Blazon of
king Fergus, in a mantle Azure, fringed at the borders with two lines red, and
two ranks of lillies one opposite to another upon a fillet of gold, which
Charlemaigne joined to those arms, in testimony of the alliance which he had
treated with king Achaius, and the Scottish men, as they bear it at this day,
for that if the Lion be the arms of that realm, the lilly is of France,
whereof this Emperor was king, who not content therewith, the better to
confirm the league and friendship Charles the seventh, the French king, who
renewed the ancient league with them of Scotland; and that in recompense of the
succors which they had given him in his most desperate affairs, he increased
their arms with those of France: but the first opinion is more certain.

Among the Scottish men, has also flourished the order of the knights of the
Rue: their mark was a collar made of two branches of rue or of thistle,
whereon did hang Andrew with his cross: but there is nothing found certain of
their beginning.

The order of the knights of S. Marie, or of the Elephant.
IN Denmark has flourished the order, which they say had been instituted by
the father of Christiern, king of that realm, their blazon is a collar
pouldred with elephants, having their towers and castles upon their backs,
with spurs interlaced, having hanging at it, the image of the Virgin Marie,
environed with Sun beams, and to it is joined a little medal of gold,
whereon are graven three nails, representing those wherewith our Savior was
fastened to the cross. The arms of these kings which are

The kings of Denmark have given the title of Elephant to this knighthood, and
have adorned their arms, for that these beasts seem to approach nearest unto
the nature of man, and to shine in a manner in all virtues, as military force,
providence, religion, piety, and royal clemency; to the end that they which
should be honored with this order, should labor as much to exceed those
beasts in the perfection of these virtues, as the nature of man is more
excellent than theirs.

The order of the knights of Cypres.
THe house of Lusignan, which has furnished Christendom with so many kings
and princes, especially Jerusalem, Armenia, and Cypres, gave beginning to this
order, but the certain time is not known. The ensigns was a collar made of a
cord of gold interlaced with S, in great characters, and beneath did hang a
sword, having the blade silver, and the handle gold, with this devise about it,
Pour loyaute maintenir, to teach them that were of this order, that they should
never loose any occasion to show themselves generouse and valiant, carrying the
sword to that end, and that they should maintain concord and friendship among
themselves for the defense of their country, the letter S signifying silence,
among the ancient Romans. The arms of the house of Lusignan

The order of the knights of the Dove, and of the Reason in Castile.
John the first, king of Castile, to encourage his courtiers and gentlemen to
undertake something worthy of the rank which they held, invented this order
in the year 1390, their Blazon was the figure of a Dove, environed with Sun
beams, the which did hang upon a collar of gold, which collar (being at
Segobia, whenas they did celebrate James) he distributed many of them in the
Cathedral Church, taking them away from the Altar with great solemnity, and
giving them unto those which he would make of that order, with a book of the
constitutions which he desired should be observed.

This king instituted another order which he called of the Reason, less noble
than the first, to the which he admitted gentlemen of meaner quality, but yet
such as carried themselves valiantly in military exercises.

The order of the Dragon among the Germans and Hongarians, of the Tusin in
Bohemia, and of the Discipline in
THe Emperor Sygismond did show so great zeal to the advancement of Christian
religion, as he not only gave many battles to the Turks, and won great
victories;

Ierosme Romain faith, That in the time of king John, and of the Emperors
Sigismond and Albert, there were three famous orders in Germany, and that one
called Moses Didaco, Albert, as King of Hungary, that of the Tusin, as King
of Bohemia, and the collar of the order of the Disciplines, enricht with a
white Eagle (which are the arms of the Kings of Poland, in a field Gules) as
Duke of Austria. In the History of Hungary, mention is made of those
Hungarian Knights, whose badge was a green Cross set upon a cloak of
scarlet. Ierosme Megyserus, Historiographer to the Archduke of Austria, in the
treaty which he has made of the three kinds of Knights, says, That this
order was instituted two hundred years since in Hungary, to oppose them
against the Turks, who sought to invade it.


THe care which the Kings and Princes of the Goths had in former times to
eternize the honor and glory which they had gotten by arms, is observed in
their arms, ensigns, blazons, and targets, which they have left graven in
many places of South Flanders, in the stately Port of Angoa, a town, whereas
the kings of Suethland held their consultations both of peace, and war. There
are also to be seen upon rocks graven by Alphabeticall order, the ancient
arms of the worthiest men which have lived among them. These Kings had in old
time for their device, two Virgins crowned, attired in cloth of gold, and
embracing one another mutually in a green forest, as glorying at the fair
nymphs and goddesses which frequented that province: yet after some ages, the

The order of the Knights of the Sword and Baudricke
THere was another order in Suethland, called Porte-Espees, or Carrie-swords,
for that their collar was made of swords of gold, joining together with a belt
or baudricke, the which did seem to shocke one against another with their
bloody points, as a Symbol of justice and arms, the two pillars of an
Estate. Their blazon was a shield of gold, which had a reddish Bosse, whereon
was painted a yellow Lion rampant, and about it three royal Crowns, with as
many red Bells: upon this shield was a Helmet, with a murall Crown Argent,
covered with a green feather, out of the which came two ensigns Argent,
whereon were painted two red Cocks: but since this country changed

The order of the Knights of the Ear of Corn in Britanie.
FRancis, first of that name, Duke of Britanie, son to John the fifth, and
grandchild to John the fourth, surnamed the Conqueror, who first transported
this Duchy to the house of Montfort, descended from that great Euerard of
Montmorency; in the year 1450, instituted the order of the Ear of Corn, as
well to honor the memory of his grandfather as to grace the Nobility. He
gave to them which he admitted a collar of gold made of Ears of Corn, and
tied together with love knots, being in a manner like to Co^es Crown. At this
collar did hang by two little chains, an Ermine upon a green John the
Conqueror, Amaire: a symbol of a pure and generous soul. This beast, as
Pliny writes, does so delight in cleanness, as if he be pursued by huntsmen,
seeking to ^aue himself in his clapper, if he finds the entry foul and
beastly, he had rather be taken, than to enter and defile himsele. Anne,
daughter to Francis the second, king of Britanie, and to Marguerite of Foix,
daughter to Gast^n of Foix, and to Elli^or Queen of Navarre, took in a manner
the like device, which was, Plustost mourir, as you may see in the castle of
Bloise. This order of the knights of the Ear ended whenas the duchy of
Britanie was united to the crown of France by the marriage of the said Anne to
king Charles the eighth, and after his decease, to Lewis the twelfth, French
kings.

The order of the Knights of the Cressant, or half Moon, among the
REne, Duke of Apiou, and King of Sicile, Naples, and Jerusalem, instituted
this order, in the Cathedral Church of S. M^urice at Angers, and gave to them
he admitted, a collar of gold, at the which did hang a Cressant with this
device, Los en croissant. No man was admitted into thi^ order, if he had not
first given some notable proof of his valor. It was well known at how many
combats he had assisted, by certain little sticks which were bound together
with a ring, and did hang about his neck by a riband.

The first that were honored with this order, were John eldest brother to the
said king, Estagi Bertrand Lord of ^^^a^ois, and others, whose names are
recorded in the said Church of S. Maurice at An^^^. These knights were bound to
participat equally one with another fortune, were it good or bad, and
charitably to aid and assist in all necessities, and not to wrong one another
by arms. The family of Anjou being extinct by the death of this king, this
order ended.

The order of the Knights of the Ship, or of the Cockle.
THe French were in old time very expert in arms, as Pacatus, Apollinaris,
and S. Rene report, giving themselves with such affection to navigations, as
they resolved that Lewis caused a certain kind of money to be coined with a
sh^^ and cockle shells. And there was a certain order in France, whose knights
carried for their device two ships ^ables in a shield Or, made of cockle
shells, in the which were two Cressants Gules, in remembrance of so many
victories which the kings of France. had gotten of the Barbarians of the East,
and of their ensigns which they had taken from them, marked with the figure of
this ^ight Stat, which is the Turks ensign, as the Eagle Bizantium, whose
blazon it was, as L^psius faith he had observed in Busbec, and in certain
ancient Medalls, upon the (...) whereof there was a half Moon, with this
inscription; Bizantium.


LEwis the eleventh, transported from the Romans to the French, faith Gaguin,
the custom which great men had to wear a collar of gold; whenas upon the
first of August, in the year 1469, he instituted the order of S. Michael at
Amboyse, the which he augmented with new constitutions at Plessis near Tours,
giving for devise to those which should be admitted to this knighthood, a
collar of gold wouen with cockle shells, fastened one unto another like unto
those which the Roman Senators did use to wear Immensitremor Oceani, being
moved thereunto by the example of his father Charles the seventh, who had in
his ensigns the image of this Archangell, whenas he made his entry into
Rouen, for that as they say by a special miracle he had been seen upon the
bridge at Orleans, defending that town against the English at an assault which
they gave. In the beginning, the number of those knights were but thirty of
the noblest and most virtuous of the whole realm, whereof the king would be
great Master. They that were admitted to this company, were bound by special
promise^ to obey the king, and might not be degraded but for heresy or
treason, or when they had left their ranks in battle, and fled for fear.
Whenas any of them died, they were to choose another in his place, the which was
not done by voices and suffrages, Michael, and a Register, who inrolls the
names and brave exploits of the knights. The French kings did also honor
foreign princes with this order, in testimony of their love, who if they
would declare themselves their enemies, sent back their order to be free from
their oath.


ROdulphus of Habfpurg, who was the first of the house of Austria which came
unto the Empire, instituted the order of S. George to defend Hongarie, Stiria,
and Carynthia against the invasions of the Turks, who seemed to threaten them
with ruin, giving to the great Master and General thereof the town of
Carynthia, of a goodly situation, there to make his ordinary abode, and he
honored him with the dignity of prince. He would also that the bishop of the
city, being come from Austria, should depend of him touching the temporaltie,
with his Chanoins, who for that cause were transported into the fort, and they
did wear a red cross in the arms of their houses. And to Toparchs of
Cranichberg, newly slain with their families, that is to say, the lands of
Trautmansdorf, Scharfenech, and S. Petronilla.

Bernard of Luxembourg, in his book of military orders says, that the order
of S. George was instituted by Pope Alexander the sixth, and the Emperor
Maximillian, against the Turks, whose Blazon was a cross Or, with a crown in
a ring of gold.

The order of the Bourgondian Cross in the realm of Thunes.
CHarles the fifth, Emperor and king of Spain, having restored Muleasses king
of Thunes to his realm, from whence he had been expelled by that notable
Pirate Barbarousse, he entered in pomp like a conqueror into Thunes, wearing a
cloak whereon there was a Bourgondian cross, the which he had been
accustomed to wear in the war. As he was of a noble and generous courage, so
he desired to purchase the love of all men, wherefore to acknowledge the valor
of such as had assisted him in this conquest, and Mary Magdalens day, in the
year 1535; to which cross he added an iron which stroke fire out of a flint,
with this inscription, Barbaria.

The Order of the knights of S. Stephen in Tuscanie.
COsmo de Medicis, first duke of Florence, in the year 1561, instituted the
order of S. Stephen, Pope and Martyr, on the sixth of August, upon which day he
had won the battle of Marciano: and the same year Pope Pius the fourth
confirmed it, granting Bennet, upon condition that all that would be of this
order should make a vow of charity, conjugal chastity, and obedience, not
admitting any one unless he were noble, and borne in lawful marriage, a
Catholic, and without note of infamy. They wear a white chamlet roabe with
a red cross upon the left side, as well upon their cloakes, as their ordinary
garments, and they are bound to carry arms for the defense of the Christian
faith both by sea and land, redeem Christian prisoners, and help the poor,
and to say daily one hundred Pater nosters, and as many Auie Mary's for their
ordinary service, and upon certain solemn days, double the number: and
whenas any of the company dies, every one is bound to say one hundred Pater
nosters, and as many Auie Mary's for his

The order of the knights of the Holy Ghost in France.
HEnry, the third of that name, king of France and Poland, for a mark of
eternal piety, and to acknowledge the benefits which he had received from
God, upon the day of the sending down of the holy Ghost, having been that
day chosen king of Polonia, succeeded to the crown of France, by the death of
king Charles the ninth, his brother; Augustine. This order being instituted for
the rooting out of heresies, and for the increase of the Romish religion: he
would that at the ceremony, every knight should have a mantle of black
velvet pouldred and imbroidered with lil^^^ and flames of gold and silver, and
wear a collar of gold interlaced with lillies and flames, whereon does hang a
cross of Malta, having a dove in the midst of it. There is a particular
book written of this institution.

The order of the knights of the sacred blood of our Lord Jesus Christ at
Mantous.
VIncent of G^^zague the fourth duke of Mantoua, and second of Montserrat,
instituted this order in the year 1608, at the marriage of Francis his son
with Margueri^e of Souoy, for the defense and increase of Christian religion,
making to the number of twenty knights: which order has been ^onfirmed by
Pope Paul the fifth. And for that they of S. Andrews Church in Mantoua hold,
that they have a part of the sponge of our Savior, and three drops of his
blood, which they say, had been gathered up by S. Lungis a Centenier and
Martyr: he therefore erected his order upon that subject, with this
inscription, Nihilisto triste recepto. He caused the collar to be made of
little rods of Domine proba^ti me, teaching them of his order by this Cymbole,
that in their greatest adversities they should keep their faith, and live in
perpetual love and concord together.


IN the beginning of this treaty, mention has been made of the reunion of
the two orders of S. Maurice, and S. Lazare in Sauoy, but the Knights of S.
John had also obtained from Pope Innocent the eighth, that it should be united
unto their order, in regard of France: the which they held unto the time of
Amarus the Chaste: who being a knight of S. John, and master of the order of S.
Lazare, labored to have the lands which did belong Philibert of Nerestan,
endowed with as great piety and courage, as force and modesty, took his
predecessors course, although he were no Knight of S. John; and to this end he
went to Rome to Pope Paul the fist, where he obtained what he desired; and
moreover, that from that time the French Knights of S. Lazare, should call
themselves Knights of our Lady of Mont Carmel, and of S. Lazare, and for their
blazon they should wear about their necks a violet Cross, whereon should be
the image of our Lady, and another should be sewed upon their cloak, of the
same color and form.

Knights instituted by Popes.
Peter, of S. Paul, of S. George, of Pope Pius, of Lorette, of S. Anthony, of
Iulio, and of the Lilly. Of which knights some are secular men, and some of
the Clergy, all pentioners to the Pope, distinguished one from another by
their Crosses of diverse colors. The knights of Jesus Christ carry a red
Cross, in a manner like to that of the Knights of the same name in Portugal,
having a border about it of gold. They were instituted by Pope John the two and
twentieth, as Francis Tarafe affirms, and John Confettius, in his collection
of the privileges of begging Friars.

The knights of the Holy Ghost, called at Rome the brethren of the Hospital
of the John Azores says, That in Saxony there is also an order of the knights
of the Holy Ghost. Leo the tenth instituted the order of S. Peter against the
Turks, as Alphonso Ciaconius writes, in the History of Popes and Cardinals,
the which Pope Paul the third confirmed. They of S. George were made by
Alexander the fourth, and Pope Pius the fourth, in the year of our Lord God
1560, erected the which carry his name, whom he would have precede all other
orders made by E^^^^^ors and other Princes, yea the knights of Malta
themselves, for that they were of his household, and did eat at his Table.
Sixtus the fifth, in the year 1586, instituted them of Lorette. This is
briefly all that can be spoken of the orders of knighthood which have been of
any note in Christendom. As for their statutes and particular constitutions,

Of the beginning of all Religious Orders.
A DISCOVRSE OF ALL
Having discoursed at large of all the Monarchies and Kingdoms of the earth,
and of their gouernements and religion: I hold it not inconvenient to speak
something of all the Religious orders Enoch, the Patriarchs, and Prophets,
Christ, S. John Baptist, and the Apostles, the first Institutors and Founders
of an Heremiticall and Monasticke life. Monachall or Monkish.
Wherefore, leaving this question to the learned Divines, I will come to three
kinds of Monks, which he propounds to have been among the Jews, whereof the
first were called.

Pharisees, Pharisees, Monks among the Jews.
whom Alexandra, the mother of Hircanus, and Aristobulus, did much honor,
Phariseus signifies a Doctor or Expositor: yet some are of opinion they were
called so of Pharez, that is to say, Separation, for that they would be
distinguished in their habit from other (...) men, whose living and apparel
they held unclean, and their lives polluted with (...) ^hey would seem great
obseruers of the law, yet they held many errors in the chief points of divine
doctrine: for as they held one true God, so they believed there was but one
Person, and they accused Christ of blasphemy, for that he did affirm himself
to be the true son of God, and very God: They did believe that the Messiah
should only have a humane

^aduce^.
The second order of Jewish Monks were the Saduces, who had purchased unto
themselves a stately name from justice. As the Pharisees had charged men with
unreasonable ceremonies, so these sought to give them some liberty: They
denied the chief points of faith and religion, as the providence of God, the
immortality of the soul, and the resurrection of the body: They held that
the good had no retribution for their good works,

Essaei.
who attributed salvation to the good works of men, and not to the grace of
God. These men, whenas they could neither endure the too great licentiousness
of the Saduces, nor the hypocrisy and dissimulation of the Pharisees, went into
a certain desert of Palestina, not far from Jericho, whereas they lived a
Monasticke life, having private schools, in which, besides the law of God, they
taught liberal Arts, especially, that part of Philosophy which treats of
manners. They were enemies to all pleasures, and held continency for the
greatest virtue. They hated marriage, not for that they would have all mankind
perish, but believing that no woman kept her faith unto her husband. They
contemned riches, and lived Nestria and of Thebaide.

Religious Orders since Christ.
THe Popes of Rome challenging a succession from S. Peter, Priest^
and seeking to imitate the Hebrews, began to institute Vshers, Readers, and
Exercists, Acolites, Deacons, and Subdeacons, all which were commonly near to
those that were called Clerks; and these were chosen to be men full of
religion, integrity of life, faithfulness, and bounty, after the example of
the Churches of Jerusalem and Antioche, who were called Clerks, consecrating
them with the imposition of hands, and making some of them Priests, and Cletus
and Euaristes reduced them to a prefixed number, for Cletus made the number of
Roman Priests five and twenty, and Euaristes, conformable to the Apostles,
augmented the Deacons to the number of seven. Some say that Pope Gaius the
first, Dioclesian, was the first which made a distinction of orders, to the end
that by degrees they might come to the office of Priesthood. Others say, it was
Pope Iginius, one hundred forty and eight years before Gaius; but it was held
for certain that the institution comes from the Apostles, who ordained seven
Deacons, the which have continued from time to time.

Having spoken of Priesthod, Chanoins*
the order of this subject seems to require that I should say something of
Chanoins, whose beginning although it be doubtful; yet it is most certain,
that good and religious men instituted colleges for Priests and Chanoins;
whereas Clerks ordained for the service and ministry of the Church, and
Priests settled in the ministry of the Church might live after a certain and
prescript rule, the which although Mark of Alexandria, as Castranus writes.
Some refer the beginning of a Canonic all life o Vrbin the first, a Roman
Bishop, who lived about the year of Grace 230. Others, and namely Possidonius
Augustine the chief Author of this institution, who when he had gathered
together a company of godly men, who lived religiously, far from the noise
and company of the multitude, being made a Bishop, he built a monastery for
Clerks and Priests within his palace, with whom he might live in common.
Onufrius Panuinus writes, that Pope Gelasius the first, about the year 493,
placed the regular Chanoins of S. Augustine at Latran. Some write, that in the
year 1396, a reverend Clergy man called Bartholomew, a citisen of Rome, and an
excellent preacher, associating himself with one James of Auogard of the
country of Bergamo, set up this order again, which was much declined, in a
poor Monastery called S. Mary of Frisonnaye, who for the poverty of the
place were John of La^^an, Pope Gelasius an African borne, and Disciple to S.
Augustine, after the death of (...) master, came to Rome, and stayed in this
Church with his companions, where they lived according to the rule given by
this holy Doctor, the which was continued by them that followed after for the
space of eight hundred years, until that Pope Boniface, in the year 1298,
placed secular Chanoins there. Gregerie the twelfth restored the regular, and
would have all the congregation of Latran called of S. Savior. Calistus the
third brought in secular Chanoins again, and Pope Paul the second of that
name, dispossessed them, and restored the regular. But in the end, under Sixtus
the fourth, the regular Chanoins lost the possession, there remaining nothing
unto them but the titles, rights, and privileges Bennet, whenas the heat of
devotion began to grow cold, the Church of Latran being no more frequen^ed; yet
the secular Chanoins sung for a certain time, after that the Monasteries of
Mont had been ruined by the Lombards. The rule of these Chanoins, and of them
of Frisonnaye (of whom mention has been made) consisted chiefly upon three
points, to have nothing of their own, to be chaste, and to keep their
^loisters. The secular Chanoins continue at Latran unto this day.

Besides the regular Chanoins of Latran, there are also the Chanoins of S.
Mark of Mantoua, who say, they had their first foundation in Alexandria of
Egypt from S. Mark the Evangelist, and therefore they are called Chanoins of
S. Mark, not only of the title of their Church, but also of the name of their
Author, as they affirm: S. Mark they take for their Patron, and Pope Innocent
the third, confirmed it by a Bull dated in the year 1205. Honorius the third,
added four conuents to their congregation, and many Popes confirmed their rule
and privileges. They were wont to sleep upon matresses, and had blankets of
wool: they fasted much, used great silence, and lived in common, having
nothing proper to themselves: they used exercises two hours in the day, and at
the end of the year, they made their profession. They did not admit any one to
the habit until Mark of Mantoua, and a member depending thereon at Neise
near unto Padoua. In their house they are attired like unto the Chanoins of
La^ran, with a Rochet; but whenas they go into the town, they cast on a white
frocke. They wear a square white cap. Whenas they go into the quire, they
wear no frocke, but a rochet, and a surpluse upon it, like unto a Bishop. They
wear also a skin of furre upon their ^^mes, like unto the secular Chanoins.
Johannes Andreas in the first Clemintin says, that in his time they were so
attired.

Hermites.
We now come to the Hermites life, of whose beginning and first authors, there
is great Sozomenus, Nicepho^^^* and some others affirm, that the times of
persecution were the first cause of this kind of life. For whenas in the time
of Decius and Valerianus Emperors, about two hundred fifty and two years
after Christ, they prepared horrible torments against the Christians,

Among the first which entered into this course of a solitary life, of whom
histories Paulus Thebeus is held the chief, Paulus Thebeus.
who being about the age of fifteen years old, during the persecution of
Decius, having lost his parents, and being left a rich patrimony, with a
sister that was married, her husband sought means to betray him for a
Christian, to the end he might enjoy his father in laws whole estate alone;
whereupon, he fled into a solitary place for his safety, hiding himself in a
cave at the foot of a rock, where, being delighted with the pleasantness of
the place, he spent the rest of his life in solitariness. They write, That in
this cave there was a goodly Palm tree, the which extended her bows by an
ouerture in the top: This tree was so great, as it covered all the place, near
unto the which was a clear fountain which was his daily drink, he fed upon
the fruits of the Palm tree, and was relieved, as they say, by the space of
sixty years, Ierosme writes, That from the time he entered into this solitary
place, which was about the year of our Redemption 260, unto the end of his
life, he never went forth, having continued there about one hundred and ten
years; that he never saw any man but Anthony, who came unto him the last day
of his life, and buried him; wherefore many call him the first Hermit.

Many have since imitated him, not only for fear of persecution and tyranny,
but upon zeal, being weary of the world, least they should be polluted with
the unclean conversation of worldlings, and to the end they might more freely
spend their times in divine

The first after Paul of Thebes, which lived a solitary life, was Anohonie,
Anthony.
who instituted an Hermits life in Egypt, the which was afterward dispersed
into other countries, and therefore is by some called the Father of the Hermits
of Egypt. He was borne of noble and religious parents, and being about twenty
years old, he sold his Estate, and gave part of it to his sister, and the rest
he distributed to the poor; and in the beginning went and lived in a remote
place alone, from whence he went often to his Disciples. Being five and thirty
years old, he went into the Desert, and propounded unto himself a stricter
kind of life, where, having lived twenty years, he came again into the
world, and had familiarity with other Monks, with whom he did often converse.
Coming Constantin the second, who reigned, with Constans and Constantius his
brethren, at what time Julius the second held the Apostolic See. He was
called the Father of the Monks, in regard that he was the most valiant
Champion, yea the most excellent Captain that ever entered the lists against
the Devil. It was a custom in those days, that who so would leave the world,
retired themselves into solitary places, where, being separated from the
people, they did what penance they thought good, and every man took what
habit he held most decent, but it was without form or rule of life, and no man
bound Anthony, and did acknowledge him for their Father. He was so much
esteemed for his virtues throughout the world, as Emperors, Kings, and
Princes, wrate often unto him for his council, and recommended themselves unto
his prayers.

Yet to prove that Anthony was not the Author of a Monasticke life, they
produce Denis Ariopagita, Philo Iudeus, who lived in the time of the Emperors,
Tyberius and Caligula, in the treaty which he made of a contemplative life, in
the which he does greatly magnify the Christians, whom he calls the servants
of the great God (the name of Christians which took his beginning at Antioch,
being not yet in use) says, That they had nothing proper to themselves; none
were rich nor poor; they spent their time commonly in praying to God, and
singing, desirous to learn, and living in great continency. He says also,
that their habitations were called Monasteria, that is to say, Solitudes. S.
Ierosme hold, That S. Mark the Evangelist was the Head and Founder Philo has
written in praise of Christians, was in regard of the commendable behavior
which he saw in S. Mark, and his Monks at Alexandria: And Peter Damian, and
Cassianus affirm, That the Monasticke order was in the Apostles time: but this
does not infer that Anthony was not Father of the Monkes^ for by his
example, and the reputation of his Holiness, the deserts of Egypt were (...)
with Monks, yet this is no consequence, that there were none before, not only
(...) deserts, but also in them of Thebaide, Lybia, and Palestina.

Hilarion.
Many did imitate Anthony in this solitary course of life, among which was
Hilarion, who was the first Hermit in Palestina and Syria, and was the Head of
a great number of Monks. Some write, that being fifteen years old, moved
with the fame of Anthony, Sozimenus, and S. Ierosme. Macarius, a Disciple to
S. Anthony, (for they are all canonized for Saints) an Egyptian, living in
the time of Hilarion, was Author of the Monks of Thebaide. And they write of
a holy Abbot in Thebaide, who dwelt upon the confines of the city of
Hermopolis, whether, they say, that the Virgin Marie, with Joseph, and Jesus
her son, retired themselves to fly the cruelty of Herod, who, by the report
of Heraclides, had command over five thousand Monks. And the same Author
affirms, that the Abbot Isodorus caused a Monastery to be built in Thebaide,

In the mountain of Nitria, distant about forty miles from Alexandria, as S.
Ierosme and Heraclides write, there were fifty Monasteries one near unto
another, in some of the which the Monks did live in common, and in others they
lived a part; but they were all governed by one Superior and Head, which may
seem very strange, and yet Heraclid^s writes, that he found in these
Monasteries about two thousand Monks of great perfection: And S. Ierosme does
affirm, that he found in a town of Thebaide, two thousand Virgins, and above
ten thousand Monks which lived there. The same myrrour of repentance, S.
Ierosme, Three kinds of Monks.
writing to Eustachius, says, That there were three kinds of Monks in Egypt:
The first were Anchorits, or Hermits, who lived alone in deserts, far from
Isidorus makes a difference betwixt Monasterium, and Coenobium, for that
Monasterium may be called the dwelling or abode of one Monk alone, and
Coenobium is of many.

The third kind of Monks that were in Egypt, were called Rembo^s, or Remboth,
men which were little esteemed, and in a manner contemned. They lived together
by couples, or three and three, according to their own humors, and they were
not subject to any Superior, neither yielded they obedience to any: They
labored with their hands, and what they got, they kept as their own proper,
conferring some small portion, that they might have their meat in common. Their
abode was most commonly in towns Ierosme writes of them.

Besides these three orders S. Benedict adds a fourth, which were called
Gyrouagi, vagabonds or wanderers, never abiding any certain place, but
wandering through diverse regions and provinces, standing at the doors of
Churches to beg money. They lodged in Hospitalls and Innes, and were gluttons
given to sensuallitie and pleasure, for what they had gotten together with much
labor and long time, they consumed in an hour, and wandering up and down they
corrupted many by the example of their ill

As for the Cenobites or Monks, the first vow they made was to obey whatsoever
their superiors should command. They were divided by tens and hundreds, so as
the tenth man had charge over the other nine, and the Centinier over the
hundred. They lived of bread, pulses, and some herbs, and they wrought many
factures, the rest of the time they spent in prayer and devotion: they fasted
all the year, and whenas Lent came they observed it more strictly. After
Whitsunday, they changed supper to dinner, to satisfy (as they said) the
traditions of the Apostles. Some of the Anachorets or Hermites, before they
entered into solitude, made their Probations in Monasteries: the thing wherein
they most exercised themselves, was to quiet their own wills, practicing
humility Paul of Thebes of whom we have made mention, unless we had rather
say (but erroniously) that S. John Baptist was the first which put it in
practice.

Cariton borne at Icome, Cariton.
having suffered much under the Emperor Aurelian for the faith of Christ: in
the end being ^reed, during the reign of the Emperor Tacitus which succeeded
him, going the voi^ge of the Holy Land, they write that he was taken by
thieves, who bound his hands, and put an iron collar about his neck, and so
led him into a desa^t place, near unto the de^d sea, which was called the
Fonnes of Asphaltides, or Cariton were myraculously broken at the same time; so
as he remained Master of all their w^^lth, whereof he distributed part to the
poor Chri^^ian^ that were retired into the d^s^rts, stying persecution; and
with the rest, he built the Monast^rie of Laura in the same place, the which
was afterward one of the most famous of all the East: the Church was
con^ecrated to S. Macaire, who was one of the fathers that came to the Counsel
of Nice* but being oppressed by the multitudes of people which came thither
unto him, he retired farther into the desert, where in time he Iulio a Roman
was Bishop of Rome, under the Emperor Constantin the second, and Constance his
brother, who was an Arrian, and persecuted the Christians that favored not his
error.

Julian the Martyr, Julian.
he which was of the city of Antioch in Surya (for there were three and
twenty of that name, and all canonised) having made a vow of chastity; yet
marrying, they say that by a revelation which he had the first night of his
marriage he so disposed his wife Basilissa (who was very fair and of a good
house) as she made a vow to live with him in perpetual continency unknown to
the world. Their parents being dead, a while after they gave part of their
goods to the poor, and with the rest, they built a Julian. They also built
another Monastery for Basil ssa, who was mother to a thousand Nu^nes.
Afterward in the time of the tenth persecution, under the Emperors Dioclesian
and Maximian, having suffered many martyrdomes by the commandment of Martial
President of Antioche, in the end he received the crown of martyrdom with his
companions, this tyrant having caused them to be slain by the sword.

S. Basil.
But for the better understanding of these religious orders, it is necessary to
know that there are four rules, the which are propounded by the Church of
Rome, that is to say, Basil, S. Augustine, S. Benedict, and S. Francis, under
the which all other orders are comprehended, and governed. As for S. Basil
that learned man, who was surnamed the Great, he lived about the year of Grace
300, being a Priest at Caesaria, the chief city of Cappadocia, where he was
borne, and afterward chosen Bishop, he was slaundered to Eusebius the Bishop
of that place, who hated him in such sort, as he sought to expel him the
Church, if he had not been prohibited; but S. Basil being loath to oppose
himself against Eusebius, willingly gave way to his hatred, and retired
himself into a certain Monastery of Pontus, where he instructed the Monks
diligently in religion, and the word of God: then going from thence into the
country and cities of Pontus, he was the author of the building of
Monasteries, whereas many might live together, Basil drew the Monks into
Monasteries, and instituted a discipline, by the which they should no more
wander, but be always bound by one form of religion. These Monasteries, as
Nazianzenus and Ruffinus do write, were schools, in the which the arts and
Philosophy, together with Divinity, true religion, and pierie, were taught,
to the end there might be learned and fit men always ready to govern the
Church: wherefore the Monks under S. Basil were millitant, retired from the
world, and from all worldly cares, to the end they might learn good arts, and
true religion, and serve God more freely by watching, hymns, and prayers. They
hold that he was the first which caused Monks to make a vow, after a years
probation, to live in their Monasteries Basil is the first of all others, for
that he was the first which restrained religious men into one place, and forced
them to make posession of a certain rule. He built so great and spacious a
Monastery in Armenia, as it contained above three thousand Monks, and in the
end he reduced all the religious men of the East to hold a good form of life.

The order of this holy man did also flourish in some parts of Greece, but
especially in the dominions of the famous city of Venice. There are likewise
some of this order in Qui ex patre filioque procedit, the which they of the
East do not. The orders are conferred unto them by the Popes Vicar, having
been examined by some learned man in the Greek tongue: they make profession
under their Archimandrite, which signifies the chief of the convent: they eat
no flesh nor any fat, and before they say Mass, they wash the Altar, and use
great abstinence: they labor with their hands in imitation of the perfect
Monks of Egypt, and what they get with their labor they bring in common,
retaining nothing to themselves. All the other Monasteries of Italy which are
of this order acknowledge the Abbey Nil, borne in Calabria. All continue in the
rule which was given them at a Council held at Florence by Pope Eugenius the
fourth. As for S. Basil, he died in the year three hundred seventy and nine,
whenas Damasus the first of that name, held the Sea of Rome, and the Valens, an
Arrian, governed the East.

Next to S. Basile, according to the order of times, we are to speak of the
Abbot Pacomes, who first of all lived an Hermits life in the Island of Tabenna,
in the province of Thebaide, about the time of Constantius, son to
Constantine the Great, after which, he instituted Monasteries in the same
place, Thabennensiotae institute by Pacomo^.
and his Monks were called Thabennensiotae. They write, That an Angel came
unto him sitting in his cave, and said unto him, Veni, and omnes iuniores
Monachos collige, eosque iuxta regulam vitae, quam a me disces, institue, Come,
and gather together all the young Monks, and instruct them according to the
rule of life which thou shall learn of me: whereupon, he gave him Pacomes
remained, whom Gennadius, in his Book of Ecclesiastical Consonances, calls a
man endowed with an Apostolical grace, as well for his manner of teaching, as
for the miracles which he did. He had afterward fifteen hundred Monks,
besides the seven thousand above mentioned, all under his discipline; and he
divided them into four and twenty orders or forms, according to the
disposition of the Greek letters, as they said, he had in charge from the
Angel; for by Honorius and Arcadius, whenas Innocent the first governed the
Church of Rome.

S. Simphorian lived in Pacomes time, Simphorian.
who caused a monastery to be built without the tie of Milan, whither he
retired himself with many Disciples, to whom he gave a Benedict, it was
divided into many branches. He lived in the time of S. Ambrose, and it was to
him that the Holy Ghost sent S. Augustine after his baptism, as to a man which
was more famous for his piety and learning than the rest: He was very
learned, and did converse familiarly with Victorin, an excellent and famous
Orator, to whom S. Ierosme confesfeth himself to have been sometime a
Disciple and Auditor.

I must now speak of S. Martin, who was borne at Sibaria, S. Martin.
a famous castle in Hungary, bred up at Pauia, and received baptism at
Poictiers, by S. Hillarie, Bishop of that Arcadius and Honorius, Siricius the
first sitting at Rome.

But who can pass over with silence, Great S. Ierosme, Ieromit^.
that myrrour and pattern of Eusebius, Lord of a castle called Stridonia; upon
the consines of Hungaria, and Dalmatia: He grew so learned above the common
sort, as S. Augustine says of him, that his knowledge was such in all the
liberal arts and tongues, as unto his time he knew not any one that might be
compared unto him. He traveled seven years with great toil and difficulty,
after which, he went into the most uncouth deserts of Egypt, whereas he mades
his abode four whole years: And he that would know the fasts, pains, and
austeritie which he endured in that place, let him read the Epistle which he
himself wrate to Eustachius. But notwithstanding that he contented himself
with this kind of solitary life, yet the necessities of the Church called him
out of Syria to Rome, whereas he behaved himself in such sort, as Damasus
being dead, he was held worthy by many to be Bishop, only the Clergy hated
him, for that Syrillus, Archbishop thereof, he built a goodly Monastery,
where, within a short time, he gathered together a great number of Disciples,
among which were Eusebius of Cremona, who has since written his masters life,
and Sympronius, who has also written very learnedly. S. Ierosme lived in that
place, with his Disciples, according to the institution of the Apostles, who,
notwithstanding all his toil (spending his time continually in the traduction
of the holy Bartholomew of Lupiena, three leagues from the town of Gardayes,
and there are two and thirty Monasteries of this order in Spain, who are
commonly called the Monks of S. Ierosme of Guadeloupe. They make profession of
the rule of S. Augustine, and observe some of his constitutions: There are none
of this profession in Italy, yet they entertain a Procurator. As for S.
Ierosme, he died the last day of September, in the year of our Lord God 420,
the twelfth year of the Emperor Honorius, and in the first Boniface the first.

Augustins.
The next rule approved by the Church of Rome, after that of S. Basile the
Great, was that of the Doctor (as I may term him) of all Doctors, that is, S.
Augustine: This great and worthy spirit, who can never be honored according to
his merits, was borne, about the year of our Redemption 358, in the castle of
Tegast, and had to father one called by the name of Patricius, and his mother
was termed Monica: At the age of eighteen years, the reading of a Book
called Hortensis, made him a Manichean, who coming to Rome, he purchased such
reputation and credit for his learning, as the Romans erected a statue in his
honors; and going from thence to Milan, the entreaties of his mother Monica,
and the profound and learned Sermons of S. Ambrose, drew him from the error
wherein he had continued unto the age of thirty Augustine, Nembrides, Enodes,
Alipe, Pontient, Dieudonne, or Theodore, Simplician, Faustin, a Grecian by
nation, Hordulus, Valerius, Justin, and Paul. All which girt themselves with a
belt of leather, to be distinguished from other Monks. Having continued some
time in this Monastery, with his companions, seeing the concourse of people
that came daily to visit Augustine had their first beginning, who at that time
were to the number of one hundred and twenty, or near thereabouts, under his
obedience. They drank no wine but in cases of necessity. This number
multiplied greatly, so as in a short time there were a great many monasteries
in Afric; but the persecutions of the Goths and Vandales forced them to
abandon and leave the country, and to go into other provinces, where this
order was also so persecuted by Heretics and Infidells, as it was in a manner
altogether extinct, until the time of William duke of Guienne, who afterward
became a Monk of this order, whose holiness of life was the cause that he
obtained leave from Pope Anastasius, and Adrian the fourth of

Afterward, about the year of our redemption one thousand and two hundred,
this order which carries the name of Augustins began to flourish in Italy, by
the means of John, surnamed the Good, borne at Mantoua, who made himself a
Monk of this order, getting so great reputation, as well by his holiness of
life, as learning, Augustine, as well in Romagnia, and the duchy of Spoletum,
as in the marquisat of Ancona and Lombardie; so as he may well be called the
the Father and Reformer of this order in Italy. He died in the year of our
salvation one thousand two hundred twenty and two. His body rests at Mantoua
in the Church of Saint Agnes, famous for many mirackles. Some hold that he was
scholemaister to Saint Francis of Assise, and that he made profession under the
said John, after whose death the order multiplied greatly: but the Monks took
diverse habits, some calling themselves of Saint Augustine, others of Saint
William, some of Soint John the Good, some of the congregation of Saint
Fabales, and others of the order of the Britins; whereupon, in the year one
thousand Innocent the fourth ordained that all the Hermites, and other
religious men of the order of Saint Augustine should be called by one name,
Augustins, or Hermitans of Saint Augustine: and although they made their
residence in towns, yet they should be called Hermitans, and should live
according to the profession and rule which they ascribed to S. Augustine, so as
their diverse sorts of habits were reduced into one.

This order of S. Augustine is divided into two, whereof the one are called
Conuentualls, and the other of the Observance: and that of the Observance is
again divided into eleven companies, the which since the time of Pope Innocent
have bin reformed, that is to say, the Observance, Miletane, Carbonian,
Perusian, that of Lomdie, that of Paul, of all which mention shall be made
hereafter.

Having made mention of the founders of a monasticke life, Benedictus,
and of the beginning of the Religious orders, the which have flourished in
Egypt, Syria, Armenia, and Afric: it shall be fit to observe what has past
in these Western parts, whereas first of all Saint Benedict or Saint Bennet
presents himself, as the Patriarch and Father of all the Monks of Europe: He
was borne about one hundred sixty and six years after Anthony, who was the
first Hermit in Egypt, and near about forty years after Saint Augustine,
being in the year of our salvation four hundred eighty and two in the town
of Nursia, the which is a region of the Sabins, otherwise called Regards, who
were then powerful and famous, not only in Nursia, but in all the country
about: his fathers name was Propre, and his mother Abundance: he was sent to
Rome at the age of ten years to learn the liberal Arts, but he left his
study and wealth, and fled into a Castle the which was Justinian, he went from
thence into a desert the which was near to Sublac, sometimes a good town of
the Latins, being about forty miles distant from Rome, where he continued for
the space of three years or thereabouts, doing very austere penance, and being
unknown to any but to a Monk, the which was called Romain; but being
afterward discovered by certain shepherds, the people flocked from all parts
to see him, who had such force to persuade them to abandon the world, as in a
short time they built twelve monasteries, and having given to every one of them
a good Superior Basil, the which was allowed by the Sea of Rome: by the
preaching and good Paul, who was one of the most famous disciples of this Saint
Benedict, the Monasticke life which was used in France was reformed; and
Placidus was another who did the like in Sicile. This tree has cast forth very
many branches, as the orders of Cluni, Comalduli, Val d'Ombre, of Cisteaux,
the Humbled, Celestins, Oliuetains, and that of Saint Justin. Saint Benedict
being made Abbot, would have the Monks which were of his monastery, live
after the rule and order which he had prescribed: but as some write, they who
were not accustomed to so strickt a of life, but given altogether to their
pleasures, resolved in the end to kill Saint Benedict, mixing poison with wine
in a glass, the which brake in pieces, and so the wine was spilt; whereupon
they paint Benedict with a broken glass in his hand, and a serpent,

The order of Cluni.
All things degenerate in time, and stray in a manner from the right course. The
order of Saint Benedict having flourished with great reputation, differed so
much from the first institution of their Founder, as both General and
Provincial Counsels had made many decrees to reform them, and to draw them
to their first principles, but what neither the decrees, nor the authority of
holy fathers could effect, the holiness and sanctity of an Abbot of Cluni,
who was called Odo, brought happily to pass, reviving in a manner from death
to life the Monasticke order, forcing them to observe, and observing himself
from point to point all that was practiced in the time of Saint Benedict; so as
many of their Abbots which were drawn by his Odo lived in the year of Grace
nine hundred and thirteen, and died under the Empire of Henry the second, John
the tenth borne at Rauenna, being then Pope.

The order of Comalduli.
The order of Comalduli began in Italy about the year one thousand and twelve,
and it had for Founder Romoald borne at Rauenna, of the family of the Saxes,
the Peter Damian writes, not only in the Marquisat of Treuiso, Romagnia, and
Tuscanie, but also in France and Syria, so great numbers were converted, as
they say, if they had not taken some order, in a manner, the best part of the
world had become Monks; many Earls, Marquises, Dukes, and others which were
of very great personages, being, as I may term them, his Disciples, and daily
Scholars. He built many Monasteries Maldo, a gentleman of that City, who
seeing the holy and devout life of Romould, gave him a part of the Appenin
hills, where this Monastery was built, the which Romould would have so called
in remembrance of his benefactor. This Monastery maintains it self in his
first vigor, and observes the originarie rule strictly unto this day, the
which makes it to be generally honored, and much respected. As for Romould, he
flourished in the time of Basilius, and Constantin, both Emperors of Greece,
and Otho the third, Emperor of Germany. He died when he was one hundred and
twenty Bennet.

The order of Grand Mont was instituted at Grand Mont in Limosin, The order of
Grand Mont.
about the year of our Redemption one thousand seventy six, under the rule of
S. Benedict, by Stephen a gentleman of Au^ergne, who being sent by his father
to Molon, Bishop of Beneuent, to be instructed by him, he spent twelve years,
learning the institutions and rule of S. Benedict. Going from thence, and
having duly observed the lives of many Hermits, and Monks, and seen what was
worthy of imitation, in the end he settled himself upon the top of a high hill
in Limosin, being at that time thirty years Benedict, to his Disciples,
himself living with bread and water, and died, being eighty years old.

In the year of our Lord God one thousand ninety five, The order of S.
Anthonies Hospital.
was instituted the order of those which served the sick in S. Anthonies
Hospital, that is to say, of such whose members consume away by little and
little by S. Anthonies fare, as they call it, whose first Author was a French
gentleman, called Gaston, of the country of Vienna, with Gerin his son,
having eight more joined unto them, who being lay men, took a black habit,
having the letter Tau, of a sky color, sowed upon their breasts. Some write,
That S. Anthonies Monks are very troublesome to men by their importunat
begging: Anthonies fire to them that contribute nothing: whereupon, poor
superstitious people do every year give them a fat hog, to the end they
may have their favor and prayers to God, and be free from their threats.

The order of Val d'Ombre depending of that of S. Benedict, The order of Val
d'Ombre^
having certain private constitutions added to the rule, had his beginning
about the year 1040, from John Gualbert, a Florentin, Lord of Pretreuol, and
Val de Pesche, who upon Good Friday having met with his enemy, who had slain
his brother, and pursuing him in such sort as he could by no means possibly
escape, the other casting himself from his horse, entreated him to save his
life, even for his sake who upon that day dyed upon John was so moved, as he
not only gave him his life, but also lighting from his horse, embraced him
lovingly and kindly, promising to esteem him as his own brother, who was
dead; from whence he went to the Church of S. M^niat, near Florence, to pray,
where being upon his knees, before John being moved with this prodigious
miracle, resolved to leave the world, and as Christ was hanged naked upon the
Cross, so to follow him naked: wherefore, leaving all wordly things, he gave
himself wholly to the study of religion, and went to profess himself a
Monk in the Monastery of S. Miniat; but leaving that place for certain
causes, he came unto an arm of the Appenin hills, twenty Henry the third,
Gregory the seventh being Bishop of Rome, who canonized him, as some write,
others say it was Calixtus. The Monks of this place have a habit of a smokie
color, to distinguish them from the black Monks, and they observe the rule
of S. Benedict.

The order of the Charthufiens.
They write, that another fearful miracle soon after the erecting of the
order of Val d'Ombre, was the cause of the beginning of the Carthusiens, that
is to say, in the year of our Lord God 1080, a Doctor of Paris, a man of great
learning and reputation Responde mihi, the body sitting up in the coffin,
answered the first day with a terrible voice, Iusto Dei iudicio accusatus sum,
I am accused by the just judgment of God: At which voice, all the company
being much amazed, they deferred his interment until the next day, at what
time the body did rise in the like manner, and said, Iusto Dei iudicio
iudicatus sum: Then attending the event of this wonder until the third day,
the people flocking thither from all parts of the city, and the Priests
coming to the words, Responde mihi, he raised himself up as before, saying,
Iusto Dei Iudicio condemnatus sum, with so fearful and strange a voice, as it
not only amazed them that were present, but all such as heard speak of this
wonder. Bruno a Germain, borne at Colleyne, of a rich and noble family,
Channoin of the Cathedral Church of Rheims in Champagne, and Doctor of
Divinity in the Canon law, who being much amazed at this strange and never
heard of spectacle, said unto the Assistants: You see how miserable the end of
this man is, who in all our opinions was held religious and holy: Shall we
perish after this manner? Believe me, there is no hope of salvation, unless we
leave the world; If this be done unto a great tree, what shall become of that
which is seere and withered: whereupon, he resolved to leave the world, and to
retire himself into some solitary place, imparting this his resolution to six
of his companions, whose names were Lewis a Doctor of Paris, who was the first
Prior of the Charthusiens Bruno; two which carried the name of Stephen, and
both Channoins, Hugh a Priest, with Andrew, and Gerin, lay men, who being moved
by the persuasions of Bruno, resolved to accompany him into some desert place,
so as going all together to Grenoble, a city of Dauphine in France, they
presented themselves to Hugh, who was then Bishop there, whom they requested to
give them some solitary place, where to spend the remainder of their days.
Being come before the Bishop, he had a vision, in which he thought that God was
come down to the place whereas now the great Charthusiens stands, and that he
saw seven stars, of the color of gold, rise out of the earth, differing much
from those of the firmament. This was the night before the holy man and his
troops arrived, who being come before Bishop Hugh, whenas he saw them to Hugh,
who also not long after joined himself to that company.

They built a Church, or rather a Monastery upon the top of a hill, and small
houses or cells about the fountain, the which unto this day is called Brunos
Well, not far d^st^nt from the Church, yet separated, least they should
interrupt one another quiet, and in these cells they lived by couples, and
like unto the old Monks of Egypt, they gave themselves to silence, prayer, and
reading, spending some hours in the labor of their hands, especially in
writing of books, both to relieve their wants, and to do service to the Church
of God: they did macerate their bodies by fasting and discipline; and in Hugh
was confirmed by Hugh Archbishop of Lion, and afterward by Pope Vrbain the
second.

This order extends it self into diverse parts of Christendom, and it is
divided into seventeen provinces, in the which there are ninety and three
Monasteries: they have Vrbaine, who had been his disciple, he remained there,
and did help much to pacify the troubles which were then in the Church by his
prayers: he parted from Rome, and taking his way by Calabria, he came into a
desert, called the tower in the diocese of Squilace, where he stayed with his
companions, making their residence in certain caves under the ground, the
which Roger the prince of that country understanding, he went to visit this
holy man Bruno, and gave to him, and to his society all that desert, whereas
they built a Church, in the which Bruno remained alone, where his companions
lived, and in this place he died, in the year one thousand one hundr^d and
one, Paschall the second holding Henry the fourth, the Emprie. He was
cannonized in the year 1520.

Next unto the order of the Charthusiens, follows that of Cisteaux, The order
of Cisteaux.
founded by Robert Abbot of Molesme, a town in the duchy of Bourgondie near
to Langres, who seeing that he could not reform the Monks of his Abbey, their
great wealth having made them proud and idle, he took with him one and twenty
of the honestest men, and parting from Chalon, one of the chief towns of
Bourgondie, he made his abode in a solitary place called Cisteaux, where by
the permission of Gualter Bishop of that place, of Hugh Archbishop of Lion, and
of Odo duke of Bourgondie, he gave beginning to the Monastery of Cisteaux,
from whence all this order has taken their name Stephen, was chosen in his
place. Fifteen years after this foundation, Bernard borne at the Castle of
Fountanay in Bourgondie, whereof his father was Lord, with thirty of his
companions, among which there were three of his brethren became religious men
in this Monastery, where Henry the fourth holding Philip the first being king
of France; then continuing to build a great number of Abbeys in France and
elsewhere, he did so amplify and enrich this order, as he may justly be called
the father and restorer thereof; for they find that in his time he
reestablished and built one hundred and sixty Abbeys, yea he was held of all
the world for a holy, learned, and wise man, and of admirable Council. The
Monks of Cisteaux observe the rule of S. Benedict, they wear a white
cassocke, and are girt with a cord of wool, and the rest of their habit is
black. They did not use to eat any flesh, but in the year 1560, they obtained
a brief to eat flesh certain days in the week: at Milan, they call them
religious of S. Ambrose: at Rome, of the Holy Cross: and at Jerusalem, they
have the title of the Church.

The order of the Humbled.
The order of times requires that we speak now of the order of the Humbled,
which was erected upon this occasion: The Emperor Frederick of Barbaroussa,
having made himself Master of the city of Milan, destroyed it quite in
despite of the Milanois; and to the end there should remain no memory of
them, he sowed the soil with salt, and sent many noble and worthy personages,
not only of Milan, but of all the neighbor cities, with their wives and
children, to exile into Germany, among which was Gualuagne, Vicont and Duke of
Milan, son to great Andrew: all which after many years, grieuing to remain
so long in exile, they attired themselves in white, and having prostrated
themselves often at the Emperors feet, in the end they obtained leave to
return into their country, where with the same habit they spent the remainder
John, who was a gentleman, and borne at Como in the duchy of Milan, others say
at Mede, a place belonging to Como, and twelve miles distant from it, they put
themselves under that of S. Benedict; the rule which he gave them, was
afterward allowed by Pope Innocent the third, and by his successors, so as in
many parts of Italy, there are many Monasteries of this order. At Milan they
have ten prouostships, for so they call them, and three conuents of religious
Nuns, whereof the most famous is that which they call Cerceau. They were
Lucius the third, and of the Emperor Frederick: they are attired in white,
having a little hood sewed behind, and upon it they have a long roabe open of
either side for their arms, and upon it a great hood which couers their
shoulders like unto a Cardinals scarlet cloak: they have round caps, but
their Prelates wear them square like unto other Priests, yet they are white.
They were wont to live in common, but their revenues being fallen into the
hands of their Prelates, they suffer them to live at liberty; but in the year
1568, Cardinal Charles Boromee labored to reduce them to their first estate,
that is to say, to live in common, and as religious men, but it was not without
many difficulties, and

The order of the Carmolites.
We are now to speak of the order of Carmes or Carmolites, which they say is
very ancient, drawing their first institution from Elias the Prophet, Elizeus,
and S. John Sabellicus, Baleus, and others write, That this order of Carmelites
had his beginning about the year of our Redemption 1121, no doubt from Mont
Carmell in Syria, as the name does show, being famous by reason that Elias, and
other Prophets, had lived there, which place was afterward inhabited by many
Hermits, whom Almeric, Bishop of Antioch, drew together, living before
dispersed about the mountain, who hearing that the Latin Hermits of Mont
Carmell were ignorant of the Greek tongue, he caused a Greek Book, written
by John Bishop of Jerusalem, of the institution of the first Monks, to be
translated out of Greek into Latin. He built the first Monastery for them,
and appointed one Berthold of Aquitaine to be their Albert Patriarch of
Jerusalem, a very famous man, set down a rule, drawn (as they say) from the
life of Elias, and the Book of the foresaid Patriarch John, and from the rule
of S. Basile the Great, giving it to keep, by his own authority, to Brocard,
who was Prior of Mont Carmel, and to his Hermits, which rule of Albert they
have ever since observed, the which was afterward confirmed by Pope Honorius
the third. It appears by this rule, that the Carmes were Hermits, for the said
Patriarch Albert appointed such as could not read, to say a great number of
Pater Nosters: And for that they affirm, that the Virgin Marie appeared to one
of this order, presenting unto him a Scapularie, and saying, A Scapularie is a
narrow piece of cloth which Monks wear over their habit, hanging down before
and behind.
Receive (my beloved) this Scapularie which I give unto thy order in sign of
my fellowship: they do now use to wear it. Honorius the fourth suffered them
to wear white Capes or Cloakes, and in the year of our Lord God 1287, it was
decreed in a general Chapter at Mont Pelier, that all they of the said order
should wear them, the which Nicholas the fourth confirmed.

They were not allowed to eat flesh, by the rule of the Patriarch Albert: but
the Popes Eugenius the fourth, and Pius the second, dispensed with them; and
moreover, granted them a moderation of certain strict fastings whereunto they
were bound; but Master John Soret, a man of great knowledge, reformed this
order, and obtained from Pope Nicholas the fourth, that all they that should
withstand the said reformation, should be excommunicated, and that the Friars
reformed, might choose a Prior and Eresa of Ahumade, who was of the town of
Auila in Spain, reformed this order of Carmes, and restored it to his first
beauty, beginning first with the Cloisters of women, whereof she founded many,
and afterward with them of men, who are at this day called Carmes discalced,
or barefooted, for whom she made certain constitutions, and comprehended them
in a bull, which she obtained from Pope Pius the fourth, bearing date the
seventeenth of Iulie, in the year of our Salvation 1565, and were afterward
confirmed by the Apostolic authority, in a general Chapter held at Alcala
de Henares, in the year of our Redemption 1581. And as this order is wholly
given to mental devotion,

After these, follow the religious of the holy Cross, The order of the Holy
Cross.
whose beginning was before them, but they had many Crosses. Some say, That one
Syriacus, a Bishop of Jerusalem, was their first founder: but the Bulls of
Pope Alexander the third, Alexander the eighth, and Pius the fifth, with the
Chronicle, Martimades, and Sabellius, hold that Cletus, who they write was
Disciple to S. Peter, and Bishop of Rome, was the first beginner: Having been
admonished by a divine Oracle to provide lodgings for poor in the Christian
Religion: And to the end they should be the better known, he enjoined

After the death of Cletus, the Christians having been greatly persecuted, in
the end they began to take breath under Constantin the Great; and Queen Hellen
his mother going to Jerusalem, found the Holie-Crosse, by the means of great
promises which she made to those that could show her where it was, and
threatening such as should dissemble their knowledge. In the end, a Jew (as they
write) called Judas showed her the Cyriacus, after which time, preaching the
virtues and miracles of the Holie-Crosse, with many Disciples, he was in the
end, Bishop of Jerusalem: whereof, many of Cletus Disciples, who had secretly
continued in the exercise of Hospitality, being advertised, they came and
discovered themselves to Cyriacus, who restored this order, and gave it a new
birth, in the year of our Redemption 325, the which continued and increased
unto the year of our Salvation 365, under Julian the Apostat, who Cyriacus to
death the same year, whereby this order was in a manner extinct, by reason of
the great persecution. Afterward, it was revived again under Vrbain the
second, whenas the Christian Princes, joining together, went to conquer
Aritulla, Jerusalem, and other cities of Asia. Pope Alexander the third, long
after the persecution of Ione Barbaroussa, gave many great privileges to this
order. After, came the opinion of the Albigeois, which did so trouble the
Church, as all they of this order which were able to carry arms, were forced
to go in person to fight against them. And Pope Innocent the third, at the
Council of Lateran, confirmed it, and granted many privileges, by reason of
the great losses this order had sustained. Afterward, there was another
general Council celebrated at Mantoua, where it was ordained, That the
Clement the seventh, of the house of Medicis, reformed this company, and, in
the year 1568, the Fathers of this order holding their general Chapter in the
city of Bolognia, Pope Pius the fifth sent them a Visitor, and afterward
approved the order, and increased it, with indulgences and privileges, all
according to the rule given by Alexander the third, and the institution of
Cletus.

Dominicans.
As for the order of the preaching Friars, it took beginning from S. Dominicke,
a Spaniard, (as all men know) borne in a town called Calogora, in the Diocese
of Osma, where he was a regular Channoin; afterward, he came into Gasconie,
where he continued ten years, preaching, and drawing Christian Princes into
arms against the Innocent the third, as has been said, of whom he obtained
leave to put himself under what rule he should like best that were allowed by
the Church: whereupon, he made choice of that of S. Anthony, with sixteen of
his Disciples, and having made certain constitutions, it was confirmed by
Honorius the third, in the year of Grace 1206, the first year of his
Popedom, and in the sixth year of the Empire of Frederick the second: Then,
going to Tolousa, he exhorted his Friars, and sent them to preach two and two
together, persuading them to be preachers both in deed and name: for Pope
Innocent had already given them leave to take upon them the name of preachers.
This order having showed great fruits in the world, even to the farthest bounds
of the Indies, Sabina, which was in Honorius the third, to Dominicke, who was
cannonized by Gregory the fourth, in the year 1221.

In the time of Dominicke flourished that great and admirable S. Francis,
Franciscans.
borne in the town of Assise, in the country of Vmbria, or the duchy of
Spoletum, about eight miles from Peruse, who dealing in the trade of
merchandise unto the age of two and twenty years, was by the reason of a
great sickness transformed to another man, of proud, he became very humble,
of covetous, a giver of alms, of rich, poor, of a lover of the world, a
contemner of it, who passing one day before S. Damians Church, and entering into
it to pray, they hold that the Image of the Cross before which he Francis, go
and repair my house, the which as thou see falls to ruin: then having
conformed his life to the passion of our Savior Christ, he put a shire of
hair upon his bare skin, and a sack upon it, girding himself with a cord,
going also without hose or shoes, to make himself the more contemptible, so
as the same of him being spread over the neighbor country, many drawn by his
holiness abandoned the world, and became his disciples, making profession of
poverty and beggerie: for which cause he wrate a rule, as well for those that
were united unto him, as for such as should come after him, the which he
presented to Pope Innocent the third, woh confirmed in the year of Grace 1212:
it was also approved by Honorius the third, successor to Innocent. And after
the confirmation Francis, he died the fourth of October 1226, and was
cannonized by Gregory the ninth, 1236. Besides the Friars which he called
Minors, he erected also a second order of Nuns, under the government of S.
Clara. And he instituted a third order, which were called Penitents, for such
as being married desired to do penance. They might have goods proper to
themselves, and continue married, and they did actual service only. They were
not called religious, yet they had a religious kind of living.

The order of the Valley of Scholars.
by a doctor of Divinity called William borne in England, who having been long
a scholar at Paris, and afterward a professor in the said city, and in
Bourgondie, in the end he retired himself into a certain Hermitage with his
disciples and scholars, wherefore this order was called the Valley of
scholars, and was approved by Pope Honorius the third, in the year 1218.
Among the first companions of the said William, were Richard, Euerard, and
Manasses: they hold the rule of S. Augustine, and wear a white habit with a
black cloak. They have made profession at Mons in Haynault, at Mackli^, and
Louain in Brabant, at Gerontsart, in the country of Namur, at Liege, and at
Hofalize, at Paris, and at Orleans, whereas most commonly the general of the
order

Great S. Lewis whose piety can never be sufficiently recommended to
posterity, The order of the Penitents.
being stirred up by queen Blaunch his mother, in the year of our salvation
1261, retired into a great house standing before the palace, on the other side
of the river of Seine, which passes beneath S. Michaels bridge, certain
religious men of the Repentance of Jesus Christ, commonly called in Latin
Saccarij, that is to say, Friars carrying sacks, for that they were clad in
sackcloth, giving them the said house to remain there for ever, but they made
no long abode, for in the year 1293, and upon the fourteenth day of October,
they yielded it up by contract into the hands of Friar Giles at Rome, at that
time Prior General of the whole order of the Augustine Hermites, pretending
Andrew des Arts at Paris, and they were called Sachettes, but they were
expelled in the time of the same king, leaving only the Matthew Paris, who
calls them Saccati.

Servants of the blessed Virgin Mary.
Presently after the death of S. Francis, began the order of Friars called the
Servants of the blessed Virgin Mary, which took its beginning from seven rich
merchants of Florence, which were of a brotherhood called the Praises of the
blessed Virgin, who being upon the day of the Assumption in prayer, heard a
voice which said unto them, that they should be like seven stars, and that
within short time they should give beginning to a Religious order, carrying the
name of the holy mother of God, this voice Bo^fils, others say, Monaldy,
Amedee, Bonaionta, Manetto of Antelli, Alexis Fauconnier, Sostegno of Sostegni,
and Vguecione of the family of the Vguecioni, who being come to Florence upon
a Twelfth day to demand alms, the young children began to cry, as divinely
inspired, Mary; so as from that time this order was called by that name, and
Pope Innocent the eight, confirmed it. As for the black roabe, and the
Scapularie which they took, putting themselves under the rule of S. Augustine,
the reason was for that it had been revealed unto them (as they say) by the
^olie Virgin, seven years after they had retired themselves into the mountain;
so as having taken this rule, the first head of their order was father Bonfils,
then they built a Church, and the monastery of the Anonciado, famous
throughout all Italy, where there is to beseene the Portraict of the Virgin
Mary's face, painted (as they hold) twenty years after their foundation. One
called Philip Binitij being entered myraculously into their order, received so
many graces of the holy Virgin, as he became admirable both in Alexander the
fourth, approved and confirmed this order, in the year of our salvation 1255,
giving them power to creat a General, like to the sour begging Friars, being
so augmented, as it is dispersed into all parts. In the year of our Redemption
1427, Nicholas Perusien their General divided this order into two, whereupon
the one are called Friars servants Counentuals, and the other, Fathers servants
of the Observance. This company began in the year of our Salvation one
thousand two hundred thirty and three, in the time of Gregory the ninth,
whenas the Guelphes and Gibelins began to make their spoils in Italy, the
which was also much afflicted with

Celestins.
He that was head of the order of the Celestins, was first called Peter, and
surnamed Moron borne in Heruia, a town of the Samnites, now called Sergue in
the country of Laben, in the year 1215. His father was called Angelieri, and
his mother Marie, a man given wholly to austeritie and solitariness from his
youth: having spent three years in penance upon a mountain, in the end he was
received a Monk into the monastery of Ieseli of the order of S. Bennet, where
having spent some time, he demanded leave of his Abbot to retire himself into
a desert cave under the mountain of Moron, from the which he took his
surname, but being sought after by multitudes of people which came from all
parts, he went into the mountain of Salmonne called Bennet, which was then
much degenerated. The same of his Holiness adorned with many goodly miracles,
was so spread over all Europe, as the number of the Celestins encrea^ed much,
and a Council being then held at Lion in ^rance, under Gregory the tenth, of
the noble family of the Vilconti: He obtained of the Pope, a confirmation of
his rule, and then returning into Italy, he celebrated the first general
Chapter of his order: Finally, after the decease of Nicholas the fourth, the
Church of Rome, having been two years without a Pastor, he was chosen Pope,
in Boniface the eighth, his successor, who condemned him afterward (without
any subject) to perpetual prison, in the Castle of S. Simon, where he
continued ten months, others say, two years, doing miracles, foretelling
things to come, and praying to God for his successor, in which prison he died,
saying these words of the Psalmist following: Every soul praise the Lord. He
was canonized by Clement the fifth. This order is divided into thirteen
provinces through France, Germany, and Italy, and it contains at this
present one hundred twenty and four Monasteries.

John the two and twentieth being Pope at Rome, Order of Mon^ Oliuet.
and Henry the seventh, Emperor in Germany, the order of Mont Oliuet b^gan
by three gentlemen of Syenna, the first was called Bernard Tolomei, the other
Ambrose Piccolomimt, and the third Pat^^^^us of Patricij, who, by the
persuasion of Bernard, retired themselves unto a mountain called Oliuet, being
in the county of Montalein, where they remained to do penance, and being
accused unto the Pope as Authors of new superstitions, they went unto him, who
having heard the reasons which they alleged, he sent them back to Guide
Pietramala, Bishop and Lord of Arezzo, under whose Diocese the said mountain
of Oliue^ was, who before their arriual, they write, had a vision, in the which
he saw the Virgin Marie environed with a great multitude Bennet: whereupon, he
gave them a white habit in the Church of the Trinity, with the rule of S.
Bennet, under the protection of the blessed Virgin Marie. After this, they
built a goodly fair Monastery, upon Mont Oliuet, called the Cloisters. This
order extends not out of Italy, and it has above sixty Monasteries. In old
time they did wear wooden shoes, and of late years they made their nouices
upon Mont Oliuet, to wear them, but now they have dispensed with them, and
have gotten more liberty.

As for the order of the Iesuastes of S. Ierosme, Iesua^^^.
they had their beginning from one John Colombin, a gentleman of Syenna, and
one of the most eminent men of the town, Mart, the Egyptian, the manner of
which conversion would be too teadious for this Abridgement: but having in the
end so disposed his wife, as she suffered him to live in chasti^ie; they write,
That the miracle of a L^per which he brought home unto her, and left in her
keeping, was the cause that she her self was content to make a solemn vow of
chastity, and to give all their goods to the poor: for in stead of the Leper,
she found nothing in the chamber where he had been left, but a most sweet
sent, so as they did believe that it was our Lord and S^uiour Jesus Christ, who
in the shape of a Leper had appeared unto them; then associating himself with
one called Francis Vincent, one of the chief men of Syenna, they Colombin
seeing, he went unto the Pope to Viterbe, having seen him before at
Tuscanelle, for he and his Disciples were accused to hold John Baptists day. As
for the name of Iesuastes, Paulus Mauricius affirms, That it was not given
them for that they had the name of Jesus often in their mouths, but by a
prophe^icall spirit, the little children crying whenas they saw them, Behold
the Iesuasts; and that John Colombin, in a prophetical spirit, said one day to
his companions, We may well work, Jesus Augustine, is not common, it shall not
be unfit to set it down here in particular, as Paulus Mauricius has delivered
it. He says, That they are bound to say but one hundred sixty and five Pater
Nosters, and as many Aue Mary's, going three times to the oratorie, having a
certain number to say at every time, from the which not any one is exempt.
Betwixt the morning and evening, they are five or six hours in prayer: Mattins
being ended, the Prior does every day make a Lecture, and then a little
Sermon, which being done, they stay a while to pray mentally to God: Moreover,
every one does discipline himself twice a day in his oratorie privately, and
never fails, but upon the three principal feasts of the year, that is to
say, once at the break of day, Pater Nosters, and as many A^e Mary's, in
honor and commemoration of our Saviors passion: They do John Colombin did
also institute the order of religious Nuns, called Iesuates, of which the
chief was Ka^herine of Syenna, cousin to the said Colombin. There is a
Monastery in Luca, which they commonly call the Iesuates of S. Joseph, and
whereas they are called the Iesuates of S. Ierosme, the reason is, for that in
the beginning of their order, they took this great myrrour of penitence, and
light of religious men, for their particular protector: and their love and
devotion was such toward this Saint, as they Alexander the fourth ordained by
his Bull, That they should no more be called Iesuates simply, but Iesuates of
S. Ierosme.

Chanoins of S. Savior.
After the Iesuates, the order of times calls us to speak of the regular
Chanoins of S. Savior, of whom, they say, Helias was the beginning. Two miles
from Bolognia, there was sometimes a College of Chanoins of the order of S.
Augustine, which they called by the name of S. Marie of the Rhyne, the which
having been ruined by John Visconte; Duke, and Archbishop of Milan, whenas he
took the town of Bolognia, the Chanoins were forced to retire themselves into
the town to the Monastery of S. Savior, which had been built long before in
memory of a great miracle which Athanasius being Bishop of Alexandria, in the
year of Christ 785, the ninth day of September. Stephen of Syenn, of the order
of the Hermitans of Lecette, a place about three miles from Syenna: of whose
holy life, Pope Gregory the twelfth being informed, and knowing the desire
which he and his companions had to restore the canonical order, he gave charge
to three Cardinals to give a canonical habit to Stephen, and to one Friar
James, the which was done in the city of Luca the four and twentieth of
April 1408, and Stephen did afterward give the same habit to many of them of
Lecette. They then took the habit of S. Savior by reason of the place, where
they had made profession of the Hermitan order. In this Cloister of S. Savior,
whereof mention has been made, there remained one Gillier Stephen, and of his
chanoins, desiring to see that canonical order restored, sent for Stephen, and
having conferred together with him, they sent a Procurator to Pope Martin the
fifth, of the house of the Co^^nnes, having succeeded Gregory, who having heard
their demand, granted a commission to Nicholas Dalbergati, then Bishop of
Bolognia, (and afterward made Cardinal of Saint Croix by Pope Eugenius the
fourth) to take some order for that which they demanded, and then he united
the convent of S. Ambrose of Gobre, and that of S. Marie of the Rhyn, with the
Chano^rie of S. Savior of Bolognia, which was confirmed by the Apostolic
authority, as it appeared by a brief given the fifth of June 1518, and they
had permission to call a general Chapter by a Bull given at Mantoua, the
nineteenth of Martin, after the union of certain conuents. This order began to
take the name of a congregation, and they were called Chanoins of Saint
Savior: they were also called Scopetins by them of Florence, by reason of John
of Scopette, who was of this company, but it was the fourth convent, whereas
the other was the first; and they were commonly called the Chanoins of S.
Savior.

After these Chanoins, follows the company of S. Peter of Pisa, Order of S.
Peter of Pisa.
who was of the family of Iambes Courts, one of the chiefest of that city,
who having resolved to imitate the life of that great Doctor Saint Ierosme,^
was presently followed by many disciples, with the which he went into the
county of Vrbin to a goodly hill the which Ierosme, as they are at this day,
adding only of the congregation of S. Peter of Pisa, which company has so
multiplied, as there are at this present thirty and seven Monasteries only in
Italy, there being none without it. They are clad in a long Iacket, and girt
with a leather girdle, carrying a cloak upon it, upon the which they do cast
their scapularie; Pius the fifth, would have them make profession, for before
they might leave it, and go where they list. This order began in the year of
Grace 1380.

The company of S. Ierosme of Fesola, began soon after in the year of our
Salvation one thousand four hundred and six, in the time of Pope Innocent the
seventh, by one called Charles earl of Grauella, a Florentine, who bring
inspired by God, went into the mountains, where in old time stood the ancient
town of Fesola, ruined by the Florentins, where he toooke the habit of an
Hermit, and with him Rhedon Gra^elle, and Walter Marsie, whereas they continued
not long, before that many came unto Gregory the twelfth, who gave them
another habit of a gray color, girding their frockes with a girdle of leather,
and on it they had a long cloak gathered thick and open before, and they ware
wooden shoes; but since they have left them: and for that they were held
Francis as some think, that gray habit which they ware was given them. They
extend not out of Italy, where they have thirty or forty Monasteries: they
which do remain at Milan are called the Friars of Saint Anne.

George Dalegue.
In the year 1407, Gregory the twelfth being Pope, and Robert of Bauaria
holding the Empire, began the company called S. George Dalegue surnamed
Azzurine, which had for author Anthony Corrara a gentleman of Venice, who was
of the company of the regular Clerks, Iesuates of Saint Ierosme. The Friars
of this order ware wooden shoes, and begged for their living: he gave them
certain rules confirmed by Gregory, who added more, but especially Laurence
Justinian, first Patriarch of Venice, who was to this congregation, as Saint
Bernard had been to that of Cisteaux. They of this order ware underneath, a
habit of white cloth, make like a cassocke, the which was buttoned before, and
upon it a roabe of sky color, a bonnet upon their heads, and upon their
shoulders a hood of the same color. They live in common, their commanders are
called Priors, and they create a General. They were not wont to make
profession, but if anyone of them having continued some time in the order,
changed his mind, they gave him a certain sum of money, and attired him like
a secular Priest, and then suffered him to go at his pleasure, but Pope Pius
the fifth, in the year of our Redemption one thousand five hundred and
seventy, ordained that they should all make solemn profession, as they do,
not derogating their privileges,

Mont Cassin.
The congregation of Mont Cassin, which took his beginning from Lewis le Begue
a gentleman of Venice, began in the Monastery of Saint Justin, and therefore
was called the company of Saint Justin, in the year of Grace one thousand
four hundred and ten, under Pope John the three and twentieth, Sigismond being
Emperor of Martin the fifth, and Eugenius the fourth, seeing this company to
increase daily in holiness of life, they gratified it with many privileges,
for which cause it was full of learned men. Afterward the Abbey of Mont Cassin
was added unto it; and for that it was the first and most honorable of all
those of Saint Bennet, it took the name thereof, and was called the
congregation of Mont Cassin, and so all the black Monks which live under the
Observance, are the true and first Monks of Saint Bennet, who were many times
destroyed and reformed. This order of S. Bennet was grown to that greatness,
not only in wealth (which was the chief cause of their ruin) but also in
number of men and monasteries, as it is found, they had three and thirty
thousand Abbeys, and fourteen thousand Prouostships and Priories: but whenas
Justin, it was so low, as the name of the Monks of S. Bennet was in a manner
extinct; yet since it is so augmented, as there are above ten thousand Abbeys
in Italy and Spain, which live according to this reformation, many of which,
besides that they live according to the rule of S. Bennet, give themselves to
study, to public disputations, and to preaching, like unto the begging
Friars, which make them to be much respected in those countries.

S. Anthony in the wood.
It will at the first seem to have been more convenient to have put the Friars
which are of Saint Anthony in the wood, with the most ancient orders, than
now, but it is by reason they are more dilated, and have made a greater show in
their reformation than in their beginning, which happened after this manner: In
the suburbs of the Ambrose in the wood, there was in old time in that place a
goodly wood, and very thick, in the midst Marie, and near unto it did run
a brook of clear water, which came from a fair fountain, the which is at
this day held in such reverence, as many drink of this water for devotion. In
this wood there remained three Gentlemen Milanois, who lived as Hermits; the
first was called Alexander, of the noble family of the Creuelli; the second
was named Albert Bozosse; and the third was termed Anthony Pierre Sancte, from
whence it comes that the Pierri Sancti have at this day a certain jurisdiction
in a Monastery of this order, called Casterne. At such time as these men lived
in their solitude, that admirable S. Ambrose shined in the city of Milan, who
being advertised of their kind of Augustine: The Milanois did afterward build
them a Monastery in the same place, in the honor of S. Ambrose, and they
called it S. Ambrose in the Wood, for that this Saint frequented that place in
his life time: They are since augmented in diverse places, namely in the duchy
of Milan. They have a General, Visitors, and Priors, and every three years
they celebrat their general Chapter in that place where they had their
beginning. They have many places whereas they say service, according Ambrose.

The like may be said of the company of the Hermitaine Monks of S. Ierosme,
Hermitaine Monks of S. Ierosme.
of whom something has been formerly spoken, but since it was reformed by
Loup Solmete, a learned Spaniard, who coming to Rome, obtained leave from the
Pope to reform this order, begging of him the Church of S. Alexis at Rome,
standing upon Mont Auentin with the circuit, and all the rents and revenues
thereof, giving them a form and rule to live by, the which he had drawn out
of the works of S. Ierosme. Some say, That they began in the time of Eusebius
of Cremona, a Disciple of S. Ierosmes, and that the Monks of Gardeloupe in
Spain followed their order: It may be they had been reformed by the said
Loupe, that afterward seeing their order ready Loup had divided these from
the others, and had made a new company. They are attired in a white habit,
with a tawnie Scapularie. Whenas they go into town, they wear a cloak which
is close before like unto Monks, the which is also tawnie. Loup of Oliuete
died in the year of Grace 1433, in the third year of Pope Eugenius the fourth.
This company has in Italy about twenty Monasteries, whereof the chief and
principal is the hospital of Lodeiane in Lombardie. They had six monasteries
in Spain, the chief of which was S. Isidore, a league from Seuille. They make
profession, and seem to observe the rule of S. Augustine.

In the year of our Lord God 1400, Order of the Observance.
which was the Iubile at Rome, there reigned Bernard lived in Syenna, whose
father was called by the name of Patricius, and his mother by the name of Nona,
of a noble extraction, borne at Massa, of Maremma, a near town, and (as some
write) subject to Syenna. This holy man (moved with a holy and zealous
charity) went unto the hospital, where he tended such as were sick of the
plague, and never left them until the plague ceased, being then but twenty
years old; from whence he retired himself solitarily into a wood, where
having lived some time very austerely, in the end he became professed of the
order the which he reformed, taking away all the abuses which were crept in,
and causing Francis; wherein he was much assisted by many which followed his
new reformation; but there were others which would not leave that which they
had gotten with labor and pain. Hence it grows (at the least wise it savors
somewhat of likelihood) that the religious of the order of S. Francis, are
divided into two, that is to say, Conuentualls, and that of the Observance, who
were called Sabottiers, which have so increased since, as they exceed many
other orders in number. This happened under Pope Eugenius the fourth, and in
the time of the Emperor Frederic the third.

About the year of our Lord God 1450, the religious order of Minimes began to
flourish, by the means of Francis, surnamed of Paul, in regard of the castle
of Paul, where some say he was borne, the which is situated in the realm of
Naples, betwixt Abrusse, and Lucania, now called by the name of the
Principality, joining to Calabria, and about thirty miles from the famous
city of Cossence. His father was called by the name of Martetille, and his
mother by the name of Vienna: He was given, (as a man may say, even from his
cradle) to austeritie, loving a religious life above all terrestiall things:
being come to the age of a perfect man, he had a resolution to build a Church,
with certain little lodgings to dwell in, the which (by the permission of one
Pyrrhus, who was then Archbishop of Cossence, and the help of his neighbors)
he Lewis the eleventh, the French king, who reigned at that present time, sent
an Ambassador to entreat Pope Sixtus the fourth to send him this holy man, the
which he willingly did, and he came unto the king at Tours, who (for the love
which he bare unto him) caused the Church and Monastery at Pleffis, which is
near to the said town, to be built for him. This order being in France and
Spain, there are not any in Lombardie, but at Milan.

The order of Ami-Dieu.
In the time of Francis de Paulo, lived that holy man Ami-Dieu, borne in
Portugal, Marie in Bresanois, toward Cremona, of the dependances of the duchy
of Milan, where he gave beginning unto his order. Soon after, he went to Rome,
and lived upon the hill which is at this day called S. Peter, in Montorio, and
whereas now stands a goodly Monastery of this order. He was much given to
contemplation, and had many profetique visions, presaging and foretelling
things to come. Of him this order has taken the name of Amis-Dieu, or Amidees:
They are clothed in a russet habit, and wear wooden shoes, and have no
breeches, being girt with a cord, like unto the Sabottiers: They have eight and
twenty Conuents at this day in Italy, for it extends no farther. Their order
began in the year of our Redemption 1460; but Pius the fifth united it with
that of Cleruaux, and the Sabottiers, that is to say, of the Observance of S.
Francis.

Apostolins.
otherwise called Friars of the Apostles, they write that it had his beginning
or first original from Saint Barnabe the Apostle, who being come unto Milan,
was the first that ministered there. In that place he gathered together a good
number of disciples, which lived in a manner according to the ancient custom
of the Primitive Church, whom whilst he lived they called Christian Disciples,
and after his death they were called Apostolins, and now Friars, of the
Apostles or Barnabites. They were for a long time dispersed here and there, and
did not celebrate the Mass, but attended prayer only, and to live in common,
as they did in the Primitive Church: but in the year of our Redemption one
thousand Innocent the eight, at their request, suffered them to say Mass, and
gave unto them a certain habit, ordaining that they should make profession, and
giving unto them the rule of Saint Augustine to observe. He gave them leave to
enjoy the same privileges that the Augustins did enjoy. They are attired in a
frocke of taunie cloth, with a scapularie of the same color, and after this
manner they commonly go abroad, and without any cloak, but in Winter they
wear one which is of the same color, like unto the Sabottiers of Saint
Francis. They hold a Chapter, and their head is called Vicar General. The
first of this order which said Mass, were Friar Simon of Morane, Friar John
Scarpe, and Friar Nicholas Cesterie Geneuors.

Capucins.
In the Marquisat of Ancona, under the Seigneurie of Fermo, there is a castle
which is called Mount Faucon, in the which the Iacobins have a goodly
Monastery, where there was a Monk, who was called Matthew Basci, a man of an
honest and good life, and a great obseruer of the holy institutions. It
happened on a day, that he went with some of his companions to a place hard by
to assist at some office, which being done, they all returned to the
Monastery, he remaining a little behind: upon the way, his companions found a
poor man lying upon the ground almost naked, and shaking for cold, for that it
was Winter, and there had great store of snow fallen, who having demanded some
cloth in charity to cover him, he had no answer from the rest; but Matthew
coming after, and seeing this poor and impotent man, moved with compassion,
and fearing least he should die with the extremity of the cold which he
endured, he took two good pieces of cloth which he had under his habit,
according to the custom of their order, and gave them to this poor man, and
then going on his way toward the Monastery, he was amazed that this poor man
was suddenly vanished away. This made that good father to think that he had
made profession of poverty, and yet there were some that were poorer; so as he
did not truly imitate his father Saint Francis, and much less observed that
which he had promised entering into the order, whereupon he prayed continually
unto God that he might peforme the vow which he had made. After much
lamentation, he had an inspiration which said Frances; so as he took a frocke
that was all torn and rent, and tied a hood upon it, as they wear at this
day, then without speaking to any man, he went to Rome to Pope Clement the
seventh, demanding leave of him to carry the habit which Saint Francis and his
Friars did wear in the beginning, the which he easily obtained, the Pope
telling him thrice that he would have that order obeserued in every point. A
while after, one which was called Friar Lewis, with a companion of his, both
Iacobins of Fossebona, the which is a town of the Marquisat, and of the Duchy
of Vrbin, moved with zeal of the observation of their rule, left their
convent, and joined themselves with the said Matthew: but to the Lewis went to
the Pope, and obtained a brief, not only to carry the habit, and observe the
rule, but also to give it to any that should demand it, the which happened in
year of our Salvation 1526, the eight and twentieth day of May, and in the
third year of Pope Clement; so as in Matthew, and the first Monastery they
had, was in the town of Cameria, in the Marquisat which was given unto them by
Katherine Cibo who was duchess of Cameria. This order increased so, as within
the space of two and forty years or near thereabout, it had about the number
of two hundred twenty and two Monasteries, divided into fifteen provinces,
and there were religious men amounting unto the number of two thousand two
hundred and forty. Besides these, there are the reformed of the order of S.
Francis, as the Clairains, Clarueaux, and Recolets, of whom something may be
spoken hereafter.

Orders of the Observance.
Although we have formerly discoursed of the beginning of those orders which
live under the rule of Saint Augustine, yet it shall not be unfitting to speak
something of those company which live according to this rule, under the name
and title of the Observance. The first is the company of Lecette: This place
is about three miles distant from Syenna, Lecette.
and was in old time called Lissiette Foltignan, founded of Saint Savior, and
since, Saint Savior of Lecette in the wood of the Lake. This lake was
inhabited by the Hermites of Saint Augustine, since the year of our Redemption
1050. This place was always maintained in holiness, secret poverty, and fit
for contemplation. Bartholomew a Venetian, did set down goodly rules in the
year of our Salvation one thousand three hundred eighty and seven, the like
did Nicholas Cassin, and Gerard of Rimini, both Priors General of this order,
the which did afterward so multiply and increase, as there are to be seen at
this day eleven Conuents in the countries of Syenna and Florence, either of
which has at the least a hundred religious men.

Charbonnier.
The second congregation of the Observance of the Hermitans is that of
Charbonniere in the Land of Labor, which they call at this day Campania, the
which is also called the Congregation of Saint John of Naples, it was begun by
one whose name was Friar Simon of Cremona, who was a great Philosopher, and
Divine in his time, who lived in the year of our Redemption one thousand three
hundred ninety and nine.

Perusina.
The company called Perusina, or Saint Mary, of the people in the province of
Vmbria, began in the year of our Redemption 1414, and has about fourteen
Monasteries.

The company of Lombardie, so called by themselves: it was begun in the year
of our Salvation one thousand four hundred forty and four, Order of
Lombardie.
by a father called John Roque of Pauia, and another who (...) called Friar
Gregory of Cremona, within the Castle of Crana. This company is the greatest,
and of most note of all those of the Observance of the Hermitans, as well by
reason of their great numbers, as for that they of this order are altogether
men of great learning, and such as make profession of preaching. There are in
this order sixty and eight Monasteries, which are well

S. Marie of Mont Orton.
The order of Saint Mary of Mont Orton, distant about five miles from Pudone,
instituted by a learned man called Friar Simon borne at Camerin a town in the
Marquisat of Auerne. It has but three Conuents, and was begun in the year of
Christ 1460.

Baptistes.
The order of the Baptistes, so called in regard of Friar Baptista, who was the
Author, began in the year of our Salvation one thousand four hundred eighty
and four. They wear wooden shoes, and they are also called Geneuois, for
that their founder was of Genoua.

Hermites called Pouilliouse
The company of Hermites called Pouilloise or Doucette, which had his beginning
Felix, who was of that country, in the year of our Redemption one thousand
four hundred ninety and two.

Zumpane.
by one Francis Zumpane a Calabrian, who in those times was much honored for
his good parts. The same year began the order called of S. Augustine of
Dalmatia, Dalm^^^a.
for that it began in Sclauonia.

Fourteen years after, Of Andrew Pro^^^
there was instituted in Germany a new company or fellowship of Hermits,
which they call the Congregation of Andrew Proles of Germany.

The last company of this order was that of S. Paul, the first Hermit,
wearing the same habit that the rest, and it began in the year of our
Redemption 1550. There are

The company of S. Paul, the first Hermit, of Hungary, S. Paul the first
Hermit.
was begun in the Monastery of S. James of Potach in Hungary, by a Strigonian
called Eusebius, who with his companions observed a certain rule and kind of
life, which had been given them by Bartholomew Bishop of Quinque Ecclesia, in
the year of our Lord God 1215. A while after, their number increasing, they
entreated Pope Vrbain the fourth to give them Augustine, but they could not
obtain it: Whereupon, Paul Bishop of Vesprin gave them that form of life
which they now hold, in the year of our Salvation 1263, and then this order
began to be called the Congregation of S. Paul the first Hermit: Since, in the
year of our Redemption 1300, they made one Friar Laurence, a Strigonian, their
first Prior general: About eight years after, the order was confirmed by a
Cardinal which Pope Clement the fifth had sent Legate into Hungary, who was
called Friar Gentil, of Mont fleur, and had been before a Friar Minor: He gave
to them of the same company the rule of S. Augustine, and granted them leave
to make constitutions, and to hold a general Chapter, the which happened upon
the sixth of November, in the year of our Redemption 1308, in the Monastery of
S. Laurence, John the two and twentieth being made Pope, he confirmed their
order, and received them under the protection of the Sea of Rome, and then it
began to increase much, not only in number, but also in sanctity of life, so
as in Hungary they were held the best religious men of all that were in the
realm. In the time of Pope Nicholas the fifth, the Church of S. Stephen de la
Rotonde at Rome, upon Mont Celio, was given them by the holy See, with all the
revenues thereof, and they were about one hundred and twenty years before
they had any other Convent in Italy, into the which they admit not any one but
Hungarians. They are attired in white, and have a great round Scapularie that
couers all their shoulders, and upon it a cloak which is also white, and
somewhat shorter than that which

The order of S. Brigide began under Pope Gregory the eleventh, Order of S^
Brigide.
in the year of our Lord God 1376, who confirmed it to this holy Lady,
Queen of Sueden; who going to Rome, she obtained of him, that the Monasteries
of the said order should be common, as well for men as women, yet there should
be such a separation by walls, as the one should have no means to come unto
the other, but upon great necessity. He would also have but one Church for
both sexes, and that the Monks as Ministers of sacred things should be below,
and the Nuns above, to say their service and prayers: but the Abbess should
have power to command both, yet the men should have charge of that which did
belong to the divine service, and to the ornaments of the one and the other, as
well for victuals as apparel, should belong unto the Abbess: Augustine, with
certain Articles added by this famous Queen. Some are of opinion, that this
form of religion was first invented in Greece, but that the fathers had
ordained, that the men should remain separated from the women, least they
should give occasion of scandal: wherefore, S. Brigide desiring to revive this
order, she found means how, without any suspicion, the Church and house should
be common to both. She ordained, That they should wear a russet habit, with a
cloak of the same color, with a redd Cross upon their breasts; she would have
Paul: Then four Deacons, who might also be Priests, and represented the four
Doctors of the Church, and eight Conuerts, who must always be ready to labor
for the affairs of the house: so as the Friars and the Nuns all together
made the number of the thirteen Apostles, and the seventy two Disciples of
our Savior: and to the end they might be distinguished one from another, the
Priests carried a redd Cross upon the left side of their cloak, under which
Cross they put a little piece of white cloth, as broad as a wafer, which they
offer up in reverence of the holy Sacrament. And the four Deacons, for a
difference from the Priests, carry a round Katherine, Princess of Nerice,
caused the rule, after her death, to be confirmed by Pope Vrbain the fifth. She
began her Revelations, in the year of our Lord God 1344, and in the year of
our Redemption 1346. She came to Rome at the age of two and forty, where she
continued eight and twenty years; she was canonized

Premontre.
The beginning of the order of Premontre came from one Norbert, borne at
Cologne, and afterward Archbishop of Magdebourg, to whom they write that the
Virgin Marie appeared on a time, saying, Norbert, take a white habit: Whereupon
he left the world, and with certain companions which he had, retired into a
very so^i^arie and desert place, called Premontre, to do penance, in the
year of our Lord God 1120, the which he did by the permission of the
Archbishop of Lion, for that this Desert was in his Diocese: Thus from this
place, called Premontre, the company took the name which it bears unto this
day: afterward, he caused it to be confirmed by Calixtus the second, in the
year of our Redemption 1121, and then by Honorius the second, his successor,
who gave them the rule of S. Augustine, and made them Innocent the third. This
company is so multiplipied in France, Spain, and elsewhere, as it is divided
into thirty provinces, in the which they have above one thousand and three
hundred Monasteries, and about four hundred Conuents of women. Their Abbots
are perpetual, and must be consecrated by Bishops. They have power to confer
the lesser orders to their Monks, and to bless all the ornaments of the
Church, and to do all other ceremonies, but whereas consecration is required in
the blessing: yet they may celebrat solemn and public Mass, with the Myter,
Crosier, Staff, Cappe, and other ornaments which belong to the Episcopal
dignity and honor. Their service, or Henry the fourth, who was Emperor of
Germany. William Tyr says, that in his time one which was called Almeric a
regular Chanoin of Premontre, was made Bishop of Sienna, in the year of our
Redemption one thousand one hundred and eighty. As for their founder, having
done many miracles as well in his life time, as after his death he was
canonized.

The first founder of the order of Font-Auellana was Saint Lodolfe,
Font-Auellana.
who being Dante, the which are about five miles distant from the town of
Cailles, and twenty from Vrbin or near thereabouts; and yet they are under
the Diocese of Aggobia. This good and virtuous man, being retired into this
place, where he lived solitarily after the manner of an Hermit, in a short
time he purchased to himself such reputation of sanctity, as a great many
went and submitted themselves unto him, to follow his kind of life; whereupon
he caused a Monastery to be erected and built, carrying the title of the holy
Cross; so as at this day it is called by them that inhabit or dwell
thereabouts the Mountain of the holy Cross: Peter Damian who was a Monk of
the Abbey of Classi at Rauenna of the order of Camaldoli, the which was a great
personage, not only for that he had been Bishop and Cardinal, but also, for
his great sanctity and holiness, for the which he deserved to be canonized,
restored this order to her ancient rule and observance, causing them to
observe the rule of Saint Bennet, and having caused a Cloister to be built, he
put into it such Hermites as he thought fit for that place. Their habit was a
white frocke, with a scapularie of wool, and a white hood, they made
profession in the hands of a Notarie: since they grew disordered again; so as
the Abbey was held in Comendam: and since all Monasticke order and discipline
being overthrown, Pope Pius the fifth, Balueoli of Bagnacaualli, and their
Prior Ambrose Cagnoli, a gentleman of Lodese. The Poet Dante remained sometime
in this place, where he composed part of his verses. This order was begun about
the year of Grace

The company which they call the Hermites of the Lady of Gonzaga grew upon
this occasion: Francis of Gonzaga, the fourth Marquis of Mantoua, Hermites of
our Lady of Gonzaga.
who had made himself famous among the most valiant, and worthiest captains
of his time, going one day to disport himself in a house of his the which was
about twelve miles distant from Mantoua, passing by a part of the wall whereon
was painted the image of the Virgin Marie, suddenly his horse rose upright and
fell backewards, the Marquis being under him, who was so bruised, as all his
gentlemen held him for dead: then one of the company who was called Ierosme
Regini of Castle Geoffrey, which is in the country of Mantoua, a devout man
and fearing God, being wonderfully grieved Mary that if it pleased him of his
mercy to restore the Marquis to life, he would abandon the world, and become a
Hermit in that place, the which prayer was presently heard, for the Marquis
Ierosme, appointing it a good rent, whither he retired himself, and was the
cause that many came and joined with him: some time after, by the favor of the
Bishop of Rhegium, they chose a rule and form of living, the which, they say,
they keep at this present day, being established and confirmed by Pope
Alexander the sixth. They make no profession, neither are they bound to any
article upon pain of deadly sin. They have certain privileges which were
given them by the holy See: they choose a General, and have at this present
day about three score and ten Monasteries, whereof the chief is that of
Gonzaga, Innocent the eight, and during the Empire of Maximilian the first.

(...)
Richard Ear of Cornwall, brother to Henry the third, king of England, having
remained some time in Germany, at his return he brought with him a small
portion of the blood of Jesus Christ, and built a Monastery near unto a
village the which was about five and twenty miles distant from London, where
he put this precious blood, bringing in this order, which they call Bons
Hommes, or good men, who observe and follow the rule of Saint A^gusti^, and
wear a habit of a smokie color, the which is almost like unto that of the
Hermites. Their Prior or Abbot is called by the name of Rector, and the chief
and most famous Monastery of their order is

Of the Common life.
The company of the Common life began in the time of Pope Gregory the
eleventh, by one called Gerrard, who was a man of great holiness, in the
diocese of T^rentum, in the year of our Salvation one thousand three hundred
seventy and three. He was a Germane borne, and composed many excellent works,
the which were worthy to be read for their doctrine. Barefooted.
In Spain there was another congregation called the Barefooted, which attire
themselves in course cloth, like unto the Capucins; but they wear a round
capuche or hood: they do great penance, and observe the rule of Saint Francis
very severely and strictly. They have many monasteries, all which are in Of the
holy Ghost.
the which is alone of that order, only it has a member in Padoue which
depends thereon, and it is called Saint Michaell: they attire themselves like
unto the regular Chanoins of Latran: they live in common, and observe the rule
of Saint Augustine. They are all Venecians, and enjoy great revenues.

Order of the Redemption of Captives.
In the year of our Lord God one thousand two hundred sixty and four, in the
time of Clement the fourth, began the order of the Redemption of captives,
whose charge is to redeem prisoners that are under the Turks hands, and to
restore them to their full liberty: they attire themselves in white, a wear a
cloak, the which is open before, after the manner of the Carmes, but it is
white: they have upon the right side Quir^e near unto the tower of Conte at
Rome, who obtained it from the Pope with some revenue, in the year 1564. They
observe the rule of Saint Augustine.

Order of the Trinity.
The order of the holy Trinity was instituted to deliver poor prisoners out
of the Turks hands. Paul M^ris^ holds that their first monastery was Saint
Thomas des Monts in Mont Celia, and the reason of the foundation is, for that
entering into the little Anno Domini and Incarnationis 1197, Pontificatus vero
Domini Innocentij Papae terty, Anno primo 15 Calendis Ianuarij, institutus est
nutu Dei ordo Sanctissimae Trinitatis, and captiuorum, a fratre Iohanne, sub
propriaregula sibi ab Apostolica sede concessa; sepultus est idem frater
Johannes in hoc loco: Anno Domini 1213, Mense Decembris vicesimo primo. It was
begun whenas Pope Innocent the third declared Otho the fifth, Emperor of the
West, and cro^ned him, and at the same time that Constantinople was taken by
the French and Venetians.

In the year of our Lord God 1198, Hospital of the Holy Ghost.
Pope Innocent the third caused to be built in Rome, that goodly and famous
Hospital of the Holy Ghost, in Saxony (which place Bernard, in Cirilli of
Aquila, Preceptor, and Master general of the said order, reformed and amended
it in such sort, as the sick are better tended, the alms augmented, a great
number of Virgins married, divine Service well administered, the revenues much
increased, and the place very well entertained with reparations. This rule
commands, that all the brethren I such a one, give and present my self to
God, to the blessed Virgin Marie, to the Holy Ghost, and to my Lords the poor
and sick, to be their servant all the days of my life: I promise (by the
grace of God) to keep chastity, and have nothing in my own possession, and
to yield all obedience to you ^y Master and General, and to all your
successors, and to have a faithful care of the good of the poor, as God me
help, and the holy Evangelists; and so he presents himself at the Altar,
with the Book of the Evangelists: then the Preceptor, or he that is the most
ancient, makes him this answer: For the promise which thou have made unto God,
and Having said this, the Ancient takes a cloak whereon there is a Cosse, the
which he shows him, then putting it upon his shoulders, he says unto him: By
virtue of this sign of the Cross, let thy bad spirit be chased from thee, and
Jesus Christ lead thee to the everlasting kingdom. This Congregation has many
Hospitalls in diverse parts of Christendom, whereof that at Rome is the chief:
Their general Chapters are held there, and there an account

The Author of the Congregation of Priests which gather together Orphans, The
order of Priests.
was a Venetian gentleman called Ierosme Miani, who having an intent to do
some work pleasing unto God, and persisting in this holy resolution, there
fell out a great death at Venice, where it was so great, as the poor dyed in
the streets of h^nger: which Marie) with such as were with him, living only of
bread and water, and not caring for any other meat: The which being di^^lged
into all the neighbor and bordering places, many of those people came flocking
unto him, and there was a lodging given in that town whereas he and his did
live in all holiness of life, the which did move many by his example to
abandon their goods to follow him, and to live with him in poverty. Being thus
settled in this place, and desiring to show some fruits in other places, he went
into the town of Bergamo, whereas he caused three hospitalls to be built, one
for poor ^word another for the Conuerts, and the third for women children
which were (...). This being done, he took his way toward Milan, where being
safely arrived, Francis Sforce the second, Duke of Milan, who assisted him much
to continue this holy and religious enterprise, giving him the place whereas
they now lodge, and binding himself to pay the rent thereof to the great
hospital of Milan, for that it did belong solely unto it, so as even at this
day, the rent of that hospital is paid out of the Dukes treasury. After that
this good gentleman had labored long in this holy and godly work, going to
diverse towns to build places fit to receive poor orphans: he Paul Farnese
the third, and afterward by Pius the fourth, who suffered them to continue as
they had begun, and accepted, under the protection of the Church, not only all
the places and Conuents which they had then, but all others they should have
hereafter. Since, they began to make profession, the which was confirmed by
Pope Pius the fifth: It began in the year of Grace 1528, Clement the seventh
holding the Holy See, and Charles the fifth being Emperor.

Francis Ssorce the last duke of that house, was besieged in Milan, and
retiring himself into the Castle, he was forced for want of victuals to yield
himself to Anthony de Leave, and to the Marquis of Pescara, leaving the city
and castle to the Emperor Charles the fifth. Moreover Milan was so afflicted
with the plague, as at the least two parts of the people were dead: at that
time three gentlemen, the first was called James Anthony of the house of Moris
(the which is very ancient, as may appear by the two Martyrs Nabor and Foelix
of the said house, who received Maximian and Disclesian, the which was about
three ^eore and ten years before Saint Ambrose:) the second was of Cremona who
was called Francis Maria Z^charie: and the third was a Milanois, and his ^ame
was Bartholomew Ferrera: Regular Pries^^ of S. Paul.
these three instituted the company of Regular Priests of Saint Paul in Milan,
dedicating themselves to a devout and contemplative life, and abstaining from
all pleasures and vanities of the world, exhorting sinners continually to
repentance and amendment of life, and reading the Epistles of Saint Paul
publicly, hearing all men in confession, and administering the Sacraments of
the holy Communion. Finally they lived in common, and held nothing in proper:
they had a custom to discipline and whip themselves in streets and public
Barnabie.

The order of the Regular Priests Theatins took his beginning from John Peter
Caraphe son to John Anthony Caraphe a famous ^aron of the city of Naples,
Theatins.
who having been Bishop of Theate, renounced his Bishopric, to the end he
might live solitarily in a part of Mont Piatio: in the end, upon the day of the
exaltation of the holy Cross, in the year of our Lord God one thousand five
hundred twenty and eight, Clement the fifth, being Pope, and Charles the fifth
Emperor, accompanied by Ca^eta^ Tienne of Vicenes, Apostolic Prothono^arie,
Boniface Colly Alexandrin, and Paul who was a Roman, all (...) and agreeing in
one devotion, they went together into the Church of Saint Peter, where they
were conducted by the whole Clergy in solemn Procession to the great Altar,
where are the holy Relics of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, upon which Altar
they did swear and promise before all the world to ob^erue and keep the three
vows which other religious and holy men are accustomed to promise in their
profession, that is to say, Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience. These four
(which are here mentioned) were the first which made this vow, and all they
that have since entered into this order have done the like; and for that the
chiefest among them was Bishop of Theate, they are at this day called Theatins.
It is true that this Bishop after he had instituted this order, was made
Cardinal Paul, and since, after the death of Marcell, who was Pope for the
space of one and twenty days, he was advanced to the Pontifical See, and was
called Paul the fourth; fo as many of this order are called Paulists, but more
commonly Theatins.

The order of the Jesuits is now so well known throughout the whole world,
Jesuits.
as it were super^^uous to write much: it suffices only to observe that the
Founder was Ignatius of the noble family of the Loyoles, who are near to the
town of Alpeithia in the province of Guipuscoa in Spain, who being
accompanied by Peter Febure, Alphonso Salmeron, Claud ^aye, Francis Xaiues,
James Laynes, Nicholas Bou^dille, Simon Rodrigues, John Cordure, and Pasquis
Broet, made a vow in the Chapel of Martyrs, Denis Areopagita, patron and
protector of the city of Paris, they made a vow to God to renounce the world,
and Peter, for the health and spiritual succor of their neighbors, without
any expectance of recompense, or exception of time and place, which vow they
made in the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred thirty and four, on
the fifteenth day of August, whenas the Church does solemnize the feast of the
Assumption of the mother Ignatius having been established and confirmed by the
holy See, upon the eight and twentieth day of October, in the year of Grace
one thousand five hundred and forty; upon Friday before the Calends of May,
Ignatius and his companions made a new profession in the Church of Saint Paul
at Rome. This order was confirmed at the Council of Trent, as may be seen in
the five and twentieth Session, Chap. seventeen. They write that a vision
which Ignatius had of our Savior Jesus Christ when he was at Rome, (who
promised to be favorable unto him) was the only cause that made him to give
the most holy name of Jesus to his Society.

Priests of the Oratorie.
There are also the Priests of the Oratorie, of which Philip Nerio who was a
Florentine, Caesar Baronius, the second Francis Bourdin, who was afterward
Bishop of Auignon, and the third Alexander Fidelle, they began their
congregation at Rome in Saint Ierosmes Church, whereas after their number
increased, they daily chose some among them to preach unto the people, Saturday
excepted. His principal intent was to reduce the order of Priesthood to his
ancient beauty.

This last year Peter of Berule, a French man borne at Paris, of a good and
noble family, (whose piety and holiness cannot be sufficiently recommended,
nor the great and fervent zeal which he has to the glory of God, and the
health of souls, Paul the fifth, now Bishop of Rome, from which they attend
great fruits by the goodly rules and reformations which they expect from them
in many things.

There are other companies for Christian doctrine, instituted chiefly to
catechize young children, Vrsulines.
the which begins now to be much used in France, among the which there are
Virgins called Vrsulines, both at Lion, Auignon, and in other places which
instruct the youth, yet they make no vow: but the last year being one thousand
one hundred and twelve, in the month of November upon Saint Martins day, other
Jacques at Paris, took a new habit under the rule of Saint Augustine, and made
the three solemn vows which they had obtained from Paul the fifth. They are
yet but twelve.

Orde^ condemned. The White.
Having treated of the orders allowed by the Church, it shall not be from the
purpose to speak something of those which are condemned, among others of the
Whites, which had this beginning. In the time of Boniface the ninth, there came
out of Germany a certain Priest, who descending from the Alps with some that
followed him, staid at Lucca, where he presently drew above 3000 persons unto
his devotion. He attired himself all in white, wearing a surplus of linen,
with a hood upon his head Mercy, Peace, with other inuocations: This is the
contemplation of the most holy Mother of God, composed by S. Gregory, that is
to say, Stabat Matter dolorosa, etc. and whereas night surprised them, they lay
down upon the ground, and Innocent the ninth, who was at Viterbe, about forty
miles distant from Rome, being aduertized thereof, caused their leader to be
apprehended, and then carried to Rome, where being examined, he was presently
condemned to die, and executed as a superstitious man: so the head and guide
being taken away, this company was soon dissolved, and every man returned to
his own house, the which did happen in the year of our Redemption one Peter
of Moron, the which is also much reverenced for the great miracles it does, and
they say, it is the same which the women of that company carried in Procession
whenas they followed this Churchman. There is also in this Church, a
brotherhood of the Whites. This company began about the year of our Lord God
1396, and was extinct in the year of Iubile 1400. In the city of Luca there
is a Church of S. Martin, which Pope Alexander the second caused to be built,
whenas he was Bishop of that place: and being Pope, he granted a privilege to
the Chanoins which are there, to wear Myters of white silk in certain
solemnities: The which they have always observed since, unto the time of Paul
the third, who not only confirmed this privilege, but also gave them leave to
wear an Episcopal habit when they would.

After these, we may place them of the Coquinerie, The Coquinerie.
who had rather endure all discommodities, than to labor; yet they would raise
a new company under a kind of religion, wearing a long jacket of course
canuase, wandering up and down bare headed, and bare feet, standing at the
doors of Churches, or at the corners of streets to demand alms. They say that
an idle man of Cremona, called James, was the Author; they did eat all kinds of
meat, and what they would, and they slept when and as much as they pleased,
they went where they list, and did use money, and which was worst of all, they
yielded no obedience to any man, but lived at discretion, being neither subject
to Bishop,

There was also the company of Friars of the Opinion, Friars of the Opinion.
who had their beginning in the year of Christ 1278, by one called Herman, and
it was much favored by many Princes, but in the end, when their villainies were
discovered, they were suppressed, and their company was excommunicated by Pope
Boniface the eighth.

Doulcins.
In the year of our Lord God 1300, began the company of the Doulcins, which
was invented by one borne at Navarre, a town in the Duchy of Milan, called
Doulcin, who in less than a year drew together above six thousand persons,
which followed the same order, or rather disorder, like to those we have
formerly spoken of. This company was excommunicated by Pope Clement the fifth.

The poor of Lion.
As for the company of the poor of Lion, they were chased away by Pope John
the two and twentieth. They term themselves to be of the order of S. Francis,
and held certain opinions against the Romish faith; wherefore, the Pope did
not only banish Peter, of the order of the Friars Minors.

Orders in Aethiopia.
But before we end this discourse, it shall be fit to content the Readers
curiosity, to speak something of the orders which they have in Aethiopia. The
greatest Monastery which they have in that country, is that of Bisan, that is
to say, of the Vision, the which is near to the town of Ercoco, in the
government of Bernagas, subject unto Presbiter John: There are in this
Monastery above three thousand Monks, this being the chief of six others
which are situated thereabouts, whereof the farthest is not thirty miles
distant. In either of them there is a Dauitte, that is to say, a Guardian, who
is subject, and yields obedience to the Abbot of the Vision. This Monastery is
seated

Anthony, although they have some diversity in their fasts and abstinences:
for there are some which eat flesh, and drink wine, and others which will not
once see it, nor suffer it to enter into their conuents. Their garments are all
yellow, some being made of course cotton, and others of goats skins dressed
like Shamois. The religious women have the like habit, but they wear no cloak
upon their frocke, nor hair like to the men, but they wear a bare frocke, and
their heads are shaven, about the which they wear a band of leather very
close, but when they are old, and then they wear certain coyfes and vailes:
they do not live shut up in any monasteries, but in farms and villages which
depend thereon, and for that (as we have said) all their religious Candace,
after that she had been baptized Philip) there are three hundred Chanoins, and
as many Monks: they never say but one Mass a day, and they come not to it,
but there are three Priests ready at the altar with incense, and barefoot, for
every man puts off his shoes before he comes into the Church, neither do they
spit when they are once entered. Lay^ men and women never enter but stay without
in a round circle, and there receive the Sacrament from Churchmen, be they
Priests or Monks. They have bells of stone and iron, and the Monks rise
always two hours before day to Mattins, the which they say by heart, and they
have no other light but a lamp, which burns always in the midst of the
Church, whereunto they put butter in steed of oil, for that they have no olive
trees in that country. to the solemnity which they celebrate; and whilst
they are in the Church at

As for their fasts, they begin their Lent upon the Monday of Sexagesima, which
is ten days before our Lent: their general abstinence during their Lent, is
to live of bread and water, for in truth they should find no fish if they would
eat any, there being little in that country, for that it is too far from the
sea: true it is, they have good fish, and some store in their rivers, but they
know not how to take it; and they fish but seldom at the instance of great
men. Their ordinary feeding is bread, for their Lent being just in the heart
of their Summer, for want of rain, they can have no coleworts; yet in some
monasteries they plant them so well, as they want not any throughout the year:
in other places they live of grapes and peaches which grow ripe in the end of
February, and continue to the end of April, whereof they feed, and they that
Candace, where there is a lake, in the which there are many little lodgings of
stone, whereas many Monks and other Priests sit upon those days: there are
others which not only forbear to eat bread, but retire themselves into deep
valleys in very thick forests, whereas no creature living comes, and there
they do penance all the Lent with water. The fasting of most of the religious
during Lent, is to eat once in two days, and always Marie, which they
commonly call the feast of S. Sauere, they have no fasts. The three first days
after the Purification, they fast very strictly and carefully, and they say it
is the repentance of Niniue: Upon these three days, the time of Aduent, and
the holy time of Lent, all indifferently, as Priests, Seculars, men, women,
and chidren, both great and small, fast inuiolably, without any respect of
persons. Having spoken of the Monks which march under the Standard of the
Crucifix, it shall not be much from the purpose (in my opinion) to write a word
of those which are now enrolled for the better part, under that triumphant and
glorious ensign, and which were heretofore tied to the superstitions of
Idolatry and ungodliness, that is to say, of those of the great Island of
Iapon, or of Zipang^, as Francis Xauier the Jesuit relates, Xaca (which they
say was borne 8000 years before his mother had conceived him) Amida, and
Quanon. They do also worship the Sun and the Moon, which they call Denix,
this people being Michael Vilette, a Jesuit, says, in an Epistle which he has
written, that in a mountain near to the royal town of Meaco, there were in
old time seven thousand Monasteries dedicated to Idols, and among others, there
was one very rich, where their king, and all the rest of the people, go to
make their vows,

Thus I have briefly set down what may be said of the orders and companies of
religious men which are in Christendom.

FINIS

