PAGANISM AND PAPISME: PARALLELED AND SET forth in a Sermon at the
Temple-Church, upon the Feast day of All Saints. 1623.

BY THOMAS AILESBVRY Student in Divinity.

LACTAN. Primus sapientla gradus est falsa cognoscere.

LONDON, Printed by George Eld, for Leonard Becket.

1624.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY EARL OF Southampton, Baron of Tichfield, Knight
of the most Noble order of the Garter, Captain of the I Will of Weight, and one
of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
I Present unto your Lordships view, the Model of a Sermon, unworthy I
confess, either of their public life, or of so transcendent a protection;
modestly framed for the Pulpit, not curiously adorned for the Press: wherein
your Lordship may behold Pagan and Papal Rome, so mutually intertexed and
folded up into one Mass or Chaos, that you may safely pronounce the Heathen
City to live in this they call Christian: Yea, such is the dependancy, that if
this Iezabel were stripped out of those Robes of Paganism, she would well-nigh
go naked.

Many nations were converted to Christ by the preaching of S. Paul. Yet we
find not such an honorable attribute given to any of his Auditors, as to those
who are said, To have received the Word with readiness, and to have searched
the Scriptures daily, to see whether the things preached by S. Paul were so or
not: For they are styled by the best Record Noble men. And nothing (Sir) has
added, or can add more true nobleness to all your other great Titles of
Honor, then the like Zealous affections and actions in you to the Word of God,
delivered by his Ministers.

The daily enlargement whereof in your Lordship, being Zealously coueted by my
self: who although I am the weakest Labourer in Gods Vineyard, yet I have
presumed humbly to offer to your Lordship this little cluster of Grapes
gathered from thence, and which I did lately in a Sermon deliver unto the
Auditory then present: which if your Lordship will vouchsafe to take into your
hands, to bruise it a little more, and to see and taste whether it sprung from
the true Vine or not: I shall have good hope that yet a little juice may
thereby flow from thence to refresh some weak ones in the Church of God.

Which being the only business that God has set me about, by any means to
save some; And all I have to say to your Lordship at this time: With my humble
acknowledgement of your Lordships great favors, and my hearty prayers to God
to increase daily your Zeal to his true worship: I rest

Your Lordships most humbly devoted, THOMAS AILESBVRY.

PAGANISM AND PAPISME PARALLELED.
1. COR. 10. 19, 20. What say I then? that the Idol is any thing? Or that which
is offered in sacrifice to Idols is any thing?
But I say, the thing which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils,
and not to God: and I would not that you should have fellowship with devils.

WHen the Apostle Lectured at Athens, the Inscription of an Altar was his
Theme; the saying of a Poet was his explication. The Altar was sacred unto the
unknown God, whose influence to all his Creatures was made known by the Poet;
In him we live, move, and have our being.

As God is the Efficient, so is he the final cause to all his Creatures, not
the least work that passed his hands, but he stamped perfection upon it, yet
that perfection is finite, and limited, as having a being after a not- being,
and a necessity of ceasing to be, if the hand be withdrawn wherewith it is
supported, Perfectio ordinis is communicated to the Creatures, but perfectio
Essentiae resideth in the Almighty, and of that the Creature falling infinitely
short, does aspire and reflect upon the infinitely perfect Creator.

The issuing of the Creatures from the Creator, is like to a right line drawn
out in length which of all other is the weakest, neither can it be strengthened
but by redoubling, and so becomes in a manner Circular. The creature fears
to remove too far from the Creator: therefore looks back, and makes haste
to return to that first being, for whose sake they are, and have been
created; Man especially like Noah's Dove finds no resting but in this Arc, does
center his restless motions upon nothing but the Almighties fruition. And thus
by nature directed to the high Deity of Heaven, does prescribe to himself a
mean called Religion, to win the favor of that high perfection: That speech
of Tully prescribes against all Atheists, There is no Nation so barbarous but
takes notice of heavens Ruler. The Indigitamenta stored with diverse Deities
proclaim the Gentiles to be no Atheists, yet their (...) error in the
erection of many, shows their Religion to be waste. Deum vnum non vnice
colunt, branching out this one God into diverse fragments of Religious Deities.

Inexplicable I suppose is that which the Apostle relates of the religious
knowledge and practice of the Gentiles, Romans 1. 19.
(...) they were not ignorant of that which may be known of God. And the
reason thereof was a celestial illumination. God has manifested it unto them.
For without a supernall Revelation they could not understand the Idiom of the
Creatures when they spoke of a Deity* And Saint Augustine traceth in their
writings some footsteps of the sacred Trinity; though with judicious De Ciui^.
Dei 10* 23.
Viues, Loquntos eos, potius quam intellexisse existimo, I suppose that high
subject to transcend humane capacity. Rom* 2* 15.
And for their practice, The Gentiles do the works of the Law written in
their hearts. For I demand how they did those works. If as Gentiles, it is
Pelagianisme; and if as Christians, why does the Apostle say by nature? I bury
old Clemens, who in 7o (...) teaches that saving knowledge was couched in
Philosophy, or else let the great Casaubon heartily interpret him; That so
Explicit a knowledge of our Savior before the Incarnation, was not so
necessarily required, as since his manifestation in the flesh.

Thus we see Religion inserted by Nature, yet without Grace but an aberration;
Eadem spectamus astra, Coelum nobis commune est, idem nos involuit mundus; (as
he spoke in Ambrose) we all stand upon the same earth, under one celestial
Roof imbroidered with Stars; Our desires tend to the same heaven, yet we
seek not to mount by the same Ladder; to the Gentiles, Jews, and Christians
heaven is the Goal, though the race be diverse. The Apostle censureth
Gentilisme to be deuilish; Iudaisme, Superstitious; but Christianity Devotion:
this truth to be embraced, those Deuiations to be shunned; What say I then that
the Idol is any thing, etc. Therefore I would not you should have fellowship
with Devils.

The oceasion.
The Apostle returns to his dispute begun Chap. 8. concerning things
sacrificed to Idols, whereof those Christians that did participate, were a rack
and Scandal to their consciences, that out of tenderness refused to eat of
the Idol-sacrifices: here both their reasons are produced: First, for those
which abstained, in regard of that (...) which depends betwixt the Religion,
and the meats set apart to those Religious obseruances, that they could not
touch the Idol-Hosts without contracting pollution from the profane Religion;
for every sacrifice confines the suppliant to that excellency which thereby is
celebrated; The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of Christ's body?
And are not they which eat of the sacrifices, partakers of the Altar? So that
by Antithesis, as sanctity does stream from the service of the God of heaven,
must corruption be traduced from the Altar of an Infernal Idol: therefore they
abstained.

Other Christians well knowing an Idol to be nothing, and by consequence of no
power to infect, did eat of the meat taken from the profane Altars, because
the earth was the Lords, and the fulness thereof. The Apostle grants this
foundation to be true. What say I then, that an Idol is any thing? but shows
that they built stubble thereupon, because in so eating they gave offense, and
withal adds, Though the Idol be nothing to pollute Gods Creatures; yet the
end and intent of the Sacrificers was impious, and therefore might well defile
the associates; and enioynes a forbearing for peril of Idolatry. I would not
that you should have fellowship with devils.

Aquinas deriues this Text another way. That S. Paul did thus determine, in
respect of those that were without. The blind Gentiles thought all meats
unclean, unless consecrated at the Altar, by the touch whereof the superstitious
Jews thought them defiled; both false: for an Idol being nothing, had neither
virtue to sanctify, nor power to pollute any of Gods Creatures. Thus you see
the Text ingulphed in difficulties, yet with Gods grace, and your favor, I
despair not to fadome the depth thereof.

The Subject whereof is Gentile Theology: it begins in an Idol, and ends in
Devils, the true object, and intent of Paganism: the one Idolatrous, the other
Deuilish: And it separates it self into two parts; the Object, and the
Subject. The Object about which, was an Idol: the Subject in which, were the
Aeditui, or Idol-Sacrificers: upon both of which lies the Apostolical
Censure, that the Idol, and the Sacrifice is nothing; but the Sacrificers, and
their intent is deuillish, then is the question vmpierd in this compassionate
Conclusion, I would not you should have fellowship with Devils. And the former
of these shall I consider; 1. Absolutely, the Idol, and the Sacrifice; 2, with
relation to the Apostolical Censure, that they are nothing.

In the later, of the Sacrificers, I shall take these steps. 1. Their
Adoration of false gods, Damonijs immolant, they sacrifice to Devils: 2, the
dereliction of the True God, and not unto God: and so shut-vp in the Apostles
Conclusion: I would not you should, etc.

First, the Idol.
Though the Gentiles at Natures school had learnt to pacific God with
Religion; yet when they expected not further instructions from heaven, they
became vain in Rom.* 1. 23
their thoughts and changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into an image
made like corruptible man.

The Eastern Sages had two Guides to conduct to Christ, humane wisdom, they
were wisemen: and heavens direction, a Star chalked out their way to
Bethlehem; which no sooner dispeared, but put them to seek their way. God will
be served according to his own directions. The Heathen would do him homage,
but after their own humor; and pourtrait out his Deity by an earthly Idol. A
mispreson of the High God first occasioned Idols. And when Religion was cut-out
according to the rules of flesh and blood, there was no God thought on, except
the eye could witness it. The Lord when he gave the Law in the Mount,
appeared in no shape, lest man thereby should take a pattern to delineate his
Image. It was uncouth in Israel (such was their breeding in Egypt) to adore an
unseen God* therefore they became suitors to Aaron for an Instauration of the
Egyptian gods, Make us gods that may go before us. When Man became vain in
his thoughts, Idols were not erected till then, and then they were.

And these Idols were of two sorts. 1. Either the representations of false
gods: 2, or false representations of the true. The first time that we meet with
Idols in the Scripture Genesis 31. 19.
we find them in Labans Family, Rahel thought her fathers Teraphim a fair
portion for her Jacob. And *it is clear, those Images were his Gods, for he
accuses his Daughter of Sacrilege, Why have thou stolen my gods?

Idols of the first sort.
The Heathen to continue the memory of their deceased Worthies, erected
Columnas, and Simulacra to outface the Iniquity of aftertimes, that
obliterate and intombe all things in the grave of oblivion. And at those
Statues did they perform their Anniuersarie Devotions with such Solemnity,
that the vulgar conceived them to be more then men. Who had read in the Roman
Annals the Iusta, and exequies sacred to the honor of Germanicus, celebrated
Saliari Carmine with an Hymn (if Lypsius say true) appropriated to the Gods,
his Seeds curules, and Effegies erected in the Capital, would not (if an high
illumination should not check him) register him in his thoughts for a god; to
this purpose their most ancient Columns, and Altars were consecrated, and bore
this inscription Diis Manibus; and (...) is derived says In Fulgentii
Mythologis.
Diophantus of (...), that is a Species of grief; and a late Critic
remembers us of the like in the Hebrew Dialect, where (...) signifies both
grief, and Idols: And though the Gentiles are not ignorant, that their own
Apollodorus has described the lives, recorded the deaths, and pointed at the
very Sepulchers of their gods, yet their Commemoratiue Statues have gained such
credit in the breasts of the Vulgar, that their thoughts have enrolled them in
heaven; whom they know to be putrified in earth. These Idols are
representations of false gods.

Secondly, the Pagans erected false Images of the True God. This the Apostle
touches, The Gentiles, did not change God into Man, but (...) into the
likeness of Man. And how ever the wiser Heathen were carried away with the
Streams of the furious Vulgar, it is manifest, they reputed those Idols, but
as Symbols of that high Deity they comprehended not. The Israelites infected
with the Egyptian air, and imbrued with Idolatry, learnt no more but to erect
Calves in memory of the great God. They could not on the sudden fall off from
the Lord, so lately catechized with his wonders, but thought to set up Calves
to his honor: So runs the Tenor of Aarons Proclamation: To morrow shall be
a Feast to Jehovah: being wiser then the Vulgar Idolatrous; but as Idolatrous
as the wiser Heathen, to serve God before an Idol.

The Papal Rome at this day out-bids the Pagan for Idols of this sort, and
scorns the old City should exceed the new in Plurality of Images. She has
forged Images to Saints, to Christ, and dares appear by her Champion Cardinal
Bellarmine, (though timorously I confess) in defense of those Images, that
limme out the Sacred Trinity. Impudent man to make any comparison of God,
whereas the Prophet demands in his name, To whom will ye compare me? The
Lord did reserve himself in the Mount that he might not occasion Idolatry, and
slacken the reins of that spiritual concupiscence. S. Augustine lib. 4. de
Ciuit. Dei, cap. 31. relates out of Varro, that the ancient Romans for an
hundred and seventy years, A. V. C. had no Idol in their Capital, which
custom had it still continued Castius Dij obseruarentur, our devotions had
been celebrated with greater Chastity, prudenter existimans says that
indicious Father, Deospossein simulacrorum stoliditate contemni, That the Deity
would grow into contempt, if figured by an Idol: Thus much for the first
branch, the Idol. Remove your attention to the Idol-sacrifice: which is the
next in order.

Sacrifices
I omit their Hymns, Inuocations, etc. wherein consisted their profane service,
though as gross as their Idols. No Gods would down with the Heathen, but
those before their eyes; no supplications could pierce the clouds, and have the
hearing, except they speak out. Cry aloud, said Elias, in a holy derision to
the Priests of Baal, which (...) is perstringed by our Savior: Use no vain
repetitions as the Heathen, who think to be heard for their much babbling.

As Nature did prompt Religion, so has she taught to solemnize it with
Sacrifice. The first pair of Brethren Cain and Abel though not both good; yet
both were sacrificers, Chrysostom.
V^erque conscientiae suae magisterio, by intimation from the Conscience. And
seeing all blessings stream down from heaven to us, it is most reasonable to
reflect upon God the fountain by sacrifice: And as the beams of his blessings
fall, such is the reflection. Good Jacob had Genesis 27. 28. 39.
for his share in his fathers blessing, the dew of Heaven, and the fatness of
the earth. Profane Esau, the fatness of the earth, and the dew of Heaven: Vide
structuram benedictionis, says Chrysostom: Mark how these blessings were
compacted, Jacob had the dew of heaven seconded with the fatnes of the earth,
which in Esaus blessing is post-posed. And such is the return, Abel immolates
with a free heart, Cain with murmuring: therefore respexit Dominus ad Abel and
eius munera; the Lord loved the fruit for the tree that bare them.

The Church of Rome has made bold to turn over all the rest of Gods worship
to the Saints his servants, but has reserved sacrifice to the Highest; and did
never as yet make a breach thereupon, lest the Heathen should whisper in their
ears, and tell them that sacrifice is an Emblem of a Deity. The men of Lystra
no sooner supposed Paul, and Barnabas to be Gods, but Jupiters Priests shall
welcome them with sacrifice. And with this solemnity was the God of Heaven
truly honored, till all Sacrifices determined in that great one of our Savior
upon the Cross.

Superstition is the Canker of Religion, and as Religion is not faith, but a
protestation thereof: so Superstition is not, but a protestation of
Infidelity; Religion scarce ever existed without this bane, and has no sooner
seized upon a heart, but Superstition knocks at the door, and calls for
admittance. The Holy Ghost has left it doubtful, Genesis 4. Com. 20. If men did
call, or profane in calling on the Name of the Lord; the Hebrew (...) of (...)
will bear both significations. And whether reading is to be embraced, they
began to call, or profane in calling, let our Critics see that.

The Gentile-Theologie was threefold. 1, Physicalis: 2, Fabularis. 3, and
Ciuilis: The first was read in schools, and that had in it some notions of the
True God: the second was represented on Theaters, the Seges and matter of
Poetry: the third had religious adoration in the Temples; which Adoration was
twofold, internal, and external. The first was the act of sacrificing
prescribed by nature: the second the manner of the sacrifices indicted by man.
And hence it came to pass, that as all Nations agreed in Sacrifice, so did
they dissent in the manner; an Ox was sacred to Osyris, an Eagle unto Jupiter,
a Porket to Ceres, the Phoenix to Apollo, a Peacock to Juno, etc.

I conceal their Groves, high places, and costly apparatus, of which the
Scripture is full, all dedicated to Idol-deuotion. The fury of their Priests,
neither in sparing themselves from lancing, and scourging; nor their children
from sending them up in smoke, to those hellish Deities.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum. Better it were to live as beasts, Qua^
Deos tam impios, profanos, and sanguinarios colere; then to prostrate
themselves as Vassals to such blood-sucking Gods. Know you Heathen, that the
God of mercy delights not in effusion of blood. Is it possible that murder
should become piety? or can you not be faithful, except you be unnatural? I
will not load your patience further with their trifles, and had here stepped to
the third part, had not Rome called me to a consideration of her Helen the
sacrifice of the Mass; neither is it strange, that in this Text to find a
shelter, which may be reduced to no other head then Idols, and their
Sacrifices. We envy not Bellarmine this proof, but smile to see the Popish
Mass warranted from Pagan I dolatry. It was for want of better furniture, when
he implored aid of this place.

-- Vos mihi manes
Esteboni, Quoniam superis aversa voluntas.
The Jesuit will fetch his doctrine from Hell, if Heaven oppose it.

The blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist we deny not to be a Sacrifice, but
only Commemoratiue, with the Master of the Sentences. And say with Cyprian,
Christ is offered, Iugiter in mysterium, semclin pretium; daily in a mystery,
once in price and propitiation for our sins. And we take that ample
confession which the Cardinal gives us. Saint Thomas and the Schoolmen, were
so intent on the bloody sacrifice of the Cross, that they seldom mentioned
that propitiatory one in the Mass, but relatiuely as it reflected on the
other; but we disauow that abomination which defeateth the merits of our
Saviors passion; and disanulleth the benefit of our Redemption.

Thus far go the Idol, and the sacrifice, both which the Apostle censureth
for naught, that is the third thing. Mistake me not, that I say an Idol is any
thing; for we know that an Idol is nothing, and that in three respects.

First, because of no form, their Images were imaginations of their own
fancy, their pictures Chymaera's, and had no ground in Nature. The Rabbis
say, that Dagon the great tutelary Idol of the Philistims, bore in shape half
a Fish, and half a Man. So God gave the matter, but folly invented the form.
A Similitude is rei existentis, the likeness of a thing that is, an Idol is
non entis, that resembles nothing: both prohibited in the Decalogue; Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing.

Secondly, the Schoolmen observe in an Idol, a twofold composition. First,
formae artis ad materiam. Secondly; Diuinitatis ad artificium. The first is the
external shape of the materials; the second is the fiction of a Deity to that
Idol. In the former sense an Idol is something; in the later it is nothing.

Thirdly, nothing in the Gentiles estimate; for though they yielded to the
vulgar in practice; yet the learned attributed small Deity to them, else how
durst Lucian flout at their religious obseruances, Quae Religio dicenda est?
(says Lactantius,) quae adoratur in templis, illuditur in Theatris? What
Religion may that be which is adored in the Temples, and flouted at in
Theaters? The Principles in Paganism are by themselves mutually destroyed: How
could Jupiter be hominum sator atque Deorum, that had Saturn to his father?
Also their Gods were not only conspicuous for their Virtues, but infamous for
their Vices. Jupiter was an Adulterer; Mercury, a thief; Venus a wanton;
Quirinus a murderer; Flora a Curtizan. Now, quis est tam excors, qui hunc in
coelo regnare Lactantius.
putet, qui ne in terra quidem debuit? What folly is it to admit them for
Rulers in Heaven, who are not worthy to live upon this earth? And the practice
of their Religion was as vicious; the same Lactantius relates of the
Lacedaemonians, the deuouter Heathen, who upon a foul occasion (which modesty
silenceth) dedicated an Altar to Armata Venus. Holy Scripture does intimate the
foul practice of the Moabites to Baal-Peor (which was Idolum turpitudinis; so
Origin: or Priapus, as Hierome supposes) and that Israel was conspurcated by
being their Associates Numb. 25. 3.
who committed whoredom with the Daughters of Moab, and coupled himself to
Baal-Peor. Some gods found devotion, ne noceant, that they might not be
prejudicial to them; of which sort were Rhamnusia, Rubigo, Febris, Tempestas,
and mala Fortuna, all which found entertainment in Pagan- Rome. Yet every
trifle was recorded for a God. Gluttony is Idolatry says the Apostle; and the
Heathen did practice it in adoring the very Oven. Quis non rideat Fornacem
Deam? says Lactantius. But who may abstain from laughter to hear of Deamuta?
styled Lara, and Larunda, Quid praestare colenti potest, quae loqui non potest?
Besotted Heathen, thus to put themselves under the protection of a dumb
Goddess; has she a hand to protect, that wants a tongue for direction? Add
hereunto the abstract Virtues and Vices, which with them found Altarroome:
Hence were those Fana erected to Victoria, Contumelia, and Impudentia. Physic
made Aesculapius 2 God; and Valor, Mars another; every Art deifying the
Inuentor, as if such honor were due to every Invention. Nonne Milites, and
Medici egregii declarant ipsos Deos non esse Deos? says Cyril unto Julian. Men
on earth dare contend with the gods in heaven for excellency in Physic, and
warfare, which show your gods to be no gods: yea, they have not only made gods
of eminent men; but of the basest Creatures, as Allium, Cepe, etc. perstringed
by him in Statius.

Vilia cur magnos aequent animalia Diuos?

By all which it appears, there was no daintiness in the Gentile Religion:
that they reputed their gods to be trifles, and Idols nothing.

Here must I vindicate our Divines from the Calumnies of the Jesuit; who for
affirming the Gentiles not to reckon of their Idols as gods; but to adore them
in an Idol, are falsely charged with lying by the Cardinal. Indeed this
touches the quick, and remoueth all differences betwixt popish Images, and
Pagan Idols. Holy Augustine in Psalm. 96. brings in the popish Pagan objection;
We adore not the Idol, said the Heathen, but the invisible Numen there present;
yet Idola non colunt, sed colunt Daemonia; (says the Father) you worship not
Idols, yet Devils. And so am I transported to the second general branch of my
Text: viz. the Sacrificers and their intention. But that which the Gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils.

The second Part.
THe Idolatry confisted not in the Sacrifice, and Idol, but in the deordinate
intent of the Sacrificers. The Will is the subject and foundation of Justice,
or sin; and as it ever tends to the end, so from thence it traduceth either
good, or evil. Moses numbered the people with thanks; David with heavens
displeasure. The act offends not, but the mis affection. Indifferent actions
receive their life or bane from the intention of the agent. S. Augustine
observes, that Zachary the Priest, and the blessed Virgin questioned alike of
the like subject; How shall I know this? said the Priest. How shall this be?
replied the Virgin. Si verba attendamus, haud ambo crediderunt: the words in
both gave the like sound: Sed Deus potest and corda interrogare; they streamed
not from the same fountain: Mistrust of the fact had seized upon the heart of
the Priest, whereas the blessed Virgin believes the fact, but desires a
further resolution of the manner: the end is the touchstone of our doings; the
intention qualifieth, and interprets them. The Patriarks before the Law offered
sacrifice, as did the Gentiles; the practicke Religion was alike, but the scope
was diverse; they directed their sacrifice to the True God: these to devils.

Sin is a privation; but every privation is not merely a non ens: yea
Aquinas disputes, if sin may be said to be a habit: and resolves, that it
may; like sickness where there is a privation of health, and an evil
disposition of the humors; so in sin there is a want of Rectitude, and an
inordinate disposition of the affections to evil. Be it then, that the Idol
and Sacrifice be a privation, yet the intent of the Gentiles was set upon
Idolatry, in doing devotion unto devils.

First, they did sacrifice to Devils: for what else were all their Heathen
Deities, but devils, with change of appellations; the slynesse of the evil
Spirit, deluding those miserable Clients.

There are two opinions of the Gentiles. First, of Hermes Trismegistus, that
the Idols were as bodies, and the Demons as souls to inform them: the reason
of this conjecture was, because the Devils did confine themselves to particular
Statues, as at Delphos, etc. The god of Eckron was up in Ahaziahs time, which
made him send Ambassadors to consult with that Idol-Baalzebub (whom the learned
conjecture to be Jupiter Belas) either for cure, or for intelligence; that King
was the first that brought his Oracle in request, or that paid him the tribute
of devotion. But upon the apparition of our Lord in the flesh, they were forced
from their Altars, and dispossessed of those habitations.

The second is of Plato and the Academicks, who as S. Augustine mentions, l.
s. de Ciuit. Dei, c. 14. ranked his gods into three squadrons, Deos, Damones,
and Heroas, and assigned them three places to reside in; Heaven, the air, and
earth. And those Demons he fained to be made up of a middle nature betwixt the
Gods, and men, and describes them to be animalia, in animo passiua, mente
rationalia, corpore aeria, and tempore aeterna; and so makes them share of
every essence; as living creatures, common to beasts; as endowed with
understanding, and subject to passion, like unto men; as immortal, resembling
his gods; but as consisting of an aeriall body, proper to themselves.

And as the same Father witnesses, cap. 18. he placed them as Mediators,
betwixt the greater gods and mankind, vt ad Deos perferant preces hominum, to
convey the prayers of men to the gods, and to give answers to them again.
Rome, see from whence thy doctrine of Saints mediation is traduced. First,
hatched in the School of Paganism; next, set on foot by thy Disciples. But, O
multum dolenda necessitas, and detestanda vanitas, ne sit vana Diuinitas, as
the B. Father bursteth out in cap. 21. We detest the vanity of that doctrine,
which makes a vain Divinity. How ever the Heathen agreed in their devotion.
They sacrificed not to the True God. So goes the Text. They sacrificed to
Devils, and not unto God.

Which words are an Hebraisme, like that of the Prophet to Ezekiah: Thou shall
dye, and not line. And a reflection of that in Moses prayer, Deuteronomy. 32. Com. 17.
Yet in adoring devils, by consequent they lost the Almighty, The God of Heaven
is then neglected, and bid stand aside, when the heart shall but complement
with an Infernal Rival.

But this consequent shows that Religion admits of no Ambi dexters, and
halters betwixt two opinions. Our God is jealous, and disdaines a Rival in his
service, and takes the erection of another God, an affront unto his Majesty.
Dagon shall fall at the presence of the Arc. Illi soli seruies, replied our
Savior to the Devil, when he was a suitor to be worshipful, we may not
retain two Masters, nor wear any other Livery besides our Gods. In vain was
that plea of Symachus in Ambrose, that God is infinite; therefore may all ways
of worship be permitted: for vno itinere non potest perveniri ad tam grande
secretum, there may be more ways to that great mystery then one. But as Christ
is the Life, so is he the Way; Nadab and Abihu were turned into ashes, for
offering strange fire before the Lord. Man may not prescribe a law to the
Almighty, but expect it from him.

I will destroy those that swear by God and Melchom, says the Prophet Zephan.
1. 4* Hear this, ye Atheists, that have the Art to comply and keepe-in with
all religions; yet not so touched with any, but can put it off upon occasion.
Irresolute men that dare laugh God in the face, and deem it weakness to
believe, wisdom to profess, any Religion.

All Moral virtues are comprised in an universal Justice, and all religious
Theology shuts-vp in one Verity: and that solid and entire truth, admits no
rupture. As he that breaks one precept, is guilty of all: so the letting in
of one heresy euerteth the whole truth. Justly therefore does the Apostle cut
off all association with Idolaters. I would not that you should have fellowship
with Devils.

Hitherto my discourse has been Senticetum: I need no other Apology to the
same, then that the Apostle premiseth: Sapicntibus loquor, etc. I speak to
those that are wise, Judge ye what I say. And shall close with the Apostles
conclusion, I would not, etc.

The Conclusion.
There is a threefold society with Devils. First, spiritual; we have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. So Christ tells the Jews,
Ioh. 8. when they conspired with Satan to act the works of darkness, You are
of your father the Devil. And in that eruption of the Prodigal son from his
Father: he claue to a man of that Country. The second is penal, in that
fearful sentence to Goeyecursed, etc. With the Devil and his Angels.

The third sacramental, and here intended which is Religion knits: Forgine the
trespass of the servants of thy fathers God, said the Patriarks to their
brother Joseph. What a Petition for pardon was that? They say not, the sons
of thy father; but the servants of thy fathers God. How much stronger are the
cords of Religion, then those of nature, which in it self is a formal
difference from Atheists. Christus patri omnes Gentes in crucis titulo Hieron.
dedicauit; Christianity dedicates her Professors to heaven; whereas Idolatry
chains hers with Devils.

It carries with it a special Emphasis, that Israel coupled himself with
Baal-Peor: this wicked flesh courteth nothing so much, as this spiritual
fornication; Procliuis est Hieron.
malorum imitatio, est quorum virtutes assequi nequeas, cito imitaris vitia:
Our nature is like Iett, which omitting gold, and silver, and such precious
objects, licks up nothing but straw, and dust. Infidelity spreads her pleasing
nets to inchant, Christianity makes show of nothing but the Cross. Truth is
solid, and hates all superficial glosses; whereas Error is crafty, and with
her painted delusions, oft-times robs Truth of probability. The Iezabel of Rome
sets out her self to sale in a most tempting fashion, whereas the Spouse of
Christ comes forth clad in the Robes of modesty; I am black, but comely;
Negra foris, formosa intus, ^igra vestro, formosa divine, Angelicoque
conspectu; says mellifluous Bernard.

It Is not safe to insist upon the borders of evils. Dinah in curiosity went
out to see the maids of that Country: Otiose spectat, sed non Otiose
spectatur; far was it from her to think that such curiosity should forfeit
her Chastity, and that shut up in so fearful a Tragedy. Our Grandam Eve
expressed more then an inclination to fall, in that she presumed to hold chat
with the Serpent. Peter the Champion of our Lord (whose sword was out in his
Masters quarrel) is so infected with the air of the High Priests Hall, that
he throws down his Livery, and there denies him; and as he warmed at the
fire, so did he cool in devotion to his Master.

But most dangerous it is to come within the smell of false Religion.
Tertullian in his book de Corona Militis, cuts off all appearance of
fellowship with Idolatry, in not permitting Christian soldiers to wear a
Laurel, because the Heathen Victims were encircled with such garlands. The
Apostle (says he) magnu^ divortium mandat ab Idololatria, inioynes a
diuorcement from Idolatry. And Saint John, fly from Idols, not from Idolatry,
but Idols that Tertullian.
may occasion it; etiam Draco terrenus de longinquo non minus spiritu absorbet
alites: The Babylonian Dragon will from.
infect with his breath afar off. Non necesse habes aurum in luto quaerere,
says Hieroms, No need to rake the dungfor gold. Will any except madmen, run
into a house infected to rifle for a rich suit? or dip his hand into a fiery
Crucible to pull out gold? or hazard his foul for acquaintance with all
Religions? and damn himself in a vain curiosity? How many for all this dare
breathe in Italianated air, and touch the very pomell of the Chair of
pestilence. He that will be safe from the act of evil, must wisely prevent
the occasions.

Some indeed by a spiritual Antiperistasis have thriued in Religion, by being
environed with heresy, and infidelity; but these men are presidents for
wonder more then imitation; and their paths are not for ordinary treadings.
Will any adventure upon the mercy of Lions, because Daniel in the den found a
guard? or commit himself to a flaming furnace, because the three children
escaped scorching? It Is mercy above expectation, to deliver that man, who
willingly casts himself into the mouth of a temptation.

Let us therefore be fearful to blend Religion and heresy together. The Jews
might not plow with an Ox and an Ass in the same yoke. The Church of Galatia
might not endure the copartnership of the Jewish Ceremonies, the fullness of
time was their diminution. If Moses and Christ might not stand together, much
less Christ and Belial; the Lords Table, and the Altar of Devils. Let us be
united with our selves, and bequeath oppositions to Rome: Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, O let them prosper that love her. Follow after peace (O Israelites
of God) and make not the enemy happy with your civil dissentions; our discord
is their music; and our ruin would be their glory: learn to defy Rome,
and Hell. Come not within the pale or sent of her Idolatry. And be ever zealous
for that Religion, whereof Truth is the Circumference, and Christ Jesus the
Center; that you may live in his truth, dye in his favor, and reign with him
in his glory; which God grant, etc.

FINIS.

