THE PASSION SERMON AT PAVLS-CROSSE, upon GOOD FRIDAY last, April 7. 1626.

By Thomas Ailesbury.

Sanguis Christi est Clauis Paradisi, Tertullian. LONDON Printed by G. M. for
Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his shop in Saint Dunstans Churchyard,
1626.

THE PASSION SERMON at Pauls-Crosse, upon Good Friday last, April 7. 1626.
1 Cor. 2.8. Had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
SAint Paul, the Trumpe and solemn Proclaimer of the Gospel, who on earth
sat at Gamaliels feet, and in a divine rapture was assumed into a higher
School in Heaven, where he gained the audience of unspeakable mysteries. The
deputed, deligated Doctor and Apostle of the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 1.
made Christ crucified his preaching, his learning, and his glory. The subject
of his preaching, We preach Christ crucified; Gal. 6, 14.
the object of his glory, God forbid I should glory save in the Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ. The Sap of his learning, I determined not to know any thing,
save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Very well may the death of life, the end
of eternity, and the Obsequies of him that could not dye make work for this
great Apostle. It Is learning enough to sit at the Cross by the feet of Christ;
no School to Caluary, no Chair to the Cross, no Doctor unto Christ, no
Lesson to him crucified. This is Jacobs Ladder, Moses Chair, David's Key, and
Solomon's Throne, wherein I know not if the love of God the Father was more
ardent to exhibit, or the Will of God the Son more prompt to this
propitiatory expedition. Oblatus est quia voluit. And Christ would never have
been so willing, but he knew it to be of sovereign use for mankind: misit
redemptionem; He sent redemption to his people, profitable for us, but it cost
him dear, redemit sanguine, it was the price of blood. Were every Star a
world, here is plenteous redemption for them all; of great extent, which
reaches unto all, Omnia trahit ad seipsum, In this good all our felicity does
consent; the effusion of his Blood not without pain, that pain without
parallel, Was there ever sorrow like to my sorrow? Pain concomitated with
shame, Cum iniquis reputatus est, he makes up the number of the wicked, as
unjust as could be, Sicut ouis ad occisionem, as unkind as might be, massacred
by his own Nation. A people whom God had sequestered to himself, yet when we
view the record of their lives, they make it good that their Election was not
of works but of grace. They had Abraham to their Father: could God to that
Patriarch, upon the exercise of his omnipotency, forge or raise a more flinty
Ceneration? The Messiah, the perfume of their Offerings, the blood of their
Sacrifices, the fire of their Holocausts, shadowed in their Ceremonies,
fore-spoken by their Prophets, all this could not dispell that mist of
darkness which settled upon their hearts; Si enim cognouissent: for, had they
known, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory.

The parts and persons of this Text are two fold: First, the persons nocent,
the Jews. Secondly, the party Innocent, The Lord of glory. Of them the Apostle
speaks; first, by way of supposition; Si cogno^issent, Had they known.
Secondly, by way of position, the sequel infers, non cognouerunt, they have
not known him. In the second part there are two branches. 1. The Indignity of
the Passion, the worst that might be; They crucified. 2. The dignity of the
Patient, the best that could be; the Lord of glory. These pillars must carry
my meditations, and your attentions. I begin with the Jews ignorance, and
shall end with their malice to the Lord of glory.

THE Jews proceed against their Messiah out of error. Ignorance was that
cloud, The first part of their ignorance.
in which all the storms that fell upon our Saviors head were engendered; so
the due punishments which hung over their heads, and by the tradition of just
revenge upon their children, to them were veiled; Jerusalem si cognouisses and
haec, a City in this miserable, in that she did not understand her approaching
misery.

COuld the Jews be ignorant of their Messiah? The Jews could not see Christ
by the light of Nature.
They were men, and upon the first Man God stamped his Image; as the Sun is
gilded with light, so the Soul was engraven with knowledge: but Adam and his
wife, ambitious to enlarge their Science, would steal it forth of the sides of
an Apple, that all was cancelled, and obliterated by their fall, and a penance
due to their pride to know as Gods, was to be as ignorant as beasts. Thus man,
an Egregious creature was yoaked with beasts, who may say truly, what God
Ironically, Genesis 3.
Ecce Adam factus est quasi vnus e nobis, see, man is become as one of us;
here is little light left for the Jews to see their Messiah.

Man naturally endeavors to repair these losses, to set down some thing in
the naked tables of his soul, the corporal organs no sooner give leave to the
soul to unfold it self, but it readily makes love to knowledge. Dame natures
best scholar makes us no less desirous then happy in the enjoying.

Yet without supernall revelation Philosophy begets not Theology. Hierom.
Hoc doctus Plato nesciuit, hoc eloquens Demostenes ignorauit. Platoes learning
could never tower so high, nor Demosthenes eloquence express it. Were every
Jew as Moses well read in Egyptian learning, and Egypt was then the worlds
Academy; Greece and Palestine had not yet spoiled her of that Jewel: such
Herbalists as Solomon, whose skill reaches from the Cedar to the Thistle: such
Secretaries to Nature, that the earth should not quake, nor the Sea pass her
bounds, except their Art should impale the one, confirm the other; or that the
voice of thunder could not be heard in our Land, but they so well acquainted
with it, as if they had made that Canon, and charged it with that Bullet; or
the Clouds not set on fire by lightning without the sparks of their invention,
to kindle them; or those Crystal bottles of the air thin as the liquor they
contain, could not empty their moist burdens upon the earth without their
prognostication, or the power of some domineering planet to unstop them; could
they number the Stars, read their meaning in their faces, I load your
patience: what of all this? This is a wise madness, says Justin Martyr; a
busy vanity, says Basil, and a curious fancy. Ioh 38 4.
These men darken counsel by words without knowledge. Where wast thou when I
laid the foundation of the earth? declare, Job 38.25.26.
If thou have understanding, who laid the corner stone; who shut up the Sea
within doors when I made a cloud the garment thereof, and the thick
darkness a swadlingband, and said, hitherto shall thou come, here shall thy
proud waves be stayed. The Lord weighs the winds and waters by measure,
makes a decree for rain, and a way for lightning and thunder. Thus their own
Art is their own labyrinth, much more will the transcendent truth of the
Gospel amaze them. Paul's Lecture at Athens was a new Doctrine never heard of
there, the Inscription upon their altar (...) was a record of their ignorance.
Acts 17.
We speak the wisdom of God hidden in a Mystery. Where is the wise? 1 Cor.
1.
Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this world? Has not God made
foolish the wisdom of this world? I will destroy the wisdom of the wise,
and bring to nothing the understanding of the Prudent. The ladder of human
wisdom is too short to scale the Cross of Christ; We preach Christ
crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, unto the Greeks foolishness:
the mystery whereof was wisdom beyond their understanding, knowledge beyond
their learning, and a work beyond their time; were the Jews as wise as the
wisest Philosophers, yet non cognouerunt, that knowledge will not lend them
Spectacles to see the Lord of Glory.

But the Jews were the Secretaries of Heaven, they have Moses and the
Prophets; to them were these divine Oracles committed, The Lord was known in
Jury, and his Name great in Israel, this Sun was in that Ecliptike, this
light in that Goshen. If all other lights be an Ignis fatuus, falie and dimnie,
here is a Star from Heaven that will never fail them: man to the attainment of
a supernatural end needs a supernatural mean, the natural understanding,
Non sufficit viatori, will never shine bright enough to be our safe conduct to
these celestial truths. In Prolog. sent.
Percipit per naturalem potentiam, non per naturalem agentem, says Scotus. It
may be the Caske to reserve, never the light without a greater light to descry
them. He keeps his Chair in Heaven that dictates these lessons. Illiterate
Apostles, in whom the Creator to qualify them with gifts wrought a new
creation, that suddenly from all simple they became all wise, the Jews
therefore having the Key of Scriptures, what mysteries will not that unlock?

Come then, lets see what light the Scripture gives to Christ, here are
contained a cloud of Prophesies, the day would fail me to suruay them. Genesis 3.
Semen mulicris, etc. it was but young days when God first engaged himself to
mercy, that a Child should repair those breaches the mother occasioned. The
promise is renewed to Abraham: upon his seed the blessed one is entailed, but
the blessedness is enlarged unto all nations, in the miraculous birth and
unbloody facrifice of Isaak was a vision of the birth and death of the worlds
redeemer, Abraham saw my day and rejoiced. What will the Jews say to Jacobs
Shilo. The Scepter shall not depart from Israel, etc. Ge^. 49.
When in Christ's time the Scepter was wrested out of the Jews hands: Their
King a beneficiary, and precarious King: With all their hearts they wished for
the Messiah, though their conceits could no otherwise employ him then to quit
them of the Roman yoke. David was the root out of which this branch did
flourish; What Ditties did Isreal's chief Chanter warble upon his Son, his
Lord. The manner of his death, the cry upon the Cross, his Passion, and his
skorne are the contents of that Evangelical 22. Psalm, I am powered out like
water: a worm and no man: I may tell all my bones: they part my Garments in
sunder, etc. So plain, that the wicked Jews had no way to put out the eyes of
that Prophecy, then by offering violence to the sacred Text. And had rather
posterity should find nonsense, then their cruelty recorded. Esaias, the flower
of speech and Prophecy, who seems to contex a History, not write a Prophecy,
Surely, Esaias 53.
he has borne our griefs and carried our sorrows; he was wounded for our
transgressions, he opened not his mouth, he is brought like a Lamb to the
slaughter, the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. And to give the
Scribes and Priests their due, they could by this light blazen the Tribe,
Family, Mat. 2.
and place of his birth. For when the Star dispeared, the Prophesies by them
applied to the Sages of the East, were Stars, to conduce their feet to
worship there, as swift as Herod's to go shed blood there. How then could the
Jews be ignorant?

Very well, for Prophesies are but empty sounds, Volant and auolant, the fly
and dye; beat the ear, not the heart, if the Holy Ghost be not present to
pierce it. No breaking open these Seals, no vnlocking of these mysteries
without David's Key. The right honorable Eunuch, Treasurer to the Queen of
Aethiopia, sought for a better treasure at that time to be found at Jerusalem,
nec Sanctior sum hoc Eunucho, nec studiosior. Can our diligence compare with
his, who underwent a tedious journey, and in that devout Pilgrimage made the
Scripture his companion? Hieron ad Paulin.
Et cum verba Domini lingua volueret, labijs personaret; ignorabat cum, quem in
libro nesciens venerabatur, says Heirom. He read the Prophet without divine
Spectacles, and with an implicit devotion adored whom he knew not. Philip
lays open Jesus, that lay hid in the letter, for the common place of his
Meditations was the very Passion of Jesus. But the Jews had no sacred Spirit,
no Philip to expound these Mysteries, their proud conceits cheating their
understanding, as some foolish Mountebankes were ignorant of what they
professed; and which (I cannot speak without stomach) were ignorant of their
ignorance: for all this to them Moses is veiled; I know who has said it, 1
Cor. 3.14, 15.
When Moses is read, the veil is upon their hearts.

What of this, 3 They know not the Messiah in our Saviors person.
will the Jew reply, we are versed in the Scripture, the Prophesies fly not
out of our sight, the Messiah we expect, and hope he is not long a coming,
then a rush for this Roman dominion; but is it possible Jesus should be the
man? borne of mean parentage, his education obscure, himself followed by the
meanest; we must be convinced by better evidence, our Rulers upon such slender
proofs are too wise to trust him. But no reason to distrust him, a threefold
cord of witnesses is not easily broken: Christ, besides the written, had the
living Word of his mouth, supported by his famous Acts to speak for him.
Scrutamini Scripturas (says our Savior) Search these Volumes, and if I am not
recorded there, never credit me more: his astonishing words and conuincing
works, what metal were the Jews composed off, that these would not soften?

What was Christ's life but a Commentary, and reflection of the fore-running
Prophesies. The Law was but a shadow; Christ the substance, the good thing to
come. In the volume of thy Law it is written of me, etc. not a line therein but
tends unto Christ the Center, his birth of a Virgin Mother, cradle banishment,
when he fled that could not go, the efficacy of his preaching, his miraculous
cures, vindicating of his Fathers Temple from pollution, etc. all are filed
which were in him fulfilled. Let us arest our selves awhile upon his foretold
Passions, when Christ rode in triumph toward his Cross, he did not bestride
an Asses back without a Prophecy to help him up; Behold, Z^ch 5.
thy King comes riding upon an Asses fool. Indas makes his merchandise of
him, the price of blood is pitched by one Prophet, and the man of blood
described by another; Lach 11.13.
a goodly price that I was prized of them, even thirty pieces: see the
difference, GOD values man at his own Blood, man his God at thirty pence. The
Betrayer is betrayed by description, My familiar and friend, etc. Ps^. 41.
has conspired against me. All his Disciples shall turn Cowards, a Prophecy
had sounded that retreat, I will strike the Shepherd and the sheep shall be
scattered; dye he must, for the Messiah must be slain, and that in a grievous
manner, to make good the Type, he must be lifted up; then fastened with nails;
They have pierced my hands and my feet, upon a Cross, Dominus triumphauit
eligno, which reading Justin Martyr and Tertullian embrace. If they plough upon
his back with whips, those Furrows are recorded. No marvel the Soldiers
riflle for his garments, that veiled covetousness of Lots an event in it self
contingent, Psalm. 22.
in the Prophecy certain, for my vestments they did cast lots. What will the
Jew say now? Prophesies not accomplished, ambiguitates sunt and anigmata,
(says Irenaeus) are dark Clouds, but in the accomplishment those Clouds are
dispersed, they become Histories. Obdurate Jews! show us but a man in whom all
the Prophesies were fulfilled, and any Prophecy left unfulfilled in our
Saviors person, and we will suppose some probability to march on your side:
why then? (knowing what the Jews did know) upon so foul a fact will our
Apostle find and return Ignoramus. Yet one prophecy had not been
accomplished, if the Jews had known it, that they must be the men to imbrew
their hands in the blood of their Messiah.

But They glory in the act, are so confident, that were it to do again, their
Conscience would make no scruple to reiterate it; as deeming the same a master
piece of obedience. In killing of his Disciples they thought to merit at the
hands of God, but in killing of his son to super-errogate, and in a desperate
affectation of Ignorance, solicit for that blood upon their heads, which
Pilate washed from his hands; and are so far from sorrow, that holding one
life too little to take from him, only they lament he has no more: their
Malice is so hereditary, that if Christ should revive himself daily, to save
the Priests of Rome a labor, daily would they Sacrifice him.

A Gross mistake there was then in the person of Christ, 4 The Miracles of
Jesus did not remove their ignorance.
who in their own verdict was not tainted with sin; but that they could not
collect what he was by his miracles, they are to me a miracle of sottish
infidelity; Iudaei signa petunt, their curiosity was set upon miracles; now
they might take their fill. Tell me, what was he? Arnob.
Cuius Iussu ipsi Daemones in hominum visceribus merst, and cooperti
possessione ^^debant: The very Dinels inuiscerated in men, at the sound of his
Imperial word, yield up possession, leaving their habitations, as if their
houses had been on fire over their heads: Confession is their penance, with an
yielding voice they yellow out, Thou art the Son of God: Intelligunt diaboli
quod non intelligunt Iudaei, as Cyrill spoke of the Arians; that power the
devils ascribe to God which the Jews to the Devils; surely Satan is a greater
politician then to undermine himself with civil discord. Was he an ordinary
Man, who with the trident of his word becalmes the Seas, paues them with
solidity to a confirmed path for himself and Peter to walk on; the Spectators
amazed cry out, what manner of man was this to whom the dumb creatures speak
such obedience. Surely he another Neptune was then whom Poets feign: Arnob.
cra. Gentes lib 1.
Post liminto vitam restituens animas efflatas iussit in diem lucidam remeare:
Christ's call awakes Lazarus in the grave, unites what death for four days had
divorced, the spirit returns to its old moald, and by a new Metempsychosis,
or rather (...), (such which Pythagoras never dreamed of) the same soul
reenters into the same body. This Miracle reconciles envy, envy a conspiracy,
and for a further conclusion, They will see if God can dye or not. When the
Conspirators came armed to apprehend him, who expected not declined them, the
breath of his mouth as a mighty tempest, leuels them with the earth. A Roman
Cohort driven back at a word? Nec vox hominem sonat: could not his speech
betray him? without flattery they might have applauded, not the voice of man,
but God. Quid poterit Matest as eius iudicatura, cuius hoc poterat humilitas
Iudicanda, says Leo. When Peter with a blow had lopt off Malchus ear, the
divorced piece is glewed to its former place, Christ reforming what himself
had formed, and that flesh knowing whose potsheard it was, is no sooner touched
with Gods finger, then again restored, yet this Physicians pay was cruelty.

Thus to recapitulate all, 1. not humane science, 2. not revealed prophesies,
3. though accomplished in Christ's person: 4. confirmed with the working of
Miracles could open their eyes, but in seeing they did not see, Aquia.
etc. God has sent them the spirit of slumber. These Evidences led them to
know the Messiah in Christ, but not the Mystery in the Deity, but with leave
to Aquinas the Jews held the Deity inseparable from the Messiah: Chrysostom
in loc.
or they knew not Crucifixionis mysterium. The Messiah to undergo so
ignominious a death, to suffer, and be crucified under Pontius Pilate, could
never come within the Jewish Creed. The vulgar Jew conceived well, but not
truly, of him; yet somewhat popish loath to leave the tradition of his fathers.
The more illuminate Doctors had greater knowledge, but with greater pride and
malice, which did extinguish it. Their Theory was vertiginous, swom in the
brain, there floating without anchor, and was of no credit with the will. They
cauelled at his preaching, traduced his person, slandered his miracles,
fathering them upon devils. God only has the key which unlocks the heart,
Faith is in his own custody, and he distributs it to whom he will. Yet their
ignorance was a sin; Saint Paul led away with inconsiderate zeal, was made
thereby the chief of sinners, though qualified for mercy. In the Jews their
knowledge shall accuse them not acquit them, they knew enough to condemn them,
but not enough to to save them.

But the Divine decree for slaying of the Lamb was out, which nailed him surer
to the Cross then the Jewish nails, and thereby sealed to an infallible
necessity: how then can the determinate counsel of God be set upon the
contingent knowledge of the Jews. The Jesuits piece all with a Scient^a
media, whereby God holds his hands from decreeing, till either in se or in re,
he observes the voluminous foldings, and pleating of the Will of man, and
passes his decree accordingly: So he knew Conditionately what the Jews would
have done upon better knowledge. The Schoolmen content themselves with
Scientta simplicis Intelligentiae, whose object is Ens possibile, but not
futurum, goes as far as possibility can go: and Scientia visionis, whereby
God perceives all things that are and shall be. Betwixt them crowds in
Scientia media, and participates of both: as it precedeth the Divine decree
has relation to the former; but as the effect may come to pass, if the
condition were fulfilled, comes nearer to that of Vision; a spiders web, a
curious fancy, and Jesuits darling; pretended by Fonseca to be found in
Aristotle's Metaphysics, which to establish a freedom of will in man,
destroys it in God; for God may not decree till he sees what man will do;
and what man will do, God is bound to determine accordingly.

But without this groundless subtilty, truth will show it self. Necessary
events as they flow from the first cause, in respect of the second causes may
admit contingency; both in the effect may concur with no dissonant harmony;
for 1. Many effects are immutable in the second causes, which in respect of the
first cause are mutable; the Sun is a fixed Planet unto Ioshuah, stands still
to behold his conquests, flies backward at the sight of Ahaz dyall, yet ex
necessitate naturae, constantly circleth about the heavens in the Orb his
Chariot, and is never tired with that diurnall progress. 2. Many Effects
mutable in the second causes, but immutable in the first cause: the confirmed
Angels by nature subject to change by grace determined in goodness; collapsed
Adam in respect of the divine Prescience his fall was necessary, but in
himself most contingent, so for Christ, his Father from all eternity marked
him to the slaughter by his decree; yet our Savior offered himself as
willingly as the Jews did kill him, although non inde volunt as interficien
divnde moriendi; the Jews had not the same end in killing as Christ in dying.
Our Redeemer then did suffer necessarily; necessitate finis, in three respects
says Aquinas: 1. for us, to procure our freedom, Aquin. part. 3. q. 40.
Oportet exaltari; The son of man must be lifted up, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish. Secondly, for himself, to make way for
Glory: Opertet Christum pati; ought not Christ to suffer these things, and so
to enter into his glory. Thirdly, to answer his Fathers Decree: filius hominis
sicut definitum est vadit; The Son of man truly goes as it is written of
him. Thus the Jews were as free as ignorant, every way guilty; neither Gods
all seeing decree, nor their blinded ignorance shall excuse them from that
which follows; They crucified the Lord of glory; which is the second part.

THE Jews for long were, as I may say, The first branch the persons, They.
the favorites of heaven; if deliverances, miracles and blessings are pledges
of mercy, never was people so endeared, or God more exuberant to any Nation,
non taliter secit, etc. yet they were an ill complexioned people, of a
rebellious and churlish temper. Pharaoh is hardened and scourged to tame them;
never was any Prince so subdued with wonders, yet they ascribe their
deliverance to a Calfe, and though those Miracles were Emblems of a Diuiner
power, and did speak a supreme Deity; they prostrate themselves unto an Idol
beholding for its Godhead, to the curious Artizan. God sent his Prophets, which
sealed their Prophesies with their blood; long had Christ been slain in them,
now they kill him in himself. Those to this were tolerable Assasinates; for
flesht in their blood, they conspire against the Lord of glory.

It must needs augment his torments, that his own people should degenerate
into Traitors, not a Gentile, but a Jew, not a Jew alone, but Judas his
Apostle. The Gentiles were Idolaters, the Jews like themselves, cruel, Judas
was a man, and homo Deo lupus, no marvel these do like themselves. God his
father, and Christ most dear unto himself, are privy to the carriage of all
this; conspiracy, and danger on all hands, Treason, treason, never the like, of
Jew and Gentile, Soldiers and Apostle, father and son, heaven and earth,
Singuli non perdunt, per dunt omnes; all conjure against this lamb to lead him
to the slaughter. The Father, I have smitten him: The Son, I lay down my
life for my sheep; the Jew, crucify him; the Gentile, in Pilate condemning
him, the Earth gaping for salvation, the heavens waiting for restitution. Thus
a son delivered of his father, yielding himself, a Prince slain of his
people, the Nations conjure against the Blessed one of Nations, heavens
dispoyle him of his throne, the earth of his footstool: but in what had Christ
offended himself, to lay hands upon his own person, abnegauit seipsum non
quod debuit pe^c^tis plenus, sed quod voluit plenus charitatis, says Cyprian:
no need to deny himself for sin, but chose rather to hate himself then desist
from loving us.

All Christ's life a continual passion, banished before he had the use of his
legs, in preachings often, in fastings, and temptations often, restless,
harbourlesse, and in vita passiuam habuit actionem, Bernard.
and in morte passionem actiuam sustinuit, and though the Jews could not lay
hold on him till the hour was come, yet beforehand they crucify his
reputation: but all these to that which followed were but the beginning of
sorrows. Let us trace his footsteps, though with Peter we follow him a far
off, and in the Gospel there is such a living Commentary of his death and
passion, that we do not read but see him crucified.

Many hours of consultation had the Jews spent in complotting his death, but
all their designs were frustrated, for nondum venit hora, and when that time
calculated by heavens appointment, was come; Judas is suborned, an Apostle that
was his Treasurer and his Almner; thou wast deceived Judas, Virtue was his
treasure, Mercy was his dole; who to augment his pay, resolves at once, to sell
his place and Master, and vnder-values him at so cheap a rate, that he sets no
price upon the price of the world, but entertaines their own proffer of
thirty-peeces to become a mercinary Traitor.

Whilst they strike hands to betray him, the Lord remembers us, institutes the
sacrament of Grace, breaths forth divine admonitions, makes his will,
bequeathes to his Disciples his peace for a legacy, patience and pressures for
an inheritance, against which he armeth them with heavenly habitations. Quo
dulcius esse solet lumen Phoebi iam. iam cadentis; happy men that were Auditors
to this Sermon; then concludes with a Hymn, which continued and ended with
his progress to Mount Oliuet: Was not heaven now on earth, when Halleluiahs
were chaunted by this holy Quire?

Where, to meet the Traitor and his accomplices, He baulkes not the place Judas
knew was consecrated by his customary devotions, attended with three Disciples
that had witnessed his glory in the Mount; In a Garden undergoes the penance
for Adams trespass in a garden; that the same place which was the nest where
sin was first hatched, might be now the childbed of grace and mercy; and where
the premises of our miseries were, might be the conclusion of our misfortunes.
There his soul is couched under the burdens of fear and sorrow. The
chastisement of our peace is laid upon him; Esaias 53.
The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. David fetched many penitent
groans; Caine belched forth words of despair under this burden; the heavens
could not hold sinful Angels, nor the earth Corah and his associates, nor the
water preserve Pharach and his host. Marvel not then that Christ prostrate in
pangs, sunk unto the earth, blessing the same with his embracements, making
his foot stool his couch, where he finds, if not to lay his head, his face;
like a worm he crawles upon the ground, and upon that earth he is crucified
without a Cross; fear and love are the nails, our sins the thorns, his
Fathers wrath the spear to cruciate him, which cruse a bleeding shower to
reign throughout all his pores, that in a cold night he sweats without heat,
and bleeds without a wound, all his body is besprinkled with a crimson dew; the
very Veins and Pores expediting our Saviors will of their own accord, not
waiting the Tormentors fury, pour out the blood of mercy. August.
Quam frigidumerat peccatum quod tam calido indiguit lauacro. Foul sin that
could not be cleansed but by such a bath: That Sweat is not wipte off, but He
falls into an Agony, in a counterconquest of affection if he shall pity
himself or his people.

Thrice does he pray and thrice suffers an unwilling willing repulse; Si
possibile, If it he possible, let this Cup pass from me, was the voice of
flesh and blood: but Fiat voluntas tua, Thy not my Will be done, was the voice
of a prompter Spirit. As a bitter Potion Christ declines that Cup, but as
beneficial to us, accepts it. This Cup pass from me? Does the General,
quake and is the Soldier valiant? With undaunted courage have Martyrs embraced
the flaming Instruments of death; Bernard.
Stat Martyr tripudians and triumphans licet corpore lacero, and rimante latera
ferro: those Bonefires to them golden Chariots to ascend with Elias. That
incendialis tunica, Contra Na^iones, lib. 1.
as Tertullian terms it, a coat context of flames was put on willingly by
many. But Christ underwent the sting of death, they incountred death without a
sting. Death by Christ was once foiled, Hell by him once appalled, that the
Relicts of that conquest are subdued with an easy onset. Besides, their
punishments are so spiced and lenified with celestial comfort, illis in poent
est volunt as, in martyrio Coelum, that to these Christian Stoics their
tortures are pleasures, their martyrdom a Paradise. To Stephen the Heavens are
opened, nor can that cloud of stones eclipse him from seeing the Sun of
Righteousness upon his feet to assist him. To Peter a delivering Angel, that
shakes off his chains like dust from his hands and feet; and asking no leave
of the Iaylors, does enlarge him. It Is happiness to be a Martyr; but to Christ
afflicted what comfort is afforded? His Father never so angry bent against him
as now, when he personated universal sinners. An Angel indeed looks upon him
from Heaven, with a purpose to comfort him: alas, small is the light that a
Star can yield when the Sun is down; and a sorry exchange, that a creature
shall comfort his God, his Comforter. Bernard.
Therefore agnosco vocem aegroti in medico, agnosc^ Gallinam infirmantem cum
Pullis, stupeo miserationem, expanesco dignationem; that our Phisician is ill,
our Comforter desolate, to me this mercy is an amazement, this infirmity a
wonder.

But hark you Sir, What may you call those torments that Christ did there
endure? Our answer is, that he suffered all those punishments for sin, that
did reconcile us to his Father. All those, I say, that did neither prejudice
the plenitude of sanctity or science in his sacred person; but to say, that
hell fire was endured by him, is a Doctrine fit for none, but him that has
made shipwreck of his faith, to land on shore his private fancies. How could
it comply with Gods Son, to be subjected to that vengeance which was prepared
for Devils. Yet Christ underwent what the divine Justice could require,
neither did the dignity of his person dispense with any torment, but to make
the passion of one available for many. For if he might have dispensed with
one degree of extremity in punishment, 4 Sent. ^. 46. q. 4. a. 4.
then with another, and so consequently with all, as Scotus aptly notes. So
far as we are able to clear this doubt, and acquit our selves of unjust
imputation, observe, that sin is either inherent or assumed. To the first,
there is ever annexed remorse of conscience, but not unto the latter; Christ
therefore assuming sin by imputation, not committing it, felt the punishment
thereof, without the gnawings of the worm of Conscience: again, there are
punishments due to sinners which ever remain in their stain and guilt, or to
those which break off their sins by repentance: to the former, the Analogy
of Justice has measured tortures by the length of eternity, it being a well
proportionated right, that to those, who if they had lived ever, would have
sinned ever, to be punished for ever: but to those which bury their temporary
sins in repentance, eternity of punishments belongs not. Christ therefore
suffering efficaciously for these, not for those, satisfied his Father without
eternity of punishments or despair of recovery. Further, how Christ was exiled
from his Fathers presence, as his forlorn words upon the Cross seem to
import. Scotus will inform us, that affectione Iustitiae, 4 Sent. d. 46. q. 4.
Resp. ad princip. Arg.
he was ever united to his Father, because he ever trusted, loved, and
glorified him. But affectione commodi, that delight ever emergent from that
divine vision, was for a time suspended; his body and soul till the
Resurrection, ever within sight of the Deity, were stayed from glorification,
so to make his soul and body capable of more ample sorrow, was in the instant
of his passion deprived of happiness. Though both these, says Canus, may go
for Miracles, Christ was then forsaken of his Father, by denial of protection
and subtraction of Joy, not otherwise. His soul has not ended in these
griefs, but new cruelties invade his body. After these conflicts the butcherly
Jews attach him, and lead him as a Lamb to the slaughter, apprehending him
whom mercy before had apprehended; as a Malefactor the true high Priest is
brought before the false, and from painted wall Annas dismissed to Caiphas, a
Priest as wise as Balaams Ass, who spoke more then he knew, yet the truth;
where they bind his hands, buffet him with theirs, spit upon his face, which
the Angels desire to contemplate; the Priests question him, their servants
blind him, those, out of the superfluity of contempt, these, of skorne; those,
to try if he were a God, these, if a Prophet. Accusers are wanting, which in so
wicked a generation cannot be long, who corrupt his words, change his meaning;
for Christ said not, Destruam Templum, but Soluite, I will destroy this Temple;
but, destroy ye; neither added he, Templum Dei, but simply, This Temple.
Thirdly, he meant his Body, not that material Fabric wherein consisted their
holy Ostentation. This evening was famous with the revolt and reconcilement of
one Disciple, as the next morning with the despair of another: thus that day
was ended.

Their wrath went not down with the Sun, the next morning was to them a
continual night when they consult to eclipse the Sun. Judas, the first in
treason, is the first in the Calender of revenge; a transcendent sun, a
Traitor Paramount: therefore he is his own Judge and Executioner, his
conscience arraignes him, his own hands do hang him. Passage is denied that
impious soul through those lips which had touched Christ's: nor shall it
ascend so high toward heaven, but rip open a way by the violent rupture of his
bowels to hell. Arius that killed his Godhead by denial; Judas his manhood by
treason, are alike in punishment; yet it was a greater sin to kill himself,
then his Master.

These mental murderers loath to act it with their own hands, convent him
before Pilate. Where Christ stands at the Roman tribunal, the Judge delegated
from God, more then Caesar sits in Commission upon him; by him he is questioned
to amazing silence. Justly was the Lamb of God dumb, and opened not his mouth
before him that had shorn him with whips. Pilat after the expense of some
cruelty, labors to take off the Jews, to lenifie and tame their cruelty,
which like fire kept in with water sprinkled, or a watercourse stopped, breaks
forth with greater fury. Good Jesus, how art thou now abused! New accusations
are forged, new Knights of the Post procured, to make thee a traitor to the
Roman State. He that with Spittle cured the eyes of the blind, is blinded with
their spittle: who can number those stripes wherewith they flea, and tear his
body, one wound eating into another, that there is no health in his bones by
reason of our sins. Tyranny cloatheth him with one purple, died in the purest
grain of his blood; disdain with another: a Reed is his Scepter, and a Crown
context with Thorns is beaten to his head; and with all the complement of
scorn, on bended knees they salute him King. O Jesus! was that frothy spittle
the ointment, those thorns thy Crown, the Reed thy Scepter, the purple died
and imbroidered with blood thy royal robes: or because Adams sin brought
forth thorns, must it be thy penance to wear them? Unthankful people, thus
watered with his blood, bring forth nothing but Thorns to crown him: conspuunt
in leprefu^^, ugauerunt vt latronem, deriserunt vt fatuum, says Chrysostom.

Thus Pilate persisting to take off the edge of their malice, exposes him to
be commiserated, with Ecce homo, sufficiently punished; Ecce Rex vester,
sufficiently derided; then pleading the benefit of their custom, is desirous
that Christ might be pardoned upon course, but these pacifications are but
whetstones of a sharper and more incensed hatred. Barrabas that brought many
from life to death, is preferred before Christ, that brought more from death to
life; and no marvel, like will to like, murderers to a murderer. An outcry is
raised, Crucify him, crucify him: twice Cruelfie, as if they thought one
Cross too little for him; Inconstant favor of man, their Anthemes of Hosanna
and Benedictus not long since joyfully spoken, are converted into tragical
notes of Crucify him. If Pilat be indulgent, they go near to proclaim him
traitor, to avoid which suspicion, he chooses to be an unjust Judge, rather
then supposed a disloyal subject: by his doom he allots him to the Cross,
appoints the Soldiers his executioners, and the Priests his Ouersters.

Now Christ goes the dolorous way, bears his Cross till he fainted, that
bore him till he dyed, where malice in them, longing as much as mercy in him
for accomplishment; to make haste permit him an Adiutor. A guilty conscience
doubts want of time, therefore dispatcheth hastily. Where the women as as he
went, strew the way with tears, whom he wishes to spend when occasion
shallserue, to still their plaint and to stay their weeping, as if some
trespass were in their tears, or some sin in their sorrow: when in the rage
of slaughter Infants blood shall be more plentiful then Mothers tears, and a
screeching voice shall be heard in Hterusalem, many Rachels weeping for their
children, and would not be comforted because they were not.

Must no other death stint their malice but the Cross? others they had in
practice, as the Towell, stoning, and beheading, more favorable, and suitable
to their Nation; will they pollute a Jew with a Roman death? He was made
obedient to the death of the Cross, a degree beyond death. Magnacrudelitas,
non solum occidere, sed and crucifigere quaerunt, vt morte vexaretur producta,
says venerable Bede: Tertull.
the Cross crucifigendi corporis machina, the engine of torture, a slow death,
spinning out pain into a longer thread, where his own weight becomes his own
affliction, upon this rack dinumerauerunt omnia ossa mea; They sum up the
number of his bones, anatomize his body, his arms and legs racked with
violent pulls, hands and feet boared with nails, his side wounded with a
spear, the whole body torn with stripes, and goared with blood; with what
words shall I complain of their savageness? Lactant.
Tully extended all the nerves of Eloquence, and crucified his inventions to
express the quality of these pains, yet was non-p^ust at his Gauintan Cross:
yet hitherto their malice brought our Savior.

And that at the solemn time of the Passover, when Jerusalem was full of
Jews and Proselytes; they kill the Lamb of God without a figure, their malice
making way for the divine dispensation, for Christ our passover is offered for
us, etc. And to fulfill their cruelty with a Prophecy, they crucify him with
thieves, where the one a Doeg obdurate wounds him with his tongue, and has
Justice; the other in a holy Catastrophe, does bless God and dye: Were my
soul so happy a felon as to steal Paradise at the last; I would not fear any
temporal arraignment to dye such a sinner, or to be condemned for such a
thief.

The witness of all this, and chief mourner was the Blessed virgin: Nature
and Grace are the welsprings whence flow such rivers of tears for her innocent
son; now Simeons Prophecy is made good: A sword of compassion does pierce
her heart; Can such a mother forget such a son? by a reflect act her hands
and feet with his are pierced, her side wounded and head bruised with thorns,
as if but one soul in two bodies. Oh my Lord! thy grief was the greatest that
ever was in man, and mine as great as ever happened to woman. The very dumb
Creatures cry out of these pains; the renting of his body rends the veil of
the Temple; the digging into his side opens the Monuments; the cry of him dying
awakes the dead; the immouable earth does quake for fear of those fears; the
Sun is ashamed to show his brightness, when the Father of lights was darkened
with such disgrace; the Heavens discolor their beauties, and suiting
themselves to their makers fortune are in mourning robes when the lamp of
heaven is extinguished: Ungrateful Nation, the Sun will not shine upon them,
but is immantled with a miraculous eclipse, and Sympathizing with the Sun of
Righteousness, will not appear in Glory, when the Lord of Glory is thus
disgraced: Bonau.
Solus homo non compatitur pro quo solo Christus patitur. Only man is bereft
of compassion, for whom only Christ underwent this Passion. I except the
Centurion, Bernard.
qui vitam agnouit in morte, who in the shadow of death espied the substance of
the Deity. Surely this man was the Son of God.

Thus Christ having out-cryed his torments, prayed for relief, and at his
death for forgiveness to his enemies; emisit spiritum non amisit, willingly
yields to nature, and offers up a broken heart and a troubled spirit to his
Father for the worlds redemption: O strange Physic where the Physician must
bleed! and a stranger Conquest, where the Conqueror must dye, and God would
take no other satisfaction. The wit of Heathen Religion pacified their Gods
with sacrifices, and of greater price of greater efficacy. Sanguine placastis
ventos, etc. The Childrens passage through the fire to Molech was thought a
holy procession; but here is a mystery, God to offer himself, and men to kill
him: Noua hostia nouo imponitur altari, and crux Christi non templi fit ara sed
mundi, says Leo: this Catholic Sacrifice is offered upon Mount Caluary, the
altar of the world; O the Miracle of mercy to quicken us! The Lord is, view his
worth in the end of my Text. The Lord of Glory.

Shall that Deity, Lord of glory.
which principally resides in heaven be fastened to a cross on earth? truly,
though the Deity be impatible, yet by Hypostaticall union, it constituted, and
made up that Person which was qualified to passion, and that so well compacted
and put together, that death could not divorce that union. The godhead has not
flesh and blood, yet God, he bled for us, Qui redemit nos sanguine suo: our
sins were at so high a rate, that nothing but the blood of the Lord of glory
could purchase us.

This union consists (...) undivided, (...) inseparable, and (...) without
local distance, says Damascene: as a branch in the stock, as light in the
Sun, as an accident in a subject is the humanity sustained by the Deity.
The Catholic Faith goes upright betwixt Eutiches and Nestorius, bending
neither to the right hand of natural confusion, or to the left of personal
divorce. Now, Quaecunque in vno supposito vniuntur, illa dese inuicem possunt
praedicari. Our Saviors person is invested with the properties of either
nature; hence flow the concrete predication of natures, God is man; and the
abstract communication of properties to the subject Christ, is infiniteness.
In this marriage the humane nature is in the person enstated with all the
divine Royalties; and that is so indulgent, as to assume her infirmities, that
we may say, Christ-God-Man made the world, Christ-Man-God redeemed it. Here is
the root of the infiniteness of his merits; Principium quo, the subject
wherein he suffered was the humane nature; but the principium quod, the soul
which did enable and inform it was the Deity. Sent. 3. d. 19.
Christ did elicere actiones ex supposito, says Scotus, perform his task in
proper person. So by that means, reconciled infiniteness to all his actions.
Infinite not in respect of the act, but Person, The Lord of glory. Gabriel.
3.5.19. d. q. 19. d. q. vnica.


The Lord of glory, and yet crucified! Never was glory so eclipsed, here is
Honor ashamed, Majesty afflicted, Innocence guilty, health sick, the Sun in
the night, a veiled Deity. In mount Tabor Christ was apparelled like himself,
a man might read Majesty in his countenance, but in Mount Caluary all is
obtenebrated. Christ, like his Spouse the Church, is black, but comely. The
Cross nigredo est sed forma, and similitudo Domini. Go unto Esaias, He has no
form nor comeliness, there is no beauty in him. The sable Curtains by that
Prophet are drawn upon him: Have recourse unto David, Thou art fairer then the
children of men, grace is powered into thy lips: Bernard.
Intuere sane pannis sordidum, plagis liuidum, illitum sputis, pallidum morte,
and nigrum vel tunc profecto fatebere; to see him thus conspuicated, thy wit
will serve thee to confess his blackness; but ask the Apostles whom they saw
in the Mount, or the Angels whom they desire to see, thou will soon recognize
him to be the Lord of glory. Ergo formosus in se, niger propter te; so comely
in himself, so black for thee: thus crucified he was without disparagement to
his glory. Non est fastidita humilitas, Leo.
quia nec imminuta Maiest^s; nihil nocuit naturae inuiolabili quod passibili
oportehat inferri. All these passions truly undergone by him, did no whit
impeach his Deity. So, Consummatum est, it is finished, and with it my
Meditations: there is remaining a short conclusion which desires to find and
leave you attentive.

YOu have heard me relate the greatest crime that ever was committed, wherein I
know not if the Art of Tyranny were greater to invent, or Christ's patience to
endure. The Heir is slain, but the Jews have lost the inheritance. This is
the medulla, and blessedness of Christianity, that God set more by us, then
his Son, and Christ lost his life in seeking us. Nos tanto redimimur pretio,
Leo.
nos tanto curamur impendio; so dearly did he ransom us. Is it nothing unto
you, all ye that pass by, Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like to my
sorrow which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day
of his fierce anger.

Yet to consider Christ as a man of sorrow, and not a Savior of sinners, that
his wounds were not our salues, yields but a melancholic contemplation; but
when we call to mind that this was our ransom, and how every stripe that razed
his Flesh does cure our souls: How the blood of compassion ran in Christ:
nec desunt foramina per quae effluat; Conduit pipes are not wanting for
transfusion, not of blood but mercy; with all our hearts we pray, His Blood be
upon us and our children. In the Sea of sin let us cast Anchor upon this
Rock; be thy sins never so great, Bernard.
it is able to support them. Turbatur Conscientia, sed non perturbabitur; the
sting of sin is taken out by our Saviors Passion, so that though the
remembrance thereof be bitter, yet the rehearsal of Christ's Passions is far
sweeter, wherein Quot vulnera tot ora, so many wounds, so many speaking and
interceding tongues, pleading thy right at the mercy-seat, Lord, whither shall
we then go? Here is a Iubilee of grace: let Rome expect an influence of
goodness from the Stars, we desire but the Sun of Righteousness to be our
light, our heat, our life. Quaeris Alcidae parem, nemo est nisi ipse; Seneca in
Theb.
Let our souls perish if He cannot save them.

Beware your sins make you not incapable. Jesus washed all his Disciples
feet, yet all were not clean: though from the Center of Caluary lines of mercy
are drawn to the utmost parts of the earth, yet all the world is not within
the Circle of pardon. The best Physike has not its efficacy upon some
indisposed patients, Quicquid recipitur, etc. proves true in Divinity: I shall
go beyond my Commission to tell you, He has made Salvation as common as the
light of the Sun or breath of our Nostrells; God is no Prodigal of his
mercy: inuert that speech of Piso in Tacitus, Perdere scit, donare nescit;
Histor. 1.
he is bountiful, not profuse, and his goodness observes a Method. Christ's
pains were not extensiuely infinite, so not auailable for such sinners, of
whose iniquity there is no end. Our sins indeed betrayed him into sinners
hands, who crucify unto themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open
shame. Every sin is a nail, a thorn, a Spear; and every sinner, a Jew, a
Judas, and a Pilat. Be not encouraged to sin, and then think to take Sanctuary
at a Savior; iniure not Christ so much, as to make him the foundation of thy
sinful life, who lost his to extinguish it; presumptuous sinners! that put
themselves under the protection of a Redeemer, and so think to escape the
arest: Surely, to tender Christ the complement of our lips with corrupt hearts,
is like the Soldiers, to prostrate our selves before him in scorn. Bera.
Defer not to be good upon hopes, I tu and quaere salutem in medio Gehennae,
quae semel operata est in medio terrae; this life is our Harvest to reap the
fruit of his merits. Finally, Christ has left us an example to crucify the
world with the lusts thereof; for, Quid est volaticum huius mundi gaudium? This
world is a fleeting good, a winged Joy. But spes Resurrectionis fastidium est
mortis, says Tertullian. The Saints contemn death, who have a part in the
second Resurrection: where they shall be crowned, not with Thorns but Glory;
and sing praises to Jesus, the Lord of glory.

FINIS.

