Certain QVESTIONS DEMAVNded and asked by the Noble Realm of England, of her
true natural children and Subjects of the same.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.

Imprinted AT LONDON AT THE earneste request and suit of your graces true
and faithful servant Miles Hogherde.





England speaks to the Englishmen.
Answer these questions and so shall I know
If thou wyshe my safte or my overthrow.

Whether there be two kind of tresones, one to the kings parsone, and a another
to the body of the relme or not, and whether the boddy of the rellme, may
pardone the committed treasone unto the parsone of the prince, and a gain
whether the Prince may pardon treason done to ye body of the relme?

Ite^ whether a Prince can betray his own realm, or not? and whether as the
subjects of a realm without the consent of the Prince may not deliver up the
right and title of ye same realm (belonging unto the Prince) unto a stranger,
whom it belongs nothing unto: So likewise the Prince cannot deliver up unto
another farre^ Prince, the right title, tuition, and defense, of his realm,
without the consent of his lawful air or eyres apparent and faithful
subjects, unto any stranger, without their lawful and expressed consent of
them both.

Ite^ whether the cheff Captayn and sodiars of any town, Castelle or hold,
owght to obey his princes letters of commandment where by the same town or
hold should either be forsaken or surrendered from the realm to the enemy or to a
stranger, or else left desolate to the destruction of the realm, for the
princes pleasure alone?

Ite^, whether the Princes be worthy to be her fathers air (who only by his
last will called her unto) will not observe her fathers will, and whether of
right her fathers will ought to prevail against all her practyses, contrary to
the same will, or not? and what judgment shall follow that Princes which does
the contrary?

Ite^ whether one being a bastard in deed and so declared by the testimonye
of.xiij. of the greatest and best scoles or universities in all Christe^dom, and
by the whole body of the Cano^ law, can be made no bastard, otherways then by
legittimacio^ from the Pope only, whose power the same realm had renounced, by
the auctorite of Gods word, and whether they were worthy punishment that called
such a one bastard.

Ite^ whether the expres word of god in the xxij. Chap. of Deuteronomy. forbid a woman
to bear a sword, or wear spurs, as kings do in their creacion, or to wear
any other weapon, or apparel of man, saying: A woman shall not we are the
weapons of a man, neither shall a man put on woman's raiment, for who so does
it, is abhominacion unto the Lord God.

Ite^, whether a King becomes a tyrant, in following his will, and forsaking
his law?

Ite^, whether it be tyranny for a Prince, to keep his brother or sister in
prison, and ca^ charge them with nothing, as all the Realm well knows.

Item, whether the King thursteth the blood of his subjects, when he seeks
means to put his subjects to death, after he is lawfully quyte by the laws
of his Realm, and punished those men, who have passed upon his life, forcing
them as much as may be to kyl his said subject.

Item, whether that Prince does commyt oppression and extorcion, which takes
away his subjects goods, when he is out of his realm, before he be
condemned, or called home to his answer: And whether god will revenge such
extorcion or not?

Item, whether it be a point of tyranny for a Prince, when he knows a
dosyne of his counsayl guilty of hye treason, to condemn one of the most
innocente to death for the same, because he would not assent to them in
religion, and to pardon the rest: yea, and to cause some of the^ to sit upon
him in judgment, who were more guilty then the party condemned?

Item, whether it be a point of tyranny, to kill one of his own blood for a
fault devised, and done by others. So that none other cause can appear, why
he should kill his said Cousyn, but only that he should not raygne after him?

Item, whether a King promysing before his entrey to the imperial crown of his
realm, to suffer some of his subjects to follow their own religion, or
afterward in the time of co^mocion promise them pardon, if they will lay down
their weapons and depart. Be bound to preserve his promise: and if he do not,
whether such a Prince ought ever after to be believed or credited, when he
offers pardonne to serve his turn.

Item whether they that have taken an oath never to receive the Bishop of Rome
again, and have not withstanding in open parliament suffered bills to be
preponed, and with their voices consented to the receiving of him again, be
perjured or not.

Item, whether a King being betroughted to another Kings daughter, with words
of the present time, may marry another women or not, she being a live? And if
such a Prince should marry with ye Queen of England, whether should she live
in aduoutry, and the child child so begotten, then be a bastard or not?

Item, whether it be treason to declare a title of a Realm by a petegree to a
spanish strange blood, by diverse other means removed, but specially by act
of Parliament declaringe the same to be treason?

Item, whether subjects ought to look to their own safetye, and to the
safety of the realm and to join them selfs wholly together, to put down
such a Prince as seeks all means possible to deliver the^, their lands,
their goods, their wives, their children, and the whole realm into the hands
of Spanyardes, who be most justly hated like dogs all the world over:

Item, whether these men be mete to sytte in the Parliament house, that will not
speak as readely and as earnestly for the profit of the poor man, and wealth
of the realm, as for the pleasure and flattering of his Prince, or not?

Item, whether acts made by a parcial Parliament, chosen by craft and policy,
for the co^passing of the Princes wilful purpose, ought to be obeyed or not?

Item, whether the determinacion of such a parliamente, as be all together
ignoraunte in matters of religion, ought to be obeyed, though all the souls of
the poor people in the realm should be damned thereby, or not?

Item, whether that man that maryeth the Queen of a realm (if she decease
before him) shall have all her goods, mouable within the realm, or else
where, as all her gold, and silver, and Jewels of plate and other, all the
treasures of the towns and castles, all ordenaunce and gonnes, horses,
ships, bows, harnas, and all such other things as were hers, at the time of
her death, and whether by the law he may carry away out of ye realm the same
treasure Whim?

Item, whether all such as in religion follow the commandment of man shall be
damned with the man that commands if he command it, that is contrary to
the law of God:

Item, whether children be better brought to the understanding of God, by
learning the x. Commandments, and the processio^ in english, and the
Catechism, or else by learning the latyne seruyces, whereof the unlearned
understands not one word?

Ite^, whether he speaks and does against the holy ghost, that speaks
against the holy Bible and known truth therein, and says yt it is the
fountain of heresies, and vyly and contemptuously poulleth down the same
Bible, and treads it under his feet.

Ite^, whether the Cytezens of Andwerpe in requyring that no spanyardes should
enter their city, give example to al men or not, to do the like. And whether
the smart of other countries under the bondage and tyrann^e of the spanyardes,
where they have been suffered to enter, did move the wise sort of Andwerpe to
forsee their mischief.

Ite^, whether it be lykelye, that if the spanyardes obtain the better hand of
the English nation, that the poor English men shall be forced to pay such
importable taxes, as all countries and cities pay, where the Prince or they
have all ready had the over hand?

Ite^, for as much as the safete of the realm touches the Lords and commons
of the same, and al their lands, goods, and possessions, whether may a Queen
marrye to such a one, though she promise never so fair: as may by any means
in danger the realm, or proper possessions.

Ite^, whether the King of Spaynes subjects (being made free of England) the
commodities of the Realm shall come into the hands of strangers, and the
English men undone thereby, or not?

Ite^, whether it be a common maxim, or general rule, practysed amongst
Princes, if they may at any time break their faith, and forswear
themselves, for the purchasing or obtaining of a Kingdom. And because England
is one of the best Kingdoms in all Europa, whether it be lykely now at this
present that England will provoke a Prince rather to forswear him self, not
withstanding any article or oath made to the contrary?

Ite^, whether the Realm of England belong to the Queen, or to her subjects?

Ite^, whether the Queen of England may sell away the realm or not, to a
stranger, with out the consent of her commons?

Ite^, if she cannot sell it away, whether may she give it away or not, to a
stranger, and marry the same stranger, without the consent of her commons, or
not?

Ite^, whether the commons may not lawefully by the laws of God, and of
nature, stand against such a Prince, to depose her which has and does seek
all means possible to give away the Realm for ever, by Parliament, or
otherwise from her right eyres and natural subjects, to a stranger?

Ite^, whether a Queen being desired by the whole lower house of Parliament to
marry within the realm, and to no stranger, ought to be obeyed, if she do
to the contrary to her poor commons?

Ite^, whether William Conqueror destroyed all the nobilite of England for his
own sauegarde, by the counsel of Robart Archbishop of Canterbury, whom King
Lerolde banished his Realm for treason. And whether it be lykely that in
process of time, the Prince of Spain if he be suffered, will do the like by
the counsel of Steven Gardener, now Bishop of Winchester, or not?

Ite^, whether the poor commo^s of England shall not be shamefully impouerished
with repayinge to the Emperor.xx. C.M. franche crowns, which ye Prince of
Spain borrowed of him before he entered the Realm, yt he might appear rich,
until he had compassed his purpose, or not?

Ite^, whether the Bishop of Romes authority be lawfully received or not again
into England, for as much as the last Parliamente wherein he was restored, was
no Parliament, because it is euydente by the old laws of the Realm, that the
Kings of England may not keep two Parliamentes in one year. Wherefore the last
must be unlawful and no Parliament?

Ite^, whether such as have any free hold coppe holds, or indenture holds of
Abbey lands, shall be forced to yield them up again or not, by the Bishop of
Romes laws, notwithstanding any promise made to the contrary, seeing that the
next Pope may undo al grau^tes made to the contrary by his prodecessour. And
seeing also that there is aplayne law that all such be excommunicate and
excluded from the church by the Popes doctrine, who keep any such lands as
have been put at any time in mortmane, and appointed by the consent of
Princes to find the Clargie.

Ite^, whether it be lykely that the Queen help the Pope to bring this thing
to pass by all means possible or not, seeing she her self first has
restored some Abbey lands to give example?

Ite^, whether it be likely, that, that Prince which promised upon his faith to
keep certain articles, and amongst them not to demand the crown, and
afterward contrary to the same faith and articles, attempted to be crowned
king of the realm, will not seek all means possible as well to be perjured as
if need shall require by open war to obtain his purpose?

Ite^, whether such a Prince missing of his purpose by entreaty and fair
means, ought not to be feared having forreyne power within the Realm at his
commandment, which increases daily, and the favor of the Queen, least he
will attempt to obtain that thing by conquest which otherwise by intreatye he
cannot obtain, from which miserye I beseech almighty God save England.

Ite^, whether the Pope be God, or God the Pope?

Ite^, Herry the fowrth Emperor married with Co^stancia, the air and Queen of
Napels, and by her entitled King of Napels, if because of her years being
before a Nun virgin dispayring of lawful issue, practysed with his
Physician, having a wife, which lately conceived to brute according to the time
of her co^cepcion, a like concepcion of the Queen: and so in thend brought
forth the Phisicio^s child, as the Queen's: whereby the inheritance of ye realm
was transported to a villayn, whether it is impossible, there might be again
any such like practyse?

Ite^, whether the testimony of a Bishop at large out of prison, enjoying all
his dignities, openly in printe set forth to the whole world, be stronger
against the Kings child, the^ when he being deprived from all, and in prison,
upon delyuerye and restitucion by the same child, affyrmeth the contrary?

Ite^, if this word noble, be as much to say as notable: whether the notable
wise, or ye notable fools of a realm are to be called nobles, and whether of
their consentes, is to be taken for the consent of the nobility?

Item, whether after this life be ended and men dye out of this life, there be
to be looked for a resurrection and eternal life, or no? and whether the Bishops
lives confyrme this article, or dest^^ye it?

Item, whether it be Treason to ask a question?

Item, whether it be treason to say God save the noble Realm of England from
the captivity, bondage, and conqueste of the vile Spanyardes?

FINIS.

