This is the Cronycle of all the kings names that have been in England: and
how many years they reigned / and how many saints and martyrs have been i^ this
land: and shewith the hole su^me / from the making of the world till the
coming of Brute: ye which is.iiii.M.lxxvii. years / and fro the coming of
Brute to the Incarnacion of Christ is M.C.xxii. years: and fro the Incarnacion
to the.xxiiii. year of king Henry the.vi. is.M.CCCC.xlvi. years.


depiction of a king with sword and orb
THis is the Cronycle of all the kings names and how many years they reigned
and how many saints and martyrs have been in this land.
Brute came after the making of the world into the land of Albion / in the
time that Ely the Pressed of the law was in the land of Israel.iiii.M.lxxvii.
years.

New Troy (that now is called London) was fou^dyd by the making of Brute /
after ye making of the world.iiii.M.C.xxiiii. year.

Rome was was foundyd by Remus and Romulus iiii.M.iiii.C.lxxxiiii. year.

Jesus Christ was conceyuyd by the holy ghost in the mayde^ Marie on a friday:
in the time of king Kamelyn was king of Brytayne: the.xv. day of March:
after the making of the world.v.M.C.lxxxxix. year.

Jesus Christ was borne / when his mother was xiiii. year old on a sunday /
the.xxv. day of December / in the same year: after the making of ye world
v.M.C.lxxxxix. year.

Saint John^ the Baptyste was hedyd the.xxv. day of Auguste after the
Incarnacion.xxxii. year.

Jesus Christ suffered death on a friday the.xv. day of March: after his
incarnacion.xxxiii. year

Saint Stephen was martyred the third day of August: after the Incarnacion.
xxxiii. year.

Saint Paul was converted the.xxv. day of January after the
Incarnacion.xxxiiii. year.

Our lady Mary was taken into heaven the.xv. day of August in the.lx. year of
her age: after the Incarnacion.xlv. year.

Saint Longlus was martyred after the Incarnacion.lvii. year.

Saint Peter and Paul were martyred the.xxix. day of June: after the
Incarnacion.lxix. year.

Lucy the king of Brytayn^ become christen after the incarnacion.C.lxii. year.

Saint katheryne was martyred by Maxencius Emperor of Rome in ye time yt
Constantyne saint Elynsonne was king of Brytayn^ after the Incarnacion.CC.lii.
year.

Saint Vrsula / with the.xi.M. virgins were martyred at Coleyn: by a Sarasyn
that was called Swane ye which was king of Coleyn in yt time that Maxymyan
was king of Brytayn^: after the Incarnacion.CC.lxxxxvii. years.

Saint Abon was martyred / by the foresaid Swane in the time of Maxymyan:
after the Incarnacion.CCC.i. year.

Saint Gregory the pope / sent into England saint Augustyne after the
Incarnacion.CCCCC.lxxxxvi. year.

Saint Edmunde the king was martyred / by Hungar and Hubba of De^marke: in
time that first Alured was king of England: after the Incarnacion.viii.C.lxx.
years.

Saint Edward the martyr / was martyred by his stepmother after the
Incarnac.ix.C.lxxx. ye.

Saint Edward the confessor was quycke and deed in the year of grace.M.lxvi.
years.

Saint Edmunde the king was translated the time that Wyllya^ Ruphus was kind
of England the year of grace.M.lxxxxvi. years.

Saint Edward the confessor was translated by saint Thomas of Caunturbury in
the time of king Henry.ii. year of grace.

Saint Thomas of Caunturbury was martyred in the same king Henr time in the
year of grace.M.C.lxx. yer.

The same saint Thomas was traunslated in the time of king Henry in the year
of grace.M.CC.xx. years.

These ben the Chronicles of the kings that have been / sith Brute came into
this land first.
Brute came into this land after the making of the world.iiii.M.lxxvii.
years. And he lived i^ the land or he were crowned.xl. year. And after he was
crowned.xx. years.

Lotryn his sone.v. years.

Madan his sone.xxx. years.

Ebranke his sone.xl. years.

Leyle his sone.ix. years.

Bladud his sone.xxi. years.

Guentolyn his wife. xv. years.

Memps his sone.xxiiii. years.

Brute Bremenshull.xxx. year.

Ludebras.xiii. year.

Lyre his sone.xlviii. year.

Credel his daughter.v. year.

Conadage her suster sone.xxxiii. year.

Reynolde his sone.xx. year.

Gorbodyan his sone.xv. year.

Denobaud wan the realm by conquest and reigned.xl. year.

Bellyn his sone.xi. year.

Cornabatrus his sone.xxv. year.

Guentolem his sone.xxv. year.

Scisisse his sone.xv. year.

Kymore his sone.xix. year.

Morwych his sone.ix. year.

Grandobodyan his sone.xi. year.

Portagayle his sone.xvi. year.

Petitur his brother.v. year.

Esydur his brother.xiiii. year.

xxxiii. kyngus reigned afterward.
Luke the last kyngus sone of.xxxiii. reigned.xi. ye.

Kassibalan his brother.xxvii. year.

Andragen Luddes first sone.viii. year.

Kembolyn before the Incarnacion.ii. year.

The hole su^me fro the coming of Brute till the Incarnacion.M.C.xxii. year.
Grynder and Armogus his.ii. sons.xliiii. year.

Koyle Armogus his sone.xli. year.

Lucy his son reigned an Hethenman.xi. year. and a Christen man.xi. year.

And afterward was so great debate in ye land / that the realm was long
without a king l. yera.

Cole that made Colchester was king then.xiii. years.

Constantyne the Romayne / that weddyd saint Elyn Coals daughter.xv. year.

Constantyne that was Enperour his sone.xx. yer.

Octauyan reigned after that Constantyne was gone to Rome to be crowned
Emperor.xv. years.

Maximya^ wedded Octauia^s daughter and reigned.xxviii. yer. in his time saint
Albon was slain.

Consta^tyne cosyn to the king of little Brytayn^ reyned.xii. year.

Constantyne his sone that was a monk at Wynchester reigned.v. year.

Forteger that was Earl of Essex reigned.xi. yer

Fortymer his sone.xiiii. year.

Engyst of Saxony in that land of Iarmayn / yt was a Sarasyn / wan the land
and reigned.v. year.

Aurylambros Constantynes son slough Engyst / and drove the Sarasyns away /
and reigned.viii. year.

Vter Pendragon his brother reigned.xvii. yer.

Arthur his sone reigned.xxvi. year.

Constantyne Arthurs cosyn.xxiiii. year.

Guran for Constantyne had none heir.xxx. yer

Tonagh his cosyn.xxiiii. year.

Syryke reigned.xxv. yer.

Saint Adelbert and Sebert yt were converted by saint Augustyne and his
fellowship reigned.l. year.

Elfrede and Cadwaller / saint Oswald and Cadwalyn reigned in the realm of
England one after another..lxxx. yer.

Off a saint Oswaldis brother.xlviii. years

Alured the first / in his time saint Edmunde of Bury was slain of Hungar and
Hubba the kings brethren of Denmark.xxx. years.

Edward the first his sone.xxv. yer.

Edmunde his brother.xvii. years

Adelstone. (...)

Eldrede his brother.x. yer

Edwyn his third brother.iiii. years.

Edgar his sone.xvii. yer.

Saint Edward the martyr his son^.xii. years.

Swyn^ that was king of Denmark.xv. yer.

Eldrede saint Edwardes Brother ix. year.

Edmunde Irensyd and Knowt Swyn^son^.xx. yer

Harolde harefote knowte son xiii. yer.

Hardeknowte his brother.xvi. years.

Saint Edward the confessor Eldred son reigned.xxiii. years.

Harolde / that was Godwyn son Earl of westsex reigned.i. year.

Here ends ye cronycle of the kings that reigned before the conquest.
The cronycle of all the kings names that have reigned in England sith the
conquest of Wyllyam Conqueror.


This mighty Wyllyam Duke of Normandye
As books old make mension
By just title and by his chiualrye
Made king by conquest of Brutes Albion
Put out Harolde / and took possession
Bare his crown full.xxi. year
Buried at Cane. thus says the cronycolere.
Next him in order by succession
Wyllyam Rufus his son crowned king
Which to godwarde had no devotion
Distroyed church of new and old building
To make a forest plesaunt for hunting
xiiii. year bare his crown in deed
Buried at Wynchester: the cronycle ye may read.
His brother next / called the first Henry
Was at London crowned / as I find
Whose brother Robert / duke of Normandye
Gave him war^: the cronycle makes mind
Rcconcyled: all rancour set behind
Full.xxxvi. year (by record of wryttynge)
He reigned: and buried at Redynge.
His cosyn Stephen / when Henry ye first was deed
Toward England / began to cross his sail
The Archebysshop set upon his heed.
A rich crown: being of his counsel
xix. year with sorrow and great travail
Bare his crown and had never rest
At Feuersham lies buried in a cheste.
Henry the second son of the empres
Was next crowned: a full comely knight
As books old plainly do express
This said Henry by froward force and might
Slew saint Thomas for the churches right
xxxv. year he reigned: as it is made mind
At Founteuerarde lyth buried: as I find
Richard his son next by succession
First of the name strong / hard / and notable
Was crowned king / called cure de lion
With Sarasyns heed is served at his table
Slain at Talus / by death lamentable
He reigned fully the space of.ix. year
His heart kuryed at Rone at the high autere
Next king Richard reigned his brother John
After soon entered into France
Lost all Angie and Normandye anon
This land enterdyted by his governance
And as it is put in rememberaunce
xviii. year king of this Regyon
Lies at Worcester / dyed of poison.
Henry the.iii. his sone of.ix. year of age
Was at Gloucestre crowned as I read
Long war he had with his baronage
Greatly delyted in almesdede
lvi.year: he reigned here in deed
Buried at Westmynster by record of wryttynge.
Day of saint Edmunde made martyr and king
Edward the first with the shankes long
Was after crowned that was so good a knight
Wanne Scotland / maugre the Scotts strong
And all Walys dispyte of all their might
Duryd his life maynteyned truth and right
xxxv. year he was here king
Lyth at Westmynster / this is treuth and no lesynge.
Edward his son called Carnaruane
Succyde after to make his alyaunce
As the cronycle well rehearse cane
Weddyd the daughter of the king of France
On Thomas Lancaster by death he took vengeance
xix. year here / he held his regalye
Buried at Glocestre / as books specifye.
The third Edward / borne at wynsore
Which in knyghthod had so great a pris
Enherytour of France withouten more
Bare in his armies quartly.iii. flowerdelys
And he gate Calys by his prudent deuyce
Reigned in England.li. year
Lyth at Westmynster. thus says the cronycolere.
Son of prince Edward / Rychard the secou^de
In whose time was peace great plente
Wedded quyne Anne of Ceume as it is found
Isabell after of France / who list se
xxii. year he reigned here parde
At Langley buried / first so stood the case
After to Westmynster his body carried was
Henry the.iiii. next crowned in certain
A famous knight / and of great semblenesse
From his exyle when he came whom again
Trauayled after with war and great sykenesse
xiiii. year he reigned in southnesse
Lyth at Canterbury in that holy place
God of his mercy do his soul grace.
The.v. Henry of knyghthod lodsterr
Wise and right manly plainly to termyne
Right fortunate proved in peace and war
Greatly expert in marcyal displyne
Able to stand among the worthys nine.
Reigned.x. year / who so list have regard
Lyth at Westmynster not far from saint Edward.
Henry the syxte / as I find by wryttynge
Reigned justly.xxxviii. year
Which was right holy and virtuous of living.
And after him: as it does appear
Reigned Edward the fourth. xxii. year
And one month: neither less nor more
And both those kyngeslye at Wynsore.
After this.iiii. Edward: as it is accounted
Reigned Edward the.v. of that name
The which Edward was never crowned
Who redeth the cronycle shall se the same
And atter him (mine acco^pte for to frame)
Richard the third / reigned in certain
Two year and.ii. months: the cronycle says plain.
After whom reigned / that most noble king
Henry the seventh.xxiii. year
And.viii. months by record of wryttynge
Whom his enemies drad both far and nere
With whom all christen pryncis / as it does appear
In his actis: were glad to make bands of peace
And for to live in quiet / rest / and eas.
Which prudent prince / of April the.xxi. day
Departed this world by deuyne ordinance.
For whom many one said / alas and welway
With lamentable teres and woeful semblau^ce
Blamed Athropos for all their greuaunce
And specially the commons sorowed for their king
But nothing auayled their lachrymable weeping.
Much was the dolor of great and small
His death right grievous to us euerychone
For in his time we were dread over all
yet us to reco^fort / and to be our champyon
He left behynd him the mighty Sypton
His only son / the eight king Henry
Of great hardy courage / Ector the worthy.
Which mighty prince shortly to determyne
The.xxii. day of April / began to rain
(Anno domini. M.D. and nine)
Over England / sumtyme named Brytayne
The.xxiiii. day of June after / in certain
(With all the nobles of spiritual and te^poralte)
Crowned he was / with tryu^p he and sole^pnyte.
And here will I leave him as a conqueror
Saylynge forth (a prince inuictissimus)
Within the ship / of high and great honor
Which grace gydeth from all things perilous
With.iiii. quarter masters most famous
Called Justice / Prudence / and Temperau^ce
And strong Force / all them does auaunce.
Finis.
Thus ends the cronycle of all the kings names / that have reigned in
England. since ye coming of Wyllya^ Conqueror: and how long they reigned.
Imprinted by Rychard Pynson / Prynter unto the kings noble grace.



Cum priuilegio


