Certain causes gathered together, wherein is showed the decay of England,
only by the great multitude of sheep, to the utter decay of household keeping,
mayntenau^ce of men, dearth of corn, and other notable dyscommodityes approved
by sire old Proverbs.

Prouer. 20. A king that sits in judgment, and looks well about him,
dryueth away all evil. To the Kings most honorable Counsel, and the Lords
of the Parlayment house.
THe first Article and point as we do think, is it great pittye (so the will
of God it were) that there is no corn enough within this Realm of England,
at all times necessary to certyfy and suffyce the Kings subjects for the
space of one year two or three, if there were no corn sown in this Realm by
the said space.

We do say that ye Kings Majesty mercifully hearing the peticio^ of these
his graces poor subjects may at altymes remedy it, when it shall please his
majesty, being for a common wealth for his graces subjects, and to the great
increase of this noble realm of England.

We say as reason does lead us, ye sheep and shepemasters, does cause
ska^tyte of corn, which we do think, it may be well approved, by reason of
six proverbs, for and if all our lyuynges, and all our commodities, were
diuyded in parts, by reason of ye same syx proverbs, we that be ye Kings
maiestyes poor subjects do lose syx of our co^modityes, then have we three
losses, which make nine, by reason of the same three losses we the Kings
mayestyes subjects do lose ye third part of our lyuinge, then have we the
tenth part, which we call a remedy, beseching your noble grace, to remedy when
your majesty shall please.

As touching the first proverb of the syx we do think. The more sheep the
dearer is the woll. The more sheep the dearer is the motton. The more sheep the
dearer is the beffe. The more sheep the dearer is the corn. The more sheep the
skanter is the whit meat. The more sheep the fewer eggs for a penny.


In ye first proverb, ye more sheep the dearer is the woll. Our complayntis
for Oxford shyre, Buckyngham shyre, and Northampton shyre, and as for all other
shyres, we refer it to the playntyues.

We shall desire you, and al other that read and se the true ententes and
meanynges of this our doings to pardon our ignorance, yet not with standing
we desire you sumwhat to attender the premises, saying it is dove, and put
forth, for the commoditye of ye Kings magesties realm, and for the wealth of
his graces poor subjects.

In the said Oxford shyre Buckyngham shyre and Northhampton shyre, there be
many men of worship dwelling within the said three shyres. And has great
lauds rolyue upon, the which we pray to God to give them joy of, and well to
occupye its Many of these worshipful men, set no store, nor pryse, upon the
mayntenaunce of tyllage of their lands, as before time has been used, neither
breadyng nor feadynge of catle, but many of them does keep the most substance
of their lands, in their own hands. And where tillage was wont to be, now is
it stored, with great vmberment of sheep: and they that have great vmberment
of sheep, must needs have great store of woll, and we cannot think who
should make the pryse of woll, but those yt have great plentye of sheep. And we
do partly know that there be some dwelling within these three shyres, rather
then they will sell their woll at a low pryse, they will keep it a year or
twain, and all to make it dear, and to keep it a dear pryse. And by this
means ye first proverb to be true The more sheep the dearer is the woll.

In the second proverb as we do think: The more sheep, the dearer is ye
moton.

As by reason, the most substance of our feadynge was wont to be on beffe, and
now it is on motton, And so many mouths goith to motton, which causes motton
to be dear.

In the third proverb as we do think: The more sheep the dearer is the beffe.

As by reason that breding and fedyng, is not set by as it has been in times
past, and where as sheep is kept upon the pasture grounds where breadyng and
fedynge of beffes was wont to be kept: and where as sheep is kept upon the
pasture grounds, where bredyng and fedynge was wont to be kept: And now there
is nothing kept there but motton.

The fourth proverb: The more sheep, the dearer is the corn.

By reason tyllage is not used, occupied, and mainteyned as it has been before
time, but sheep kept upon the ground, where tyllage was wont to be kept and
mainteyned.

The.v. proverb: The more sheep the skanter is the weyte meat.

By reason tyllage is not used, occupied and maynteyned another mayntenaunce of
houses and hospitalytye, where as catle was wont to be feed and bread, by
reason of keeping of catle should increase whyt meat, and now there is nothing
kept there but only sheep.

The syxte proverb: The more sheep the fewer eggs for a penny.

By reason cottages go down in the contre, where as pultrye was wont to be
bread and fed, now there is nothing kept there but sheep, which cause the
eggs to be sold for four a penny. Thus be the syx proverbs true, as we do
think desiring you to give hearing unto them, and that it may be well
amended, for the common welthe of the Kings poor subjects.

Then have we three losses that makes nine.

The first loss as we do think, there is not so many plowes used, occupied,
and mainteyned within Oxforth shyre, as was in King Henry the seventh time,
and sens his first coming there lacks xl. plowes, every plough was able to
keep.vi. persons down lyinge and vprisynge in his house, the which draws to
twelf score persons in Oxford shyre. And where yt the said twelf score persons
were wo^t to have meat, drink, raiment and wages, payinge skot and lot to
God, and to our King, now there is nothing kept there but only sheep. Now
these twelfscore persons had need to have living, whether shall they go, into
Northhampton shyre? and there is also the living of twelef score persons lost,
whether shall then they goo? forth from shyre to shyre, and to be scathered
thus abroad, within ye Kings maiestyes Realm, where it shall please almighty
God, and for lack of masters, by compulsion driven some of them to beg, and
some to steal.

The second loss as we do think, that there is never a plough of the.xl.
plowes, but he is able to till and plowe to certifye syx persons, and every
ploughe to sell.xxx. quarters of grain by the year, or else he can full ill
pay, syx, seven, eight poundt by the year, xl. plowes.xxx. quarters every
ploughe, draws to two hundredth quarters in Buckingham shyre, two hundredth
quarters in Oxforde shyre, and two.cc. quarters in Northa^pto^ shyre, and so
forth from shyre to shyre in certain shyres within ye Kings majesty's Realm
of England, what shall the twelf two hundredth quarters of corn do in Oxforth
shyre: we do think it will mainteyne the Kings markettes, and sustain the
Kings subjects, and likewise in Buckyngham shyre, and also in Northampton
shyre, and so from shyre to shyre, in certain shyres within the Kings
magesties Realm. Furthermore it is to be considered what this twelf hundredth
quarters of corn is able to do within Oxford shyre, it is able to certifye and
suffyce xv. score people by the year bread, and drink, and allow to every
person.ij. quarters of weate, and two quarters of malt by the year, where as in
the first the hole living of twelf score persons meat, and drink, and
raiment, vprysyng and down lying, payinge skot and lot to our God, and to our
King. And the second loss bread and drink for. xv score persons by the year,
which the hole nombre draws to.v. hundredth and.xl. persons in Oxforth shyre,
so in Buckyngham shyre, and so likewise in Northampton shyre, and so forth from
shyre to shyre within the Kings maiestyes Realm.

And if it be as we do think yt there be.iiij. score plowes in every one of
these shyres les the^ there was, then is there ye living lost of a thousand and
iiij. score persons in every one of these foresaid shyres: This is the
second loss as we do think and call for remedy for it.

The third loss, as we do think, we do lose in the said three shyres keeping
of household and hospitalitye and maintayning of tyllage and household keeping, we
do lack corn and also lose our cattle, for where any household is kept,
there is kept kyne and calves, and of our kine there comes milk, butter and
chease, and all this does sustain the Kings Mayesties subjects, and for
this we have nothing but sheep.

And furthermore, where housholdes be kept, there is hogs, pigs and bakon,
capons, he^nes, duckes, Eggs, fruit and many other co^modityes, that is
necessary and needful to be had for ye maintenance and lyuinge of the Kings
majesty's poor subjects to live by, and for that we have nothing but sheep.
This is the third loss.

The.x. is which we do call for remedy, and we desire of God and the Kings
majesty, if it shall please his highness to be so good and gracyous unto his
poor subjects, that there might be in every shyre and hundred as many plowes
used, occupied, and maynteyned as many households kept as was by king Henry the
seventh time, first coming and then unfeigned as we do think we should have
corn enough, cattle enough, and sheep enough, then will sheep and woll be in
more men's hands, we shall have also white meat enough, and all things
necessary. And thus Jesus preserve our dread soueraingne Lord and King.

As we do think we have two losses more that we have not spoken: The first
loss is for lack of household keeping and mayntenaunce of tyllage, it is great
decay to artyllary: for yt do we reken that shepeherdes be but ill artchers.

And as we do further think it leseth the kings majesty in provision for his
noble housholdes, that is to say in wheat, malt, beues, mottons, veles, hay
and otes, and pultry, and all manner such provisions, yt belongs to his
maiestyes household as we do think, v. thousand marks by the year with ye
lest. In a trial as we do think if it should please the Kings majesty's
officers to call in his graces purue yers, and examyne them where they have had
within their time for his graces prouisio^s of his wars, and for his
maiestyes household: where as there is now nothing to be gotten, for they that
keep the said lands, has put the fore said lands to pastures themself
byeth all manner of grain and corn to keep their household with all.

Furthermore, if it shall please the Kings highness, and his noble counsel for
to have a further trial of this matter, and to assure it to be true: take al
crafts me^ dwelling in cities and towns, day laborers that laboreth by water
or by land, corrygers and other householders, refusyng none, but only them yt
has all this abundance, that is to say: sheep or woll masters and inclosers,
the lamentacions of the Kings maiestyes subjects will make any true herted
body to seek and call for remedy, which we beseech ye Lord to amend. Amen.

Furthermore, as we do think, this Realm does decay by this means, it is
to understand and known, yt there is in England towns and villages to the
number of fifty thousand and upward, and for every town and vyllage take them
one with an other throughout all, there is one plowe decayed sens the first
year of the reign of king Henry the seventh. And in some towns and vyllages
all the hole town decayed sens that time, and if there be for every town and
village one plough decayed, sens the first year of the raygne of king Henry
the seventh: Then is there decayed.l. thousand plowes and upward. The
which.l. thousand plowes, every ploughe were able to maintain.vi. persons.
That is to say: the man, the wife and four other in his house less and
more.l. thousand plowes, syx persons to every plough, draws to the number of
three hundred thousand persons were wont to have meat, drink and raiment,
vprysing and down lyinge, paying skot and lot to God, and to the King. And now
they have nothing, but goes about in England from door to door, and axe their
almose for Gods sake And because they will not beg, some of them does
steal, and then they be hanged, and thus the Realm does decay, and by none
other ways else, as we do think, besechynge your hyghnes of your most noble
grace and honorable Lordshyppes, the premises tenderly considered before you
in examinacion upon ye premises, th^^ we may have a remedy in this behalf. And
we shall daily pray for the co^seruacion of your highness and for your full
noble lordshyppes.

Finis.
Imprinted at London in Pouls church yearde at the sign of Saynct Austen by
Heugh Syngelton.


