IN the year of thyncarnacion of our lord Jhu^ crist M.CCCC.lxxx. And in the
xx. year of the Regne of king Edward the fourth / At request of dyuerce
gentilmen I have endeuourd me to enprinte the cronicles of England as in this
book shall by the suffraunce of god follow / And to the end that every man may
see and shortly find such matter as it shall plese him to see or read I have
ordained a table of the matters shortly compiled and chapitred as here shall
follow which book begins at Albyne how she with her susters fond this land
first and named it Albion and ends at the beginning of the regne of our said
souerain lord king Edward the iiij.

First in the prologue is contained how Albyne with her sustre^ en^^d in to
this I Will / and named it Albion The beginning of the book conteyneth how Brute
was enge^drid of them of Troy and how he slew his fadre and mother Ca.j How
B^ute was driven out of his land / and how he held him in greece / And
delivered the trojans there out of bondage Ca.ij How Coryn becam Brutes man and
how king Goffar was discomfi^ed And of the fondacion of Tours in Turayne
Ca.iij. How B^ute arrived at tottenesse in the I Will of Albion / And of the
bataill bitwene Coryn and Gogmagog Ca.iiij How Brute made london and named this
land britaigne / and Scotland Albanie / and Walys Cambre / And of the division
of the land to his three sons Ca.v. How king Madan reigned in pe^s / and of the
debate of his sons and how that one slow that other / and how after wulues
slew him that slew his brother Ca.vj. How king Ebrac conquered france and
begat xx. sons and yxiij daughters Ca.vij. Of king Brute grenesheld first
sone of king Ebrac Ca.viij Of king Leyl / Brute grenesheldis sone Ca.ix. Of
king Lud ludibras that was king Leybes sone Ca.x Of king Bladud that was sone
of king lud ludibras Ca.xj Of king Leyr and of his iij. doughtres and how the
youngest was married to the king of france Ca.xij How king Leyr was driven out
of his land by his folly / and how Cordeil his yong^st daughter helped him in
his need Ca.xiij How Morgan and Conedage which were n^uews to Cordeil werxyd on
her / and had her in ^^son Ca.xiiij How Reynold that was Conedages sone reigned
aft his fadre And in his time it rayned blood three days Ca.xv. How Gorbodian
reigned after after reygrold his fadre Ca.xvj How the two sons of Gorbodian
fought for the heritage / and how they both were slain Ca.xvij. How iiij.
kings held all Britaigne / And what their names were Ca.xviij. Of king
Doneband that was Cleteus sone and how he wan the land Ca.xix. How Doneband was
the first king that euere wered croune of gold in Britaigne Ca.xx. How B^^nne
and Belyn departed bitwene hem the land after the death of ^ and their werre
Ca.xxi. How Belyn drofe out of this land Guthlagh of Denmark and Samye
Ca.xxij How wacoord was made bitwene Brenne and belyn by the moyen of Cornewen
her modre Ca.xxiij. How king Cormbatrus slow the king of denmark by cause he
would not pay him his truage Ca.xxiiij. How king Guenthelon reigned and go^ned
the land Ca.xxv. How king Seysell reigned after Guenthelon Ca.xxvj How kymor
reigned aft seysell / and howan reigned aft him ca.xxvij How king morwith deide
through devouring of a best ca.xxviij Of Grandebodian that was the sone of mor
with which made the town of Cambrige Ca.xxix Of Ar^ogaill that was grando
bodians sone / how he was made king and after deposed for his wikkednesse
Ca.xxx. How Hesidur was made king aft the death of Artogaille his brother
Ca.xxxj. How the Britons token hesidur out of prison / and made him king the
thride time Ca.xxxij How xxxiij. kings reigned in pees each after other / after
y^ death of Hesidur Ca.xxx.ij How lud was made king after the death of his fadre
ca.xxxiiij. How the britone granted Cassibalam which was luddes brother the
Reame / in whose time Julius caesar come twies to conquer the land Ca.xxxv. Of
the debate that was bitwene Cassibalam and the earl of london and of the truage
that was paid to rome Ca.xxxvj. How the lords of the land after the death of
Cassibalam be cause he had none heir made Andragen king Ca.xxxvij. Of kymbalin
which was Andragens sone / in whose time was Ihu^ born of the blessed virgin
seint marie Ca.xxxviij. Of king Guynder kymbalyns sone which refused to pay
tribute to Rome / and how he was slain Ca.xxxix. Of king Armager / in whose
time the appostles preched ca.xl How king westmer gaf to Beringer an Island and
made the (...) of ^^re wyke Ca.xlj How king westmer did do arere a stone in
thentring of westmerland / where he slew Roderyke Ca.xlij. Of king Coyll that
was westmers sone Ca.xliij How king lucie reigned after Coyll / And was the
first christian king that ever was in this land Ca.xliiij. How this land was long
without a king / and at last the britons chees Astlepades / which after was
slain by Coeyll ca.xlv How Constaunce a romayn was chosen king by cause he
wedded Eleyne king Coeyls daughter Ca.xlvj. How Costantine sone of Constaunce
and of seint Eleyne Ruled the land / and after was made Emperor of Rome
Ca.xlvij. How Maxymian that was the Emperors cousin of Rome wedded Octauians
daughter / and was made king Ca.xlviij How Maximian conquered the land of
Amorican. and gaf it to Conan meriedok Ca.xlix How seint Vrsula with xj.M.
virgyns in her company were martred at Coleyne Ca.l. How king Gowan came for
to destroy this land / And how Gracian defended it Ca.lj. How Gracian made
him self king when Maximian was slain and afterward the britons slew him
Ca.lij How Costantine that was the kings brother of litell britayne was
crouned king of much britayne Ca.liij Of Constaunce that was Costantins sone a
monk at wynchestre was taken out by vortiger and made king after his fadres
death whom vortigeer let sle him to make him self king Ca.liiij How the wardeyns
that had tho ij. children to keep which were co^stantines sons led them to
litell britayn for the trayson and falsenesse of vortiger Ca.lv. How Engist
with xj.M. men come in to this land to whom vortiger gaf the place that is
called thongcastell Ca.lvj. Of Ronewen Engistes daughter / whom king vortiger
wedded for her beauty Ca.lvij. How Vortimer that was Vortigers sone was made
king / and how Engist was driven out / and how Vortymer was slain by Ronewen
Ca.lviij. How the britons chosen Vortiger again to be king / and how Engiste
returned and how they fought to gedre Ca.lix. How Vortiger began a Castle that
would not stand / wherefore counscill was given him to tempre the mortar with
blood Ca.lx How M^rlyn was sought in walys for to come and speak with the king
Ca.lxj Of the ansuere of Merlyn to the king why the Castle might not stand
Ca.lxij. Of the significacion of ij. dragons that fout to gedre ca.lxiij Of
king Aurilambros how he pursued Vortiger and Engiste and how they deiden
Ca.lxiiij. How Aurilambros redressed the land of Britayne which was destroyed
by the saxons Ca.lxv How the britons went to seche the great stones in Irla^d
ca.^xvj. How Passent vortigers sone and king Guillomer come in to this land /
and how Coppa a traitor enpoysend the king Aurilambros Capitulo lxvij. When
Aurilambros was deed a sterre was seen in the morning with a clear light / and
at the bought of the beme was seen the head of an horrible dragon Ca.lxv.ij. Of
the ^^tokenyng of the sterre Ca.lxix Of Vter pendragon which was king after his
brother / and of the love that he had to ygerne therbes wife of Cornewaille
Ca.lxx. How Vter begat on Igerne countess of Cornewaille Arthur the king
Ca.lxxj. How king Vter ordained Aloth to rule the land whiles that he was seek
Ca.lxxij How Arthur sone of Vter was king after his fadre / and how he drofe
Colegrine / the saxons / and Cheldryke of Almayne out of this land Ca.lxx^ij.
How Arthur faught with the saxoues when they come again and besected the town
of bathe and hem ouerco^^e Ca.lxxiiij. How Arthur ayed of Merlyn of vj. the
last kings that we^^ to regn^ in this land / and of Merlyns prophecy Ca.lxxv
How Arthur overcome Guillomer king of Irland / and the scotts be^^me^ his men
Ca.lxxvj. How the noble king Arthur wedded Gunnore co^^n to the^^^ of corn
waill / and after how he conquered all Irland ca.lxxvij How Arthur conquered
france and slew frollo ca.lxxviij Hnw Arthur a vaunced his men that had
trauaylled in his ser^^se and how he was crouned king of Glomergan ca.lxxix. Of
the letter that was sent fro rome to king Arthur ca.lxxx Of the manly ansuere
that king Arthur sent to the Emperor and to the Romans ca.lxxxj Of the
reverence that king Arthur did to the messagers of the Emperor ca.lxxxij Of
the kings and lords that comen to serve and aid king Arthur a^enst the
Emperor ca.lxxxiij. How king Arthur faught and slew a geant called Dinabus
that had slain heleyne king hoels cousin of litell britaigne ca.lxxxiiij. How
king Arthur yaf bataill to the emperor / in which the emperor was slain
ca.lxxxv How king arthur buried the bodies of his knights that were slain in
the bataille / And how he sent the emperors body to Rome for tribute
ca.lxxxvj How Mordred to whom he had given the governance of his Reame in his
absence rebellid against him ca.lxxxvij How king Arthur enchaced Mordred the
traitor and how he was slain and king Arthur wounded to the death ca.lxxxviij
How king Arth^r drliuered the reame to Costantyn the sone of Cador his neuew
ca.lxxxix How Costa^tine was werred of Mordreds ij. sons ca.lxxxx. Of king
Adelbright and of Edell ca.lxxxxj How king Edell married the damoyfell
Adelbrightes daughter un to a knave in his kichen ca.lxxxxij Of king Conan
ca.lxxxxiij Of king Cortif and of Gurmonde that come by help of the ^^^nems in
to britaigne ca.lxxxxiiij. How king Gurmond drofe king Cortif to chichestre and
slew the britons and gate the town ca.lxxxxv How this land was named England
after the name of Engist And how many kings were made after in diverse parties
of the land ca.lxxxxvj How seint Austyn come first in to England and baptized
and con^tid king Adelbright / and of two bisshoppes that were his felows
ca.lxxxxvij. How seint Austyn went in to walys / and how the britons there
would not obey tharchebisshopp of Caunterbury ca.lxxxxviij. How king
Adelbright and king Olfride slew brecinal king of britons that held the
contre of leycestre Ca.lxxxxix. How Cadewan king of leycestre / and Elfride
king of northumberland were friends / and after of the deba^e that was bitwene
Edwyn and walyn which were both her sons Capitulo Centesimo How king Oswold
was slain by king Cadwalyn and peanda And how Oswy seint Oswaldes brother
reigned after him and slew Peanda / And how king Cadewaldre that was Cadewalynes
sone reigned after his fadre / And was last king of the Britons Capitulo C.j.
How Cadewaldre forsook this land and went in to litell Britaigne ca.c.ij How
king Offa was sovereign above all the kings in England and their werre / and
how Osbright enforced the wife of buerne bocarde / whereof fill much sorwe
ca.c.iij. How the Danes took york and slew king Osbright / and Elle
ca.c.iiij. How seint Edmond the king was martred ca.c.v How hubba and hungar
took the town of redyng ca.c.vj Of king Alured and how the danes in his time
required him to suffer them to depart out of this land ca.c.vij How hubba and
hungar were slain at Chippenham / and how the danes brought her king to king
Alured ca.c.viij How the danes that went in to france with Gurmond come a
gain in to england / and of the death of king Alured ca.c.ix Of king Edward
that was king Aluredes sone ca.c.x Of king Adelston and of Edmond / Eldrede and
of Edwyne his brotheren ca.c.xj Of king Edgar how he reigned over the kings of
scotland and walys / and how he was deceived in taking of his wife ca.c.xij How
king Edgar wedded Estrilde after the death of Edelwold ca.c.xiij How seint
Edward the martyr was slain by his stepmodre Estrilde for to make Eldred her
sone king ca.c.xiiij. Of king Eldrede / and how king swyne of denmark held
england and how Eldrede seint Edwardes brother was not beloved / wherefore be
fled in to normandy ca.c.xv How king Eldrede come again from normandy /
and how knoght the dane reigned / and of the werre bitwene him and Edmond
Irenside ca.c.xvj. Of king knoght ca.c.xvij. How king Edmond Irenside was
slain by a tcaitour named Edrith of Stratton ca.c.xviij How king knoght sent
king Edmondes sons in to denmark for to slay / and how they were sauyd
ca.c.xix. How king knoght conquered norewey / and how after his pride become
meke and mylde ca.c.xx Of king harolde that lever had to go on foot than ride
ca.c.xxj Of king hardeknoght haroldes brother ca.c.xxij. Of the vylanye that
the danes diden to englisshme^ wherefore afterward was no dane made king of
england ca.c.xxiiij How godewyn took Alured on gildesdoune when he came out of
norma^die to be kyug / and how he was martred in y^ I Will of ely ca.124 How seint
Edward Alureds brother was made king of England ca.c.xxv. Of the first miracle
that god showed for seint edward ca.c.xxvj How earl Godewyne returned in to
england / and how seint Edward wedded his daughter ca.c.xxvij. How seint Edward
saw sweyne drowned in the sea / as he stood and berde his mass ca.c.xxviij.
How the ringe that seint Edward had given to seint Johan the evangelist was
sen^ to him again ca.c.xxix. How seint Edward deide and is buried at
westmestre ca.c.xxx How harold good wynes sone was made king / and how he
escaped fro the duke of normandy ca.c.xxxj How william bastard duke of
normandy conquered england and slew king harold ca.c.xxxij. How king william
governed him well / and of the werre bitwene him and the king of france
ca.c.xxxiij Of king william Rous / william bastardis sone that destroyed tounes
and houses of Religion to make a forest ca.c.xxxiiij How king henry beauclerke
william Rous brother was king and of the de^ate bitwene him and Robert Curthose
his brother Capitulo c.xxxv. Of the debate that was bitwene king lowys of
feaunce and king henry of England / and how his two sons were drowned in the sea ca.c.xxxvj. How Maude the Emperesse come again in to england / and how she
was wedded after to Geffrey earl of angeo ca.c.xxxvij How stephen king henry's
suster sone was made king of England ca.c.xxxviij. How Maude themperesse had
much trouble and disease / And how she ascaped fro Oxenford to wallyngford
ca.c.xxxix How Geffrey earl of Angeo gaf un to henry themperesse sone all
Normandy ca.c.xl. Of king henry the second themperesse sone in whose time seint
Thomas of Caunterbury was made chaunceler ca.c.xlj Of king henry that was sone
of king henry themperesse sone / and of the debate of him and of his fadre
ca.c.xlij How christian men lost the holy land in this time through a falls
christian man that renyed his faith and became a sarasyn ca.c.xliij. Of king
Richard Cuer de lion and of his conqueste in the holy land ca.c.xliiij How
king Richard returned fro the holy land / and how he avenged him on his
enemies ca.c.xlv. How Johan his brother was made king / And the first year of
his regne he lost all Normandy ca.c.xlvj How king Johan would not obeyee the
popes commandment / wherefore all England was enterdited ca.c.xlvij How
stephen of langton come in to england by the popes commandment and how he
returned again ca.c.xlvx How king Johan destroyed thordre of Cisteaus ca.c.xlix
How Pandolf delivered a clerk that had falsed and cou^terfetid the kings money
in the kings presence ca.c.l. Of the letter obligatorie that king Johan made
un to the court of Rome wherefore petre pens be paid ca.c.lj. How the clerks
that were out^lawed come again / And how king Johan was assoylled ca.c.lij. How
the enterdiction cessyd / And of the debate bitwene king Johan and the barons
of England ca.c.liij. How lowys the kings sone of france come in to England
with a strong power for to be king ca.c.liiij. How the pope sent Swalo a
l^gate in to England And of the death of king Johan ca.c.lv How king henry the
thridde was crou^ed at gloucestre ca.c.lvj How lowys returned in to france /
And of the confirmacion of king Iohanes chartre ca.c.lvij. Of the quynzieme of
goods granted for the new chartre^ and of the purueyaunce of Oxenford
Ca.clviii Of the siege of kenilworth and how gentilmen were disherited by
counseill of the lords / and how they had her lands again Ca.c.lix The
prophecy of Merlyn of king henry that was king Iohanes sone ca.c.lx. Of king
Edward king henry's sone ca.c.lxj. How ydeyne daughter of lewelyn prince of
walys / and Aymer brother of therle of Mountfort were take on the sea
ca.c.lxij. How lewelyne by encoragyng of David his brother / made werre against
king Edward ca.c.lxiij. How david lewelyns brother prince of walys was put to
death Capitulo c.lxiiij. How king Edward redressyd his Iustises and clerks /
and how the Jews were put out of England ca.c.lxv How king Edward was seized
in all the land of scotland by consent of all the lords of the same ca.c.lxvj
How sir Johan bailloll withsaid his homage for scotland and of sir Thomas
Turbeluyle ca.c.lxvij Of the conquest of berewyke in scotland ca.c.lxviij How
king Edward delivered the scotts out of prison / and how they drew^ hem to
the frensshmen by counseill of william waleys Capitulo c.lxix How william
waleys let fle sir hugh of Cressyngham and of the bataill of fonkyrke ca.c.lxx
Of the last marriage of king Edward / and how he went the their de time in to
scotland ca.c.lxxj How the Castle of Estreuelyn was beseged ca.c.lxxij How
Troylebastone was first ordained ca.c.lxxiij Of the death of william waley^ the false traitor ca.c.lxxiiij How the scottis come to king Edward for tamende
their offencis that they had trespacid against him ca.c.lxxv How Robert the Brus
challenged scotland ca.c.lxxvj How sir Johan of Common gaynsaide the crounyng of
sir Robert the Bru^ ca.c.lxxvij How sir Johan of common was pitously slain
ca.c.lxxviij How sir Robert the Brus wa^ crouned ca.c.lxxix How king Edward
dubbed at westmynstre (...) sco^^ ^nyghtes ca.c.lxxx How Robert the Brus was
discomfited in bataill / ^ how Sir su^^ond frysell was slain ca.c.lxxxj. How
Johan earl of atheles was take and put to death ca.c.lxxxij How John^ william
waleis brother was put to death ca.c.lxxxiij How robert the hrus fled fro
scotland to norwey ca.c.lxxxiiij How the noble king Edward deide ca.c.lxxxv. Of
Merlyns prophecy declared on king Edward ca.c.lxxxvj Of king Edward of
Carnariuan which was king Edwardes sone ca.c.lxxxvij How robert the brus come
again in to scotla^^^ assembled a great power to werre upon king Edward
ca.c.lxxxviij How the town of berewyk was taken by treson / and how ij.
Cardinallis were robbed in england ca.c.lxxxix How the scotts robbed
northumberland ca.c.lxxxx How Scotland would not amend their trespaces /
wherefore the land was enterdited ca.c.lxxxxj. How sir hugh the spencers sone
was made the kings chamberlayn and of the bataill of mytone ca.c.lxxxxij How
king edward was all ruled by the spe^cers ca.c.lxxxxiij How sir hugh spencer
and his fadre were exibed out of England ca.c.lxxxxiiij. How the king exiled
Thomas earl of lancastre and all them that held with him / And how mortimer
come and yielded him to the king ca.c.lxxxxv. Of the siege of tickhille and of
the earl of lancaster ca.c.lxxxxv. Of the discomfiture of burghbrigge
ca.c.lxxxxvij. How Thomas of lancastre was biheded at pountfrete / and v.
Barons honged and drawn ca.c.lxxxxviij How king edward went in to scotland
with an honderd M. men of werre and might not speed ca.c.lxxxxix How sir Andrew
of herkla was taken and put to death which wa^ Earl of cardoylle ca.cc. Of the
miracles that god wrought for seint Thomas of Lancastre wherefore the doors of
the priorie were closed by cause none should come and offer at his sepulture
ca.cc.j How Queen Isabell w^nte in to frannce for to trete for pees bitwene
both kings of england and of france ca.cc.ij How king Edward sent Edward his
sone the Prince in to france ca.cc.iij How king Edward exiled the queen his
wife and Edward his odelst sone ca.cc.iiij How king Edward by the counceill of
the spencers sent to the xij. peers of france to help exile queen Isabell
and her sone sir Edward out of france Ca.cc.v How king Edward let keep the
costs of the sea / and tried out the best men of werre in england Ca.cc.vj
How queen Isabell and Edward her sone duke of guyan londed at her wych and how
they did^n Ca.cc.vij. How mastir waltier Stapleton bisshopp of Excestre (...)
kynge^ tresorer was beheded at london ca.cc.viij How king Edward / sir hugh
spencer / and therle of Arundell were taken ca.cc.ix. How king Edward was
deposed and his dignite taken from him ca.cc.x The prophecy of Merlyn declared
upon king edward of Carnariuan sone of king Edward Ca.cc.xj. Of king edward the
thridde after the conquest Ca.cc.xij How king Edward went to Stanhope for to
mete the Scotts Ca.cc.xiij. How the englisshmen stopped the scotts in the
park of sta^hope and how they turned ayene in to scotland ca.cc.xiiij Of the
de^h of king Edward of Carnariuan sometime king of England Ca.cc.xv. How king
Edward spoused Phelip therles daughter of henande at york ca.cc.xvj How the
pees was made bitwent englisshmen and scotts and of Justifying of
Troylebastonne Ca.cc.xvij Of the debate that was bitwene queen Isabell and sir
henry Earl of lancastre / and of the ridyng at bedford ca.cc.xviij How king
Edward went over see to do his homage un to the king of france for guyan
ca.cc.xix How sir roger Mortimer bare him proudly and hie ca.cc.xx. How Edmond
of wodestoke Earl of kente and brother to king Edward of Carnariua^ was beheded
at wynchestre / Capitulo cc.xxj. Of the death of Sir Roger mortimer Earl of the
March Capitulo cc.xxij. How king Edward gate ayene the homages and feautes of
scotland which he had lo^^ by his modre and sir Roger mortimer new made Earl of
the march ca.cc.xxiij This was the arraye of the Scotts that come in bataill
again the two kings of England and Scotland in the auauntward first were
these lords Ca.cc xxiiij How king Edward made a duchy of y^ erledome of
Cornewaile And of other vj. new earls y^ he made / and of the first challenge
and title of the Reame of france Ca.cc.xxv How king Edward fought in the haven
of skluys against the power of france / whereof he had the victory Ca.cc.xxvj
How king Edward sailled in to Normandy and arrived at hogs with a great
host Ca.cc.xxvij How king edward beseged caleys and how he gate it
ca.cc.xxviij How king Edward had a great bataille on the sea by wynchel see
with spaynardes Ca.cc.xxix. How king Edward was cronned king of Scotland / and
how pance Edward took the king of france and sir phelip his younger so ne at
the bataill of Peyters Ca.cc.xxx How the great company aroos in france / and
the white company in lumbardie / and of other meruayllis Ca.cc.xxxj. Of the
great wind and how prince Edward took the lordshipp of Gnyan of his fadre and
went thider Ca.cc.xxxij Of the bataill of spain by Nazers bitwene prince
Edward and sir henry bastard of spain Ca.cc.xxxiij How sir Robert knolles with
other lords went over see in to ^^aunce / and of their governance
Ca.cc.xxxiiij. Of the siege of Rochel / And the earl of penbroke and his
company were take with spaynardes Ca.cc.xxxv. How the duke of lancaster with a
great host wite in to flau^dres and passed by paris through france till he
come to burdenz ca.cc.xxxvj Of the death of prince Edward / And of the lord
latimer and daine Alice piers by mayntenaunce of whom the reame was lo^g^
mysgouerned Ca.cc.xxxvij. Of the death of king Edward and how sir Johan Monster
worth knight was draw and honged Ca.cc.xxxviij How king Richard prince
Edwardes sone was made king / and of Iak straw / And how he wedded Queen Anne
/ and of many other thing^s Ca.cc.xxxix. and.cc.xl. How v. lords risen at
Rafotrd brigge Ca.cc.xlj. How king Richard wedded Isabell the kings daughter
of france in Caleys / and of her coronacion at westmestre Ca.cc.xlij. How king
henry the fourth after the conquest regn^d a^t king Richard whom he deposed /
and of the bataill of shrewisbury and of all his regue Ca.cc.xliij. How king
henry the fifthe his sone was king / and of his regnyng in the beginning and of
the siege of harflete / bataill of Again court and werre in normandy
ca.cc.xliiij. How king henry was made heretier and regent of france / and how
he married quen^ katherine ca.cc.x^v. Of the lawde of king henry the fifthe /
and what he ordained for king Richard and for him self after his death
ca.cc.xlvj How king henry the sixthe reigned after his fadre being not full a
year of ag^ / and of the bataill of verneyll in perch ca.cc.xlvij How there was
like to have been a great affcaye bitwene the Cardinal and the duk^ of
gloacestre / and of the coronacion of king henry the six he both in england
and in france ca.cc.xlv^ij. Of the heresi^ of praghe / and of the counseill of
Aras where the duke of ^ourgoyne become frenssh ca.cc.xlix How Caleys and
guynes were beseged by the duke of burgoyne and how the duke of gloucestre
rescued them ca.cc.l. How Owayn a squire of walys that had wedded queen
kathe^ne was arested and put in prison / and of the scisine bitwene Eugen^e and
Felix ca.cc.lj. How the duchess of gloucestre was arested for treson / and
committed to perpetuell prison in the I Will of man / and of the death of mastir
Roger bolynbroke ca.cc.lij How king henry wedded queen Margarete and of her
coronacion ca.cc.lij How the duke of gloucestre humfrey the kings uncle was
arestid at the plement of bury / and of his death and how Angeo in main was
delivered ca.cc.liij How sir fransoys Aragonoys took fogiers in normandy / and
of the loss of Constantinople by the turk ca.cc.liiij Of thynsurr^xion in
kente of the communes of whom an Irissh man called Johan Cade was Captayn
ca.cc.lv How the duke of york took a field in kente at brentheth / And of the
burth of prince Edward / and of the first field of Seint Albons where the duke
of Somersete was slain and other lords / (...) cc.lvj How ^he lord egremond
was take by therle of salisburies sons and of ^he robbyng of sandwych
ca.cc.lvij. How they of the kings household made affraye a^enst therle of
warrewyke at westmynstre And of the Journey of bloreleth Capitulo cc.lviij How
the duke of york therles of warwyke and of salisbury took a field in the
westcontre and how Andrew trollopp and the soudiours of Caleys forsook them
Ca.cc.lix How the ^rlis of March warrewyk and salisbury entrid in to Caleys /
And how the earl of warrewyke went in to Irland C^p^ulo ducentesimo sexagesimo
How the ^rles of March warewyke and of salisbury entrid in to England / And of
the field of northampton where diverse lords were slain Ca.cc.lxj How the
noble duke of york was slain at wakefelde / And of the second Journey at
seint Albons by the Queen and the prince Ca.cc.lxij. Of the deposicion of king
Henry the six^he And how king Edward the fourth took possession of the Reame
And of the ba^^ille on palm^sonday / and how he was crouned Ca.cc.lxiij. and
vltio^
How the land of England was first namd Albion And by what encheson it was so
namd
N the noble land of Sirrie there was a noble king and myhty and a man of great
renome that me called Dioclisian that well and worthily him go^ned and ruled
through his noble chinalrie.

So that he conquered all the landez about him so that almost all the kings of
the world to him were ente^dant. Hit befell thus y^ this Dioclisian spoused a
gentill damisell y^ was wonder fair that was his Emes daughter labana and she
loved him as reason would so that he gate upon her xxxiij. doughtrez / of the
which the eldest me called Albyne and thees damiselles when they comen un to
age bicomen so fair y^ it was wonder Wherefore y^ this Dioclisian anon^ let make
a sompnynge and commanded by his lr^ez that all the kings that helden of him
should come at a certain day as in his lr^ez were contained to make a riall
feste At which day thider they comen and brought with hem amirallys princes and
dukes and noble thinalrie. The fest was rially arrayed and there they lived in
Joy and mirthe enough that it was wonder to wit And it befell thus that this
Dioclisian thought to marie his doughtres among all tho kings that tho were at
that solempnite / and so they spaken and ded that albyne his eldest daughter
and all her sustres richely were married un to xxxiij. kings that were lords
of great honor and of power at this solempnite And when the solempnite was
done every king took his wif and lad hem in to her own co^tre and there made
hem queen's And it befell thus afterward y^ this dame albyne bicome so stout
and so stern that she told litel pris of her lord and of him had scorn and
despit and would not done his will but she would have her own will in diverse
matters and all her other sustres e^ichone here hem so euel against her lords
that it was wonder to wit and for as much as hem thought that her husbondes
were naught of so hie ^age come^ as her fadre But tho kings that were her
lordis would have chastized hem with fair speech and behestes and also by
yeftes and warned hem in fair manner upon all love and frendshipp that they
should amend her l^ther conditions but all was for naught for they didden her
own will in all thing that hem liked and had of poer wherefore tho xxxiij.
kings upon a time and often times beten her wifes for they wend that they
would have amended her taches and her wilked thewes but of soche conditions
they were that for fair speech and warnyng they didden all the wers and for
be^ynges eftsoon mochel wers wherefore the king that had wedded Albine wrote the
tacches and conditions of his wife Albyn and the letter sent to Dioclisian her
fadre / And when the other kings herd that Albines lord had sent a left to
Dioclisian / anon they sent lr^ez enseled with her seals the conditions and
the tacches of her wifes When the king dioclisian saw and herd so many playntes
of his doughtres he was sore aschamed and become wonder angry and wroth toward
hi^ doughtres and thought both night and day if he tho might amend it y^ they
so mysded / And anon sent his lr^ez un to the xxxiij. kings that they should
come to him and bring with hem her wifes euerichone at a certain day / for he
would there chastise them of their wikkednesse if he might in any manner wise So
that y^ kings come^ all at that day and time that tho was set bitwene hem
and the king Dioclisian hem vnderfeng with much honor and made a solemn
fest to all that were under his lordshipp And the thridde day after that
solempnite the king Dioclisian sent after his xxxiij. doughtres that they should
come and speak with him in his chamber and when they were come he spoke un to
hem of her wikkednesse and of her cruelte and dispitously hem reproved and
vndernam and to hem he said that if they would not be chastised they should his
love lose for evermore And when the ladies herden all this they becomen
abashed and greatly aschamed and to her fadre they said that they would make all
amends and so they departed out from her fadres chamber / and dame Albyne that
was the eldest suster lad hem all to her chamber and tho made wide all that
were therynne so that no life was among hem but she and her sustres yfere /
Tho said this Albyne My fair sustres well we known that the king our fadre us
has reproved shamed and despised for encheson to make us obedient un to our
housbondes / but certes that shall I never whiles that I leave since that I am
come of a more hier kings blood than mine housbonde is And when she had thus
said all her sustres said the same And tho said Albine full well I wot fair
sustres that our housbondes have pleyned un to our fadrr upon us wherefore he
has us thus foul reproved and despised wherefore sustres my counceill is that
this night when our housbondes been a bed all we with one assent cutten her
throtes and than we may been in pees of hem and better we mow do this thing
under our fadres power than else where And anon all the ladies consented and
granted to this counseill And when night was com^ the lords and ladies went
to bed / and anon as her lords were in sleep they cut all her housbondes
throtes / And so they slowen hem all when^e that Dioclisian the king her fadre
herd of this thing / he bicome hugely wroth against his doughtres and anon
would hem all have brent But all the barons and lords of sirrie cou^ceilled
not so for to do such sternesse to his own doughtres but only should void
the land of hem for evermore so that they neu should come ayene. And so he did.
And Dioclisian that was her fadre anon commanded hem to gone in to shipp and
delivered to hem vitailles for half ayere / And when this was done all the
sustren went in to the shipp and sailed forth in the sea and bitoke all her
friends to Appolyn that was her god. And so long they sailled in the sea till
at the last they come and arrined in an isle that was all wilderness. And wen
dame Albyne was come to that land and all her sustres this Albyne went forth
out of the shipp and said to her other sustres. For as much quod she as I am
the oldest suster of all this company and first this land have taken / and for
as much as my name is Albyne I wull that this land becalled Albion after mine
own name And anon all her sustren granted to her with a good will Tho went
out all the sustres of the shipp and token the land Albion as her suster called
it And there they went up and down and fond nether man ne woman ne child but
wild bestes of diverse kinds And when^ her vitailles where dispended and hem
failled they fed hem with herbs and fruits in seson of the year and so they
leued as they best might and after that they token flessh of diverse bestes and
bicame wonder fat and so they desired ma^nys company and ma^nys kind that hem
failled / and for hete they woxen wonder coragious of kind so that they
desired more ma^nys company then any other solace or mirthe When the deuel
that perceyud and went by diverse contreys and no^me body af the eir and
likynge natures shad of men and come in to the land of Albion and lay by thoo
wymen and shad tho natures upon hem and they conceived after they brought forth
Geantz of the which one me called Gogmagog and an other laugherigan and so
they were nempned by diverse names and in this manner they come forth and were
borne horrible geantz in Albion and they duelled in caves and in hulles at her
will and had the land of Albion as hem liked un to the time that Brute arrined
and come to Totnesse that was in the isle of Albion and there this brut conquered
and scomfited these geantz above said

Here ends the prolog of Albion that tho was an I Will and herkeneth now how
Brute was gotten and how he slow first his mother and after ward his fadre and
how he conquered Albion that after he nempned Britaigne after his own name
that now is called England after the name of Engist of Saxony Ca.j.
In the noble Cite of great Troy there was a noble knight and a man of great
poer that was called Eneas and when the Cite of Troy was lost and destroyed
through hem of Greece this Eneas with all his meyne fled thens and come in to
lumbardie that tho was lord and governor of that land a king that was called
Latyne And an other king there was that was called Turocelyne that strongly
werred upon this king latyne that often times did him much harm And when this
king latyne herd that Eneas was comen he vnderfeng him with mochel honor and
him with held for as much as he had herd of him and wist well that he was a
noble knight and a worthy of his body and of his deeds This Eneas help king
Latyne in his werre and shortly for to tell so well and worthily he did that
he slow Turocelyne and discomfited him and all his people And when all this was
done kxng Latyne yaf all that land yt was Turocelinis to Eneas in marriage with
lauyne his daughter the most fair creature that any man wiste and so they
lived to gedrr in joye and myrthe all her lyfes time And after he wedded a wife
and upon her he begat a sone that was called Silu^yne and this Silueyne when
he could some reason of man un witing his fadre and against his will acqueynted
with a dam^sell that was cousin to Lauyne that was king Latynes dougter the
queen that was Eneas wife and brought the damisell with child And when
Ascanius his fadre it wist anon let enqnere of the wisest mastres and of the
gretest clerks what child the damisell should bring forth and they ansuered and
seid that she should bring forth a sone that should quelle both fadre and mother
and so he did For his mother died in bering of him / And when this child was
borne / his fadre let call him Brute And the mastres said that he should do
much harm and forwe in many diverse places / and after he should come to great
honor and wurshipp This king Ascamus deide when god would / and silueyne his
sone resseyued the land and mode him wo^derlich well beloved among his people
And when Brute that was Silueynus sone was xv. year old he went upon a day
with his fadre for to pley and solace and as this Brute should shete un to an
her^ his arwe myshapped and glaced and so there Brute qu^lled his fadre.

How Brute was driven out of the land and how he held him in Greece Ca.ij.
ANd when this mischance befalle was the people of the land ^ade sorw y now
and were sore an angered and for encheson thereof they driven Brnte out of the
land and would not suffer him among hem and he sangh that he must not abide
and went feo thens in to greece and there he fond vij.M. men that were of the
^^nage and kynred of Troy that were comen of great blood as the story tells
as of men and women and children the which were all holden in thraldom and
bondage of the king Pandras of greece for the death of achilles that was bitraied
and slain at troy This Brute was a wonder fair man and a strong and huge of
his age and of glad chere and semblant and also worthy of body and was
well-beloved among his people. This king Pandras herd speak of his goodness and
his conditions and anon made him duel with him so that Brute bicome wo^dre
prive and much beloved with the king so that long time Brute duelled with the
king So at the last they of Troy and Brute spaken to gedre of kynred and of
lineage and of acqueyntance and there pleyned hem un to Brute of her sorwe and of
her bou^dage and of meny other shames that the king Pandras had hem done and to
Brute they saiden upon a time / Ye be a lord of our lineage and a strong man and
a mighty be ye our captayn and lord and we wull bicome your men and your
co^mandementz done in all manner things and bring ye us out of this
wrecchednesse and bondage and fight we with the king for thorgh the grace of
the great god we shall him overcome and we shul make yon king of the land and
to you done homage and of you we shull hold evermore Brut had tho great pite
of her bondage that they were brought in and preuelich went him from the kings
court and all tho that were of Troy went and put hem in to wodes and in to
montaignes and hem held and sent un to king Pandras that he should give hem
leave sauelich for to Wend out of the land for they nold no longer duelle in
his bondage The king Pandras wax tho sore annoied and tho swore that he would
slay hem euerichone and ordained a great poer and went to wards hem al for to
fight but Brut and his men man^^che hem defended and fersely foughten and
quelled all the kings men that none of hem ascaped and token the king and him
held in prison and ordained counceill bitwene hem what they might done sum
said that he should be put to death and sum said that he should be exiled out
of the land and sum said that he should be brent / And tho spoke a wise
knight that was called Menpris and said to Brute and to all tho of Troy if
king Pandras would yield him and have his life I counceill that he give un to
Brute that is our duke and our sovereign his daughter Gennogen to a wife and
in marriage with her an honderd ships well araied and all his tresoure of gold
and silver of corn and of wine and as much as us needs to have of o thing
and other and than go we out of his land and ordeyne we us land else
wherefor we ne none of our kynred that comen after us shall never have pees in
this land among hem of Greece / for we have slain so many of her knights
and of her other friends that evermore werre and contake should been among us
Brute tho and all his folk consented well to that counceille and this thing
they tolden to king Pandras and there for to have his life granted as much as
they axrd / and anon yaf un to Brute Gennogen his daughter to wife and the
hundred ships with as much as hem neded of all vitailles as before was
ordained Brute tho took his wife and all his men that forsook the land of Greece
and wenten hem un to the sea and hadden wind and weder at will and comen the
thridde day in to an I Will that was called Lorgers Brute anon sen^e of his men a
land for to aspie the manner of the contre and they founden an old Cite all
wasted and forlet that nas therynne nethir man ne woman ne no thing duellyng
and in the myddell of this Cite they founden an old temple of a fair lady
that was called Diane the goddess and they comen ayene un to Brute and told
him what they had seyne and founden and counc^illed him to gone and to done
sacrifice un to dame Diane / For she was woned to give ansuere of what thing
that ever men prayed her and namely un to them that her honored with sacrifice
Brute went to that image and said Diane noble goddess lady that all thing have
in might and in thy poer wyndes watres wodes feldes and all things of the
world and all^ manner bestes that there in been to you I make my prayer that ^e
me councelle and tell where and in what place I shall have a couenable
duellyng for me and for my people and there I shall make in honor of you a well
fair temple and a noble wherynne ye shull evermore been honored when he had
done his prayer Diane ansuered in this manner Brute quod she go even forth thy
wey over the sea in to france to ward the we^^ and there ye shull fyn^e an I Will
that is called Albion and that I Will is bicompassed all with the sea and no man
may come therein but it been by ships And in that land were woned to be
geantz but now it is not so but all wilderness and that land is you
destenyed and ordained for you and for your people.

How Coryn became Brutes man and how king Goffar was discomfited Capitulo
tercio.
WHen Brute herd this ansuere of diane the goddess anon he let the ancres
wind up and sailed (...) to the high see and when he and his men had sailled
xx. days and moo they fou^den fast beside a cost of the sea a thousand men of
the lineage and kynred of Troy and her sovereign and her master of all was
called Corin / And when Brute wiste whennes they were he tho vnderfeng hem with
mochel ^oye in to his ships and hem lad forth with him / This Coryn tho
become Brutes man and to him did feaulte and homage and so long they sailled
forth in the sea till they comen in to Gascoyne and anon they arrived in the
haven of liegers and there they duelled viij. days hem for to resten and her
sailles to amend there that it was need Tydynge sone come to king Goffar that
was lord of the land how that mochel folk of strange land weren arrived in
his land in the haven of liegers wherefore he was sore angered and anoied that
they comen and arrived in his land without leave and anon he ordained him a
great poer to driven out and to shend Brute with his people but kung Goffar was
discomfited and all his folk and him self fled in to feau^ce to seek help
and socour And in that time reigned in feau^oe xij. kings and the xj. assembled
a great poer for to help Goffar for to fight ayens Brute Goffar duelled with
hem of france half ayere and more And Brute in the mean time and his company
destroyed all the land of gascoyne and let take all the tresour that king
goffar had and let bring it in to his ships And this Brute found in that
land a fair place and a couenable and there Brute made a fair Castle and a
strong When that was done king Goffar come fro france and xj. kings with him
and broughten xx.M. men for to fight with Brut and his company and Brut had
but vij.M.(...) m^n Nothelees when the ij. hosts metten to gedre Brut^^ (...)
though help of him self and of Turyn his cousin and of Corin ^ and manlich him
defended and fought so that in litel time they had quelled of the
f^enshmen.ij.M. and mo and tho that were alive fledden away And in this bataill
Turyn that was Brutes cousin was slain and Brute let enteer worthili him when
he had space and leiser in the castle that he had made and tho let call the
castle Tours for the name of Turine that there was enteered and yet in to this
day there is a noble cite that is called Tonrs when king Goffar wist that Turin
was deed he come again with his men and after yaf a strong bataill un to Brute
but Brute and his men were so weary of fighting that they might no longer endure
but maugre him and all his Brute went in to his castle with all his men and
made the yates fast for to save hem self and for to take conceill among hem
what were best for to done Brute and Coryn no^me conceill and ordained that
Coryn privily should gone out and bussh him in a wode til amorne So that in
the morning when Brnte should fight with his Enymies Coryn should come with his
folk in that one side and slay and done all the harm that he might And
amornyng in the dawenyng Brute went out of the castle and faught with his
Enymies and they fersely defended but withyn a litell time Brute and his folk
slew viij.c. of Goffars men and tho come Coryn fro the buschement and smete to
ground he and his company all that would stand or abide so that king Goffar
and his folk were discomfited and fast they gu^ne to flee. And Brute and Coryn
with her company ferselich hem pouesued and quelled mo of hem in the fleyng
than they diden in bataill And in that manner Brute had the victory and
natheles Brute made much sorwe for his cousin Toryn that there was slain and
for other also that he had lost of his men that is to seyn vij.c. and xv. the
which nobely he let entier in the castle of Tonrs there that he had entered
Turyn his cousin.

How Brute arrined at Tottenesse in the isle of Albion and of the bataill that
was bytuene Coryn and Gogmagog Capitulo quarto
WHen all this was done Brute would no longer there duelle for to figgt ne no mo
lose of his pep^^ For king Goffarus people might every day e^^resse mo and mo
And Brutes lassen and there for he took all his men and went un to the sea and
had wynd and weder at will / and the fifthe day afterward they arrived in an
haven at Tottenesse and comen in to the I Will of Albion and there fond nethir man
nethir woman as the story tells / but Geantz and they woned in hills and in
caves Brute saw the land was fair and at his likyng and good also for him and
for his folk as Diane the goddess had him behight Tho was Brute wonder glad
and late assemble upon a day all his folk to make a solemn sacrifice and a
great fest in honor and reverence of Diane the goddess through whose counceill
he was comen in to that land And when they had her solempnite made as they upon
a day sat at mete / there comen in upon hem suddenly xxx. Geantz and quelled of
Brutes men xxx. Brute and his men anon sturten up and foughten with the geantz
and quelled hem euerichon / but one geant that was master of all that was
called Gogmagog that was stronger and hier than any of the other Geantz and
Brute ^^epte him and saved his life for encheson that he should wrestell with
Coryn / for Coryn was gref and hi^r than any of Brutes men from the gerdelstede
up ward

Gogmagog and Coryn undertook for to wrastlyn yfere and so to gedre they
wrest^^d long time but at the last Gogmagog held Coryn so fast that he brak
ij. ribs of his side wherefore Coryn was sore angry and took tho Gogmagog
bitwene his arms and cast him down upon a roche so that Gogmagog brak all to
pieces and so died an evil death and therefore the place is called yet un to this
day the saute of Gogmagog / And tho yaf Brute all that contre to Corin and
Corin it called after his name Corn waille and his me^ he called Cornewailles
and so shull men of that contre been called for evermore And in that contre
duelled Corin and his men and made tounes and houses and inhabited the land at
her will

How Brute made london and called this land Britaigne and scotland Albyne and
walys Cambir Capitulo quinto
BRute and his men w^nten forth and saw aloute in (...) places where they might
find a good place and couenable that they might make a Cite for him and for
his folk So at the last they comen by a fair River that is called the Thamys
and there brute bigan a fair ate and let call it new Troy in mind and
remembrance of the great Troy from which place all her lineage was comen / And
this brute let fall a down wodes and let erye and sow lands and done mow
medes for sustenance of him and of his people and he departed the land to hem so
that euer^chon of them had a certain place for to duelle upon And Brute let
call all this land Bretaigue after his own name and his folk he let call
Bretons And this Brute had gotten an his wife Geunogen iij. soens that were
worthy of deeds the first was called lotryn the second Albanac and the thread
kamber And Brute bare corone in the Cite of new Troy xx. year after time that
the Cite was made and there he made the laws that the Bretons holden And this
Brute was wonderly well beloved among all men and Brutes sons also loved
wonderly well to gedre And when brute had sought all the land in length and in
bread he fond a land that ^omed to Britaigue in the north and that land brute
yaf to Albanac his sone and let call it Albanie after his name that now is
called Scotland And Brute fond an other contre toward the west and that yaf to
Camber his other sone and he let call it Camber after his name and now it is
called wales And when Brut had reigned xx. year as before is said he died in the
cite of new Troy and there his sone him entered with mochel honor. And
lotryn Brutes sone was crouned king with mochel solempnite of all the land of
Breteyn^ and after when he was crouned Albanac and Camber his ij. brethern^
whent again in to her own contre and lived with mikel honor. And lotryn her
brother reigned and was king and governed the land well and wisely for he was a
good man and wonder well beloved of all his land / And it befell so that Albanac
duelled in his own land with mochel honor and wurshipp and then^e came king
humbar of hunland with a great poer and arrined in albanie and would have
conquered the land and bigan to werre upon Albanac and him quelled in bataille.
When Albanac was slain the folk of the land fled un to lotryn and told him for
he was king of Bretaigue how that his brother was slain and prayed him of help
for to a venge his brothers death

Lotryne anon let assemble all the bretons of kent of dover in to derewent of
Northfolk and Southfolke of keftefen and of lyndessey and when they were all
ensembled they sped fast to ward their enemies for to give hem bataill Lotrine
had sent to Camber his brother that he should come also to him with all the
power that he might make him for to help / and so he did with good will and so
they comen all to gedres and took her wey preuelich for to seche Humbar where
they might him find And so it befell that this Humbar was besides a water that
was a great River with his folk him for to disporte and tho come Lotrine and
Camber his brother with all her folk suddenly er that any of that other wist
And when Humbar saw hem come he was sore adrad For as much as his men wist it
not and also they were unarmed And anon Humbar for dread lept in to the water
and drenched him self and so died he and his men were all slain that none of
hem ascaped and therefore is that water called Humbar and evermore shall be
called thus for encheson that king humbar was therynne drenched

And after that Lotryne went to his ships and took there gold and silver and
as much as he fand un to him self and all that other pilfre he yaf un to
other folk of the host and they founden in one of the ships a fair
damisell that was king humbars daughter and was called Estrilde And when
Lotryne saw her he took her with him for her fairness and for her was o^^
taken with love and would have w^dded her / This tidings come to Corin anon^
he thought to avenge him upon Lotrine For as much as Lotrine had made
covenant for to spousen Corines daughter that was called Guentolen And Coryn
in haste went to him un to the new Troy and thus said to Lotryne / now
certes quod he ye reward me full evil for all the peynes that I suffered and
have had many times for Brute your fadre / and therefore I wull now avenge me
upon you and drowe his fauchon an high and would have slain Lotryne / but the
damisell went bitw^n^ hem and made hem acorded in this manner / that Lotrine
should spouse Guentolen that was Corynes daughter And so Lotryne did And
nethelees that he had spoused Guentolen Corynes dought preuelich he come to
Estrilde and brought her with child and gate on her a daughter thas was called
Abren Hit befell anon after that Corin died and anon as he was deed Lotrine
for soke Guentolen his wife and made Estrilde queen And Guentolen went thens
all in wrath in to Cornewaille and seized all the land in to her hand / for
as much as she was her fadres eir and vnderfong feaultes and homages of all
the men of the land and after assembled a great host and a great poer for to
ben upon lotryne avenged that was her lord and to him come and yaf him a
strong bataill and there was lotryn slain and his men discomfited the v. year
of his regne. Guentelon let take Estrild and Abram her daughter and bind both
hondes and fete and cast hem in to a water and so they were drenched wherefore
that water was evermore called aftir abram aftir the name of the damisel that
was Estril dys daughter and Englisshmen calls that water seuerne and walshmen
call it abram in to this day And when this was done Guentelon let croune her
queen of that land and governed the land full well and wisely un to the time
that Madhon her sone that lotryne had beget upon her were of xx. witer age yt
he might be king so that ye queen reigned xv. year and tho let she croune her
sone and he reigned and governed the land well and honourabely and she went in to
corn waille and there she duelled all her lyfes time.

Of king Madan how he reigned in pees all his life and of Menpris and of Maulyn
his sons and how Menpris slow Maulyn his brother and how wolves drou him al
to pieces Ca.vj
WHen Madan had reigned xxx. year he died and lies in new troie and he had ij.
sons that one me called Menpris and y^ other Maulyn and these ij. bredren after
her fadre^ death strinen fast for the land And menpris for encheson yt he was
the eldest sone would have had all that land and Maulyn would not suffer him so
that they token a day of love and acorde And at this day Me^pris let quelle his
brother through treson and him self afterward held the land and a none let
croune him king and reigned / and after bicame so lither a man that he destroyed
in a while all y^ men of his land And at the last he bicame so wikked and so
lecherous that he forsook his own^ wif and used the sin of sodomie where for
almighty god was wroth and upon him took vengeamice / For on a day as he went
in a wode an huntyng he lost his folk and went allone up and down crieng
after his men and there com^ wolfes and all to drou him in to pieces when^ he had
reigned xxiiij year and when his people wist yt he was deed they made ^oy y now
and anon made Ebrac his son king and he reigned with mochel honor

Of king Ebrac how he conquered frannce and bigate xx. sons and xxiij.
doughtres Ca.vij.
THis Ebrac reigned lx year and a strong man was and a mighty And this Ebra^
through his might and help of his bretons conquered all fra^nce and wan there so
much gold and silver that when he come again in to this land he made a noble
cite and after his name let call it Ebrac that is called every wik and this
king made the castle of maidenes that now is called Edinburgh This king had
xx. sons and xxiij. doughtres by diverse wymen gotten and the sons were called
as ye shall here Brute Gr^nescheld Margand Seisel Morgh with Flengham Bladud
Iak^n ^^ymbar Rocelm Spadogh Godeherl Thormnan Gldaugh Iorkanghut Haibor ketin
Rother kaier and assaruth. And the doughtres highten as ye shull here after
Elegyne ymogen oghdas Guenbran gnardich Augarel guenthold Tangustel gorghon
michel medhan mailour Ondur Cambredan Ragan Renthely Nees^ Cheghan Skaldud
Gladus Heberhyn Abalaghe and Blandan and thees were tho xxiij. doughtres and
the brethren bicame good knights and worthy in meny contres

Of the king brute grenesheld the first sone of Ebrac the king Capitulo octauo.
AFter the death of king Ebrac reigned Brute grenesheld his sone xxx. year that
was Ebrakes first sone that well and nobly reigned and when time came he died and
lies at york

Of king leyl Ca.ix.
ANd when Brute grenesheld was deed reigned his sone leyl xxij. year and he made
a fair town and let call it karlille after his name and was a worthy man and
much beloved of his people and when he had reigned xxij. year he died and lies
at Carlille And in his time reigned king Solomon in Ihrlm^ and made the noble
temple and to him come Sibelle queen of Saba for to here and see if it were
soth that men speken of the great and noble wit and wisdam of king Salamon and
she fond it soth that men had her told

Of king lud ludibras that was king leyles sone Ca.x
ANd after this king leyl reigned his sone lud ludibras that made the cite of
Canterbury and of wynchestre and he reigned xiij. year and died and lies at
wynchestre

Of king Bladud that was ludibras sone how he reigned and was a good man and a
nigromancer Ca.xj
And after this lud ludibras reigned Bladud his sone a great nigromancer and
through hie craft of nigromancie he made the meruaillous hot bath as the gest
tells and he reigned xxj. year and he lies at the new Troy

Of king Leir and of the ansuere of his youngest daughter that graciously was
married to the king of france Ca.xij.
AFter this king Bladud reigned Leir his sone and this Leir made the town of
leycestre and let call the town aft his name and he governed the town well
and nobely / This king Leir had ij. doughtres the first was called Gonorill the
second Rigan and the thridde Cordeill and the youngest daughter was fairest and
best of conditions / The king her fadre became an old man and would that his
doughtres were married ^r that he deide / but first he thought to assay which
of hem loved him most and best / for she that loved him best should best been
married and he axed of the first daughter how much she him loved and she
ansuerd and said better than her own life / Now certes quod the fadre that is
a great love Tho axed he of the second daughter how much she him loved and she
said more and passing all the creatures of the world ^ ma foy quoth the fadre I
may no more axe And tho axed he of the thridde daughter how much she him loved
/ certes fadre quod she my sustres have told you glosing words / but forsooth
I shall tell troth / For I love you as much as I ought to love my fadre and
for to bring you more in certain how I love you I shall you tell / as much as
ye been worth so much shall ye be loved The king her fadre went that she had
scorned him and become wonder wroth and swore by heaven and earth she should
never have good of him but his doughtres that loved him so much should been
well auaunced and married And the first daughter he married to Maugles king of
Scotland / and the second he married to haneinos Earl of Cornewaille and so they
ordained and spoke bitwene hem that they should depart the Reame bitwene hem
two after the death of king Leir her fadre so that Cordeill his youngest daughter
should no thing have of his land / but this Cordeill was wonder fair and of so
good conditions ^ud manners that the king of france Agampe herd of her speak
and sent to the king leir her fadre for to have her un to his wife and prayed
him thereof / and king Leir her fadre sent him word that he had departed the
land un to his two doughtres and said he had no more land wherewith her to
marien

And when Aga^pe herd this ansuer he sent anon ayene to leir and said that
he axed no thing with her but only her cl^thyng and her body And anon king
leir sent her over the sea to the king of france And he resseyned her with
much wurshipp and with much solempnite her spoused and made her queen of
france.

How king leir was driven out of his land through his folly and how Cordeil
his yougest daughter help him in his need Capitulo xiij.
WHus it fell afterward that tho ij. eldest doughtren would not abide till leir
her fadre was deed but werred upon him whiles that he leued and much sorwe and
shame him did wherefore they beno^men him holy the roialme and bitwene hem had
ordained that one of hem should have king leir to soiourne all his life time
with xl. k^yghtes and squyers that he might wurshippfully gone and ride whidder
that he would in to what contre that him liked to pley and to solace. So that
Managles king of Scotland had king leir with him in the manner as is above said
and or other half year were passed Corneill that was his eldest d^ughter and
queen of Scotland was so a^noied of him and of his people that anon she and her
lord spoke to gedre wherefore his knights half and his squyers from him were
gone and nomo left but only xxx. and when this was done leir bigan for to make
much sorwe for encheson that his estate was empeired And men had of him more
scorn and despite then ever they had b^for Wherefore he nift what for to done
and at the last thought that he would wend in to Corn waill to Rigan his
other daughter And when he was come the Earl and his wif that was leires
daughter him welcomed and with him made much Joy and there he duelled with
xxx. knights and squyers And he and naught duelled there scarsely tuelfmonth
that his daughter of him nas full and of his company and her lord and she of
him had scorn and despite / so that from xxx. knights they bronghten un to x.
and afterward.v. and so there left with him no mo. Tho made be forwe y now^ and
said sore weeping Allas that ever he come in to that land and said yet had me
hetter to have duelled with my first daughter And anon^ wene thennes to his
first daughter But anon as she saw him come she swore by god and his holy
names and by as much as she might that he should have no mo with him but one
knight if he would there abide Tho bigan leir again we^e and made much sorwe and
said tho allas now to long have I lyuet that this sorwe and meschief is to me
now fall For now am I porer that some time was rich / but now have I no
friend ne kyn that me wull do any good But when I was rich all men me honored
and wurshipped and now every man has of me scorn and despite / and now I
wot well that Cordeill my yongeste daughter said me trougth when she said as
much as I had so much should I been beloved and all the while that I had good
tho was I beloved and honored for my ricchesse but my two doughtres glosed me
tho / and now of me they set litell pris and soth told me Cordeill but I
would not believe it ne understand and therefore I let her gone fro me as a thing
that I set litell pris of / and now wot I never what for to done since my
ij. doughtres have me thus disceyued that I so much loved / and now mot I
needs sechen her that is in an other land that lightely I let her gone fro me
without any reward or yiftes and she said that she loved me as much as she
ought to love her fadre by all manner of reason and tho I should have ax^d of her
no more / and tho that me othirwise behighten through her falls speech now have
me disceyued / In this manner Leir long time began to make his moan and at the
last he shope him to the sea and passed over in to france and asked and aspied
where the Q^ene might be founden / and men told him where she was / And when he
come to the Cite that she was in / preuelich he sent his squire un to the queen
to tell her that her fadre was comen to her for great needs And when the
squire come to the queen he told her every dele of her sustres from the
beginning un to the end Cordeill the queen anon took gold and silver plente
and took it to the squire in counceille that he should gone and bear it un to
her fadr^ and that (...) should go in to a certain Cite and him araien laten and
wasshen and than come ayene to her and bring with him an honest company of
knights xl. at lest with her meyne / and than he should send to her lord the
king and said that he were comen for to speak with his daughter and him for to
seen / and so he did. And when the king and the q^ene herd that they comen
with mochel honor they him resseyued And the king of france tho let send
through all his Reame and commanded that all men should to him been entendant
to king Leir the Queen's fadre in all manner of thing / as it were to him self
When king Leir had duelled there a month and more he told to the king and to
the Queen his daughter / how his two eldest doughtres had him served / Agampe
anon let ordeyne a great host of france and sent it in to Britaigne with leir
the queen's fadre for to conquer his land ayene and his kingdom / and Cordeill
also come with her fadre in to britaig^e for to have the royame after her
fadres death And anon they went to shipp and passed the sea and come in to
britaigue and foughten with the felons and hem scomfited and queld And tho had
he his land again and after leued iij. year and held his royalme in pees and
afterward died and Cordeill his daughter him let entier with mikel honor at
leicestre

How morgan and Conedage that were newus to Cordeill wrrred upon her and put
her in to prison Ca.xiiij.
WHen that king leir was deed Cordeill his youngest daughter held and had the
land v year and in the mean time died her lord Agam^p that was king of france
and after his death she left widue And tho came Morgan and Conedage that were
Cordeill sustre sons and to her had Enymite for as much as there aunte should
have the land. So that bitwene hem they ordained a great power and upon her
werred greatly / and never they rest till they had her taken and put her un to
death And tho Morgan and Conedage seized all the land and deperted it bitwene
hem And they held it xij. year and when tho xij. year were gone there bigan
bitwene hem a great debate so that werred strongely yfere and every of hem did
other much disese For Morgan would have had all the land fro beyond humbr^
that Conedage held But he come ayens him with a strong po^r so that Morgan
durst not abide but fled awey in to wales and Conedage pursued him and took him
and queld him Tho come Conedage again and seized all the land in to his hand
and held it and reigned after xxxiij. year and tho died and lies at new Troy

How Reignold that was Conedages sone reigned after his fadre and in his time
it rayned blood iij. days in tokenyng of great death Ca.xv
ANd after this Conedage reigned Reignold his sone a wise knight and an hardy
and curteis that well and nobely go^ned the land and wonder well made him
beloved of all manner of folk and in his time it rayned blood that lasted iij.
days as god would and sone after there come great death of people for hosts
without nombre of people foughten till that they were deed whereof no man might
have let til that almighty god thereof took mercy and pite and thogan it cese
and this Reignold reigned xxij. year and died and lies at york

How Gorbodian reigned in pees that was Reignoldes sone and aft he died and lith
at york ca.xvj
AFter this Reignold reigned Gorbodian his sone xv. year and died and lies at
york.

How Gorbodian had ij. sons and how that one s^owe that other for to have the
heritage / and how ydoyne her mother quelled that other wherefore the land was
destroyed Ca.xvij
WHen this Gorbodian was deed his ij. sons that he had becomen stout and
proud and ever werred to gedre for the land that one was called ferres and
that other porres / And this ferres would have all the land / but that other
would not suffer him Ferres had a felons heart and thought through treson to slay
his brother but preuelich he went in to france and there abode with the king
Syward till upon a time when he come ayene and faught with his brother ferres /
but full evil it happed tho for he was slain first When ydoyne her mother wist
that Porres was deed she made great sorwe for encheson yt she loved him more
than that other and thought him for to quelle preuely and preuely she come to
her sone upon a night with ij. knyues and therewith cut his throat and the
body also in to small pieces who herd ever such a cursed modre that quelled
with her own hondes her own sone and long time after last the reprove and
shame to the mother that for encheson of that one sone murdered that other and so
lost hem both

How iiij. kyngis courtesly held all Britain and which been her names
Ca.xviij.
WHen the ij. brethren were so deed they and left behynd hem nethir sone ne
daughter ne none other of the kynred that might have the heritage and for as
much as the strengest me^ driven and scomfited the feblest and token all her
lands so that in every country they had great werre and strife under hem but
among all other things there were among hem in the contre that overcome all
tho other and through her strenght and might they token all the lands and every
of him took a certain contre and in his contre let call him king and one of
hem was called Scater and he was king of Scotland and that other was called
Dawalliere and he was king of loegers and of all the land that was Lotrinus
that was Brutes sone / The thridde was called Rudac and he was king of walys /
and the iiij. was called Cloten and he was king of Cornewaille But this Cloten
should have had all the land by reason for there was no man that wist none so
rightful heir as he was But they that were strengest set litell by hem that
ware of less estate / and therefore this cloten had no more land among hem than
Cornewaille

Of king Donebaut that was Clotes sone and how he had wo^ne the land Ca.xix
THis Cloten had a sone that was called Doneband that af the death of his fadre
bicome an hardy man and a fair and curteis so that he passed all the kings of
britaigue of fairness and of worthiness And anon as he was knight he wist
well when that his fadre lived he was most rightful heir of all the land and
should have had by reason but other kings that were of more strength than he
beno^me him his land. And afterward this Doneband ordained him poer and first
conquered all the land of logiers and after he would have couquered all
Scotland and walys and scater came with his men and yaf him bataill and Rudac
come again with his walshmen for to help him But so it befell that Rudac was
queld and Scater also in pleyn bataill and so Donebant had the victory and
conquered all the land and well maintened it in pees and in quiet that never
before it was so well mayntened

How Doneband was first king that ever wered croune of gold in Britaigue
Ca.xx.
THis Doneband let make him a croune of gold and wered the cron^e upon his
head as neu king did before and he ordained a statut that had a man done neu so
much harm and he myt come in to the temple should no man him mysdoo but gone
theryn sauf and in pees and after gone in to what co^tre that he would without
any harm and if any man set any hand upon him he than should lose his life
And this Doneband made the town of Malmesbury and the town of the vise And
when he had reigned well and worthily xl. year he died and lies at new Troy.

How Brenne and belin deperted bitwene hem the land aft the death of Doneband
her fadre and of the werre Ca.xxj.
And after that thi^ Doneband was deed his sons that he had departed the land
bitwene hem as her fadre had ordained so that Belyn his eldest sone had all the
land of britaigue on this half humber and his brother Brenne had all the land
from humber un to scotland but for as much that Belin had the bett part brenne
therefore wax wroth and would had more of the land and Belin his brother would
grant him no more Wherefore contak and werre arose bitwene hem two But brenne
the younger brother had no myt ne strenght a^ens belin and therefore brenne through
co^ceill of his folk went fro thens in to norwey to te king Olsinges and praid
him of help and socour for to conquer all the land upon belyn his brother upon
that covenant that he would have his daughter to wife and the king Olsinges him
granted Belyn anon^ as his brother was go to norwey he seized in to his hand
all the land of northumberland and took all the Castelles and let hem arraie
and keep the costs of the sea that Brenne should not arrive in no side but that
he were take The king Olfynges let assemble a great host and delinered his
daughter to Brenne and all the people that he had ordained / and this damisell
Samye had long time loved a king that was called gutlaghen and to him she
told all her counceill how that Brenne should her have and her led with him
for evermore and so he should lose her bnt that she might forsake Brenne And
when Gutlagh had herd this tydyng he lay for to aspie Brenue with as many
ships as he might have so that the ij fletes metten to gedre and long time
foughten so that Brenne and his ships turned ayene and were disco^fited And
king Gutlagh took Samye and put her in to his ship and Brenne shamfully fley
thennes as a man discomfited And Gutlagh would have went in to his own contre
but there come up on him a great tempest that v. days lastid so that through
that tempest he was driven in to Britaigne with iij. ships and no mo And tho
that kept the costs of the sea token Gutlagh and Samye and all his folk and
hem presented to Belyn / and Belyn put hem in to prison

How Belyn drofe out of this land king Gutlagh of Denmark and Samye Ca.xxij
HIt was not long after that Brenne ne come a^ene with a great nauye and sent
to his brother Belyn y^ he should yield ^yen his land to his wife and to his
folk and his castelles also or else he would destroy his land Belyn drade no
thing his manace and would no thing done after that he said wherefore Brenne come
with his folk and fought with belyn and Brenne was discomfited and his folk
slain and him self fled with xij. me^ in to France / And this Belyn that
was Brennes brother went tho to york and took counceill what he might done
with king gutlagh for king Gutlagh prof^ed to become his man and to hold hi^
land of him yelding by year a thousand pound of silver for evermore and for
sikernesse of this covenant to behold Gutlagh should bring him good hostages
and to him should done homage and all his folk And yet should swear upon the
book that these couenantz should never been broke ne falsed Belyn tho by
counceill of his folk granted him his axyng And so Gutlagh become his man and
Belyn vnderfeng of him his homage by oath and by writing the same covenants And
upon these covenants king Gutlagh no^me samye and his folk and went thens and
turned again to denma^c Evermore after were the couena^ts holden and the truage
paid til the time that honelos was king of denmarc and also of this land
through his wif Gildeburgh that he had spoused for she wa^ the right heir of
this land This Belyn duelled tho in pees and wurshippfully him held among his
barons and he made iiij. real weyes one from the Est in to west and that was
called watlyng street and an other from the north un to the south that was
called Ikelmestrete and ij. other weyes he made in bossynge through out the
land that on is called fosse and that other fossedike and he maintened well the
good laws that Doneband his fadre had made and ordained in his time as before
is said

How accord was made between Brenne and Belyn through Cornewen her mother
Ca.xxiij.
GRenne that was Belynus brother had long time duelled in france and there had
conquered a great lordshipp through marriage For he was duke of Burgoyne through
the daughter of the duke Fewyn that he had spoused that was right heir of the
land and this Brenne ordained a great poer of his folk and also of france and
come in to this land for to fight with Belyn his brother and Belyn come ayens
him with a great poer of bretons and would tho have yeuen him bataill but her
mother Cornewen^ that tho lived had herd that that one brother would have
destroyed that other and went bitwene her sons and hem made accorded with
much pain So that at the last tho ij. brethren with michel blis went to
gedre in to great Troy that now is called london and there they duelled ayere
and after they no^me her conseill for to gone conquer all france and so they
diden and brent tounes and destroyed the land both in length and bread and the
king of france yaf hem bataill with his poer but he was overcome and yaf
truage un to Belyn and to his brother. And after that they wenten forth to Rome
and conquered Rome and all lu^bardie and Germany and took homage and feaulte
of Earls Barons and of all other and aft they come in to this land of
Britaigue and duelled with her britons in Joy and rest and tho made Brenne the
town of Bristowe and since he went over to his own lordshipp and there duelled
he all his lyf^ and Belyn duelled at new Troy and there he made a fair gate
that is called Belyngesgate aft his own name and when this belin had reigned
nobely xj. year he died and lies at new Troie

How king Cormbatrus quelled the king of denmark for encheson that he would not
pay him his truage Ca.xxiiij.
ANd after this Belyn reigned his sone cormbatrus a good man and a worthy and
the king of denmar^^ would not pay him his truage that is to sey a M. pound
as he had sworn by oath for to pay it and also by writing recorded to Belyn his
fadre wherefore he was evil paid and wroth and assembled a great host of
britons and went in to denmark and slow the king Gutlagh and brout the land in
subjection all new and took of folk feautes and homages and after went ayene
in to his land and as he come forth by Orkeney he fond xxx. ships full of
men and women besides the cost of the sea and the king axed what they were / An
earl that was mastir of hem all courteisly ansuerd un to the king and said that
they were exiled out of spain and so that they had trauailled half a year and
more in the sea to witen if they might find any king in any land that of hem
would have pite or mercy to give hem any land in any contre wherein they
myghten duelle and have rest and become his li^ge men and to him would done
homage and feaulte whiles that (...) and to his heirs after him and him and of
his heirs holden that land And when the king this herd he had pite of hem
and yafe hem an I Will all wilderness there that no man was duellyng saufe only
wild bestes and the Earl thanked much the king and become his man and did him
homage and feaulte and took all his folk and went in to the same I Will and the
Earl was called Irlamal and therefore he let call y^ land Irlande aft his own
name The king Cormbatrus come ayene in to this land and reigned xxv. year and
after he died and lies at new Troie

How the king Guentholen reigned in goodness and well go^ned the land all his
lyfes time Ca.xxv
ANd when Cormbatrus was deed reigned Guentholen his sone a man of good
co^dicions and well-beloved and he go^ned the land well and wy^ely and he reigned
xxvj. year and after died and lies at new Troie

How king seisell reigned and well governed the land after Guentholen Ca.xxvj.
ANd after this Guentholen reigned his sone Seisell well and worthily and well
governed the land as his fadre had done beforne him and he reigned xv. year and
died and lith at new Troie

How kymor reigned after seisell his fadre and he begat howan that reigned after
Ca.xxvij.
ANd after seisell reigned his sone kymor well and nobely xix. year in pees and
howan his sone x. year and died and lies at Ikaldoune

How king Mor with died through meschaunce through a best for his wikednesse
Ca.xxviij
AFter this Howan reigned morwith and become wikked and so stern till at the
last great vengeance come to him / for as ^e went upon a time by the sea side
he mete a great (...) that was blak and horrible and hidous and he went that it
had been a whale of the sea and bent an arblast and would have slayn^ that best
with a quarrel but he might not smite him And when he had shot all his
quarelles the best anon come to him in a great have and him devoured a life
and so he died for his wi^kenesse through vengeance of god aft that he had
reigned ix. year

Of Grandobodian that was morwiths sone that made the town of Cambrigge
Ca.xxix.
AFter this morwith was deed the britons crou^ed Gra^dobodi an his sone and
this Gra^dobodia^ long time reigned in goodness and made temples and tounes and
this Grandobodian made the town of Cambrigge and the town of Grauntham and
was welbe loved of rich and poer for he honored the rich and help the poer
This Grandobodian had iiij. sons Arthogaill / Hesidur Higamus and petitur and
when he had reigned xj. year he died and lies at new Troie

Of Artogaill that was Grandobodianus sone how he was made king and ^^th put a
down for his wikkednesse Ca.xxx
AFter Grandobodian reigned his sone Artogaille v. year and he become so wikked
and so stern that the britons would not suffer him to be king but put him a
down and made Hesidur his brother king and he become so good and merciable
that me^ him called king of pite And when he had reigned v. year he had so great
pite of his brother Artogaille yt was king before and anon he forsook his
dignite and took his brother the croun^ ayene and made him king ayens all the
britons will / And afterward Artogaille become so good of condition that he was
well-beloved of all the land for he become so debonair and fre and did right and
reason to all manner of men and he reigned vj. year and died and lies at Grantham

How Hesidur was made king after the death of Artogaill his brother Ca.xxxj
AFter the death of Artogaill the Bretons ^rouned an other ty^e Hesidur but his
ij. brethern^ Higamus and Petitur hadde^ of him great despite and eke scorn
and ordained hem help for to werre upon the king her brother and so they token
him and put him in to prison the second year of his regne and they deperted
all (...) bitwene hem both but Higamus leuyd but vij. year and tho had petitur
all the land and he made the town of Pykeryng

How the Britons nomen Hesidur out of pr^son and made him king the thridde
time Ca.xxxij.
ANd when this Petitur was deed Britons no^me anon yet Hesidur and made him
king the third time and tho reigned he in pees xiiij. year and after he died and
lies at karlille

How xxxiij. kings reigned in pees each after other after the death of Hesidur
Ca.xxxiij.
AFter the death of Hesidur reigned xxxiij. kings every aft^r other in pees and
without any long tarieng I shall tell hem all and how long each of hem reigned
as the story tells. The first king of tho xxxiij. was called Gerbodia and he
reigned xij. year and aft him reigned Morgan ij. year. and after him reigned
Cighnus vj. year and after him reigned Idwalan viij. year / and after him reigned
Rohugo xj. year. And after him reigned ^oghen xiij. year / And after him reigned
Catill xv. year / And after him reigned Porrex ij. year And after him reigned
Cheryn xvij. year And after him reigned Coyll xij. year And after him reigned
Sulgenis xiiij. year. And after him reigned Esdad xx. year And after him reigned
Andragie xv.ij. year And after him reigned ^rian v. year / And after him reigned
Elind ij. year And after him reigned Eldagan xv. year And after him reigned
Claten xij. year And aft him reigned Quirgunde viij. year And after him reg^ed
Mortan vj. year And after him reigned Bledagh iij. year And after him reigned
Caph j. year And after him reigned Gen ij. year And after him reigned Seisell and
king Bled xxij. year And king Tabreth xj. year And Archinal xiiij. year And
Groll xxx. year And Rodingu xxxij yer^ And Hert^r v. year And Hampir vj. year
And Car^our vij. year And Digneill iij. year And Samuel xxiiij. year and Read
ij. year and Eln vij. months and this Ely had iij. sone^lud ca^sibala^ and
enemyo^

How lud was made king after the death of Ely his fadre Capitulo xx^iiij.
AFter the death of Ely reigned lud his sone and governed well ^he land and much
honored good folk and te^pred and amended wikked folk This lud loved more to
duelle at Troie than in any other place of the land wherefore the name of new
Troie was left and tho was the Cite called ludstone / But the name is changed
through variance of lr^ez and now is called london And this king made in the
Cite a fair gate and called it ludgate after his name and the folk of the Cite
hete it loundres and when he had reigned xj. year he deide and lies at london
and he had ij. young sons And^aghen and Tormace / but they could nethir speak
ne go for yongth and therefore the britons crouned a strong knight that was
called lud that was Cassibalamus brother and made him king of Britaigne

How the britons granted to cassibalam that was ludes brother the land in whose
time Julius Caesar come twyes for to conquer the land Ca.xxxv.
AFter the death of king lud reigned his brother Cassibalam and become a good man
and much beloved of his britons so y^ for his goodness and courtesy they
granted him the Reame for evermore to him and to his heirs / and the king of
his goodness bet norissh worthelich both sons that were lud his brothers and
after made the eldest sone earl of Cornewaill and that other earl of london And
while this king Cassibalam reigned come Julius caesar that was Emperor of Rome
in to this land with a poer of Romans and would have had this land through
strength / but Cassibala^ o^come him in bataille through help of the britons
and drofe him out of thi^ land and he went ayene to Rome and assembled a great
poer an other time and come ayene in to this land for to give bataille to
Cassibala^ but he was disco^fited through strength of the britons and through
help of the earl of Corn waill and the earl of london his brother and through
help of Gudian king of Scotland and Corband king of north walys and of
bretaill king of southwales / and in this bataill was slayn^ Nennon that was
Cassibalams brother wherefore he made much sorwe / And so w^nt Julius caesar out
of this land with a sewe of romans that were left a live / And tho Cassibalam
went ayene to london and made a fest un to all his folk that tho had him help
and when that feste was done each man went in to his own contre.

Of the debate that was bitwene Cassibalam and the Earl of london and of the
truage that was paid to Rome Ca.xxxvj
ANd after it befell thus upon a day that the gentilme^ of the kings household
and gentilmen of the Earls household of london after mete went in fere for to
play and through debate that arose among hem Enelyn that was the Earls cousin of
london queld Irenglas that was the kings cousin wherefore the king swore that
Enelin should been honged but the Earl of london that was Enelinus lord would
not suffer it wherefore the king was wroth to ward the Earl and thought him
destroy and preuely the Earl sent lr^ez to Julius caesar that he should come in
to this land for to help him and him a venge upon the king and he would help
him with all his might And when the Emperor herd this tydyng he was full glad
and ordained a strong poer and come again the third time in to this land and the
Earl of london halp him with vij.M. men and at the third time was Cass^balan
ouercom^ and discomfited and made pees to the Emperor for iij.M. ponde of
silver yeldyng by year for truage for this land for evermore and half ayere
passed the Emperor went to Rome and the Earl of london with him for he durst
not abide in this land and after Cass^balan reigned xvij. year in pees and tho
died he the xvij. year of his regne and lies at york

How lords of the land after the death of cassibalan for enche^on that he had
none heir made Andragen king Ca.xxxvij.
AFter the death of Cassibalan for as much as he had non heir of his body the
lords of the land by comune assent crouned Andragen Earl of Cornwaille and
made him king and he reigned well and worthily and was a good man and well
governed the land and when he had reigned viij. year he died and lies at london

Of kymbalyn that was Andragenys sone a good man and well governed the land
Ca.xxxviij.
AFter the death of Andragen reigned Kymbalyn his sone that was a good man and
well governed the land in much ^ sperite and pees all his life's time and in
his time was borne Ihu^ crist our savior of that sweet virgin Marie. This king
kymbelyn had ij. sons Guider and Armoger good knights and worthy and when
this king kymbalyn had reigned xxij. year he died and lies at london

Of king Gynder that was kymbalynus sone that would not pay the truage to Rome
for the land that Cassibalan had granted and how he was slain of a romayne
Ca.xxxix
ANd after the death of this kymbalyn reigned Gynder his sone (...) good man and
a worthy and he was of so high heart that he would not pare to Rome that truag^
that king Cassibalan bad granted un to Julius Caesar wherefore the Emperor that
was tho that was called Claudius caesar was sore annoied and or deyned a great
power of Romans and come in to this land for to conquer the truage through
strength and have it of the king / but the king Gynder and Armager his brother
gadred a great host yfere of Britons and yafe bataille to the Emperor
Claudius and queld of Romans great plente / The Emperor had afterward one y^
was called Hamon that saw that her people ware fast slayue preuelich he cast a
way his own arms and took the arms of a deed Briton and armed him with his
armure and come in to the bataille to the king and said in this manner / Sir
beye good of heart for goddis love for the Romans that been yone enemies anon
shull be slain and discomfited euerychon / and the king yaf no keep ne reward
to his speech for encheson of the arms that he had upon him and went it had
been a Briton / but the traitor ever held him next the king / and preuelich
under the shuldres of his arms he smote the king where for he was deed and fell
down to the earth / when Armager saw his brother deed he cast away his arms
and took to him his brothers arms and come in to the bataille among the
Britons and bad hem hertely for to fight and fast bey a down the Romans / and
for the arms they wend it had he king Gynder that erst was slain that they
wise not then^ gone the Britons hertely fight and quelled the Romans so at the
last the Emperor forsook the field and fled as fast as he might with his
folk in to the Cite of wynchestre and the false traitor hamon that had queld
the king fast anon began for to flee with all the have that he might and
Armager the kings brother pursued him full fersely with a ferse heart and drofe
him un to a water and there he took him / and anon smo^e of both hond head and
feet and hew the body all to pieces and tho cast him in to the water wherefore
that water was called hamonus haven and afterward there was made a fair town
that yet stands that is called southa^pton / And afterward Armager went to
wynchestre for to seek claudius caesar the Emperor and there Armager him took /
and Claudius the Emperor through counceill of his romans that with him were
left a live made pees with Armager in this manner as ye shull here y^ is to say
how that Claudius the Emperor should give to Armager Gennen his fair daughter
for to have to wife so that this land fro that time afterward should be in the
Emperors poer of Rome vppn such covenant that never afterward none emperor
of rome should take none other truage of this la^d / but only feaulte and so
they were acorded And upon this conenant Claudius caesar sent to Rome for his
daughter Gennen and when she was come Claudius caesar yaf her to Armager to wife
and Armager spoused her at london with much solempnite and myrthe and tho was
Armager crouned and made king of Britaigue

Of king Armager in whose time seint Petre precked in Anti ochie with other
apostoles in du^erse contreis Ca.xl
THis king Armager reigned well and worthily and the land go^ned And Claudius
Caesar in remembrance of this acord and for reverence and honor of his
daughter made in this land a fair town and a fair castle and let call the
town after his name Claucestren that now is called Gloucestre and when this
was all done the Emperor no^me his leave and thowent again to Rome and Armager
tho was king and go^ned the land well and nobely all his lyfes time and this
Armager got a sone on his wife that called was westmer and whiles that this
armager reigned seint petre preched in Antioche and there he made a noble church
in which he sat first in his chair and there he duelled vij. year and after he
went to Rome and was made pope till that New the Emperor let him martre^ and
tho preched openly all the appostles in diverse lands the right faith And when
Armager had reigned xxiiij. year he died and lies at london

How^ king westmer yaf to Berynger an yland forlet and there this Berynger made
the town of Berewike Ca.xli.
ANd after this Armager reigned his sone westmer a good man and a worthy of body
and well go^ned the land. Hit befell so that tydynge came to him on a day that
the king Rodryk of gascoine was come in to his land with a houge number of
people and was duellyng in staynesmore And when king westmer herd tho tidings
he let assemble an houge host of britons and come to the king rodrik and yaf
him bataill and king westmer queld rodrik with his own hondes in plain
bataille And when king rodrikes me^ sow that her lord was deed they yolden hem
all un to the king we stmer and bicomen his men for e^more and he yaf hem a
contre that was forleten where in they might duelle and thidder they went and
duelled there all her lyfes time and ix.c. men there were of hem and no mo
left at that bataill. Her go^nour and prince was called Berynger and anon^ he
bigan a town that they might there in duel and have restorte and let call
the town Berewyk up twede and there they duelled and bicame rich but they had
no women among hem and the britons would not yefe her doughtres to the
strangers wherefore they went over see in to Irland and brought with hem women
and tho hem tho spoused but the men koude not understand y^ langage ne the
speech of the women and there for they spoken to gedre as scotts and afterward
through chang^ng of her langages in all feaunce they were called tho scotts
and so shullen that folk of that co^tre for evermore

How king westmer let arere a stone in the entering of westmerland there y^ he
slow roderic and there he began first housing Ca.xlij
ANd after this bataill that is above said when Rodric was deed king westmer in
remembrance of his victory let a^ere there besides the wey a great stone an
high and yet hit stant and e^more shall stand and let grave in the stone l^ez
that thus said The king westmer of Britaigne quelde in this place Roderic his
enemy And this westmer was the first man that made town and house in england
and at that stone begins westmerla^d that westmer let call after his own
name / and when westmer had so done he duelled all his lyfes time in that
contre of westmerland for he loved that contre more than any other contre / And
when he had reigned xxv. year he died and lies at Carlille

Of king Coill that was westmers sone that held his land in pees his lyfes
time Ca.xliij
AFter this king westmer reigned his sone Coill a goodma^ and a worthy and of
good conditions and well governed his land and of all men he had love and pees
and in his time was never contak debate ne werre in Britaigne and he reigned and
was king in pees all his lyfes time and when he had been king xj. year he died
and lies at york

How king lucie reigned after Coill his fadre that was a good man and after he
become christian Ca.xliiij.
AFter king coill reigned lucie his sone that was a goodma^ to god and to all y^
people he sent to rome to y^ apostle eule^thre that tho was pope and said that
he would become a christian man and resceyue baptism in the name of god and torn
to the right be^eu^ Eulenthre sent ij. begat that were called Pagan and
Elibayn^ in to this land and baptized the king and all his main and after went
fro town to town and baptized the people till all the land was baptized and
this was in the C.lvj. year after the incarnacion of our lord Ihu^ crist and
this king lucie made tho in this land ij. erche bysshoppes ^n at Canterbury an
other at york and other many bysshoppes that yet been in this land And when
thees ij. legatz had baptized all that land they ordained prestz for to
baptaze children and for to make the sacrament and after they went ayen^ to
Rome and the king duelled in his land and reigned with mochel honor x.ij. year
and after died and lies at Gloucestre.

How this land was long with out a king and how the bretons chosen a king
Ca.xl.
THis king lucie had non^ heir of his body bygoten that was afterward great
harm and sorwe to the land For aftir this king lucies death non^ of the great
of the land would suffer an other to be king but lived in werre and in debate
among hem.l. year without kyug But it befell afterward that a great Prince
come fro Rome in to this land that me called seuerie naught for to werre but
for to save the right of Rome. but natheles he had not duelled half a year in
this land that the bretonz ne quelled him when tho of Rome wist that seuerie
was so slain they sent an other great lord in to this land that me called
Allec that was a strong man and a mighty of body and duelled in this land long
time and did much sorwe to the Bretons so that after for pure malice they
chosen hem a king among hem that me called astlepades and assembled a great
host of britons and went to london^ to seche Allec there they founden him and
queld him and all his felaws and one called walon defended him fersely and
fought long with the britons but at the last he was discomfited and the
britons no^me him and bond hands and feet and cast him in to a water where for
that water afterward was called evermore walbcoke. Tho reigned astlepades in
quiet till one of his Earls that me called coill made a fair town ayens the
kings will and le^ call the tou^ne Colchestre after his name wherefore the king
was full wroth and thought destroy the earl and bigan to werre upon him and
brought great power and yaf bataill to the earl and the Earl defended him
fersely with his power and slow the king him self in that bataill and tho was
Coill crouned and made king of this land. This Coill reigned and governed the
royalme well and nobely for he was a noble man and well-beloved among the
briton^. When tho of rome herd that Astlepodes was slayn^ they were wonder
glad and sent an other great Prince of Romany that was called Constance and he
come to the king Coill for to challenge the truage that was woned to be paid to
Rome And the king ansuerd well and wisely and said that he would pay to Rom
^all that right and reason would with good will And so they accorded tho with
good will and without any contak and both they duelled to gedees in love The
king Coyll yaf his daughter Eleyn^ to Constance for to have her to his spouse
that was both fair wise and good and well lettred And this Constance spoused
her there with much honor / And it befell sone afterward that this king Coyll
died in the year of his regne xiij. and lies at Colcestre entierd

Of king Constance that was a Romayne that was chosen king aft the death of Coyl
for as much that he had spoused Eleyn thas was king Coyles daughter Ca.xlvj.
AFter this king Coyl Constance was made king and crou^ed for as much that he
had spoused king Coyles daughter that was heir of the land the which
Constance reigned well and worthily governed the land and he bigate on his wif
Eleyn a sone that was called Constantine and this king bare tree we faith and
truly did to hem of rome all his life and when he had reigned xv. year he died
and lies at york.

How Constantine that was king Constances sone and the sone of seint Eleyn
governed and ruled the land and was Em^our of Rome Ca.xlvij
AFter king Constances death Constantine his sone and the one of seint Eleyn
that fond the holy cross in the holy land and how Conseantine bicame
Emperor of Rome. Hit befell so in that time there was an Emperor at Rome a
Sarazyne a tiraunt that was called Maxence that put to death all that believed in
god and destroyed holy church by all his poer and slough all Criste^ men that
he might find. And among all other he let martre seint katerine and many other
christian people that had dread of death that fled de and come in to this land to
king Constantine and told him of the sorwe that Maxence did to Cristiente
wherefore Constantine had pite and great sorwe made and assembled a great holt
and a great power and went over to Rome and no^me the City and quelled all
that there in were of mysbeleue that he might find / And tho was he made
Emperor and was a good man and governed him so well that all lands to him
were attendaunt for to been under his gouernaill. And this deuell tiraunt
Maxence that time was in the land of Grec^ and herd this tydynge he become
wode and soden^ch he died and so he ended his life when Costantine went fro
this land to Rome he took with him his mother Eleyne for the mochel wisdom that
she could and iij. other great lords that he most loved that one was called
Hoel an other was called Dalerne and the thridde Morhin and took all his land
to keep un to the Earl of Cornewaille that was called Octauian / And anon as
this Octauian wist that his lord was duellyng at Rome he seized all the land in
to his hand and there with did all his will among high and low and they held
him for king wha^ this tydynge come to Costantine the emperor he was wonder
wroth to ward the earl Octauian and sent ^aberne with xij. thousand me^ for to
destroy the Earl for his falsenesse and arrived at Port smouth And when
Octauian wist that he assembled a great power of britons and discomfited
^aberne / and ^aberne fled thens in to Scotland and ordained there a great
power and come ayene in to this land an other time for to give bataille to
Octauian When Octauian herd tell that he assembled a great power and come
toward ^aberne as much as he might so that the ij. hosts metten upon
steynesmore and strongly smote to gedre / and tho was Octauian discomfited and
fled thens in to Norwey and ^aberne seized all the land in to his hand
tounes castelles as much as they there had And since Octauian come ayene fro
Norwey with a great power and seized ayene all the land in to his hand and
drofe out all the Romans and was tho made king and reigned

How Maximian that was the Emperors cousin of Rome spoused Octauians donghter
and was made king Ca.xlviij.
THis king Octauian governed the land well and nobely but he and none heir sauf
a dought that was a young child that he loved as much as his life and for as
much that he wax sike and was in point of death and might no longer regne he
would have made one of his nepheus to have been king the which was a noble
knyt and a strong man y^ was called Conan meriedoke and he should have kept the
kings daughter and have married her when tym^ had been but the lords of the
land nolde not suffer it but yaf her counseill to be married to some high man
of great honor and than might she have all her lust And the counseill of the
Emperor Costantine her lord and at this counceill they accorded and chose tho
cador of cornewaille for to we^de to y^ emperor for to do this message and he
no^me the wey and went to Rome and tolde^eth Emperor this tydyng well and
wisely and the Emperor sent in to this land with him his own cousin y^ was
his uncles sone a noble knight and a strong thas was called Maximian and he
spoused Octauians daughter and was crouned king of this land

How Maximian that was the Emperors cousin conquered the land of Amorican and
yaf it to Conan Meriedok Ca.xlix.
THis king Maximian bicome so riall that he thought to conquer the land of
Amorican for great ricchesse that he herd tell that was in that land so that
he ne left man thas was of worthiness knight squire ne none other man that he
ne took with him to great damage to all the land for he left at home behynd
him no man to keep the land but no^me hem with him fro this land xxx.M.
knights that were doughty me^nys bodies and went over in to the land of
Amorican and there slew the king that was called Imball and conqnered all the
land.

And when he had so done he called Conan and said For as much as king Octauian
have made you king of Britaigue and through me ye were let and destrobled
that ye were not king I give you all this land of Amorican and you there of
make king And for as much as ye ben a briton and your men also and become fro
britaigue I wull that this land have the same name and no more be called
Amorican but he called litell britaigne and the land fro whens ye ben comen
shall he called much britaigue And so that men know that one britaigue fro
that other Conan meriedok thanked him hendely and so was he made king of litell
britaigue

And when all this was done Maximian went thens to rome and was tho made
Emperor after Costantine Conan Meriedok dnelled in litell britaigue with
mochel honor and let ordeyn ii.M. ploughmen of the land for to erie the land
to harwe it and saw and feffed hem richely after that they were And for as
much as king Conan and none of his knights ne none of his other people would
not take wifes of the nacion^ of france he tho sent in to great Britaigue to
the Earl of Cornwaille that me called Dionothe that chese through out all the
land xj.M. of maidens that is to say viij.M. for the mean people and iij.M. for
the grettest lords that should hem spouse And when Dionothe vn^fonge this
co^mau^dament he let seche through all great britaigne as many as the no^bre
came to for no man durst withsto^de his co^mau^dame^ts for as much as all the
land was take him to ward and to keep to done all thing that him good liked
And when all the maidens were as sembled be let hem come before him to london
and let ordeyne for he^ ships hastily as much as hem neded to y^ viage and
took his own daughter that was called Vrsula / that was the fairest creature
that any man wist and would have sent her to king Conan that should have spoused
her and made her queen of the land / but she had made preuely to god a vow of
chastity that her fadre wiste not ne no man else that was living upon earth.

How Vrsula and xj.M. maidens that were in her company went toward litell
britaigne and all were martred at Coleyne Capitulo quinquagesimo
THis Vrsula chese un to her company xj.M. maidens that of all other she was
lady and mastresse and all they went in to shipp at one time in the water
that was called the thamise and commanded her kyn and all her friends to
Almighty god and sailled to ward litell britaigne / But when they were comen in
to the high see / a strong tempeste arose as it was goddis will

And Vrsula with her ships and her company were driven to ward hundland
through tempest and arrived in the haven of the Cite of Coloyne / The king of
the land that was called Geowan was tho in the Cite / and when he wise the
tydyng that so many fair maidens were there arrived / he took Elga his brother
and other of his household with him and went to the ships to seen that fair
company and when he saw hem so fair he and his company would have ouerlayne
hem and betake fro hem her maydenhode But Vrsula that good maid counceilled
prayed warned and taught he^ that were her felawes that they should defend hem
with all her myt and rather suffer death than suffer her body to be defoiled So
that all tho maidens become so steadfast in god that they defended hem through
his grace so that none of hem had poer to done hem any shame / Wherefore the king
Gowan wax so sore annoied that he for wrath let slay hem euerichone anon right
/ and so were all tho maydenes martred for the love of god and lien at Coloyne

How king Gowan come for to destroy this land and how a man of great power
that was called Gracian defended the land Capitulo quinquagesimoprimo
WHen all this was done king Gowan that was a sarazen called his brother Elga
and said to him that he should go to co^quere the la^d that all tho fair
maidens were in borne And he ordained tho a great poer of Pehites of denmare of
orkoney and of norwey and they come in to this land and brent tounes and slew
folk and cast a down chyrches and houses and religion and robbed the land in
length and bread and put to death all tho that would not forsake the right
believe and cristendome For as much as there was no sovereign that might hem
help For the king Maximian had taken with him all the worthy men he went to
co^quere litell britaigne And in the same time that ye here now tell was
seint Albone martred through the wode tiraunt Dio^^cian in the same place where
is now an Albaye made of seint Albone whiles that he was a paynyme But he
converted him to god through the predicacion^ of a clear and a wise man that was
called Anabel that was herburghed a night in his house And this waz after the
Incarnacion^ of Ihu^ crist^^ xxvj. year And men shull vnderston that seint
Albone suffered his matirdome before that seint Edmond was martred and her for
is seint Albone called the first martyr of England This Gowannes brother and
his folk that were sarazenes went through out the land and destroyed all thing
that they found and no thing they ne spared When this tydyng came to Rome Now
that king Gowan had bigo^ne for to stroie this land the Emperor and tho of
Rome sent a strong man and of great poer that was called Gracian with xxiiij.M.
men well fyghtyng for to cast out Sarazenes out of this land and all they
arrined at portesmothe Maximian might not come him self for as much as he was
chosen Emperor after the death of Constantine that was seint Eleynes sone When
this Gracian was arrined with his host he let aspie privily where the king gowan
might be found and he come upon hem suddenly as they lay in her beds and
descomfited him and slew hem in her beds every chon that non^ of him ascaped
sauf Gowan that fled with much sorwe in to his contre Sone after it befell
that Maximian was slain at Rome through treson And when Gracian wise that
tydynge be let croune him king of this land

How Gracian made him king when Maximian was slain and afterward the britons
queld him for his wikkednesse Ca.lij
His Gracian when he bigan to regne he bicome so wikked and so stern and so
much sorwe did to the britons that they (...) him among hem Tho the king
Gowan had understand tha^ Gracian was slain and done to death he assembled a
great power and come ayene in to this land / and if he had erst done harm tho
did he much more / for tho destroyed he all this land and the christian people
that was in much britaigne so that no man was so hardy for to nem^ne god /
and he that so did anon he was put to strong death But the bisshopp of london
that was tho that was called Gosselyn escaped and went thens to them of Rome to
seche socour to help cestroie the sarazenes that had destroyed this land And
the Romans said that they had be so often annoied for her sending after folk
in to Britaigne all for to help the Britons and they would no more so done And
so the bisshopp Gosselyne went thens without any socour or help And tho went
he to the king of litell britaigne that was called Aldroie and this was the
thridde king after Gowan mer^edoke as before is said The bisshopp prayed this
king Aldroie of help and socour The king had great pite in his heart when he
had herd how the bisshopp fled and how the Christian men weren slain in great
britaigne through paynyms and sarazenes he granted him Costantine his brother
him for to help with power of folk and hem did araie horse armure and ships
and all thing that hem neded to that viage And when all thing was ready he
called the bisshopp and to him said I take you here to help and socour
Costa^tine my brother upon this covenant that if god give him grace the
paynymes and the sarazenes to shende and discomfite that than ye make him king
And the bisshopp it granted with good will Costantine and the bisshopp took
leave of the king Aldroie and betoke him to god and took her men xij.M. and
went to her ships and sailled toward great Britaigne and arrived at
tottenesse When the Britons herd the tidings that to hem come socour they
were strongly helped and ordained hem an huge nombre of people and come to hem
and vnderfenge hem with mochel honor Gowan anon as he wist of this things he
assembled all the sarazenes and come ayens hem and yafe hem bataille / And
Costantine slow him with his own hondes And all tho other sarazenes were
discomfited and slain that none ascaped but tho that were converted un to god

How Costantine that was the kings brother of litell Britaigne was crouned
king of mochel Britoigne for his worthiness Capitulo quinquagesimotercio
Anon after the bataill they went to london and couned there Costantine and
made him king of this land and the bisshopp Goseline set the croune on his
head and a^noynted him as falls to a king for to been and tho bigan
cristendome This king Costantine when he was crouned anon after he spoused his
wife through conceill of the britons and he begat iij. sons on her / The first
was called Constance that other Aurilambros and the thridde Vter Constance the
elder brother when he came to age he made him a monk at wyuchestere Costantine
her fadre waz slain through treson For it befell on a time that a Pchite come
to him upon a day in message as it were and said that he would speak with the
king privily in conceill The king let wide his chamber of tho me^ that were
wythynne and there abode no mo but the king and the Pehite and made a
contenaunce as they he would have spoke with the king in his ere and there he
quelled him with a long knyfe and after went queyntely out of the chamber
into an other chamber so at the last no man wist where he was bicome When the
kings meyn^ wist that her lord was so deed they made so much sorwe they nyse
all what to done For as much as his ij / sons Aurilambros and Vter weren so
young that none of hem might be king and the thridde brother was monk at wyn
chestre as is said be forne But vortiger that was earl of westsexe thought
privily in his heart through queyntyse to be king and went to wynchestre there
that Constance was monk and to him said Constance quod he your fadre is deed
and yonr ij. brethren that been with Gosseline the bisshopp of london to
norissh ben so young that none of hem may be king Wherefore I conceill you that
ye forsake your abit and come with me and I shall done so to the britons that
ye shall be made king.

Of Constaunce that was king Costantines sone that was monk at wynchestre and
how he was made king after his fadres death through conceill of Vortiger that
was Earl of westsexe for as much as Aurilambros and Vter his ij. brethren
went but young of age And Vortiger let sle^ him to be king him self Capitulo
liiij.
His Vorager conc^illed this Constan^t so much till he forsook his Abbot and
went with him And anon after he was ^ouned and made king by assent of the
Britons

This king Constance when he was crouned and made king he wist ne knew but
litell of the world ne could no thing what knyghthode axed he made Vortiger
his chief mastir and counceiller and ya fe him all his power for to ordeyne and
to do as much as to the Reame aperteyned So that him self nothing enternelled
but only bare the name of king When Vortiger saw that he had all the land in
his ward and goueruaille at his own will he thought a prive treson and to slay
Constance the king / that he might him self been crouned and made king and
regne and let send after an hundred knights of Pehites the worthiest of all
the land and hem held with him to duelle with him as to be kepers of his body
/ as he would wend through the land to ordeyne things that apperteyned to a
king And this Vortiger honored so much the houdred knights and so much yafe
him of gold and silver and so rich Iewrlles robes horse and other thingis
plente where for they held him more lord than they did the king And Vortiger
told hem if he most be king ye as it were through treson / he would make hem
ricchest of the land So at the last through great yiftes that he had give
largely / they cried through the court that Vortiger were better worthy to be
king than Constance / wherefore Vortiger made semblant as he had been wroth and
departed thens fro the court and said he must gone else whidder for thing that
he had to done / and so the traitor said for encheson that they should slay him
that is to say Constance When this Vortiger was gone it befell sone after that
tho houndred knights of Pehites breken the doors of the kings chamber and
there they him show and smyten of his heed / and bear it to Vortiger there that
he duelled And when Vortiger saw that heed / he wept full tenderly with his
eye And nothele^s he was somedell glad of his death And anon let take the
hundred knights of Pehites and bind her hondes behind hem and led hem to
london and / there they were dampened to the death as falls traitors And anon
after all the britons of the land by commune assent crouned Vortiger and made
him king of the land

How the wardeyns that had tho two children to keep that were Costantines sons
lad de hem to litell Britaigne for the treson and falsenesse of Vortiger.
Capitulo quinquagesimoquinto
THis king Vortiger when he was crouned tho that had the ij. children in keeping
Au^lambros and Vter through or dinaunce of Gosselyne tha^ was bisshopp of london
at his death durst not duelle in the land with the children / but lad hem to
the king of litell Britaigne / for as much as be tho wist the treson of
Vortiger that tho was made king / through whom Constance her brother was slain
/ wherefore the houndred knights of Pehites were put to death and beren all the
blame / as that Vortiger had not wist there of nothir there to consented And so
the kepers of tho two children dred left Vortiger would put hem to death through
his treson and falsenesse as he had done her brother beforne / And there fore
they were lad over in to litell Britaigne / and the king hem resseyued with
mochel honor and let hem to norisshe / and there they duelled till they become
fair knights and strong and fers and thought to be avenged upon the death of
Constance her brother when they saw her time and so they did as ye shnll here
tell afterward Hit was not long after that the tidings ne come over see to
the kynred of tho houndred knights of Pehites that were dampened and put to the
death through Vortiger in this land therefore they were wondrely wroth and
sworen that they would been avenged of her kynnes death / and comen in to this
land with a great power and robbed in many places and queld and did all the
sorwe that they might / When Vortiger it wist he made much sorwe and sore was
ann^ied / And in an other place also tidings came to him that Aurilambros and
Vter his brother ordained and assembled a great host for to come in to mochel
Britaigne that is to sey in to this land to been quenged upon Consta^ce her
brothers death / So that in one half and in that other he was brought in to so
much sorwe that he ne wist whidder to wend

How Engist and xj. thousaud men come in to this land (...) whom Vortiger yafe
a place that called is thong^^stell Capitulo quinquagesimosexto
ANd sone after this sorwe tydynge come to Vortiger that a great nauye of
strangiers were arrived in the contre of ^ent but he wist not whens they were
ne wherefore they were come in to this land The king sent anon a messaiger
(...) that sum of bem should come and speak with him for to (...) what folk
they were and what they axed and in to what contre they would gone There were
ij. brethren mastres and princes of that strong company that one was called
Engist and that other horse Engist went to the king and told him encheson
wherefore they were there arrined in his land. And said Sir we ben of a contre
that called is Saxony that is the land of Eermayne where in is so much for we
that of the people be so much that the land may not hem sustain The mastres
and princes that have the land to govern and rule make to come before hem men
and women that boldest ben among hem for to fight and that best may trauaill in
to diucrse lands

And so they shull hem give horse and harnays Armure and all thing that hem
needs and after they shall sey to hem that they gone in to a other contre where
that they mow lyuen as her aunce stres did beforne hem And therefore Sir king if
ye have ought to do with our company we be come in to your land and with good
will you will serve and your land keep help and defended, from your enymyes
if that you needs

When Vortiger herd this tydynge he said he would gladly hem withold upon
such covenant if they might deliver his land of his Enemies he would give hem
reasonable lands where they should duel for evermore Engist thanked him goodly
and in this manner he and his company xj.M. should dnell with the king Vortiger
and so much they did through her boldness that they delivered the land clean
of his enemies Tho prayed Engist the kyug of so much land that he might make
to him a Cite for him and for his meyne The king ansuerd it was not to done
with out conc^ill of his britons Engist prayed him eftsoon of as much place
as he might compase with a thonge of a skin whereupon he might make him a
manner and for him to duel on And the king granted him feely Tho no^me Engist
a bull skin and cut it as small as he myt all in to a thwonge all a round
and there with compased he as much land as he made upon a fair castle and
when this castle was y made he let call it ^hwongcastell For as much as the
place was marked with a thonge

Of Ronewen that was Engistes daughter and how the king Vortiger spoused her
for her beauty Capitulo quinqnagesimo sepfimo.
WHen this Castle was maked and fnll well araied Engist preuely sent by leter
in to the contre that he came of after an houndred ships filled with strange
men that ware bold and well fyghtyng in all batailles / and that they should
bring with hem Rone wen his daughter that was the fairest creature that a man
might see And when the people was comen that he had sent after he took hem in
to the Castle with much Joy And him self upon a day went un to the king and
prayed him there worthily that he would come and see his new manner that he had
made in the place that he compassed with a thonge of the skyn^ The king anon
granted it him freely and with him went thidder and was well a paid with the
Castle and with the fair work / and to gedres there they eten and dronken with
mochel Joy

And when night come that the king Vortiger should gone in to his chamber for to
take there his nyghtes rest / Ronewen that was Engistes daughter come with a
coupe of gold in her hand and kneled beforne the king / and said to him
wassaille / and the king wist not what it was to mean ne what he should ansuere
for as much as him self ne none of his Britons yet could none Englissh speken
ne understand it / but speken tho the same langage that Britons yet done
Nothelees a latymer told the king the full understanding there of wassaille /
and that other should an suere drink haille And that was the first time that
was saille and drynkhaille come up in this land / and from that time un to this
time it is will used in this land.

The king Vortiger saw the fairness of Rone wen and his arms laid about her
nekke and iij. swetely killed her and anon right he was anamered upon her /
that be desided to have her to wife and asked of Engist her fadr^. And Engiste
granted him upon this covenant that the king should give him all the co^tre of
kent that he might duelle in and his people The king him granted preuely with a
good will And anon after he spoused the damisell that was much confusion to
him self.

And therefore all the Britons become so wroth for encheson that he had spoused
a woman of mysbeleue / wherefore they went all from him and no thing to him took
keep ne help him in thing that he had to done.

How Vortymer that was Vortiger^ sone was made king and Engist druien ou^^ and
how Vortymer was slain Capitulo lviij.
THis Engist went in to kent and seized all the land in to his hand for him
and for his men and bicome in a litel whyl of so great poer and so much people
had that men wist not in litell time which were the kings men and which were
Engistes me^ wherefore all britaigne had of him dread and said among hem that if
they ne took other cou^ceill bitwene hem all the land should be betrayed
through Engist and his people ^ortiger the king had bigoten on his first wife
iij. sons the first was callet Vortimer that second Catagren and the thridde
passent

The britons euerychon by one assent chosen Vortimer to be her lord and
sovereign and her cou^ceiller in every bataille and crouned him and made him
king and would suffer Vortiger no longer to regne for encheson of the Alliance
bitwene Engist and him The bri^on^ ordained a great host to drive out Engist
and his company of the land and yafe him iij. batailles that first was in
kent there he was lord The second wat at Tette forde And the third de was in a
shire athishalf Cool in a more And in this bataill hem met Catagren and horse
Engistes brother so that each of he^ slew other But for as much as the contre
was yeuen long before to horn through Vortiger tho he had spoused his cousin
there h^ had made a fair castle that me called hornecastell after his own name
And Vortimer was so a^noied for his brothers death Catagren that he was deed in
such a manner Wherefore anon he let fell the castle to ground And after that
he ne left night ne day till he had driven out Engist and all his people of the
land And when Engist was driven away Ronewen his daughter made forwey now and
quentelyn spoke to hem that were next the king Vortimer and priuyest with him
and so much she yaf him of yiftes that he was enpoisened and died at london
the iiij. year of his regne and there he lies

How the britous chosen an other time Vortiger to been her king and Engist
came in to this land open and they foughten to gedre. Ca.lix.
Fter Vortimers death the Britons by her commune assent eftsoon made Vortiger
her king upon this covenant that he should never after suffer Engist ne none of
his eftsoon to come in to this land And when all this was done Ronewen the
Queen preuely sent by letter to Engist that she had enpoisened Vortimer and
that Vortiger her lord ayene bare the corone and reigned and that he should come
in to this land well arraied with much people for to avenge him upon the
Britons and to win this land ayene And when Engist hered this tydynge he
made great ^oye and apparailled him hastily with xv. thousand men that were
doubghty in every bataille and come in to this land And when Vortiger herd
tell that Engist was come ayen^ with a great poer in to this land he assembled
his Britons and tho went ayens Engist for to have give him bataille and his
folk But Engiste drad him sore of the Britons / For they had discomficed him
beforne / and had driven him out with strength / wherefore Engist p^aied a love
day / and said he was not comen in to this land for to fight / but to have his
land ayene if he might acord with the Britons and of hem have grace The king
Vortiger through counceill of his Britons granted a love day and thus it was or
deyned through the Britons / that the same love day should been hold fast be
side Salisbury upon an hull And Engist should come thidder with four houndred
knights without moo / And the king with as many of the wysest of his land
And at that day the king come with his counceill as it was ordained But Engiste
had warned his knights preuelich and hem commounded that every of hem should
put a long knyfe in his hose And when he said fair Sires now is time to speak
of love and pees every man a none should draw his knyfe and sler a Briton and
so they queld a thousand lxj. of knights and with much sorwe many of hem
ascared And the king Vortiger him self tho was taken and lad to Thongcastell
and put in to prison / and sum of Engistes men would that the king had been
brent all quyke

And Vortiger tho for to have his life / granted hem as much as they would
axe and yafe up all the land tounes Castelles Cites and burghes to Engist and
to his folk And all the Britons fled thens in to wales and there they held
hem still

And Engiste went through the land and seized all the land with feaunchises
and in every place let cast a down chyrches and houses of Religione and
destroyed Cristendome through the land and let change the name of the land /
that no man of his were so hardy after that time to call this land britaigne
but call it Engistesland and he deperted all that land to his men and there
made vij. kings for to strenght the la^d that the britons should never come
after there in The first kyngdeme was kent there that Engist him self reigned and
was lord and mastir over all the other An other king had southsex^ that now is
Chichestre the iij. king had westsex The iiij. king had Eestsexe The v. king
had Estangill that now is called northfolk Southfolc Mercheinerich that is to
say the Erldome of Nichol The vj. had leicestreshire Northm^ptonshire Hertford
and huntyngdon^ The vij. had Oxu^ford Gloucestre Wynchestre War wyk and Derby
shire

How vortiger went in to wales and bigan there a castle that would not stand
without mortier tempred with blood Ca.lx
WHen Engist had deperted all the land in this manner bitwene his men he
delivered Vortiger out of prison and suffered him freely to gone whidder he that
would and be no^me his wey and went in to wales there that his britons duelled
for as much as that land was strong and wykked to wy^^e And engist never
come there ne knew it never before that land Vortiger held him there with his
britons and axed cou^ceill what him was best all for to done And they yaf him
conceill to make a strong castle that might him self there in keep and defend
if need were

Masons in have tho were fet and bigan the work upon the hylle of Breigh But
certes thus it befell all the werk that the masons made a day adoune it fell
anyght and wist not what it myt been and there of the king was sore a^noied of
that chan^ce and wist not what to done Wherefore he let send after the wysest
clerk and also lered men that weren through out wales that might been found.

For they should tell wherefore the foundament so failled under the work and
that they should him tell what was best to done

And the wisest men long time had studied they said to the king that he should
done seek a child borne of awoman that never had with man to done and that
child he should slay and tempre with his blood the mortier of the work and so
should the work ever endure without end

How the king let seche Merlyn through all wales for to speak with him Ca.lxj.
WHen the king herd this he commanded his messagiers anon to wend through
out all wales to seek that child if they might him find / and that they
should bring him forth with hem un to him / and in record and in witness of
this thing he had take hem his lr^e that they ne were destourbled of no man ne
let And tho the messagiers went thens and spedde so fast that they come in
to a town that was called ^rarmardine and as they passed forth her way they
founden ij. children of xxiiij. year age chidden yfere with hasty words / and
one of hem said to that other Donebat quod he ye done all wrong to chide or
strife with me For ye have no wit ne reason as I have Certes Merlyn quod he of
your wit ne of your reason I make no force for men tell communely that ye have
no thing of god almy ghty since ye had never fadre but every man knows well
who is your mother The messagiers of the king Vortiger when they herd this
strife bitwene tho two gromes they axed of hem that stood besides hem whens
that Merlyn was borne / and also who him norisshed and the folk hem told that
a great gentil woman him bare in karmardine that was called Adhan But never myt
man wite who might be the childs fadre When the kings messagiers herd this
tydyng they went anon to him that was wardeyne of the town and told him the
kings will and his l^re she wed him wherefore they were come thidder

Merlyn and his mother anon were sent before the wardeyne of the town and he
commanded hem that they should gone to the king as it was ordained by his
messagiers Merlyn and his mother went th^ns and comen un to the king and there
they were vnderfonge with mochel honor and the king axed of that lady if that
child were her sone / and who him beagte

The lady ansuerd full tendrely weeping and said she had never company of man
wordely But Sir quod she as I was a young maiden in my fadres chamber and other
of great ^nage were in my company / that often times were wont to play and to
solace I beleft allone in my chamber and would not gone out for bre^nyng of the
son And upon a time there come a fair bache ^er and entered in to my chamber
they y^ I was allone / but how he come in to me / and where I wiste it neu ne
yet wot it not For yt doors were fast barred / and with me he did game of love
For I ne had myt ne poer him to defend fro me / and often he come to me in y^
forsaid manner so that he begat this child / but neu myt I wit what he was

Of the ansuerd of Merlyn wherefore the king axed why his werk myt not stond that
he had bigo^ne ner prove Ca.lxij.
WHen Merlyn had herd all that his mother had said spake^to the king in this
manner. Sir how I was begoten ax ye no more for it falls naught to perowe ne
to none other to wit but tells me encheson wherefore I am to you y brought and
wherefore ye have sent after me. Certes quod the king my wise cou^celers have
done me to understand that ye mortier of a work that I have bigo^ne behooved
to be tempred with your blood or the foundement shall faill for evermore Sir
quod Merlyn will ye slay me for my blood for to tempre with your mortier ye quoth
the king orelles shall never my castle stand as my cou^celers done me to
understand Tho ansuerde Merlyn to the king Sir he said let hem com^ before me
tho wise concelers and I wull prove that they say not well ne trewly And when
the wise were y comen Merlyn axed if his blood were the encheson to make the
work stand and endure All these wise were abashed and counde not ansuere

Merlyn tho said to the king Sir I shall tell you then cheson wherefore your werk
thus fails and may not stand There is under the montaigne there that ye have
bigo^ne your towr a great ponde of water and in the botome of the ponde under
the water there (...). dragons that one is white that other reed that fyghte^ to
ged^^^ ayens your werk Do ye mine deep till your men come to the ponce and does
your men take away the water all out and than ye shall se the dragons as I have
yo we told that to gedre fight ayens your werk And this is the encheson certes
wherefore the fundament failleth The king anon let dig under till that men
come to that ponde and let done away all that water and there they found ij.
dragons as Merlyn had told that egrely foughten to gedres The white dragon
egrely assailled the reed and laid on him so strongly that he might not e^d^re
but withdrowe him and rested in the same caue^ And when he had a while rested
he went before and assailled the reed deagon angrely and held him so sore that
he myt not ayens him endure but wythdrowe him and rested And after come ayene
the white dragon and strongely fought with the reed dragon and ^ote him evil
and him overcome that he fleigh thens and no more come ayene

Of the significacion^ of tho ij. dragons that were in the bottom of the ponde
that foughten to gedre. Ca.lxiij.
THis king Vortiger and his men that faught this bataill had great mervaille
and prayed Merlyn to tell him what it myt betoken Sir quoth Merlyn I shall you
tell

The read dragon betokens your self and the white betokens the folk of
saxony that first ye took and held in this land that now fighten ayens you
and yo we have driven and enchaced.

But britons of your lineage ouercomen hem and driven hem a way and sithen at
the coming again of the saxons they recovered this land and held it for evermore
and driven out the britons and did with this land her will and destroid
cristendome th^rgh out this land e had had first Joy with her coming but no
we it is turned to you great damage and sorwe For tho ij. brethren of
Constance that was king the which ye let slay Shulle come bifor a quinzeme
passed with a great poer from litell britaigne and shullen avenge the death of
her brother and they shull brenne you first with sorwe And after they shull
slay a great party of Saxons and shull out drive all the remenaunt of the land
and therefore abide ye here no longer to make castle ne none other work but
anon goth else where your life all for to save to god I you bytake / for
troth I have said to you of thing that shall befall And understands well
that Aurilambros shall be king but he shall be empoisened and litell time regne

Of king Aurilambros how be pursued Vortig^^ and Engist and how they diden
Co.lxiiij.
QErlyn and his mother deperted fro the king and turned again karmardyne And so
after tydyng come to the britons that Aurilambros and Vter his brother were
arrined at Cottenesse with a great host And the britons anon^ assembled hem and
went to vnderfong Aurilambros and Vter with great nobilesse and lad hem to
london and crouned there Aurilambros and made him king and diden to him homage
And he axed where Vortiger that was king myt be found for he would be a venged
of hi^ brothers death and after he would werre upon paynyms And they told him
that Vortiger was in wales and so they ladde him thidderward Vortiger wist well
that the brethren come him to conquer and flew thens in to a castle that was
called Gerneth that stood upon a hi^h montaigne and there him held Aurila^bros
and Vter his brother and her folk had beseged the castle full long time for
the castle was strong and well araied So at the last they cast wyldefire and
brent house and men and all her arraie and as much as was withyn the castle /
So that Vortiger was brend among all other and so died he with mochel sorwe
The was Engist in kent and reigned there and herd this tydyng and anon fled
and would have gone in to Scotland for to have had socour / but Anrilambros and
his men met with him in the northcontre and yafe him bataille and Engist and
his men hem defended whiles that they might / but he and his folk weren
discomfited and slain And Otta his sone fley un to york / and Aurila^bros him
followed egrely Otta a litell while ayens him stood / but afterward he put him
to his mercy And Aurilambros under fenge him and to him and to his men he yafe
the contre of Galewey in Scotland and there they duelled The king Aurilambros
went tho th^rgh out the land and put away the name of Engistesla^d that
Engist after his name had called it before Tho let he it call ayene great
britaigne and let make ayene churches houses of religion Castelles Cites and
burghes and tounes that the Saxons had destroyed and come to london and let
make the walls of the Cite which Engist and his folk had cast a down The
Britons led him to the monte of Anbrian where sum time was an house of religion
that tho was destroyed through paynymes Where of a knyt was called Anbry that
sum time was founder of the house and th^r for the hill was called the mont of
Brian / and after was called Ambresbury and shall for evermore

How Aurilambros did redress the land of great Britaigne that was destroyed
through saxons Ca.lxv
HOw the king Aurilambros let amend and redress the house of Amlesbury and
theryn put mon^^es but now there be nonnes a litell from the place that was
called Salisbury there tho the Saxones queld the britons where Engist and he
should have made a love day in which time there were slain a M.lxj. knights
through treson of Engis^ The king there of had great pite / and thought to make
in mind of hem a monument of stone that might endure to the worlds en^e And
of this thing they took her counce^^^ what there of was best foe to done Tho
spoke to the king the bisshopp of london that was called Cernekyn that he should
enquere after Merlyn / for he could best tell how this thing myt be made And
Merlyn after was sought and found and come to y^ king And the king told^ him
his will of the monument that he would have made Tho ansuerde Merlyn to the king
and said There ben great stones in Irland and long upon the hull of kyan that
men called Geants karoll and if they were in this place as they been there here
they would endure evermore in remembrance of tho knights that here ben
entered Per ma foy ad the king as hard stones be in my land as in Irla^d Soth
quoth Merlyn But in all your land ben none such For Eeaunts set hem for great
good of hem self For at every times that they were wounded or in any manner
hurt they wesshen the stones with hot wat and than wessh hem there with and
anon they were hole

How the britons went for to seche the great stones in Irland Capitulo lxvj.
When this britons had herd of this thing they went and swore among hem that
they would gone seche the stones and no^me with hem Vter the kings brother to
ben her cheueteyne and xv.M. men and Merlyn conceilled hem for to gone in to
Irland and so they diden And when the king of Irland that was called Guillomer
herd tell that strangiers were arri^ed in his land he assembled a great poer
and fought ayens hem. but he and his folk was discomfited The britons went
biforne till they come to the mo^te of kylian and climed un to the mo^te But
whenne they saugh the stones and the manner how they stounde they had great
merwille and said bitwene hem that no man should remeue for no strength ne
engyue so huge they were and so long But Merlyn through his craft^ and
queyntize remeued hem and brought hem in to her ships and come ayene in to
this land And Merlyn set the stones there that the king would have hem and set
hem in the same manner that they stoden in Irland And when the king saugh that
it was made he thanked Merlyn and richely hem re warded at his own will and
that place let call stouhenge for evermore

How Passent that was Vortigers sone and the king Guillomer come in to this
land and how a traitor that was called Cappa enpoysened the king Aurilambros
Ca.lxvij
ANd men shull understand that Passant that was Vortigers sone leued in the
same time and come in to this land with a great poer and arri^ed in the
northco^tre and would been a veuged of his fodres death Vortiger. And strongly
trusted upon the company that he had brought with him out of the land of
Germayne and had conquered all the northcontre un to york And when king
Aurilambros herd this he assembled a great po^r of britons and went for to
befyght him And he and his people were discomfited but passent ascaped thens
with some of his folk / and fled thens in to Irland and come to king
Guillomer and prayed him of help and socour / The king granted him with good
will / and said he would help him with good will upon that covenant that I my
self must gone with you with all my power in to Britaigne / and I would me
avenge upon the britons rather than they in to my land come^ and token the
stones with strength that called is Geauntz karoll The king Guillomer let
ordeyne his ships and went to the sea with xv.M. men and arrived in wales
and begone to rob and much sorwe done Hit befell so that king Aurilambros
lay sike at wynchestre and myt not help him self So that he sent in his name
Vter his brother with a great power to help wales and thidderwarde he went as
much as he might The king of Irland and Passent had herd ^elle that
Aurilambros was sike and to him come a sarazen that was called Coppa and said
Sir quoth he duelle ye here all in pees with your host and I behote you through my
queyntize that I shall she the king Aurilambros that is sike / yif ye do so
quod Passent I shall you richely auaunce This traitor Coppa put upon him an
abbyt of Religion and let shave him a broad croune and come to the kings court
and said that he would hele the king of his malady Tho said the traitor Coppa
un to the king Sir ben of good comfort for I shall give you such a medicine
that ye shull sweet anon^ right and lusten to sleep and have good rest and the
traitor yaf him such poison that he sleep anon right and died in his slepyng
And the traitor said that he would gone out in to the field till he were a
waked / and so escaped he away / For no man had to him suspection for encheson
of his Abbyt that he was in clothed and also for his broad croune But when the
kings men wist that he was deed they becomen wonder sorry / and fast sought the
traitor / But they might not find him / For Coppa turued ayene to the host
frowhens that he come

When Aurilambros was deed a sterre in the morn was seyne with a clear light
and at the bought of the beme was seyne the head of an horrible dragon Ca.lxviij
WHen the king Aurilambros was thus deed and enpoisened at wynchestre / amorne
after that he was deed about the time of prime there was seyne a st^rre great
and clear and the beme of that sterre was brighter tha^ the son and at the
bout of the beem appeared a drago^s head and out of his mouth come ij. huge
lights that were as bright as any fire brennyg And that one beme till toward
france and straught over the sea thidder ward And out of that beem come vij.
bemes full clear and long as it were the lit of fire This stern was se^n of
many a man but none of hem wist what it betokened Vter that was the kings
brother that was in walys with his host of brito^s saw that sterre and the
great light y^ yaf he wondered there of greatly what it myt betoken and let call
Merlyn and prayed him for to tell what it myt betoke^

Of the betokenyng of the sterre Ca.lxix
MErlyn saw that sterre and beheld him long time and sithene^ (...) qnoke and
wept tenderly And said Allas allas that so noble king and worthy is deed And I
do you to understand that Aurilambros your brother is enpoysened and that I
see well in this sterre and your self betokened by the head of the dragon^ that
is seyn^ at the bought of the beem that is your self that shall be king and
regne And by the beem that sto^t toward the Est is understand that ye shall
get a sone that shall conquer all france and all the lands that been lougyng
to the croun^ of france that shall be a worthier king and of more honor than
ever was any of his auncestres And by the beem that straight toward Irland is
betokened that ye shall geten a daughter that shall be queen of Irland And the
vij. bemes betokened that she shall have vij. sons and every of hem shall be
king and regne with mochell honor and abide ye no longer here but goth and
give bataille to your enemies and fyghted with hem boldly for ye shull
overcome hem and have the victory Vter thanked hertely Merlyn and no^me his
men and went toward his enymie and they foughten to gedre mortaly and so he
discomfited his enymies all and destroyed and him self quelled passent that was
Vortigers sone And his britons queld Guillomer that was king of Irland and all
his men And Vter anon^ after that bataill took his way toward wynchestre for to
done e^tier Aurilambros king thas wat his brother But tho was the body borne to
stonhenge with mochel honor that he had done made in remembrance of the
britons that there ware slayn^ through treson of Engist that same day that they
should have been accorded and in the same place they entered Aurilambros the
second yerr of his regne with all the wurshipp that myt belongen to such a
kyug of whose soul god have mercy.

Of Vter pendragon and wherefore he was called so after ye shall here / and how
he was over take with the great love of Igerne that was the earl of
Cornewailles wife Ca.lxx.
AFter the death of Aurilambros Vter his brother was crouned and reigned well and
worthily and in remembrance of the dragon that he was liked to he let make two
dragons through counceill of his britons / that one to be bore before him whenne
he went in to bataille / and that other to abide at wynchestre in the
bisshoppes church And for that encheson he was called ever after Vter
pendragon And Otta that was Engistes sone commended but litell Vter / that was
made new king and ayens him began to meue werre / and ordained a great
company of his friends and of his kynne and of Ossa his brother and had take
all the land from humber un to york / but tho of york held strongely again
hem and nold not suffer hem to come in to the town nothir to yield the Cite to
hem / And he beseged the town anon right and yafe there to a strong assaute /
but they of the Cite hem kept well and strongly And when Vter herd there of he
come thidder with a great power for to help and rescue the town and put away
the siege and yafe a strong bataille and Otta and his company hem defended as
well as they might but at the last they were discomfited and the most part of
hem aueld and Otta and Ossa were taken and put in to prison at london And Vter
him self dnelled a while at york and after he went to london / and at the
Ester after sueng he would bear corone and hold a solemn fest / and let
sompne all his Earls and Barons that they should come to that fest and all tho
that had wyfes should bring hem also to that feste and all comen at the kings
commandment as they were commanded The fest was richely holden and all
worthily set to mete after that they weren of estate so that earl Gorloys of
Corn waill and Igerne his wife seten alther next the king / and the king saw
the fairness of that lady that she had / And was ranysshed for her beauty /
and often he made to her nyce semblant in lokyng and laughyng / so at the last
the Earl perceived the ^ue lokyng and laughyng and the love bitwene hem and
aroos ^p from the toble all in wrath and took his wife and called to him his
knights and went thens all in wrath without taking been of the king

The king anon sent after him that he should come ayene and goo not thens in
despite of him And the Earl would not come ayene in no manner wise Wherefore the
king was full wroth and in wrath him deffied as his dedely e^nymy And the Earl
went (...) in to Cornewaille with his wif in to the Castle of Tyntagell

And the king let ordeyne a great host and come in to Cornewaill for to
destroy the Earl if he might But he had put him in such a castle that was
strong and well araied of Tyntagell and would not yield him to the king The king
anon beseged the castle and there duelled xv. days that never might speed and
ever thought upon ygerne and upon her laid so much love that he nyst what to
done So at the last he called to him a knight that was called Vlfyn that was
prive with him and told him all his conseill and axed of him what was best for
to done Sir quoth he does send aft^r Merlyn for he can tell you the best
cou^ceill of any man living Merlyn anon was sent after and come to the king
and the king told him all his will. Sir quoth Merlyn I shall done so much through
craft that I can that I shall make you come this nyt in to the castle of
Tyntagell and shall have all your will of that lady

How Vter bigate on Igerne that was the Earls wif of Cornewaille Arthur king
Ca.lxxj
MErlyn through craft that he could changed the kings figu^ in to the likeness
of the earl and vlfyn garloys his cha^bir^ayne and to the figure of Jordan that
was the Earls chambirlayne So that each of hem was transfigured to other
likeness. And when Merlyn had so done he said to the king Sir quoth he now mow
ye gone suddenly to the castle of Tyntagell and axen enter there and have your
will The king took privily all the host to go ^ne and led to a knyt that he
much loved and no^me his way toward the castle and with him vlfin his
chambirlayn^ and Merlyn And when they come thidder the Portier went that it had
been his own^ lord and when time come for to go to led The king went to bed
with Igerne the Earls wife and did with her all his will and bigate upon her a
sone that was called Arthur. Upon the mor we the noble mighty king no^me his
leave of the lady and went again to his host And the same night that the king lay
by ygerne in bed y fere with the Earls wif the kings men yeuen a strong
assaut to the castle and the Earl and his men manly hem defended But at the
last it befell so that at same assaute the Earl him self was slain and the
Castle taken.

And the king anon turned ayene to Tyntagell and spoused Igerne with mochel
honor and made her queen and sone after time come that she should be delivered
and bear a child a sone that was called Arthur / and after he gate on her a
daughter that was called Amya / And when she come to age nobely was married to a
noble Baron that was called Aloth that was lord of leons When Vter long time
had reigned there come upon him a great sikenesse as it were a sorwe And in the
mean time tho that had to keep Otta that was Engistes sone and Ossa his brother
that tho were in prison men let hem gone for great yiftes that they hem yaf and
went with hem And when tho two brethren were ascaped and come^ again in to her
own contre They ordained hem a great host and a great poer and bego^ne to
were eftsoon upon the king

How king Vter chese Aloth to keep the land of Britaigne whiles that he was
sike / for as much as he might not for his sikenesse Capitulo
septuagesimosecundo
ANd for as much as king Vter was sike and might not help him self he
ordained Aloth sone of Eleyne y^ tho was chosen to be wardeyne and chiueteyne
of all his folk and he anon and his britons assembled a great host and yafe
bataille to Otta and to his folk / but Otta at the last was discomfited Hit
befell thus afterward thas this britons had dedignacion of Aloth and would not
to him been attendant / wherefore the king was annoied wonder sore and let put
hem in a lytter in the host among folk

And they lad him to veroloyne that tho was a fair Cite there y^ seint Albone
was martred and after was that Cite destroyed with paynyms and through werre and
thidder they had sense Otta and Ossa and her people and entered in to the town
and let make fase the yates and there they halde hem / and the king come and hem
beseged and made a strong assauce / but tho that were within manlich hem
defended The king let ordeyne his gonnes and his engynes for to break the
walls and the walls were so strong that no thing might hem mysdoo Otta and
his people had great despite that a king byggyng in a lytter had hem beseged /
and they token counceill among hem for to stand up in the morwe and come
out and give bataille to the king and so they diden and in that bataille were
both Otta and Ossa slain / and all tho other that ascaped a live fled in to
Scotland and made Colegryne her chyuetay ne / and the saxons that were a live
and ascaped fro the bataile brough ten ayene a great strength and among hem
they seyden / that if king Vter were deed they should well conquer the land and
among he^ they thought enpoisen the king and ordained men for to done this
deed / and yaf hem of yiftes great plente this thing to done and they ordained
hem thidderward there that the king was ducllyng and clo / thed hem in pouerwede
the better all for to speed her lither purpose / but nothelees for all her
falsenesse and queyntize they might ne^ come to nygh the king But so at the
last they aspied that the king drank / none other licour but only water of a
clear well that was nygh besides And thees falls traitors upon a day preuelich
went to the well and put therein poysen so that all the water was enpoisened /
And anon after as the king had drunk of that wat he began to swell and sone
after he died / and as many as dronken of that water deide also And anon as
this falsenesse was aspied foll^ of the town let stop the well for evermore
When the king was deed his folk here him to Stonhenge with great solempnite of
bisshops and of barons that were there that beried him beside Aur^lambros his
brother and after turned ayene tho euerichon and lot send after Arthur his
sone and they made him king of the land with much reuereuce after his fadres
death the xvij. year of his regne

How Arthur that was the sone of Vter was crouned after his fadres death and how
he drofe Colegrine and the saxones and Cheldrik of Almayne out of this land
Ca.lxxiij
WHen Arthur was made king of the la^d he was but young of age of xv. year / but
he was fair and bold and doubty of body and to meke folk he was good and
cour^oi^ and large of spendyng and made him well-beloved among all men there that
it was need And when he began to regne he swore that saxons neure should have
pees ne rest till that he had drive hem out of his land / And let assemble a
grate host and faught with Colegrine the which after time that Otta was deed
the saxons mayntened, And this Colkgrine was discomfited and fled vij to
york and took the town and there held him And the king beseged y^ town bnt
he might no thing speed / for the town was so strong / and they withynne
kept the town well and orpedly And in the meant ^yme Colegriue let the town
to Bladulf and fled him self to Cheldryke that was king of Almayne for to have
of him socour and the king assembled a great power and come and arrived in
scotland with v.C. ships / and when Arthur wist of this tydyng that he had
not poer and strength ynowe to fight ayens Cheldryk he let been the fie^e and
went ot London And sent anon his lettres to the king of litell britaigne
that was called hoel his nepheu his sustres sone that he should come to him
with all the poer that he might and he assembled a great host and arrined at
southm^pton And when king Arthur it wist he was glad y now and went ayens hem
and hem resceyned with mochel honor so that tho ij hosts hem assembled and
token her way even to ni^hol that Cheldrik had beseged but nouzt yet taken And
they come upon Cheldrik and upon his people or they it wist there that they were
and hem egrely assailled The king chel drik and his meyny defended hem manly by
her poer But king Arthur and his men quelled so many saxons that never er was
say ne such slaughter And Cheldrik and his men that were left alive fledden a
way And Arthur hem poursued and drofe hem in to a wode that they might no
ferthir pass Cheldrik and his me^ saw well that they were brought in to much
disese and hem yolden to Arthur in this manner wise that he should take her horse
and her armure and all that they had they must only gone a foot in to her
ships And so they would gone in to her own land and never come a yen in to
this land And upon assurance of this thing they yeuen him good hostages And
Arthur by co^ceill of his me^ granted this thing and resseyued the hostages
And her upon the other went to her ships And when they were in the hie see
her will changed as the deuel it would and they returned her nauye and come a
yene in to this land and arrined at To^tenesse and went out of her ships and
no^me the land and clean robbed it and much people slew and token all the
armure that they might find and so they went forth till they comen to Bathe
But the men of the town shitten fast her yates and would not suffer hem come
with in the town and they defended hem well and orpedly ayens hem

How Arthur yafe bataill to the saxones when they come again and beseged the
town of Bathe and hem overcome Capitulo. lxxiiij.
WHen Arthur herd this tydynge he let honge anon the hostages and left hoel
of britayne his nepheu for to ke^e the march to ward Scotland with half his
people and him self went to help reskew the town of bathe and when be come
thidder he yaf a strong bataill to cheldrik and queld all most all the people
that he had for no man myt him withstond ne endure vn^ the stroke of his swerd
And there both were slain Colegryne and Bladud his brother And Cheldryk fled
thens and would have gone to his ships / But when Arthur it wist he took x.M.
knygh (...) to Cador that was Earl of Cornewaille for to let and stop his
coming And Arthur him self went toward the march of scotland, / For
messagiers told him that the scotts had beseged Hoell of britaigne there that
he lay sike and therefore he hasted thidderward And Cador pnrsued after Cheldryke
and took him er he might come to his ships and queld Cheldryke and his people
And when Cador had done this viage / he hasted him ayene as fast as he might
toward Arthur and fond him in Scotland there that he had rescued hoel of
britaigne But the scotts were all far with in Mounref / And there they held
hem a while but Arthur hem pursued and they fled thens in to lymoigne that were
in that contre lx. Isles and great plente of briddes and great plente of Egles
that were woned to cry and fight to gedres and make great noise / when folk
come to rob that land and werren as much as they might and so they diden for
the Scotts were so great rauenours that they to^e all that they might find in
the land of lymoigne without any sparyng and there with they charged ayene the
folk in to scotland for to wend

How king Arthur axed of Merlyn the auentures of vj. the last kings that weren
to regne in England and how the land should end Ca.lxxv.
SIr quoth Merlyn In the year of incarnacion of Ihesu criste M.CC.xv. shall come a
lamb out of wynchestre y^ shall have a white tongue and true lips / and he
shall have written in his heart holiness This lamb shall make many gods
houses / and he shall have pees the most pert of all his life / And he shall
make one of the fairest places of the world that in his time shall not fully be
made an end And in the end of his life a wolf of a strange land shall do him
much harm and sorwe through werre but at the end the lamb shall be mastir
through help of a read fox that shall come out of the northwest and him shall
overcome and the wolf shall die in water / and after that time the lamb shall
live no while / that he ne shall die His sede than shall be in a strange land /
and the land shall be without a governor a litell while

ANd after his time shall come a dragon melled with mercy and (...) with
wodenesse that shall have a ^erd as a goot (...) shall give in england shade we
and shall keep the land from cold and hete and his one scot shall be set in
wyke and that other in london and he shall enbrace in babitacions and he shall
open his mouth toward walis and the trembling of the hidour of his mouth his
eres shall strech toward many habitacions and contries and his breath shall be
full sweet in strange land And in hiz time shall the rivers run with blood
and with brain and he shall make in places of his land walls that sh^lle done
much harm un to his seed after his time Then shall there come a people out of
the northwest during his regne that shall be lad through out a wikked hare that
the dragon shall done croune king that afterwad shall ^lee over the sea without
coming again for dread of the dragon

And in that time the son shall be as reed as blood as me^ shull see through
all the world that shall betoken great pestilence and death of folk through dent
of sword and that people shall ben fadreles till the time that the dragon shall
die through an hare that shall meue ayens him werre un to the end of his life
that shall not fully been ended in his time This dragon shall be hold in his
time the best body of the world and he shall die besides the marches of a
strange land and the land shall duelle fadreles without a good governor and
me shall were for his death from the I Will of shepey un to the haven of Marall
Wherefore Allas shall be the commune song of fadrelees folk that shull ouerlynen
in his land destroyed.

ANd after this dragon shall come a goot out of kar that shall have horns and
a berde of silver and there shall come out of his nostrell adomp that shall
betoken hunger and for we and great death of the people and mochel of his land
in the beginning of his regne shall be wasted

This goot shall go over to feaunce and shall opene the flour of his life and
of death In his time there shall arise an egle in Corn waille that shall have
feathers of gold that of pride shall be with out pere of the land and he shall
despise lords of blood and after he shall flee shamfully by a bear at
Gauersech and after shull be made brigges of men upon the costs of the sea and
stones shull fall fro Castelles and many other tounes shull be made plain

In his time shall seem that the bear shall brenne and a bataille shall be done
upon the arms of the sea in a feld ordained as a sheld And at that bataille
shall die many white heedes Wherefore his bataill shall be called the white
bataille

And the forsaid bear shall done this goot mochel harm and if shall come out
of the southwest and of his blood / than shall the goot lose much of his land
till at the time that shendshipp shall him o^ come / and than shall he cloth
him in a lion skin / and than shall he win that he had lost and more there
to / For a people shall come out of the northwest that shall make the goot sore
adrad and he shall venge him of his enemies through counceill of two owls that
first shall be in peril for to been un done / but the old oule shall wend a
certain time / and after he shall come ayene in to this land

These two owls shullen do great harm to many on and so they shall counceill
the goot that he shall arere werre ayens the forsaid bear, and at the last the
goot and the owls shall come at Burton up Trent and shull wend over and for
dread the bear shall flee / and aswan with him fro his company to Burton
toward the north and there they shull been with an hard shour and than the swan
shall be slain with forwe and the bear taken and he heded alther next his nest
that shall stand upon a broken brngge on whom the sonn^ shall cast her bemes /
and many shall him seek for virtue that fro him shall come In the same shall die
for sorwe and care / a people of his land so that many lands shull been on him
the more bolder afterward, and tho two owls shulle do much harm to the
forsaid flour of lyse and her shull led in distress so that she shall pass
o^ in to france for to make pees bitwene the goot and the flour delise and
there she shall duelle till a time that her seed shall come and seche her and
they shullen be stille till a time that they shull hem cloth with grace / and
they shull seche the owls and shull put hem to despitou^ death And after shall
this goot been brought to disese and great augnyssh and in sorwe he shall leave
all his life.

AFter this Goot shall come out of wyndesore a bore that shall have an head of
white a lions heart and a pitous ^okyng / his visage shall be rest to sike men
his word shall been stanchyng of therst / to hem that been a therst his word
shall be gospel / his beryng shall be meke as a lombe /

In the first year of his regne he shall have great pain to Justify hem that
been untrue / And in his time shall his land be multiplied with aliens.

And this bore through fersenesse of heart that he shall have / shall make
wolfes become lambs / and he shall be called through out the world boor of
holiness fersenesse of nobilesse and of meekness and he shall done mesurably
all that he shall have to done un to burgh of Ihrlm^ and he shall whett his
teth upon the yates of Paris and upon iiij. lands Spaigne shall tremble for
dread Gastoyne shall sweet In france he shall put his wynge his great taille
shall rest in England softely Almayne shall quake for dread of him This boor
shall give mantels to ij. tounes of England and shall make the River run with
blood and with brain and he shall make many medewes reed and he shall get as
much as his Auncestres diden and er that he be deed he shall bear iij. cron^es
and he shall put a land in to great subiectione and after it shall be releued
but not in his time This boor after he is deed for his doughtynesse shall be
entered at Coloigne and his land shall be than fullfylled of all good

AFter this Boor shall come a lamb that shall have feet of leed an head of
bras an heart of a loppe a swynes skyn and an hard and in his time his land
shall been in pees the first year of his regne he shall do make a cite that all
the world shall speak there of This lamb shall leave in his time a great part of
his land through an hidons wolf but he shall recover it and give a lordshipp
to an Egle of ^ and this Egle shall well govern it till the time that pride
shall him ouergone Allas the sorwe For he shall deye of his brothers suerd and
after shall the land fall to the forsaid lamb that shall govern the land in
pees all his lyfes time and after he shall die and the land be full filled of
all manner good

AFter this lamb shall come a molde warpe cursed of gods mouth a caytyfe a
coward an hare he shall have an Elderly skyne as a got and vengeance shall
fall upon him for sin In the first year of his regne he shall have of all
good great pleute in his land and toward him also and in his land he shall
have great preisyng till the time that he shall suffer his people live in to
much pride without chastisyuge wherefore god wull be wroth Than shall arise up a
dragon of the north that shall been full fers and shall me^^ werre ayens the
forsaid Molde warpe and shall give him bataill upon a stone.

This dragon shall gadre ayene in to his company a wolf that shall out come
of west to begin werre ayens the forsaid Molde werpe in his side and so shull
the dragon and he bind her tailles to gedre Than shall come a lion out of
Irland that shall fall in company with hem / and than shall tremble the land
that than shall be called England / as an aspen leef / And in that time shall
castelles be felled a down upon thamyse and it shall seem that seuerne shall
be dry for the bodies that shull fall deed therein The iiij chief flodes in
England shull run in blood / and great dred shull be and angnyssh that shull
arisen After the molde warpee shall flee and the dragon The lion and the wolf
hem shull drive a way / and the land shall be without hem / And the Moldewarpe
shall have no manner power sauf only a ship where to he may wend / And after
that he shall gone to land when the sea is withdraw / And after that he shall
give the thridde part of his land / for to have the fourth part in pees and
rest / and after he shall leave in sorwe all his lyfes time / And in his time
the hot bathes shullen becomen cold / and after that shall the Molde warpe
die auentoursly and suddenly / Allas the sorwe / for he shall be draynt in a
flode of the sea / His seed shall become fadrelees in strange land for evermore
/ And than shall the land be departed in iij. parties / that is to sey to the
wolf / to the dragon / and to the lion / and so shall it be for evermore / and
than shall this land be called the land of conqueste And so shull the rightful
heirs of England end

How Arthur overcome Guyllomere that was king of Irland and how the scotts
becomen his men Capitulo septuagesimosexto
WHen Guillomer that was king of Irland had tydynge that king Arthur was entered
at Glastenbury / he ordained a great power of Irisshmen and come to the sea
with his Irissh people and so come in to Scotland over the sea / and arrived
fast^ by there that king Arthur was with his host and anon as he wyste there of
he went toward him / and yafe him bataille / and overcome him anon right
and Guillomer fled with his men ayene in to Irland And when this discomfiture
was done / Arthur turned him ayene there that he was in to the place there that
he had left the Scotts and would have hem all slain / But the bisshoppes
Abbotes and other folk of the contre and ladies open head come before king
Arthur and cried him mercy and said Sir gentill king and mighty have mercy and
pite of us / And as your self ben of the right law to hold and maynten
christian dome fall great dishonor it should be to quelle hem that believe in
almighty god as ye done and for gods love have mercy and pite of us and
suffer us for to leave for we have had much sorwe and pyne for the saxon^s have
many time through our land passed but that is (...) y now to you For often
times they have done us sorwe and disese For our castelles they have taken and
our bestes slain and eten and much harm they have us done and if ye would
now us quelle it were none honor to a king to quelle hem that (...) him mercy
For y now ye have y done and us overcome and for the love of god suffer us for
to live and haueth mercy of christian people that beleuen in crist as ye done When
king Arthur herd this sorwe he had pite of hem and yaf hem life and lymme and
they fill down to his fete and bicome his liegmen and he took of hem homages
And after that king Arthur turned again with his host and come again to york and
there abode during that viage And tho yaf he all loegers to Aloth that had
spoused his suster and other yiftes great plente and tho was Gawen his cousin
but of young age and to all his other men that him had served in his werre he
yaf rich yiftes and he thanked hem much of her good seruise

How king Arthur spoused Gu^nore that was Gu^nores cousin Earl of Cornwaille
and after he conquerde of Giullomer all Irla^d Capitulo lxxvij.
WHen Arthur had brought his land in pees and rest and in good state and rest
was in every contre tho no^me he and wedded a wife that was called Gu^nor and
made her queen a fair lady and a gentill that Cador the Earl of Cornwaill had
long time norisshed in his chamber that was his own cousin ^ut never they had
child to gedre and nothelees king Arthur loved her wonder well and derly And
anon as winter was passed he let assemble a great host and all his barons and
said that he would wend in to Irland for to conquer the land and he tarried
not long that he ne passed over in to Irlande And Guillomer the king let
assemble a great host and yaf bataill to king Arthur. But Guillomer was
discomfited and yield him to the king Arthur and bicome his man and to him did
feaulte and homage and of him held all that land fro that time forward

And after passed king Arthur furthermore and conquered Gutla^de and Island and
took homages of folk and of the land and th^r duelled xij. year in pees and
reigned with Joy and myrthe and werred no manner man ne no man upon him And he
bicome so courtois and large and so honorable that the Emperors court of Rome
ne none through out all the world was not accounted to king Arthure that any
man wist ne none so well preised

And therefore the best knights of all manner lands come to him for to duelle
and hem resseyned with good will and reverence And all the knights weren so
good that no man knew the werst And therefore king Arthur made a round table
that when they should sitten to the mete all should be aliche hie and euenly
served at the table that none might make a vau^t that none (...) hier than
other And king Arthur had at that table Britons Frensh men Normans Flemynges
Burgouners Mausers ^oherms and of all the lands a this half monte of Gorye
and of his land of britayne and of the great Corn waille of walys and of
Irland and of Scotland and shortly to tell of all the lands that wold^
wurshipp and chinalrie ^eche comen to king Arthures court

How king Arthur come in to france and conquered that land of Froll that was
a Romayne and him queld Ca.lxxv.ij
Sith it befell that king Arthur through conceill of his barons and lords would
gone to conquer all france that tho was cleped Galle through romans that tho
held that la^d in her poer and in her lordshipp and the romans had take that
land to a noble knight and worthy of body that was called Frolle and when he
wist that Arthur come he ordained an host and a great poer and fought with the
king And he and his folk were discomfited and then nes they fled un to Paris
and entered the town and closed the yates and there hem held Arthur wist that
Froll was gone to (...) he pursued after and come thidder and him beseged but
the Cite was so strong and well araied and tho that were withyn defended hem
well and ma^ly King Arthur duelled there more than a month and there was so
much people in the Cite and dispended all her vitailles that were withyn and so
great hunger bicome among hem that they deiden wonder thikke withyn the Cite
for hunger and comen to Frolle and prayed him to been accorded with king Arthur
for to have pees and they would yield hem to him and the town also Froll saw
that no longer he ne might hold the town ayens her will and trust greatly upon
his own strength and sent to king Arthur that he should come fight with him
body for body / and so should they deperte france bitwene hem two / King Arthur
anon granted it and would not that none of his people undertook the bataille
for him And upon the morwe both comen well armed without Paris there that they
should fight and anon^ they smyten to gedres so fersely and so well they
foughten in both sides that no man could deem the better of he^ And so it
befell that Frolle yaf Arthur such a stroke that he kneled to the ground would
he nolde he / and as Frolle withdrowe his suerd he wounded king Arthur in the
forhede that the blood fell a down by his yien and his face Arthur anon stert
up hertely when he felt him hurt as a man that seemed almost wode / and he took
Tabourne his good suerd and drowe it upon high / and yafe Frolle such a stroke
that there with he clafe his heed down to the sholdres so that his helm might
not be his warrant / and so he fille a down deed in the place / and tho of the
Cite made great sorwe for Frolle / anon euerichon yield hem to king Arthur /
and the town also / and becomen his men and did to him homage and feaulte /
and he vnderfenge hem and took of hem good hostages / And king Arthur after
that went forth with his host and conquered Augien and Angiers Gascoyne Pehito
Nauerne Burgoyne Berry Lotherne Turyn and Peithers / and all the other land of
france he conqnered hollych And when he had all conquered and taken by homages
and feaultes he turned ayene to Paris and there he duelled long time / and
ordained pees long time over all the country and through out all france And
when pees was made o^ all through his noble knyghthood that he had and also for
his own worthynesse / And no man were he never so great a lord durst not meue
werre ayens him nothir to arise for to make the la^d of france in quiet and
pees / he woned there ix. year / and did there many great wondres and reproved
many proud men and lither tirauntz and hem chastised after her deseruise

How king Arthur auaunced all his men that had trauayled in his service Ca.lxxix
ANd afterward it befell thus at Estren there that he held a fest at Paris /
richly he began auaunce his knights for her service that had him helped in his
conquest

He yafe to his stiward that was called Kay Augien and Angiers / And to Bedeler
his Boteler he yafe Normandy that tho was called Neustrie / And to Holdyne his
Chamburlayne he yaf Flaundres and Mance And to Dorell his cousin he yaf ^oloigne
And to Richard his nepheu he yaf Pountyf And to all other he yaf large lands
and ^ees after they were of estate And when Arthur had thus his knights feffed
at auerill next after sneyng he come ayene in to Britayne his own land And
after at whytsontyde next sewyng by co^ceill of his barons he would be crouned
king of Glomergon and held a solemn fest and let sompne kings Earls and
barons that they should come thidder euerichone There was Scater king of
Scotland Cadwere king of southwales Guillomer king of northwales Maded king of
Irland Malgamus king of Gutland Achilles king of Iseland Aloth king of Denmark
Gonewas king of norewey and Hell his cousin king of dorkeny Cador king of litell
britaigne Morwyth earl of Cornewaille Mauran earl of gloucestre guerdon earl of
wynchestre Boel earl of hertford Vrtegy earl of Oxu^ford Cursall earl of Bathe
Jonas earl of Chestre Enerall earl of dorsestre Kymare earl of salisburi waloth
earl of Caunterburi Iugerne earl of chichestre Arall earl of leicestre and the
earl of warwyke and many other rich lords Britons also there came mo that is to
say dippo^donaud gennes and many other that be not here nempned were^ at that
fest and many a fair fest king Arthur had hold biforne but never none such ne
so solemn and that lastyd xv. days with mochel honor and mirthe

Of the letter that was sent from the cite of Rome for pride to king Arthur
Ca.lxxx.
THe in day as king Arthur sat at his mete among his kings and among hem
that seten at the feste byforne hem come in xij eldren men of age richely
araied and courtoisely salued the king and said they come from Rome sent as
messagiers fro the Emperor and took to him a lr^e that thus much was to
understand Greatly us mervaileth Arthure that thou art ones so hardy with eien
in thy head to make open werre and contake ayens us of Rome that owen all the
world to deem for thou have neu yet biforne this time proved ne assaied the
strength of the Romans and therefore thou it shall in a litell time For Julius
Caesar conquered all the land of Britaigne and took there of truag^ and our folk
have it long y had and now through thy pride thou wythholdest it Wherefore we
commannde the that thou it yield ayene / and yet have thou more folly done /
that thou have slain Frolle that was our baron of frannce all with wrong /
and the^for all the co^munes of Rome warnen and command the upon life and
lymme / that thou in have be at Rome amends to make of thy misdeeds that thou
have done / And if it so be that thou come nouzt / we shull pass the hylle of
Joy with strength / and we shull the seek where ever thou may be found and
thou shall not have a foot of land of thyn own that we ne shall destroy / and
afterward with thy body we shull done on^ will / when this lr^e was rad / and
all men it herd / they were annoied all that were at that solempnite / and the
britons would have slain the messagiers / but the king would not suffer hem /
and said that the messagiers should have none harm / and mow by reason none
deserve / but commanded hem to be wurshipp fully served / And after mete he
took counceill of kings ^rles and barons / what ansuere he might give ayene to
the messagiers and they counceilled him at onys that he should assemble a great
poe^ of all the lands of which he had lordshipp. and manly avenge him upon the
Emperor of the despite that he had sent him such a lr^e / and they sworen by
god and by his names that they should him pursue and brenne as much as they
might / and said that they nold never faille king Arthur / and rather to be
deed / And they let write a lr^e to send to the Emperor by the same
messagiers in this manner

Of the bold ansuere that king Arthur sent to the Emperor of Rome and to the
romans Ca.lxxxj.
UNderstondeth among you of Rome that I am king Arthur of Britaigne and
freely it hold and shall hold and at Rome hastily I will be / not to give you
trnage / but for to axen truage / For Costantine that was Eleynes sone y^ was
Emperor of Rome and of all the honor that there to belongs And Maximian king
conquered all france and Almayne / and mont Joy passed and conquered all
lumbardie / and these ij. were mine auncestres and that they held and had / I
shall have through gods will

Of the reverence that Arthur did to the Emperors messagiers of Rome Ca.lxxxij.
WHen this letter was made and enseled king Arthur to the messagiers yafe great
yiftes / and after that the messagiers took her leave and went thens and come to
the court of Rome ayene and told the Emperor how worthily they were
vnderfongen and which a rialle company he had him to serve / and how he was
mor rially served than the Emperor or any king ^ uyng in the world And when
the Emperor had said the lete^ and herd what was there in and saw that Arthur
would not be ruled after him he let assemble and ordeyne an huge host for to
destroy king Arthur if that he might. And king Arthur (...) touching his poer
and party ordained his poer and knights of the round table

Of the kings and lords that comen to help king Arthur ayens the Emperor
Ca.lxxxiij.
THe king of Scotland and of Irland and of gutland of denmark and of Almaigne
every of hem had x.M. men The due of nor^a^die gastoyne Fla^dres Pehito and of
Boloigne had iiij.M. Geryn of Chartres had x.M. Hoel of britaigne had xii.M.
and him self of his own land xij.M. and of Arbalastiers and of archiers and
of other folk in foot that no man could hem no^bre And when all were ready for
to wend king arthur his la^d and Gu^nore his wife took to keep to one of his
nepheus that was a wys knight and an hardy that was called Mordred but he was
not all true as ye shull here afterward king Arthur took all his reaulme to
this Mordred sauf only the croune And after that king Arthur no^me his host
and went to southampton there that the ships were bronght and the folk
assembled and they deden hem to the sea and had good wynd and wether at will
and also sone as they might they arrmed at Harflete And as soon as they might
they went out of her ships and spradden all the contre

How king Arthur fought with a Geaunte in spaigne that was called Dinabus that
queld Eleyne that was king hoels cousin of litell britaigne Ca.lxxxiiij.
BYng Arthur had not duelled in the co^tre but a litell while that men ne told
him that there was comen a great geant in to spain and had rauysshed fair
Eleyn^ that was cousin to ho^l of britaigne and had brought her upon an hill
that is called the mount of seint Bernard and there was no man in that co^tre
so bold ne so hardy y^ durst with him fight ner come nere the place there that
geant duelled and he was called dinabus that much sorwe did in the contre When
king Arthur herd this tydynge he called key and Bedewere and commanded hem to
go privily and espy where the geant might be found and they come^ to the
Rinage there that men should gone to the mount that was all enclosed about
with water and yet is and ever shall he And they saw abrennyng fire upon the
hille / and there was also an other hille nigh that / there was there upon an other
fire brennyng Key and Bedewere comen to the next hill and founden a widewe
openhede sittyng besides a tomb sore weeping and great sorwe made / and often
she said Eleyne Eleyne And Key and Bedewere axed what her was and wherefore she
made so much sorwe / and who lay in that tomb O quoth she what sorwe and
mysauenture fair lords seek ye here / for if the Geant may you here find /
ye worth deed anon / Been stille good wife quoth they there of dismay ye not / but
tell us the soth why thou make so much sorwe and weeping Sires quoth she / for
a damisell that I norisshed with my breast that was called Eleyne that was nece
to Hoel king of Britaigne / and here lies the body in this tomb that to me
was betaken to norissh So there come a deuell a Geant and rauisshed her and me
also and lad us both away / and he would have forlayne that maid that was so
young and tender of age / but she might it not suffer / so great and so huge as
the Geant was / And if he now come as he is woned to do certis he will you
quelle both to / And therefore fast wend ye hens And wherefore said they go ye
not hens Certes Sir quoth she when that Eleyne was deed the Geant made me to
abide to done and hannte is will and me must needs it suffer And god it wot I
do it not with my good will for me lever were to be deed / than with him to
dele / So much pain I have when he me forlieth When Key and Bedewere had
herd all that this woman had told they turned ayene and come to king Arthur
and told him all that they had seyne and herd / Arthur anon took hem both
with him and went preuelich by night that none of his host it wist and come on
the morwe erly to the geant and faught with him strongly and at the last him
slow And Arthur bad Bedewere smite of his heed / and bring it to the host to
show hem for a wonder / for it was so great and so huge / When they comen
ayene to the host / they tolden wherefore they had been out and showed to hem
the heed / and every man was glad and Ioifull of the worthy deed that king
Arthur had done that was her lord

And Hoel was full sorwefull for his nece that was so lost / and after when he
had space he let make a fair^ chapel of our lady over Eleyns tomb

How king Arthur yafe bataille to the Emperor in the which bataille the
Emperor was slain Capitulo. lxxxv.
ARthur and his people had tydyng that the Emperor had assembled a great poer
az well of sarasyns as of paynymz and christian me^ where of the nombre was
lxxx.M. horse me^ and footmen Arthur and his people ordained fast forth in her
way toward the Emperor and passed Normandy and france un to Burgoyne and
would even have gone to the host For men told him that the Emperors host would
come to lucie The emperor and his host in the begyn^yng of August remeued fro
rome and came forth right the way toward the host Tho comen king Arthures espies
and said if that Arthur would he should find there fast by the Emperor But
they said that the Emperor had so great poer with him of kings of the land
and of paynyms yfere and also christian people that it nere but great folly to king
Arthur to meten with him for the espies told that the Emperor had v. men or
vj. ayens one of his King arthur was bold and hardy and for no thing him
dismayed and said go we boldly in gods name ayens the Romans that with hem
led sarasins and paynyms that no manner trust they have to god but only upon
her strength. Go we now and sech hem Sharply in the name of Almighty god and
slay we the paynyms and christian men that been ennmies with hem for to destroy
christian men and god shall us help for we have the right and therefore have we
trust in god and do we so that the enemies that be to cristendome and to god
mow be deed and destroyed and that men mow record the worthynesse of knight
hode When king Arthur had thus said they cried all with a high vois.

God fadre almighty wurshipped be thy name withouten end amen and grant us
grace well to done and to destroy our enemies that been ayens cristendome In
the name of the fadre of the sone and of the holy ghost amen and god give him
never grace ne worshipp in the world ne mercy of him to have that this day
shall feyuten well for to smite and egrely and so they riden softely and
ordained his wings well and wisely

The Emperor herd tell that king Arthur and his folk were ready araied for to
fight with him and thidder they come And he ordained his wings in the best
manner that he myt and more trust upon his strength than in god almighty and
that was seyn afterward For when tho ij. hosts met the Emperor lost such
iiij. of his folk as did Arthur and so many were slain what in that one side
and in that other that it was great pite to wit and to seen In this bataill
were slain through king Arthur v. kings of the paynyms and of other wonder
much people / And king Arthures men foughten so well that the roymains and
paynyms had no more strength to withstonde / than xx. sheep ayens v. wolfee /
And so it befell that in this bataille in shower that was wondre hard and long
during in that one side and in that other the Emperor among hem there was
slain / but no man wist for soth who him slow

How king Arthut let entier his knights that he had lost in y^ betaille and
how he sent the Emperors body to rome that there was slain in bataille
Ca.lxxxvj
WHen the roman wist that the Emperor was deed they for soke the field and
the paynyms also / And king Arthure after hem chaced till it was nyt and so
many of hem queld that it was wonder to tell And tho turned king Arthur again
tho it was nyt / and thanked god of his victory / And in the morwe he let look
and see all the field for his knights that he had there lost that is to say
Borell Earl of Maunt Bedewere and Key and Ligiers Earl of Boloigne V^geti Earl
of Baac Aloth earl of wynchestre Cursale earl of chestre and after holdein earl
of Flaundres thees were the great lords that king Arthur lost in that bataille
/ among other worthy knights / And some he let entier in Abbeis by the contre
sum he let be borne in to her own contre / And the Emperors body he let
take and put upon a beer and sent it to rome And sent to say the romans that
for britaigne and france which that he held / other truage would he non^ pay
/ And if they ax^d him any other truages / right such truage he would hem pay
The king let bear Key to kenen his own Castle and there he was entered / and
Ligier was borne to Boloigne there he was lord / And Holden was borne to
flaundres / and there he was entered And all the other he let entier with
mochell honor in Abbeis and in houses of religion in the contre there that they
were deed And Arthur him self soiourned that same year in Burgoyne with his
host / and thought the same year folewyng to pass the mount of Joy / and
have gone to rome all for to take the Cite / and have put the romans in
subjection but the wykked tiraunt Mordred him let as after ye shall here

How mordred the traitor to whom king Arthur took his land to keep and his
castelles and held it ayens him Ca.lxxxvij
WHen king Arthur had taken to mordred his Reame to keep and was gone ayens the
Emperor of Rome and was passed the sea / Mordred anon took homages and
feautes of all hem that were in this land / and would have had the land to
his own use / and took castelles about and let hem araie / And aft this
falsenesse he did an other great wrong / for ayens the law of criste^te / he
took his own (...) wife as a traitor should and ^^^yned him a greece host ayens
Arthurs coming to hold ^ him with strength for evermore / And to she king
(...) if he might and send by the sea and land and let assemble paynyms and
christian people / and he sent to sax^nes and to danois for to help him / And
also Mordred sent to Chel^rik to ^one men to come to him out of Saxoyne / that
was a worthy duke / and byhet him if that he brought with him much people he
would grant him in heritage for evermore all the laud from beyond humbe^ un
to scotland / And all the land that Engist had of vortigers yift / when that
he spoused his daughter And Cheldrik come with great strength and poer of people
/ and Mordred had assembled also in his half that they had xl.M. of strong
knights / when that they had need

How Arthur enchased mordred the traitor and how he was slay ne and also king
Arthur wounded to death Ca.lxxxviij
WHen this tydynge come to king Arthur there that he was in Burgoyne he was full
sore a^noied and took all frannce to ho^l for to keep with haluendel of his
men and prayed him that he would it keep till he come ayene / for him self
woldwe^d in to Britaigne / and an^nge him upon mordred that was his tral tonr
and forth went his way / and come to whytsand and made his men gone in to
ship and would have arrived at sandewych / and brought with him a great host
of france also with his own land^ But er that he might come to land with his
people that were comen out of his ships Mordred was comen with all his power
/ and yafe a strong bataille / so that king Arthur lost many a man (...) that
he might comen to land For there was Gawen his nep^^u slain and Augnissell
that held scotland and many other where of king Arthur was full sorry / But
after that they were come^ to la^d mordred might not ayens hem endure / but
anon was disco^fited and fled this the same nyt with his men / and upon the
morn to london but tho of the cite would not suffer him to come in / and from
thens he fled to wynchestre and there be held him with his people that with him
(...) King Arthur let take the body of Gawen his cousin and the body of
Augnissell and let hem (...) in to Scotland in to her own center and there they
were entered And after anon king Arthur no^me his wey to destroy Mordred and
fled fro thens in to Cornewaille The queen Gu^nore that was king Arthuris wif
that tho (...) at york and herd that Mordred was fled the^z that he (...) must
not endure ayens king Arthnr she was sore adrad and (...) great doubt and wist
not what was best all for to done For the wist well that her lord king Arthur
would never of her have mercy For the great shame that she to him had done and
no^me her wey privily with iiij. men with out mo and come to karli one and
there she duelled all her life that neu was sey among folk her life during
Arthur wist that Mordred was fled in to Cornewaille and let send after his
men in to Scotland and northumberland un to humber and let assemble folk
withonte nombre and comen fro thens in to Corn waille to seche and pursewe
after mordred And Mordred had assembled to him all the folk of Cornewaille and
had people without nombre and wist that Arthur was coming and had lever to die
and take his chance than longer fle And abode and yaf an hard bataill to king
Arthur and to his people so that so much people was slain what of that on half
and in that other that no man wist who had the better pertie But so it be fell
at the last that Mordred was slain and all his folk and the good chivalry
that king Arthur had gadred and norisshed of diverse lands And also the noble
knights of the round table that so much was preised through out all the world
were there slain And Arthur him self was wounded to the death but he let him he
borne in a litter to a vyoun to be heled of his wonndes and yet the britons
supposen that he live in an other land and that he shall come yet and conquer
all Britaigne but certes this is the proficie of Merlyn he said that his death
shall be doubtous and said soth for men there of yet have doubt and shulle for
evermore as me ^aith For men wit not whether that he lives or is deed

Arthur was borne to Auyon^ the xxij. year of his regne after the Incarnacionn
of our lord Ihu^ crist vC. and xlvj. year

How king Arthur delivered the reaulme to Costantyn the sone of Cador his
Nepheu Ca.lxxxix.
WHen king Arthur wist that he myt no le^ger regne he let come biforne him
Costantine that was Cadors sone earl Cornewaille his cousin and to him bitoke
all his reaume and to him said and bad him there of to ben^ king till that he
come ayen^ for as much as he had none heir of his body begoten and ^ me was it
that so noble a king and so doubty had no ^ body begoteu / but all thing that
god wull have done ^ whose name be blisshed withouten end Amen

How king Costantine was werred of Morde^^^^ ^ Capitulo lxxxx
THis Costantine was a noble knight and a worthy of body and tho ij. sons that
mordred had begoten had great ^^uie to Costantine that tho was crouned king /
and so that they begone to meue werre ayens him and assembled a grest host of
he^ that were before with mordrede / and had been driven away / and that diden
much sorwe through all that land / that one brother ordained him to london for
to take the Cite and that other to wynchestre / but Costantine come to london
and s^ow him that was there / and after he went to wynchestre and slow him that
there was also / so that both his ennemies were deed / And when Costantine had
reigned worthily iiij. year he died and lies at london

Of the kings Adelbright and of Edell Ca.lxxxxj
AFter king Costatines death there were ij. kings in Britaigne that one was
called Adelbright / that was a dan^y^ and held the contre of Northfolke and
southfolke / that other hight Edell and was a briton / and held Nichol
Lyndesey and all the land un to humbet These ij. kings fast werred to gedres
but after they we^en accorded and loved to gedre / as they had be borne of o
body The king Edell had a sustre that was called Orewenne / and he yafe her
through great frendeshipp to king Adelbright to wife / and he begat on her a
daughter that was called Argentill / And in the iij. year after come upon him a
strong sikenesse that needs he must die / And he sent to king Edelf his
brother in law that he should (...) me and speak with him and be come to him
with good will Tho prayed he the king and co^^^red also in the name of god /
that aft when he were deed he should take Argentill his daughter and the land
and that he kept her well and norisshe her in his chamber And when she were of
age she should be married to the strongest and wurthiest man that he might find
/ and than he should yield up her land arene Edell it granted it and by oath
confermed his prayer.

And when Adelbright was deed and entered Edell took the damisell Argentill and
norisshed her in his chamber / and she become the fairest creature that might
live or any man find

^ Edell married the damisell to a knave of hiz kyche^ ^
^ king Edelf that was uncle to the damisell Arge^till (...) how that he myt
falsely have the la^d from his nece for evermore and falsely ayens his oath
thought to disceyne the damisell and to marie her to a knave of his kychen that
was called Curan and he bicome the worthiest and strengist man of body that any
man wist in any land that tho leued and to him he thought her shendfully have
married for to have had her land afterward but he was clean disceyued For this
Curan that was hauelockes sone that was king of kyrkelane in denmark and this
Curan conquered his w^fes land and show king Edelf that was his wifes uncle
and had all her land as in an other place it tells more openly and he ne
reigned but iij. year For saxons and danoys him queld and that was great harm
to all britaigne and britons bare him to St^nhe^g and there they him entered
with mochel honor

Of king Conan Ca.lxxxxiij.
AFter this Curan reigned Conan that was his co^in that was a wonder proud
knight and reigned and could have no manner love but ever he was medelyng with
his people and took his uncle with werre and queld his ij. children. The saxones
werred ayens him often times bnt he hem overcome at the last and so he was (...)
pees all his life time and he reigned xiij. year and after he died and lies at
london

Of king Cortif and of Gurmonde that comen through the paynyms in to Britaigne
Ca.lxxxxiiij.
AFter this Conan reigned his cousin Cortif that was bihated of all his people and
no thyug beloved and this cortif lost all britaigne through werre and in his
time fell that great myschef in britaigne that crystendome was destroyed and
all the britons were driven out and the land y lost without auy recover but
afterward left the land to saxons as ye afterward shall here For in that time
there was a paynyme that was called Gurmo^d that was the kings sone Daufrikes
of the paynyms folk that had the name after his fadre and was king sauf be
bequath and yaf it to his brother and said yt he nolde neu be king but if he
myt get and conquer a reaume in a strange contre For he was bold and eke
strong of body and of him profecied Merlyn and said that he should he a wolf
of the sea and he let assemble paynyms without nombre and let apparaill
ships and went by many lands and took homages and feautes of many / and so
he went by the sea and conquered many diverse lands / so that he come in to
Irland (...) conquered that land that often times werred upon britons and britons
upon hem / and often wo^nen and often losten / and give hostages to britons and
so they sent to Gurmonde there that he was in Irland that he should come in to
Britaigne and help hem ayens the britons / to help hem deliver that land of
hem / and they would him hold gladly for her lord / for he was a paynyme and
they were paynyms and the Britons were christian / well ought he them for to
help so as they weren of one law When Gurmond herd this prayer he hasted him
as much as he might and arrived in scotland and come in to Northumberland there
that the saxons were duellyng / and they confermed y^ couenauntz bitwene hem
that were made by oaths and by hostag^s for to bear him true fay and hold him
for lord and pay to him truage by year Tho began the saxons and the Affricans
to destroy rob and brenne tounes and destroy all thing in as much as they
might / and spared nethir man woman ne child lered ne lewd / that all they
queld and cast a down tounes Castelles and churches / and so put they all the
land in great destruction / and as soon as they might fleen they fled thens
as well pore as rich / Bisshoppes Abbotes Chanons / and all other great and
small sum in to litell Britaigne and sum in to Corn waille / All tho that
ships might have /

How king Gurmond drofe the king Cortife to Chichestre and queld the britons
and through quentise get the town Capitulo lxxxxv
COrtife the king fley thens in to Chichestre that tho was a good Cite and a
strong and there held him xx. days And this Gurmond it beseged / but the Cite
was so strong that he might not get that Cite by no manner engyn that he myt
done / Tho bythought they upon a great queyntise for to brenne the town / they
made engynes with glewe of nets and token pieces of tunder and of fire and
bound it to the sparwes fete and afterward let hem flee / and they anon right
fley and logged hem in the town there that her nestes were / and in stakkes and
in euissyng of houses / and the fire began to tend and brend all y^ town /
and when the britons saw that in ^^y side they hied he^ out and faut but anon^
they were slain and discomfited and whiles the bataille dured the king privily
hid him and stale away in to wales and me^ wist never where he bicome and so
was the town of Chichestre taken and destroued And after went Gurmond and
destroyed Citees and tounes that never were afterward made again as it is seyn
yet in many places

How this land was cleped England for the name of engist and how many kings
were made after in the land Capitulo lxxxxvj
WHen Gurmond had destroyed all the land through out he yafe the land to they
saxons anon the took it with good will For the Saxones long time had desired
it for as much as they were of Engistes kynrede that first had all the la^d of
britaigne and tho let hem be called Englisshmen for enchesou of Engistes name
And the land they let call it England in her langage and the folk ben called
Englisshmen for as much as in his time it was called Engistes land When he had
co^querd it of Vortiger that had spoused his daughter but from the time that
brute come first in to England this land was called britaigne and the folk
britons But since the time that this Gurmond eftsoon conquered it and yaf it un
to the saxons and they anon right changed the name as before is said And when
this was done Gurmond passed over in to France and there conquered many lands
and destroyed all christian people there that he come and the Saxones duelled in
this land and bygonne fast it to inhabit at her own will And they would have
made new kings and lords bnt they might never ^ssenten to have only o king
for to be to hem entendaunt and therefore they made many kings in diverse
Shires as it was in Engistes time The first kingdom was kent and that other
southsexe and the thridde westsexe and the iiij. Estsexe and the v.
northumberla^d and the vj. estangle that is to sey northfolk and southfolk and
the vij. Merchenorth and that is the erledom^ of Nichol huntyngdone Herford
Glouchestre wynchestre warrewyke and Derby and so departed the englissh all
england in vij. parties And after that it befell that tho kings werred often
time to gedre and ever he that was strengest byno^me him that was feblest and
so it was long time that they and no king crouned among hem ne no Christian
man was tho among hem ne cristendome nothir But were paynyms till that Seint
Gregory was pope of Rome that had seyn children of the nation of England in
the Cite of Rome / that were wonder fair creatures and had great will and
desire hem to behold / and axed of the marchantz whennes they were and of what
nation / and men told him that they were of England / and Englissh they were
called / but they and all the people of England were paynyms / and believed not
upon god Allas quod seint Gregory well mow they be called englissh for they
have the visages of Angeles and therefore well onght they to be christian / And for
this encheson seint Gregory sent Seint Austyn in to England / and xl. good men
with him that were of good life and holy men to preche and teache and to convert
the Engliss people / and hem turn to god / and that was in the vj. year that
seint Gregory had been pope / that is to say after the Incarnacion of our lord
Ihesu crist v.C.lxxxvij / year as the cronicles tells

How seint Austyn baptized and converted king Adelbright and the bisshoppes
that he made his felawes Ca.lxxxvij
WHen seint Austyn come first in to England he arrived in the I Will of Tenet /
and so passed forth and come un to Caunterbury and there soiourned And king
Adelbright of kent that was of the lineage of Engist fair vnderfeng seint Austyn
and his felawes with mochel honor / and hem fond all that hem neded / and
ferthermore he yafe hem a fair place / that now is called the Abbey of seint
Austyns / in which place he lies him self shryned This king Adelbright was a
good man / and with good will herd seint Austyns predicacions / and yafe him
leave to preche through all his land of kent to torn and convert to him all
the people that he might / It befell so afterward through gods grace / that in
litell time the king him self was converted to god and all his people of his
land was baptized And in the mean time while the people turned hem to god Seint
Austyn come to Rouchestre / and there preched gods word / The paynyms therefore
him scorned and cast on him reigh tailles / so that all his mantell was honged
full of reigh tailles / and for more despite they cast on him the guts of
reighes and of fissh wherefore the good man seint Austyn was sore annoied and
grieved and prayed to god that all the children that should be borne afterward
in that Cite of Rouchestre most have tailles / And when the king wist and herd
of this vengeance that was fall through seint Austyns prayer / he let make an
house in honor of almighty god wherein women should be delivered of her children
at the brugges end / in which house yet women of the Cite been delivered of
child / when seint Gregory had herd tell how the Englisshmen were turned to
god and converted he sent to seint Austyn his pallione by a bishopp that was
called Paulyn and made him ^mat and Erchebishopp of England and sent word that
he than should ordeyne and make bishops in the land And anon as Austyn had
the pallione of the dignite of the Erchebishoppe he made ij. bishops of his
felaws that come with him from Rome that one was called Mellit and he duelled
at london And that other was called Iustyn that held the diguite of Rouchestre
and this bishopp mellit tho went to preche in to Essexe and baptized the king
of the contre that was called Sicwith that was king adelbrightes cousin his
susters sone This Iustine went to preche in southsexe and turned much of the
people to god And seint Austyn went him self prechyng through out England

How seint Austyn went in to wales there that the britons were and how they
nold not be obbedient to the Erchebishopp of Canterbury Ca.xcviij
WHen all England was baptized and turned to god Seint Anstyn went in to that
land there that the britons were and for to keep hem from Englisshme^ that is to
seyne in to walis And there he found monks and abbeis and vij. bishops For
the britons destroyed all way the christian people that seint Austyn had converted
and said to the bishops that he was a legate of rome and ^mat of all England
and that they should by all reason to him be obedient and they said that they
nold But to Erchebishopp of Carlion^ and said they nold never for no manner
thing been obedient to the englismen

For the englishmen they said ben our ad^saries and our enemies and have driven
us out of our own co^tre and we ben christian me^ and ever have been and the
englishmen have ever ben paynyms but now late that they been converted Seint
Austyn myt of hem none ansuere have othirwyse but saiden apertely that they
nolde never he^ meke to him ne to the pope of Rome And seint Austyn turned a
yen tho to king Adelbright that was king of kent and told him that his folk
nolde not be to no man obedient but to the Erchebishopp of karlion^ And when
the king herd this he was sore a^noied and said that he would hem destroy and
sent to Olferide king of Rorthumberla^d that was his friend that he should come
to him with all the poer that he might and that he should mete him at leycestre
and from thens they would gone in to wales and destroy the Erchebishopp of
Carlione and all tho that had refused Seint Austyn

How king Adelbright and the king Olfride queld Bre^male that was a king of
britons that held the contre of leicestre Capitulo lxxxxix
HIt befell so that there was a king Britonn^ that held the contre of leicestre
and all the coutre about named Brecma^ And this briton^ herd tell y^ tho ij.
englissh kings would me^e there at leicestre for to wend in to walis He let
ordeyne all the poer that he had for to fight with thees ij. kings but litell
it a vailled him for his folk that he had were slain and him self fled and
lost his lands for e^more And these ij. kings Adelbright and Elfride duelled
a while at leicestre and deperted the land among he^ and token homages and
feautes of folk of the contre And after they we^ten toward wales and tho of
walys had herd tell of the scomfiture that Brecmal had at leicestre and were
wonder sore adrad of tho ^. kings And no^me and chose among hem good men and
holy of here mites monks and prestes and of other folk great pleute that
wenten baarfoot and wellewerd for to have mercy of the ij. kings But tho
kings were so stern and so wykked that they nold neu speak with hem but queld
hem euerichone Allas for sorwe for they ne spared hem no more than the wolf
does the sheep but smyton of the heedes of euerichoue and so all were there
martred that to hem come that is to understand v.C. and xl. and afterward tho
ij. kings went fro the^s to Baugore for to quelle all tho that they myt there
find of the britons And when the britons that herd that assembled and
ordained all her poer for to fight with hem Tho was there a baron^ in wales that
was called Bledrik of Cornewaille that som^e time waz lord of Denenshire but
the king Adelbright had driven him in to walys and give him bataille And at
that bataille was king adelbright slain and Elfrid wounded sore and forsook
the field and the most part of his people slain And Elfrid fled in to
northumberland that was his own land And afterward the people of leicestreshire
made with strength Cadewan y^ was Brecynalis sone king of leicestre and he
after reigned nobely and with great honor

How Cadewan king of leicestre and Elfride king of northu^berlande were friends
and of the debate that after was bitwene Edwyn and Cadwalyn that were both her
sons. Capitulo Centesimo
ANd after that this bataille was done / the britons assembled hem and went
thens / and come^ un to leycestre and made Cadewan that was Brecinales sone
king of leycestre / and of all the contre / and he took homages and feautes of
all the folk of the contre / and after that he assembled a great host and said
he would gone in to Northumberland to destroy king Elfride / and slay him if he
might and when he was comen thidder / friends went so bitwene hem and made hem
accorded in this manner / That Elfrid should hold all the land from humber un
to Scotland / and Cadewan should have all the land athis side humber un to the
south / and after that they become^ good friends all her lyfes during and loved
to gedre as they had be ij brethren / And this Elfride had a sone that was
called Edwyne y^ h^d and held all the land of Northumberland after his fadres
death as his fadre had hold all his lyfes time And Cadewan had an other sone
that was called Cad^alyn that held his fadres land as he it held whiles he
was a life and they loved to gedre as they had be brethren / And the love last
bitwene hem but only ij. year

And after began debate bitwene hem through a lither eniuons cousin of Cadwalyne
that was called B^^ens / so that they assembled a great host in both perties /
and at the last it befelle that Cadwalyne was discomfited / and Edwyn him
pursued and drofe him fro place to place / so at last he fley in to Irland /
And this other destroyed his land / and cast a down castelles and brent his
manners and deperted all Cadwalyns land among his friends And long time after
come Cadwalyn ayene from Irland with a strong power / and in plain bataille
quelled Edwyne and all his frendshippes / and namely tho that witheld his
lands through Edwynes yift

How king Oswolde was queld through king Cadwalyn and Peanda / and how Oswy that
was seint Oswaldes brother reigned after him and queld Peanda Ca.C.j
WHen that Edwyne was slain Offris his sone undertook the w^rre ayens
Cadwelyne his Eme so that this Offris deide during the werre / And after the
death of Offris tho reigned a gentill christian man that much loved god almighty /
that had all the land of Northumberland by heritage that was called Oswold /
and he was king of all that land / But for as much as he was friend to Edwyne
and held a great part of the land of Cadwalyn / the same Cadwalyn werred upon
him and drofe him toward Scotland And when Cadwelyn saw that he nold not abide
Cadewalyn^ nolde no longer him pu^sewe but took sum of his folk to Peanda his
brother in law and prayed Peanda to pursewe Oswald till that he were take and
slayn^ And Cadwalyn turned home again when Oswald herd the tydyng that Cadwalyn
turned home again he would no longer flee but abode Peanda and yaf him bataill
and Peanda was discomfited and fley and come ayene to Cadwalyn^ and said that
he would never hold o foot of land of him but if were so that he would avenge
him of Oswald Cadwalyn let assemble a great host for to fit with Oswold so that
he and Peanda come un to Northumberland and give bataill un to Oswold and in
the same bataill was Oswold slain and his head smyten of and after he was
entered at the abbey of Bardeney in which place god has wrought for him many a
fair miracle both there and else where And anon Oswy his brother seized in to
his hand all the land that was Oswaldes and the folk of Northumberland loved
him wonder well and held him for her lord but he had men of his kyn worthy y
now that would have departed the land and they werred to gedre and for as
much as they were not strong y now they comen to Peanda and prayed him of
help and socour and byhete him of that land largely upon covenant that he would
hem ghye and help and counceil^ Peanda herd her prayer and so spoke with the
king Cadwallyn^ that he should ordeyne a great host and f^st ordeyn^ him in to
Northumberland for to fight with Oswy And Oswy was a meke man and much loved
pees and charity and prayed Peanda of love and pees and proferd him of gold and
of sil^ great pleute And this Pea^da was so proud that he nolde grant him
pees for no man thing but for all thing he would with him fight So at the last
there was set a day of bataill And Oswy ever had trust upon god And this Peanda
trust to much upon his pride and upon his host that he had and to gedre they
smyten egrely but Peanda anon was discomfited and slain and this was after
the Incarnacion^ of our lord Ihu^ crist vj.C. ^ lv year And this Oswy tho
reigned xxviij. year and a king that was called Oswyne that was Peanda is cousin
werred upon king Oswy and to gedre foughten but Oswy had the victory of Oswyne
and Oswyn^ was discomfited and slain and lies at Tynnemouth.

How king Cadewaldre that was Cadewaleynes sone reigned after his fadre and was
the last king of britons Ca.C.ij.
AFter the death of Cadwaleyne reigned his sone Cadwaladre well and nobely and
his mother was the suster of king Peanda and when he had reigned xij year he fell
in to a great sikenesse and than was there so great discord bitwene the lords
of the land that every werred upon other / And yet in that time there fell so
great derth and scarcite of corn and other vitailles in this land that a man
might goo iij. days or iiij. fro town to town y^ he should not find to bye
for gold ne for silver bread wine ne none other vit^ille wherewith a man might
live But only the people lived by rotes of herbs for other living had they none
/ so much was it failled all about Fisshes wildebestes and all other thing /
so that yet to this mysauenture there fell so great mortalite and pestilence
among the people / by the corrupcion of the eir / that the living people ne
suffised not to bury the deed bodies / for they deide so suddenly both great
and small / lord and servant / eting going spekyng / so that never was herd of
more sodeyne death among the people / For he that went for to bury the deed body
/ with the same deed body was buried / They that myghten flee fledden and
forsook her lands and houses as w^ll for the great hunger derthe and scarcite
of corn and other vitaill as for the horrible mortalite and pestilence in the
land and wenten in to other lands / for to save her lives and left the land
all desert / and waste so that there was not any man to trauaille and till the
land ne ere ne sow / so that the land was bareyne of corns and all other
fruytes for defaute of tiliers / and this mysauenture dured xj. year and moo
that no man might ere ne sow.

How Cadewaldre went out of this land in to litell Britaigne

CAdwaladre saw the great hunger mortalite and pestilence and the land all
pour / and failyng corns and other vitailles / and his folk perissed / and
saw also the most pertie of his land all wasted and void of people / he
apparailled him and his folk that were left on live / and passed over in to
litell Britaigne with a litell nauye un to king Aleyne that he much loved that
was his cousin / and that his fadre had much loved in his time And as they
sailled in the sea he made great lamentacion / and so did all tho that were
with him / and said

Dedisti nos dn^e tan^ oues esca^ and in gentibus dispersisti nos

ANd than began Cadwaldre to compleyn him to his folk pitously and said Allas
said he to us wrecches and Caytyf For why for our great sins of the which we
would not amend us while we had space of repentance is comen upon us this
mysauentur which chaceth us out of our own reaulme and propre soil fro and
out of which sometime romans Scotts Saxons ne danes might not exilen us But
what a vailleth it now to us that before time oftsithes have gotten many other
lands since it is not the will of god that we abide and duelle in our own
land God that is werray Judge that all things knows before they be done or
made he sethe that we would not cessen of our sins and that our enemies ne
might not us ne our lineage exilen fro and out of our reaulme he would that we
amend us of our folies and that we seen our propre defaultes And therefore has
he showed to us his wrath and wull chastise us of our misdeeds Since that he
does us without bataille or strength of our enemies by great companyes
wrecchedly to leave our own reaulme and propre land Turn again ye Romans
turn again ye scotts turn again ye Saxones turn again ye Fraunsois now
shows to you Britayne all desert the which your power might never make
desert ne yet your power has not now put us in exil but ouly the power of the
king Almighty whom we have often offended by our folies the which we would not
leven un till he chastised us by his dyvyne power Among the words and
lamentacion that the king Cadwaladre made to his folk they arrined in litell
Britaigne and come to king Aleyne before said And the king resseyued him with
Joy and made him to be served wonder nobely and there he duelled long time
after The englissh people that were left on live and were ascaped the great
hunger and mortalite lived in the best wise that they might and much people
spronge and come of hem

And they senten in to Saxoyne where they were borne to her friends For men
women and children to restore the citees with people and other tounes that were
all void of people and fortolabour tranaille and tillen the earth When the
Saxons had herd this tydyng they comen in to this land wonder thikke in great
companies and logged and herburghed hem self in the contre all about where
they would for they found no man hem to let ne withstoude And so they woxen
and multiplied greatly and used the customs of the contrees where of they were
comen and the laws and the langage of her own land And they changed the
names of citees tounes castelles and burghes and yaf hem names and called hem
as they be now called / And they helden the Countees the baronages lordshippes
and trees in manner as the Britons before time had compaced hem / And among
other great companies that come fro Germayne in to this land / came the noble
queen that was called Sexburga with men and women without nombre / and arrived
in the contre of Northumberland / and took the land from Alby^ne in to Corn
waille for her and for her folk For there was none that might letten hem / for
all was desolat and void of people But it were a few pour Batons that were
left in mountains and wodes un till that time / And fro that time forth losten
Britons this Royame for all days / and the Englissh people begone to reign
and departed the land bitwene hem and they made many kings about by diverse
parties of the land as here been devised / the first of westsex / the second
Merchenrich / the thridde Estangle / the fourth kent / the fifthe southsex /
All thees reigned in this land after Cadwaladre was passed out of this land /
and duelled in litell Britaigne with king Aleyne his cousin and true friend And
when he had long duelled there / and had knowing that the mortalite and
pestilence was over passed and that the land was replenysshed of Aliene people
he thought to turn ayene in to his own land / and prayed king Aleyne his
cousin of socour and help that he might be restored to his propre realm and
first dignite and king Aleyne granted him his prayer Than did ^e apparaillen
him to take his way and viage in to this land and prayed god Almighty devoutly
that he would make to him demonstracion if his prayer in to this land were to
him plesaunte or none / for again the will of god Almighty he would no thing
done / when he had thus devoutly made his prayer / a vois fro heaven to him said
/ and bad him leave that Journey a way in to England / and that he go to the
pope of Rome For it was not the will of almighty god that Britons regne no more
in Britaigne ne never recover the land un to the time that the prophecy that
Merlyn said before be fullfylled / and that should never been un to the time
were comen that the relics of his body shull been brought fro Rome and
translated in Britaigne And when the relics of other saints that have been
hid for the ^ersecucion of the paynyme folk shull be founden and openly showed
than shall they recover her land ayene which they have so long time lost
through her deserts When Cadwaladre had herd this ansuere he meruailled greatly
and told it to king Aleyne.

Than king Aleyne did send for the clergy of his land and made hem to bring
the stories and profecies that Merlyn and sibille had said in her prophecies
and when he knew that the prophecy that festo me had prophesied of the egle
and other prophecies accorded to the dyuine ansuere that Cadwaladre had herd he
counceilled him to leave his people and his navy and submit him to the
disposicion^ of god and done all that the angel had commanded him Than
Cadwaladre called Ynoz his sone and yvory his cousin that was his sustres sone
and said to hem Takes said he my folk and my navy that is here all ready and
pass in to wales and be ye lords of Britons that no dishonor come to he^ by
intereupcion^ of the paynyme folk for defaute of lords And he him self left
his reame of Britaigne and his folk for evermore and took his way to Rome to
the pope Sergius the which wurshipped him much and so he was confessed and
took penance for his sins And he had not long duelled there that he ne died
the xij. Kalend of May the year of grace v.Clxxix.

How king Offa was sovereign above all the kings of Engglond and how every
king werred upon other Ca.C.ij
IT befell so that all the kings in that time that were in the land as they of
westsexe Merchenriche Esta^gle of ke^t and of southsexe and of other costs
each werred upon other and he that was most mighty beno^me the land of him that
was most feeble But there was a king among hem that was called Offa that was
seint Oswaldes brother This Offa conquered all the kings of the land and
reigned above hem all And so great was the werre in every co^tre bitwene kings
that no man myt wit how the land went But abbotes Priours and men of religion^
written the lyves and the deeds of kings and how long every reigned had and in
whose contre and in what mauer every king died and of bisshoppes also And there
of made great books and let call he^ the cronicles and the good king Alured
had that book in his ward and let bring it at wynchestre and let it fast be
takked un to a piler that men myt it not remeve ne bear it thens so that every
man myt it see and there upon look For there in ben the lives of all the kings
that ever were in England

How the king of Northumberland Osbright forlay the wife of Buerne Bocard
through strength and after this Buer^e conquered the king with poer and strength
Ca.C.iij
ANd thus it it befell in the same time that there was a king in Northumberla^d
that was called Osebright and soiourned in york / and this king went him upon
a day in to a wode him for to disporte / and when he come ayene / he went
preuely in to a good man's house that was called Buerne And the good man of
that place was gone that time to the sea / for often times he was woned there
aspie and awaite thieves and robbours that often times were woned to come in to
the land to rob brenne and slay / The lady that was this Buernes wife was a
wonder fair woman and welcomed the king with mochel honor / and worthily him
served in all thing / when the king had eten / he took the lady by the hand
and lad her in to a chamber and said that he would speak with her a counceill /
and all the folk from the chamber he made void sauf only the lady and he /
but the lady wist not wherefore he it ded / till that he had done with her his
will / And when he had done this deed he turned ayene to york And the lady he
left there wonder so re weeping for the deed that he had y done And when her
lord was comen home and saw her weep and such sorwe and morning make he ax^d
of her what she had done and why she made such sorwe Sir quoth she queintely and
falsely the king Osbright me has done shame and vilanye ayens my will and
told him trewthe how the king had her forlayne with strength wherefore she said
she had lever to die than lyu^ Fair leef be still quoth he / for ayens strength
feblenesse is litell worth and therefore of me shall thou never the less be
loved / and namely for thou have told me trewthe And if almighty god grant me
life / I shall the well avenge

This Buerne was a great man and a mighty lord and was well beloned and great
friends had / and let send for the grettest lords of the land and to hem
made his compleint of the despite that the king to him had y done / and said
that he would been avenged how so that ever it were / and all his friends
councrilled and grauuted to wend toward york there that the king was / And
Buerne took his meyne and come to the king / And when the king him saw he
called him courtously Buerne by name / and Buerne him ansuerd and to him said /
Sir I you deffye / and yield up feautes / hoinages and lands / and as much as
I have hold of you / and so fro this time foreward I will never of the no
thing hold / And so he deperted from the king without more speech or any
abydyng / and took ^^ue of his friends and went to denmark / and playned to the
king Godryne and told him of the despite / that king Osbright to him had done
of his wife / and prayed him of socour and of help him to aue^ go When king
Godryne of denmark and the danois had herd the pleint of this Buerne and of
the prayer that he bad / they were wonder glad in heart / for as much that they
might find cause for to gone in to England for to werre upon the Englisshmen /
and also for to aue^ge Buerne of the despite that the king had done to his wife
/ and for as much as Burn was sibbe to the king of Denmark / Anon they let
ordeyne a great host of men and let ordeyne ships / and as much as was need
to that viage / And when all the host was a ready / the king made his ij
brethren chiuetayns that were noble knights and bold that one was called
hungar and that other hubba

How the danois took york and quelled the king Osbright and afterward king
Elle Ca.C.iiij.
WHen all thing was a ready Tho ij. brethren tok^ leave of the king Godryn that
went toward the sea for to wend in to England as fast as they might speed Now
is Burn so well comforted and fast hied him with the danois that they been
arrived in the Northcontre and comen through out holdernesse / and destroyed
all the contre and brend tounes and robbed folk / and quelled all that might
be take till that they come to york And when king Osbright saw hem come / he
took his people that he had and come out of the Cite and faught with hem / but
no foyson he and ayens hem / and much was the people that there was slain in
both parties And kyug Osbright him self there was slain / and the Cite anon
was take / and the danois wenten in And there was also an other king in
Northumberland that Buernes friends had chosen and held him for king a man
that was called Elle / for as much as they would not to king Osbright been
entendaunt / for the despite that he had done to Buerne her cousin /

Hit befell thus that the king Elle was gone to wode him for to desporte and of
venison somdel he had take / and as he sat in the wode at m^te to a knight he
said / we have well y sped and much venison taken / and with that word there
come in a man / and to him said / if ye so much of venison had wonnen / an
houndred times so much more there ayens ye have lost / For all this contre the
Danois have get / and take the Cite of york / and ayens you shull it hold
that never ye shull not come theryn / And for soth they have slain the king
Osbright And when king Elle these words herd he let assemble all the folk of
the contre and ordained all the poer that he myt have and would have get y^
toun^ of york with strength but the danois comen out anon and yafe him
hataill and qneld the king and the most pertie of his men that he had brought
with him and the same place there that they were slain shall ever be called
Ellecroft and that place is a lite^^ from york And tho a bode the danois never
till they had conquered all Northumberland and in that contre they made
wardeyns and went ferther in to the land and token Nothyngham and there they
abyden^ all the winter and diden the sorwe that they might And after when Somer
time come they remeued from Notyngham and come in to Nichol and to lyndesey and
to holand For no man might hem withstonde so much poer and strength they had.

How seint Edmond the king was martred Ca.C.v.
ANd so far had the danois passed from contre un to contre and evermore
brennyng and robbyng and destroyed all that they might till they comen un to
Thetford. And in that contre they fonnden a christian king that much loved god
and his works that was called Edmond And he was king of Northfolk and
southfolk This seint Edmond king ordained as much folk as he might and fought
with the danois but he and his folk were disco^fited and the king him self
driven un to the castle of f^amelynham And the danois him pursued and comen un
to the same castle And when king Edmond saw that the castle might not hem
withstond he come ayens hem with whom the danois ferst speken And anon they
axed of him where king Edmond was now forsooth quoth he when I was in the castle
there was y^ king and when I went out of the castle he went out also and
whethir he shall ascape or die at gods will mote it be When seint Edmond had
nempned god by that they wysten well all that it was he him self and anon
hubba and humbar no^men him and said that he should god forsake and all christian
law as many other had done him beforne And seint Edmond said that he nold
never but rather he would suffer death for gods love and his laws to keep tho
no^me they king Edmond and bound him un to a tree and made her archiers to him
shete with arewes till that his body Stykked as full of arewes as an vrchon^ is
full of prikkes but for all the pain that he had / he would never god forsake
and in the same pain and turme^t he died and betoke his soul to god And when
they saw that he was deed they smyten of his head And this manner was seint
Edmond martred

How hubba and hungar took the town of Redyng Ca.C.vj
WHen seint Edmond was martred hu^gar and hubba went thens with all her danois
un to Redinge / And as they went thidderward they brende tounes and Cites and
quelled all christian people that would not god forsake and cast a down churches
and comen to Redinge and took the town and there held hem till that the king
Edelf of westsex come thidder with all his power for to take the town Tho
comen out the danois for to give bataill to king edelf and at that bataille
was queld an earl of danois that was called Cidrake v^on the morwe come the
king Elred and his brother Alured with a strong power and a great host / And
the king Edelfe come ayene that had foughten the day before to that bataille /
And the danois tho comen out for to fight with hem and the bataill was wonder
strong / for many a man was there slain And the danois that day had the
victory / and the king Eldred and his brother Alured that day were discomfited
But the iiij. day afterward the danois and the englisshmen foughten to gedre an
other time v^on Ekeldenne And there was slain a king of denmark that was
called Rafyng and iiij. earls of great power And that day had the danois shame
for they were druien un to Engilfelde And the xv. day after the danois and the
Englisshmen and the danois fongh^^n an other time at Rafyng and there were the
englisshmen discom^^^d and from thens a danois that was called Roynt went to
Reding with his host and destroyed all that he might take / And king Eldred
fonght with him / but he was wounded so wherefore he was deed / and he had not
reigned but v. year and lies at wonburne

Of king Alured and how the danois in his time prayed him of mercy that they
must gone out of the land Ca / C.vij
AFter the death of this Eldred reigned his brother Alured that Dolfynes was
called Tho went the danois and assembled hem / and went for to seche Alured
that tho was the new^ king of southsex / and there they founden him at wiltone
with a li^ell people / and notheles he faught with he^ / but at the last he
fled thens from the f^lde / and went in to westsex / and ordained so much
people of his own Realm and also of other so till that he had a strong host
so that the danois had no poer ayens him to sto^de And he come to london with
his host and there were the danois soiourned and there would he have foughten
with hem but the danois durst not with him fight but prayed him of pees and
that they must gone ayene in to her own contre and neuermore in to England for
to come again any harm to done And upon this covenant they should give him to
plegge good hostages and such az the Englisshmen would axen

How hubba and hungar were quelled at Chippenham and how the danois brought her
king to our king Ca.C.viij.
ANd the same day that the Danois departed from london so fast they ridden both
night and day and never took rest of going till that they comen un to Excestre
and token tho the town and there held hem. When king Alured herd the tydyng
anon he let take the hostages And went from thens to excestre with all the
poer that he had And when the danois herd tell of his coming they wenten fro
thens in to westsexe and comen to Chippenam and there they diden much ^arme in
the contre they robbed folk and brought hem in prison The king Alured hem
pursued and come upon hem and fersely hem assailled and there were slain both
hubba and hungar his brother and Buerne Bocard and in this bataille was much
folk slain in o pertie and in that other but the gree of the field left with
the danois For as much as y^ ^yng tho come with litell company The king hasted
him as much as he myt for to wend ayene and when the danois founde^ hubba his
body liggyng deed they entered it and made upon it a great logge and let call
it hubbeslowe and so it is called in to this day And that place is in
deuenshire The barons of somerset wilteshire and dorset herd tell how that
her king was discomfited and ordained all the poer that they myghten have and
comen to the king there he was and thanked god that they had him found alive
for they had went that the danois had him slain. Tho no^me they a counceill
the king and his barons that they would gone and seche the danois with hem all
for to fighten and so they ridden all that nyt hem all for to seche and come^ a
morwe abonte ^me to Abyngdon there y^ the danois were The king tho Alured and
his barons assembled and there assailled the danois egrely and there yaf hem a
strong bataill and the danois nobely put hem of long time that no man wist in
whethir pertie more people were slain. But thus it befell as god would that the
king Alured had the victory with mochel hononr for the danois were so driven
that they ne wist whidder for to torn / and xv. days the king hem pursued at
his will / that glad and feign they were for to speken of pee^ and of accord
and token him good hostages / and said that they nold never more upon him werre
ne no deba^e are^^ And more over they behight to the king Alured that they
would gone and bring her own king un to him / and that her king and they all
should be baptized / And up on this condition king Alured him granted life and
lymme / And said to hem that they should gone her king for to seche and at a
^^rtayne day to comen ayene that to hem was set / And so they went forth
fast and comen ayene at her day that was assigned / And all the danois brought
her king with him The king Alured anon bet^ hem been baptized and her names
change / so that the king of danois called was A^helston / and xxx. of his
felawes names were changed also / And the other were baptized to the right
believe. And all^ this was done at westmynstre And after that the king Alured
held with him king Ath^lstone and all his danois xij. days at soiourne with
mochel solempnite and yafe him great yif^es / after that they were baptized and
so they deperted Tho was king alured all at ese when he had his enemies
overcome and that they were turned to the right believe of Almighty god

How the danois that comen in to france with Gurmond comen ayene in to England
and of the death of king Alured Ca.C.ix
ANd thu^ it befell afterward that the danois of Northumberland that were
paynyms comen with a great strength and an huge host of france that is to
understand with he^ that went in to frannce / With Gurmond of Aufrike when he
had conquered England / And it yafe un to the sax^ns / and tho that comen fro
france arriu^d in kent / and sent in to Northumberland that they should come to
hem / and when tho ij. hosts were come and assembled / anon they went to
destroy the christian people of England from place to place and diden much sorwe
Hit befell thus as almighty god would an hard chance in England / For the good
king Alured that was woned to abate the danois deide in the mean time / This
king Alured reigned xxx. year / and a good king had been / and well could
chastise his enemies / for he was a good c^^rc / and let make many books / And
a book he made of Englissh / of auenture^ of kings and of batailles that had
been done in the ^ond / and many other books of gests he let hem write that
were of great wisdom and of good lernyng through which bo^es many a man may him
amend y^ will hem read and upon look upon who^ soul almighty god hane mercy
And this king Alured lies at wynchestre

Of king Edward that was king Aluredes sone Ca.C.x.
ANd after this Alured reigned Edward his sone y^ was a good man and a wise that
was called Edward that was wonder courtois The danois did much sorwe in the
land and her poer encresed and began for to wex from day to day for the danois
comen often with her companies in to this land And when the king saw that he
might no better done he no^me trewes with hem and granted hem his pees And
notheles the trews dured not long that the danois ne bego^ne strongly for to
werre up on the englisshmen and did hem much sorwe wherefore king Edward did
assemble a great host for to fight with hem And tho this king Edward died when
god would This king Edward reigned xxiiij. year and lies at wynchestre besides
his fadre

Of king Adelston and of Edmonde Eldred and of Edewyne his brother Ca.C.xj.
AFter this Edward reigned Athelston his sone And when he had reigned iiij. year
he held bataill ayens the da^oys and drofe king Gaufride that was king of the
danoys and all his host un to the sea and rested by Scotland and no^me strongly
the contre all ayere And after that tho of Cumberland and the scotts of
westmerland bego^ne to werre upon king Athelston And he hem yaf so strong
bataille that he queld so many of hem that no man could tell the nombre of hem
and after that he ne reigned but iij* year And he reigned in all xxv. and lies
at Malmesbu^ And after this Adelston reigned Edmonde his brother for as much as
king Adelstone had no sone And this Edmond was a worthy knight and a doughty
man of body and a noble knight And he iij. year after that he was king he went
over humber in which place he fo^d ij kings of danoys that one was called
Enelaf And that other Renant This king Edmond drofe hem both from the land and
after wet and took a great prey in Cumberland This Edmond ne reigned but vij.
year and lies at Glastenburie And after this Edmond reigned Eldrede his brother
that avenged Edward his fadre of his enemies that him quelled and afterward he
seized northumberland in to his hand and made the scotts abowe and meke un to
his will And the second year y^ he had reigned come Arnalaf guyran that was
king of de^marc and seized all Northumberland and held that land ij. year /
and after that come king Eldered with a great poer and drofe him out of this
land And this king Eldred was a noble man and a good of whose goodness seint
Dunstan preched / and this king Eldred reigned xj. year and lies at wynchestre
And after this Eldred Edwyne sone of Edmond his brother reigned and was a lither
man toward god and the people / for he hated folk of his own land and loved
and honored strange men And set litell by holy church and betoke of holy
church all the tresour that he myt have that was great shame and v^lanye to him
self and peril to his soul And therefore god would not that he should not regne
no longer than iiij. year and died and lies at wynchestre

Of king Edgar that reigned a boue the kyng^s of scotland and of wales and how
he was begiled through taking of his wife / Capitulo Centesimo duodecimo
ANd after this Edwyne reigned Edgare his brother a man that much loved god and
pees and holy church also And was a worthy lord bold and myty and mayntened
well this land in pees And this Edgar was lord and king above all the kings of
scotland and of walys / from the time that Arthur was a gone and never was
sithen king of his power And this Edgare was seint Edwardes fadre And when
Edgares wife was deed that was seint Edwardes mother and entered / he herd
speak of the fairness of Estrilde that was Orgarus dought a baron of
dene^shire that was so fair a woman that all men speken there of / he called o^
of his knights that he much loved and trusted upon and told him / Go quoth he to
the n^ble baron Orgar of denenshire and see if his daughter be so fair as men
sp^ken of / and if it be sothe / I will have her un to my wife

This knight that was called Edelwold went forth his way / and came there that
the lady was / and when he saw her so fair he thought t^ hane her him self to
wife / and there of spoke to Orgar her fadre and Orgar was an old man and had
no moo children but only her and saw that Edelwold was a fair young knight and
worthy and rich and was well with the king / and thought his daughter should
well be married / and well beset upon him and granted him his daughter if the
good lord the king would consent there to

This Edelwold come ayene to the king and told him that she wa^ fair ynowe v^on
to see but she was wonder lothly Tho ansuerd the king and said that he took but
litell charge / Sir quod Edelwold tho she is her fadres heir / and I am not
^^che of lands and if ye would consent and grant that I must her have than
should I be rich y now In gods name quoth the king I consent there to Edelwold
thanked tho much the king and went again in to Denenshire and spoused the
damisell and in that contre he duelled And thus it befell upon a time that he
told his cou^ceill and all this thing un to his wife how and in what manner he
had begiled his lord the king that would have had her to wife And anon as she it
wist she loved him never more afterward as she had done beforne

This lady conceived by him a sone and when time was that the child should be
borne Edelwold come to the king and prayed him to heue a sone of his at
fontston the king him granted and let call him Edgar of his own name And when
this was done he thout that he was syker y now of the king y^ not would have
taken his wife for as much as his lord was a ^oly man and an amerous.

How that king Edgar wedded Estrilde after the death of edelwold Ca.C*xiij.
THus it befell that all men in king Edgarys court tho speken and said that
Edelwold was richely avaunced through the marriage of his wife and yet they said
he was avaunced an hunderd fold more For he had spoused the fairest woman that
ever was seyn^ And the king herd speak so much of her beauty he thought that
Edelwold had him desseyued and begiled and thought privily in his heart that he
would gone in to Denenshire as it were for to hunt for the heart and for the
hynde and other wild bestes and than he should se there the lady or he departed
thennes And this lady was duelly^g at a manner besides the forest there that the
king would hunte and at that manner he was her burghed all night and whenne time
come the king should soap and the son shone the king asked after his Gossyp
and after his godsone and edelwold made her come before the king And notheles
if it other might have been she should not have comen in his sight by his will
The lady welcomed the king and swetely him cussed and he no^me her the hand
and tho next by him her set and so soped they to gedre And tho was a custom
and an usage in this land that when a man drunk un to an other the drynker
should sey wassayl and that other should ansuere drynkehaille and thus did the
king and the lady many times and also kyst And after sop^^ whent yme was gone
to bed the king went un to his bed ^^rtely thenkyng upon that ladies
fairness and tho was overcome for her love that him thought that he should die
but of her his will he had Upon the morn the king Aroos and in the forest went
him there to disporte with hertes and hyndes and all other wild bestes and of
the hertes great ple^te to that lady he sent and thries he went to solacen and
speak with that lady whiles he duelled in that co^tre And after that the king
remeued thennes and thought how he might best deliver edelwold from his wife as
he had him first disceyued And the king anon after viij. days let ordeyne a
parliament at Salesbury of all his baronage conceill to have and for to ordeyne
how the contre of Northumberland myt best ben kept that the danois comen not
there the land to destroy And this Edelwold come also un to the kings
perlement and the king sent him to york for to be keeper of that contre And
thus it befell that men that knew him not slow him by the wey. And anon as
the king herd that he was deed he let send after the lady Estrild that she
should come to the Cite of london and there ben w^dded to the king with great
solempnite and wurshipp an held a solemn feste and he wered a croune of gold
and the queen an other And seint dunston amorwe came un to the king in to the
chamber and found the king abedde and the queen also yfere And seint dinisto^
axed ho she was the king ansuerde this is the queen Estrilde and the
erchebisshopp seint dunston said that he did great wrong and ayens gods will
to take a woman to wife whose child ye had take at the^ fonstone and the queen
for that word never after loved seint du^ston and nothelees the good man warned
of that foli^ to let but his warnyng availled litell for the love bitwene hem
was so much The king begat upon this woman a sone was called Eldred and tho
this child was vj. year old the king his fadre died and about that time he
had reigned xvij. year and lies at Glastenbury

Of seint Edward the martyr how Estrild his stepmoder let him quelle for to
make Eldred her own^ sone king Ca.C*xiiij
ANd after this Edgar reigned Edward his sone that he bagate on his first wife
that well and nobely governed the land for he was full of all manner of
goodness and lad full holy life and above all thing he loved god and holy
church and the queen Estrild his stepmoder let him slay for encheson to make
her own sone Eldred king and thus was he slain as afterward ye shull here Hit
befell thus on a day that the king Edward went in to a wode for to play in the
southco^tre besides a tou^e that is called warham in which forest was great
plente of hertes and hyndes / and as he had been a while there him for to pley
he thought upon his brother Eldred that was with his mother the queen for her
place was nygh the forest / and thought for to gone thidder and visit and see
his brother / and took with him but a litell meyne / and went him tho toward
his stepmodre^ house that in that time soiourned in the Castle of Corfe / and
as he rode in the thikkenesse of the wode to aspie his game it befell that he
went amys and lost his meyn^ that with him come / and at the last he come out
of the wode / and as he looked about he saw there fast besides the manner that
his stepmoder duelled in / and thidderward he went allone and anon it was told
the Queen how that the king was comen allone without company and therefore she
made ^oie y now and thought how that she myt done that he ner slain as
preuelich as she myt And anon preuelich she called to one of her knights to
whom she had told much of her counceill bitwene hem / and both they comen to
the king and courtously him resseyued / and the king told that he was come her
to visit and also for to speak with Eldred his brother / The Queen many times
him thanked and him prayed for to alite and herburgh with her all that nyg^t
The king said that he might not / but ayene he would wend un to his folk if
he might hem find / And when the Queen saw that he would not abide she prayed
him that he would ones drink and he granted her and anon as the drink come
the queen drank un to the king and the king took the cup and set it to his
mouth and in the mean time whiles that he drank / the knight that was with the
Queen with a knyfe smote even the king un to the heart / and there he fill a
down deed of his palfray un to the er^h The queen for this deed yaf to the
knight gold and silver great plente / and of other ricchesse y now / And the
knight anon as this was done he went him over the sea / and so escaped he out
of this land When this king Edward thus was matred / Hit was in the year of
incarnacion after our lord ^hesu crist ix.C.lxxx. year and he had reigned xij.
year and an half and lies at Glast^nbury.

Of king Eldred and how the king Swyne of denmark held England and how Eldred
that was seint Edwardes brother wa^ not beloved in his reame and therefore he
fled in to Normandy. Capitulo Centesimo decimoquint^
AFter this king Edward reigned Eldred his brother and seint dunston crouned him
and his seint dunston died sone after that he had foryeue the queen her
trespace Estrild for encheson that she was cause of king Edwards death and seint
du^ston had her assoyled and penance her emoyued and she lyved aft chaste life
and clen^ This king Eldred wedded an Englissh woman and on her begat Edmond
Irenside and an other sone that was called Edewyne And after died the queen her
modre And in that time come in to England Swyn that was king of denmark for to
challenge and conquer all that his auncestres had before that tym^ and so he
conquered and had it all at his axyng For the good earl Cutbert of lyndesey and
all the people of northumberland and almost all the great of England held with
Swyne that was king of de^mark for as much as they loved not king Eldred for
encheson that his good brother Edward was slain falsely for en^heson of him
and therefore no man set but litell by him Wherefore king Swyne had all his will
and took all the land And Eldred the king fled tho in to Normandy and so
spoke to the duke richard that the duke yaf him his sustre Emma to wife upon
the which he begat ij. sons that one was called Alured and that other Edward
And when Swyn had conq^ered all the land he reigned no^ely and leued but xv.
year and died and lies at york.

How king Eldred came ayene from Normandy and how knoght the danois reigned
and of the werre bitwene him and Edmond Irenside Ca.C.xvj.
AFter the death of Swyne that was a danois knoght his sone duelled in England
and would have be king and ^ho come ayene Eldred out of Normandy with much
people and with a strong meynye that knoght durst not abide but fley thens in to
denmark The king Eldred had ayene his reame and held so great lordshipp that
he began to destroy all tho that help Swyn that was a danois ayens him And
afterward come ayene this knoght from denmark with a great power so that king
Eldred durst not with him fight but fled fro thens in to london and there held
him Tho come knoght and him beseged so long till king Eldred died in the cite
of london and lies at seint paulus and he reigned ix. year

Of king knoght Ca.C.xvij
AFter the death of this Eldr^d knoght that was a danois ^^gan tho for to regne
/ but Edmond Irenside that wa^ king Eldredis sone be his first wif ordained a
gret^ host and began to werre upon king knoght and so he did many times and
often / and the werre was so strong and hard that wonder it was to wite and the
Queen Emme that dnelled tho at westmynstre had great dread of her ij. sons of
the werre Alured and Edward lest they should be defoilled and mysdone thurg^
this werre / wh^^for she sent he^ over see in to Normandy to the duke Richard
her uncle / and there they duelled in sa^fte and pees long tym^ This Edmond
Irenside and knoght werred stro^gely to gedres / but at the last they were
accorded in this manner that they should depart the reame bitwene he^ and so they
diden / and after they becomen good friends and so well loved that they becomen
sworn brethren and so well loved to g^dres as they had he brethren geten of o
body and of one mother y borne

How king Edmond ^renside traitoursly was slain through a traitor that was
called Edrich of stratton Ca.C.xviij.
ANd after tho reigned king Edmond Irenside / and knoght the danois / but thus
it befell afterward that in the same year that they were accorded and so much
loved to gedre where for a false thef traitor had envy un to the love that was
bitwene hem and frendshipp / whose name was Edrik of st^atton that was a great
lord that was Edmond Irensides man and of him held all the land that he had /
and notheles he thought his lord to bitraie / and make knoght king of the land
in intent richely to ben^ auaunced and with him ^ene well-beloved / wherefore he
prayed his lord Edmond Irenside upon a day with him for to eten and to duell^
and the king courtously him granted and to him come at his prayer / and at the
mete the king rially was served with diverse metes and drinks / And when night
come that he should goo to bed the king took his own meyne and went in to
chamber / and a^ he looked about he saw a wondre fair Image and well made and
in sembla^t as it were an archier with a bow bent in his hond and in y^ bow a
fine arwe / King Edmond went tho nerre to behold it better what it might been
and anon the arwe him s^ote through the body and there slow the king / for that
eugyn was made to quelle his own lord traitoursly / And when king Edmond this
was deed and slain he and reigned but y. year / and his people for him made much
sorwe and his body they bear un to Glastenburi and there they him entered And
this false traitor Edrith anon went to the Queen that was king Edmondes wife
that wist of her lords death anon^ he no^me from her ij. sons that were fair
and young that her lord had upon her gotten that one was called Edward and that
other Edewyne and lad hem with him at london and took him to king knoght that
he should do with hem what his will were and told him how queintly he had queld
king Edmond for encheson and love of him so that king knoght all England in his
poer holly might have. O thou falls traitor have y^ my true brother slayn^ for
^^cheson of me a man that I most loved in the world Now be mine head I shall
for thy tranaille the well reward as thou have deserved and anon^ let him take
and bind hand and feet in manner of a traitor and let cast him in tho Thamyse
and in this manner the false traitor ended his life The king no^me the ij.
children and took hem to the Abbot of westmynster to ward and to keep till he
wist what was best with hem to done

How king knoght sent king Edmondes sons both in to denmark for to slay and
how they were saved Ca.C.xix
HIt befell sone afterward that king knoght had all the land in his hand and
spoused the qnene Emme through consent of his Baronage for she was a fair woman
y^ was Eldredis wife and the dukes suster of Norma^die and they leued to gedre
with much love as reason would The king axed upon a day conceill of the queen
what was best to done with the sons that were Edmond Irensides Sir quoth she they
be the right heirs of the land and if they be ven they wull do you much sorwe
with werre and therefore let send hem in to a strange land aferre to sum man
that may hem defoylle and destroy. The king anon let call a danois that was
called walgar and commanded him that he sh^^d led tho ij. children in to
Denmark and so do and ordeyne for hem that never they herd moo tydynge of hem
Sir said this walgar gladly your commandment shall be done And no^me tho ij.
children and led hem in to Denmark And for as much as he saw that the children
were wonder fair and also meke he had of hem great pite and routh and would not
hem slay but let hem to the king of hu^gery for to norice For this walgar was
welbeknowen with the king and well-beloved Anon the king axed whens the children
were And walgare told him and said they were the right heirs of e^glond and
therefore men would hem destroy / and th^^ sir to you they be comen mercy and
help for to seche / and for soth if they mow lyuen your men they shull
becomen / and of you they shull hold all her land The king of hungery hem
vnderfenge with mochel honor and ^et^ hem worthily to been kept And thus it
befell afterward that Edwyne the yo^ger brother died / and Edward the elder
brother lived a fair man and a strong and large of body and gentill and
courtois of conditions So that all men him loved / And this Edward in the
cronicles is called among englisshmen Edward the out^lawe / And when he was
made knight the kings daughter of hungery so much him loved for his goodness
and his fairness that she made and called him her derlyng The king that was
her fadre perceived well the love that was bitwene hem two and had none heir
but that daughter / and the king vouched his daughter to no man as well as he
did to him that she loved and he her / and he yaf^ her un to him with good will
and Edward her spoused with mochel honor / the king of hungerie sent after
all his baronage and made a solemn fest and rich weddyng / and made all men
to understand that he should be king when that he were deed and therefore all
they maden great ^oie / and of that tydynge they were full glad This Edward
begat upon this lady a sone was called Edgar helyng and afterward a dough^
that was called Margarete that afterward was queen of Scotland and by the king
of Scotland that was called Mancolyn she had a daughter that was called Maude
that was Queen afterward of England through king Henry that was the first sone
of the co^querour that her wedded And he begat on her a daughter that was
called Mande that after was Emperesse of Almayne / And of this Maude come the
king of England that un to this day is called Henry the Emperesse sone / And
yet had this Edward an other daughter by his wife that was called Cristian /
and she was a nonne /

How king knoght that was a proud man conquered Norwey and how he become
afterward meke and mylde Ca.C.xx.
Now have ye herd of Edmondes sons with Irenside that king Knoght wend that
they had been deed as he had commanded walgar before / And this knoght had in
his hond all England and Denmark / and after that he went to Norwey that land
to conquer / But the king of the land that was called Elaf come with his
people and wend his land well have kept and defended and so (...) he faught
with him / till at the last he was slain in that bataille And tho this knoght
no^me all that land in his hand And when he had conquered Norewey and taken
feautes and homages there he come after ayene in to England and held him self
so great a lord that him thought in all the world his pere no man was and
become so proud and hauteyn that it was great wonder And so it befell upon a
day as he had herd mass at west mynster and would have gone in to his palais
the wawes of the thamyse so^ wif^ely ayens him comen that all most they touched
his (...) Tho said the king with a proud heart I command the water to turn
ayene or else I shall the mak^ The wawes for his commandment would not spare
but flowed over in hie more and more The king was so proud of heart that he
would not flee the water but abode stille in the water And beat the water with a
small yerde that he held in his hand and commanded the water that it should
wend no ferther but for all his commandment the water would not cese but
ever wax more and more an high so that the king was all wete and stood deep in
the water And when he saw that he had abide there to long and the water would no
thing done his commandment tho sone he withdrowe him and tho stood he upon a
stone and held his hondes an high and said this word in hering all people This
god that makes the sea thus arise an high he is king of all kings and of
myghtes most and I am a caytyf and a man dedely and he may never die and all
thing does his commandment and to him is obedient To that god I pray that he
be my warrant For I knowlech me cayt if feeble and of no power and therefore I
wull go to rome with out^ any lettynge my wykkednesse to punysshe and me to
amend For of that god I claim my land for to hold and of none other And anon^
made ready his heir and him self to Rome without any lettynge and by the weye
did many alms deeds And when he come to Rome also And when he had been there
and for his sins done penance he come ayene in to England and become a good
man and an holy and left al manner pride and stoutness and lyved an holy life
all his life after and made ij Abbeis of seint Benet one in England and that
other in Norewey For as much as he loved specialy seint Benet before all other
seintes And much he loved also seint Edmond the king and often he yaf great
yiftes to the hows Wherefore it was made rich and when he had reigned xx. year he
died and lies at wynchestre

Of king Harold that lever had gone in foot than rite an horse. Capitulo
Centesimo vicesimo primo
THis knoght of whom we have spoken before had ij. sons by his wife Emme that
one was called hardyknoght and that other harold / and he was so light of foot
that men called him comenlich harolde harefoot / And this harold had no thing
y^ cond^cions and manner of king knoght that was his fadre / for he set but
litell pris of chivalry ne of no curtosie nothir of wurshipp / but only by his
own will And he become so wykk^d that he exiled his mother Emme / and she went
out of the land in to flaundres / and there duelled with the earl werfor after
there was never good love bitwene him and his brother / for his brother him
hated dedly / and when he had reigned ij. year and a litell more he died and
lies at westmynstre

Of king hardeknoght that was haroldes brother Capitulo Centesimo xxij.
AFter this harold harefoot reigned his brother hardeknoght a noble knight and a
worthy and much loved chivalry and all manner goodness / And when this
hardeknoght had reigned a litell while he let uncover his brother harold and
smite of his head that was his brother at westmynstre and let cast the head in
to a gonge and the body in to thamyse / and after com^ fisshers and took the
body with her nets be night and bear him to seint clementes church / and there
him beried / And in this manner avenged him hardeknoght of his brother / for in
none other manner he might be avenged This king hardeknoght was so large yeuer
of mete and drink that his tables were set every day iij. times / full with
riall metes and drinks for his own meyne and for all that comen un to his
court to be richely served of riall metes And this king hardeknoght sent after
Emme his mother and made her come ayene in to England / for she was drive out
of England / whiles that harold hare foot reigned through counceill of the earl
godewyne that tho was the grettest lord of England next the king / and most
might do what he would through all england through his commandment / for as
much as he had spoused the dought of the good king knoght that was a danois
which daughter he had by his first wife And when this queen was drive ou^e of
England and come to the earl of flaundres that was called Balde wine his cousin
he fond her there all thing that her n^d^d un to the time that she went ayene
in to england / that the king hardeknoght had sent for her that was her sone /
and made her come ayene with mochel honor This king hardeknoght when he had
reigned v. year he died and lies at wrstmynstre

Of the vilonie that the danois did to the Englisshmen wherefore from that time
after was no danois made king of England Capitulo Centesimo xxiij.
AFter the death of this king hardeknoght for as much as he and no thing of his
body begote / the earls and barons assembled and made a counceill and never
more after no man that was a danois / though he were never so great a man
among hem he should never be king of england for the despite that the danoiz
had done to engli^shm^n For ever more beforne hand if it were so that
englisshmen and dan^is hapeten to mete upon a brigge the englishmen should not
be so hardy to meue ne ster^ a foot / but stand stille till he danois were
appa^sed forth And more over if the englisshmen had not abowed down her hedes
to done reverence un to the danois / they should have been bet and defouled /
and soch manner despites and vilanie diden the danois to our englisshmen wherefore
they were driven out of the land after time that king hardeknoght was deed /
for they had no lord that hem might maynten In this manner voided the danois
england that never they come ayene The earls and barons by her commnne assent
and counseill senten un to Normandy for to seche tho ij. kretheren Alured and
Edward that were duellyng with the duke Richard / that was her Eme in intent
for to croune Alured the elder brother and him make king of england and of this
thing to make an end / the Earls and Barons made her oath / But the earl
Godewyne of westsex falsely and traitoursly thought to slay the ij. brethren /
anon as they should come in to england in intent to make his sone harold king
the which sone he had begote upon his wife that was king knoghtes daughter that
was a danois / And this Godewyne preuely went him in to sout hampton / for to
mete there the ij. brethren when that they should come to land / And thus it
befell that the messagiers that went in to Normandy found not b^t only Alured
that was the elder brother / for Edward his brother gone was to hungerie / for
to speak with his cousin Edward the outelawe that was edmo^des sone with the
Irenside / The messagiers told and said to Alured how that the earls and barons
of england sent after him and that he boldelich should come in to England and
vnderfonge the reame For king hardeknoght was deed and all the danois driven
were out of the land

How Godewyne the false traitor took Alured upon Gildesdoune whenne he come fro
normandy to been king of England and did him been martred in the I Will of Ely
Capitulo. C.xxiiij.
WHen Alured herd this tydyng he thanked god and in to shipp went with all the
have that he myt and passed the sea and arri^ed at southampton there that
godewyn^ the traitor was And tho this traitor saw that he was come he
welcomed him and vnder^eng him with mochel ^oie and said that he would led him
to london there that all the barons of England him abode for to make him king
and so they went in her wey toward london And when they come upon Gildesdone
tho said the traitor Godewyne to Alured take keep about you both on the
lift side and on the right side And of all ye shull be king and of such an
hunderd more Now forsooth quoth Alured I behote you and if I be king I shall
ordeyne and make such laws where of god and all folk shullen hem hold well paid
Now had the traitor commanded all his men that were with him that when they
were come upon Gildesdon^ that they should slay all that were in Alureds
company that com^ with him from normandy and after that taken Alured and led
him in to the I Will of Ely and there put onte both his yien of his head and
afterward bring him un to death And they diden so for they quelled all y^
company that xij. were in no^bre of gentilmen that were comen with Alured from
normandy. And after no^men Alured and lad him in to the I Will of Ely and put out
his yien out of his head and rent his womb and no^me^ the chief of his boels
and put a stake in to the ground and an end of the boels there to fastened And
with nedles of ^ren prikked the good child and so made him go about the stake
till that all his bowelles were drawn all out And so died there Alured through
treson of the earl Godewyne

When the lords of England had herd and wist how Alured that should have been
her king was put un to the death through the false traitor Godewyne they were all
wonder wroth and swore bitwene hem god and by his holy names that he should die
in more werse death than did Edrith of stratton^ that had betrayed his lord
Edmond Irenside / and they would have put him to death / but the thief traitor
f^ey thennes in to denmark and there held him iiij. year and m^re and lost
all his land in England

Of seint Edward the confessor that was Aluredes brother how he was king of
England Ca.C.xxv.
ANd when this was done all the barons of England senten an other time in to
normandy / for that Edward should come in to England with mochel honor / And
this Edward in his childehode loved almighty god and him drad And in honest
and clennesse lad his life and hated sin as death And when he was crouned and
anointed with a riall power he foryate not his good manners and conditions that
he first used / and foryate not all good customs for no manner honor ne for no
ricchesse ne for no manner higness / b^t ever more and more yaf him to goodness
and well loved god and all meekness / and loved god and holy church passing
all manner thing and pour men also and hem loved and held as they had hene his
own brethren and to hem often yafe great ^lmesse with good will

Of the first specialte that god showed for seint Edwardes love by his life
Ca.C.xxvj
IT befell on a day as he went from the church of westmynstre and had herd
mass of seint ^ohan Evangelist / for as much as he loved seint Johan
E^angelist more specially after god and our lady than he did any other seint
And so there come to him a pilgryme and prayed him for the love of god and of
seint Johan Enangeliste some good him for to give And the king preuely took his
ringe of his finger that no man perceived it / and yafe it to the pilgryme and
he hit vnderfenge and went thennes This king Edward made all the good laws of
England that yet been most holden / And was so merciable / and so full of pite
that no man might be more /

How the Earl Godewyne come ayene in to England and had ayene all his land and
afterward seint Edward wedded his daughter Ca.C.xxvij
WHen the Earl Godewyne that was duellyng in denmark had mochel herd of the
goodness of king Edward and that he was full of mercy and of pite And thought
that he would gone ayene in to England for to seche and to have g^ac^ of him and
that he might have his land a^ene in pees / and arraied him as much as he might
and put him toward the sea and come in to England to london there that the king
was that time and all the lords of Englong and held a parliament Godewyne sent
to hem that were his friends and were the most grettest lords of the land and
prayed hem to beseech the kings grace for him and that he would his pees and
his land grant him his enemies ladden him before the king to seche grace And
anon as the king him saw he appeled him of treson and of the death of Alured
his brother and these words un to him said. Traitor Godewyne quod the king I
the appele that thou have betrayed and slain my brother Alured Certes sir quoth
Godewyne save your grace and your pees and your lordshipp I never him betrayed
ne slew him and there for I put me in reward of the court Now fair lords quoth
the king ye that bien my lieges Earls and barons of the la^d that here ben all
assembled Full well ye have herd mine Appele and the ansuere also of Godwyne
And therefore I will that ye award and does right The Earls and barons tho drowen
hem all to gedre for to done this award by hem self and so they speken
diuersely among hem For sum said there was neu alliance by homage serment
service ne by lordshipp bitwene Godewyne and Alured for which thing they myt
him draw And at the last they devised and demed that he should put him in the
kings mercy all to gedres Tho spoke the earl ^euerich of Coue^tre a good man
to god and to all the world and told his reason in this manner and said The Earl
Godewyne is the best freuded man of England after the king and well myt it not
been gayn said that without conseill of godewyn^ Alured was neu put to the
death wherefore I award as touching my part that him self and his sone and every
of us xij. earls that been his fredes wend before the king charged with as
much gold and sil^ as we mow bear bitwen our hondes and prayeng the king for
give his evil will to the earl godewyn^ and receive his homage and his land
yield ayene And all they accorded un to that award and comen in this manner as is
above said every of hem with gold and sil^ as much as they myt bear bitwene
her hondes before the king and they saiden the form and the manner of her
accord and of her award

The king would not hem gayn say but as much as they ordained he granted and
confermed And so was the Earl Godewyne accorded with the king and had ayene all
his land And afterward he bear him so well and so wisely that the king ^oned
him wonder much and with him was full priuee And withyn a litell time the king
loved him so much that he spoused Godewynes daughter and made her quen^ And
notheles for all that tho the king had a wife he lived ever more in chastity /
and in clennesse of body without any flesshly deed doing with his wi^ and the
queen also in her half lad holy life ij. year and deide And afterward the king
lived all his life without any wif^ The king yafe the erledome of Oxenford to
Harold that was Godewynes sone and made him earl And so well they were beloved
both the fadre and he and so prive with the king both the fadre and the sone
y^ they myt done what thing they would by right For ayens right would he no thyn^
done for no manner man / so good and true he was of conscience / and therefore
our lord ^hesu crist great specially love to him showed

How king Edward saw Sweyne king of denmark drenched in the se^ in the
sacrament as he stood and herd his m^sse Ca.C.xxv.ij
IT befe^l v^on whitsonday as king edward herd his mass in ^he great church
of westmestre right at y^ leuacion of (...) cristes body / and as all men were
gadred in to the church and comen nere the Auter sacringe for to see the king
his hondes lift upon high / and a great laughter took up wherefore all that
about him stood greatly gonne wond^^ / and after mass they axed why the kings
laughter wa^ Fair lords quoth the king Swryne the yo^ger that was king of
deumarke come in to the sea with all his power for to have comen in to England
upon us to have werred and I saw him and all his folk drenched in the high
see And all this saw I in the eleuacion of ^hu^ cristes body bitwene the
prestes hondes / and I had there of so much ^oie / that I might not my langhter
withholde And the Earl leuerich besides him stood at leuacion / and openlich
he saw the fo^me of bread turn in to a likeness of a child young / and took
up his right hand and first blisshed y^ king and afterward the earl / and the
earl anon turned him toward the king to make him see that holy sight / And tho
said the king / Sir Earl quoth he I see well that ye see thanked be god tha^ I
have honored my god my savior visibely ^hesu crist in form of man whose name
be blisshed in all worlds Amen

How the ringe that seint Edward had give to a pour pilgryme for the love of
god and seint ^ohan Evangelist come ayene un to king Edward Capitulo C^nt^simo
vic^simonon^
THis noble man seint Edward reigned xiij. year and thus it befell upon a time
beforne er he died that ij. men of Enlond were went in to the holy land and
hadden done her pilgremage and were going ayene to her own contre

And as they went in the wey they met a pilgryme that courtosely hem salued
and axed of hem in what land and in what co^tre they were borne And they said
in England Tho axed he who was king of England and they ansuerd and said the
good king Edward Fair friends tho said the pilgrim when that ye come in to
your contre again I pray you that ye would gone un to king Edward and often times
him great in mine name And often times thonk him of his great courtesye that he
to me has done and namely for the ring that he yaf me when he had herd mess
at westmynster For seint Johannes love Evangelist and nomme tho the ring and
took it to the pilgrymes And said I pray you for to gone and bear this ring
and take it to king Edward and tell him that I sent it him and a full richer
yifte I wull him yeve For upon the xij. day he shall come to me and evermore
duelle in bliss withouten end Sir said the pilgrymes what ma^ben ye and in
what place is your duellyng Fair friends quod he I am Johan the evangelist and
am duellyng with almighty god and your king Edward is my friend and I love him
specialy for encheson that he has ever lived in clennesse and is clean maid
And I pray you my message all for to done as I have to you y said When seint
Johan Evangelist had thus hem charged suddenly he voided out of her sight.

The pilgrims tho thanked Almighty god and went forth in her way And when they
had gone ij. er iij. mile they begone to we^ weary And sat adoune hem for to
rest And so they fill a sleep And when they had slept well one of hem awoke and
lift up his head and looked about and said un to his felawe Arise up and wend
we in our way What said that one felawe to that other where be we now Certes
said that other it seems me that this is not the same contre that we laid us
in for to rest and ^e^e For we were from Ih^lm^ but iij. miles.

They no^men up her hondes and blissed hem and went forth in her way And as
they went in her way they saw shepeherdes going with her shep that speken none
other langage but Englissh Leave fre^des quoth one of the pilgrymes what co^tre is
this and who is lord there of And one of the shepeherdes ansuered this is the
contre of kent in England of the which the good king Edward was land The
pilgrims thanked to almighty god and seint Johan Evangelist and went forth in
her way and come to Caunterbnry and fro thennes in to london / and there they
fond the king / and told him all fro the beginning un to the end / as much as
seint ^ohan had hem charged and of all things how they spedde by the wey / and
took the ring to king Edward / and he vnderfeng it and thanked Almighty god and
se^^t Johan Evangelist And tho made him a ready every day from day to day for to
wend out of this life / when god would for him send.

How seint Edward died on the xij. day Ca.C.xxx.
ANd after it befell thus in cristesmasse eve as the holy man Edward was at
gods service matines for to here of y^ high f^ste he become full sike / and
in the morw^ endured with much ^ayne the mass for to here and after let him be
lad in to his chamber there for to resten him but in to his halle among his
barons and his knights myt he not come hem for to comfort and solace / as he
was woned for to done at that worthy fest / wherefore all her mirth and comfort
among all that were in the halle was turned in to care and sorwe / for
encheson that they dred for to lose her good lord the king And upon seint
^ohanes day Evangelist tho that come next the king vnderfenge his rightes of
holy church as falls to every christian man / and abode the mercy and the will
of god / and tho ij. pilgrims he let before hem come and yaf hem rich yiftes
and betoke hem un to god And also the Abbot of westmynstre he let before him
come and took him that ring in honor of god and seint Mari^ and of seint Johan
Evangelist / And the Abbot took and put it among other relics / so that it is
at westmynstre and ever more shall be and so lay the king sike till the xij.
even and tho died the good king edward at westmynster and there he heth / for
whose love god had showed many fair miracles And this was in the year of
incarnacion of our lord ^hu^ crist.M.lxv. year / And after he was translated
and put in to the shrine through the noble martyr seint Thomas of Caunterbury /

How Harolde that was Godewynes sone was made king and how he escaped fro the
duke of Britayne Ca.C.xxxi
WHen seint Edward was gone out of this world and was gone to god and worthily
entered as it aperteyned to such a lord for to be / the barons of the la^d would
have had edward Helyngus sone to Edward the Outelawe that was Edmonde Irensides
sone to be king for as much as he was most kyndest kings blood of the reame
But haroldus sone through the earl go dewyne and the strength of his fadre good
wine and through other great lords of the royame that were of his kyn and un to
him sibbe seized all Engl^nd to his hand and anon^ let croune him king aft the
e^tereme^t of seint Edward This Harolde that was good wynes sone the second
year after that seint Edward was deed welde have gone in to Flaundres but he
was drive through tempest in to the contre of Pountyfe and there he was take and
brought to the duke william And this harold went tho that Duke william would
have been a venged upon him for encheson that the earl Good wine that was
haroldus fadre had let quelle alured that was seint Edwardes brother and
principaly for encheson that Alured was queen Emmes sone that was Richardus
mother duke of normandy that was Aiell to the duke william And nothelees whenne
the duke william had harolde in prison and under his poer for as much as this
harolde was a noble knight wise and worthy of body and that his fadre and he
were accorded with good king Edward and therefore would not mysdone him but all
manner things that bitwene hem were spoken and ordained harolde by his good
will swore upon a book and upon holy saints that he should spouse and wedde
duke williams daughter after the death of seint Edward and that he should besily
done his deuer for to keep and save the royame of england to the profit and a
vauntage of duke william And when harold had thus made his oath un to duke
william he let him go and yaf him many rich yiftes And he tho went thennes and
come in to England and anon ded in this manner when seint Edward was deed and
as a man falsely forswore he let croune him king of England and falsely brak
the couenantz that he had made before with duke william Wherefore he was with him
wonder wroth and swore that he would upon him been a venged what ever so him be
fell And anon duke william let assemble a great host and come in to England to
a venge him upon harold and to conquer the land if that he might And in the
same year that harold was cronned harolde harestrenge king of denmark arrined
in scotland and thout to have been king of England and he come in to england
and queld and robbed and destroyed all that he myt till that he com^ to york
and there he quelled meny men of Arms a thousand and an C. prestes When this
tydynge come to the king he assembled a strong poer and went for to fight with
harold of Denmark and with his own hand him queld and the danois were
discomfited and tho that left alive with much sorwe fley to her ships And
thus king harold of England queld king harold of denmark

How william bastard duke of Normandy come in to England and quelled king
harold Ca.C.xxx^j
ANd when this bataill was done harold bicome so proud and would no thing part
with his people of thing that he had gotten but held it all to ward him self
wherefore the most pertie of his people were wroth and from him deperted so that
only with him left no mo but his saudiour^ And v^on a day as he sat at mete a
messagier come to him and said that william bastard duke of Normandy was
arrined in England with a great host and had taken all the land about
hastynge and also mined the castle Whenne the king had herd this tydynge he
went thidder / with a litell people with all the have that he might for a litell
people was with him left And when he was come thidder he ordained for to ye ve
bataill to the duke william But the duke ax^d him of these iij. things if that
he would have his daughter to wife as he had made and swore his oath and
behight or that he would hold the la^d of him in truage or that he would
detmyn^ this thing through bataill^ This harold was a proud man and a stout
and trusted wonder much upon his strength and faught with the duke and with
his people but harold and his men in this bataille were discomfited and him self
was there slain and this bataille was ended at Tonbrigge in the second year of
his regne upon seint kalixtes day and he lith at waltham

Of king william bastard and how he gouened him well and wisely and of the
werre bitweue him and the king of f^aunce Capitulo C.xxxiij.
WHen william bastard duke of Normandy hod conquered all the land upon
Cristesmasse day tho next Sueng he let ^roune him king at westmynster and was a
worthy king and yaf to Englisshmen largely lands and to his knights.

And afterward he went over the sea and come in to Normandy and there duelled a
whyl and in the second year of his regne he come ayene in to England and
brought with him Mou^e his wife and let cron^e her queen of England on
withsonday And tho anon after the king of Scotland that was called Mancolyn
began to strive and werre with the duke william And he ordained him tho to ward
Scotland with his men both by land and by see for to destroy the king
Mancolyn / but they were accorded And the king of Scotland become his man and
held all his land of him And king william ress^yued of him his homage and come
ayene in to England / And when king william had be king xvij. year ^aude the
Queen died on whom king william had begoten many fair children / that is for to
seyne Robert curthose william ^e Rous Richard also that deide Henry beauclerc /
and Maude also y^ was the earls wife of Bleynes and other iiij. doughtres and
after his wifes death great debate began bitwene him and the king of f^aunce
Ph^lip but at the last they were accorded And tho duelled the king of England
in Normandy / and no man him werred and he no ma^longe time And the king of
france said upon a day in scorn of king william / that king william had long
tym leyne in child bed and long time had rested him And this word come to the
king of england there that he lay in normandy at Roen / and for this word was
tho ille paid and ek^ wonder wroth toward the king of france and swore by god
that when he were arise of his gysin he would light a thousand candels to the
king of france And anon let assemble a great host of Normandy and of
englisshmen And in the beginning of heruest he come in to france / and brend
all the tounes that he come by through all the contre and robbed and did all
the en^ll that he might through out all france and at the last he been de the
Cite of Mandos and commanded his ^eple for to ^ere wode and as much as might
brenne and him self help there to all that be might with a good will And there
was great hete what of fire that was so great and of the son that t^o was
wonder hoot that all stuffed him self become and fell in to a great sikenesse
/ and when he saw that he was so strong like / he ordained and as signed all
Normandy un to Robert Cur^hoos his sone / and all england to william the Rous
and bi^uath to henry beaucler^ all his cresour / And tho he thus had done / he
vnderfenge all the sacraments of holy church and deide the xxij. year of his
regne and lies at Caan in Normandy

Of king william Roos that was william Bastardus sone that destroyed tounes and
houses of Religion for to make the new forest Capitulo Centesimo
trice^imoquarto
ANd after this william bastard reigned his sone william the Rous and this
william was a wonder contrarions man to god and to holy church and let amend
and make the town of Cardeis that the paynyms had destroyed This king william
destroyed holy church and all her possessions in what part he might hem find
And therefore there was so much debate bitwene him and the erchebisshopp of
Canterbury Ancelme for encheson that he vnderna^me him of his wikkednesse that
he de stroied holy church And for encheson there of the king to him bare great
wrath and for that ca^se he exiled him out of the land And the erchebisshopp
tho went to the court of Rome and there duelled with the pope And this king made
the new forest and cast and destroyed xxvj. toune^ and lxxx. houses of
Religion all for to make his forest longer and bredder And become wonder glad
and proud of his wode and of his forest and of the wild bestes that were there
in that it was mervaill for to wit so that me^ called him keeper of wodes and of
pastures and the longer that he leued the more wykked he become both to god and
to holy church and to all his men. And this king let make the great hall at
west mynster so upon a day of witsonday he held theryn his first feste and he
looked about and said that the hall was to litell by the halue^ dele And at
last he become so contrarions that all thing that plesed god displesed him and
all thing that god loved he hated dedely And so it befell that he dremed and
met upon a nyt a litell or that he deied that he was let blood and bled a great
qua^ti^e of blood and a streme of blood lept an high to ward heaven more than an
C. ^ethem and the clernesse of the day was turned all in to derkenesse And the
firmament also And when he awoke he had great dread so that he nyst what to
done and told his dreme to meny of his conceill and said that he had great
dread and supposed that him was some myschaunce to come And the second night
before a monk dremed of the houhsold that the king went in to a church with
much people and he was proud that he despised all the people thas was with him
and that he no^me the image of the crucifixe and shamfully lote it with his
teth.

And the crucifixe mekely suffered all that he ded but the king as a wode man
rent of the Arms of the crucifixe and cast it under his fete and defouled it
and threw it all abroad and a great flamme of fire came out of the crucifixes
mouth of which dreme meny men had great wonder The goodman that had dremed this
dreme had told it to a knight that tho was most prive with the kxng of all men
/ and the knight was called Hamundes sone and the monk and he told the dreme
to the king and said that it should betoken other thing than good / and notheles
the king lau^ ghed there at ij. or iij. and litell set there of And thought that
he would gone hunte and pley in the forest / and his men him cou^ceilled that he
should not that day for no manner thing come in the wode / so that he abode at
home before mete But anon as he had eten no man myt him let that he nolde
gone to the wod^ for to have his disport

And so it be fell that one of his knights that hight walter Tirell would have
shot to an heart and his arwe gla^^ed upon a branch and through mysauenture
smote the king to the heart / and so he fell down deed to the ground without
any word spekyng and so ended his life / And it was no great wonder for the
day that he deide he had let to ferme the erchebisshopprich of Caunterbury and
xij. abbeis also / and ever more did great destruction to holy church through
wrongful taking and axinges for no man durst withsay that he would have done
and of his lithernesse he would never withdra we nothir to amend his life and
therefore god would suffer him no longer regne in his wikkednesse and he had been
king xiij. year and vj. wekes and lies at westmynstre

Of king Henry ^eauclerke that was william Rous brother and of the debate
bitwene him and Robert Curthose his brother Capitulo Centesimo xxxv.
ANd when this william rous was deed Henry beauclerke his brother was made king
for encheson that william Rou^ had no child begoten of his body and this henry
beauclerke was crouned king at london the iiij. day after that his brother was
deed that is to say the v. day of August And a none as An^^lme that was
Erch^bisshoppe of Caunterbury that was at the court of Rome herd that william
Rous was deed he come ayene in to england / and the king beauc^^rk welcomed him
with mochel honor / And the first year that king henry was crouned he spoused
Maude that was Margaretes dought^r the queen of Scotland and the Erch^bisshopp
Ancelme of Caunterbury wedded hem And this king begat upon his wife ij sons
and a daughter / that is to say william Richard and Maude / And this Maude was
after the Emperesse of Almayne

And in the second year of his regne his brother Robert Curthose that was duke
of Normandy come with an huge maynye in to England for to challenge the land
but through conceille of the wise men of the land they were accorded in this
manner that the king should give the duke his brother a thousand pound every
year and which of hem lengest leued should been others heir and so bitwene hem
should be no debate ne strife And when they were thus accorded the duke went
home ayene in to Normandy And when the king had reigned iiij. year there Aroos a
great debate bitwene him and the Erchebisshopp of Canterbury Auncelme For cause
that the Erchebisshopp would not grant him for to take talliage of chyrches
at his will And therefore eftsone the Erchebisshopp went over the sea to the
court of rome and there duelled with the Pope And in the same year duke of
Normandy come in to England for to speak with his brother And among other
things the duke of Normandy for yaf to the king his brother the forsaid
thousand pound by year that he should pay him And with good love the duke went
tho ayene in to Normandy

And when the ij. year were a gone through enticement of the deuell and of
lither men a great debate arose bitwene the king and the duke so that the king
thnrgh conceill went over the sea in to Normandy And when the king of England
was comen in to Normandy (...) the great lords of Normandy turned to the
king of England and held ayens the duke her own lord and him forsook and to
the king hem yelden and all the good c^stelles and tounes of Normandy And sone
after was the duke taken and lad with the king in to England and the king let
put the duke in to prison And this was the vengeance of god For when the duke
was in the holy land God yafe him such might and honor there wherefore he was
chosen to been of Iherusalem king And he would not be it but forsook it and
therefore send him that shame and despite for to be put in to his brothers prison
Tho seized king Henry all Normandy in to his hand and held hit all his lyves
time and in the same year come the bisshopp Auncelme from the court of Rome in
to England ayene and the king and he were accorded.

And in the year next coming after there began a great debate bitwene king
Phillipp of France And king Henry of England Wherefore king Henry went in to
Norma^die and the werre was strong bitwene hem two And tho died the king of
france / and lowys his sone was made king anon after his death And tho went
king henry ayene in to england / and married Maude his daughter to Henry the
Emperor of Almayne

Of the debate that was bitwene king lowys of france and king Henry of england
and how king henry's ij. sons were lost in the high see Capitulo
Centesimo.xxxvj.
WHenne king Henry had been king xvij. year a great debate aroos bitwene king
lowys of france and king henry of england / for encheson that the king had
sent in to Normandy to his men that they should been helping to the earl of
b^oyes as mochel as they might in werre ayens the king of france / and that
they were as ready un to him as they would ben un to her own lord / for encheson
that the earl had spoused his sustre dame Maude for which encheson the king of
france did much sorwe to normandy / wherefore the king of england was wonder
wroth and in haste went over the sea with a great power and come in to
normandy for to defend that land / and the werre bitwene hem lasted ij. year
till at the last they ij. foughten to gedre and the king of france was
discomfited and uneath escaped a way with much ^eyne and the most part of his
men were take / and the king did with hem what him liked And sum of hem let
he go frelich and sum let he put to the death / But afterward tho ij. kings
were accorded / And when king Henry had holich all the land of Normandy / and
scomfited his enemies of france / he turned ayene in to england with mochel
honor / And his ij. sons william and Richard would come after her fadre and
went to the sea with a great company of people / but ^r that they might come to
land the shipp come ayens a roche and brake all in to pieces and all were
drenched that were therein sauf o man yt was in the sauie ship that ascaped /
and this was on seint katerines day / and thees were the names of hem that were
drenched that is to say william the kings sone Richard his brother / the earl
of Chestre Qttonell his brother / Gieffrey ridell / walter emurcy / Godfrey
er^hedeken / the kings daughter / the Countess of Perches / the kings nece /
the Countess of Chestre / and many other / When king henry and other lords
arrived were in england and herd these tidings / they made sorwe y now / and
all her myrthe and ^oye was turned in to morning and sorwe

How Maude the Emperesse come ayene in to England and how she was afterward
wedded to Gieffroy the Earl of Angoy Capitulo C.xxxvij.
ANd when that ij. year were agone that the Earl had duelled with the king the
Earl went tho from the king and began to werre upon him and did much harm in
the land of Normandy and took there a strong Castle and there he duelled all
that year and tho come to him tydyng that Henry the Emperor of Almaigne that
had spoused Maude his daughter was deed and that she duelled no longer in
Almaigne And that she would come ayene in to Normandy to her fadre And when
she was come to him he no^me her tho to him and come ayene in to England and
made the englisshmen done oath and feaute un to the Emperesse And the first man
that made the oath was william the Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury And that other
king David of Scotland and after him all the Earls and barons of england Also
after the noble man the Earl of Angoy a worthy knight sent to the king of
england y^ he would grant him for to have his daughter to spouse Maude the
Emperesse And for encheson that her fadre wist that he was a noble man the king
granted him and consented there to And tho no^me he his daughter and lad her in
to Normandy and come to the noble knight Earl Gaufride and he spoused the
forsaid Maude with mochel honor And the Earl begat upon her a sone that was
called Henry the Emperesse sone

And after when all this was done king Henry duelled all that year in Normandy
And after that long time a grevous sikenesse took him wherthurgh he died And
this king Henry reigned xxxv. year and iiij. months and after he died as before
is said in Normandy and his heart was entered in the great church of our lady
in Rouen And his body was brought with mochel honor in to England and entered
at Redyng in the Abbey of the which abbey he was begynner and foundour

How Stephene king Henry sustres sone was made king of England Ca.C.xxxviij
AFter this king Henry y^ was the first was made king his nepheu his sustres
sone Stephen Earl of Bo^^igne For anon as he herd the tydynge of his uncles
death he passed (...) see and come in to England through counceill and strength
and help of many (...) lords in england ayens her oath that they had made to
Maude the Emperesse took the reame and let croune Stephen king of the land And
the Erchebisshopp william of Cau^t^rbury that first made the oath of feaute un
to maude the Emperesse set the croune upon king Stephenes head and him
anointed / and bisshoppe Rogier of Salisbury maynteyned the kings party in
as moth as he might The first year that king Stephen began to regne he
assembled a great host and went him toward Scotland / for to have werred upon
the king of Scotland / but he come ayens him in pees and in good man^r and to
him trusted / but he made to him none homage / for as much as he had made
homage un to the Emperesse Maude And the iiij. year of his regne Maude the
Emperesse come in to england / and tho began debate bitwene king Stephen and
Maude the Emperesse This Maude went un to the Cite of Nichol and the king her
beseged long time and might not speed so well the Cite was kept and defended
/ and tho that were within the Cite queyntely ascaped away without any manner
harm / and tho took the king the Cite and duelled therein till condelmesse /
And tho come the Barons that held with the Emperesse that is for to say the
earl Randulphe of Chestre / the Earl Robert of Ebucestre hugh / bygot / Robert
of Morley / and brought with hem a strong power and faught with the king and
yafe him a great bataille / in which bataill king stephen was taken and set
in prison in the Castle of Bristowe

How Maude the Emperesse went fro wynchestre un to Oxenford and after she
ascaped to wallynford and what sorwe and disese that she had Capitulo
Centesimo.xxxix.
WHenne the king was take and brought in to word in the castle of Bristowe /
this Maude the Emperisse anon was made lady of England and all men held her
for lady of the land / But tho of kente held with the king Stephenes wife /
and also william of Pree and his reteune help hem and held werre ayens Maude
the Emperesse and anon aft y^ king of Scotland come to him with an huge nombre
of people / and tho went they yfere un to wynchestre there that the Emperesse was
and would have take her / but the Earl of Gloucestre come with his power and
faught with hem / and the Emperesse in the mean while that the bataille dured
escaped fro thens and went un to Oxenford / and there her held / And in that
bataille was the Earl of Gloucestre discomfited and taken / and with him many
other lords And for his deliverance was king Stephen delivered out of prison
/ And when he was delivered out of prison he went thens to Oxenford and
beseged the Emperesse that was tho at Oxenford / and the sege endured fro
Mihelmasse un to seint Andrews tide / And the Emperesse let tho cloth her all
in whit lynnen cloth / for encheson that she not would be ne know / for in the
same time wa^ much snow / and so she ascaped by the thamyse from hem away /
that were her ennemies / And fro thens she went to wallyngford / and there her
held And the king would have beseged her / but he had so much to done with the
earl Ra^dulfe of Chestre / and with hugh bygot that stronglich werred up on him
in every place that he ne wist widder for to turn / And the Earl of Gloucestre
halpe hem with his power

How Gaufride the Earl of Angron yafe up un to Henry the Emperesse sone all
Normandy Capitulo Centesimo quadragesime.
ANd after this the king went un to wilton / and would have made a Castle
there / but tho come to him the Earl of Gloucestre with a strong power / and
almost had take the king / but yet the king ascaped with much pain / and
william martell there was take / And for whose deliverance the yafe un to the
Earl of Gloucestre the good Castle of shirborne / that he had take And when
this was done the Earl Robert / and all the kings enemies went to Faringdone
and begone there for to make a strong Castle / but the king come thidder with
a strong power and drofe hem thens in that same year The Earl Randulfse of
Chestre was accorded with the king / and come to his cour^ at his commandment
/ And the Earl wend saufelich to come and the king anon set take him and put
him in to p^^son and must never for no thing come out till that he had yield
up un to the king the Castle of Nicholl the which he had take from the king
with strength in the xv. year of his regne And Gaufride the Earl of Angeon yafe
up un to Henry his sone all Normandy / And in the year that next su^d deide
the Earl Gaufride And Henry his sone the anon turned arene to Angeon / and
there was made Earl with mochel honor of his men of the land / and to him
diden feaute and homage the most rartie of his land And tho was this henry the
Emperesse sone Earl of Angewe and duke of Norma^die

In the same year was made divorce bitwene the king of France and the queen
his wife that was right heir of Gascoyne For encheson that it was know and
proved that they were sible and nygh of blood And the spoused her Henry the
Emperesse sone Earl of ^ngoy and duke of Normandy and duke of Gascoyne

The xviij. year of this king Stephen this Henry come in to england with a
strong power and began for to werre upon king s^ephen and took y^ Castle of
Malmesbury And did much harm and the king Stephen had so much werre that he
nyst whidder for to wend but at the last they were accorded through the
Erchebisshopp Theobald and through other worthy lords of England upon this
condition that they should depart the Reame of England bitwene hem so that Henry
the Emperesse sone should holich half have all the land of England And thus
they were accorded And pees cried through out all England And when the accord
was made bitwene the ij. lords King Stephen become so sorry for cause he had
lost half Euglond and fell in to such amaladie and died in the xix. year
viij. wekes and v. day of his regne all in werre and in contak and he ^eth in
the Abbey of Feueresham the which he let make in the vj. year of his regne

Of king Henry the second that was the Emperesse sone in whose time seint
Thomas of Caunterbury was Chaunceler Capitulo Centesimo quadrages^mopr^mo.
ANd after this king S^^phen reigned Henry the Emperesse sone and was crouned of
the Erchebisshopp Theobald the xvii. day before Cristemasse And in the same
year Thomas Beket of (...) Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury was made the kings
chaunceler of England The second year that he was crouned he let (...) adoune
all the new Castelles that were longyug to the cr^^ne the which king Stephen
had give un to diverse men and hem had made Earls and baron^ for to hold with
him (...) to help him against Henry the Emperesse sone

And the iiij. year of his regne he put under his own lordshipp the king of
wales And in the same year when the king of Scotland had in his own hand that
is to seyn the Cite of karlille the Castle of Banburgh the new Castle upon
Tyne and the Erldome of laucastre.

The same year the king with a great powrr went in to waly^ and let cast a
down woles and make weyes and made strong the Castle of Rutland basyng work
/ and among the Castells he made an house of the temple And in the same year
was Richard his sone borne / that afterward was earl of Oxenford and the
fourth year of his regne he made Gaufride earl of Britaigne / and in that year
he changed his money / and the vj. year of his regne he lad an huge host un
to Tolouse and conquer by it / And the vij. year of his regne deide Thebault
the Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury / And tho all the Cite of caunterbury all most
through meschief was bre^d The ix. year of his regne Thomas Beket his Chaunceler
/ was chosen to been Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury And upon seint bar nardis day
he was sacred / and in that year was borne Alienore the kyuges daughter And the
x. year of his regne seint Edward the king was translated with mochel honor
And the xj. year of his regne he held his parliament of Northampton And from
thens fled seint Thomas Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury / for the great debate
that was bitwene the king and him / for if he had been founden in the morn he
had be slayye / and therefore he fled thens with iij. felawes on foot only that
no man wist where he was / and went over the sea to the pope of Rome / And this
was the principal encheson for as much as the king would have put clerks to
death / that were atteint of felony without any priuelege of holy church And
the xij. year of his regne was Johan his sone borne / And the xi^j. year of his
regne deide Maude the Emperesse that was his mod^^ And in that same year was
Johan his daughter borne The xiiij. year of his regne the duke henry of Saxone
spoused Maude his daughter / And he begat on her iij. sons / Henry Othus and
william / And in the xv. year of his regne deide the good Earl Robert of
Gloucestre that founded the Abbey of nonnes of Eton

And in the same year Marike king of Iherusalem conquered Babiloigne The xvj.
year of his regne he let croune his sone Henry at westmynstre / and him crouned
Rogier Erchebisshopp of york in harmyng of Thomas Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury
/ wherefore the same Rogier was acursed of the Pope

Of king Henry that was sone of king Henry the Emperesse son^ and of the debate
that was bitwene him and his fad^^ while that he was in normandy Capitulo
Centesimo xlij.
AFter the coronacion of king Henry the sone of king henry the Emperesse sone
Tat same Henry the Emperesse son^ went over in to Normandy and there he let
mar^e Elienore the daughter of the Dolfyne that was king of Almaigne And in the
vij. year that the Erchebisshopp seint Thomas had been outelawed the king of
frannce made the king and seint thomas accorded And tho come Thomas the
Erchebisshopp to Canterbury ayene to his own church And this accord was made
in the beginning of aduent And afterward he was quelled and martred the v^day
of Cristemasse that tho next come For king Henry thought upon seint Thomas
Erchebisshope upon Cristemasse day as he sat at mete and thees words said
That if he had any good knight with him he had be many day passed avenged upon
the Erchebisshopp Thomas And anon Sir william breton Sir hugh morvile Sir
william Tracy And Sir Reignold fitz vese beres sone in Englissh privily went un
to the sea and comen in to England to the church of Canterbury and him there
they martred at seint Benettes Autre in the modre church And that was in the
year of Incarnacion of Ihesu crist M.C.lxxij. year.

And anon after Henry the new king began for to make were upon Henry his
fadre and eke upon his brethren also

And so upon a day the king of france and a^l the kings sons and the king of
Scotland and the grettest lords of england were arisen ayens the king Henry
the fadre and at the last as god would he conquered all his enemies And the
king of france and he were accorded And tho sent king Henry the fadre specialy
un to the king of France and prayed him hertely for his love that he would
send to him by letter the names of hem that begonnen the werre upon him And the
king of france sent ayene to him by a letter the names of hem that bygonnen
the werre The first was Johan his sone and Richard his brother and Henry his
sone the new king Tho was Henry the king wonder wroth and cursed the time
that ever he hem bigate

And while the werre dured Henry his sone the new king died sore repentyng his
mysdede and most sorwe made of onyma^ for cause of seint Thomas death of
Caunterbury

And prayed his fadre with much sorwe of heart mercy for his trespass and his
fadre for yaf it him And had of him great pite and after he died the xxxvj.
year of his regne and lies at Redyng

How the christian lost the holy land in the forsaid kings time through a falls
christian man that become a sarazene Ca.C.xliij
ANd while that king henry the Emperesse sone lived and reigned the great
bataille was in the holy land bitwene the christian men and the sarazenes / but
the criste^ men were there quelled through great treson of the earl Tirpe that
would have had to wife / the q^ene of ^hrlm^ that some time was Baldewynes wife
but she forsook him / and took to her lord a knight a worthy man that waz
called sir Gny perches wherefore the earl Tirpe was wroth and went anon right
to Soladyne that was soudan of Babiloigne and become sarazene and his man / and
forsook his cristendome and all christian law and the christian men wist not of
this deeds / b^t went for to have had great help of him as they were woned to
have before / And when they comen to the bataille / this false christian man
turned un to the sarazenes / and forsook his own nations and so were the
christian men there quelled with the sarazenes / and thus were the christian men
slain and put to horrible death / and the cite of ^h^lm^ destroyed / and the
holy cross borne away The king of france and all the great lords of the land
let hem cross for to go in to the holy land / And among hem went Richard
king henry's sone first after the king of france that took the cross to the
Erchebisshopp of tours / but he took not the viage at that time for encheson
that he was let by other manner weyes and needs to be done And when king henry
his fadre had reigned xxxv. year and v. months and iiij. days he died and
lies at foundenerard

Of king Richard that conquered all the holy land that christian men had (...)
Ca.C.xliiij
ANd after this king henry reigned Richard his sone a strong man and a worthy
and also bold and he was crouned at westmynster of the Erchebisshopp Baldewyne
of Canterbury the iij. day of Septembre / and the ij. year of his regne king
Richard him self and Baldewyne the Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury and Hubert
bisshopp of Salisbury and Raudulphe Earl of Gloucestre / and other many lords
of england went in to the holy land / and in that viage deide the
Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury And king Richard went before in to the holy land
and rest not till that he come forth in his way un to Cipres / and took Cipres
with great force / and sithen king Richard went forth toward the holy land and
get there as much as the Christian men hadden lost before and conquered the
land ayene through great might sauf only the holy cross And when king Rihard
come to the town of Acres for to get the cite Agrete debate a rose bitwene
him and the king of france so that king of france went ayene in to france
and was wroth toward the king Richard but er king Richard went ayene he took
the cite of Acres And whenne he had taken it he duelled in the cite a whyl but
to him come tydynge that the earl ^ohan of Oxu^ford his brother would have
seized all England in to his hand And Normandy also and would croune him king
of the land And whenne king Richard herd this tydynge he went a ye^e toward
England with all the speed that he myt but the duke of Ostriche met with him
and took him and brought him to the Empero^r of Almaigne And the Emperor
brought him in to his prison And afterward he was delivered for an huge
raunsone that is for to say an hounderd thousand pound And for which raunsone
to be paid each other chalice of England was molte and made in to money and
all the monks of the order of cisteanx yeuen all her ^okes through england to
done he^ to selle and the rau^sone for to pay

How king Richard come ayene from the holy land and avenged him of his enemies
Ca.C.xlvj.
WHiles this king Richard was in prison the king of france werred upon him
strongely in Normandy and Johan his brother werred v^on him in England but the
bishops and barons of England withstode him with all the power that they
might get and geten the castle of wyndesore and all other castelles And the
forsaid Johan saw that he had no might ne poer ayens the barons of England for
to fight but anon went him over see un to the king of france And when king
Richard com^ out of prison and was delivered and come in to England Anon after
Ca^delmasse in great have he went un to Notyngham and the castle of Notyngham
to him was yolden And tho discomfited he Johan his brother and that with him
held And after he went un to the Cite of wynchestre and there he let him croune
king of England and after he went in to Normandy for to werre upon the king of
france And the king of france come with vj.C. knyght^s toward Gisors and the
king Richard met him and tho would have give him bataille but the king of
france fled and an hundred knights of his were take and ij. hundred stedes
were trapped with yren And anon^ after went king Richard for to besege the
Castle of Gaillard And as he rode upon a day by the Castle to take auisement
of the Castle / an arbalastier smote him with a quarrel that was enuenyned /
and the king drofe out the shafte of the quarrel / but the quarellys head
aboode still in his head / and it began for to rancle that ^e might not help
him self ne meue his arme^ And tho he wist that he had dethes wound that he
myt not be hole for no manner thing / he commanded anon sharply all his men
fo to assaill the Castle / So that the castle was taken o^ that he died / and
so manlich his men diden that all the people that were in the castle were all
taken / and the king did with he^ what he would and commanded his men that they
should bring before him the man that him so hurt and so wounded And when he
come before the king y^ king axed what was his name And he said / my name is
Bartram gurdone / wherefore said the king have thou me slain / since that I did
the never none harm Sir said he though ye did me never none harm / ye your
self with your hand quelled my fodre and my brother And therefore I have qnytte
now your trauaill Tho said king Richard he that died upon the cross to bring
man's soul from pyne of hell foryeue the my death / and I also foryeue it the
Tho commanded the king that no man should him mysdo / But for all the kings
defending some of his men him followed and preuely him quelled / and the vj. day
af^ the king did shriuen him and sore repeutau^ce having of his misdeeds and
was houseled and anointed / and this king ne reigned but ix. rere and xxxix.
wekes and deide and lies besides his fadre at founte^erard

Of king Johan that in the first year of his regne lost all Normandy
Ca.C.lxvj
WHen king Richard was deed for e^chesan that he had none heir nothir sone ne
daughter his brother ^ohan was made king and crouned at westmynstre of Huberd
that was tho Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury And when he began to regne he become
so meruaillous man and went over in to Norma^die / and werred upon the king of
france / and so long they werred to gedre till at the last king Johan lost
Normandy and Angeon / wherefore ^e was sore annoied it was no meruaille Tho let
he assemble be fore him at london erchebisshoppes bisshoppes abbotes and ^ours
earls and barons and held there a great ^leme^t and axed there of the clergy
the tenthe of every church of england for to con^uere and get ayene norma^die
and Augeon that he had lost And thy would not grant y^ thing wherefore he was
wonder wroth And in the same time died bisshopp Hubert and the ^our and the
count of Canterbury chosen ayens the kings will to to been erchebisshop mastir
stepha^ of langeton a good clear that woned at the court of rome and send to
the pope her Election and the pope co^fermed it and sacred him at viterbe when
y^ kyngwyst this tydyng he was wonder wroth and drofe the priour and the coue^t
fro Canterbury and exiled hem out of england and commanded that no manner
letter that come from rome ne no manudeme^t should be vnderfonge ne pleted in
England when this tydyng come to the pope He sent un to king Johan by his lr^e
and prayed him with good will and good heart that he would vnderfong stephan
erchebisshopp of Canterburi un to his church and suffer the prior and his
monks to come ayene un to her own^ duellynge but the king would not grant it
for no thing

How king Johan would no thing done for the popes co^maun deme^t wherefore all
England was e^terdited and suspe^ded Ca.C.lxvij
ANd at the last the Pope sent by his Auctorite and enjoined to the bisshoppes
of England that if the king would not vnderfong the priour of Canterbury and his
monks that they should done g^all interdityug through out all England and
granted full power to iiij. bisshoppes to pronounce the interdityng if it were
need The first was bisshopp william of london and that other bisshopp Eustace
of Ely and the iij. was bisshopp walter of wynchestre and the iiij. was
bisshopp Giles of Herford And thees iiij. bisshoppes prayed the king knelyng on
her knees and sore weeping y^ he would done the Popes co^manudement and showed
him the bulls of the Enterditing but for no prayer that they might pray he
would not consent there to And when the bisshoppes saw this they went from the
king And in the morn after the Anunciacion of out lady they pronounced the
general enterditing through out all england so that the church doors were shit
with keys and with other fastenyng and with walls And when the enterditing
was pronounced than the king began for to wex all out of mesure and nomme in to
his hand all the possessions of the iiij. bisshoppes and of all y^ clergy
through out all the land and ordained men for to keep it that the clerkys
might not have her living Wherefore the bisshopes cursed all hem that put or
should meddle with holy church goods ayens the will of hem that hem owed. And
when the king would not cese of his malice for no manner thing the iiij.
bisshoppes before said went over the sea and went to the bisshopp of Canterbury
and told him all the thing And the Erchebisshopp to hem said that they should
gone ayene to Canterbury and he would come thidder to hem or else he would send
thidder certain persons in his stead that should done as much as him self were
there And when the bisshoppes herd this they turned again in to england and
comen un to Canterbury The tydynge come to the king y^ the bisshoppes were
comen ayene to Canterbury and him self might not come thidder that time he send
thidder bisshoppes Earls and Abbotes for to trete with hem that the king should
vnderfonge the erche bisshopp Stephen and the priour and all the monks of
Canterbury and that he should never after that time no thing take of holy chyrhe
ayens the will of hem that owed the goods and that the king should make full
amends to hem of whom he had any goods taken and that holy church should have
all fraunchises as ferforth as they had in seint Edwards time the confessor

How stephen of langeton^ come in to england through the popes commandment and
he went again Ca.C.xlviij.
WHen the form of accord thus was ordained hit was in a pair of Endentures
and they put her seals un to that one part and they that comen in the kings
name put her seal^^ to that other part of endentures and the iiij. bisshoppes
above said took that o part of the endentures to hem and that other part of the
endentures they bare with hem to show the king when the king saw the form
and understood he held him full well paid of all manner thing as they had
ordained saving as touching restitucion of the goods for to make ayene to that
thing he nold not accord and so he send word ayene to the iiij. bisshoppes that
they should done out and put a way that o ^oint of restitucion and they ansuerd
that they nold not done o word out Tho sent the king to the erchebisshopp by
tho iiij. bisshoppes that he should come to Caunterbury for to speak with him
there and sent un to him saufcondit vuder plegges that is to seyne his Justices
Gilbert Peyte vyn^ william de la Brener and Johan be fitz hugh that in her
conduit saufely he should come and gone ayene at his will ^ in this manner the
Erchebisshopp Stephen come to Canterbury And whenne the Erchebisshopp was com^
the king come to Chilham for he would come no ner to Cannterbury at that time
but he sent by his tresorer bisshopp of wynchestre that he should done out of
the endentures the clause of restitucion for to make of the goods And the
Erchebisshopp made his oath that he would never done out ^ word there of ne
change of that the bisshoppes had spoken and ordained And tho the Erchebisshopp
went ayene to Rome withonte any more doing King ^ohan was tho wrother than
ever he was before / and let make a comune cry through out all england that
all tho that had holy church rentes and went o^ the sea that they should come
ayene in to england at a certain day or else they should lose her rentes for
ever more and that he commanded to every shereue through out all england that
they should enquere if any Bisshopp / Abbot / Priour / or any other prelat of
holy church fro y^ day afterward resceyued any mau^deme^t that come fro the
pope that they should take the body and bring it before him / and that they
should t^ke in to the kings hand all her lands of holy church that were yeuen
to any man by the Erchebisshopp stephen or by the ^our of canterbury from the
time of election of the erchebisshopp / and commanded that all the wodes that
were the erchebisshoppes should be cast a dou^ un to the ground and all sold

How king Johan destroyed the order of Cisteaux Ca.C.x^^^
ANd in the same time the Irisshmen begone to werre upon king ^ohan / and king
^ohan ordained him for to wend in to Irland and ^et arere an huge tax through
out all england that is to say xxxv.M. marc / and sent through all England to
the monks of the order of Cisteaux that they should help him of vj.M. marc of
silver And they ansuerd and said that they durst no thing done without her
chief Abbot of Cisteaux / wherefore king ^ohan when he come ayene from Irland he
did hem so much sorwe and care that they nist where to a bide for he took so
much raunsone of enery house of hem that the sum a^mounted to ix.M.cc^. marc
So that they were clean lost and destroyed and voided her house and her lands
through out all england / And the abbot of wauersey drad so much his manace
that he forsook all the abbey and went thens and preuely ordained him over see
to the house of Cisteaux when the tydynge come to the pope that the king had
done so much malice / tho was he to the kyngward full wroth / and sent ij.
^^gatz un to the king that one was called Pandolfe and that other durant that
they should warn the king in the popes name / that he should cese of hie
persecucion that he did un to holy church and amend the wrong and the
trespase that he had done to the Erchebisshoppe of Caunterbury and to the
Priour and un to the monks of Caunterbury and to all the clergy of England
and that he should restore the goods aye^ that he had taken of hem ayens her
will and else they should curse the king by name and to do this thing and to
conferme the Pope took hem his lr^es in bulls patentz These ij. legatz come in
to England and comen to the king to Northampton there that he held his
parliament and full courteisely they him salued and sayden Sir we ben come fro
the pope of rome the pees of holy church and of the land to amend And we
amonest you first in the Popi^ half that ye make full restitucion of the
goods that ye have rauyshed of holy church and of the land and that ye
vnderfonge stephen Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury in to his dignite and the
priour of Caunterbury and his monks and that ye yield ayene un to the
Erchebisshopp all his lands and rents without any with holdyng And Sir yet
more over that ye such restitucion hem make as holy church shall hold her
paid Tho ansuerd the king as touching the Priour and his monks of Caunterbury
all that ye have said I wull gladly do and all thing that ye will ordeyne But
as touching the Erchebisshopp I shall tell you in mine heart as hit lithe that
the Erchebisshopp let his bishop rich and that the Pope than for him would pray
and than upon a venture me should like some other bisshoppriche for to give him
in Engloud and upon this condition I would him resceyue and vnderfong And
nothlees in England as Erchebisshopp yif he abide he shall never have so good
saufconduit but he shall be take. Tho said Pandolfe un to the king Holy church
was woned never to discharge an Erchebisshoppe without cause resonably but
ever the has ^e woned to chastyze princes that to god and holy chyche were
inobedient What how now quod the king manace ye me Nay said Pandolfe but ye
now openly have told as it stands in your heart And to you we wull tell
what is the Popes will and thus it stant that he has you holy enterdited and
acursed for the wrongs that ye have done to holy church and to the clergy
And for as much as ye duells and beth in will to a bide in ma^^ and will not
come to no^^ ammendement ye shall understand that fro this time afterward the
scentence / is upon you ye ben and holds stead and strength and upon all tho
that with you have communed before this time wethir they been Earls Barons or
Knights or any other what so ever they been we hem o^^oyle saufely un to this
day and fro this time afterward of what condition ever that they be we hem
accurse that with you comen / and so do we scentence upon hem openly and
specially And we assoille quytely Earls Barons knights and all other manner men
of her homages services and feautes that they should / un to you done / and
this tydynge to conferme / we give pleyne power to the bisshopp of wynchestre
to the bishop of nor the wych^ And the same power we give in scotland to the
bisshoppes of Rouchestre and of Salisbury And in walys we give the same power
to the bisshoppes of seint david and of landaf and of seint ass / And more
over we send through all cristendome that all the bisshoppes / be yonde the sea
that they done accurse a^le tho that helps you or any counceill yeueth you
in any manner need that ye have to done in any pertie of the world / And we
assoille hem also all by the auctorite of the pope and command hem also with
you for to werre as with him that is en^mie to all holy church Tho ansuerd the
king what mow ye done me more Tho ansuerd Pandolf we sey ne to you in verbo
dei that ye ne none heir that ye have never after this day may be crouued Tho
said the king by him that is almyty god and I had wist of this thing er y^ ye
come in to my land that ye had me brought such tydynge I should have made you
ride all an hole year / Tho ansuerd Pandolfe full well wend we at our first
coming that ye would have been obedient to god and to holy church / and have
fullfylled the popes commandment / and now we have showed to you and
pronounced the popes will as we were charged there with And as now ye have
said that if ye had wist the cause of our coming that ye would have made us
(...) all an hole year / and as well ye might have said that ye would have take
an hole year of respite by the popes ^eue / But for to suffer what death ye
could crdyne / we shull not spare for to tell you hollich all the popes
message and his will that we were charged with

How Pandolfe delivered a cler^ that had falsed and counterfated the kings
money before the king him self Ca.C.l.
ANd anon tho commanded the king the shereues and (...) of northampton that
were in the kings presence that they should bring forth all the ^soners that
they might been done un to the death before Pandolfe for encheson the king wend
that they would have gain said her deeds for cause of death all thing that he
had spoken before / Whenne the ^soners were come before the king the king
commanded some to be honged and some to been draw and some to draw out her
yien out of her head and among all other there was a clerc had falsed the
kings money and the king command that he should be honged and draw And when
Pandolf herd this commandment of the king he stert him by smertely and anon
axed a book and candell and would have cursed all (...) that set upon the clerc
any ho^de And Pandolf him self went for to seche a cross and the king folewed
him and delivered him the clerc by the hand that he should done with him what
that ever he would And thus was the clerc delivered and went thens and Pandolfe
and durant his felaw went fro the king Johan and come ayene to the Pope of Rome
and told him that king Johan would not amended been but ever abide so occur
(...) And nothelees the pope granted that year through out england that men
might sing masses in couenable chyrches and make gods body and yeve it to
sike m^n that pass should out of this world And also that men might christian
children oueralle

And when the pope wist and saw that the king would not ben under the rule of
holy church for no manner thing the pope tho sent to the king of France in
remission of his sins that he should take with him all the power that he
might and wend in to England for to destroy king Johan When this tydynge come
to king Johan tho was he sore annoied and sore drad left that he should lose
his Reame and him self be done to death

Tho sent he to the pope messagiers and said that he would been Justified and
come to ammendement in all things and would make satisfaction to all manner men
after the popes ordeynaunce Tho sent the pope ayene in to England Pandolfe and
other messagiers comen to Canterbury there the king abode And the xiij. day of
May the king made an oath for to stand to the popes ordinance before Pandolfe
the legate in all manner things in which he was accursed and that he should
make full restitucion to all men of holy church and of religion and of the
goods that he had take of hem ayens her will and all the great lords of
England swore upon the book and by the holy dome that if the king would not
hold his other they said that they would make him hold it by strength.

Tho put the king him to the court of Rome and to the Pope and tho yafe up the
royame of England and of Irland for him and for his heirs for evermore that
should come after him So that king Johan and his heirs should take tho ij.
royams of the popes hand and should hold tho ij. Royamrs of the Pope as to
ferme payng every year un to the court of Rome a thousand marc of (...) / and
tho took the king the croune of his ^^rd and set him on his knees and thee^
words he said in ^ering of all the great lords of england / here I resign up
the crount and the reame of England in to the popes ^and Innocent the iij. and
put me hollich in his m^rcy and in his ordinaun^^ Tho vnderfeng Pandolfe the
croune of king Johan and kept it v. days as for seisyn taking of ij. reames of
^nglond and of Irland and confermed all manner things by his chartre that
foleweth after

Of the letter obligatorie that king Johan made un to the court of Rome wherefore
the petre^ pen^ been gadred through out all England Ca.C.^^.
TO all christian people through out the world duelling Johan by the grace of god
king of ^nglond greting to your university / and know thing it be that for as
much ^s we have grieved and offended god and our modre church of Rome / and for
as much as we have need to the mercy of our lord Ihesu crist and we may no
thing so worthy offer as competent satisfaction to make to god and to holy
church but if it were our own body as with our ^eames of england and of Irland
Than by the grace of god we desire to meke us for the love of him that meked
him to the death of the cross / through cou^seill of the noble Earls and barons
we off^^n and freely grannten to god and to the apposteles seint petre and seint
Paul and to our modre church of Rome and to our holy fadre the pope Innocent
the thridde and to all the ropes that comes after him all the reame and
patronages of churches o^ england and of Irland with her appertenaunces for
remission of our sins and help and health of our kyn souls and of all
christian sou^^s / so that fro this time afterward we wull resceyue and hold of
our modr^ church of Rome as fee ferme doing feaute to our holy fadre the pope
Innocent the thridde / and to all the popes that comen after him in the manner
above said / And in presence of the wise man Pandolfe the popes subdekene we
maken liege homage as it were in the popes presence and before him were and we
shull done all manner things above said and there to we bynden us and all that
comes after us / and our ^eires for ever more without any gain seyeng to the
Pope and eke the ward of church vacauntz and in token of this thing ever for
to last we wulle conferme and ordeyne that our specialle rentes of the forsaid
Royame saving S^int Petres pen^ in all thing to the mother church of rome payeng
by year a M. marc of silver at ij. terms of the year for all manner customs
that we should done for the forsaid Royames that is to seyne at mihelmasse and
at Estren that is to seyne vij.C. marc for england and ccc. marc for Irland
saving to us and to our heirs our Justices and our other fraunchises and other
realtes that apperteyneth to the croune And all these things that before been
said we wull that it be ferme and stable withouten end and to that obligacion
we and our successors and our heirs in this manner ben bound that if we or any
of our heirs through any presumpcion fall in any point against any of these
thyngis above said and he be warned and he wull not right amend him he shall
than lose the forsaid Reame for evermore and that this chartre of obligacion
and our warrant for evermore be ferme and stable without gain saying we shull
fro this day afterward be true to god and to the mother church of Rome and to
the pope Innocent the thridde and to all that comes after him and the Reames
of England and of Irland we shull maynten trewly in all manner pointz ayens all
manner men by our power through gods help

How the clerks that were outelawed out of England come ayene and how king
Johan was assoiled Ca.C.^ij.
WHenne this chartre was made and enseled the king vnderfenge ayene his croune
of pandolfes hand and sent anon^ un to Erchebisshopp Stephen and to all his
other clerkys and lewd men that he had exiled out of his land that they should
come ayene in to England and have ayene her lands and her ren^^s and that he
would make restitucion of the goods that he had taken of hirs against her will
The king him self tho and Pandolfe and Earls and barons went tho un to
wynchestre ayens the Erchebisshopp Stephen and when he was come the king went
ayens him and fell a down to his fete and said to him fair sir ye be welcome
and I cri^ you mercy for ^^cheson that I have trespased ayen^ yow^ The
Erchebisshopp took him up tho in his arms and cussed him courtoisely often
times and after lad him to the do^e of seint Swythynes church by the hand and
assoiled him of the sentence and him reco^siled to god and to holy church and
that waz on seint Margaretes day and the Erchebisshopp anon went for to sing
mass and the king offered at the mass a marc of gold And when the mass was
done all they went to vnderfonge all her lands without any manner gain saying
And that day they made all myrthe and ^oye y now / but yet was not the
enterditing releced / for encheson the Pope had set that the enterditing should
not ben undone / till the king had made full restitucion of the goods that he
had take of holy church and also that him self should done homage to the Pope
by a certain legate that he should send in to England

Tho took Pandolfe his leave of the king and of the Erchebisshop and went ayene
un to Rome / And the Erchebisshopp anon let come before him prelates of holy
church at reding for to trete and cou^seill how much and what they should axe of
the king for to make restitucion of the goods that he had taken of hem / And
they ordained and said that the king should give to the Erchebisshopp iij.M.
marc for the wrong that the king had done un to him And also to other clerks
by porcions xv. thousand marc. And in the same time Nicholas bisshopp of Tuscan
Cardmall penitauncer of Rome come in to engloud through the Popes commandment
the v. ^al. of Octo^ and come to london the v. nonas of Octobre for encheson
that king ^ohan and all the kings that comen after him should evermore hold the
reames of england and of Irland of god and of the Pope payeng to the pope by
year as it is above said

How the ^nterditinge was undone in england and of the debate that was bitwene
king Johan and the barons of the Reame Capitulo Centesimo quinquagesimo^ercio
WHen king Johan had done his homage to the begat that showed him the popes
lr^e that he should pay to ^uliane and yield ayene that was king Richardes wife
the iij. part of the land of England and of Irland that he had withholde since
that king Richard deide When king Johan herd this he was wonder wroth / for
utterlich the enterditing might not been undone till that he had made gree and
restitucion to the forsaid Iuliane of that she axed The legate went tho ayene to
he Pope after Cristemasse / and the king sent tho messagiers over see to
Iuliane that was king Richardes wife for to have a relese of that she axed of
him And so it befell that Iuliane deide anon after Estre / And in so much the
king was quyte of thing that she axed But tho at the fest of Seint Johan that
come next after through the Popes commaudement the enterditing was first relesed
through all england the vij. day of Inyll / And vij. year was the land
enterdited / and in the morwe men ronge and said massis through out london and
so after through out all england And the next year after there ^ega^ a great
debate bitwene king Johan and the lords of england / for encheson that he
would not grant the laws and hold the which seint Edward had ordained / and
had been used and hold un to that time that he had hem broken / for he would no
law hold / but did all thing that him liked / and disherited many men
without consent of lords and perys of the land / and he would disherite the
good Earl Randulfe of Chestre for encheson that he undertook him of his
wikkednesse / and for cause that he did so much shame and vilany to god and to
holy church / and also for he held and haunted his own brothers wife / and
lay also by many other women great lords doughtres / for he spared no woman
that him liked for to have / wherefore all the lords of the land were with him
wonder wroth and went to london and took the cite And for to cese this debate
and sorwe the king and the Erchebisshopp and other great lords of the land of
england assembled hem before the fest of seint Ioha^ baptist in a medewe
besides the town of Stanes that is called Romnemede / And the king made hem
there a chartre of frau^chises soche as they would axe^ and in soche manner they
were accorded and that accordement last not f^ll long / for the king him self
sone after did ayens the points of the same chartre that he had made wherefore
the most party of the land of lords assembled hem and begone to we^re upon
king Johan / and brend his tounes and robbed his folk and did all the sorwe
that they might / and made hem as strong as they might with all her power and
thought to drive him out of england / and make lowys the kings sone of
frauuce king of england And king Johan sent tho over see and ordained so much
people of Normans and of Picardes and of Flemmynges So that the land might not
hem sustain but with much sorwe / And among all these people there was a man
of No^ma^die that was called Faukes of brent and this Normand and his company
^ their church ne house of religion that they ne brend and (...) it (...) bare a
way all that they might take / so that the land (...) all destroyed what in o
side and that other The barons and lords of England ordained among hem the
best spekers and wisest men / and sent hem over see to king Philipp of france
and prayed him that be would send lowys his sone in to england to been king of
england and to vnderfenge the croune

How ^owys the kings sone of france come in to england with a strong power
of people to be king of england Capitulo C^ntesimo quinquagesimoquarto
WHen king Philipp of france herd this tydyng he made certain aliaunce
bitwene hem by her common election that lowys king Philippes sone of france
should go with hem in to England and drive out king Johan of the land and all
that were in presence of Lowys made un to him homage and bicome his men And the
barons of England held hem still at london and abide^ Lowys the kings sone of
france and this was the next saturday before the Ascencion of our lord that
Lowys come in to England with a strong poer and that time king ^ohan had taken
all the castelles of England in to Aliens hondes And lowys come tho and beseged
at rouchestre the castle and took it with strength and the thursday in
whitsonweke let honge all the Aliens that were theryn and the thursday tho next
sueng he come to london and there he was vnderfonge with mochel honor of the
lords that abyden him there and all to him made homage And afterward in the
tewysday next after the trinite sunday he took the castle of Reigate and in
the morwe after the castle of Gilford and the friday next after the castle of
Farneham and the monday next after the cite of wynchestre to him was yolde and
in the morwe after seint ^ohanes day the Manner of woluesey and the tewisday aft
the Vt^s of seint petre and seint paul they took y^ castle of Odiham And the
monday next after seint Magarete day he ordained him toward beaumer for to
besege the castle and there he duelled xv. days and might not get the castle
and then went he thens and come to london and the Tour to him was yolde

And in the same time the Pope sent in to england a legate that was called Swalo
and of king ^ohanes death. Ca.C.lv.
ANd in the same time the Pope sent in to England a legate that was called Swalo
and he was (...) Cardinal of Ro^ne for to maynten king ^ohanes cause ayens the
barons of England but the barons had so huge part and help through Lowys the
kings sone of france that king Johan wist not whidder for to turn ne gone
And so it fell that he would have gone to Nichol and as he went thidderward he
come by the Abbey of swyneshede and there he abode ij. days And as he sat at
the mete he axed amo^k of the house how much a lofe was worth that was set
before him upon the table And the monk said that the lofe was worth but an
halfpeny. O quod the king tho here is great chepe of bread Now quoth the king
And I may leave such a lofe shall be worth xx. shilling or half a year begone /
and when he had seid this word much he thought and often he sighed and took and
ete of the bread and said by god the word that I have spoken it shall been
soth / The monk that stood before the king was for this word full sorry in
heart / and thought rather he would him self suffer pitouse death / and thought
if he might ordeyne there for some manner remedy / And anon the monk went to
his abbot and was shriuen of him / and told the abbot all that the king said
/ and prayed his abbot for to assoille him / for he would give the king such a
wassaille that all england should be glad there of and ^oyfull / Tho went the
monk in to a gardeyne and fond a great tode therein and took her up and put
her in a cup and prikked the tode through with a broche many times till that
the venyme com^ out in every side in to the cup / and tho took he the cup
and filled it with good ale and brought it before (...) king and kne^yng said /
sir quoth he wassaille / for never days of your life ne drunk ye of such a cup
/ Begin monk quoth the king / and the monk drank a great draught and took the
king the cup / and the king also drank a great draught and set down the
cupp^ The monk anon right went in to the fermorie and there died anon on whose
soul god have mercy Amen / and v. monks s^ng for his soul specially and
shullen whiles the abbey stant The king aroos up anon full evil at ese / and
commanded to remeue the table and axed after the monk / and men told him that
he was deed for his womb was (...) in sunder

When the king herd this he commanded to (...) but all it was for naught /
for his belly began so to swelle for the drink that he dra^ke that he died
withynne ij. days the morw^ after seint lukrs day And this king ^ohan had fair
children of his body begoten / that is to say Henry his sone that was king
after his fadre / and Richard that was Earl of Cornewaille and Isabell that was
Emperesse of Rome and E^^eno (...) was Queen of scotland And this king Johan
when he had reigned xvij. year ^. mo^thes and v. days he deide in the Castle
of Newerke and his body was buried at wynchestre

Of king Henry the thridde that was crouned at Gloucestre / Capitulo C^ntesimo
quinquag^simosexto
ANd after this king Johan reigned Henry his soue and was crouned at Gloucest^^
when he was ix. year old on Seint Symondes day and Jude of Swalo the legate of
Rome through counceille of all the g^ete lords that held with king Johan his
fadre that is to seyne the Earl Raudolfe of Chestre william Earl Marchall
william Earl of Penbroke william the Brener Earl of Feriers Serle the Maule
baron and all other great lords of England held with lowys the kings sone of
france And anon after when king Henry was c^ouned Swalo the legate held his
counceill eat Bristo we at seint Martynes fest and there were xj. bisshoppes of
England and of walys and of other prelates of holy church a great nombre and
Earls and Barons and many knights of England and all tho that were at that
co^ceill swore feaut^ un to Henry the king that was king ^ohanes so ne And
anon after the legate enterdited walys for encheson that they held with the
barons of england also all tho that helped or yafe cou^ceill to meve werre
ayene the new king Henry he acursed hem and in the beginning he put in the
sentence the kings sone of france lowys. And nothelees the same lowys would
not spare for to werre for all that but went anon and took the castle of
Berkamsted and eke the castle of Herford And from that day afterward the
barons did so much harm through out all England and principally the frnshmen
that were come with king lowys wherefore the great lords and all the common
people of England let hem croice for to drive lowys and his company out of
England But sum of the barons and eke of the frensh men were gone to the Cite
of Nichole and token the Cite and held it to king lowys profit But thidder
come king Henry's men with a great power that is to seyn the Earl Raudolfe of
Chestre and william Earl Marchall and william the Brener Earl of Feriers and
many other lords with hem and yeuen bat^ille un to Lowys men And there was
slain the Earl of Perches and Lowys men were there foul discomfited And there
was take Serle Earl of wynchestre and Humfrey de Bowne Earl of Herford and
Robert the sone of walter and many other that begone werre ayens the king they
were taken and lad un to king Henry king Iohanes sone Whenne the tydyng of this
scomfiture come un to Lowys the kings sone of france he remeued thennes and
went un to london and let shit the yates fast of the Cite And anon after the
king sent to the burgeis of london that they should yield hem un to him and the
Cite also And he would hem grant all the fraunchises that ever they were
woned for to have and would conferme hem by his great new chartre under his
great seal And in the same time a great lord that was called Eustace the monk
come out of france with a great company of lords and would have come in to
england for to have help lowys the kings sone of france / but hubert of
borugh and the v. ports with v ij. ships tho met with hem in the high see
and assailled he^ egrely and over come hem with strength / and smyten of
Eustace the monks ^eed and token also x. great lords of france / and put hem
in to prison / and queld almost all the men that come with hem and anon
drenched the ships in the sea

How lowys turned ayene in to france and of the confirmacion of king Iohanes
chartre Ca.C.lvij
WHen lowys herd this tydynge he drad sore to be deed and lost and let
ordeyne and speak bitwene the king and lowys by the ^egat Swalo / and through
the Erchebisshopp of Caunterbu^ty and through other great lords that all the
prisoners on that one half and on that other should be delivered and gone quyte
/ and lowys him self should have for his costages a M. pound of silver / and
should gone out of england and come never therein ayene / and in this manner was
the accord made bitwene king henry and lowys / and tho was lowys assoilled of
the popes ^egat thas was called Swalo of scente^^e that he was in and the
barons of england also / And after this king Henry and Swalo the legate and
lowys went un to Merton / and there was the pees confermed and bitwene hem
ordained And afterward Lowys went fro thens un to london and took his leave /
and was brout with mo^hel honor at the sea with the Erchebisshopp of
Caunter^bury / and with other bisshoppes / and also with Earls and baronz and
so went lowys in to fraunc^ And afterward the king and the Erchebisshopp and
earls and Barons assembled hem at london at mihelmasse that next come tho
sewyng and held there a parliament and there were tho renewed all the frannchises
that king Johan granted had at Romnemede and king Henry tho co^fermed by his
ch^rtre the which yet been hold through out all england And in that time the
king took of every plough land ij. shilling And hubert of burgh was made tho
chief Justice of england And this was y^ iiij year of king henry's regne / And
in the same year was seint Thomas of Caunterbury translated the.l. year after
his martyrdom And after it was ordained by all the lords of england that all
aliens should gone out of england and come no more therein and king Henry took
tho all the Castelles in to his hand that king Johan his fadre had give and
taken un to aliens for to keep that held with him But the proud faukes of
Brent richely let array his Castle of Bedford which he had of the kings yift
Johan and he held that castle ayens king henry's will with might and
strength And the king come thidder with a strong poer and beseged the castle
And the Erchebisshopp mastir stephen of langeton with a fair company of
knights come to the king him for to help and from the ascencion un to the
assumpcion of our lady last the sege And tho was the castle won and take and
the king let honge all tho that were went in to the castle with her good will
for to hold the castle that is for to seyne lxxx. men And tho afterward ^aukes
him self was found in a church of Couentre And there he forswore all England
with much shame and went tho ayene in to his own^ contre And whiles that king
Henry reigned Edmond of Abyngdon that was tresorere of Salusbury was consacred
Erchebisshopp of Canterbury And this king Henry sent over the sea un to the
Earl of Prouynce that he should send him his dought in to england that was
called Elienore and he would wedde her and so she came in to England after
Cristemasse and in the morwe after seint Hillarie the Erchebisshopp Edmond
spoused hem to gedre at Caunterbury And at the viij. of seint Hillarie she was
crouned at westmynster with much sole^pnite And there was a sweet sight bitwene
hem that is to seyne Edward that was next king after his fadre flour of^
courtesy and of largess and Margarete that was after queen of Scotland and
beatrice that was afterward Countess of Britaigne and katerine that died maid
in religion.

Of the quinzeme of gods that were granted for the new chartres and of the
purveaunce of Oxu^ford Ca.C.lviij
ANd thus it befell that the lords of England would have sum addicions mo in
the chartre of fraunchises y^ they had of the king and speken thus bitwene hem
and the king granted hem all her axyng and made to hem ij. chartres that one
is called the great chartre of fraunchises and that other is called the chartre
of forest and for the grant of these ij. chartres Prelates Earls and barons
and all the co^munes of e^glond yaf to the king a M. marc of silver when king
Henry had been king xliij. year the same year he and his lords Earls and
barons of the Rayme went to Oxu^ford and ordained a law in amendment of the
Royame And first swore the king him self and after all the lords of the
Reame that they would hold that statute for ever more And who that hem brake
should be deed But the second year after that ordinance / the king through
counceill of Sir Edward his sone and of Richard his brother that was Earl of
Cornewaille and also of other repented him of that oath that he had made for to
hold that law and ordinance / and sent to the court of Rome to ^ene assoilled
of that oath / And in that year next coming after was the great derth of ^orne
in england / for a quartier of whete was worth xxiiij. shillinges and the pour
people ete neteles and other wedes for hunger / and deide many a thousand for
defaute of mete And in the xlviij. year of king Henry's regne began werre and
debate bitwene him and hi^ lords for encheson that he had broke the couenanutz
that were made bitwene hem at Oxenford / And in the same year was the town of
Northampton take and the folk slain that were with ynne for e^cheson that
they had ordained wyldefire for to have bre^d the Cite of london And in the
month of May that come next after upon seint Pancras day was the bataille of
^ewes that is to seyne the wedenesday before seint Dunstones day and there was
take king Henry him self and Sir Edward his sone and Richard his brother Earl
of Cornewaille and many other lords /

And in the same year next sewyng / Sir Edward the kings sone brake out of
the ward of Sir Symond of Mountfort earl of ^ey c^stre at he reford and went
to the barons of the march and they vnderfenge him with moc^el honor And in
the same time Gillebert of Clarence Earl of Gloucestre that was in the ward
also of the forsaid Symond through the commandment of king Henry that went
from him with great heart / for encheson that he said that the forsaid Gillebert
was a fool iij his counceill / wherefore he ordained him afterd so and ^^lde him
with king Henry

And the Satirday next after the mids of August / Sir Edward the kings sone
discomfited Sir Symond de Mountfort at kemlworth But the great lords that were
there with him were taken that is to seyne Baldewyne wake / william of
Mounchensie and many other great lords / And the tewysday next after was the
bataille done at Euesham / And there was quelled Sir Symond de Mountfort / Hugh
the Spencer / and Mountforth that was Rafe Bassettz fadre of Draiton and other
many great lords And when this bataille was done all the gentilles that had
been with the Earl Symond were disherited / and they ordained to geder and did
much harm to all the land for they destroyed her ennemies in all that they
might.

Of the siege of ke^lworth and how the gentilmen were disherited through
counceill of the lords of the Reame of england and how they come ayene and had
her lands Ca.C.lix.
ANd in the year next coming in May the forth day beforne the fest of seint
dunstan was y^ bataille and sco^fiture at Chesterfelde of hem that were
disherited and there many of hem were quelled And Robert Earl of Feriers there
was taken and also Bawdewyne wake and Johan da la hay with mochel sorwe ascaped
thens And in seint ^ohanes eve the baptist tho next sewyng began the siege of
the castle of kemlworth and the siege last till seint Thomas eve the appostell
in which day Sir hugh hasting had the castle for to keep that yeldid up the
castle un to the king in this manner that him self and all the othirthat were
withyn the castle should have her life and lymme and as much thing as they had
theryn both horse and harneis and iiij. days of respite for to deliver clenly
the castle of hem self and of all other manner thing that they had withyn the
castle and so they went from de castle And sir Simond the mountefort the
younger and the Countess his mother were fled over see in to France and there
held hem as people that were exiled out of England for evermore And sone after
it was ordained by the legate Octobone and by other great lords the wysest of
England that all tho that had been against the king and were disherited should
have ayene her lands by grevous Raunsone after that it was ordained and thus
they were accorded with the king Tho was pees cried through out all England and
thus the werre was ended And when this was done the ^egat took his leave of the
king and of the queen and of all the great lords of Engl^nd and went tho to
rome the lv. year of king Henry's regne And Edward king Iohanes sone of
Britaigne Johan vessy Thomas of Clare Ro^ier of Clifford Oaths of Grauntson
Robert be Brus Johan of verdon and many other lords of England and of byyonde
the sea token her way toward the holy land and the king Henry died in the mean
time at westmynster when he had been king lv. year and xix wokes in seint
Edmondes day the Erchebisshopp of Canterbury and he was entered at
westmynster on seint Edmondes day the king In the year of ^ncarnacion of our
lord ^hu^ crist M.CC.lxxij

Profecie of Merlyn of the king henry y^ first ^^pouned y^ was king ^ohanes
sone Ca.C.lx.
ANd of this Henry profecied Merlyn and said that a lo^be should come out of
wynchestre in the year of Incarnacion of our lord M.CC. and xvj. with true
lips and holiness se written in his heart and he said soth for the good Henry
the king was bore in wynchestre in the year above said and he spoke good words
and sweet and was an holy man and of good conscience And Merlyn said that this
Henry should make the fairest place of all the world that in his time should not
be full ended and he said fothe for he made the new work of the abbey of
seint Petres church at westmynster that is fairer of s^ght than any other
church y^ men k^owe through all cristendome but king Henry died er y^ work
were fully made and that was great harm And yet said Merlyn that this lamb
should have pees the most time of his regne and he said full soth for he was
never annoied through werre ne disesed in no manner wise till a titell before his
death And yet said Merlin in his prophecy more and in the regne and end of the
forsaid lamb a wolf of a strange land should done him great harm^ through his
werre And that he should at the last been mastir through help of a reed fox that
should come out of the northwest and should him overcome And that he should drive
him un to the water and that profecie full well was know for withynne a litell
time or the king died Simond of Mounteford Earl of Leicestre that was borne in
france began ayens him strong werre through which doing many a good bachilere
was shent and deed and disheated

And when king Henry had the victory at Euesham and Simond the Earl was slain
through help and might of Gillebert of Clare Earl of Glouchestre that was in
keeping and ward of the forsaid Simoude through ordinance of king Henry that
went ayene to the king with mochel power. Wherefore the forsaid Simond was shent
and that was great harm to the communes of England that so good a man was
shent for troth and died in charity and for the commune profit of the same
folk and there for Almighty god for him has Sithenes showed many a fair
miracle to diverse men and women of the sikenesse and dissese that they have
had for the love of him

And Merlyn also told and said in his profecie that after that time the lamb
should love no whylle (...) than his seed should been in strange land without
Pasture And he said sothe for king Henry leued no while after when Simond
mountfort was deed that king Henry ne deide anon after him / And in the mean
time Sir Edward his sone that was the best knight of the world of honor was
tho in the holy land and get there Acres / And in that contre he begat on
dame Alienore his wife ^ohan of Acres his donghter that afterward was Countess
of Gloucestre / And he made in the holy land such a viage that all the world
spoke of his knyghthode / and every man dead him high and low thurghoute all
cristendome / as the story of him tells as afterward ye shull here more
openly / And from the time that king Henry deide / till that sir Edward was
crouned king / all the great lords of england were as fadr^les children
without any socour that him might maynten and govern and defend ayens her
dedely enemies

Of king Edward that was king henry's sone Ca.C.lxj
ANd after this king Henry reigned his sone Edward the worthiest knight of all
the world of honor / for gods grace was in him / for he had the victory of
his enemies

And as soon as king henry deide he come to london with a fair company of
prelatz and of Earls and barons and all manner men did him much honor / For in
every place that Sir Edward rode in london the streets were covered over his
head with rich clothes of silk of tapites and with rich coueringe And for
^oye of his coming the noble burgeis of the Cite cast out at her wyndowes
gold and silver hondes full in tokenyng of love and of wurshipp sernyses and
reverence And out of the conduit of chepe ran white wine and re^e as stremes
does of the water and every man there of might drink at her own will And this
king Edward was crouned and anointed as right heir of England with moc^el
honor And after mass the king went in to his paleis for to hold a rialle
feste among hem that him did honor / And when he was fette un to his m^te /
the king Alisaundre of Scotland come for to done him honor and reverence with
a queyntize and an houndred knights with him well horsed and draied / And when
they were light a down of her stedes they (...) hem gone whidder that they
would and who that might take hem took at her own will without any challenge
And afterward come Sir Edmond king Edwardes brother a curteis knight and a
gentill of renonne / and the Earl of Cornewaille and the Earl of Gloucestre And
after hem come the Earl of Penbroke / and the Earl of Garenne / And each of hem
by hem self lad in her hand an hundred knights gayly disgised in her arms
And when they were light of her horse they let hem gou^ whidder that hem liked
and who that might hem take to have hem stille without any let And when all
this waz done King Edward did his diligence and his might for to amend the
reame and redress the wrongs in the best manner that he might to the honor of
god and holy church and to maynten his honor and to amend the noyaunce of
the common people

How ydeyne y^ was lewelynes dought of walys ^nce and aymer yt was y^ earls
brother of mou^tfort were taken in the sea Ca.C.lxij
THe first year afterward that king Edward was crouned Lewelyne prince of walys
sent in to france to the Earl Mountfort that through counceill of his friends
the Earl should wedde his daughter and the Earl tho avised him upon this thing
and sent ayene to Lewelyne and said that he would send after his daughter And
so he sent Aymer his brother after the damisell and Lewelyne arraied ships
for his daughter and for Sir Aymer and for her fair company that should goo
with her

And this Lewelyn did great wrong for it was covenant that he should give his
daughter to no manner man without counceill and consent of king Edward And so
it fell that a burgeis of Bristowe come in the sea with wine lade and met hem
and hem took with might and power and anon the burgeis sent hem to the king
And when lewelyn herd this tydynge he was wonder wroth and eke sorwefull and
began for to werre upon king Edward and did much harm un to the Englishmen and
beat a down the kings castelles and began fast to destroy king Edwardes
lands And when tydyng come un to king Edward of this thing he went in to walys
And so much he did through gods grace and his great poer that he drofe
lewelyn un to much meschief that he fled all manner strength and come and yield
him to king Edward and yaf him.l.M. marc of silver far to have pees and took
the damisell and all his heritage and made an obligacion to king Edward to come
to his parliament ij. times of the year And in the second year after that king
Edward was crouned he held a general parliament at westmynster and there he
made the statutes for defaute of law by commue assent of all his baronage And
at Estren next sewynge the king sent by his lr^ez to Lewelyn Prince of wales
that he should come to parliament for his land and for his holding in wales as
the strength of the letter obligatorie witnessed

Tho Lowelyne had scorn and despite of the kings commandment and for pure
wrath began ayene for to werre upon king Edward and destroy his lands And tho
kyug Edward herd this tydinge he wax wonder wroth un to lewelyn and in have
assembled his people and went him toward walys and werred so upon Lewelyn the
prince till that he brought him in much sorwe and disese And Lewelyn saw that
his defense myt not auaille and come ayene and yield him to the kings grace /
and cried him mercy and long time kneled before the kings fete The king had
of him pite and commanded him for to arise / and for his meekness foryafe him
his wrath and to him said / that it he trespaced ayene him an other time that
he would destroy him for evermore / David that was lewelynes brother that same
time duelled with the king Edward and was a fell man and a sotill and envious
and far castyng and much treson thought / and evermore held him stille for
to wit and aspie the kings will / and evermore made good semblant / and seemed
so true that no man might perceive his falsenesse

How Lewelyne through eggynge of david his brother werred ayene upon king Edward
Ca.C.lx ij.
HIt was not long after that time that kyug Edward ne yafe to David lewelynes
brother the lordshipp of frodesha^ and made him a knight / and so mochel honor
did he never after to no man of walys for encheson of him / King Edw^rd held
his parliament at london when he had done in walys all that he would and
changed his money that tho was full cut and rounded wherefore the common
people pleyned hem wonder sore / so that y^ king let enquere of hem that such
trespaces diden and ccc. were at^^int of such manner falsenesse wherefore sum
were honged and sum draw and afterward honged And afterward the king
ordained that the sterling halpeny and ferthing should gone through out his la^d
and commanded that no man fro that day afterward yaf ne ^effed house of
religion with land ^^^ement with out special leave of the king / and he that
did should be punysshed at the kings will / and the yift should be for naught
/ And it was not long after that lewelyn Prince of walis through ticement of
David his brother and by both her consence they thought to disherite king
Edward in as much as they myt so that through hem both the kings pees was
broken / And when king Edward herd this / anon he sent his barons in to
northumberland and the sur^eis also that they should gone and take her viage
upon the traitors Lewelyn and David And wonder hard was for to werre tho for
it is winter in walis when in other co^trees is somer And Lewelyne let ordeyne
and well arrai^ and vitaille his good castle of Swandon and was theryn an huge
no^bre of people and plente of vitailles so that king Edward wist not where for
to enter And when the kings me it perceived and also the strength of wales
they let come in the sea barges and botes and great plankes as many as they myt
ordeyne and have for to gone to the forsaid castle of Swandone with men on
foot and eke on horse But the walshmen had so much people and were so strong
that they driven he englishmen ayene so that there was so much prese of people
at the turnyng ayene that the charge and the berthen of he^ made the barges and
botes sink And there was drenched full many a good knight that is to seyne Sir
Rogier of Clifford Sir william of lyndesey that was sir Iohanes sone fitz
Robert and sir Richard Tanny and an huge nombre of other and all was through her
own folly for if they had had good espies they had not been harmed

When king Edward herd t^lle that his people was so drenched he made sorwey now
But tho come sir Johan of vessye from the king of aragon and brougth with him
much folk of bachilers and of Gascoynes and were sowdiours and duellyng with
the forsaid sir Johan of vessye and vnderfonge of him wages and with him were
witholde and noble men it were for to fight and brent many tounes and queld
much people of walshmen all that they might take.

And all tho with strength and might made assaute to the Castle of Swandon and
get the castle And when David the princes brother herd this tydyng he
ordained him to fligh^ And Lewelyn the prince saw that his brother was flowen
and sore was abashed For he had no power to his werre for to maynten And so
Lewelyn began for to flee and wend well for to have ascaped.

But an o morwe sir Rogier Mortiemer met with him only with x. knights and set
him round about and to him went and smote of his head and presented him un to
the king Edward And in this manner the prince of walys was taken and his head
smyten of and all his heirs disherited for evermore through rightful dome of
all the lands of the reame

How David that was Lewelynes brother prince of walys was put to the death Ca.C
lxiiij.
David that was the Princes brother of walys through pride went for to have
been Prince of walys / after his brothers death And upon that sent he after
walsshmen to his perlement at dinbigh and follilich made walys arise ^yens the
king and began to meue werre ayens the king / and did all the sorwe and disese
that he might by his power When king Edward herd of this thing he ordained men
to pursue upon him / And David ferselich him defended till that he come to the
town of seint morice / and there was David take as he fled and led to the king
And the king commanded that he should be honged and draw and smite of his head
and quarter him and send his head to london and the iiij. quartiers send to
the iiij. tounes chief of walys / for they should take example and there of been
ware And afterward king Edward let cry his pees thurghoute all walys and
seized all the land in to his hand / and all the great lords that were left a
live come to done feaute and homage to the king Edward / as to her kind lord
And tho let king Edward amend the lawez of walys that were defectife And after
he sent to all the lords of walys by his lr^e patent / that they should come
all to his parliament And when they were come the king said to hem full
curteisely / Lordynges ye be well come / and me behooves your counceill and
your help for to wend in to Gascoyne for to amend the trespaces that me was
done when I was there And for to entrete of ^ees bitwene the king of Aragon and
the Prince of Morrey

And all the kings liege men Earls and Barons consented and gr^unted there to

And tho made him king Edward ready and went in to Gascoyne and let amend all
the trespaces that him was done in Gascoyne And of the debate that was bitwene
the king of Aragon and the prince of Morrey he cesed and made hem accorded

And while the good king Edward and the Queen Elienore his wife were in
Gascoyne / the good Earl of Cornewaille was made wardeyne of England till that
king Edward come ayene

And tho enquered he of his traitors that congetted falfenesse ayens him / and
each of hem all vnderfenge her dome after that they had deserved But in the
mean time while that the good king Edward was beyond the sea to done hem for
to make amends that ayens him had trespaced there was a falls the^e a traitor
that was called Rys ap Meriedoke beg^n for to make werre ayens king king Edward
and that was for encheson of Sir Pain Tiptot wrongfully greved and disesed y^
for said Ris ap Meriedo^ And when king Edward herd all this he sent by his
lr^ez to Ris ap Meriedok that he should begin for to make no werre but that he
should be in pees for his love And when that he come ayene in to England he would
undertake the quarrel and done amend all that was mysdone The forsaid Ris ap
meriedok despised the kings commandment and spared not for to do all the
sorw that he myt to the kings men of england but anon after he was taken and
lad to york and there he was draw and honged for his felonye.

Of the redressynge that king Edward made of his Justices and of his clerks
that they had done for her falsenesse and how he drofe the Jews out of
England for her vsery and mysbeleue Capitulo Centesimo lxv.
WHen king Edward had duelled iij. year in gascoyne will come to him for to
wend ayene in to England and tho he was come again he fond so many plaintes
made to him of his Justices and of his clerks that had done so many wrongs
and falsenesse that wonder it was to here And for which falsenesse Sir Thomas
weylond the kings Justice forswore England at the Toure of london for
falsenesse that men put upon him whereof he was atteint and proved falls And
anon after when the king had done his will of the Justices Tho let he enquere
and aspie how the Jews desceyued and begiled his people through her sin of
falsenesse and of usury and let ordeyne a prive parliament among his lords
and they ordained among hem that all the Jews should void England for her
mysbeleue And also for her falls usury that they did un to christian men And for
to speed and to make an end of this thing all the co^munite of England yafe un
to the king the xv penny of all her goods meuable and so were the Jews driven
out of England And tho went Jews in to france and there duelled through leave
of king philipp that tho was king of france

How king Edward was seized in all the land of Scotland through consent and
grant of all the lords of scotland Ca.C.lxvj
HIt was not long after that Alisaunder king of Scotland nas deed And David
Earl of Huntyngdone that was the kings brother of Scotland axed and claymed
the kingdom of Scotland for encheson that he was right full heir But many
great lords of Scotland saiden nay wherefore great debate arose bitwene hem and
her friends for as much that they would not consent to his coronacion and in
the mean time the forsaid david deide And so it befell that the sa^^e david had
iij dough t^es that worthelich were married / the first daughter was married to
Bailloll / the second to Brus / the thridde to Hastinges And the for said
Bailloll and Brus challenged the land of scotland and great debate and strife
aroos bitwene hem iij. for encheson that each of hem would have be king / And
when the lords of Scotland saw the debate bitwene hem iij. they come to king
Edward of england and seized him in all the land of Scotland as her chief lord
/ And when the king was seized of the lords of Scotland / the forsaid Bailloll
Bru^^ Hastinges come to the kings court and axed of the king which of hem
should be king of scotland And king Edward that was full gentill and tre^e let
enquere by the cronicles of Scotland and of the great lords of Scotland which
of hem was of the eldest blood (...) it was found that Bailloll was eldest And
that the king of (...) land should hold of the king of england and done him
feaute and ^ And after this was done Bailloll went in to Scotland and there was
crouned king of scotland / And the same time was upon the sea strong werre
bitwene the englisshmen and the normans / but upon a time the normans arrived
all at dover and there they martred an holy man that was called Thomas of dover
/ And afterward were the normans (...) that there escaped of hem not one And so
ne after king Edward should lose the duchy of Gascoyne through king Phelip of
france through falls casting of the dossepiers of the land wherefore sir Edmond
that was king Edwardes brother yafe up his homage un to the king of france And
in that time the clerks of england granted to king Edward halfendele of holy
churh goods in helping for to recover his land ayene in Gascoigne And the king
sent thidder a noble company of his bachillers and him self would have went
to Portesmouth / But he was let through one Maddoke of walys that had seized the
Castle of Swa^done in to his hand / and for that encheson the king turned again
un to walys at crist^mass^ And for encheson that the noble lords of england
that were sent in to Gascoyne had no comfort of her lord the king they were
take of sir Charles of france that is to say (...) Johan of Britaigne / sir
Robert Tiptot / sir Rauf Tanny ^ir (...) Bardolf / and sir Adam of Cretinges /
and yet at the ascencion was (...) doke take in walys and an other that was
called morgan / and they were sent to the tour of london and there they were
beheded

How sir Johan bailloll king of scotland withsaid his homage and of sir Thomas
Turbeluille Ca.C.lxvij.
ANd when sir ^ohan bailloll king of scotland understood y^ that king Edward
was werred in gascoyne to whom the ^eame of scotland was delivered / falsely
tho ayeus his oath withsaid his homage through procuring of his folk / and sent
to the court of Rome through a falls suggestion to be assoilled of that oath that
he swore un to the king of england / and so he was by lr^ez enbulled / Tho
chosen they of scotland doussepers for to benymme edward his right And in that
time come ij. card^^alls from the court of rome from the pope Celestine for to
trete of acord bitwene the king of frallce and the king of england And as tho
ij. Cardinals speken of a cord Thomas Turbel^^lle was take at ^^ouns and made
feaute and homage to the wardeyne of Paris and to him put his ij. sons in
hostage / for that he thought gone in to england for to aspie the contre and
tell hem when he come in to england that he had broken the kings prison of
france by nyt and said that he would done that all englissh men and walshmen
should abowe to the king of france / and this thing for to bring to the end
he swore / and upon this covenant deeds were made bitwene hem / and that he
should have by year a M. ponndes worth of land to bring this thing to an end
This false traitou^ took his leave and went thennes and come in to england un to
the king and said y^ he was broken out of prison and that he had put him in
such peril for his love / wherefore the king could him much thank and full
glad was of his coming / And the false thief traitor fro that day aspied all
the doing of the king and also his counseill for the king loved him well and
was with him full prive But a clear of england that was in the kings house of
france herd of this treson and of the falsenesse and wrote to an other clerk
that was duellyng with the king of england all how Thomas Turbeluille had done
his false coniectyng and all the counceill of england was write for to have
sent un to the king of france / and through the forsaid lr^e that the clerk
had sent fro france hit was found upon him wherefore he was lad to london and
draw^n and honged there for his treson / And his ij. sons that he had put in
france for hostages were tho beheded

Of the conquest of Berewyke Ca.C.lxviij
WHen tho two Cardinals were went anene in to France for to trete of the pees
at Cambrey the king sent thidder of his earls and barons / that is to say sir
edmond his brother Earl of laucastre and of leycestre sir henry lacy Earl of
Nichol and ^^liain vessy a baron and of other baronettz about xiiij. of the
best and wysest of England And in the same time the king Edward took his viage
to Scotland for to werre upon Johan Bailloll king of Scotland And sir Robert
Roos of Berewyk fled fro the englishmen and went to the scotts And king Edward
went him toward Berewyk and beseged the town And tho that were withyn manlich
hem defended and set a fire and brende ij. of king Edward is ships and said
in despite and reprove of him Wend king edward with his long shankes To have
get Berewyk all our vnt hankes Gas pikes him And when he has don Gas dikes him

(...) When king Edward herd this scorn anon through his mygh tynesse he
passed over the dikes assailled the town and come to the yatys and gate and
conquered the town and through his gracious power queld xxv. thousand and
vij.C. Scotts And king Edward lost no man of renonne save sir Richard of
Cornewaille and him quelled a flemmyng out of the read hall with a quarrel as
the forsaid Richard did of his helm and commanded hem for to yield hem and
put hem to the kings grace and the scotts ^olde not wherefore that halle was
brent and cast a down and all tho that were withyn were brent And king Edward
lost no mo men at that viage of simple estate but xxviij. Englishmen

And the wardeyne of the Castle yafe up the keys without any assaute And
there was taken william douglas and Sir Simond feisell and the Earl Patrike yield
hem to the pe^s but Ingham of Huuisremlle and Robert the Brus that were with
the king Edward forsook king Edward and held with the Scotts and afterward
they were take and put in to prison and afterward the king foryaf hem her
trespace and delivered hem out of prison And tho let king Edward close in
Berewyk with wallys and with dyches. And afterward Robert Rous went to Tyndale
and set wuyebrugge a fire and Exham and Lamerstoke and queld and robbed the
folk of the contre And afterward he went fro thennes un to Dumbarre And the
first wedenesday of March the king sent the Earl of Garenne Sir hugh Percy and
Sir hugh Spencer with a fair company for to besege the Castle But one that
was called Sir Richard Syward a traitor a falls man ymagyned for to begile the
Eng^^sshmen and sent to the Englisshmen hem for to desceyu^ And said that he
would yield to hem the Castle if they would grant hem viij. days of respite
/ that he myt send and tell to sir Johan bailloll king of scotland / how his
men ferde that were with in the Castle and send him word if that he nold
rem^^e the stege of the englisshmen that they would yield the Castle to
englisshmen The messagier tho come to sir ^ohan bailloll king of scotland there
that he was with his host and his message told him And sir ^ohan took tho his
host and come in the morwe erly toward the castle / And sir Richard siward saw
him come that was mastir of the counseil and keeper of the castle and said un
to the englisshmen O god quoth he now I see of folk a fair company and well
appailled I wull go ayen^ hem and with hem to mete and hem assaill^ And sir
hugh the Spencer saw the falsenesse of him and the treson and said to him O
traitor take and proved your falsenesse shall not avail you / And hugh the
spencer commanded anon for to bind him and in all have went ayens her
enemies and qneld of the scotts xxij.M. For the scotts had that time no man
with hem of honor sauf sir Patrik graham that manlich faught and long and at
the last he was queld / And tho said the englisshmen in reprove of the Scotts
These scaterand scotts hold I for sottes of wrenches vnwarre / Erly in a
morning in an euel timyng went ye fro diinbarre

WHen tho that were in the Castle saw the sco^fitur^ they yolden the castle
un to englisshmen and ^ounden her bodies lands and Castelles to the king
Edward / and so they were take there in the castle iij. Earls and vij. barons
and xxviij. knights and xj. clerks and vij. Picardes and all were presented
to king Edward and he sent hem to the tour of london to been kept there

How king Edward of his great grace delivered ayene the Scotts out of prison
that were chiuetayns of the land and they drowe hem to the frensshmen through
cou^ceill of william waleys Ca.c.lxix
WHen king Edward had made tho an end of the werre and taken the chiuetayns of
Scotland / tho come sir Johan bailloll and yield him to king Edward and put him
in his (...) / and he was lad to london / and when king edward was come (...) /
they were brought before him / and the king axed of he^ how they would make
amends of that trespass and loss that they had done him and they put he^ in
his mercy / Lordingis quoth the king I wull not your lands ne none of your goods
but I wull that ye make to me an oath upon gods body to ben trew^ to me and
neu after this time ayens me bear arms / and all they consented to the kings
will and swo^e upon gods body That is to seyne sir Johan of Comyn^ / and the
Earl of the strathorne the earl of Carryk and also iiij. bisshoppes undertook
for all the clergy and so the king delivered hem and ya^e hem saufconduit to
wend in to her own land And it was not long afterward that they ne arisen
ayene king Edward For encheson that they wist well that king Edwardys folk was
take in Gascoyne as before is said but sir Johan Bailloll king of scotland wist
well that his land should have forwe and shame for her falsenesse and in have
went him over the sea to his own lands and there held him and come never more
ayene wherefore the scotts chosen to her king william walei^^a ^^baud and an
harlot comen up of not and much harm did to the englishmen And king edward
thout how he might have deliverance of his people that were taken in gascoyne
and in have went over the sea in to flaundres for to werre up on the king of
france And the earl of flaundres vnderfeng him with moc^el honor and granted
him all his lands at his own will And when the king of france herd tell
that the king of england was arrined in flaundres and come with an huge poer
him for to destroy he prayed him to trews for ij. year so that english
marchantz and also frensh myt saufely gone and ^om^ in both sides The king
Edward granted it so that he must have his men out of ^ son that were in
Gascoyne and the king of france granted an^^e and so they were delivered And
in the same time the scotts sent by the bisshopp of seint Andrews in to
frannce to the king and to sir Charlys his brother that sir Charlys should come
with his power and they of scotland would come with her poer And so they should
gone in to england that land for to destroy from scotland till that they come
to kent And the scotts trust much upon the frenshmen but of that thing they
had no manner grant And nothelees the scotts bego^ne to rob and quelle in
northu^berla^d and did much harm

How william walleis let s^ee sir Hugh of Cressyngham and of the bataille of
Fonkirke Ca.C.lxx.
WHen this tydyng was come to king Edward that william walleis had ordained
such a strong poer and that all scotland to him was attendant and ready to
quelle Englishmen and to destroy the land he was sore annoied and sent anon^
^y letters to the Earl of Garren and to Sir Henry Percy and to Sir William
latomer and to Sir hugh of Cressyngham his tresorer that they should take poer
and wend in to Northumberland and so forth in to Scotland for to keep the
contreis And when william waleys herd of her coming he began for to flee and the
Englisshmen him folewed and drofe him till he come to Striue^yn / and there he
held him in the Castle And the walsshmen eue^y day he^ escried and manaced /
and did all the despite that they my^t So that the englisshmen upon a time in a
mornyug went out from the Castle the mountaunce of x. mile and passed over a
brugge And william waleis come with a strong power and drofe hem a bake / for
the englisshmen had ayens him tho no myt but fled and they y^ myt take the
brugge ascaped / but sir hugh the kings tresorer there was slain and many
other also / wherefore was made much sorwe / Tho had king Edward sped all his
needs in Flaundres and was a yene come in to england / and in haste took his
wey toward Scotland and come thidder at asc^ncion tide / And all that (...)
found be set a fire and brend / But the pour people of Scotland come to him
wonder thikke and prayed him for gods love that ^e would have on them mercy
and pite / wherefore the king tho commanded that no man should done harm to hem
that were yolden to him ne to no man of order ne to no ^ous of religion ne no
manner chirch But let aspie all that he myt where that he might find any of his
enemies / Tho come a spy to the king and told him (...) the Scotts were
assembled for to abide bataille / and on seint marie Magdalen^ day the king
come to fonkirke and yafe bataille to the scotts And at that bataille were
quelled xxviij. thousand and of Englisshmen but xxviij. and no mo of the which
was a worthy knight slain that was a knight an hospiteler that was called
Friar Brian ^ay For when william waleys fled from the bataille / that same
Friar Brian him pursued forselich and as his horse ran it st^rt in to amere of
mareys up to the belly And william waleis turned tho ayene and there quelled the
forsaid Brian / and that was much harm^ And that while king Edward went
through Scotland for to enquere if he might find an^ of his ennemies And in
that land he duelled as long as him liked / and there was none enemy that
durst him abide And sone afterward king Edward went to southampton for he would
not abide in Scotland in winter seson for esement of his people / And when he
come to london he let amend many misdeeds that were done ayens his pees and
his law while that he was in Flaundres

Of the last marriage of king edward and how he went y^ iij. time in (...)
Ca.C.lxxj
ANd aftward it was ordained through the court of Rome that king Edward should
wedde dame margarete king Philippes ^uster of france and the ^rhebisshopp
Robert of wynchelsee spoused hem to gedre through which marriage there waz made
pees bitwene king Edward of England and king philipp of france King Edward
went tho the iij time in to Scotland and tho withyn the first year he had
enfamined the land so that there left not on that ne come to his mercy sauf tho
that were in the castle of Estreuelyne that was well vitailled and astored for
vij. year

How the castle of Estreuelyne was beseged Ca.C.lxxij
HYng Edward come with an huge power to the Castle of Estreuelyn and beseged
the castle but it litell a vailled for he myt do the scotts none harm For
the castle was so strong and well y kept And king Edward saw that and thought
him upon a queyntize and let make anon there ij. pe^re of high gale was before
the tour of the castle and made his oath that as many as were in ye castle
were he earl or baron and he were take with strength but if he would the rather
him yield he should been honged upon the gale we^^ And when tho that were in
the castle herd this they come and yield hem all to the kings grace and mercy
And the king foryafe hem all his maletalent And there were all the great lords
of Scotland swore to king Edward that they should come to london to every
parliament and should stand to his ordinance

How troylebastonne was first ordained Ca.C.lxxiij
THe king Edward went thens to london and went have had rest and pees of his
werre with which werre he was acupied xx. year that is to seyne in wa^ys in
gascoyne and in Scotland And thought how he might recover his tresour that he
had spended about his werre and let enquere through the reame of all
mystakynges and wrongs done through mysdoers in england of all the time that he
had been out of his reame that men called Troillebaston And ordained there to
Justices and in this manner he recovered tresour without nombre. And his
encheson was for he had thought for to have gone in to holy land for to werre
upon gods enemies For encheson that he was croised long time before And
nothelees that law that he had ordained ded much good through all England to
hem that were mysbode For tho that trespaced were well chastized and afterward
the meker and the better / and the pour co^munes were in rest and in pees /
And the same time king Edward enprisoned his own sone Edward for encheson that
walter of langeton bisshopp of Chestre that was the kings tresorer had made
upon him complaint / and said that the for said Edward through cou^ceill and
procurement of one piers of Ganastone a squire of Gascoyne had broke the parkes
of the forsaid bisshopp / and the forsaid piers cou^ceilled and lad the same
edward And for this cause king edward exiled his sone out of england for (...)
more

Of the death of william waleis the false traitor Ca.C.lxxiiij
ANd when this king Edward had his enemies over come in walys Gascoyne and in
Scotland and destroyed his traitors but on^^ch that ribaude william waleys
that never to the king would him yield and at the last in the town of seint do
meni^ in the year of kyug Edwardes regne xxxiij. that falls traitor was take
and presented to the king / sauf the king would not see him but sent him to
londo^n to vnderfonge his ^ugement and on seint Bartholom^ was eve he was
honged and draw / and his head s^^yten of and his boweles take out of his
body and brende / and his body quartred and sent to iiij. ^he best tounes of
Scotland / and his head set upon a spear and set upon london brugge in
example that the Scotts should have in mind for to ^ere hem amys ayens her
liege ^^rd eftsoon

How the Scotts come^ to king Edward for to amend her trespace that^ they had
done ayens him Ca.C.lxxv.
ANd at Mihelmasse tho next coming king Edward held his parliament at
westmynstre and thidder come the Scotts that is to seyne the bisshoppe of
seint Andrewe Robert (...) Brus Earl of Carryk / Symond the frisell Johan the
Earl of ^thell / and they were accorded with the king and bound and by oath
sworn / that afterward if any of him ^isbere hem ayens king Edward that they
should been disherited for ever more / And when her pees was thus y made / they
took her ^eue priuelich and went home to her coutre.

How Robert the Brus chalanged Scotland Ca.C.lxxvj
ANd after this Robert the Brus Earl of Carryk sent by his lr^e to the Earls
and Barons of Scotland that they should come to him to Scone in the morwe after
the (...) (...) of our lady / for high needs of the land and the lords come
(...) the day assigned And at the same day Sir Robert the Brus said fair lords
full well ye know that in my person duell^d the right of the Reame of
Scotland and as ye wit well am right full ^eir Since that sir ^ohan Bailloll
that was our king us has forsake and lef^e his land And though it so be that
king Edward of england with wrongful power has made me to him assente ayens
my will if that ye will grant that I be king of Scotland I shall keep you
ayens king Edward and ayens all manner men and with that word the abbot of
scone arose and before hem all said that it was reason for to help him and the
land to k^pe and defend And tho said in presence of hem all that he would give
him a M. pound for to maynten that land and all the other granted the land to
him and with her poer him for to help and defied king Edward of england and
said that Robert the Brus should be king of Scotland

How sir Johan of Common gainesaid the crounyng of Sir Robert the Brus
Ca.C.lxxvij
LOrdynges said sir Johan of Common thenketh upon the truth and the oath that
ye made un to king Edward of e^glond and touching my self I will not break mine
oath for no man and so he went fro that company at that time wherefore Robert
the Brus and all that to him consented were wonder wroth and tho manaced sir
Johan of Common* Tho ordained they an other conceill at donfris to the which
come the forsaid Sir Johan Common he duelled but ij. mile from donfris there that
he was woned for to soiourne and abide

How sir Johan was treitoursely queld Ca C.lxxviij.
WHen Robert the Brus wist that all the great lords of Scotland were come to
scone (...) sir Johan Common y^ soiourned tho nygh scone he sent after him
specially that sir Johan Common should come and speak with him and upon that he
sent after him Johan Comyns his brother and prayed him for to come and speak
with him at the gray freris at donfris and that was the thursday after
Candelmasse and sir Johan granted him for to wend with him And when he had
herd mass he took a so^^e and drank and afterward he bestrode his palfray and
rode his way and so come to donfris And Robert the brus saw him come at a
wyndowe as he was in his chamber and tho made Joy y now (...) ^ome ayens him
and colled him about the nek and made (...) him good semblant. And when all
the Erle^ and ba^ (...) of Scotland were present ^Robert the Brus spoke and
said Sires quoth he ye wit well the encheson of this coming and wherefore it is if
ye wull grant that I mote be king of Scotland as right he^r of the land and
all the lords that were there said with one vois that he should be crouned king
of Scotland a^^ that they would him help and maynten ayens all manner men on
life and for him yef it were need die ^The gentill knight tho Johan of Comyne
ansuerd and said Certes never for me ner for to have of me as much help as
the value of a botonne For that oath that I have made to king Edward of England
I shall hold while my life last and with that word he went fro the company
and would have went upon his Palfray And Robert the Brus pursued him with a
draw swerd and bare him through the body and Sir Johan Common fell down to the
earth But when Rogier that was Sir Johan Comyns brother saw the fa^senesse and
stert to Sir Robert the Brus and smote him with a knyfe but the false traitor
was armed under So that the stroke might do him none harm And so much help
come about Sir Robert the Brus So that Rogier Common was there quelled and all
to hew in to small pieces.

And Robert the Brus turned ayene there that Sir Johan Common the noble baron lay
wounded and pyned toward his death besides the high auter in the church at the
gray freris and said un to Sir Johan Common O traitor thou shall be deed and
never after let mine a vauncement and shoke his swerd at the high au^er and
smote him on the head that the brain fill adoune up on the ground and the
blood stert an high upon the walls And yet un to this day that blood is seen
there that no water may wassh it away and so died that noble knight in holy
church

ANd when the traitor Robert the Brus saw that no man tho would let his
coronacion he commanded all hem that were of power should come to his crounyng
to seint Iohanes town in Scotland And so it befell that on our lady day of
Annunciacion the bisshopp of Glastone and the bisshopp of seint Andrewe crouned
for her king Robert the Brus in seint Iohanes town and made him king And anon
after he drofe out all ^he Englishmen out of Scotland and they fled and come
and ^^layned un to king Edward how Robert the Brus had drive ^^m out of the
land and disherited hem.

How king Edward dub^ed at w^stmynster xxiiij. score knights Ca.C.lxxx
ANd when king edward ^erde of this meschief ^e swore y^ he would there of ^ene
avenged / and said that all the traitors of Scotland should been honged and
draw and that they should never ^e raunsomed And king edward thout upon this
falsenesse that the Scotts had done / and send after all the bachillerie of
e^glond that they should come to london at witsontyde / ^ he dub^ed at
westmynstre xxiiij. score knytes Tho ordained him the noble king Edward for to
wend in to scotland to werre upon Robert y^ Brus / and sent before him in to
scotland sir Aymer the valaunce earl of Penbroke and sir henry Percy baronn
with a fair company that pursued the scotts and brend tounes and Castelles /
and afterward come the king him self with earls and barons a fair company /

How Robert the Brus was scomfited in bataille and how Symond Frisell was
slain Ca.C.lxxxj.
THe friday next before the assumpcion of our lady king edward met Robert the
Brus beside seint Iohanes town in scotland and with his company / of which
company king Edward queld vij.M. When Robert the Brus saw this meschi^f / he
began to flee and hid him that no man myt him find But sir symond Frisell
pursued him sore / so that he turned ayene and abode bataille / for he was a
worthy knight and a bold of body / and the englisshmen pursued ever sore in
every side and queld the stead that sir Symond Frisell rode upon / and they
took him and lad him un to the host And sir Symond began for to flat^r and
speak fair / and said / lords I shall give you iijj.M. marc of silver and mine
horse mine harneis and all myue armure / and become a beggar Tho ansuerd
Theobaude of Peuenes that was the kings archier / Now god me so help it is
for naught that thou spekest / for all the (...) in england I would the not let
gone without commandment of king Edward And tho was he lad to king Edward
and the king would not see him but commanded to ^ede him a way to have his dome
at london / and on our ladies even natiuit^ he was honged and drawn and his
heed smyten of and honged ayene with cheynes of yren upon the galewes And his
head was set upon london h^ugge upon a spear / and against Cristemasse the
body was brend / for encheson that the men that k^^te the body by night they
saw so many deueles raumpand with great Iren crokes rennyng upon the Gale was
and horribe^^ch turmented the body and many that hem saw anon after they died
for dr^de and some woxen mad or sore sikenesse they had And in that bataille
was take the bisshopp of Baston the bisshopp of seint Andr^w^s and the Abbot of
scone all armed with yren as men of arms as falls traitors and falls prelatz
ayens her oath and they were brout to the king and the king sent hem to the
Pope of Rome that he should done with hem what his will were

How ^ohan earl of atheles wat take and put to the death Capitul^ Centesimo
lxxxij.
ANd at that bataille fled Sir Johan Earl of Atheles and went in to a church
and there hyd him for dread but he myt have there no refute for encheson that
the church was endited through a general sentence and in the same church he
was take And this sir Johan went well have had escaped from the death / for
encheson that he claymed kynered of king Edward And the king nold no longer be
tarried of his traitors but sent him to london in have and there he was honged
and his head smy^en of and his body brent all to ass^his But at the prayer of
the Queen Margarete for encheson that he claymed of king Edward kynred his
drawyng was foryeue him

How Johan that was william walleys brother was put to the death Ca.C.lxxxiij.
WHen the grettest mastirs of Scotland were thus done to euel death and shended
for her falsenesse Johan that was wiliam walleis brother was take and done to
death as Sir Johan earl of atheles was

How Robert the brus fled from scotland to Norwey Capitulo Centesimo lxxxiiij.
ANd at that same time was Robert the brus much hated among the people of
Scotland So he wist not what was for to done and for to hide him he went in to
Norwey to the king that had spoused his suster and there held him socour for to
have And Robert the brus might not befounde in Scotland king Edward tho let
cry his pese through out all the land and his laws were used and his
ministres served through out all the land

How king Edward died Ca.C.lxxxv.
WHen king Edward had abated his enemies he turned a yene southward and a
malady took him at burgh up sand in the march of Scotland and he wist well
that his death waz full nygh and called to him sir henry the lacy earl of Nichol
/ sir Guyerle of warrewyke sir Aymer va^ence earl of penbroke / and sir Robert
of Clifford baronn and prayed hem upon the faith that they him owed that they
should make Edward of Carnariuan king of England his sone as rathe as they myt /
and that they should not suffer piers of Ganeston come ayene in to england for
to make his sone to use riotte / and they granted him with good will / And the
king took the sacrament of holy church as a good christian man should and deide in
verray repentance / and when he had be king xxxv. year he deid and was buried
at westmestre with mochel solempnite upon whose soul god have mercy Amen

Of Merlyns prophecies that were declared of king edward that was king ^enries
sone Ca* C.lxxxvj.
ANd of this king Edward prophesied Merlyn and called him a dragon the second
king of the vi. last kings that should be for to regne in england / and said
that he should be meddled with mercy and also with strength and sternesse that
should keep england fro cold and hete / and that he should open his mouth toward
walis / and that he should set his o foot in wyke / and that he should closen
with walls y^ should do much harm to his seed / And he said soth for the good
king Edward was meddled with mercy and with fersenesse with mercy a yens his
enemies of walys and after of Scotland / with fersenesse when he put hem to
death for her falsenesse and traitrie as they had deserved it And well kept he
england from cold and hete since he kept it from all manner enemies that run
upon him to done him any wrong And well he opened his mouth toward walys and
made it quake through the hidour of his mouth when he co^querd it through dynt of
swerd / for the prince ^ewelyne and David his brother Ri^ and morgan were put
un to the death for her falsenesse and her folly And he set his o foot in to
wyke / and conquered Berewyke at the which conquest were slain xxv. thousand
and vii. houndred outetake hem that were brend in the reed halle And the walls
that he let make shall be noyous un to his ^eed as men shull here after see in
the life of Sir Edward of Carnariuan his sone

And yet Merlyn said that he should make rivers run in blood and with brain
/ and that seemed well in his werres there that he had the mastrie And yet Merlyn
said that there should come a people out of the north west during the regne of
the forsaid dragon that should be lad by an ylle grehounde that should the dragon
Croune king that afterward should flee over the sea for dread of the drag^n
without coming ayene and that was proved by Sir Johan bailloll that king
Edward made for to been king of scotland that falsely arose ayens him and after
he fled un to his own lands of france and never come ayene in to scotland
for dread of king Edward And yet said Merlyn that people that should bid the
forsaid Grehond should be faderles un till a certain time and he said soth for
the people of scotland gretely were disesed since that sir Johan bailloll her
king fled from scotland And yet said Merlyn that the son^e should become in his
time as reed as any blood in tokenyng of great mortalite of people and that was
well known when the scotts were slain And since said Merlyn that ylke dragon
should norissh a fox that should meue great werre against him that should not in
his time been ended And that seemed well by Robert the Brus that king Edward
norisshed in his chamber that sithenes stale away and meued great werre ayens
him which werre was not ended in his time And afterward Merlyn told that this
dragon should been hold the best body of all the world and be said sothe for the
good king Edward was the worthiest knight of all the world in his time And yet
said Merlyn that the dragon should die in the march of an other la^d and y^ his
la^d should be long without any good keeper and that men should we^e for his
death from the I Will of she pey un to the I Will of marcyll Wherefore allas should be
her common song among people fadreles in the land wasted and that profecie
was know ouerall full well For the good king Edward died at Burgh up sands
that is upon the march of Scotland wherefore the Englishmen were discomforted
and sorowed in northumber land For encheson that king Edwardes sone set by
the Scotts no force for the Riott of piers of Ganaston wherefore allas waz the
song through out all england For defaute of a good wardeyn from the I Will of
shepey un to the I Will of marcyll the people made much sorwe for good king
Edwardes death For they wend that good king Edward should have gone in to the
holy land for that was hollyche his purposse upon whose soul god for his high
grace have mercy

Of king Edward y^ was king edwardes sone Ca.C.lxxxvij
ANd after this king Edward reigned Edward his sone that was bore in Carnariuan
and this Edward went in to france and spoused Isabell the kings dought of
france the xxv. day of Ianiuer at the church of our lady at Boloigne In the
year of our lord Ihesu crist a.M.CCC.vij. and the xx. day of Feuerer the next
year that come after he was crouned solemplich at westmynstre of the
Erchebisshoppe Robert of wynchelsee and of the Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury /
and there was so great prece of people / that Sir Johan Bacwell was deed and
murdered

And anon as the good king Edward was deed / Sir Edward his sone king of
England sent after Piers of Ganastone in to Gascoyne and so much loved him
that he called him his brother / and anon after he yafe him the lordshipp of
wallyngford / and it was not long after that he ne yafe him the Erledome of
Cornewaille ayens all the lords will of the Roya^^e

And tho brought he Sir walter of langeton bisshopp of Chestre in to prison in
to the tour of london with two knaves allone him to serve For the king was
wroth with him / for cause that Sir walter made compleint upon him to his fadre
/ wherefore he was put in to prison in the time of Troilebastone / And the
forsaid Piers of Ganastone made so great mastries that he went in to the
kings tresorie in the Abbey of westmynstre and took the table of gold with the
trestelles of the same / and many other rich ^eweles that some time were the
noble and good king Arthures and took hem to a merchant that was called Aymery
of Friscombande / For he should bear hem over the sea in to Gascoigne and so he
went thens / and they come never ayene after / wherefore it was a great loss un
to this land And when this Piers was so richely auaunced he become so proud
and so stout / where of all the great lords of the Reame had him in despite
for his great beryng / where for Sir Henry the lacy Earl of Nichol / and Sir Gny
Earl of warrewyke the which good lords the good king Edward Sir Edwardis king
of England his fadre charged that Piers of ganastone should not come in to
England for to bring his sone Edward in to Riott And all the lords of
England assembled hem at a certain day at the freres prechours at london and
speken of the dishonor that king Edward did un to his Royame and to his croune
and so they assented all both Earls and co^munes that the forsaid Piers of
Ganastone should been exiled out of England for ever more and so it was done
for he forswore England and went in to Irland and there the king made him (...)
uetayne and governor of the land by his commission and (...) this Piers was
chiuetayne of all the land / and did there a^le (...) him lyked and had power
what ^e would and that time were the templers exiled through all cristiente for
encheson that men put up on hem that they should done thing ayens the feyth and
good be leave King Edward loved Piers of Ganesto^ so much that he might not
forlete his company and so much the king yafe and behight to the people of
England that the exilyng of the forsaid piers should been revoked at stamford
through hem that him had exiled wherefore piers of Ganastone come ayene in to
England And when he was come ayene in to this land he despised the grettest
lordis of this land and called sir Robert of Clare Earl of Gloucestre horesone
And the Earl of Nicholl sir henry the lacy brostebely and sir Gny Earl of
warrewik the blake hounde of Arderne and also he called the noble earl and
gentill Thomas of Lancastre Cherle and many other scorns and shame hem said
and by many other great lordis of england Wherefore they were to wardys him full
angry and sore annoied And in the same time died the Earl of Nichol but he
charged or he was deed Thomas of Lancastre Earl that was his sone in law that
he should maynten his quarrel ayens the same Piers of Ganastone upon his beneson
And so it was ordained through help of the Earl of Lancastre and of the Earl of
warrewyke that forsaid sir Piers was beheded at gauersich besides warrewyke the
xix. day of Iun^ in the year of grace a M.ccc. and xij. wherefore the king was
sore annoied and prayed god that he myt see that day to been a venged upon the
death of the forsaid Piers

And so it befell afterward as ye shall here allas the time For the forsaid
Earl of Lancastre and many other great barons were put to Pitons death and
martred for encheson of the forsaid querell

The king was tho at london and held a parliament and ordained the laws of sir
Symond Mo^nfort wherefore the Earl of lancastre and the Erlys and all the clergy
of England maden an oath through counceill of Robert of wynchelsee for to
maynten tho ordinances for evermore

How Robert the Brus come ayene in to Scotland and gadred a great power of men
for to werre upon king Edward Capitulo Centesimo lxxxviij.
ANd when sir Robert the Brus that made him king of Scotland that was fled in
to Norwey for dread of death of the good king Edward and herd of therdebate
that was in england bitwene the king and his lords he ordained an host and
come in to england in to northumberland and cleenly destroyed the contre And
when king Edward herd this tydynge he let assemble his host and met the
scotts at Estreuelyne in the day of natiuite of seint Johan baptist in the
vij. year of his regne / and in the year of our lord ^hesu crist a M.CCC. and
xiiij. Allas the sorwe and loss that there was done For there was slain the
noble earl Gillebert of Clare sir Robert of Clifford baronn / and many other /
and of other people that no man could nombre / and there king Edward was
scomfited / and sir Edmond of maule the kings stiward for dread went and
drenched him self in a fressh river that is called Bannokesborne / wherefore the
Scotts said in reprove and despite of king Edward for as much as he loved to
gone by water / and also for he was discomfited at Bannokesborne / therefore
maidens maden a song there of in that contre of king Edward of England and in
this manner they song Ma^ydens of england sare may ye morn / for tit have ye
lost your lemmans at Bannokesborne / with heualogh / what wend the king of
england / to have get scotland with rombilough

WHen king Edward was discomfited he was wonder sorry and fast fled with his
folk that was left on live and went to B^rrewyke and there held him / And
after he took hostages that is to witen vij. children of the richest of the
town and the king went to london and took counceill of things that were
needful un to the reame nf england And in the same time i^ befell that tho was
in england a ribaude that was called ^ohan tanner / and he went and said that
he was the good king Edwardes sone and let him call Edward of Carnariuan and
therefore he was take at Oxenford / and there he challenged the friar carmes church
y^ king Edward had give hem the which church some time was the kings halle And
afterward was this Johan lad to northampton and draw and there honged for his
falsenesse / and er that he was deed he confessed and said before all the people
that there was That the deuell behight him that he should be king of england and
that he had served the deuell iij. year /

How the town of Berewyke was take through treson and how ij Cardinals were
robbed in england Ca.C.lxxxix.
ANd in mydlenten Sunday in the year of our lord ^hu^ crist M.CCC.xvj. Berewyke
was lost through falls t^^son of one piers of spalding the which piers the king
had put there for to keep that same town with many burg^is of the town /
Wherefore the children that were put in hostage through the burgeis of Berewyke
fol^wed the kings marchalsie many days fe^ered in strong yrens And after
that time there come ij. Cardinals in to england as the pope had hem sent / for
to make pees bitwene Scotland and england / And as they went toward duresme
for to have sacred mastir lowys of Beaumont bisshopp of dureham and as they
went they were taken and robbed upon the more of wynglesdoune of which robbery
sir guillebert of Middelton was atteint and take and honged and draw at london
/ and his heed smyten of and set upon a spear and set upon Newegate / and
the iiij. quarters sent to iiij. cites of england And that same time befell
many mischefes in england for the pour people deide in england for hunger and
so much and so fast deid that vuneth men might hem bury for a quart of whete
was worth xl. shillyng and ij. year and an half a quarter of whete was worth x
mar^ / and often times the pour people stale children and ete hem / and et^ also
all the hounds that they might take and eke hor^ and catte^ And after there
fell a great moreyne among bestes in diverse contres of england during king
Edwardes life

How the scotts robbed northumberland. Capitulo Centesimo. lxxxx.
ANd in the same time come the Scotts ayene in to england and destroyed
Northumberland and brend that land and robbed it / and queld men women and
children that leyne in cradells / and brend also holy church and destroyed
cristendome and took and bare englisshmennys goods as they had been sarazenes
or paynyms and of the wykked^esse that they diden / all the world spoke there of
through all cristendome

How the Scotts would not amend her trespace / and therefore Scotland was
enterdited Ca.C.lxxxxj.
ANd when (...) Johan the xxij. after seint Petre herd of the great sorwe and
meschief that the scotts wrought he waz wonder sorry that criste^dome was so
destroyed through the scotts / and namely they destroyed so holy church wherefore
the pope sent a general sentence under his bu^^e^ of led un to the
erchebissho^^e of Caunterbury and to the erchebisshopp of york / that if
Robert the Brus of Scotland would not be Justified and make amende^ un to the
king of England Edward her lord and make amends of his loss and of his harms
that they had done in England and also to restore the goods that they had
taken of holy church that the sentence should be pronunced through all England
And when the scotts herd this they would not let her malice for the popes
commandment wherefore Robert Brus James douglas and Thomas Raudulph Earl of
Mo^ref and all tho that with hem co^muned or hem halpe in word or in deed were
acursed in every church through england every day at mass iij. times and no
mass should he song in holy church through out all Scotland but if the
scotts would make restitucion of the harms y^ they had made un to holy church
wherefore many a good pressed and holy men therefore were slain through the reame of
Scotland for encheson that would sing no mass ayens the popes commandment and
ayens his will and to done and fullfyll the tirauntz will

How sir hugh the spencers sone was made the kings Chamberlayne and of the
bataille of Mitone Ca.C.lxxxxij.
ANd it was not long afterward that the king ne ordained a parliament at york
and there was sir hugh the spencers sone made chamburlayne and in the mean time
while the werre last the king went ayene in to Scotland that it was wonder for
to wit and beseged the town of Berewyke but scotts went over the water of
sole wath that was iij. mile from the kings host and privily they stele awey
by night and comen in to England and robbed and destroyed all that they might
and spared no manner thing till that they comen un to york And when the
Englishmen that were left at home herd this thing all tho that might
trauaille as well monks and prestes and freris and chanons and seculers come
and met with the scotts at Mitone up swale the xij. day of October Allas
what sorwe for the English husbondmen that could no thing of the werre that
there were quelled and drenched in an arm of the se^ And her chi^iteyns sir
william of melton Erchebishopp of york and the abbot of sell by with her stedes
fled and comen un to york and that was her own folly that they had that
myschannce for they passed the wa^ of swale and the scotts set a fire the
stakkes of hey and the smoke there of was huge that the englishmen might not see
the scotts And when the englishmen were gone over the water tho comen the
Scotts with her wynge in manner of ashelde and come toward the englisshme^ in
array and the englisshmen fl^d for vuneth they had any me^ of arms / for the
king had hem almost lost at the siege of Berewyke / and the scottissh hobi^^rs
went bitwene the bruge and the englissh men / And when the great host hem met
the englisshmen fled bitwene the hobilers and the great host / and the
englisshmen almost were there quelled / and he that might wend over the water
was saved / but many were draint / Allas for there was slain many men of
religion and seculers and eke prestes and clerkys and with much sorwe the
Erchebisshopp ascaped / and therefore the scotts called the bataille the white
bataille

How king Edward did all manner thing that sir hugh the spe^cer would
Ca.C.lxxxxiij.
ANd when king Edward herd this tydynge he remeu^d his sege from Berewyke and
come ayene in to england / but sir hugh the spencer the sone that was the
kings Chamburleyne kept so the kings chamber that no man must speak with the
king / but he had made with him a frette / for to done his need / and that over
mesure / and this hugh ^are him so stout that all men had of him scorn and
despite / and the king him self would not been governed ne ruled by no manner
man / but only by his fadre and by him / and if any knyt of england had wodes
manners or lords that they would coueit / anon the king must give it hem^or
else the man y^ ought it should be falsely endited of forest or of fel^nie /
And through such doing they disherited many a good bachiller and so much land
geten that it was wonder And when the lords of england saw the great couetise
and the falsenesse of sir hugh the spencer the fadre and of Sir hugh the sone
they come to the gentill Earl of lancastre / and axed him of counceill of the
disese that was in the Royame through Sir hugh the spencer and his sone / and in
have by one ass^nte they made a ^ue assemble at shirborne in Elmede / and all
they made there an oath / for to break and destourble the doing bitwene the king
and sir hugh the spencer and his sone upon her power And they went in to the
marc^^ of walys and destroyed the land of the forsaid sir hughes

How sir h^gh the spencer and his fadre were exiled on^e of England
Ca.C.lxxxxiiij
When king Edward saw the great harm and destruction that the Barons of
England diden to Sir Hugh the spencers land and to his sons in every place
that they comen upon And the king tho through his counseil exiled sir Johan
monbray Sir Rogier of clifford and sir Gosselyne dauill and many other lords
that were to hem consent wherefore the Barons did tho more harm than they diden
before And when the king saw that the barons would not cese of her cruelte the
king was sore ad^ad left they would destroy him and his reame for his meynte
naunce but if that he assented to hem And so he sent for hem by let tres that
they should come to london to his perlement at a certain day as in his letters
was contained And they comen with iij batailles well armed at all pointz and
every bataille had cote arumres of grene cloth and there of the right quarter
was yelwe with whit bendes wherefore that plement was called the perlement of the
whit bend And in that company was sir ^mfrey de Bohen^ Earl of herford and
sir Rogier of clifford sir Johan Mombray sir Gecelin dauill sir Rogier Mortuner
uncle of sir Rogier Mortimer of wigmore sir Henry of Trais sir Johan Giffard
and sir Bartholomewe of Badelesmore that was the kings stiward that the king
had sent to Shirborne in elmede to the Earl of Lancastre and to all that with
him were for to trete of accord that him allied to the harons and come with
that company And sir Rogier dammorie and sir hugh Dandale that had spoused the
kings neces suster and sir Gillebert of Clare earl of Gloucestre that was
queld in scotland as before is said And tho ij. lords had tho ij. parties of
the Erledome of Gloucestre and sir hugh the spencer the sone had the thridde
part in his wyfes half the iij. suster and tho ij. lords went to the barons
with all her power ayens sir hugh her brother in law and so there come with hem
Sir Rogier of Clifford sir Johan Mombray Sir Gosselme dauill sir Rogier
Mortimer of werk sir Rogier mortimer of wigmore his nepheu sir Henry trays sir
Johan Giffard sir Bartholomewe of badelesmore with all her company and many
other that to hem were consent All these great lords comen to westmynster to
the kings parliament and so they spoken and did that both sir hugh spencer the
fadre and sir hugh the sone were outelawed of England for evermore And sir hugh
the fadre went to Dover and made much sorwe and fell down upon the ground
by the sea bank acros with his arms and sore weeping said Now fair England
and good England to Almighty god I the betake and thries cust the ground and
wend never to have comen ayene and weeping full sore cursed the time that ever
he begat Sir Hugh his ^^one And said for him he had lost all England and in
presence of hem that were about him he yafe him his curse and went over the sea to his lands / but sir hugh the sone would not gon^ out of england but
held him in the sea / and he and his company robbed ij. dromondes beside
sandewich and took and ^ere away all the good that was on hem the value of
xl.M. pound.

How the king exiled Earl Thomas of lancastre and all that held with him and
how the Mortimer come and yield him to the king and of the lords Ca.C.lxxxxv.
HIt was not long after that the king ne made sir Hugh spencer the fadre and
sir hugh the sone come ayene in to England ayens the lords will of the reame /
And sone after the king with a strong power come and beseged the Castle of
bedes / and in the Castle was the lady of Badelesmere for encheson that she
would not grant that Castle to queen Isabell king Edwardes wife / But the
principal cause was for encheson that sir Bartholomewe badelesmere was ayens
the king and held with the lords of england / and notheles the king by help
and socour of men of london and also of help of southern men / the king gate
the Castle mangre he^ all that were therein and took with him all that he might
find / And when the barons of england herd of this thing sir Rogier Mortimer
and other many lords took the town of Brugge worth with strength wherefore the
king was wonder wroth and let outelawe Thomas of lancastre and vmfrey de
Bohoune earl of hertford and all tho that were assentant to the same quarrel
And the king assembled an huge host and come against the lords of england
wherefore the mortimerz put hem to the kings mercy and his grace and anon they
were sent to the tour of london and there kept in prison And when the barons
herd of this thing they comen to Pounfret there that earl Thomas soiourned and
told him how that Mortimers both had yield hem to the king and put hem in his
grace

Of the siege of Tykhille Ca.C.lxxxxvj
WHen Thomas earl of lancastre herd this / they were wonder wroth / and all
that were of his company / and greatly they were disco^fited and ordained her
power to gedre and beseged the Castle of Tykhill / but tho that were withynne
so manlich defended hem that the barons might not get the Castle / and when
the king herd that his Castle was beseged he swore by god and by his names
that the siege should be remeued and assembled a huge power of people and went
thidderward to ^eskewe the Castle and his poer encresed from day to day Whenne
the Earl of lancastre and the Earl of Herford and the barons of her company
herd of this thing they assembled all her power and went hem to Burton up Trent
and kept the brigge that the king should not pass over But it befell so on the
x. day of March In the year of grace M.ccc. and xxj. The king and the spencer
Sir Aymer ^alaunce Earl of Penbroke and Johan Earl of Arundell and her power
went on^^ the water and discomfited the Earl Thomas and his company and they
fled to the Castle of Tutbery and fro thennes they went to Pounfret And in
that viage died Sir Rogier Da^morie in the Abbey of Tutbery And in that same
time the Earl Thomas had a traitor with him that was called Robert of Holand a
knight that the Earl had brought up of naught and had norrisshed him in his
botelerie and had yeuen him a thousand mar^ of land by year and so much the
Earl loved him that he might done in the Earls court all thing that him lyked
both among hie and low and so queyntelich the thief bare him ayens his lord
that he trusted more upon him than upon any man a lyve. And the Earl had
ordained by his lettres for to wend in to the Erledome of lancastre for to
make men arise to help him in that viage that is to seyne v.C. men of Arms
But the false traitor come not there no manner men for to warn ne to make arise
for to help his lord And when the traitor herd tell that his lord was
discomfited at Burtone as a falls thief traitor he stale a way and robbed in
Rauenesdale his lords men that come fro the scomfiture and took of hem horse
and harneis and all that they had and queld of hem all that he might take and
tho come and yield him un to the king When the good Earl Thomas wist that he
was so betrayed he was sore abashed and said to him self O almighty god quod
he how might Robert holand find in his heart me to betraie sithenes that I have
loved him so much O god well may now a man see by him that no man may desceyue
an other rather than he that he trust most upon he has full euel yield my
goodness and the wurshipp that I to him have done and through my kendenesse
have him a vaunced and made hie from low and ^e makes me go from high un to
low but yet shall he die in evil death

Of the scomfiture of Burbrugge Ca.C.lxxxxvij
THe good Earl Thomas of lancastre Humfrey de Bohonn^ Earl of herford and the
barons that with hem were token counceill bitwene hem at friar prechours at
pounfrete Tho thought Thomas upon the traitrie of Robert Holand and said in
reprove / Allas holand had me hetraied / Ay is in the reed of some evil shrede
/ and by common assent they should all wend to the castle of Dunstanburgh the
which perteyned to the Erledome of lancastre and that they should abide there
till that the king had foryeue hem her male talent But when the good Earl
Thomas this herd he ansu^rd in this manner and said / lords quoth he if we go
toward the north the northren men will seyne that we go toward the scotts and
so we shull be hold traitors / for cause of distaunce that is bitwene king
Edward and Robert the Brus that made him king of scotland and therefore I sey as
touching my self that I wull goo no fer^her in to the north than to mine own
Castle of Pounfrete

And when sir Rogier Clifford herd this he aroos up anon in wrath and drowe
his swerd and swore by almighty god and by his holy names but if that he would
gone with hem he should ^e deed and that he would slay him there The noble and
gentill Earl Thomas of lancastre was sore adrad / and said fair sires I will
gone with you whidder so ever ye me led Tho went they to gedre^^ in to the
north and with hem they had vij.C. men of arms and come to Burbrugge And when
Sir Andrewe of herkela that was in the northcontre through ordinance of the
king for to keep the contre of scotland herd tell how that Thomas of
lancastre was discomfited and his company at Burton upon Trent he ordained him
a strong power / and sir Symond ward also / that was tho shereue of york and
come and met the barons at burbrugge and anon they break the brugge that was
made of tree ^ And when Sir Thomas of Lancastre ^erde that Sir An^^ewe of
herkela had brought with him such power / he was sore ad^ad / and sent for sir
Andr^we of Herkela and with him spoke / and said to him in this manner Sir
Andrewe quod ^e ye mow well understand how that onr lord the king is lad and
mysgouerned by much falls counceille thur^^h Sir Hugh the S^^ncer the fadre and
Sir hugh his sone / and Sir Johan Earl of Arundell and through Mastir Robert
(...) a falls ^iled clerk that now is in the kings court duellyng / wherefore I
pray you that ye would come with us with all the power that ye have ordained
and help to destroy the venym of England and the traitors that been therynne
and we wull give un to you the best part of v. Erldomes that we have and hold
and we wull make un to yow^ an oath that we wull neue^ done thing without your
counceill and so ye shull been ef^^as wel^ with us as ever was Robert of holand
Tho an^uerd sir Andrewe of herkela and said Sir Thomas that would I not done ne
consent there to for no manner thing ye might me give without the will and
commandment of (...) the king for than should I been hold a traitor for
evermore And when the noble Earl Thomas of laucastre saw that he nold not
consent to him for no manner thing Sir Andrewe he said will ye not consent to
destroy the venym of the reame as we be consent At one word Sir andrew y tell
the that or this year be gone that ye shull been take and hold for a traitor
and more than ye hold us now and in wers death ye shull die than ever died any
knight of England And understands well that ye ded never thing that sorrer
shall you repent and now goth and does that you good likes And I wull pnt
me un to the mercy and the grace of god And so went the false traitor Sir
Andrewe of herkela in his way as a falls traitor tirant and as a falls forsworn
man For through the noble Earl Thomas of laucastre he vnderfenge the arms of
chivalry and through him he was made knight

Tho might men seen archiers draw hem in that one side and in that other and
knights also and foughten to gedre wonder sore and also among other sir
humfrey de Boughon Earl of herford a worthy knight of renoune through all
cristendome stood and faught with his enemies upon the brugge and as the noble
lord stood and faught upon the brugge a thief a ribande skulked under the
brugge and fersely with a spear smote the noble knight in to the foundement so
that his boweles comen out there Allas the sorwe for there was slain the flour
of solace and of comfort and also of courtesy And sir Rogier of clifford a
noble knyt stood ever and faught and well and nobely him defended as a worthy
Baron But at the last he was sore wonuded in his head and Sir william of
Sullayand Sir Rogier of Bernefeld were slain at that bataille When Sir Andrewe
of herkela saw that Sir Thomas men lancastre lassed and slaked anon he and his
company comen to the gentill knight Sir Thomas of Laucastre and said yield the
traitor yield the The gentill Earl an^uerd tho and said Nay lords Traitors ^e
we none and to you will we never us yield while that our lyfes laste^ but
lever we have to be slain in our treuthe than yield us to you And sir Andrewe
ayene grad upon sir Thomas company yollyng as a wode wolf and said yield you
traitors taken yield you and with an high ^^is said ^ethe ware sires that none
of you be hardy upon life and lymme to mysdone Thomas body of Lancastre And
with that word the good Earl Thomas went in to the chapel and said knelyng
upon his knees and turned his visage toward the cross and said Almighty god
to the I me yield and hollich put me in to thy mercy And with that the vileyns
ribaudes lept about him on every side as tirauntz and wode turmentours and
difpoilled him of his armure and clothed him in a robe of ray that was of his
squyers liuere and forth lad him un to york by water Tho might men see much
sorwe and care for the gentill knights fledden in every side and the ribaudes
and the vileyns egrely hem discried and grad an high yield y^we traitors yield
you And when they were y yolde they were robbed and bound as the ves allas
the shame and despite that the gentill order of knyghthode there had at that
bataille and the land tho was with out law For holy church tho had no more
reverence than it had been a bordelhows and in that bataille was the fadre
ayens the sone and the uncle ayens his nepheu For so much vnke^denesse was
never seyn before in England as was that time among folk of one nation For o
kynrede had no more pite of that other than an hungry wolf has of a sheep
and it was no wonder For the great lords of England were not all of o nation
but were meddled with other nations that is for to seyne sum britons sum
Saxons sum Danois sum Pehites sum frenshmen sum normans sum
Spaynardes sum Romans sum Henaudes sum Flemmynges and of other diverse
nations the which nations accorded not to the kind blood of England And if so
great lords had been onlich wedded to English people than should peez have been
and rest among hem without any envy.

And at that bataille was Sir Rogier Clifford take Sir Johan Mombray Sir
william Tuchet Sir william fitz william and many other worthy knights there
were take at that bataille And sir hugh dandell the next day after was taken
and put in to prison and should have been done to death if he had not spoused the
kings nece that was Earl Gilbertes suster of Gloucester And anon afterwas sir
Bartholomew of Badelesmere taken at stowe park a manner of the bisshoppes of
lincoln that was his nepheu / and many other barons and banerettz wherefore was
made much sorwe

H^w Thomas of lancastre was beheded at Pountfrete and v. barons honged and
deawen there / Capitulo Centesimo. lxxxxviij.
ANd now I shall tell you of the noble Earl Thomas of lancastre / when he was
taken and brought to york many of the Cite were full glad / and upon him cried
with high vois / A sir traitor ye arne welcome blessed be god / for now shull
ye have the reward that long time ye have deserved / and cast upon him many
snow balls and many other reproues did him / but the ge^till earl all suffered
and said nothir one ne other / And in the same time the king herd of this same
scomfiture and was full glad and in have come to Pountfrete and sir hugh the
spe^cer and sir hugh his sone and sir ^ohan earl of arundell / and sir Edmond
of wodestoke the kings brother earl of kent / and sir Aymer of valaunce earl
of Penbroke and mastir robert baldoke a falls piled clerc that was ^ue and
duelled in the kings court and all come thidder with the king / and the king
entered in to the castle And sir Andrewe of herkela a falls tirant through the
kings commandment took with him the gentill earl Thomas to Pountfrete / and
there he was prisoned in his own castle that he had new made that stood ayens
the Abbey of king Edward And sir hugh the spencer the fadre and his sone cast
and thought how and in what manner the good earl Thomas of lancastre should be
deed without any ^ugement of his Perys / wherefore it was ordained through the
kings ^ustices that the king should put upon him points of treson / And so it
befell that he was led to bar before the kings Justices barehede as a
thief in a fair hall withyn his own castle that he had made therein many a
fair fest both to rich and eke to pour And these were his ^ustices Sir hugh
(...) the fadr^ / Aymer of valaunce Earl of Penbroke / Sir Edmond of wodestoke
Earl of kent / Sir Johan of Britaigne Earl of Richemond and Sir Robert of
Malemethorppe Justice / and Sir Robert him acoulped in this manner / Thomas at
the first / our lord the king and this court excludes you of all manner
ansuere Thomas our lord the king put upon you that ye have in his land riden
with baner displaied ayene his pees as a traitor And with that word the
gentill earl Thomas with an high vois said nay lords forsooth and by seint
Thomas I was never traitor The Justice said ayene tho Thomas our lord the king
put upon you that ye have robbed his folk and mordred his people as a thief
Thomas the king also put upon you that he discomfited you and your people with
his folk in his own reame wherefore ye went and fled to the wode as an outelawe
And also ye were taken as an outelawe And Thomas as a traitor ye shull he
honged by reason but the king has foryeue you that Jews for love of queen
Isabell And Thomas reason would also that ye should be honged but the king has
foryeue you that Jews for cause and love of your lynage But Thomas For as
much as ye were take fleyng and as an outelawe the king will that your head
shall be smyten of as ye have well deserved Anon does him out of prece and
anon bring him to his Judgment. The gentill knight Thomas he had herd all
these words with an high vois he cried sore weeping And said Allas Seint Thomas
^aire fadre Allas shall I be deed thus Grant me now blissful god ansuere
but all availled him no thing For the cursed Gascoynes put him hidder and
thidder and on him cried with an high vois O king Arthur most dreadful well
known is now thyn open traytrie an evil death shall thou die as thou have
well deserved Tho set they upon his head in scorn an old Chapelet all to
rent and to torn that was not worth an halpenye And after they set him upon
a leave white Palfrey full un semelich and eke all bare and with an old bridell
and with an horrible noise they drove him out of the Castle toward his death
and cast upon him many balls of snow

And as the turmentours lad him out of the Castle tho said he this pitonse
words and his hondes held upon high toward heven Now the king of heven
give us mercy For the Erthely king has us forsake And a friar prechour went
with him out of the Castle till that he come to the place that he ended his
life un to whom he shrofe him all his life And the gentill Earl held the friar
wonder fast by the clothes and said fair fadre abide with us till that I be
ded for my flessh quaketh for dread of death And soth for to say the gentill
Earl set him upon his knees and turned him toward the Est but a ribaude that
was called Higone of Mostone set hand upon the gentill Earl and said in
despite of him Sir traitor turn the toward the Scotts thy ^ou^e deed to
vnderfong / and turned him toward the north

The noble Earl Thomas ansuerd tho with a mylde vois and said now fair lords I
shall done all your will / and with that word the friar went fro him sore
weeping and anon a r^baude went to him and smote of his head the xj. ^al. of
Auerill in the year of grace M.CCC.xxj. Allas that ever such a gentill blood
shall been done to death without cause and reason And traitoursly was the king
counseiled when he through the false counceill of the spencers / suffered Sir
Thomas his vncles^ sone been put to such a death and so ben beheded ayen^ all
man of reason / and great pite it was also that such a noble king should been
desceyued and mysgouerned through cou^ceill of the false spencers / the which he
mayntened through loselrie ayens his honor and eke profit For afterward there
fill great vengeance in england for encheson of the forsaid Thomas death

When the gentill earl of his life was passed / The priour and the monks of
Pountfrete geten the body of sir Thomas of the king and they buried it before
the high Auter on the right side

(...) same day that this gentill lord was deed / there were honged and draw
for the same^quarell at Pountfrete / Sir william tuchet Sir william Fitz
william / sir watreyne of ysille / Sir Henry of Bradborne / and sir william /
cheynie barons all and ^ohan page squire And sone after at york were draw
and hong^d Sir Rogier Clifford / Sir Johan of Momb^^y barons / And Sir Gosselm
dauill knight / And at Bristowe were draw and honged Sir henry of wymyngton /
and sir henry Mou^tfort barons And at Gloucestre were draw and honged Sir
Johan Giffard and Sir william of Elmebrugge barons / And at london were honged
and draw Sir Henry Ties baron And at wynchelsee sir Thomas Colepepir knight /
And at wyndesore Sir Fraunceis ^f waldenham baron / And at Caunterbury was
draw and honged Sir Bartholomewe of Badelesmere / and sir Barth^lomewe of
asshebourneham barons / And at kerdyfe in walys Sir william fle^myng baron

How king Edward went in to scotland with an hondr^d thousand men of arms and
might not speed Ca.C.lxxxxix
ANd when king Edward of England had brought the flower of Chivalry v^ to her
death through couuceille of Sir hugh the spencer the fadre and Sir hugh the sone
he become as wode as any lyonne And what so ever the spencers would have it was
done and so well the king loved hem that they might done with him all thing
that they would Wherefore the king (...) un to Sir hugh spencer the fadre the
Erledome of wynchestre and to sir Andrewe of harkela the Erledome of Cardoil^
in prejudice and in harmyng of his croune And ^yng Edward tho through conseille
of the spencers disherited all hem that had been ayens him in any quarrel with
Thomas of Lancastre and many other were disherited also for encheson that the
spencers coueited for to have her lands and so they had all that they would
desire with wrong and ayens all reason Tho made the king Robert of Baldok a
falls pi^ed clerk chaunceler of England through counceill of the forsaid
spencers and he was a falls ribaud and a coueitons and so they counceilled the
king much that the king let take to his own ward all the goods of the lords
that wrongfully were put to the death in to his own hand and as well they
token the goods that were in holy church as the goods that were without and
let hem be put in to his tresorie in london and let hem call his forfaittz and
by her cou^ceill the king wrought for evermore he disherited hem that the
goods owghten And through her counceill let arere a tall^^ge of all the goods
of England Wherefore he was the ricchest king that ever was in England after
william Bastard of Normandy that conquered England And yet through counceill of
hem him seemed that he had not ynowe but made yet every town of england find a
man of arms upon her own costages for to gone and werre upon the scotts that
were his enemies wherefore the king went in to Scotland with an hounderd thousend
men of arms at witsontide in the year of our lord Ihesu crist M.CCC. and xxij.
But the Scotts went and hid hem in montains and in w^des and ta^^ed the
Englisshmen fro day to day that the king might for no manner thing hem find in
plain field wherefore many Englissh men that few vitailles hadden for hunger
there deiden wonder fast and suddenly for hunger in going and in coming and
namelich tho that had been ayens Thomas of Lancastre and had robbed his men
upon his lands

Whenne king Edward saw that vitailles failled him he was tho wonder sore
discomforted for encheson also that his m^n died and for he might nouzt spe^e
of his enemies So at the last he come ayene in to England And anon after come
James douglas and also Thomas Randulph with an hugh host in to England in to
northumberland and with hem the englisshmen that ^^ere driven out of england
and come and robbed the contre and quelled the (...) / and also brend the town
that was called No^tallertone and many other to^nes un to york And when the
king herd this ty^ynge he let (...) all manner men that myghten tranaille / and
so the englisshmen ^ the abbey of Beigheland the xv. day after Mihelmasse in
the same year about said / and the englishmen were there discomfited / and at
that scomfiture was take sir ^ohan of Britaigne Earl of Richemond that held
the contre and Erledome of lancastre And after he paid an huge raunsone and
was let gone / and after that he went in to france and come never afterward
ayene

How Sir Andrewe of herkela was take and put un to the death that was earl of
Cardoille. Capitulo ducentesimo /
ANd at that time sir Andrewe of herkela that new was made Earl of Cardoille
for cause that he had taken the good Earl Thomas of lancastre / he had ordained
through the kings commandment of england for to bring him all the ^ower that
he might for to help him ayens the Scotts at the Abbey of beigheland / And
when the false traitor had gadred all the people that he might and should have
come to the king un to the Abbey of Brigheland the false traitor lad hem by an
other co^tre through Copeland and through the erledome of lancastre / and wit
through the contre and robbed and queld folk all that he might And ferthermore
the false traitor had taken a great some of gold and silver of sir James
douglas for to be ayens the king of england and to ben helpyng and holdyng with
the Scotts through whose treson the king of england was scomfited at Beigheland
er that he come thidder wherefore the king was toward him wonder wroth / and let
^uely enquere by the contre about / how that it was / and so men enquered and
aspied / so at the last truth was found and ^ought and he atteint and taken
as a falls traitor / As the noble earl Thomas of lancastre him told / er that
he were done un to the death at his taking at bnrbruge and to him said or that
year were done he should be take and hold a traitor And so it was as the holy
man said wherefore the king sent priu^lich to Sir Anthoyne of lucy a knight of
the country of Cardoille that he should take sir Andrewe of harkela and put him
un to the death and to bring this thing un to the end the king sent his
co^missione So that the same Andrewe was take at Cardoill and led un to the
bar in the manner of an Earl worthily arraied and with a swerd gurt about hm
and hosed and spored Tho spoke sir Anthoyne in this manner Sir Andrewe quoth he the
king put up on the for as much as thou have been orped in thy deeds he ded un
to the mochel honor and made the earl of Cardoill and thou as a traitor un to
thy lord the king and laddest his people of this contre that should have help
him at the bataill of Beigheland and thou laddest them away by the contre of
Copeland and through the erledome of lancaster Wherefore our lord the king was
stomfited there of the scotts through thy treson and falsenesse And if thou
had come be times he had had the mastrie and all treson thou did for the
great sum of gold and silver that thou vnderfeng of James douglas a scotte
the kings enemy And our lord the kings will is that the order of knyghthode
by the which thou vnderfeng all thyn honor and wurshupp upon thy body be all
brought to nouzt and thy estate undone that other knights of lower degree mow
after the beware y^ which lord has the avaunced hugely in diverse contrees in
England and that all mow take example by the Her lord afterward trewely for to
serve Tho commanded he a knave anon^ to h^we of his spores on his heles And
after he let break the sword over his head the which the king him yaf to keep
and defend his land therewith when he made him Earl of Cardoille And after he
let him unclothe of his furred Tabard and of his hode and of his furred cotes
and of his gurdell and when this was done sir Anthoyne said un to him Andrewe
quod he now art thou no knyt but a knave and for thy treson the king will
that thou shall be honged and draw and thyn head smyten of and thy bowelles
taken out of thy body and brent before the and thy body quartred and thyn head
smyten of and sent un to london and there it shall stand upon london brugge and
the iiij. quarters shull be sent to iiij. tounes of England that all other mow
beware and chastized by the And as Anthoyne said so it was done all manner
thing in the last day of October In the year of grace M.CCC. and xxij. year
And the son tho turned in to blood as the people it saw and that dured fro the
morn till it was xj. of the clokke of the day

of the miracles that god wrought for seint Thomas l^ue of lancaster wherefore
the king let close the church doors of the Priorie of Pountfret for no man
should come therein to the body for to off^en Capitulo du^^^tesimo primo
ANd sone after that the good earl Thomas of lancastre was martred a priest
that long time had been blind dremed in ^is slepyng that he should gone un to
the hille there that the good earl Thomas of lancastre was done un to the death
and he should have his sight ayene / and so he dremed iij. nyghtes sewyng / and
the pressed let tho led him to the same hylle / and when he come to that place
that he was martred on^deuoutely he made there his prayers and praid god and
seint Thomas that he must have his sight again / and was in his prayers he laid
his right hand upon the same place y^ the good man was matred on / and a drope
of dry blood and small sand cleued on his hand and there with striked his yien
/ and anon through the myt of god and of seint Thomas of lancastre he had his
sight again / and thanked tho almighty god and seint Thomas / And when this
miracle was known among men the people come thidder on every side and kneled
and made her prayers at his tomb that is in the priorie of Pounfret / and
prayed that holy martyr of socour and of help and god herd her prayer

Also there was a young child drenched in a well in the town of Pountfrete and
was deed iij. days and iij. nyghtes and men comen and laid the deed child upon
seint Thomas tomb the holy martyr / and the child arose there from death to life
/ as many a man it saw / and also much people were out of her mind and god
has sent hem her mind ayene through virtue of that holy martyr / And also god
has yeuen there to / to creples her goyug and to crooked her hondes and her feet
and to blind also her sight / and to many sike folk her hele of diverse
maladies for the love of his good martyr Also there was a rich man in Coundom in
gascoyne / and such a malady he had that all his right side roted and fell
awey from him / that men myt see his liver and also his heart / and so he stanke
that vuneth men myt come nigh him wherefore his friends were for him wondre sorry
But at the last as god would they prayed to seint Thomas of lancastre that he
wollde pray to almighty god for that prisoner and behight to gone to pountfrete
for to done her pilgrymage that the martyr seint Thomas come un to him and
anointed over all his sike body / And there with the good man awoke and was all
hole / and his flessh was restored again that before was roted and fall away /
For which miracle the good man and his friends loved god and seint Thomas ever
more after / And this good man come in to England and took with him iiij.
felawes and come to Pounfreete un to that holy martyr and did her pilgrymage
but the good man that was sike come thidder all naked sauf his (...) / and when
they had done they turned home ayene in to her contre and told of the miracle
where so ever they come And also ij. men have ^^heled there of the mormal through
help of that holy martyr though that evil behold incurable When the spencers
herd that god did such miracles for this ho^y martyr / and they would be leave it
in no manner wyse-but said openlich that it was great heresy such virtue of him
to believe And when Sir hugh the spencer the sone saw all this doing anon he
sent his missagier from Pountfrete there that he duelled to the king Edward
that tho was at Grau^^e at Skipton for cause that the king should un do that
pilgrymage And as the Ribaude the messagier went to ward the king for to done
his message he come by the hulle on the which the good martyr waz done to death
and in the same place he made his ordure / and when he had done he went toward
the king / And a strong flix him come upon er he come to york / and shed
all his boweles at his fundement / And when Sir hugh the spencer herd this
tydyng somed^ell he was ad^ad / and thought for to undone the pilgrymage if he
might by any manner way / and to the king went and said that they should be in
great sklaundre through out all cristendome for the death of Thomas of lancastre
if that he suffered the people done her pilgrymage at Pountfrete / and so he
counceilled the king that he commanded to closse the church doors of
pountfrete in the which chirch the holy martyr seint Thomas was entered / and
thus they diden ayene all fraunchises of holy church / so that iiij. year after
myt no pilgryme come un to that holy body And for encheson that the monks
suffered men come and honor that holy body of seint Thomas the martyr / through
counceill of Sir hugh the spencer the sone and through counceill also of mastir
Robert of Baldoke the false piled clerk that was the kings chaunceler the
king consented that they should be set to her wages and let make wardeins over
her own good long time / and through commandment of the forsaid Sir hugh the
spencer xiiij. Gascoynes well armed kept the hulle there that the good man seint
Thomas was done un to his death so that no pilgrim myt come by that way Full
well went be to have be take cristes might and his power and the great loo^ of
miracles that he showed for his martyr seint Thomas through all cristendome And
that same time the king made Robert of Baldok the piled clerk and falls through
prayer of Sir hugh the spencer the sone Chauncelere of England / And in the
same time was the Castle of walynford holden ayens the king through the
prisoners that were withynne the castle for seint Thomas quarrel of Lancastre
wherefore the people of the contre come and took the castle up on the forsaid
prisoners wherefore sir Johan of Goldington knight and sir Edmond of the beche
prisoner and a squire that was called Rogier of walton were take and sent to
the king to Punfrete and there they were done in to prison And the forsaid
Rogier was sent un to york and there he was draw and honged And anon after
sir Rogier mortimer of wygmore krake out of the toure of london in this manner
the forsaid sir Rogier herd that he should be draw and honged at london in the
morn after seint laurence day and on the day before he held a fair fest in
the toure of london and there was sir Stephen segraue constable of y^ tour and
many great men with hem And when they should soap the forsaid Stephen sent for
all the officers of the tour and they come and souped with him And when they
should take her leave of him a squire that was called Stephen that was f^ll
priuee with the forsaid Rogier through his connceill yafe hem all such drink
that the best of hem all slept ij. days and ij. nyghtes and in the mean time
be escaped away by water y^ is to say by the thamyse and went over the sea and
held him in france. Wherefore the king was sore a^noied and tho put the same
Stephen out of his co^stablery

How the queen Isabell went in to france for to treten of pees bitwene her
lord the king of England and the king of france her brother. Ca.CC.ij.
THe king went tho un to london and there through cou^ceill of sir hugh the
spencer the fadre and of his sone and of mastir robert Baldok a falls piled
clerc his chaunceler let seize tho all the queen's lands in to his own hand
and also all the lands yt were sir Edwardis his sone and were so put to her
wages against all manner reason and that was through the falsenesse of the spencers

And when the king of france that was queen Isabelles brother herd of this
falnesse he was sore a^noied ayens the king of england and his false councelers
wherefore he sent a letter un to king Edward under his seal that he should come
in to feau^ce at a certain day for to done his homage and there to he somened
him and else he should lose all gascoyne And so it was ordained in England
through the king and his ^^^nceill that queen Isabell should wend in to france
for to trete of ^ees bitwene her lord and her brother And that Oliver of yngham
should wend in to Gascoyne and have with him vij. thousend men and moo of
arms to been seueshall and wardeyne of gascoine and so it was ordained that
queen Isabell went tho over see and come in to france / and with her went sir
Aymer of ^^launce earl of Penkroke that was there mordred suddenly in ^ue vage
but that was through gods vengeance / for he was one of the ^ustices that
consented to seint Thomas death of lancastre and would never after repent him of
that wykked deed / and at that time sir Oliver of yngham went over in to
Gascoyne and did much harm to the king of france and tho get ayene that king
Edward had lost and much more there to

How king Edward sent sir Edward his sone the eldeste in to france Ca.cc.iij.
THe queen Isabell and but a quarter of a year in france duelled that sir
Edward her eldest sone ne axed leave for to wend in to france for to speak
with his modre ^sabell the queen / and the king his fadre granted him with a
good will / and said to him / Go my fair sone in goddis blissyng and mine /
and thenke for to come ayen^ as hastily as thou might And he went over see and
come in to france And the king of france his uncle vnderfenge him with mochel
honor and said un to him fair sone ye be welcom^ and for cause that your
fadre come not for to do his homage for the duchy of Gnyhenne as his
Auncestres were wont for to do ^yeue you that lordshipp to hold it of me in
heritage as all manner Auncestres diden to for you wherefore he was called duke of
Gnyhenne

How the king exiled his queen Isabell and Edward his eldeste sone Ca.cc.iiij
WHenne king Edward of england herd tell how the king of france had give the
duchy of Gnyhenn^ un to sir Edward his sone without consent and will of him
and that his sone had vnderfonge the duchy he become wonder wroth and sent to
his sone by his lr^e and to his wife also that they should come ayene in to
england in all the have that they might The Queen Isabell and sir Edward her
sone were wonder sore adrad of the kings manace / and of his wrath and
principally the falsenesse of the spencers both of the fadre and of the sone /
and at his commandment they would not come / wherefore king Edward was full sore
annoied and let make a cry at london that if Queen Isabell and Edward her
eldest sone come not in to England that they should been hold as our enemies
both to the Royame and to the croune of england And for that they would come in
to England but both were exiled the modre and her sone When the queen Isabell
herd thees tidings she was sore adrad to ben^ shent through the false congettyng
of the spencers And went with the kuyghtes that were exiled out of England for
seint Thomas cause of lancastre that is to seyne sir Rogier of wigmore sir
william Trussell sir Johan of Cromwell and many other good knights wherefore
they took her counseill and ordained among hem for to make a marriage bitwene
the duke of Gnyhenne the kings sone of England and the Earls daughter of he
naud that was a noble knight of name and a doughty in his time And if that
thing might be brought about than stood they trowyng with the help of god and
with his help to recover her heritage in England where of they were put out
through the false congettynges of spencers

How king Edward through counceill of the spencers sent to the douzepers of
france that they should help that the queen Isabell and her sone sir Edward
weren exiled out of france Ca.CC.v.
WHen king Edward and the spencers herd how Queen Isabell and sir Edward her
sone had alied hem to the Earl of benaud and to them that were exiled out of
England for encheson of Thomas of Lancastre they were so sorry that they nist
what to done Wherefore Sir hugh spencer the sone said un to Sir hugh his fadre in
this manner wise. Fadre acursed be the time and the counceill that ever ye
consented that Queen Isabell should gone un to france for to treten of accord
bitwene the king of England and her brother the king of france for that was
your cou^ceill For at that time forsooth your wit failled For I dread ^^e sore
lest through her and her sone we shull be shent but if we take the better
counceill Now fair sires understands how mervaillous felony and falshede
the spencers ymagined and cast for privily they let fylle v. bar^ll ferrors
with silver the some amounted v. thousend pound and they sent tho barelles
over see privily by an alien that was called Arnold of spaigne that was a
brocour of london that he should gone to the douzepers of france that they
should procuren and speak to the king of france that Queen Isabell and her
sone Edward were drive and exiled out of france And among all other things
that they were brought to the death as privily as they myt But almighty god
would not so for when this Arnold was in the hie see he was take with selandres
that met him in the sea and took him and lad him to her lord Earl of henauld
and much ^oye was made for that taking / and at the last this Arnold ^uely
stake away fro thens and come to london And of this taking and of other things
the earl of henaude said to the Queen Isabell Dame makes you merry and been of
good chere for ye be more richer than ye went have been / and take ye these v.
barelles full of silver that were sent to the douzepiers of France for to
quelle you and your sone Edward / and thenketh hastily for to wend in to
england and takes ye with you sir Johan of henaude my brother and v.C. men of
arms for many of hem of france in whom ye have had great trust had great
deinte you for to scorn And Almighty god grant you grace your enemies to
overcome The Queen Isabell sent tho through ^enaud and fla^^dres for her
soudiours / and ordained her every day for to wend in to england ayene and so
she had in her company sir Edmond of wodestoke that was Earl of kent that was
sir Edwardes brother of england

Whenne king Edward let keep the costs by the sea and let try all the pri^e
men of arms and footmen through england Capitulo ducentesimo.vj
WHenne king Edward herd tell that Queen Isabell and Edward her sone would
come in to england with mauy aliens and with hem that were outelawed out of
England for her rebelnesse he was sore adrad to be put a down and lose his
kingdom wherefore he ordained to keep his castells in walys as well as in
england with vitailles and her ap^^ille and let keep his Rivers and also the sea costs where of the v. ports tok^^ to keep hem and also the se^ And at the
fest of decollacion of se^^t ^ohan baptist / the Citezems of london sent to the
king to Porchestre an C.men of arms And also he commanded ferthermore by his
lr^ez ordained that every hundred and wapentake of england to triours as well
of men of arms as of men a foot / and that they should been put in xx. some
and in an C. some and commanded that all tho men were a red^ when any oute^^se
or cry were made for to pursue and take the al^ens that comen to england for
to benymme him the land and for to put him out of his kingdom / And more over
he let cry through his ^atent in every fair and in every markete of England
that the Queen Isabell and Sir Edward his eldest sone and the Earl of kent that
they were take and saufely kept witho^te any manner harm un to hem doing and
all other manner people that come with hem anon smite of her hedes without any
manner ransom And what man that might bring sir rogiers ^eed mortimer of
wygmore should have an C. pound of money for his trauaille And furthermore he
ordained by his patent and commanded to make a fire upon every hie hill
besides the rivers and in low contres for to make hie Bekenes of tymbre that
if it so were that the Aliens come un to the land by night that men should
tend the bekenes that the contre might be warned and come and mete her enemies
and in the same time died sir Rogier Mortimer his uncle in the tour of london

How the queen Isabell and sir Edward duke of Gnyhenne his sone come to land
at herewiche and how they diden Capitulo CC.vij.
THe queen Isabell and sir Erward her sone duke of Gnyhe^ne sir Edward of
wodestoke Earl of kent and sir Johan the erlys brother of henaud and her
company drad not the manace of the king ne of his traitors for they trust all
in goddiz grace and come un to herewich in southfolk the xxiiij. day of
Sptembre and in the year of grace M.CCC.xxvj And the queen and sir Edward her
sone sent lr^ez to the maire and cominalte of london requyryng hem that they
should been helpyng in the quarrel and cause y^ they had begone that is to
seyne to destroy the traitors of the reame But none ansuere was sent again
wherefore the queen and Sir Edward her sone senten an other patent lr^e under her
seals the tenor of which letter here foleweth in this manner Isabell by the
grace of god queen of england lady of Irland and Countess of (...) and we
Edward the eldest sone of the king of England duke of Gnyhenne Earl of Chestre
of Pountyf and of Moustroille to the maire and to all the cominalte of the cite
of london sends gretyng For as much as we have before the time sent to you
by our lr^ez how we be come in to this land with good array and in good manner
for the honor and profit of holy church and of our right dear lord the king
and all the reame with all our myt and power to keep and maynten as we and all
the good folk of the forsaid Reame are holden to done And upon that we pray
you that ye would been helpyng to us in as much as ye may in this quarrel
that is for the (...) profit of all the Reame and we have had un to this time
n^ne ansuere of the forsaid lettres ne know not your will in that party.
Wherefore we send to you again and pray and charge you that ye bear you so
ayens us that we have no cause to grieve you but that ye been to us help^^g by
all the ways that ye may or may known For wetith well in certain that we and
all tho that been comen with us in to this reame ne thenke not to done if it
like god any thing but that shall be for the common profit of all the reame
but only to destroyen hugh spencer our enemy and enemy to all the reame as ye
well know / wherefore we pray you and charge you in the faith that ye owe to our
lord the king and to us / and upon all that ye shull^ mow forfet again us
that if the said Hugh spencer our enemy come withynne your power that ye done
him hastily to been taken and saufely kept un till we have ordained of him our
will / and that ye leave it not in no manner wise as ye desire honor and
profit of us all and of all the reame Understanding well that if ye done our
prayer and maundeme^t we shull the more be behold un to you / And also ye
shull get you wurshippe and profit if ye send us hastily ansuere of all
your will / yenen at Baldok the vj. day of October Which ^ettre erly in the
dawenyng of the day of Seint Denis was takked upon the new cross in chepe /
and many Copies of the same ^etter were takked upon wyndowes and doors and upon
other places in the Cite that all men passing by the wey might seen and read
And in the same time king Edward was at london in the toure at his mete / and a
messagier come in to the halle and said that the Queen Isabell was come to
land at herewyche / and has brought in her company Sir Johan of henaude and
with him men of arms without nombre And with that word Sir Hugh the (...) the
fadre spoke and thus to the king said / my most wurshipfull lord and king of
England now mow ye make good chere for certainly they been all ours

The king saw this word comfortable yet he was f^ll sorewefull and pensyfe in
heart And the king had not yet fullich ^^en that there come in to the halle an
other messagier and said that the Queen Isabell was arrived at herewych beside
yepswyche in Southfolk Sir Hugh the spencer the fadre spoke to the messagier
and said tell soth in good faith to the messagier my fair friend is she come
with a strength Certys Sir soth for to say / she ne has in her company but
vij. houndred (...) of arms / and with that word Sir hugh the spencer the
fadre cried with an high vois and said Allas allas we been all betrayed / for
certys with so litell power she had never come to land but folk of this land
were to her consent And therefore after the mete they took her cou^ceill and went
toward walys for to arere the walshmen ayene queen Isabell and edward her sone
all for to fight and so they were in purpose euerichon

How mastir waltier Stapilton bisshopp of excestre that was the kings tresorer
was beheded at london Ca.CC.viij.
ANd in the same time king Edward was sore adrad best men of london would yield
hem un to the queen Isabell and to her sone edward wherefore he sent mastir
walter stapilto^ his tresorer for to be wardeyne and keeper of the cite of
london with the maire And so he come to the Gildehall of london and axed the
keys of the yates of the cite through virtue and strength of his commission and
would have had the keeping of the cite And the co^muners ansuerd and said that
they would keep the cite to the honor of king Edward and of Isabell the Queen
and of the duke the kings sone withouten any mo The bisshopp was so sore
annoied and swore oath that they all should abie it anon as king Edward were
come out of walys And the co^muners all anon of the cite token the bisshopp
and lad him amyddes chepe and there they smyten of his head and set his heed in
his right hond And after they beheded ij. of his squyers that held with the
bisshopp and one of hem was called william of wall that was the bisshoppes
nepheu That other was called Johan of Padyngton And also they took a burgeis of
london that was called Johan marchall that was sir hugh the spencers aspie the
fadre and smyten of his head also And in that same time that same bisshopp had
in london a fa^r tour in making in his close upon the river of the thamyse that
was without templebarre and him failled stone to make there of an end wherefore
he commanded his men to gone to the church of friar carmes and there they
token stone to make there with the tower and much sand and mortier and old
robous that was left And for the despite that the bishop had done un to holy
church he and his ij. squyers were buried in that sand as though they had been
hounds And they there leyen xj. wekes till that the queen Isabell sent her
lr^es to the co^muners and prayed hem that they wuld suffer and grant that
the bisshopp must betaken out of that place and been buried at excestre at his
own church and so he was and his ij. squyers were buried at seint cleme^tz
church without temple bar and it was no wonder though y^ bisshopp died an
evil death For he was a coueitous man and had with him no mercy and evil
counceilled the king And sone af^ was arnold of spain taken he that was
assentaut to have lad the v.M pound of silver in v. barelles ferriers un to
the douzepers of france for to help and have the queen Isabell to her death
and Edward her sone also And this arnold was put un to death without the Cite
of london

How king Edward and sir hugh spencer and the Earl of arundell were taken
Ca.CC.ix.
WHen king Edward had sent mastir walt Stapilton his tresorer in to london for
to keep the cite un to him ayene y^ queen Isabell his wife and ayene Edward her
sone anon him self took with him sir hugh spencer the sone and sir Johan earl
of arundell and mastir robert baldoke his chaunceler a falls pilled pressed and
token her way toward bristowe And there the king abode a litell term and made
sir hugh the spencer the fadre as conestable and keeper of the castle And the
king and that other spencer went in to the shipp and sailled toward walys and
took no ^eue of the stiward ne of none in the kings housold And over in to
walys for to arere the walshmen ayene dame Isabell the queen and the duke her
sone and the Earl of kent and sir Johan of henaude and they w^nt and pursued
after hem and her power encresed every day So at the last the king was taken
upon an hylle in walys and sir hugh the spencer the sone in that other side of
the same hylle and the false piled clerc mastir Robert baldok there fast besides
hem and were brout ayene in to England as almighty god would and the king him
self was in sauf keeping in the castle of kenilworth and him kept sir henry
that was seint Thomas brother of lancastre And sir hugh spencer the fadre came
and put him in the queen's grace and Sir Edward her sone duke of gnyhenne But
sir hugh the spencer aft the time that he was take nolde ete no manner mete
nothir drink no manner drink for he wist to have no mercy sauf only to be deed
And the Queen and her counceille tho had ordained that he should have been do
to death at london but he was so feeble for his much fasting that he was deed
almost And therefore it was ordained that he should have his Judgment at herford
And at a place of the toure his hood was take from his heed and also from
Robert of baldok that was a pilled clerk and a falls and the kings Chauncelere
and men set upon her hedes chapp clettz of sharp netteles and two squyers
blewe in her eres with ij. great bugles horns upon tho ij. prisoners that men
might here there blowyng out with horns mo than a Mile And one Symond of
Reding the kings marchall before hem bare her arms upon a spear reuersed in
token that they should be undone for ever more And upon the morwe was Sir hugh
spencer the sone dampened to the death and was draw and honged ^e^^ded and his
boweles taken out of his body and brend and after he was quartred / and his
iiij. qnartiers were sent to iiij. tounes of England and his head sent to
london brugge / And this Symond for encheson that he despised Queen Isabell he
was draw and honged in a stage made amydde the forsaid sir hughes galewes And
the same day a litell fro thens was sir Johan of Aruudell beheded for he was of
sir hugh spencers councelers

And anon after was sir hugh spencer the fadre draw honged and beheded at
Bristowe / and after honged ayene by the arms with ij. strong ropes / and the
iiij. day after he was hewn all to pieces and hounds eten him / and for that
encheson that the king had yeuen him the Erledome of wynchestre his head was
lad thidder and put upon a spear And the^ falls Baldoke was sent to london and
there he deide in prison among thefes / for men did him no more reverence than
they would done un to an hounde / and so deiden the traitors of england blissed
be almighty god And it was no wonder for her through counceill the good earl
Thomas of lancastre was done un to death And all that helden with Thomas of
lancaster through the traitors were undone and all her heirs disherited

How kyug Edward was put a down and his dignite ^eno^me Capitulo d^centesimo
decimo
ANd anon after as this was done the Queen Isabell and Edward her sone and
all the great lords of england at one assent sent to king edward to the
castle of kenilworth the^ that he was in keeping under the ward of sir ^ohan
Hachim that was the bisshopp of Ely / and of sir ^ohan of Percy a baron for
encheson that he should ordeyne his plement at a certain place in England for to
redress and amend the state of the reame And king Edward hem ansuerd and said
lords quod he / re see full well ^ow it is / ^o haueth here my seal / I give
you all mine power to ordeyne a parliament where that ye will And they took her
(...) of him and come ayene to the barons of England. And when they had the
kings patent of this thing they showed it to the lords And tho was ordained
that the parliament should been at westmynster at the vtas of seint Hillarie And
all the great lords of England let ordeyne for hem there ayens that time that
the parliament should been And at which day that parliament was the king would not
come there for no manner thing as he had sett^ him self and assigned And
notheles the barons sent to him o time and other And he swore by gods soul
that ^e nolde come there o foot Wherefore it was ordained by all the great lords
of England that he should no longer been king but been deposed and said that
they would croune king Edward his sone the elder that was duke of Gnyhenne and
sent so tydyng un to the king there that he was inward under sir Johan Earl of
Garenne and sir Johan of Bothun that was bisshopp of Ely and sir Henry Percy a
baron and sir william Trussell a knight that wat with the Earl sir Thomas of
Lancastre for to yield up her homages un to him for all th^^ of England And sir
william Trussell said thees words

Sir Edward for encheson that ye have traied your people of england and have
undone many great lordis of England without any cause but now ye ben
withstond thanked be god And also for enc^eson that ye would not come to the
parliament as ye ordained at westmynster as in your own lettre patent is
contained for to trete with your ^^ege men as a king should And there for through
all the commune assent of all the lords of England I tell un to you these
words ye shull understand sir that the Barons of England at one assent will
that ye be no more king of England but vtterlich have put you out of your
Realte for evermore And the bisshopp of Ely said tho to the king Sir Edward
here I yield up feaute and homage for all the Erche bisshoppes and bisshoppes
of England and for all the clergy Tho said Sir Johan Earl of Garenne Sir
Edward I yield up here un to you f^aute and homage for me and for all the
Earls of England And Sir Henry Percy yafe up also there his homage for him and
for all the Barons of England

And tho said Sir william Trussell I yield up now un to you Sir mine homage
for me and also for all the knights of England and for all them that holden by
seriauntrie er by any other manner thing of you. So that fro this day afterward
ye shull not be claymed king nothir for king be hold / But from this time
afterward / ye shull be hold for a singular man of all the people / and so they
went thennes un to london there that the lords of england hem abode / And sir
Edward abode in prison in good keeping and that was the day of Conversion of
seint Panle in the xx. year of his regne

Prophecy of Merlyn declared of king Edward the sone of king Edward Ca.cc.xj
OF this king Edward prophesied Merlyn and said that there should come a Goot out
of Carre that should have horns of sil^ and a berde as white as snow / and a
doppe should come out of his nosethirles that should betoken much harm hunger
and death of the people / and great loss of his land / and that in the beginning
of his regne should be haunted much lecheri^ He said soth allas the time for
king Edward that was king Edwardes sone was borne at Carnariuan in walys /
forsooth he had horns of silver and a berde as snow / when he was made prince
of walys / to much he yafe him (...) riotte and to folly / And soth said Merlyn
in his prophecy that there should come out of his nose a doppe / for in his
time was great hunger among the pour people / and strong death among the
rich that deide in strange land with mochel sorwe and in werre in Scotland
and afterward he lost Scotland and Gascoyne / and whiles that him self was
king there was much lechery haunted And also Merlyn told and said that this
goot should seche the flour of life and of death And he said sothe / for he
spoused ^sabell the kings daughter of france And in his time Merlyn said that
there should be made brugges of folk upon diches of the sea and that was well
seyne at bannokkesborne in Scotland when he was discomfited there of the Scotts
And Merlyn told also that stones should fall from castelles and many tounes
should be made pleyn And he said sothe for when king Edward was discomfited in
Scotland and come th^^ southward the Scotts beseged tho Castelles and did hem
much harm and brend tounes un to the hard ^rthe /

And afterward Merlyn told that an Egle should come out of Cornewaille that
should have fetheres of gold that of pride should have no piere / And he should
despise lords of blood / and after he should die through a bear at Gauersiche
and that prophecy was full well know and found sothe For by the Egle is
understand Sir Piers of Ganastone that tho was Earl of Cornewaille that was a
wonder proud man that despised the baronage of England but afterward he was
beheded at Gauersiche through the Earl of Lancastre and through the Earl of war
wyke

And Merlyn told that in his time it should seem that the bear should brenne
and that bataille should be upon an arm of the sea in a field araied like a
shield were should die many white heedes.

And he said sothe for by the brennyng of the here is betokened great dread
through cuttyng of swerd at that bataille ordained in a field as a shield upon
an arm of the sea is betokened the bataill of Mitone for there comen the
Scotts in manner of a shield in manner of a winge and slew upon swale men of
religion prestes and seculers wherefore the Scotts called that bataill in
despite of Englisshmen the white bataille And after Merlyn said that the
forsaid bear should done the goot much harm and that should be upon the south
west and also upon his blood and said also that the goot should ^ese much dele
of his land till the time that shame should him o^come and than he should
clothe him with a lions skin and should win ayene that he had lost and much
more through people that should come out of the north west that should make him
been drad and him a vienge of his enemies through counceill of ij. owls that
first should been in peril to be undone And that tho ij. owle^ should wend
over the sea in to a strange land and there they should duelle till a certain
time and after they should come in to England ayene.

And tho ^j. owls should do much harm un to many one and that they should
counceille the got for to meve werre ayens the forsaid bear And that the goot
and the owls should come un to an arm^ of the sea at Barton up trent and
should wend over and that for dread the bear should flee with a swan in his
company un to bury toward the north through an unkind outpulter and that the
swan than should be slain with sorwe and the bear should be slayn^full nigh his
own nest that should stand upon Pounfrete upon whom the son shall shede his
bemes and many folk him shall seche for the mochel virtue and he said full
sothe for the good Earl Thomas of Lancastre was borne in the northwest and
cousin to the king and sone of his uncle And by law he made the king ^ese much
land the which he had purchased wylfully till at the last the king there of took
shame and him self filled with cruelte And after he gate ayene that he had
lost and much more through folk that he let assemble out of the northwest
that made him to been adrad and avenged him of his Barons through counceille of
Sir Hugh the spencere the fadr^ and of Sir Hugh the sone that beforne were
outelawed of England for her wykkednesse

But afterward come ayene in to England Sir hugh spencer the fadre out of
france / and so much counceilled the king that he should werre upon Thomas of
lancastre / So that the king and the spencers and the Earl of Arundell and her
power met with Thomas of lancaster at Burton up trente and him there
discomfited and Sir humfrey Earl of Hereford was in his company And after
fledden the forsaid Thomas and Humfrey with her company at Burbrugge with Sir
Andrewe of herkela that is called the unkind outeputter And also Sir Symond
ward Earl of york they come and met with Thomas of lancastre with an huge
company / and hem there discomfited / and in that scomfiture the earl of
Hereford was slain upon the brugge cowardely with a spear in the fundement And
the Earl Thomas was take and lad un to Pounfrete / and tho he was beheded
beside his own Castle / But aftward many men him sout for miracles that god
did for him And in that time Merlyn said for ^orwe and harm should die a people
of his land wherefore many lands should be upon him the boldr^ / And he said
sothe for by encheson of his barons that were done to death / for seint Thomas
quarrel of lancastre people of many lands become the bolder for to meue werre
upon the king / for her blood was turned to many nations And afterward Merlyn
told and said that the forsaid owls should done much harm un to the flour
of life and of death / and they should bring her un to much disese / So that
she should wend ou^r the sea in to France for to make pe^s to the flour delise
/ and there should abide till on a time that her seed should come and seche her
And tho they should abide both till a time that they should clothen hem with
grace / and tho two owls she should seek and put hem un to spitu^se death /
And that prophecy was well known and was full sothe / For Sir hugh spencer
the fader and Sir hugh the sone did much sorwe and persecucion un to Queen
Isabell through her procureme^t to her lord the king So they ordained among
hem that she was put un to her wages that is to say xx. shillyng in the day /
wherefore the king of France her brother was wonder sore annoied and sent in to
England by his lettres un to king Edward that he should come to his parliament
to Paris in France / but king Edward was sore adrad to come there / for he
wend to have been arested till that he had made amends for the trespace that
Sir hugh spencer the fadre and the sone had done / and for the harm that they
had done to Queen Isabell his suster Wherefore through her ordeynaunce and consent
of the spencers the queen Isabell went over see in to france for to make
accord bitwene king Edward and the king of france her brother And there
duelled she in france till Edward her eldest sone come her to seche and so
they duelled there both till that aliaunce was made bitwene hem And the ge^till
earl of henaude that if they with her help might destroy and over come the
venym and the falsenesse of the spencers that sir Edward should spouse Dame
Philipp the wurshipfull lady and the Earls daughter of henaude Wherefore the
Queen Isabell and sir Edward her sone and sir Edmond of wodestok the kings
brother of England and sir Johan of henaude and sir Rogier mortimer of wigmore
and sir Thomas Rocelyn and sir Johan of Cromwell and sir william Trussell and
many other of the aliaunce of the gentill Earl Thomas of lancastre that were
exiled out of England for his quarrel and were disherited of her lands
ordained hem a great power and arrined at Herewych in southfolk And sone after
they pursueden the spencers till that they were taken and put un to spitouse
death as before is said and her company and also for the great falsenesse that
they did to king Edward and to his people And Merlyn said also more that the
got should be put in to great disese and in great anguyssh and in great for we
he should led in his life and he said sothe For after the time that king
Edward was take he was put in to ward till that the spencers were put un to
the death And also for encheson that he nold not come un to his own perlement
at london as he had ordained and assigned him self and to his baronage and
also would not govern and rule his people ne his realm as a king should done
Some of the barons of England comen and yield up her homages un to him for hem
for all the other of the Reame in the day of Conversion of seint paul and in
the year of his regne xx. and they put him out of his realte for evermore and
ever he lyved his life afterward in much sorwe and anguysshe

Of king Edward the thridde after the conquest Capitulo CC.xij.
ANd after this king Edward of Carnariuan reigned sir Edward of wyndesore his
sone the which was crouned king and anointed at westmynster through consent
and will of all the great lords of the Reame the Sunday in Ca^delmasse eve in
the year of grace M.CCC.xxvj. that was of age at that time but xv. year / and
for encheson that his fadre was in ward in the castle of kemlworth and eke was
put down of his royalte / the reame of england was as without king fro the
feste of seint katherine in the year above said un to the feste of Candelmasse
and tho were all manner pl^es of the kings benche astent / And tho was
commanded to all the shereues of england through write to warn the parties to
defendauntz through somnyng ayene And also ferthermore that all prisoners that
were in the kings (...) y^ were attached through shereues should be let gone
quyte The king Edward after his coronacion at the prayer and beseching of his
liege of the reame granted hem a chartre of steadfast pees to all hem that
would it axe / And sir Johan of henaude and his company took her leave of the
king and of the lords of the reame / and turned home to her own contre ayene
/ and each of hem had full rich yiftes euerich man as he was of value and of
estate And tho was england in pees and in rest and great love bitwene the king
and his lords / and communely englisshmen said among hem that the deuell was
deed / but the tresour of the king his fadre and the tresour of the spencers
both of the fadre and of the sone / and the tresour of the earl of Arundell
and of mastir Robert Baldoke that was the kings chaunceler was departed after
the queen Isabellys ordinance and sir Rogier Mortimers of wygmore / so that
the king had no thing there of but at her will and her deliuerau^ce noght of her
lands / as afterward ye shall here

How king Edward went to stanthope for to mete the Scotts; Capitulo
ducentesimo xiij.
ANd yet in the same time was king Edward in the castle of kemlworth under the
keeping of sir henry that was earl Thomas brother of lancastre that tho was earl
of leycestre and the king granted him the erledome of lancastre that y^ king
his fadre had seized in to his hand and put out Thom^s of lancastre his
brother / And so was he earl of lancastre and of leycestre and ^ of england as
his brother was in his time / but sir Edward that was king edwardes fadre made
sorwe without end / for cause that he might not speak with his wife ne with
his sone wherefore he was in much meschief For though it were so that he was lad
^ ruled by falls counceill / yet he was king Edwardes sone (...) edward with
long scha^kes and come of the worthiest blood of the world And thilke to whom
he was woned to give great yi^^es and large were most ^ue with the king his
own sone / and they were his enemies both by night and by day and proaired
for to make debate and contele bitwene him and his sone and Isabell his wife /
but the friar p^^chours to him were good friends ever more and cast and
ordained both (...) ny^^ and day how they might bring him out of prison / And
among her company that the freres had privily brought / there was a friar that
was called Dun^^ned and he had ordained and gadred a great company of folk to
help at that need / but the friar was take and put in the Castle of
Pountfrete / and there he deide in prison And sir Henry earl of lancaster yt
had the kings fadre in keeping through commandment of the king delivered
Edward the kings fadre by endenture un to sir Thomas of Berkeley / And so sir
Johan Mautreuers / and they lad him from the Castle of kemlworth un to the
Castle of Berkely and kept him there saufely / And at Estren next after his
coronacion the king ordained an huge ^oste for to fight ayens the Scotts / And
sir Johan the earls brother of henaud fro beyo^d^ the sea come for to help
king Edward and brought with him vij. houndred men of arms and arrived at
Dover and they had leave for to gone forth till that they come to york there
that the king abode hem And the scotts come thidder to the king for to make
pees and acord / but the acordement bitwene hem last but a litell time And at
that time the Englisshmen were clothed all in cotes and hodes peinted with l^ez
and with flowers full semely with long berdes And therefore the Scotts made a
bille that was fastened upon the church doors of seint Petre toward stangate
and thus said the scripture in despite of Englisshmen

Long berde hertelees / Peynted hood witlees / Gay cote gracelees / makes
england thriftlees /

ANd the trinite day next after began the contake in the Cite of york bitwene
the Englisshm^n and th henaudiers / And in that debate were quelled of the
Er^^dome of Nicholl and mordred lxxx. and after they were buried under a stone
in seint Clementz churchhawe in fossegate / And for encheson that the henauders
come to help the king / her rees was cried on ^yne of life and lymme / And in
that other half it was found by an Enquest of the Cite that the Englisshmen
begonnne the debate

How the Englissmen stopped the Scotts in the park of stanhope and how they
turned ayene in to Scotland Ca.CC.xiiij
ANd at that time the Scotts had assembled all her poer and comen in to
England and quelled robbed all that they might take and also brenten and
destroyed all the north contre through out till that they comen to the park of
stanhope in wyredale and there the Scotts held hem in a buschement But when
the king had herd through certain aspies where the scotts were anon right
with his host beseged hem withyn the forsaid park so that the Scotts wist
never where to gone out but only un to her harms and they abiden in the park
xv. days and vita illes hem failled in every a side so that they were greatly
empeired of her bodies. And since that brute come first in to Britaigne un to
this time was never seyne so fair an host what of English men and of aliens
and of men of foot the which ordained hem for to fight with the Scotts through
eggyng of sir Henry Earl of Lancaster and of sir Johan henaude that would have
gone over the water of with for to have fought with the Scotts. But sir
Rogier mortimer consented not there to For he had privily taken mede of the
Scotts hem for to help that they might wend ayene in to her own contre And
the same Mortimer conceilled so much thomas of Brothertone the Earl marchall
that was king Edwardes uncle that the forsaid Thomas should not assemble at that
time un to the Scotts and he assented but he wist not the doing bitwene the
Scotts and the forsaid Mortimer. And for encheson that he was marchall of
England and to him perteyned ever the vauntwarde he sent hastily to the Earl of
Lancastre and to Sir Johan of henaude that they should not fight upon the
Scotts in prejudice and harmyng of him and his fee and if they did that they
should stand to her own peril And the forsaid Earl marchall was all arai^d
with his bataille at the reredoos of the Earl of Lancastre for to have fought
with him and with his folk if he had meved for to fight with the Sco^tes and
in this manner he was deceived and wist no thing of this treson And thus was the
king principally desceyued. And when it was night Mortimere that had the wach
for to keep of the host that night destourbled the wach that no thing must be
done And in the mean while the Scotts stele be night toward her own contre as
fast as they might And so was the king falsely betrayed that wend that that
all the t^^itours of his land had be brout to an end as it was^ said before /
Now here ye lords how traitoursly king Edward was desceyued and how meruousely
and boldly the scotts did of werre / for James douglas with cc. men of arms
riden through out the host of king Edward the same night the scotts were
escaped toward her own contre as is above said till that they come to the
kings p^uilon and quelled there many men in her beds and cried some Naward
Naward and an other time a douglas a douglas / wherefore the king that was in his
pauilon and much other folk were wonder sore affea^ed / but blissed be
almighty god and the king was not taken and in great peril was tho the reame
of England And that night the moon shone full clear and bright / and for all
the kings men the scotts ascaped harmelees / And in the morwe when the king
wist that the scotts were ascaped in to her contre he was wonder sorry and full
hertely wept with his young yien / and yet wist he not who him had do^^ that
treson / but that falls treson was full well y know a good while after as the
story tells The king Edward come ayene tho to york full sorwefull and his
host departed and every man went in to his own contre with full ^eny chere
and morning semblant and the benaudes took her leave and went in to her own
contre / and the king for her trauaille hugely hem rewarded And for encheson of
that viage the king had dispendid much of his tresour and wasted And in that
time were seyne ij. mones in the firmament that one was clear and that other
was derke as men myt tho see through out the world and a great debate was that
same time ayens pope Johan the xxij. aft seint petre / and the Empour of
Almayne tho made him Emperor ayens the popes will / that tho held his see at
Auinion / wherefore y^ Emperor made his cry at rome and ordained an other pope
that hight Nicholas that was a friar menour / and that was ayens the right of
holy church / wherefore he was cursed and the power of that other pope sone was
leid / And for encheson that such meruailles were seyue men said that the
world was nygh at an end

Of the death of king Edward of Carnariuan Ca.cc.xv
ANd now go we ayene to Sir Edward of Carnariuan that was king sum time of
England and was put a down of his diguite / Allas for his tribulacion and
sorwe that him befell through falls counceill that he leued and trust upon to
much that afterward were destroyed through her falseness^ as god would And this
Edward of Carnariuan was in the castle of Berkeley under the keeping of sir
morys of berkeley and sir Johan of Mautre verse and to hem he made his compleint
of his ^orwe and of his disese and often times he axed of his wardeyns what he
had trespaced ayens dame Isabell his wife and Sir Edward his sone that was made
new king that they would nouzt visit him. Tho ansuerd one of his wardeyns My
worthy lord displese you not that I shall tell you the encheson is for it is
done hem to understand that if my lady your wife come any thing nigh you that
ye would her strangle and quelle And also that ye would do to my lord your sone
that same Tho ansuerd he with simple chere Allas allas am I not in prison and
all at your own will now god it wot I thought it never and now I would y^ I
were deed so would god that I were for than were all my sorwe passed Hi^ was
not long after that the king through counceill of mortimer granted the ward
and keeping of sir Edward his fadre to sir Thomas Toiourney and to the forsaid
sir Johan Mautre verse through the kings lr^e and put out holy the forsaid sir
Morice of the ward of the king and they took and lad the king un to the
Castle of Corffe the which Castle the king hated as any death and they kept
him there saufely till it come un to seint Mathewes day in septembre in the
year of grace M.ccc.xxvij. that the forsaid sir Rogier mortimer sent the manner
of the death how and in what wise he should be do ne to death And anoue as the
forsaid Thomas and ^ohan had seyn^ the letter and commandment they made king
Edward of Caruaiua^ good chere and good solas as they might at that soper and
no thing the king wist of yt treachery And when tym^ was for to goo to bed
the king went un to his bed and lay and slept fast and as the king lay and
slept the traitors falls forsworn ayens her homage and her feaute comen
prinely in to the kings chamber and her company with hem and leyden an huge
table upon his womb and with men press den and helden fast a down the iiij.
corniers of the table upon his body wherewith the goodman awoke and was wonder
sore ^dr^d to be deed there and slain and turned his body tho vpsedoune Tho
took the false traitors and as wode tirauntz an horn and put it in to his
fundement as deep as they might and took a spite of coper brennyng and put it
through the horn in to his body and often times ^olled therewith his boweles and
so they queld her lord that no thing was perce^ued and after he was entered at
Gloucestre

How king Edward spoused Philipp the Earls daughter of henaude at york
Ca.CC.xvj
No after Cristemasse tho next sueng sir Johan of henaude brought with him
P^elipp his brothers daughter that was earl of henaude his nece in to england /
and king edward spoused her at york with much honor And sir ^ohan of Bothum
bisshopp of Ely and sir william of Melton Erchebisshopp of york songen the
mass y^ sunday in the eve of conversion of seint Paul In the year of grace a
M.ccc.xxvij. but for encheso^ that the king was but young and tender of age /
when he was crosied full many wrongs were done while that his fadre lived /
for encheson that he trowed the Councelers that were falls about him that
counceilled him to done other wife than reason would wherefore great harm was do
un to the Reame and to the king and all men directed it the kings deed / and
it was not so Almyty god wot / wherefore it was ordained at the kings crounyng
that the king for his tender age should be governed by xij. great lords of
i^glond without which no thing should be done / that is for to say The
Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury / the erchebisshop o fyorke The bisshopp of
wynchestre / and the bisshopp of hereford / the Earl of lancaster / the earl
marchall / and the Er^e of kent that were the kings uncles / and the earl of
Garenne / Sir Thomas wake / Sir Henry of Percy / Sir Oliver of yngham / and
Johan of Roos barons*

All these were sworn trewly for to counceill the king And they should ansuere
every year in the parliament of that that should be done in the time of that
gouernaille but that ordinance was sone undone / and that was much loss and
harm to all england For yt king and all the lords that should gone^ne him were
governed and ruled after the kings mother Dame Isabell / and by Sir Rogier
Mortimer And as they would all thing was done both among high and low And
they token un to hem Castelles tounes lands and rentes in great harm and
loss to the cronne and of the kings state out of mesure

How the pees was made bitwene the Englisshmen and the scotts / and also of
^ustifieng of Troylebastone Capitulo ducentesimo xvij.
THe king Edward at witsontyde the second year of his regne through counceill of
his mother and of sir Rogier Mortimer ordained a perlement at northampto^ / at
the which perlement the king through her counceill and none other of the land
within age granted to been acorded with the scotts in this manner / that all
the feautes and homages that the stottes should do un to the croune of england
foryafe hem un to the scotts for (...) more by his chartre ens^bed And
ferthermore an endenture was made of the scotts un to king Edward that was
king Henry's sone which endenture they called it rageman in the which were
contained all the homages and feautes First of the king of Scotland and of all
the prelatz Earls and Barons of the Reame of Scotland with her seals set there
on and other chartres and remembraunces that king Edward and his Barons had of
her right in the (...) of Scotland y^ was foryeue hem ayene holy church And
also with the blake cross of Scotland the which the good king Edward conquered
in Scotland and brought it out of the A^^ey of S^o^e that is a full precious
reli^ue And also forthermore he relesed and foryafe all the lands that the
barons of England had in scotland by old conquest And this pees for to hold
and lost the scotts were bound un to the king in xxx. thousend pound of
silver to be paid withyn in year that is to feyn every year x. thousend pound
by evyn porcions And ferthermore above all this they speak bitwene the parties
above said that David driton^ntier that was Robert the Brus is sone the false
tiraunt and traitor and falls forswore a^ens his oath that arose ayens his
liege ^^d the noble king Edward and falsely made him king of Scotland that was
of age of v. year And so through this cursed counceill David spoused at Berewyke
Dame Johan of the tour that was king Edwardes suster as the geest tr^eth upon
mary Magdalene day In the year of grace a M.CCC. and xxviij. to great harm and
empeiring to all the kings blod where of that gentill lady come Allas the time
For wonder much was that fair dan^ifell disraged fith that she was married
ayens all the ^ommune ^^ente of England And fro the time that Brute had
conquered albion and nempned the l^nde after his own name Britaigne that now
is called England after the name of Engist

And so was the the Reame of Scotland holden of the Recone of England and of
the croune by (...) and by homage

For Brute conquered that land and yafe it to Albana^ his second sone and be
called the land Albayne after his own name So that the beires that com^n
after him helden of Brute and of his beires the kings of Britaigne by feaute
and homoge and from that time un to this king Edward the Reame of scotland was
bolden of the Reame of England by feautes and services above said as the
cronicbes of England and of Scotland beren witness more plenarly And (...) be
the time that this perlement was ordained at Northampton / For there through falls
counceill the king was there falsely dishericed / and yet he was withyn age And
yet when king Edward was put a down of his Royalte of England / yet men put
him not out of the feautes and services of the Reame of Scotland ne of the
fraunch^ses disherited him for ever more And notheles the great lords of
England were ayens to conferme the pees and the trewes above said s^uf only
Queen Isabell that was the kings mother Edward / and the bisshopp of Ely and
lord Mortimer / but reason and law would not that a final pees should be made
bitwene hem without the common assent of England

Of the debate that was bitwene Queen Isabell and Sir Henry Earl of Lancastre
and of Leycestre and of the ridyng of Bedeford Capitulo ducentesimo xvij.
WHen the forsaid David had spoused Dame Iohane of the tour in the town of
Berewyke as before is said the Scotts in despite of the Englisshmen called
Dame Johan the Countess make pees / For the cowardyse pees that was ordained
but the kings person bare the wit and the blame with wrong of the making of
the accord / and all was done through the Queen and Rogier Mortimere And it was
not long after that the Queen Isabell ne took in to her own hand all the
lordshipp of Pountfrete / almost all the lands that were of value that
apperteyned to the croune of England / So that the king had not for to disp^ude
but of his uses and of his Escheker / For the Queen Isabell and Mortimere had a
great meyn^ of her retenaunce that followed ever more the kings court / and
went and took the kings prises for her penny worthes at good chere / wherefore
the contre that they comen ynne were full sore adrad and almost destroyed Tho
begone the comminalte of England for to hate Isabell the Queen that so much
loved her / when she come ayen^ for to pursue the false traitors the Spencers
fro France

And that same time the fols traitor Robert of Holand that betrayed his lord
Sir Thomas of Lancastre was tho delivered out of prison / and was wonder prive
with the Queen Isabell and also with Rogier the Mortimere / But that auailled
him but litell / for he was take at Mi^elmasse that tho come next ^ewyng after
as he rode toward the queen Isabell to london and sir Thomas wither smote of
his head besides the town of seint Albones And this Sir Thomas duelled tho
with sir Henry Earl of Lancastre and he put him in hidyng for dread of the
Queen For she loved him wonder nioche and prayed un to the king for him that
the same Thomas must been exiled onte of England And the noble Earl Sir Henry
lancastre had often times herd the commune clamor of the Englisshmen of the
diseses that were done in England and also for diverse wrongs that were done
among the common people of the which the king bare the blame with wrong For
he nas but full young and tender of age and thought as a good man for to done
away and slake the sclaundre of the kings person if that he might in any
manner wise So as the king was there of no thing gylty wherefore he was in peril
of lyth and lymme And so he assembled all his retenaunces and went and spoke un
to them of the kings honor and also for to amend his astate And Sir Thomas
brotherton Earl marchall and Sir Edmond of wodestoke that were the kings
uncles and also men of london made her oath him for to maynten in that same
quarill

And her cause was this that the king should hold his housold and his meyny as
a king ought for to done and have also his rialte and that the queen Isabell
should deliver out of her hand in to the kings hand all manner lordshippes
rentes tounes and Castelles that apparteyned to the croune of England as other
Quesnes had done before her and meddle with none other thing

And also that Sir Rogier Mortimer should duelle upon his own lands for the
which lands he had help disherite much people So that commune people were not
destroyed thur^h her wrong full taking And also to enquere how and by whom the
king was betrayed and falsely disceyued at Stanhope and through whose counceill
that the Scotts went away by night from the king And also how and through whose
counceill the ordinance that was made at the kings coronacione was put a
doun^ that is to seyne that the king for amendment and helping of the Reame
and in honor of him should be governed and ruled by xij. the grettest and
wysest lorde^ of all the Reame and without hem should no thing be granted
(...) done as fore is said the which couenauntz malicyusly were put a down
fro the king wherefore many harms shames and reproues have f^lle un to the king
and his Reame And that is understand for as much as Edward sum time king of
England was ordained by assent of the commalte in pleyne parliament for to be
under the ward and governance of Henry Earl of Lancastre his cousin for
sauacione of his body he was take out of the Castle of kenilworth there that
he was in ward and through color of Queen Isabell and of the Mortimer without
consent of any parliament they took and lad him there that never after none of
his kynred might with him speak ne see and after traitouresly took and him
mordred For whose death a foul sclaundr^ arose through out all Cristendome when
it was done And also the tresour that Sir Edward of Carnariuan had left in many
places in England and in walys were wasted and bare away without the will of
king Edward his sone in destructione of him and of all his folk Also through
whose counceill that the king yafe up the kingdom of Scotland For the which
Reame the kings auncestres had full sore y tr^^uailled and so did many a noble
man for her right and was ^ un to David that was Robert the Brus sone all the
(...) that no right had to the Reame as all the world it wist (...) also by
whom the chartres and remembraunces that they had of the right of Scotland were
take out of the tresorie and taken un to the Scotts the kings enemies to
disherityng of him and of his successors and to great harm un to his lieges
and great reprove un to all Englisshmen for evermore Also wherefore dame ^ohan of
the tour the kings suster Edward was disperaged and married un to David that
was Robert the Brus sone that was a traitor and enemy un to England And
through whose counceill she was take in to our enemies hondes out of England

And in the mean time while the good Earl Henry of Lancastre and his company
token counceill how these points above said might been amended un to the
wurshipp of the king and to his profit and to the profit also of his lieges
The Queen Isabell through coniectyng and sotilte and also of the Mortimer^ let
ordeyne a parliament at Salisbury And at that same parliament the Mortimer was
made Earl of the March ayens all the barons will of England in prejudice of
the king and of his Coroun^ And Sir Johan of Eltham the kings brother was gurt
with a swerd of Cornewaille and tho was called Earl of Cornewaille And evermore
Queen Isabell so much procured ayens her sone the king that she had the ward
of the forsaid Sir Edward and of his lands And at that perlement the Earl of
Lancastre would not come but ordained all his power ayen^ the Queen Isabell and
the Mortimer and men of london ordained hem with v.C. men of arms When Queen
Isabell wist of the doing she swore by god and by his names full angrely that
in evil time he thought upon tho points Tho sent the queen Isabell and the
Mortimer after her retenue / and after the kings retenue / so that they had
ordained among hem an huge host and they counceilled the king so that upon a
night they ridden xxiiij. mile toward Bedford there that the Earl of lancastre
was with his company / and thought to have him destroyed And that night she
rode besides the king her sone as a knight armed for dread of death / And it
was done the king to understand that the earl henry of lancastre and his
company would have destroyed the king and his counceill for ever more /
wherefore the king was somdele toward him ^eny and annoied / When the Earl
marchall and the Earl of kente the kings brother herd of this tydyng they
ridden so in message bitwene hem that the king (...) him his pe^s to Earl Henry
of Lancastre fo a certain (...) of xj.M. pound / but that was never paid
afterward

And these were the lords that held with sir Henry of Lancastre / Sir Henry
Beaumont Sir fouke fitzwaren / Sir Thomas rocelyn / Sir william Trussell / Sir
Thomas wyther / and about an houndred knights moo that were to him consenting
/ and all tho were exiled through counceill of Queen Isabell and of the Mortimer
/ for the Mortimer weited for to have her lands if that he myt through any
manner coniecting for he was to covetous and had to much his will and that was
great pite

How king Edward went over the sea for to do his homage un to the king of
france for the duchy of Enyhenne Ca.cc.xix
HE was not long after that the king of feau^ce through cou^ceill of his
douzepiers sent to king Edward of England that he should come to Paris and done
his homage as reason it would for the duchy of Gnyhenne And so through counceill
of the lords of england king Edward went o^ the sea and at ascencion tide he
come un to Paris the iij. year of his regne for to do his homage un to the king
of france and the king vnderfong his homage and made of him much ^oye and
wurship But wha^ king Edward had made his homage / hastily he was asente in to
England through the Queen Isabell his modre / and anon h^stely he come ayen^ in
to England upon withsonday without any taking leave of the king of france
wherefore he was wonder wroth

How sir rogier mortimer bare him proudely and so hie Ca.cc.xx
ANd now shull ye here of sir Rogier mortimer of wigmore that desired and
coueyted to be at an hie astate so that the king grauuted him to be called earl
of the march through out all his lordshipp And he become so proud and so
hauteyne y^ he would lose and forsake the name that his auncestres had ever
before And for that encheson he let him call Earl of the march and none of the
co^munes of england durst call him by none other name for he was called so
through the kings cry that men should call him earl of the march And the
mortimer bare him tho so hauteyn^ and so proud that wonder it was for to wit
and also disgysed him with w^^dre rich clothes out of all manner reason both of
shapyng and of wering Where of the englishmen had great wonder how and in what
manner he might contreue or find such manner pride and they said among hem
all co^munely that his pride should not long endure And the same time sir
Gieffrey mortimer the young that was the mortimers sone let him call king of
folly and so it befell afterward in deed for he was so full of pride and of
wrecchednesse that he held a round table in walys to all men that thidder
would come and countrefete the manner and the doing of king Arthures table but
openly he failled For the noble king Arthure was the most worthy lord of
renon^e that was in all the world in his time and yet come never none such
after For all the noble knights in cristendome of deed of arms a losed
duelled with king Arthure and held him for her lord And that was well seen for
he conquered in bataille a romayne that was called Frolle and get of him the
reame of france and quelled him with his hondes And also he faught with a
g^aunt that was called dinabus and quelled him that had rauysshed fair Eleyne
that was king hoeles nece king of litell Britaigne And afterward he queld in
bataill the Emperor of rome that was called Lucie that had assembled ayens
king Arthure for to fight with him so much people of romans and phehis and of
sarazyns that no man could he^ no^bre and he discomfited hem all as the stroy
of him tells And in y^ same time common loos sprung in england through
co^iectyng and ordinance of the freris prechours that sir Edward of Canariuan
that was king edwardes fadre of whom the geest tells faiden y^ he was a lyve
in the castle of Corfe wherefore all the communes all most of england were in
sorwe and in dread wether that it were so er not / For they wist not how
traitouresly the mortimer had him done mordred

How Edmond of wodestoke that was Earl of kent and the kings brother Edward of
Carnariuan was beheded at wynchestre / Capitulo ducentesimo xxj.
ANd upon a time it befell so that sir Edmond of wodestoke Earl of kent spoke
un to the pope Johan the xxij. at Auinion and said that almyty god had often
times done for Thomas love of lancastre many great miracles to many men and
women that were through diverse maladies undone as un to the world and through
his prayer they were brought un to her hele And so Sir Edmond prayed the pope
hertely that he would grant him grace y^ the forsaid Thomas might be
translated / but the pope said nay that he should not be translated un to the
time that he were better certified of the clergy of england and seyne by her
obedi^ce what thing god had done for the love of Thomas of lancastre aft the
suggestion that the forsaid Edmond Earl of kent had un to him y made And when
this Edmond saw that he might not speed of his purpose a^ touching the
translacion he prayed him of his cou^ceill as touching sir edward of Carnariuan
his brother and said that not long agone he was king of england what thing myt
best be done as touching his deliverance since that a common fame is through
england that he is in life and hole and sauf / when the pope herd him tell
that Sir Edward was a live he commanded the earl upon his benyson that he
should help with all the power that he might that he were delivered out of
prison and save his body in all manner that he might / and for to bring this
thing to an end he assoilled him and his company a p^na and culpa and all tho
that halpe to his deliverance Tho took Edmond of wodestoke his leave of the
pope and come ayene in to england / And when sir Edmond was come sum of the
friar prechours come and said that Sir Edward his brother yet was a live in the
Castle of Corff under the keeping of Sir Thomas Gurnay Tho sped him the forsaid
Edmond as fast as he might till that he come un to the Castle of Corff and
acqueynted and spoke so fair with Johan Dauerill that was Conestable of the
same Castle and yafe him rich yiftes for to have acquaintance of him and to
know of hi^ counceill / And thus it befell that the forsaid Sir Edmond prayed
specially to tell him preuely of his lord his brother Sir Edward if that he
lived or were deed / and if he were a live he prayed of him ones to have a
sight / And this Sir Johan Dauerill was an high herted man and full of Courage
and ansuerd shortly un to sir Edmond and said that sir edward his brother was
in hele and under his keeping and durst show him un to no man since it was
defended him in the kings half Edward that was edwardes sone of Carnariuan and
also through commandment of queen Isabell the kings mother and of sir Rogier
the mortimer that he should show his body un to no manner man of the world sauf
only un to hem upon loss of life and lymme and to ^isheriteson of his heirs
for evermore But the false traitor falsely lied for he was not in his ward but
he was take thens and lad un to the Castle of Berkelee through sir thomas
gurnay through commandment of the mortimer till that he was deed as before is
said but sir edmond of wodestoke wist no thing that Edward his brother was deed
where upon he took a letter un to the forsaid sir Johan and prayed him hertely
that he would take it un to king edward his brother as to his worthy lord And
he vnderfeng the lr^e of him and behight him for to do his message without any
manner faill and with that sir edmond took of him his leave then of the forsaid
Johan and went tho in to his own contre and lordeshipp in kent that he had
there And anon as this same Johan wist y^ sir edmond was gone in to kent his
own lordshipp anon he went in all the haste that he myt fro the Castle of
Corfe and come un to sir Rogier the mortimer and took him the lr^e that sir
Edmond of wodestoke Earl of kent had take him closed and enseled with his own
se al And when sir Rogier had vnderfong the letter he unclosed the letter and
saw what was contained theryn and began it for to read whereof the beginning was
this Wurshippes and reuerences with brothers legeaunce and subiectione Sir
knight wurshipfull and dear brother if it you plese I pray you hertely that ye
be of good comfort for I shall so ordeyne for you that sone ye shull come out
of prison and be delivered of that disese that ye ben in And understands of
your great lordshipp that I have to me assentaut all most all the great lords
of England with all her apparaille that is to say with armure with tresour
without nombre for to mayntene and help your quarrel so ferforth that ye
shull be king ayene as ye were before and that they all have swore to me upon a
book and as well prelates as Earls and Barons When Sir Rogier the Mortimore
saw and understood the might and the strength of the letter anon for wrath
his heart began bolle and euel heart bare toward Sir Edmond of wodestoke that was
Earl of kent And so with all the haste that he might he went un to Dame Isabell
the Queen that was the kings modre and showed her Sir edwardes lr^e and his
will and his purpose / and how he had coniected and ordained to put a down
king Edward of wyndesore her sone of rialte and of his kingdom / Now Crte^ sir
Rogier quoth the queen / has sir Edmond done so / By my fadre soul quod she ^
wull be there of ^uenged if that god grant me life and that in a short time
And anon^ with that the Queen Isabell went un to king Edward her sone there
that he was at the parliament at wynchestre for to have amended the wrongs and
trespaces that were done among the people in his reame / And tho took she and
showed him the letter that Sir Edmond of wodestoke Earl of kent had made and
enscaled with his own seal / and bad upon her benison that he s^^ld avenged be
upon him / as upon his dedely enemy Tho was the Queen so wroth toward Sir
Edmond Earl of kente / and cesyd never to pray un to her sone till that he had
sent in all have after him And upon that the king sent by his lr^es after Sir
Edmond of wodestoke that he should come and speak with him at wynchestre all
manner thing left And when Sir Edmond saw that the king sent after him with his
lr^ez enseled he hasted him in all that he might till that he come to
wynchestre / but tho the Queen wist that Sir Edmond was come un to wynchestre /
anon she prayed and so fast went un to king Edward her sone that the good
earl was arested anon and led un to the bar before Robert of Hamonde that
was coroner of the kings household and he associed un to him Sir Rogier the
mortimere and tho spoke the forsaid Robert and said Sir Edmond Earl of kente ye
shull understand that it is done us to wite and principally un to our liege
lord Sir Edward king of England that almyty god save and keep / that ye be his
dedely enemy and traitor / and also a commune enemy un to the reame / and
that ye have been about many a day for to make preuy deliverance of Sir Edward
sometime king of england your brother the which was put a down of his rialte by
common assent of all the lords of england in pesing of our lord the kings
astate and also of his reame Tho ansuerd the good man and said / forsooth sir
understands well that I was never traitor to my king ne to the reame / and
that I do me on god and on all the world / and ferther more by my kings leave I
shall it preue and defend as a man ought to do Tho said Mortimer Sir Edmond it
is so ferforth y kuowe / that it may not well be gaynesaid and that in presence
of all that here been it shall be well proved / Now had this false mortimer
the same letter that sir Edmond had take to sir Johan daucrell in the Castle
of Corff for to take un to king Edward his brother that sir Edmond wist not of
ne supposed no thing that sir Johan dauerell had be so falls to deliver his lr^e
in such wise to the mortimer and thought no manner thing of that (...) and said
to sir Edmond and showed a letter selyd and axed him if he knew that letter
and the seal This sir Edm^nd looked there on and avised him long on the print of
the seel for he might not see the better withynforth what was theryn and wist
well that it was his seal and thought that it had be some letter that had bore
no great charge and thought no thing of that other letter and said openly in
heryng of hem all ye forsooth this is my seal ^ will it not forsake Lo quod the
mortimer sires ye heren all what he has said and that he knowelecheth that
this is his letter and his seal and now ye shull here all what is contained
theryn And than this mortimere opened the letter that he had folden before to
gedre and red it openly word by word in heryng of hem all And when the letter
was red he said lo sires ye have herd all what is here written and that he has
knowelecheth that this is his letter and his seal and may not go there from And
than they all cried and yafe dome that he should be honged and draw and his
heed smyt of in manner of a traitor and he and his heirs disherited for
evermore And so he was lad forth and put in to prison And when this was done
and the queen wist that he was dampened by wey of law both of life and lymme
and his heirs disherited for evermore through open knowelechyng in pleine court
Wherefore hem thought that were good that the forsaid sir Edmond were hastily y
quelled without wityng of the king or else the king lightely would for give
him his death and than that should turn hem to much sorwe so as he was
empeched And anon the Queen through cou^ceill of the Mortimer and without any
other counceill sent in have to the Baillifs of wynchestre that they should
smite of sir Edmondes head of wodestoke Earl of kent without any manner abydyng
or respite up pain of life and lymme and that he should have none other
execucion be cause of tarieng not withstandyng the Judgment Tho token the
baillifs sir Edmond out of prison and lad him best des the Castle of
wynchestre and there they made a gongfermer smite of his head for none other
man durst it done and so died he there Allas the time that is to seyne the x.
day of October the iij. year of king edwardes regne and when the king wist there
of he was won^ ^ory and let entier him at the friar menors at wynchestre

Of the death of sir Rogier mortimer earl of the march / Capitulo ducentesimo
xxij.
ANd so it be fell at that time that sir Rogier mortimer Earl of the march was
so proud and so hauteyne that he held no lord of the reame his pere / and tho
become he so covetous that be followed Dame Isabell the Queen's court that was
king Edwardes mother and besette his penny worthes with the officers of y^ queen's
household in the same manner that the kings officers did and so he made his
taking as touching vitailles and also of cariages / and ^lle he did for cause
of spences and for to gadre tresour and so he did without nombre in all that
he might / Tho made he him wondre prive with the queen Isab^ll and so much
lordship and reteune had / so that all the great lords of england of him were
adrad / wherefore the king and his cou^ceill toward him were agreued and
ordained among hem to undo him through pure reason and law for cause that king
Edward that was the kings fadre traitouresly through him was mordred in the
castle of Berkelee as before is said more plenarly in the CC.xvij chapitre of
this book And some that were of the kings counceill loved the mortimer / and
told him in ^uete how that the king and his counceill were about from day to
day him for to shend and undone wherefore the mortimer was sore a^noied and angry
as the deuell ayens hem that were of the kings counceill and said that he would
on hem been avenged how so ever he took on Hit was not long afterward that
king Edward and Dame Phelipp his wife and Dame Isabell the kings modre and sir
Rogier the mortimer ne went un to No tyngham there for to soiourne / and so it
befell that the Queen Isabell through counceill of the Mortimer took to her the
keys of the yates of the Castle of Notyngham so that no man might come nethir
in ne out by night but through commandment of the Mortimer ne the king ne
none of his counceill And that time it fell so that the Mortimer as a deuell
for wrath bolled / and also for wrath that ^e had ayens the kings men edward
and principally ayens ^em that had him accused to the king of the death of Sir
Edward his fadre / And preuely a counceill was take bitwene Queen Isabell and
the Mortimer and the bisshopp of Lincoln and sir Symond of Bereford and sir
hugh of Trumpyngton and other prive of her counceill for to undone hem all that
had accused the Mortimer un to the king of his fadres death of treson and of
felony / Wherefore all tho that were of the kings counceill when they wist of
the Mortimers casting preuely come to king Edward and seide that the Mortimer
would hem destroy / for cause that they had accused him of king Edwardes death
his fadre / and prayed him that he would maynten hem in her right

And these were the lords to pursue this quarrel Sir william mountagu Sir
humfrey de ^oghun Sir william his brother Sir Rauf of stafford Sir Robert of
herfford Sir william of Clynton / Sir Johan Neuille of horneby and many other
of her consent / and all these sworn upon the book to maynten the quarrel in
as much as they might And it befell so after / that sir william mountagu ne
none of the kings friends must not been herburghed in the Castle for the
Mortimer / but went and took her herbu^ghe in diverse places in the town of
Notyngham And tho were they sore adrad left that the mortimer should hem
destroy And in have there come un to king Edward Sir william mountagu there that
he was in (...) Castle and preuely told him that he ne none of his company
should not take the Mortimer without cou^ceill and help of willam of eland
Constable of the same Castle Now certes quoth the king ^ love you well / and
therefore I counceill you that ye goo to the forsaid Constable and command him
in my name that he be your friend and your help for to take the Mortimer all
thing y left upon peril of life and lymme Tho said Mountagu Sir my lord
grant mercy Tho went forth the forsaid Mountagu and come to the Conestable of
the Castle and told him the kings will / And he ansuerd and said that the
kings will should ^e done in as much as he might / and that he would not spare
for no mauer death and so he swore and made his oth^ Tho said Sir william
Mountagu to the Conestable in ^eryng of all hem that were helpyng un to the
quarrel Now certes dear friend us behooves for to wurch and do by your
queyntise for to take the Mortimer since that ye be keeper of the Castle and
have the keys in your ward sir quoth the Conestable wull ye understood that the
gates of the Castle hen lokked with the lokkes that Dame Isabell send hidder
and be night she has the keys there of and leith him under the leuesell of the
bed un to the morwe and so ye may not come in to the Castle by the yates in
no manner wise / But I know an Aley that streccheth out of the ward under the
earth in to the forsaid Castle that goth in to the weste which Aley Dame
Isabell the Quen^ ne none of her men / ne the Mortimer ne none of his companine
knows it not / And so I shall led you through that Aley and so ye shull come
in to the Castle without aspies of any man that been your enemies And the same
night sir william Mountagu and all the lords of his quarrel and the same
Conestable also went hem to horse and maden sembland as it were for to wend
out of the Mortimers sight.

But an^ne as the mortimer herd this tydyng he went that they would have gone
over the sea for dread of him and anon he and his company token counceill
among hem for to let her passage and sent lr^ez anon to the ports so that
none of the great lords should wend home to her own contre but if they were
arested and take And among other things william Eland Conestable of the
forsaid Castle privily lad Sir william Mountagu and his company by the
forsaid wey under earth so till they comen in to the Castle and went up in to
the toure there that the mortimer was in

But sir hugh of Trumpyngton hem ascried hidously and said A traitors it is
all for naught that ye ben comen in to this Castle Ye shull die yet an evil
death euerychone And anon one of hem that was in Mountagu is company up with
a mace and smote the same hugh upon the head that the brain breast out and
fell on the ground and so was he deed an evil death Tho took they the Mortimer
as he armed him at the toures door when he herd the noise of him for dread And
when the Queen Isabell saw that the Mortimer was take she made much sorwe in
heart and the words un to hem said Now fair sires I pray you that ye done
none harm to his body a worthy knight our well-beloved friend and our dear cousin
Tho went they thennes and comen and brought the Mortimer and presented him un
to the king Edward and he commanded to bring him in sauf ward But anon as
they that were consent un to the Mortimers doing herd tell that he was take
they went and hid hem and privily by night went out of the town each in his
side with heavy heart and morning and lived up on her lands as well as they
might And so that same year that the Mortimer was take he had at his retenue
ix. score knights without squyers and seriauntes of arms and footmen And tho
was the Mortimer lad to london And Sir Symond of Bereford was lad with him and
was take to the Conestable of the toure to keep.

But afterward was the mortimers life examined at westmynster before the king
and before all the great lords of england for peril that might fall to the
Reame and to enquere also which were assenting to sir Edwardes death the kings
fadre / and also through whom the scotts ascaped from stanhope in to scotland
without the will of king Edward And also how the chartre of Rageman was
deli^ed un to the scotts wherein the homages and feautes of scotland were
contained / that the scotts should done ever more un to the kings of england
for the reame of scotland wherefore in his absence he was dampened to be draw and
honged for this treson And this meschief come un to him on seint Andrews even
in the year of ^ncarnacion of our lord Ihesu crist a M.CCC. and xxx.

How king Edward get ayene un to him graciousely the homages and feautes of
scotland where of he was put out through falls counceill of Isabell his modre and
sir Rogier Mortimer that was new made Earl of the march Ca.cc.xxiij
Now ye have herd lords how sir Johan of Bailloll in ty^e of ^ees was chosen
to be king of scotland for encheson that he come of the eldest daughter of the
earl David of hontyngton that was king alisaundres brother of scotland that
deide without heir of his body begoten / and how this Johan made feaute and
homage to king Edward Henry's sone the iij. for his lands of scotland And how
he afterward withsaid his homage through counceill of the scotts in the year of
our lord M.ccc.lxxij. and sent un to y^ pope through a falls suggescio^ that he
made his oath un to the forsaid king edward over his ^state and his will of
which oath the pope him assoilled through his bulls to him y sent And anon as
king Edward wist there of he ordained anon his barons and come un to B^re wyke
and conquered the town ^t which conqu^st there were slain xxv.M. and vij.C.
And the Baill all that was king of scotland come and yield him un to king
Edward / And the king afterward delivered him out of the toure of london / and
all the great lords of scotland with him that were take at Berewyke and yafe
hem saufco^duyt to go in to scotland And the scotts since through her falsenesse
werred upon king Edward And when sir Johan Bailloll king of scotland saw all
this (...) went and put him over the sea un to Dunpier and lived there upon his
own lands as well as he might till that the Scotts would amend hem of her
misdeeds and trespace / and lad with him Sir Edward his sone wherefore the
Scotts in despite of him called him Sir Johan Turnelabard for cause that be
would not offend ne trespace ayens king Edward of England And so he forsook
his Reame of Scotland and (...) there of but litell pris / And this Sir Johan ^
duelled in france till that he died there And sir edward his sone vnderfeng
his heritage and did homage un to the king of france for his lands of Dunpier
and so it fell afterward that edward yt was Johan baillols sone had with him a
squire of england that was bore in yorkshire that was called Johan of barnaby
and this Edward bailloll loved him much and was nigh him and full prive

And so this Johan of barnaby was in debate with a fre^shman in the town of
Dunpicr and so he quelled him and went in his way in all that he might in to
the Castle for to have socour and help of his lord And anon come the
officers of the toun^ to take ^ohan of barnaby as a^ felon and sir edward his
lord halpe him and rescued him and by nyt made him wend out of the Castle
and so he went his way and come in to England with outen any harm And when the
king of france saw that sir edward had resened his felon he become wonder
wroth ayens sir edward and anon let him be areste ^ took in to his hand all
his lands Tho duelled sir Edward in prison un to the time that sir Henry of
Beaumout come in to france the which Henry sometime was earl of angos in
scotland through his wife and was put out of the forsaid erledome when the
accord was bitwene England and Scotland through the Queen Isabell and sir Rogier
the mortimer and her company for the marriage y^ she made bitwene David that
was Robert the Brus sone and Dame Johan at Tour king edwardes suster of
england and well understood this that at the end he should come to his right
but if it were through sir edward bailloll that was right heir of the Reame of
Scotland And the king of france lowys loved much this sir Henry and he was
with him full prive and thought for to make a deliverance of Sir edward
baillols body if he might in any manner wise Tho prayed he the king that he would
grant him of his grace Sir Edward baillols body un to the next parliament that
he might live with his own rentes in the mean time and that he must stand to
be Iugged by his perys at the parliament The king granted him his prayer and
made the forsaid Edward be delivered out of prison in the manner above said And
anon as he was out of prison sir henry took him forth with him and lad him in
to England and made him duelle privily at the manner of sandehall up onse in
yorkshire with the lady vesey and so he ordained him there an houge retenaunce
of people of Englishmen and also of aliens for to conquer ayene his heritage
And so he yafe much silver un to Sowdiours and to aliens for to help him And
they behight for to help him in all that they might / but they failled him at
his most need /

And at that time Donald earl of morrif herd tell how that sir Edward was
preuely come in to england and come to him and made with him greece ^oye of his
coming ayene and said to him and behight him that all the great lords of
england should be to him entendaunt and should him hold for king as right heir
of Scotland and so much they would done that he should be crouned king of that
land and diden to him homage and feaute Tho come sir Henry of Beaumont to king
Edward of england / and prayed him in wey of charity that he would grant of
his grace un to sir edward Bailloll that he must saufely gone by land from
sandhall un to Scotland for to conquer his right heritage in Scotland The king
ansuerd and said un to him / If that I suffer the Bailloll wend through my land
in to Scotland than the people would say that I should be assenting un to the
company Now Sir I pray you that ye would grauute him leave to take (...) t^ him
soudiours of englisshmen that they might saufely led him through your land un
to Scotland And Sir upon this covenant that if it so befall that god it
forbede that he be discomfited in bataille through the Scotts / that I and also
all the lords that holden with Bailloll been for evermore put out of our
rentes that we have in england And the king upon this covenant granted her
bone as touching him and tho that were of the same quarrel / the which claymed
for to have lands or rentes in the reame of Scotland

And these were the names of the lords that pursueden this matter / that is to
say Sir Edward the Bailloll that challenged the Reame of Scotland Sir Henry
Beaumont Earl of Angos Sir David of stroboly Earl of Atheles Sir Gieffrey ap
Mombray / Waltier Comyne and many other that were put out of her heritage in
Scotland when the pees was made bitwene England and Scotland as before is said
And ye shull understand that these lords took with hem v. honndred men of
arms and ij. thousand archiers and of footmen and tho went in to ship at
rauenespore and sailled by the sea till that they com^n un to Scotland and
comen tot land at kynkehorne xij. mile from Seint Iohanes town / and anon
sent out her ships a^ene / for they should not be hurt ne empeyred nethir
that no man should gone in to the ship ayene / though that they had need but
abide at all perilles and not flee but stand / and rather suffer death than
flee for to maynt^n her true quarrel When the Earl of Fi^^e a fers man and a
stern herd that the Bailloll was comen for to take the land of Scotland he
come in haste to kynghorne with x. thousend Scotts for to destourble him that
he should not come to land

But Sir Edward Bailloll and his company there him discomfited at the which
discomfiture Sir Alizaundre of Seton was there y quelled and many other The Earl
of Fyffe was tho sorry and full ylle a shamed that so litell a company had him
discomfited and shamelich put him and all his company that was a lyve for to
flee

Tho come Sir Edward Bailloll and took the contre all about him till he come
un to the Abley of Dunfermelyne and there ^e found vitailles for him and for
his folk and among all other things he fond in a chamber a boute v. honderd
of great staves of fine oak with long pykes of yren and of stele he took hem
and delivered hem to the most strengest men of his company

And anon after he went fro thens and logged him in a field ij. mile from
seint Iohanes town and when the Burgeis of the town herd how the Earl of
Fiffe was discomfited through the Bailloll they were sore adrad and breken their
brigges that they had made over the water of Erue so that the Bailloll might
not gone over wherefore he logged him there all that night but litell head he
took of rest and said un to his people Now dear lords ye know full well that
we be now y logged between our enemies and if they mow us hampre there is no
^ote but death wherefore if we abide here all this night stille I leve that it
shall torn us to much sorwe and harm For the power of Scotland may every day
wex and encrese and we may not so done

And we been but litell people as ayens hem Wherefore I pray you for the love of
Almighty god make we us to bold and hardy and that we may myghtely take the
Scotts this night and boldly werre upon hem and let us pursue hem this night
and if they he trauailled through us and they see our hardynesse so that other
Scotts that comen and mete hem and see hem so trauailled and weary the sorrer
wull they be adrad with us for to fight and fersely than we shull fight with
hem and upon hem pursue so that through the grace of god Almighty all the world
shall speak of the d^ughtynesse of our hCiualrie

And sires vnstondeth well that all the company y^ come^ with sir Edward
Bailloll granted well un to that counceill and were there of glad / and anon
pursued upon the Scotts that they ^^^^men wonder weary And the Bailloll and his
company sore folewed hem and did hem much sorwe / through her assaute / so
that they might not for feeble hem help and for litell people / But tho said the
Scotts among hem what is now befall that so litell a people as the Bailloll
has in wynge done us so much trauaille and sorwe Now cerces it seems us that
he wercheth by grace / for he is wonder gracious in his quarrel / and all we
certes shull been deed or that we may come to him us for to yield since that his
fadre set of us no pris And among all other things the Bailloll and his people
passed the water of Erne / so that Sir Rogier of Swynertone the sone was fers
and angry and went forth / and they saw people of arms full well araied and
forth they went un to hem and with hem foughten and quelled as many as would
abide or took And nothelees at that assaute they wend it had been the great
host of Scotland And when it come to the morn they gadred hem to gedre and
rested hem a while But the while that the Englisshmen rested hem the noble
Baron Thomas of ves^y and the noble baron of Stafford priked her horse up and
down by the hills for to keep the Estres of the contre

And as they priked up and down they saw a great host of good array ordained in
three wings with helmes and sheleds shynynge coming upon hem And tho come tho
ij. lords ayene un to Bailloll is folk / and said Now for the love of
almighty god / been of good comfort / for ye shall have bataille anon right
And tho spoke Sir fouke the sone of Gareyne a baron of great renoune and of
deed of arms Sires lordinges understands that I wull seyne I have seyne many
diverse wings as well among sarazens and Jews as among the scotts / And
yet saw I never the ferthe part of the wynge fight / And therefore if we wull
abide our enemies we be y now for to fight ayens hem / But if we be not of good
heart and of good will for to fight with hem for certes we been full few ayens
this company And therefore for the love of god take un to us a good heart and let
us been bold and thenke we nethir on our wyfes ne on our children / but onlich
to conquer hem in bataille / And through the help of our lord god our enemies
we shull overcome / And with that come the host of the Scotts toward hem
full serely and ayens Sir Edward the Bailloll in iij. batailles well araied in
armure And wonder fersely they come toward the Baillolls men But when Sir
Donald Earl of Maraille saw all this he said to Robert Brus the sone of Robert
the Brus thees words Sir rohert qnod he full sore me forthynketh at my ne heart
that thees folk that the bailloll had brout with him should did with dynt
scottesh swerd since that they ben christian men as well as we ben And therefore me
thinks that it were great charity to send un to hem for to yield hem un to
our mercy and grace and ransom hem through grevous ransom for as much a^
they have taken our land and done ill Now certes quod Sir Robert the Brus I
have well perceived that thou art an enemy and a traitor un to Scotland Since
that thou wylt consent to save our dedely enemies that have done us much sorwe
and shame and now it seems well that ye ben of her assent Certes Robert quod
Sir Donald falsely ye lie I am not of her company ne of her consent and that
hastily ye shull see For I wull fight with hem rather than any of this company
And certes sir Robert said he I shall maugre thyn he^d assaille hem er thou And
with that they prikeden her stedes fersely upon Caskemore and her wenges hem
folewed on a renge And tho come they and met the bailloll and his company at
an hongyng bought of the more in a streit passage and so fast they hasted hem
un to the englishmen so that thousands fell to the ground ehe up other in to
a hepe both horse and man The bailloll tho and his men myghtely stood ayens hem
and fast quelled the Scotts un to the ground and many sore they wounded so
long till that they stoden upon hem and foyned hem with her swerdes and speres
through her bodies and so sore trauailled upon hem till that they becomen full
weary andwist not what for to done and the Scotts that were left alyve fledden
away for to save hem self in the best manner as they myt And tho pursued hem sir
edward bailloll and his men and quelled of hem till that it was nyt And fro
thens they went un to seint Iohanes town and took it and held hem there and
vitailled hem self at her own will for they founden y now wherewith to make
hem merry. Tho made the bailloll his men that were wounded gone to ship for to
wend in to England for to hele her wounds And in y^ time there was a flemmyng
in the sea a strong thief and a robber that was called Crabbe And this
flemmyng was driven out of Flaundres for his wykkednesse And therefore he come
in to Scotland to hold with the Scotts and drd as much harm un to
Englisshmen as he might. And this Crabbe met in the sea the Baillols men that
were wounded in bataille that were sent ayene in to England for to hele her
wounds And this Crabbe yafe un to hem a great assante and would have queld hem
euerichone but the Englishmen defended hem well and manly and disco^fited
Crabbe and his company And tho gone he flee in to Scotland And as he come
toward seint Iohanes town he fond a grette company of Scotts that were come
ayene to gedre after the discomfiture of Gaskemore the which beseged bailloll
and his men in the same town of seint Johan and anon told the scotts how
that he was discomfited of the Englishmen that were wounded at Gaskemore that
went toward England for to hele her wounds and said to the Scotts that they
should have no might ne grace ayens Edward bailloll for encheson that scomfited
and empeired all the chivalry of Scotland with an handefull of men as to
account as ayens the Scotts that were slain Wherefore he cou^ceilled for to
rem^ue the siege from seint Iohanes town and keep hem in the best manner that
they could and mygh^ The Scotts understood tho that Crable said hem soth and
forsook the siege and went the^s by night and halpe hem self in the best manner
that they myt When this thing was know through Scotland how that the lords
and knyghttes were scomfited at Gaskemore of Scotland through sir Edward the
bailloll^ Ye shull understand that the lords and ladies and the gentiles of
Scotland comen wonder fast to seint Iohanes town and yield hem un to the
bailloll and to him diden homage and feaute for her lands and yelden hem to
his pees And he hem resceyued freely And fro thens he went to the Abbey of Scone
and there he was crouned king of Scotland And after he let cry his pees through
out all the land And at that same time it befell that king Edward held his
perlement among his lieges at the new caastell up Tyne for to amend the
trespaces and the wrongs that had he done in his land and Sir Edward the
bailloll king of Scotland come to him thidder and did to him feaute and homage
for the reame of Scotland And in this manner king Edward of england ^adred ayene
the homages and feautes of Scotland where of he was put out through counceill
and assente of Dame Isabell his modre and of sir Rogier the mortimer Earl of
the marhe Tho took bailloll king of Scotland his leave of king Edward of england
and went thens in to his own land of Scotland and set but litell by hem
that had counceilled him and helped him in his quarrel wherefore they went fro
him and went and lived by her lands and rentes in Scotland And so it fell
afterward not long that the king of Scotland ne remeued and come to the town
of Anande / and there took his duellyng and thidder come to him a company of
knights strong men and worthy and yield hem un to the king / and bear hem so
fair in deed and in continaunce / So that he trust much upon hem / And anon
as the traitors saw that he trust much upon hem / they ordained among hem
fifty in a company and would have queld her king But through the grace of
almighty god he brake through a wall an hole in his chamber / and as god would
ascaped her treachery and all his men were quelled / and he ascaped with much
dread un to yt town of Cardoill and there held him sore annoied and this
befell in our ladies the concepcion Tho sent king Edward the Bailloll to king
Edward of England how falsely and traitouresly he was in litell time put to
shame and sorwe through his liegmen / upon whom he trusted wonder much and
prayed him for the love of god that he would maynten him and help him ayens
his enemies The king of England had of him tho great pite / and behight him
help and socour and sent him word that he should hold him in pees stille in
the forsaid Cite of Cardoille till that he had ga^red his power Tho ordained
king Edward of England a counce^ll at london and let gadre his men in diverse
shires of En^lond and when he all was ready he went toward the town of
B^rewyke up Twede and thidder come to him king Edward Bailloll of Scotland with
his power and beseged the town / and made without the town a fair town of
Panilous / and diked hem all about so that they had no dread of the Scotts /
and made many assaute with gonnes and with other engynes to the town /
wherewith they destroyed many fair houses and churches also were be^e down un
to the earth with great stones that spitousely come out of gonnes and of other
engynes / And notheles the Scotts kept well the town / that tho two kings
might not com^ therein long time And notheles the kings abide there so long
till tho that were in the town failled vitailles / and also they were so weary
of wakyng that they wiste not what for to done And ye shull understand that
tho Scotts that were in the town of Berewyke through commune counceille and
her assente let cry upon the wallys of the town that they myt have pees of
the Englisshmen / and there of they praiden the king of his grace and mercy and
prayed him of trews for viij. days upon this covenant that if they were not
rescued in that side of the town toward Scotland of the Scotts withyn viij.
days that they would yield hem un to the king and the town also And to hold
this covenant they proferd to the king xij. hostages out of the town of
Berewyke When the hostages were delivered un to the king anon tho of the town
senden un to the scotts and told hem of her sorwe and meschief And the scotts
come tho privily over the water of Twede to the bought of the Abbey And Sir
wiliam dyket that was tho stiward of Scotland and many other y^ comen with him
put hem there in great peril of hem self at that tym^ of her life for they
comen over a brugge that was to broken and the stones awey and many of her
company were there drenched but the forsaid william went over and other of his
company and come by the ships of England and queld in a barge of hull xvj.
m^ And after they went in to the town of Berewyke by the water side Wherefore
the Scotts held tho town rescued and asked her ho^tages ayene of the king of
England. And the king sen^ hem word ayene that they axed the hostages with
wrong since that they comen in to the town of Englondes side for covenant was
between hem that the town should be rescued by the half of scotland And anon
king Edward tho co^maunded^ to yield the town or he wull have the hostages And
the Scotts said that the town was rescued well y now and there to they would
hold hem When king Edward saw the Scotts break her covenant that they made he
was wonder wroth and anon let take sir Thomas fitz william and sir Alexander
of seton wardeyne of Berewyke the which thomas was person of Dunbarre and let
hem be take first a fore y^ other hostages For encheson that sir Alisaundres
fadre was keeper of the town And tho commanded every day ij. hostages of the
town till that they were all done un to the death but if they yield the town
And so he should teache hem to break her couenauntes

And when tho of the town herd thees tynges they becomen wonder sorry and
senten to the king of England that he would grant hem other viij. days of
respite So that bitwene two hounderd men of arms and xx. men of arms might he
strength gone between hem to the town of Berewyke hem for to vitaille that the
town must be hold for rescued And if so were that xx^. or xxij. or more were
slain of tho two honderd before said tha^ the town should not be hold for
rescued and this covenant to be holden they sent to him other xij. of the town
in hostage The king of England granted hem her prayer and took the hostages in
Seint Margaretes eve In the year of grace a M.CCC. and xxxij the Scotts come
fersely in iiij. wenges well araied in arms for to mete king Edward of England
and Edward the king of Scotland and with her power and come fast and sharply
ayens euensonge time and the same time was flode at Berewyke in the water of
Twede that no man might wend over on his ho^s nor on foot / and the water was
bitwene the ij. kings and the reame of England / and that time abiden the
Scotts in that other side for encheson that the englisshmen should have been
dreynt or slain

This was the array of the Scotts how that they comen in batailles ayens the ij
kings of England and scotland In the vauntward of Scotland were these lords
Capitulo ducen^^^imo xxiiij.
THe Earl of morrif / James Frisell / Symond Frisell / waltier Stiward /
Reygnold Cheyne / Patrik of Graham / ^ohan le grant / James of Cardoill /
Patrike Parkers Robert Caldecottes / Phelipp of Melledrum / Thomas Gilbert /
Raufe wyseman / Adam Gurdone James Gramat / Robert Boyde Hugh Park with xl.
knights new dubbed / and vj.C. men of arms and iij.M. of communes In the
first party of the half bataille weren these lords / The Stiward of Scotland
The Earl of Mouref James his uncle / William douglas David of ^yndesey Mancolyn
flemmyng / William of kethe Dunkan kamboke with xxx. bache^ers new y dubbed In
the second part of the bataille were these lords James Stiward of Colden
Aleyn stiward William Abbrehyn / William Morice Johan fitz william / Adam ^e
mose / Walter fitz Gilbert Johan of Cerlton Robert walham with vij.C. men of
arms and xvij.M. of communes

In the iij. part of the bataille of Scotland were these lords The Earl of
Marrethe Earl of Roffe The Earl of Strahern^ / The Earl of sotherland / William
of kyrke^^y Johan Cambron Gilbert of Hay William of Ramsey / William Prendegest
^irstyn hard / William Gurdon Arnold Guard Thomas Dolphyn with xl. knights
new dubbed ix.C. men of arms and xv.M. of communes In the iiij ward of the
bataille of Scotland were these lords / Archebald douglas The Earl of leneuax
A^^saundre le brus The Earl of Fyf Johan Cambell Earl of Athles / Robert
Lawether William of Vipount / William of lonstone Johan de labels Groos de
Sherenlawe Johan de lyndesey Alisaundre de Gray / Ingram de vmfreville Patryke
de Pollesworth David de wymes Michell Scott William landy Thomas de ^oys Rogier
the Mortimer with xx. Bachelors new dubbed ix. honderd men of arms xviij.M.
and iiij.C. of communes The Earl of Dunbarre keeper of the Castle of Berewyke
halpe the Scotts with.l. men of Arms

And Sir alisaundre of Seton keeper of the forsaid town of Berewyke with an
honderd men of arms And the commnners of the town with iiij. hounderd men of
arms and with hem viij honderd of footmen The sum of the Earls and lords
above said a^mounteth lxvj. The sum of bachelors new du^^ed ammounteth to an
honderd and xl. The sum of men of arms ammounteth M.M.M.C. The sum of the
comuners a^moun^teth liij.M.CC The sum total of the people above said
a^mounteth lvj.M.vij.C.xlv. And these lxv. great lords ladden all the other
great lords above said in iiij. batailles as it is told before all on foot And
king Edward of England and Edward king of Scotland had well apparailled her
folk in iiij. batailles for to fight on foot ayens her enemies And the English
mynstrelles blewe her trumpes and her pipes and hidously ascried the Scotts
And tho had every english bataill ij. wings of pris Archiers the which at that
bataille shoten arewe^ so fast and so sore that the Scotts might not help hem
self And they smyten the scotte^ thousands to ground And they gun for to
flee fro the Englisshmen for to save her life And whenne the ^nglish knaves
saw the scomfiture and the Scotts fall fast to the ground they priked her
mastres horse with the spores for to keep hem fro peril and set her mastres ^
force And when the Englisshmen saw that they lepten on her horse and fast
pursued the Scotts and all that abyden they queld down right There me^ might
see the doughtynesse of the noble king Edward and of his men how manly they
pursued the Scotts that flowen for dread And there man might see many a
Scottysshman cast down un to the ground deed and her b^ners displaied hakked
in to pecys and many a good habe rione of stele in her blood bathe And many a
time the scotts were gadred in to companyes but evermore they were discomfited
And so it befell as god almighty would that the Scotts had that day no more
foyson ne might ayens the Englisshmen than xx. Sheep should have ayens v.
wolfes and so were the Scotts discomfited And yet the Scotts had webe v. men
ayens one Englisshman. And that bataille was done on halydounehylle besides the
town of Berewyke at the which bataille were flayne of the Scotts
xxxv.M.vij.C. and xij. of Englisshmen but only xiiij. and tho were fotemen And
this victory befell to the Englisshmen on seint Margaretes ^ue In the year of
the ^ncarnacion of our lord Ihesu crist M.CCC.xxxij. And while this doing last
the Englissh pages took the pilfre of the Scotts that were quelled every man
that he might take without any chalengyng of any man And so after this
gracious victory the king turned him ayene un to the same siege of Berewyke /
and when they beseged saw and herd how king Edward had ^ped / They yolden to
him the town with the Castle on the morwe after that the bataille was done /
that is for to say on Seint Margaretes day / And than the king ordained Sir
Edward Bailloll with other noble and worthy men to be kepers and governors of
Scotland in his absence / and him self turned ayene and come in to England
after this victory with much ^oye and wurshipp And in the next year sewyng
that is for to say the year of ^ncarnacion of our lord Ihesu crist a
M.CCC.xxxiij. and of king Edward vij. he went ayene in to Scotland in the
winter time / at which viage the Castle of Kylbrigge in Scotland for him and
his me^ that with him comen he recovered and had ayens the Scotts all at his
own lust And in that same year Sir Edward Bailloll king of Scotland held his
parliament in Scotland with many noble lo^des of England that were at that same
parliament for encheson of her lands and lordshippes that they had in the
Royame of Scotland and helden all of the same Bailloll And in the viij. year of
his regne about the feste of Seint Johan Baptist Sir Edward Bailloll the
verray and true king of Scotland as by beritage and right line made his homage
and feaute un to king edward of England for the Royame of Scotland at the new
Castle up tyne in the presence of many worthy lords and also of communes
both of the reames of England and also of Scotland / and anon after in the
same year king Edward of England resseyued of the duke of Britaigne his homage
for the Erledome and lordship of Richemond And so following in the ix. year of
his regne after Mihelmasse / King Edward rood in to Scotland and there was fast
by Seint Iohanes town all most all the winter time and he held his
Cristemasse at the Castle of Rokesburgh

And in the same year through out all England about Seint Clementis tide in
winter there aroos such a spiyngyng and wellyng up of waters and flodes both of
the sea and also of fressh rivers and springes that y^ see brinkes walls and
costs breken up y^ men bestes and houses in many places and namely in low
co^tres violently and suddenly were dreynt And driven away and fruytes of the
Earth through co^tinuaunce and habundaunce of waters of the sea evermore
afterward were turned in to more saltness and sowrenesse of savor The x. year
of king Edwardes regne king Edward entered the Scottish see after mydsomer and
to many of the scotts he yaf bataille and overcome hem and many he treted and
bowed un to his pees through his doughtynesse And after mihelmasse than next
folueng was the Earl of Mo^^^f y take at Edinburgh and brought in to England
and put in to prison And in the months of Iuyn^ and Iuyll than next folewy^g
in the xj. year of his regne was seyne and appeared in the firmament a bemed
sterre the which clerks call stella Comata and that sterre was seyne in
diverse perties of the firmament. Where after anon there folewed in England
good chepe and wondre great plentee of all chaffare bitaille and merchandise
and there aye^s honger scarcite meschief and need of money In so much that a
quarter of whete at london was sold for two shyllyng and a good fat ox at a
noble and v. good dove briddes for a penny in which year died sir Johan of
Eltham Earl of Cornewaille king Edwardes brother and lies at westmynster

How king Edward made a duchy of the Erledome of Cornewaille and also of vj.
other Earls that were new made and of the first chalengyng of the kingdom of
france Ca.CCxxv
IN the year of our lord M.CCC. and xxxvij. and of king Edward xij. in the
month of march during the perlemen^ at westmynster in lent time king Edward
made of the Earl dome of Cornewaille a duchy and let it call the duchy of
Cornewallie the which duchy he ^afe un to Edward his first sone with the
Erledome of Chestre And also king Edward made at that same time vj. other Earls
that is for to say Sir Henry Earl of la^castres sone Earl of leycestre William
of Boghun^ Earl of Northampton William of Mountagu Earl of Salysbury Hugh of
awdele Earl of Gloucestre Robert of Vfford Earl of Southfolke And william of
Clytone Earl of Huntyngdone.

And in that same year it was ordained in the same parliament that no man should
were no cloth that was wrought out of England as clothe of gold Of Sylk Velvet
or Damask Satyn Baudekyn ne none such other ne none wild ware ne furrure of
beyond the sea but such as might spend an C. pound of rent a year but this
ordinance and statute was of litell effect / for it was no thing hold In the
xiij. year of his regne king Edward went over see in to braban with Queen
Philipp his wife there beryng child at Andewerpe there he duelled more than a
year to trete with the duke of Braban and other allied un to him of the
chalanging of the kingdom of france to king Edward of England by right and by
heritage after the death of Karoll the great king of France brother germayne of
Queen Isabell king Edwardes mod^^ / the which was holden and occupied
unrightfully by Phelipp of valoys the Emes sone of king Karoll the which duke
and all his in the forsaid things and in all other there to longyng with all
his men and goods king Edward fond ready un to him and maden and beheighten
him seurte by good feith and trust / and after that the king hasted him in to
England ayene and left there the Queen stille behind him in braban Than in the
xiiij. year of his regne wha^^ all the lords of his reame and other that
fallen to be at his parliament weren called and assembled to gedre in the same
parliament holden at london after the fest of seint Hillarie The kings needs
were put forth and promoted as touching the kingdom of France For which needs
to be sped / the king axed the fifthe part of all the m^ble goods of England
and the wulles and the ix. shefe of every corn And the lords of every town
where such thing should be taxed and gadred / should ans^ere to the kyug there of
/ and he had it and held it at his own lust and will / wherefore if I shall
know lech the verray truth / the ynner love of the people was turned in to have
and the commune prayers in to cursing / for cause that (...) ^ommune people were
so strongely grieved Also the forsaid (...) valoys of france had gadred un to
him a great host and destroyed there in his parties and kingdom many of the
kings friends of England with tounes and Castles and many other of her
lordshippes and many harms shames and despites deden un to the Queen wherefore
king Edward when he herd this tidings was strongly meued and therewith an
angered / and sent diu^rse lettres over see to the Queen and to other that were
his friends gladyng hem and certifieng hem that he would be there him self in
all the haste that he might And anon after Est^e when he had sped of all
thing that him neded and come / he went over the sea ayene Of whose coming the
Queen and all his friends were wondre glad and made much ^oye / And all that
were his enemies and ayens him helden / maden as much sorwe In the same time
the king through counceill of his true lieges and counceill of his lords that
there were present with him token the king of fraunces name / and took and
meddled the kings arms of france quartled with the arms of England and
commanded forth with his coigne of gold under descripcion and writeng of the
name of England and of france to be made best that might he / that is for to
seyne the floreyne that was called the noble pris of vj. shillyngs viij. pens
of sterlinges and the half noble of the value of iij. shillyngs iiij. pens and
the ferthyng of value xx pens.

How king Edward come to the s^luys and discomfited all the power of france in
the haven Capitulo ducentesimo xxvj.
ANd in the next year after / that is for to say the xv. year of his regne / he
commanded and let write in his chartres writtes and other lettres the date of
the regne of France ferst / And while that he was thus doing and trauayllyng
in france through his counceill he wrote to all the Prelates Dukes Earls and
Barons / and the noble lords of the contre / And also to diverse of the
commune people diverse lr^ez and maundementz beryng da^e at Gandaune the viij.
day of February And anon af^ with in a litell time he come ayene in to
England with the Queen and her children And in the same year on Midsomer eve he
began to saill toward france ayene / and manly and styfly fill upon Phelipp of
valoys the which long time lay and had gadred to him a full houge and boystous
meyne of dinerse nations in the haven of s^luys / And there they foughten to
gedre the king of france and he with her hosts fro midday un to the iij. hour
in the morn in which bataill were slain xxx.M. me^ of the kings company of
france and many ships and cogges were taken / And so through gods help he
had there the victory / and ^ere thens a glorious chivalry /

And in the same year about seint James tide without the yate^ of seint Omers
Robert of artheis with men of england and flaundre^ bitterly faught ayens the
duke of burgoyne and the frensshmen at which bataill there were slain and take
of the frensshmen xv. barons lxxx. knights / and ships and barges were take
un to the nombre of CC. and xxx. The same year the king making and abydyng upon
the siege of Turney the Earl of Henaude with Englissh archers maden assaute to
the town of Seint Amand where they slow. l. knights and many other and also
destroyed the town And in the xvj. year of his regne folewyng in the winter
time the same king duelled still upon the forsaid siege and sent often in to
England to his tresorier and other purueiour^ for gold and money that should be
sent to him there in his need but his procuratours and messagiers cursedly and
full slowly served him at his need and him deceived on whose defaute and laches
y^ king took trews bitwene him and the king of france And the king full of woe
sorwe and shame in his bert withdrowe him fro the siege and come in to
Britaigne and there was so great strife for vitaille that he lost many of his
people And when he had done there that he come for he dressed him over see in to
England ward And as he sailled toward England in the high see the most
myshappes storms and tempests thu^dred and lyghtnynges fill to him in the sea
the which was said that it was done and areised through evil spirits made by
sorcery and nygromancie of hem of france wherefore the kings heart was full of
sorwe and anguyssh weylyng and sighyng and said un to our lady in this wise
Oblissed lady seint Marie what is the cause that evermore going in to France
all things and wethers fallen to me Joyful and lykyng and gladsum and as I
would have hem but alwey turnyng in to England ward all things fallen
unprofitable and harmefull Ne^latter he scapyng all perilles of the sea as god
would come by night to the tour of london And the same year the king held his
Cristemasse at Meries and sent word to the Scotts by his messagiers that he
was ready and would fight with hem But the Scotts would not abide that but
fledden over the Scottyssh see and hid hem as well as they might And in the
xvij. year of his regne about the feste of Conversion of seint Paul king
edward when he had be in Scotland and saw that the Scotts were fled he come
ayene in to England And a litell bifor lent was the turnement at Dunstaple to
the which turnement come all the young Bachelery and Chivalry of England with
many other Earls and lords At the which turnement king Edward him self was
there present And the next year folewyng in the xviij. year of his regne at his
parliament holden at westmynstere the auynzeme of Paske the king Edward the
thridde made Edward his first begoten son prince of walys And in the.xix. year
of his regne anon after in Ianiuer by fore lent the same king Edward let make
full noble Iustes and great festes in the place of his birthe at wyndesore /
that there were never none such seen there a fore / At which feste and rial^^
were ij. kings ij. que^es the Prince of walys / The duke of Cornewaille x.
Earls ix. Co^^tesses barons and many burgeis (...) which myghten not lightely
he nombred / And of diverse lands beyond the sea weren many strangiers And at
the same time when the ^ustes were done / ^yng Edward made a great soper in the
which he ordained first and began his round table and ordained and stedfasted
the day of the forsaid round de table to be holden there at wyndesore in the
wytson we^e evermore yerly And in this time englisshmen so much haunted and
cleued to the wodnesse and folly of the strangiers / that fro the time of coming
of the henaudres xviij. year passed they ordained and changed hem every year
diverse shappes and disguysing of clothyng of long large and wide / clothes
destitut and desert / from all old honest and good usage And an other time
short clothes and streyte wastyd dagged and kyt and on every side slatered and
botened with sleues and tapites of surcotes and hodes over long and over much
hangyng / that if that I the sothe shall say they were more ^^ch to tormentours
and deueles in her clothyng and shoyng and other array than to men And the women
more nysely yet passed the me^ in array and coriousloker for they were so streyt
clothed that they let hang fox tailles sowed byneth within her clothes for to
hele and hide her a^se^ the which disgnysinges and pride perauenture afterward
brout forth and encaused many myshappes and meschief in the reame of England
The xx. year of king Edward he went over in to Britaigne and Gascoyne in whose
company went the Earl of warrewyke / the earl of suffolk / the earl of
huntyngton and the Earl of Arundell and many other lords and commune people in
a great multitude with a great nauye of CC.xl. ships / anon after Mydsomer
for to avenge him of many wrongs and harms to him done by Phelipp of valoys
king of France ayens the trews before hand granted / The which trews he
falsely and untruely by cauellacious losed and disquatte

How king Edward sailed in to Normandy and arrived at hogs with a great host
Ca.cc.xxvij.
IN the xxj. year of his regne king Edward through counceille of all the great
lords of the Royame of England called and gadred to gedre in his parliament at
westmestre before Estren ordained him for to pass over the sea ayene for to
dissese and desto^^^ble the rebels of france And when his nauye wa^ come to
gedre and made ready he went with an huge host the xij. day of Iuyll and failled
in to Normandy and arrived at hogs

And when he had rested him there vj. days for by cause of trauaylyng of the sea and for to have out all his men with all her necessaries out of her
ships he went toward Cadomu^ brennyng wastyng and destroyeng all the tounes
that he fond in his way And the xxvj. day of Iuyll at the brugge of C^dony
manly and orpedly ystre^gthed and defended with normans he had there a strong
bataill and a long during through which a great multitude of people were slain
And there were take prisoners The Earl of ewe The lord of Tankerville and an C.
other knights and men of arms and vj.C. footmen y nombred and the town and
the subarbes un to the bare walls of all thing that myt be bore and carried out
was robbed and dispollied Afterward the king passing forth by the contre a
boute the bread of xx. mile he wasted all manner thing that he fond When
Philipp of valoys perceived all this al though he were fast by with a strong
host he would not come no nerre but break all the brugges by yonde the water of
seyne fro Rone un to Paris And him self fled un to the same cite of Paris
with all the have that he might For sothe the noble king Edward when he come to
Paris brugge and fond it broken withyn ij. days he let make it ayene And in
the morwe after the assumpcione of our lady king Edward passed over the water
of seyne going toward Cres^y and destroyed by the way tounes with the people
duellyng there ynne And in the fest of seint Bartholomewe he passed over the
water of sum unhurt with all his host there as never before hand was any
manner way ne passage where ij.M. were slain of hem that let her passage over
Therefore the xxvj. day of August king Edward in a feld fast by Crescy having iij
batailles of englishmen countred and met with Philipp of valoys having with him
iiij. batailles of which the le^st passed gretely the nombre of the English
people And when thees ij. hosts metten to gedre

There fill upon him the king of beme the duke of loreyne And Earls also of
flaundres Dalaunson Bloys Harecourt Aumarle and Nevers and many other Earls
Barons Lords knights and men of Arms the nombre of a M.V.C.xlij. without
foot men and other men y armed that were no thing rekened

And for all this the vnglorious Philippe wythdro we him with the residue of
his people / wherefore it was said in commune among his own people N^e beal soy
retreyt That is for to say our fair withdra with him Than king Edward and our
Englisshmen thanked god almighty for such a victory after her great labor
taken to hem all thing needful to her sustinaunce a^^d saving of her life /
for dread of her enemies / rested hem the there / And full erly in the morning
after the frensshmen with an huge passing host come ayene for to give bataille
and fight with (...) Englisshmen with whom metten and countreden the Earls of
(...) ^^ewyke Northampton and Northfolke with her compauie (...) slowen two
thousand and token many prisoners of the gentiles of hem And the remenaunt of
the same host ^l^dde iij. my^e thens

And the thridde day after the bataill the king went to Caleys ward
destroyeng all the contre as he rode whidder when that he was come that is for
to say the thridde day of Septembre he began to besege the town with the
Castle and continued his sege fro the forsaid thridde day of Septembre un to
the thridde day of Auguste the next year after And in the same year during the
siege of Caleys the king of Scotland with a full great multitude of S^ottes
come in to England to Neuiles cross about Seint lukes day the evangelist
hopyng and trustyng to have found all the land destitute / and void of people
/ For as much as the king of england was beyond the sea / saufe only prestes
and men of holy church and wymmen and children and plowmen and such other
laboreres and th^re they robbeden and diden much prive sorwe / But yet found
they y now that hem withstode by the grace of almighty god.

And so a day of bataill was assigned bitwene hem and certain lords and men
of holy church that were of that contre with other commune people fast by the
Cite of Duresme / At which day through the grace and help of almighty god the
Scotts went (...) comen And yet were they iij. fold so many of hem as of
Englisshmen And there was slain all the Chivalry and knighthood of the Royame
of Scotland And there were take as they would have fled theris David the king
of Scotland him self The Earl of Mentife Sir william douglas and many other
great men And after that our Englisshmen when they had rested hem a few days
and had ordained there kepers of the Northcontre they comen un to london / and
broghten with hem david king of Scotland and all these other lords that were
taken prisoners un to the tour of london with all the haste that they might /
And there they left hem in sauf keeping un to the kings coming and wenten home
ayene in to her own contre And afterward was the kings raunsone of Scotland
taxed un to an C.M. marc of silver to be paid in x. year that is for to seyne
every year x M. marc

How king Edward beseged Caleys and how it was y won and yolde to him
Ca.CC.xxviij.
IN the xxij. year of king Edwardes regne he went over y^ see in the winter
time and lay all the winter at the sege of Caleys the which year the while the
siege lasted Philipp the king of france cast and purposed trechouresly and
with fraud to put a way the siege and come the xxvij. day of ^uyll in the same
year with a great host and a strong poer and neighed un to the siege of Caleys
The which Philipp the last day of ^uyll sent to king Edward word that he would
give him pleyne bataille the iij. day next after that about euesong time if he
durst come fro the siege and abide it And when king Edward herd that without
any long tarieng ex long avisement he accepted gladly the day and hour of
bataille y^ Philipp had assigned And when the king of france herd that the
next nyt after ^e set his tents a fire and remeuyd and went away thens
cowardely Than they that were in the town and in the Castle beseged seeing all
this how that they had none other help ne so cour of the king of france ne of
his men And also that her vitailles withynne hem were spended and wasted and
for defaute of vitailles and of refresshyng they eten horse hounds cattes and
mys for to keep her trougth as long they as might And when they saw and was
found among hem at the last that they had no thing among hem for to ete ne
lyve by ne no socour ne rescuenge of the frensshmen of that other side they
wist well that they most needs dey for defaute or else yield the town and
anon they wenten and token down the baners and the arms of France on every
side that were honged out and wenten on the walls of the town on diverse
places as naked as they were borne save only her shirtes and her breches and
helden her swerdes naked and the point donward in her hondes and putten ropes
and halters about her nekkes and yelden up the keys of the town and of the
Castle to king Edward of England with great fere and dread of heart And when
king Edward saw this as a merciable king and lord received all to grace and a
few of the gretest persons of state and of governance of the town he sent
in to England there to abide her ransom and the kings grace / And all the
comminalte of the town the king let gone whidder they would in pees / and
without any harm / and let hem here with hem all her things that they might
here and carry away keeping the town and the Castle to him self Than through
mediacion of Cardinales that were sent fro the Pope trews was take there
bitwene France and England for ix. months than next fool wyng / and about
Mihelmasse king Edward come ayene in to England with a glorious victory.

And in the xxiij. year of his regne in the e^st parties of the world there
arose and began a pestilence and death of sarazens and paynyms that so great a
death was never herd of a fore / And that wasted a way so the people that
uneaths the tenth person was left a live And in the same year about the
southcontrees and also in the west contrees there fill so much rain and so
great watres / that from Cristemasse un to Midsomer there was vunethes day ne
night but that it rayned somewhat through which watres the pestilence was so
enfected / and so habundannt in all contrees and namely about the court of
Rome and other places and see costs / that vunethes there were left living
folk to bery hem that were deed honestely / But maden great diches and pittes
that were wonder broad and deep / and there in buried hem / and maden a renge of
deed bodies / and cast a vitell earth to h^l^ hem above / and than cast in an
other renge of deed bodies / and an other renge of earth above hem And thus
weren they burried / and none other wise / But if it were the fewer that weren
great men of estate that were buried as honestely as they might

And after all this in the xxiiij. year of king Edwardes regne hit was him done
to wite and understand of a treson that was begone at Caleys / and ordained
for to sell that town for a great sum of floreyns un to king Philipp of
France through the falsenesse and ordinance of a knight that was called Sir
G^effrey of Charney / that was wonder prive with king Philipp of France And
when king Edward herd this he took with him the nobles and gentiles lords /
and many other worthy and orped men of arms that were there present with him
for the solempnite of that high feste And well and wisely in all the haste
that he might and as privily as he might ^e went over see

And that same year the good king Edward held his Cristemasse at haueryng And
the morwe after neweyeres day the king was in the Castle of Caleys with his
men of arms that none of the aliens wist there of And that falls conspiratour
and traitor Gieffrey of charney seth that he might not openly have his purpose
of the Castle privily and stelyngly he come in and held the tonne with a
great host And when he with his men was comen in he paid the forsaid sum of
floreyns as covenant was bitwene hem to a Genewey in the town that was keeper
of the Castle and consentyng to the same Gieffrey in all this falsenesse and
treachery and ^ounden the Englissh ministres and s^ruauntz that were in the
Castle that they might not help hem self ne let hem of her purpose And than
wenynge that they had be siker y now they speken all her wykkednesse and
falsenesse openly an high that all men might here

And now shull ye here how they were disceyued for they comen in by a prive
posterne over a litell brigge of tree and when they were comen in sotilly and
privily the brigge was drawn up and kept that none of hem that comen in might
gone out ne no mo come in to hem And anon our Englisshmen wenten out at
prive holes and wyndowes and over the walls of the town and of the Castle
and wenten and faughten manly with the frensshme^ that were without and had
the better of hem the which when they weren occupied by hem self on her side
The king that was withyn the town having with him scarcely but xxx. men of
arms drew out his swerd and with a loud vois cried an high A seint Edward A
seint George

And when folk herd that they comen rennyng to him and ^aven there to her
enemies so great assaute that there were mo than two hounderd men of arms and
many other slain and many fledden a way and so by the grace of god Almighty
the victory fill to the Englisshmen Than the king took with him this Gieffrey
that was fynder of this treachery And also many other frensh prisoners And
withyn a while after come ayene in to England

And in this same year and in the year before and also in the year next after
was so great pestilence of men fro the cest in to the west and namely through
bocches that tho that siked on this day died on the iij. day to the which men
that so dieden in this pestilence hadde^ but litell respite of liggyng The pope
clement of his goodness and grace yafe hem full remission and foryeuenesse of
all her sins y^ they were shriven of and this pestilence lasted in london fro
mihel mass in to Angust next folewyng almost an hole year And in the se days
was death without sorwe weddynges without friendship wyllfull penance and
derth withonte scarcite and fleyng without refute or socour for many fledden
fro place to place because of the pestilence but they were enfecte and myt not
ascape the death after that the prophet Isaie seith who that flees fro the
face of dread he shall fall in to the diche And he that wendeth him out of the
diche he shall he hold and teide with a grenne but when this pestilence was
cesed as god would uneaths the x. part of the people was left alyfe And in the
same year began a wonder thing that all that ever were borne after that
pestilence hadden ij. chektethe in her head less than they had before

How king Edward had a great bataille with spaynard^s in the sea fast by
wynchelsee Ca.CC.xxix.
ANnd in the xxv. year of his regne about seint Iohanes day in heruest in the sea fast by wynchelsee king edward had a great bataille with men of Spain
where that her ships and nauye lay chayned to ged^^r that either they must fit
or drenche And so when all our worthy men of arms and the Sea costs fast by
wynchelsee and Romeny were gadred to gedre and our nauye and ships all ready
to the werre the Englishmen metten manly and stiffly with her enemies coming
fersely ayens hem And when the spanyssh vessels and nauye were closed in all
about there men might see a strong bataille on both sides and land during iij
y^ which bataille there nere but few that foughten that they nere spitously
hurt and foul And after the bataille there were xxiij. ships of hers y take
And so the Englishmen had the better And in the next year folewyng of his regne
that is to say the xxvj. year yt king through his counceill let ordeyne and make
his new money that is to say the penny the grote of value of iiij. pens And the
half grote of value of ij. pens but it was of less weight than the old
sterlyng was by v. shillyng in the pound And in the xxvij. year of his regne
was the great derthe of vitailles the which was called the dear somer And in
the xxxviij. year of his regne in the perlement holden at westmynster after
estren Sir henry Earl of Lancastre was made duke of lancastre and in this same
year was so great a drought that fro the month of march un to the month of
Iuyll there fill no Rain on the earth Wherefore all fruytes seeds and herbs for
the most party were lost in defaute Whereof there come so gr^^e disese of men
and bestes and derthe of vitailles in England so that this land that ever before
had be plen^^uous had need that time to seek his vitailles and refresshyng of
other out yles and contrees And in the xxix. year of king Edward it was
accorded granted and sworn bitwene the king of france and king Edward of
England that he should have ayene all his lands and lord ships that longeden
to the duchy of Gnyhenne of old time the which had been wi^h draw / and
wrongfuly occupied by diverse kings of france before hand to have and to
hold to king Edward and to his heirs and successors for evermore freely
pesibely and in good quiet upon this covenant that the king of england should
be^e of and relese all his right and claim that he had and claymed of the
kingdom of france / and of the title that be took there of upon which speech
and couenauntz it was sent to the court of rome on both sides of the kings /
that the forsaid couenauntz should be enbulled / but god ordained better for the
kings wurshipp of england for what through fraud and disceit of the frensshme^
and what ^urgh letting of the pope and of the court of rome the forsaid
coue^aun^z ware disquat and left of And in the same year the king re^^ked by
his wise and discrete counceill the staple of wulles (...) of flau^dres in to
England with all the libertees fraunch^^es and fre c^s^omes that longen there to
and ordained it in england in diverse places that is for to say at westmester
Canterbury Chic^^stre / bristow Lyncolne Hull with all the forsaid things
tha^ longen there to

And that this thing that should thus be done the king swore him self there to
And prince edward his sone with other many great witnessed that there were
present And in the xxv. year of his regne anon after witsonday in the
parliament ord^yned at westmynstre it was told and certified to the king that
Phelipp that tho held the kingdom of France was deed / And that Johan his
sone was crouned king And that this Johan had give karoll his sone the Duchy
of Guyhenne / of the which thing king Edward when he wyste there of had great
indignacion un to him and was wondre wroth and stronglich y m^^ed And there for
before all the wrothy lords that there were assembled at that parliament he
called Edward his sone un to him to whom the duchy of Guyhenne by right
heritage should long to and yafe it him there / byddyng and strengthyng him
that he should ordeyne him to defend him and vengy^ him upon his enemies and
save maynten his right And afterward king edward him self and his eldest sone
Edward wenten to diverse places and seintes in england on pilgremage for to
have the more help and grace of god and of his seintes And the ij. Kal. of
Iuyll when all thing was ready to that viage and bataill and all his retenue and
power assembled and his nauye also ready he took with him the earl of war wyke
the earl of suffolk the earl of salysbury and the earl of Oxu^ford and a M. men
of arms and as many archiers and in the natiuite of our lady took her ships
at Plymmouth and begone to sail And when he come and was arrined in Gnyhenne
he was there wurshipfully take and resceyued of the most noble men and lords of
that contre And anon^ after king edward took with him his ij. sons that is for
to say Sir Leonell earl of vlton and sir Johan his brother Earl of richemond
and sir henry duke of lancastre with many earls and lords and men of arms and
ij M. archers and sailed toward france and rested him a while at caleys And
afterward the king went with his folk aforsaid and with other soudiours of be
yonde the sea that there aboden the kings coming the second day of Nouembre and
took his ^ournay toward king ^ohan of france there as he trowed to have founden
him fast by Odoma^ as his lr^es and covenant made mention that he would a bide
him there with his host. And when king ^ohan of france herd of the kings
coming of england he went away with his me^ and carriage cowardely and shamfully
fleyng and wastyng all vitailles over that the Englisshmen should not have there
of And when king Edward herd tell that he fled he pursued him with all hiz
oost till Hedene and than he beholding the wantyng and the scarcite of
vitailles and also the cowardice of the king of frannce he turned ayene wastyng
all the country And while all thees things were a doing the scotts privily
and be night toke^ the town of Berewyk sleyng hem that withstode hem and no
man else but blessed be god the castle ne^^latter was saved and kept by
englishmen that were theryn Than the king perceived all this turned ayene in to
england as wroth as he myt be wherefore in perleme^t at westmynster was granted
to the king of every sak of wolle.l. shillyng during the term of vj. year that
he might the myghtloker fight and defend the Reame arens the scotts and other
mysdoers And so when all things were ready the king hasted him to the siege ward

How king Edward was crouned king of Scotland and how Prince Edward took the
king of france and sir Philipp his younger sone at the bataille of Peyters
Ca.CC.xxx
ANd in the xxxj. year of his regne the xiij. day of Ianiuer the king in the
Castle of Berewyk with a few men but having there fast by a great host / the
town was yolde to him without any manner defense or difficulte / than the king
of scotland that is for to say sir Johan Bailloll considering how that god did
many meruailles and gracious things for king edward at his own will fro day
to day / he took and yafe up the reame of Scotland and the croune of scotland
at rokesburgh in to the kings hondez of england under his patent lr^ez there y
made And anon after king Edward in presence of all the prelates and other
worthy men and lords that there were let croune him king there of the reame of
Scotland And when all things were done and ordained in thilke contrees at his
lust he turned ayene in to England with an huge wurshipp / And while this viage
was a doing in Scotland Sir Edward Prince of walys as a man enspired in god was
in Guyhenne in the Cite of Burdeux treting and spekyng of the chalengyng / and
of the kings right of England that he had of the Reame of france and that he
would avenged be with strong hand and the prelates peers and mighty men of
that contre consented well to him Than Sir Edward the prince with a great host
y gadred to him the sixte day of Iuyll went from Burdeux going and trauaylling
by meny diverse contrees and he took many prisoners moo than vj.M. men of arms
by the contre as he ^ourneied and took the town of remorantyn in saloigne and
beseged the Castle vj. days And at the vj. days end they yolden the Castle
un to him And there were take the lord of Croune and sir Bursigaud and many
other knights and men of arms moo than lxxx. And fro thens by Toren^ / and
peten fast by chineney his noble men that were with him hadden a strong
bataille with frensshmen and an C. of her men of arms were slain And the Earl
of Dance and the stiward of france were take with an C. men of arms / In the
which year the xix. day of Septembre fast by Peighters the same Prince with a
M. and ix. houndred men of arms and archers ordained a bataille to king Johan
of france coming to the Prince ward with vij. M chosen men of arms and other
much people in an huge passing nombre / of the which there was y slain the duke
of Burbon and the duke of Athenes and many other noble men / and of the prince
men of arms a M. and of other after the true account and rekening viij.
houndred And the king of france was there take and sir Phelipp his younger sone
and many dukes and noble men and worthy knights and men of arms about ij.M.
And so the victory fill there to the prince and to the people of England by the
grace of god And many y^ were take prisoners were set at her raunsone and upon
her trougth and knyghthode were charged and had leave to go But the ^nce took
with him tho the king of france and philipp his sone with all the reverence
that he myt and went ayene to burdeux with a glorious victory The sum of the
men that were take prisoners and of the men that were slain the day of
bataille was iiij.M.iiij.C.xl. And in the xxxij. year of king Edward the v. day
of May Prince Edward with king Johan of france and philipp his sone and many
other worthy prisoners arrived graciousely in the haven of plymmouth and the
xxiiij. day of the same month about iij. after none they comen to london by
londou brigge and so wenten forth to the kings Paleys of westmynster and there
fill so great a multitude and prees of people about hem to behold and se that
wondir and y^ riall sight y^ uneaths fro mydday till nyt they might come to
westmynster and the kings raunsone of france was taxed and set to iij.
myllionz of scutes of whom ij. should be worth a noble and ye shull understood
that a myllion is a M.M. and after sum men his ramnsome was set at iij.M.M
floreyns and all is one in effect And this same year were made solemn Iustes
in smethfeld bey^g there present the king of England the king of france and
the king of Scotland and many other worthy and noble lords The xxxiij. year of
his regne the same king Edward at wyndesore as well for love of knyghthode as
for his own wurshipp and at the reverence of y^ king of france and of other
lords that were there at that time he held a wondre riall and costlewe fest of
seint George passing any that ever was holden before Wherefore the king of France
in scornyng said that he saw never ne herd such solemn festes ne rialtes
holden ne done with taylles without payeng of gold or silver And in the
xxxiiij. year of his regne the xiiij. Kal. of Iuyll sir ^ohan earl of richemond
king Edwardes sons wedded dame blaunche duke Henry's daughter of lancastre
cousin to the same ^ohan by dispensacione of the pope and in the mean time were
ordained Iustes at london iij. days of the rogacious that is for to say the
Meire of london with his xxiiij. aldermen ayens all that would come in whose name
and stead the king privily with his iiij. sons edward Leonell Johan and Edmond
and other xix. great lords helden y^ feld with wurshipp And this same year as
it was told and said of hem that saw it there come out blood of the tomb of
Thomas some time Earl of lancastre as fressh as that day that he was do to
death / And in the same year king Edward chese his sepulture and his liggyng at
westmynstre fast by the shrine of seint Edward /

And anon after the xxvij. day of Octobre he went over see to Caleys making
protestacion that he would never come ayene in to England till he had full ended
the werre bitwene France and him And so in the xxxvj. year of his regne in the
winter time king Edward was and trauailled in the Ryne costs and about seint
Hillarie tide he departed his host and went to Burgoyne ward with whom than
met pesibely the duke of Burgoyne behoting him lxx. thousand floreyns that he
should spare his men and his people / and the king granted at his request / and
duelled there un to the xvij. day of March / the which time come to king
Edwardes ere that strange thieves on the sea under the Earl of seint Poule the
xv. day of March liggyng a wait upon the tounes of hastyng Rye and other
places and villages on the sea cost haddyn entered as enemies in to the town
of wynchesee / and slowen all that ever withstoden hem and withsaid her coming
/ wherefore the king was greatly meued and wratthed / and he turnyng ayene to
Parysward and commanded his host to destroy and slay with dynt and strength
of swerd hem that he had before hand y spared / And the xij. day of April the
king come to Paris and there be de^arted his host in diverse batailles with
iiij.C. of kynghtes new dubbed on that one side of him And Sir Henry duke of
lancastre under pees and trewes went to the yates of the Cite / profryng to
hem that would abide a bataille in the field under such condition / that if the
king of England were overcome there as god for^ede it / that than he should
never challenge the kingdom of France

And when he had of hem but a short and a scornful ansuere he told it to the
king and his lords what he had herd and what they said / And than forth the
new knights with many other making assaute to the Cite to they destroieden
hougely the subarbes of the Cite And while all thees things were a doing the
Englisshmen made hem a ready to be avenged upon the shame and despite that was
done that year at wynchelsee and ordained a nauye of lxxx. ships of men of
london and of other marchauntz and xiiij. thousand of men of arms and archiers
and went and serched and skymmed the sea and manly token and helden the I Will of
Caux / wherefore the frensshmen that is for to say the Abbot of Cluyne the Earl
of Tankeruille and bursygand that than was S^^ward of france with many other
men of the same co^tre by common assente of the lord Charlis that tho was
reg^^t of france they hasted hem and went to the king of england asky^g and
besechyng him steadfast pese and e^lastyng upon certain co^dicions that there
were showed written The which when the king and his counceill had seen it plesed
him neu a de^e but sethe it would be non^ other in time of better accord and
deliberacion the frenshmen besily and with great instaunce asked trews for her
see costs and the king granted hem And in the morwe after the Vtas of Pasche
the king turned him with his host toward Orliaunce destroieng and wasting all
the contre by the wey And as they wenten thidderward there fill upon hem such a
storm and tempest that non^ of our nation herdne saw never none such through
the which thousands of our me^ and of her horses in her iourneyeng as it were
through vengeance suddenly were slain and perisshed the which tempests full
much yet fered not the king ne much of his people that they ne wenten forth in
her viage that they had bego^n wherefore abonte the feast of holy rood day in may
fast by incarnocu^ the forsaid lords of france metyng there with the king of
england a pesible accord and a final upon certain conditions and grauntes
articulerly gadred and written to geder evermore for to last full discretly made
and to both kings profitable and to her reames both with one assent of
Charlis the rege^t and governor of france and of Perys of the same reame y
written and made under date of Carnocu^ the xv. day of may they offered and
proferd to the king of england requyring his grace in all things written y^
he would benyngly admit hem and hold hem ferme and stable to hem and to her
heirs for evermore thens forth the which things and articles when king Edward
had seyne hem he granted hem so that both perties should be sworn on gods
body and on the holy euangelies that the forsaid covenant should be stablisshed
and so they accorded graciously

Therefore there were ordained and dressed on every side ij. barons ij. banerettz
and ij. knights to admit and receive the oaths of the lord Charlis rege^t of
france and of si^ Edward the first sone and heir of king Edward of england
And the x. day of may there was songen a solemn mass at Paris and after the
iij. Agnus dei y seid with dona nobis pacem in presence of the forsaid men that
were ordained to admit and receive the oaths and of all other that there might
be The same Caharlis leide his right hond on the Paten with gods body and his
lift hond on the missale and seid we.N. sweren on gods body and the holy
gosp^lles that we shull trewly and steadfastly hold toward us the pees and the
accord made bitwene the ij kings and (...) no manner to do the contrary And
there among all his lords for the more love and strength of witness he deled
and departed the relics of the croune of criste to the knights of england /
and they courteisely token her leave / And in the friday neyt the same manner
oath in presence of the forsaid knights and of other worthymen Prince Edward
made at lovers Afterward both kyngis and her sons and the most noble men of
both reames within the same year made the same oath / and for to strength all
thees things forsaid / the king of england axed the gretest men of france and
he had his axing that is for to say vj. dukes viij. Earls and xij. lords that
is to say barons and worthy knights And when the place and the time was
assigned in which both kings with her counceill should come to gedre all the
forsaid things bitwene hem y spoke for to ratify and make ferme and stable /
the king of england anon went toward the sea and at hountflete began to saille
beuyng to his hoostes that were left behind him by cause of his absence much
heaviness And after the xix. day of May he come in to england and went to his
paleys at westmynstre on seint dunstones day and the iij. day after he visited
^ohan king of france that was in the tour of london / and delivered him freely
from all manner prison sauf first they were accorded of iij. myllions of
floreyns for his raunsone / and the king comforted him and chered him in all
places with all solas and myrthes that longen to a king in his going hom ward
And the ix. day of Iuyll in the same year the same ^ohan king of france that
before hand lay here in hostage / went home ayene in to his own land to trete
of tho things and of other that longeden and fil^en to the governance of his
reame / And afterward met^^n and comen to gedre at Caleys both ij. kings with
both her cou^ceill about all halewen tide / and there were showed the
conditions and the pointz of the pees and of the accord of both sides y written
/ and there without any withseyeng of both sides graciously they there
accorded / and there was done and songen a solemn mass and after the iij.
Agnus dei upon gods body and also upon the mass book both kings and her
sonez and the grettest lords of both reames and of her counceill that there
were than present / and had not I swore before the forsaid oath that they had
made and was titled bitwene hem they behighten there to k^pe and olle other
couenautz that were bitwene hem y ordained / And in this same year me^nes
best^s trees and housing with sodeyn tempest and strong lightenyng were
perisshed and the deuell appeared bodily in ma^nys likeness to much people as
they went in di^se places in the co^tre and spoke to hem

How the great company aroos in france and the white company ^n lumbardie
and of many other meruaille Ca.cc.xxxj
King Edward in the xxxvj. year of his regne anon after cristemasse in the
fest of Con^cion of seint Poul held his perlement at westmynstre in the which
was put forth and showed the accord and the tretis that was stabilisshed and y
made bitwene tho ij. kings the which accorded plesed to much people / and
therefore by the kings commandment there were gadred and come to gedre in
westmynstre church the first sunday of lent that is to say the ij. kal of
Feuerer the forsaid englisshm^n and frensshmen where was song a solemn mass
of the Trinite of the Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury mastir simond ^^lepe / And
when Agnus dei was done the king being there with his sons and also with the
kings sons of france / and other noble and great lords with candeles y
light and crosses y brought forth / all that were called there to y^ were not
swore before swore that same oath that was written upon gods body and on the
mass book in this wise / We.N. and.N. sweren upon holy gods body and on the
gospeles steadfastly to hold and keep toward us the pees and the acord y made
bitwene the ij. kings / and neu for to do the contrary / and when they had
thus y sworn they token her scrowes that her oaths were co^pre^hended in to
the notaries / And this same year in the ascencion eve about mydday was seyne
the Eclips of the son / and there folewed such a drought that for defaute of
reyne there was great barinesse of corn fruit and hey And in the same month
the vj. kal. of Iuyne there fill a sangweyne rain almost lik^ blood at Burgoyne
And a sangweyne cross fro morn un to ^me was y seyne and appeared at boloigne
in the eire the which many a man saw and after it meued and fill in the midde
see And in the same time in france and in England and in other many lands as
they y^ were in pleyne contrees and desert baren witness suddenly there appeared
ij Castles of the which went out ij. ostes of arms men / And that one oost
was clothed and heled in white and that other in blake / And when bataill
bitwene hem was begone the white overcome he blake / And anon after the blake
took heart un to hem and overcome the white / And after that they went ayene in
to her Castelles / And than the Castelles and all the hoostes vanysshed away /
And in this same year was a great and an houge pesti^ence of people and namely
of men / whose wyfes as wymmen out of governance token housbondes as well
strangiers as other lewd and simple people / the which foryetyng her own
honor and wurshippe and berth^ coupled and married hem with hem that were of
low degree and litell reputacion in this same year died Henry duke of lancastre
And also in this year Edward Prince of wales wedded the countess of kent that
was sir thomas wife holand the which was deperted some time and deuorced fro
the Earl of salysbury for cause of the same knight And about this time began
and arose a great company of diverse nations gadred to gedre of whom her
leders and governors were englissh people And they were clepid a people without
an head the which did much harm in the pertie of france And not long after
there aroos an other company of diverse nations y^ was called the white
company the which in the parties and co^tres of lu^bardie did much sorwe This
same year Sir ^ohan of Gaunte the sone of king Edward the iij. was made duke of
lancastre by reason and cause of his wife that was the daughter and heir of
Henry some time duke of lancastre

Of the great wind and how prince Edward took the lordshipp of Gnyhenne of his
fadre and went thidder Ca.CC.xxxij.
ANd in the xxxvij. year of king edward the xv. day of Ianiuer that is to say
on seint Maures day about euensong time there aroos and come such a wind out
of the south with such a fersenesse and strength that he brast and blewe down
to ground high houses and strong bildynges toures churches and steples and
other stronges and all other strong works that stoden stille weren shake there
with that they been yet and shull be (...) more the febeler and weyker while
they stand And this wind lasted witho^te any cessyng vij. days continuell
And anon after there folewed such waters in hey time and in heruest time that
all field works were strongly let and left undone And in the same year ^nce
Edward took the lordshipp of Guyhenne and did to king Edward his fadre feaute
and homage therefore and went over see in to Gascoyne with his wife and his
children And anon after king Edward made sir Leonell his sone duke of Clarence
and Edmond his other sone Earl of Cambrigge And in the xxxviij. year of his
regne it was ordained in the parliament that men of law both of the tem^erall
and of holy church law fro that time forth should plete in her modir tunge
And in the same year comen in to England three kings that is for to seyne The
king of France the king of Cipres and the king of Scotland by cause to visit
and speak with the king of England Of whom they were wonder welcome and much y
wurshipped And after that they had be bear long time ij. of hem went ayene
home in to her own contres and kingdoms / but the king of france through
great sikenesse and malady that he had let still in england And in the xxxix.
year of his regne was a strong and an huge frost and that lasted long that is
for to say fro seint Andrews tide un to the xiiij. Kal. of April that the
tilthe and sowing of the earth and other such field wurkes and hand works were
much y let and left un do for cold and hardness of the earth And at Orrey in
britaigne that time was ordained a great dedely bataill bitwene sir Johan of
Mountfort duke of britaigne and sir Charles of bloys / but the victory fill to
the forsaid sir Johan through help and socour of the englisshmen / And there
were take many knytes and squyers / and other me^ that were vnno^bred / in the
which bataill was slain charles him self with all that stood about him and
of the englisshmen were slain but vij. And in this year deide at sauoy ^ohan
the king of france / whose ser^^^ and exequies king Edward let ordeyne and did
in di^se places wurshipfully to be done / and to dover of wurshipfull m^^
ordeyne him wurthely to be led with his own costs and expens / and from
thens he was fette in to france / and beried at seint denis In the xl. year of
king Edward the vij. kal of F^^^rer was borne Edward ^nce Edwardes sone the
which when he was vij. year old he deide And in the same year it was or
deyned that seint Petres pens fro that time forth should not be paid the which
king Yuo / some time king of e^glond of the co^tre of west saxons that began to
regne in the year of our lord DC.lxxix. first granted to rome for the scole
of england there to be continued And in this same year there fill so much rain
in hey ^yme that hit wasted and destroyed both corn and hey / And there was
such a debate and fighting of sparewes by diverse places in these days that
men founden innumerable inultitude of hem deed in feldes as they wenten / and
there fille also such a pestilence that never such was seen in no mannys time
that time a live for many men anon as they were go to bed hole and in good
point suddenly they deide / Also that time a sikenesse that men called the
pokkes slow both men and women through her enfecting / And in the xlj. year of
king Edward was bore at Burdeux Richard the second sone of Prince Edward of
England the which Richard king Richard of Amorican heued at the fontstone
after whom he was called Richard / And this same Richard wha^ his fadre was
deed and king Edward was deed also was crouned king of England the xj. year of
his age through right line and heritage and also by commune assent and desire of
the cominalte of the reame About this time at king Edwardes commandment of
england when all the Castelles and tounes were yold to him that long weren
hold in frannce by a great company assembled to gedre Sir Bartram Cleykyn
knight an orped man and a good werriour went and purposed him to put out Piers
king of spain out of his kingdom with help of the most pertie of the
forsaid great company trustyng also upon help and favor of the Pope for as
much as it came to his eres that the same Piers should bid and use the most
werst and sinfullest life out the which Piers y smyten with dread of this
tydyng fled in to Gascoigne to ^nce Edward to have help and socour of him And
when he was fled out of spain Henry his brother that was a bastard by
assent of the most pertie of spain and through help of that ferefull company
that I spoke of erste was made and crouned king of spain And the nombre of
that same company was rekened and set at the nombre of lx.M. fightyng men
This same year in the month of Iuyne there come a great company and nauye of
the danes and gadred hem to gedre in the north see purposing hem to come in to
England to re^ne and to rob and also to slay with whom they conntred and met
in the sea Marmers and other orped fightyng men of the contre and disparbled
hem And they asshamed went home ayene in to her own contre But among all
other there was a boystous and a strong vessel of her nauye that was
ouersailed by the Englisshmen and was perisshed and drey^te In the which the
Stiward and other worthy and great men of Denmark were take prisoners and by
the king of england and his counceill y prisoned the which lords the danes
afterward come^ and soughten all about for to have had with her goods that
they had lost and they not well a paid ne plesed of the ansuere that they had
here turned homewardes ayene leuyng be hynd hem in her ynnes privily y written
in scrowes and on walls Yet shull danes wast thee wanes Than happed there an
Englissh writer and wrote ayens the dane in this manner wise Here shull danes
fet her banes And in this time Piers king of spain with other kings that is
to say the king of Nauerne and the king of Malogre beyn^ menes wenten bitwene
and prayed counceill and help of sir Edward the prince through whose counceill
when he had understood her Articles and desire that he was required of tho
kings loathe he was and ashamed to say nay and contrary hem but notheles he
was aghast lest it should be any prejudice ayens the Pope and long time tarried
hem or that he would graunce or consent there to till he had better counceill and
auisement with good deliberacion of king Edward his geter and his fadre But
when he was with every days and continuell besechynges of many noble men y
required and spoken to / and with many prayers y sent and made bitwene hem Than
Prince Edward sent to his fadre both by pleynynge letters and also confortable
conteynyng all her suggestions and causes with all that other kings Epesteles
and ^etters for to have comfort and help of the wrongs not only to the king
of Spain y do / but also for such things as might fall to other kings Also
if it were not the somner helped and amended through the dome and help of
knyghthode to hem that it asked and desired The which lettre when the king and
his wise counceille had seyne and vnderstonden / he had great compassion and
heaviness of such a kings spoylyng and robbyng with much meruaille /

And sent ayene comfortable betters to Prince Edward his sone / and to that
other forsaid kings / and warned hem for to arm hem and ordeyne hem ayens
that mysdoer / and to withstond hem by the help of god that weren such enemies
to kings / when this noble Prince had received these lettres him self with
that other kings before said all her counceill called to gedre or that he
would undertake the quarrel / he bound and kuett sore the king that was
deposed with a great oath that is for to say that he should ever after mayntay
ne the right believe and feith of holy church and holy church also with all her
ministres rightes and libertees to defend from all her ^^emies and all euelles
And all that were there ayen^ bitterly to punyssh and destourble / And all the
rightes libertees priueleges of holy church encrese and maignten and amend /
and all things that were wrongfully betaken / withdraw and bore away by him
or by any other by cause of him / hastily to restore ayene / and to drive and
put out sarazens / and all other mysbeleued people out of his kingdom / with
all his strength and power / and suffer ne admit none such for no manner
thing ne cause to duelle therein And that when he had take a christian woman / he
should never come in none other womannys bed / ne none other ma^nys wife to
defoule All these forsaid things trewlich for to keep continewe and fullfyll
as all his life time he was bound by oath before notaries in presence and
witness of tho kings with other Princes And than that gracious prince Prince
Edward undertook the cause and the quarrel of the king that was deposed and
behight him with the grace of god to restore him ayene to his kingdom and let
ordeyne and gadre to gedre forth with in all have his nauye with men of arms
for to werre and fight in this forsaid cause

And in this same time upon the sonde of the scottyssh see that many a man it
sye iij. days to gedre there were seyne ij. Egles of y^ which that one come
out of the south and that other out of the north and cruelly and strongely
they foughten to gedre and wrastled to geder and the south Egle first over come
the north egle and all to rent and tare him with his byll and his clawys that
he should not rest ne take no brethe And after the south egle fligh home to his
own Costs And anon after there folewed and was seyne in the morn before the
sone rising and after in the last day of October save one day many sterces
gadred to gedre on an hepe fill down to the earth leuyng behind hem fery
bemes in manner of lightenyng whose flammes brent and consumed me^nes clothes and
men nes here walkyng on the earth as it was seen and known of many a man And
yet that northren wynd^ that is ever ready and destinat to all evil fro seint
katerines even till iij. days after lost good without nombre unrecoverable
And in the same days there fill and comen also such lightnynges thundre snow
and haille that it wasted and destroyed men bestes houses and trees.

Of the bataille of spain besides the water of Nazers that waz bitwene the
prince Edward and sir Henry bastard of spain Capitulo CC.xxxiij.
IN the year of our lord M.CCC.lxvij. and of king Edward xlij. the iij. day of
April there was a strong battaill and a great in a large field y called
Priazers fast by the water of Nazers in spain bitwene sir Edward the prince
and Henry the bastard of spaigne but the victory fell to prince edward by the
grace of god And this same prince Edward had with him sir ^ohan duke of
lancastre his brother and other worthy men of arms about the nombre of xxx.M.
And the king of spain had on his side men of diverse nations to tho nombre of
an C.M. and passing wherefore the sharpness and fersenesse of his adversary
with his full boystous and great strength maden and driven the rightful pertie
a bak a great way but through the grace of almighty god passing any mannys
strenght that huge host was disparbled myt fully by the noble duke of
lancastre and his host or that the prince Edward come nygh him And when Henry
the bastard saw that he turned with his men in so great haste and strength t^
fle^ / that an houge company of he^ in the forsaid flode / and of the brugge
there of fyllen down and perisshed And also there were take the Earl of Dene and
Sir Bartram Cleykyn that was chief maker and cause of the werre and also
ch^^etayne of the va^u^t ward of the bataille with many other great lords and
knights to the nombre of two thousand of whom two houndred were of F^^^nce /
and many also of Scotland And there were felled in the field on our enemies
side of lords and knights with other me ne people to the nombre of vj.
thousand and moo / and of Englissh men but a few And after this The noble
Prince Edward restored the same Piers in to his kingdom ayene / the which
pier^ afterward through treachery and falsenesse of the forsaid bastard of
Spaynt as he sete at his mete was strangled and deide But after this v^ctorie
many noble and hardy men and noble of england in Spain through the (...) and
other diverse sikenesse token her death And in the same year in the March was
seyne Stella Comata bitwene the Northcostes and the weste whose bemes stre^ched
toward france And in the year next suyng of king Edwardes regne xliij. in
April Sir Leonell king Edwardes sone that was duke of Clarence went toward
Mileyn^ with a chose meyne of the gentiles of England for to wedde Galoys
daughter and have her to wife by whom he should have half the lordshippe of
Mileyne / But after that they were solempnely wedded and about the Natiuite of
our lady the same duke of Mileyne deide / and in the same year the frensshmen
breken the pees / and the trews ridynge on the kings ground and lordshippe of
England in the shire and contre of Pountife / and token and held Cast^l^s and
tounes / and bear the Englisshmen on hand falfely and sotelly / that they were
canse of brekyng^ of the trews /

And in this same year deide the duchess of lancastre / And is buried
wurshipfully in seint Paul's church The xliiij. year of king Edwardes regne
was the gretest Pestilen^^ of me^ and of great bestes and by the great falling
of watres that fylle at that time / there fill great hyndryng and destroieng of
Corn in s^ much that the next year after a buss^^lle of whete was sold for
xl. (...) And in the same year about the lost end of May king Edward held
tho his parliament at westmynstre in the which parliament was treted and spoke
of the oath and the t^^ws that was broke bitwene him and the king of france
and how he myt best upon his wrong be a^^nged In this same year in the
assumpcione of our lady died queen Philipp of England a full noble and good
woman and at westmynster full wurshipfully is buried and entered and about
midsomer the duke of lancastre and the Earl of herford with a great company of
knights wenten in to france where they get hem but a litell wurshipp and name
For there was a huge oost of frensshmen upon chalkhull brigge and an other host
of Englissh men fast by the same brygge that long time had leyne there And
many worthy men and great of the englishmen ordained and yafe cou^ceill for to
fight and give bataille to the frenshmen But the forsaid lords would no thing
consent there to ne assent for no manner thing

There anon after it happed y^ the earl of warrewyke come thidderward for to
werre and when the frenshmen herd of his coming or that he come fullych to
land they left her tents and pauylous with all her vitailles and fledden and
went awey privily And when the Earl was comen to land with his men he went in
all have toward normandy and destroyed the I Will of Caws through dynt of swerd
and through fire But Allas in his retournyng to england ward home ayene at
Caleys he was take with sykenesse of pestilence and died not leuyng behind him
after his days so noble a knyt and orped of arms In which time reigned and
werred thilke orped knight Sir Johan hawkewode that was an Englisshma^ lorne
having with him at his governance thilke white company that is before y
ne^pned the which o time ayens holy church and an other time ayens lords
werred and ordained great batailles and there in that co^tre he did many
merueilous things And about the Conversion of seint Paul y^ king when he had
ended and done the enteryng and the exe quies with great costs and rialt^es
about the sepulture and berieng of queen philipp his wife he held ^is
parliament at westmynster in which parliament was axed of the clergy a three
years disme y^ is for to seyne a great dyme to be paid iij. year during And
the clergy put it of and would not granted un to Estre next coming and than
they granted well that in iij. year by certain terms that disme should be
paid And also of the lay fee was a iij. years xv. y granted to the king

How Sir Robert knolles with other certain lords of the Reame went over the sea in to france And of her governance Capitulo CC.xxxiiij.
ANd in the xlv. year of king Edward in the beginning king Edward with unwise
counceill and indiscreet borewed a great sum of gold of the prelatz lords
marchantz and other rich men of his reame seyeng that it should be dispended in
defendyng of holy church and of his reame Neuerthe latter it profited nouzt
wherefore about midsomer after he made a great host of the worthiest men of his
reame Among whom were some lords that is for to say the lord fitzwater and
the lord graunson and other worthy knights of which knights the king
ordained Sir Robert knolles a proved knight and a well assaied in deed of arms
for to be governor and that through his cou^ceill and governance all thing
should be governed and dressed And when they comen in to france as long as
they duelled and held hem hole to gedre the frenshmen durst not fall upon hem
And at the last about the beginning of winter for envy and couetize that was
among^s hem And also discord they sondred and parted hem in to diverse
companies unwisely and folily But sir Robert knolles and his men wenten and
kepten hem sauf withyn a Castle in Britaigne And when the frenshmen saw that
our men were divided in to diverse companies and places not holdyng ne
stre^gthing hem to gedres as they ought for to do they fyllen fersely on our
men And for the most party took hem or slowen hem and tho that they took led
with hem prisoners And in the same year Pope urban come fro Rome to Auinione
for e^cheson and cause that he should acord and make pees bitwene the king of
France and the king of England for evermore but Allas or he began his tretes
he died with sikenes the xxj. day of decembre and was y buried as for the time
in the Cathedral church of Auinione fast by the high autar And the next year
after when he had leyne so his bones were taken out of the earth and beried
new in the abbey of Seint V^ctour fast by marale of the which Abbey he was
some time Abbot him self And in both places that he was buried in there be many
great miracles done and wrought through the grace of god almighty to many a
man's help and to the wurshipp of Almighty god.

And after whom folewed next and was made Pope Gregory Cardinal Deken that
before was called Piers^Rogier

In the same year the Cite of Lymoge rebelled and faught ayens the Prince as
other Citees in Gnyhenne did for great taxes costages and raunsomes that they
were put and set to by Prince Edward which charges weren ^nportable and to
charg^able where for they turned fro him and fillen to the king of france And
when Prince Edward saw this he was sore a chafed and grieved / and in turnyng
homward ayene in to england with sore skarmysshes and fight^ng and great
assautes fought with hem and took the forsaid Cite and destroyed it almost to
the ground and slow all that were found in the Cite And than for to say the
sothe for diverse sikenesse and maladies that he had and also for defaute of
money that he not might withsto^de ne tarry on his enemies he hied him ayene in
to england with his wife and his meyne leuyng behind him in Gascoyne the duke
of lancastre and sir Edmond earl of Cambrigge with other worthy and orped m^n
of arms In the xlvj. year of king Edward at the ordinance and sendyng of king
Edward the king of Nauerne come to him to Claringdon to trete with him of
certain things touching his werre in Normandy where king Edward had left
certain seges in his stead till he come ayene / but king Edward might not
speed of that / that he asked of him / And so the king of Nau^rne with great
wurshipp and great yiftes took his leave and went home ayene And about the
beginning of march / when the perlement at westmynstre was bego^ne the king
asked of the clergy a subsidy of.l.M. pound the which by a good auisement
and by a general co^uocacion of the clergy it was granted and ordained that
it should be paid and raised of the lay fee And in this perlement at the request
and askyng of the lords in haterede of men of holy church / the Chaunceler and
the tresorer that were bisshoppes and the clerk of the prive seal were remeued
and put out of office and in her stead were seculer men put in / And while this
perlement lasted there come solemn embassatours y sent fro the pope to trete
with the king of pees / and saiden that the pope desired to fullfyll his
predecessors will / but for all her coming they sped not of her p^rpose

Of the besegyng of Rochell and how the earl of Penbroke and his company was
there y take in the haven with spaynardes and all his vessels y brent
Ca.cc.xxxv
THe ix. day of ^uyne king edward in the xlvij. year of his regne held his
perlement at wynchestre and it lasted but viij. days to the perlement were
sompned by write of me^ of holy church iiij. bisshoppes and iiij. abbotes
without any mo / This perlement was holden for marchauntz of london of Norwych
And of other diverse places in diverse things and points of treson that they
were diffamed of / that is for to say that they were rebelle and would rise
ayens the king This same year the duke of lancastre and the Earl of Cambrigge
his brother comen out of Gascoigne in to England and token and wedded to her
wifes Petres doughtres some time king of spain Of which ij. doughtres the duke
had the Elder and the Earl the younger And that same time there were sent ij.
Cardinals fro the Pope that is to say an English Cardinal and a Cardinal of
Paris to trete of pees bitwene the ij. reames the which when they had been both
long each in his provinces and in places and contres fast by tretyng of the
forsaid pees at y^ last they took with hem her lr^ez of procuracie and went
ayene to y^ court of Rome ward without any effect of her purpose In this year
also there was a strong bataille on the sea bitwene englishmen and flem mynges
and the englishmen had the victory and token xxv. ships y charged with salt
sleyeng and dre^chyng all the men that were theryn vnwityng hem that they were
of that contre And redely much harm had fall by cause there of ne had pees and
accord the so^ner bitwene hem And in this same year the frenshmen beseged the
town of the Rochell wherefore he earl of penbroke was sent in to gascoyne with a
great company of men of arms for to destroy the siege he which passed he see
and comen sauf to the haven of rochell and when they were there at the haven
mouth or that they myt enter suddenly come upon hem a strong nauye of spain
the which o^come tho the englismen in much blemyshyng hurtyng and sleyng of
many persons for as much as the englishmen were not than ready for to fight ne
ware of hem And in the coming upon of the spaynardes all the englishmen other
they were take or slain and x of hem were wounded to the death and all her
ships y brent and there they took the earl with an huge tresour of the reame
of england and many other noble me also on midsomer even the which is seint
Edeldredes day and ledden hem with he^ in to spaigne And of this meschief was
no great wonder for this earl was a full evil liver as on open lechour And
also in a certain perlement he stood and was against the rightes and
fraunchises of holy church And also he cou^ceilled the king and his cou^ceill
that he should ax more of men of holy church than of other persons of the lay
fee. And for the king and other of his counceill accepted and token rather
evil opinions and causes ayens men of holy chirch than he did for to defend
and maynten the right of holy church it was seen many times after for lak of
fortune and grace they had not ne bear awey so great victory ne power ayens
her enemies as they did before This san^ year the king with a great host entered
the sea to remeue the sege of Rochell But the wind was even contrary un t^
him and suffered him not long time to go far fro the land wherefore he a^ode a
certain yt me upon the sea costs abydyng after a good wind for hem and yet
come it not / So at the last he come thens with his men to land ward ayene /
and anon as he was a land the wind began to turn and was in an other cost
than he was in before

How the duke of lancastre with a great host went in to flaundres and passed
by Paris through Burgoyne and through all france till he come to Burdeux
Ca.cc.xxxvj
SOne after in the xlviij. year of the regne of king Edward the duke of
lancastre with a great host went in to flaundres and passed by paris through
Burgoyne and through all france till he come to Burdeux without any manner
withsto^ding of the frensshmen and he did hem but litell harm save he took and
raunsoned many places and tounes and many men and bet hem after gone freely The
same year the king sent certain embassatours to the pope prayeng him that he
should leave of and meddle not in his court of the kepinges and reseruacions of
benefices in england / and that tho that were chose to bisshoppes sees and
dignitees freely and with full right myt Joy and have and be co^fermed to the
same of her metropolitanes and erchebisshoppes as they were wont to be of old
time Of thees points and of other touching the king and his reame when they
had her ansuere of the pope / the pope euioyned hem that they should certify
him ayene by her lr^ez of the kings will and of his reame or they determined
ought of the forsaid articles / In the same year deide Johan the Erchebisshopp
of york Johan bisshopp of Ely / william bisshopp of wurcestre In whose stedes
followed and were made bisshoppes by auctorite of the pope Mastir Alisaundre
neuyll to the Erchebisshopprich of york Thomas of Arundell to the bisshopprich
of Ely / and sir henry wakefeld to the bisshopprich of wurcestre In the which
time it waz ordained in the perlement that all Cathedral churches should Joy
and have her elections hool and that the king fro that time afterward should not
write ayens hem that were y chosen but rather help he^ by his lr^ez to her
confirmacion And this statute was kept and did much profit and good And in
this perlement was granted to the king a dysme of the clergy and a xv. of lay
fee The next year after of king Edward xlix. the xv. day of Iuyne deide mastir
william witlesey Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury wherefore the monks of the same
church asked and desired a Cardinal of england to be Erchebisshopp And therefore
the king was agreued and had meant and purposed to have exiled the monks of the
same house And so they spended much good or they might have the kings grace
ayene and his love but yet would the king not consent ne grant to her election
of the Cardinal ne the Pope also ne his Cardinals And about the ^e gynnyng of
August it was treted and spoken at bruges of certeyn^ pointz and articles
hangyng bitwene the pope and the king of e^glond and this tretys last all most
ij. year At the last it was accorded bitwene hem that the Pope fro that time
forth should not use ne dele with the reseruacions of benefices in england and
that the king should not grant ne let no benefices by his write that is called
Quare impedit But as touching the Elections above said there was no thing
touchid ne do And that was y wyted and put upon certain clerks the which
rather supposed and hoped to be avaunced and promoted to bisshopriches which
they desired and coueited by the court of Rome rather than by any elections
This same year about candelmass^ there met to gedres at Bruges many noble and
worthy men of both reames to trece of pees bitwene tho ij. kyngdoms And this
tretys lasted ij. year with great costs and houge expense of both perties And
at the last they went and departed thens without any aocord or effect The next
year after the.l. year of king Edward iiij. Non^ of May being yet void and
vacant the Erchebisshopriche of caunterbury mastir Symond sudbery bisshopp of
london was made Erchebisshoppe And master william Courteney that was bisshopp
of he^eford was than made bisshopp of london and the bisshopp of Bangore was
made bisshopp of hereford And this same time in a certain tretis and spekyng
of pees trews was take bitwene france and England fro midsomer to midsomer
come ayene all an hole year And about the beginning of April the duke of
Britaigne with many Earls barons and other worthy men of England went over see
in to Britaigne where he has had all his lust desire and purpose ne had the
forsaid trews be so sone y take the which let hem much This same time the
I Will of Constantine where that the Castle of Seint Savor is in that long time
was fought at and beseged of the frenshmen was than yolden to the frenshmen
with ^ll the Apportenaunces in to great harm and hyndryng of the Reame of
England And this same year there were so great and so passing hetes and there
with all a great pestilence in England and in other diverse parties of the
world that it destroyed and slow violently and strongly both men and women
without nombre This same year died Sir Edward the lord spencer a worthy
knight and a bold And in the mynster of Tarkesbury wurshipfully is buried And
lasting this pestilence y^ pope at the instaunce and prayer of an englissh
Cardinal granted to all people that deide in england that were sorry and
repentant for her sins and also shriuen full remission by ij. bull^s under
leed vj. mo^thes than next to last In this same year the Earl of Penbroke was
take and raunsoned by bartram Cleykin bitwene paris and Caleis as he come
toward england upon seint Etheldredes day the which seint as it was said the
same Earl often times had offended / and within a while after he deide / And in
nouembre next after there met at bruges the duke of lancastre and the duke of
Angoy with many other lords and prelatz of both reames for to tret^ of pe^s

Of the death of prince Edward and of the lord latime^ and dame Alice peers
through whom and her mayntenou^s the reame meny a day was mysgouerned
Ca.CCxxxvij.
NOt long after the lj. year of king Edward is r^gne be let ordeyne and hold
at westmynstre the gretest perlement y^ was seen many ayere before In the which
perlement be ax^d of the comminal^e of the reame as he had done before a great
sub^d^ to be granted to him for defending of him and of his reame but the
co^munes ansuerd that they were so often day by day grieved and changed with so
many talliages and subsidies that they might no benger suffer no such burthous
and charges / And that they knewen and wiste^ well that the king had y now for
saving of him and of his reame if the reame were well and truly governed / but
that it had be so long evil y governed by evil officers / that the reame myt
nethir be plenteuous of chaffare and merchandise ne also with ri^^hesse / And
these things they profred hem self / it the king would certainly to (...) and
stond by And if it were found and preued after that / that the king had need /
they would than gladly every man after his power and state him help and been
And after this there were publisshed and showed in the perlement many pleintes
and defautes of diverse officers of the reame and namely of the lord latimer
the kings Chamburleyne both to the king and eke to the reame And also at the
last there was spoken and treted of dame Alice Peers for the great wrongs and
evil gouernounce that was done by her and by her counceill in the reame / the
which dame Alice Peers the king had hold long time to his lemman / wherefore it
was the less wonder though through the freelte of the womannys (...) and her
stering he consented to her lewdness and euelle counceille the which dame
Alice and also the lord latimere and other such that stered y^ king to evil
governance ayens his profit and the reames also all the commalte axed and
desired that they should be meued and put away and in her stedes wise men and
worthy that weren true and well assaied and proved and of good go^naunce should
be put in her stedes So among all other there was one among the co^munes y^
was a wise knyt and a true and an eloquent man whose name was Piers de la mare
And this same piers was chosen to be speker for the co^munes in the perlement
And for this same piers told and publisshed the truth and rehearsed the
wrongs ayens the forsaid dame Alice and other certain persons and the kings
counceill as he was bode by the co^es And also trust^g much for to be supported
and mayntened in this matter by help and favor of the prince Anon as the
Prince was deed at the insta^ce and request of the forsaid dame Alice this
Piers de la mare waz Iugged to perpetual prison in the castle of Noting^^ in
the which he was ij. year and in the vj. Kal. of Iuyll lasting that same
perlement died prince Edward king edwardes first sone that is to say in trinite
sunday in the wurshipp of which feste he was wont every year where that ever he
were in the world to make and hold the most solempnite that he myt whose name
and fortune of knyghthode but if it had be of an other Ectour all men both
christian and he^hen while he lived and was in good point wondered much and drad
him wonder sore whose body is wurshippfully y buried in Crichyrch at Canterbury
And in this same year the men and the earls tenauntes of warrewyk arisen
maliciously ayens the Abbot and covent of Euesham and her tenauntz and
destroyed fersely the abbot and the town and wounded and bet her men and
slowen of hem many one And wenten to her manners and places and did much harm
and breken down her parkes and her closes and brenten and slowen her wild
bestes and cha^ed hem brekyng her fisshpon de hedes and let the water of her
pondes stews and rivers run out and token the fissh and bear it with hem And
did hem all the harm that they might In so ferforth that forsooth they had
destroyed perpetuelly that Abbey with all her members and apportenau^ces but if
the king the so^ner had helped it and take heed there to And therefore the king
sent his lr^ez to the Earl of war^ewyke chargyng him and co^maundyng that he
should stynt redress and amend tho evil doers and brekers of his pees And so
by menys of lords and other friends of both sides pees and good accord and
love was made bitwene hem And for this hurlyng as it was said the king would
not be governed at that time by his lords that there were in the parliament but
he took and made his sone the duke of lancastre his governor of the reame the
which stood so still as governor till the time that he deide The same year
anon after Candelmasse or the parliament was do the king asked a subsidy of
the clergy and of the lay fee / and it was granted him that is for to say
that he should have of enery person of the lay fee both of man and woman that
passed xiiij. year age iiij. pens outake pour beggars that were know openly
for nedy pour beggars / And that he should have of every man of holy church
that was beneficed or promoted xij. pens / and of all other that were not
promoted iiij. pens out take the un ordres of the freris beggars

This same year after mihelmasse Richard Prince Edwardes sone was made prince
of walys to whom the king yaf also y^ duchy of Cornewaille with the Erledome
of C^estre And about this tym^ the Cardinal of england the iiij. day before
marie magdaleyne day after mete suddenly was smyten and take with a palasie and
lost his speech and on marie magdaleyne day he deide

Of the death of king Edward and sir Johan monster worth knight was draw and
honged for his falsenes Ca.cc.xxxv.ij.
RIght anon after in the lij. year of king Edward in the beginning of Octobre
Pope Gregory the xj. brought and remeued his court with him from auinion to
rome / And the xij. day of April Johan Monsterworth knight at london was draw
honged and than beheded and aft his body quartred and sent to iiij chief tounes
of england and his head set upon london ^^^gge / for this same Johan was full
untrue to the king and to the reame and full covetous and unstable / for he
took often times great sommes of money of the king and his counceill for me^ of
arms wages that he should have paid hem / and took it to his own use and he
dreding that at the last he should be shent and accused for the same cause
fled preuely to the king of frauuce and was swore to him and become his man
and behight him a great nauye out of Spain in to confusion and destroieng of
england / b^t rightful god to whom no priuite is unknow suffered him ferst to
be shend and spilt or that he so traitouresly and falsely his (...) lord the
king of england and his people and his reame in the which ground the same
Johan was bore wykkedly through bataille destroy or bring his cursed purpose
about In the fest of seint Gregory tho next after king Edward yafe to Richard
of Bur^eux his he^re that was Prince Edwardes sone / at wyndesore the order of
knyghthode and made him knight the which king Edward when he had reigned lj.
year and more the xj. kal. of Iuyne he deide at Shene and is buried
wurshipfully at westmynstre on who^ soul god have mercy Amen^ This king Edward
was for sothe of a passing goodness and full gracious among all the worthy
men of the world for he passed and shone by virtue of grace y you to him fro
god above all his predecessors that were noble me^ and worthy / and he was a
well and a hardy herted man / for he dread never of no myshappes ne harme^ ne
evil fortune that myt fall a noble werriour and a fortunat / for both on land
and on see and in all batailles and assembles with a passing glory and Joy he
had (...) the victory he was meke and benyngne homely sobre and soft to all
manner of men as well to stra^giers as to his ow^ subg^ttes and to other that
were under his governance / he was deuote and holy both to god and to holy
church / for he wurshipped halpe and mayntened holy church and her ministres
with all manner reuer^^^ he was tretable and well auised in temperall and wordly
needs wise in counceill and discrete soft and meke and good to speak with In
his deeds and manners full gentill and well y taught having pite of hem that
were in disese / plenteuous in yeuyng benefaites and alms / besy and
curiouse in bildyng / and full ligh^^^^ he here and suffered wrongs and harms
And when he was give to any occupacion he left all other thing for the mean
time and tent there to / s^mely of body and a mean stature having all wey to
high and to low a good chere And there sprange and shone so much grace of him /
that what manner man had behold his face or had dremed of him he hoped that day
that all thing should hap to him Ioyefull and likyng And he governed
gloriousely his kingdom un to his age he was large in yeuyng and wise in
spences he was fullfylled with all honest of good manners and virtues / under
whom to live it was as for to regne wherefore his fame and his loose sprange so
far that it come in to hethnesse and barbary showing and telling his
worthiness and manhood in all lands and that no land under heaven had brought
forth so noble king so gentille and so blessed / or might reise such an other
when he were deed

Never the latter lechery and meuyng of his flessh haunted him in his age
wherefore the rather as it is to suppose for un mesurable fulfyllyng of his lust
his life shorted the sonner And here of take good head like as his deeds before
^ere witness / for as in his beginning all things were Ioifull and likyng to
him and to all people And in his mydde age ^e passed all people in high Io^e
wurshippe and blessedness / right so when he drew in to ag^ drawyng dounward
through lechery and other sins litell and litell all tho Ioyefull and
blessed things and prosperity decreced and myshapped and infortunat things
and unprofitable harms with many euelles began for to spring and the more
harm is hit continued long time after

And after king Edward the iiij. that was borne in wind sore reigned Richard of
burdeux that was prince Edwardes sone of walys which prince Edward was the sone
of king Edward Capitulo ducentesimo quadragesimo
ANd after the good king Edward the iij. that was bore at wyndesore reigned
Richard the ij. that was the good sir edwardes sone prince of walys which king
Richard was borne in the Cite of Burdeux in Gascoyne and was crouned at west
mynster in the xj. year of his age And in the second year of his regne for
debate that was bitwene the lord latimer and sir rauf feriers knight that weren
ayens hawell and shakell squyers for the prisoner that was take in the bataille
of spain by these ij. squyers And y^ which the lord latimer and sir rauf
ferriers would have had the which prisoner was the earl of dene that they took
in the bataille of spayn^ wherefore these ij. lords comen in to the church at
westmynster and fond this one squire heryng his mass beside seint Edwardes
shryne and there they slow him the which was called hawell And Shakell was
arested and put in the tour of london And there he was long time for he would
not deliver the Earl of Dene his prisoner un to thees ij. lords by sir Aleyn
Buxhill constable of the tour And by sir rauf ferriers one of his adversaries
till the king granted him grace In the iij. year of king Richard come the
galeys of france in to england un to diverse ports and brent and robbed and
slow much people of England that is to say at wynchelsee Rye and hasting
Portesmouthe hampton stormore and g^auesende and deden much harm and went home
ayene And in this same year was a parliament hold at westmynster And at that
parliament was ordained that every man woman and child that weren at the age of
xiiij. year and above through out all the reame pore folk and other should pay
to the tallage iiij. pens Wherefore come and befell afterward great meschief and
much disese to all the cominalte of the reame

And in the iiij. year of king Richardes regne yt co^munes arisen up in di^se
perties of the reame and didden much harm the which they called the hurlyng
time And they of kent and of estsex made he^ ij chyueteyns to rule and go^ne
the company of kent and of estsexe That one was called Iakke straw and that
other wat tiler And they comen and ^ssembled hem upon the blake heth in kent /
And on the corpus xp^ day and after they comen down in suthwerk and breken up
the prison house / that is to say the kings benche and the marchalfie and
delivered out all the prisoners And so the same day they come in to london and
there they robbeden the people and slow all ali^ntz that they myt find in the
Cite and about the cite and de^poiled all her goods and made ^auoke / And on
the friday next after that was on the morn And they come than to the tour of
london and the king being therein they ^et out of the tour the Erchebisshopp of
Caunterbury Sir edmond sudbery and sir Robert halys hospitaler priour and
masti^ of seint Iohanes house And a white fe^re that was confessor to king
Richard and brought hem un to the toure and there they smyt^n of her hedes and
come ayene to london and slow m^^ people of men of law and other worthy men in
diverse parties of the Cite And than they went un to the dukes place of
lancastre beyond seint Mary second that was called the sauoy And there they
devoured and destroyed all the goods that they myt find there and bare hem
away and brent up the place And than after they went to seint Iohanes without
smythfeld and destroyed the goods there and brent up that house / and went to
westmynstre and seint Martins grant and made hem gone out of the seintewarie
all that were within for any manner of Grith And then come un to the Temple and
to all other ynnes of men of law and despoiled hem and robbed hem of her
go^des and also tare her books of law / and than (...) come to london and
brake up the prison of newgate and drofe out all the prisoners (...) (...) and
other / and of both countours and all the people tha^ (...) within hem and
destroyed all the books of both councers And thus they continued both
satirday and sunday un to the monday next after in all her malice and wikked
^esse And than on the mo^day kyn^ Richard with his lords that were with him
that time / and with the maire of london william walworth that was that time
come with the alderma^ and the communes of the Cite and come in to south w^rke
to here and to know the entencion of these rebels and mysgouerned people /
And this Iake stawe than made an oye in the ^^ld that all the people of accord
should come nere and here his clamours and his cri^ and his will And the lords
and the (...) and the ald^^men with the cominalte having indignacion of his
(...) and falsenesse and his fou^e presumpcion And anon william walworth that
time being Maire (...) out his knyfe and slow Ia^ (...) / and anon right there
did smite of his head and set hit upon a sp^re shaft and so it was lo^re
through london and set an high upon london brigge Anon as thees risers and
misgouerned me^ were void and clean vanysshed as it had nouzt be they And
than the king of his great goodness and by p^^aier of his lords made there
vj. knights of good and worthy men of the Cite of london. that is to say
william walworth that that time was maire and slow Iak straw And the second
was Nicholas brembre and the iij. Johan philipot and the iiij. Nicholas Twiford
and the v. Robert laundes The vj. Robert gayton And than the king with his
lords and his knights returned ayene un to the tour of london and there he
rested him till this people were better seced and set in rest and pees And
than by process of time as they myt get and take thees rebels and risers
they henge hem upon the next gale was in every lordshipp through out the reame
of england by xl. and by xxx. be x and by xij. e^ as they myt be geten and
taken in any perties And in the v. year of king Richardes regne was the great
^rthe quake and was generally through out the world the w^denesday after
whitsonday in the year of our lord M.CCC.lxxxxi. whereof all manner people were
sore aghast and dreadful long time for dread of vengeance that our lord showed
and did And in the vi. year of the regne of king Richard Sir Henry spencer
bisshopp of Norwiche went with a Croiserie over the sea in to the contre of
Flaundres And there they gate the town of Gra^ening and the town of Broburgh
Dunkerk and Newport and there they laded and fraught lj. ships with pelage for
to have comen in to England with these ships and goods And the bisshopp of
Norwyche and his counceill let brenne these ships with all the pelage in the
same haue^ all in to hard ashes And at Du^kerke was done a great bataille
bitwene the flemmynges and the Englisshmen And at that bataille was slain a
great multitude of these flemmynges and an houge nombre And than went the
bisshopp with his retenewe un to Ypres and beseged it a long time but it might
not be gotten And so he left that siege and come ayene in to England For our
Englisshmen were foull destroyed and many died on the flix And in this same
year come Queen Anne in to England for to be spoused un to king Richard And her
fadre was Emperor of Almaigne And king of beme And with her come the duke of
Tassy her uncle and many other worthy lords and knights of her contre of beme
and of other duche tongues ^o do her reverence and wurshipp And sir simond
beuerle a worthy knight of the garter and other knights and squyers that weren
the kings embassatours brought in to england and so forth to london And the
people of the Cite that is say the mayre and the aldermen and all the co^munes
ridden ayens her to welcome her and every man in good array and every craft
with his mynstralsie in the best manner met with her on the blake heth in kent
and so brought her un to london through the Cite and so forth un to westmynstre
un to the kings paleys / And there she was spoused un to king Richard well and
worthily in the abbey of westmynstre and there she was crouned Queen of england
/ And all her friends that come with her had great yiftes and weren well
chered and refresshed as long time as they abbiden here And in this same year
was a bataill done in the kings paleys at westmynstre for certain points of
treson bitwene sir Johan Ansley knight defendant / and Carton squire the
appellaunt / But this Sir Johan of Ansley overcome this Carton / and made him
to yield him within the lystes And anon was this Carton despoiled of his
harneis and draw out of the listes and so forth to Tiborne and there he was
honged for his falsenesse And in the viij. year of the regne of king Richard
Sir Edmond of langeley Earl of Cambrigge the kings uncle went in to
portingale with a fair meyne of me^ of arms and archiers in strengthyng and
helpyug of the king of Portingale ayens the king of Spain and his power / And
there the king of portingale had the victory of his enemies through help and
comfort of our Englisshmen^ And when that Journey was done the Earl of
Cambrigge come home ayene with his people in to England in haste blessed be god
and his gracious yift Amen

And this same year king Richard held his cristemasse in the manner of Eltham
And the same time the king of Ermoyne fled out of his own land and come in
to England for to have socour and help of our king ayens his enemies that had
driven him out of his Royame And so he was brought un to the king to Eltham
there as the king held his riall feste of Castemasse /

And there our king welcomed him and did him much reverence and wurshipp and
commanded all his lords to make him all the chere that they could / And than
he besought the king of grace and of help and of his comfort in his need / And
that he might be brought ayene to his kingdom and land / For the Tu^kes had
devoured and destroyed much part of his land / and for d^^de how he fled
and come hidder for socour and help /

And the king then having pite and compassion of his great meschief and
grevous disese anon he took his counceill and asked what was best to done And
they ansuerd and said yif it lyked him to give him any good hit were well y do
And as touching his people to trauaill so far in to out lands it were a
great iuperdie And so the king yafe him gold and silver and many rich yiftes
and Iewelles and betaught him to god And so he passed ayene out of England And
in this same year king Richard with a riall power went in to Scotland for to
werre upon the Scotts for the falsenesse and destruction that the Scotts had
done un to englishmen in the marches And than the scotts come down un to the
king for to entrete with him and with his lords for trews as for certain
years And so our king and his cou^ceill granted hem trews certain years un to
her askyng And our king turned him home ayene in to england And when he was
come un to york there he abode and rested him there And there sir Johan holand
the Earl of kentes brother slow the earls sone of stafford and his heir with a
daggar in the Cite of york wherefore the king was sore ameued and grieved and
remeued thens and come to london And the maire with the aldermen and the
co^munes with all the solempnite that might be don^riden ayens the king and
brought him rially through the Cite and so forth un to westmynster un to his
own Paleys And in the ix. year of king Richardis regne he held a parliament at
westmynster and there he made ij. dukes and a marqueyes and v. Earls.

The first that was made duke was the kings uncle Sir Edmond of langlec Earl
of Cambrigge and him he made duke of yo^k And his other uncle Sir Thomas of
wodestoke that was earl of Bukkyngham him he made duke of Gloucestre And sir
Lyone veer that was earl of Oxu^ford him he made markeys of dyuelyn^ And Henry
of Bolyngbroke the dukes sone of lancastre him he made Earl of Derby And Sir
Edward the dukes sone of york him he made Earl of Ruttelond Sir Johan holand
that was the Earl of kentes brother him he made Earl of huntyngdon Sir Thomas
Mombray Earl of Notyngham and Earl Marchall of England And Sir Michell de la
pole knight him he made Earl of south folk and Chaunceler of England

And the Earl of the march at that same parliament holden at westmynster in
plain parliament among all the lords and communes was proclaimed Earl of the
march and heir Ap^ant to the croune of England after king Richard the which
Earl of the march went over see in to Irland un to his lordshippes and and
lands / for the earl of the march is earl of vlster in Irland and be right
line and heritage / And there at the castle of his he lay that time And there
come upon him a great multitude in busshemetis of wild Iashmen him for to take
and destroy And he come out fetsely of his costell with his people and manly
faught with hem / and there he was take and hew all to pieces and there he deide
on whose soul god have mercy Amen And in the x. year of kyug Richardes regne /
the Earl of Arundell went un to the sea with a great nauye of ships enarmed
with men of arms / and good archiers And when they come in to the broad see
they met with the hole flete that comen with wine y lade from Rochell the
which wine were enemies goods / And there our nauye set upon hem and took hem
all and brought hem un to diverse ports and hauenes of england / and some to
london and there ye myt have had a tonne of Rochell wine of the best for xx.
shillyng sterlinges and so we had great chepe of wine through out the Reame at
that time thanked be god almighty

How the v. lords arisen at Rattecotte brigge Ca.cc.xlj.
ANd in the regne of king Richard the xj. year the v. lords a risen at
Rattecot brigge in the destruction of rebels that weren that time in all the
reame The first of the v. lords was sir Thomas of wodestoke the kings uncle /
and duke of Gloucestre / and the second was sir Richard earl of Arundell / and
the iij. was sir Richard earl of warrewyke / the iiij. was sir Henry bolingbrok
earl of derby / the v. was sir Thomas Mombray earl of Notingham And these v.
lords saw the meschief and mysgouernaunce and the falsenesse of the kings
counceill / wherefore they that weren that time chief of the kings counceill
fledden out of this land over the sea that is to say Sir Alisaundre neuill the
Erchebisshop of york and Sir Robert le veer markeys of deuelyn and earl of
Oxenford / and Sir Michell de la Pole Earl of southfolke and Chaunceler of
england And these iij. lords wenten over the sea / and come never ayene for
there they deide And than these v. lords above said maden a parliament at
westmynstre / And there they took Sir Robert Tresilian the Justice and Sir
Nichall Brembre knight and Citezeyne of london and Sir Johan Salisbury knight
of the kings hou^hold and vske sergeant of arms and many moo of other people
weren take and Iugged un to the death by the counceille of these v. lords in
her parliament at westmynstre for treson that they put upon hem to be drawn
from the toure of london through out the Cite and so forth un to Tyburne and
there they should be hanged and there her throtes to be cut and thus they were
served and died And after that in this same perlement at westmynster was sir
Symond Beuerlee that was a knight of the garter and Sir Johan Beaucham^ knyt
that was stiward of the kings housold and sir James Berners were foriugged un
to the death and than they were lad on foot to the toure hill and there weren
her hedes smyten of and many other mo by these v. lords In this same parliament
and in the xij year of king Richardes regne he let cry and ordeyne a general
Iustes that is called a turneme^t of lords knights and squyers And this
Iustes and turnement was hold at london in smythfeld of all manner of
strangiers of what land or contre that ever they were and thidder they were
right welcome and to hem and to all other was holden open housold And great
festes and also great yiftes weren yeuen to all manner of strangiers.

And of the kings side weren all of suit her cotes her armure sheldes horse
trappure And all was white hertes with crounes about her nekkes and chains of
gold hangyng there upon and the croune hangyng low before the hertes body the
which heart was the kings livery that he yafe to lords and ladies knights and
squyers for to know his housold from other people And in this fest coming to
her Iustes xxiiij. ladies lad these xxiiij. lords of the garther with cheynes
of gold And all the same suit of hertes as is a fore said from the tour an
horsebak through the cite of london in to smythfeld there that the Iustes should
be hold And this feste and Iustes was hold general and to all tho that would
come of what land and nation that ever they were And this was hold during
xxiiij. days of the kyngis cost And thees xxiiij. lords to a^suere all manner
people that would come thidder And thidder come the Earl of seint Poul of france
and many other worthy knights with him of diverse parties full well araied and
out of holand and henaud come the lord Ostreuaunt that was the dukes sone of
holand and many other worthy knights with him of holand and full well araied
And when this feste and Iustes was ended he king thanked these straungiers and
yafe hem many great yiftes And than they token her leave of the king and of
other lords and ladies and wenten home ayene in to her own contre with great
love and much thank And in the xiij. year of king Richardes regne there was a
ba. taille done in the kings Paleys at westmynster bitwene a sauyer of Nuaerue
that was with the king Richard And an other Squire that was called Johan walshe
for points of treson that this na^ne put upon this walshma^ / but this na^ne
was o^com^ and yield him creaunt to his ad^sarie And anon^ he was despoiled of
his armure and draw out of the Paleys to tibourne and there was hanged for
his falsenesse And the xiiij. year of king Richardes regne sir Johan of Gaunte
duke of lancastre went over the sea in to spain for to challenge his rihgt that
he had by his wyfes title un to the croune of spain with a great host of people
of men of arms and archrers And he had with him the duchess his wife and his
iij. daughters over the sea in to spain And there they were a great while And
at the last the king of spain began to trete with the duk of lancastre and
they were accorded to gedre through her both counceill in this manner that the
king of spain should wedde the dukes daughter of lancastre that was the right
heir of spain and he should give un to the duke of lancastre gold and silver
that weren cast in to great wegges and many other Iewelles as many as viij.
chariettes myt carry And every year after during the life of the duke of
lancastre and of the duchess his wife x.M. marc of gold Of which gold the
adventure and charges they of spain should aue^ture and bring yearly un to
Bayone to the dukes assigns by surete made Also the duke of lancastre married
an other of his doughtres un to the king of Portingale the same time And when
he had done thus he come home ayene in to england and the good lady his wife
also / but many a worthy man upon the flix in that viage died And in y^ xv.
year of king Richardes regne he held his Cristemasse in the manner of wodestoke
And there the earl of penbroke a young lord and tender of age would learn to
Just with a knight that was called sir Johan seint Johan and riden to gedre in
the park of wodestoke And there this worthy earl of penbroke was slayn^ with
that other knights spear as he kest it from him when they had coupled and thuz
this good earl made there his end And therefore the king and the queen made
much sorwe for his death And in the xvj. year of king Richardes regne Johan
hende being that time maire of london and Johan walworth and henry vanner being
shreues of london that same time a bakers man bare a basket of horsbrede in to
fleetstrete toward an hostre and there come a yoman of the bisshoppes of
salisbury that was called romayn and he took an horselofe out of the basket of
the baker and he asked him why he did so and this romayn turned ayene and brake
the bakers head And neigbours come out and would have a rested this romayn and
he brake from hem and fled un to the lords place and the Constable would have
him out but the bisshoppes men she^ fast the yates and kept the place that no
man might enter And than much more people gadred thidder and said that they
would have him out or else they would brenne up the place and all that were
with in And than come the maire and shereues with other much people and cesed
the malice of the communes and made every man to go home to her houses and keep
the pees And this Romans lord the bishop of Salisbury maistir Johan waltham
that that time was tresorer of england went to sir Thomas Arundell
Erchebisshopp of york and also chaunceler of england And there the bisshopp
made his co^pleint un to the Chaunceler upon the people of the cite of london
And than these ij. bisshoppes of great malice and veng^aunce come un to the
king to wyndesore and made a great compleint upon the maire and shereues And
anon all the Cite afterward were before the king and his counceill And they
cast un to the Cite a grievous heart and wonder great malice And anon suddenly
the king sent after the maire of london and for the ij. shereues and come un to
him un to the Castle of wyndesore And the king rebuked the maire and shereues
full foul / for the offense that they had done ayens him and his officers in
his chamber at london / wherefore the deposed and put out the maire and both
shereues and this was done a xiiij. days before the feste of seint Johan
baptist And than the king called to him a knight that was called sir Edward
dalingrigge and made him wardeyne and go^nour of the Cite and chamber of london
and over all his people therein

And so he kept that office but iiij. wekes be cause that he was so ge^till and
tender to the citezeins of london / wherefore the king deposed him and made sir
Baudewyne radyngton knight that was count roller of the kings household
wardeyne and governor of his chamber and of his people therein / and chese un to
him ij. worthy men of the Cite to be shereues with him for to govern and keep
the kings laws in the cite one was called Gilbert mawefeld / and that other
Thomas Newenton shereues And than the Maire and the ij. shereues and all the
aldremen with all the worthy crafts of london went on foot un to the toure /
and there come out the Constable of the toure and yafe the Maire and the
sherenes her oath and charge as they should have take in the Escheker of
westmynstre in the kings court of his Justices and Barons of the Escheker And
than went they home ayene And than the king and his counceille for the great
malice and despite that they had to the Cite of london remeued all his courts
from westmynstre un to the Cite of york / that is for to say the Chau^celerie
the Escheker the kings benche and the common place And there they held all the
se courts of law^ fro midsomer that is to say the fest of seint Ioha^ the
Baptist un to the fest of Cristmasse next suyng And than the king and his
couceill saw it not so profitable there as it was at london / than anon he
remeued it ayene un to london and so to westmynster for great ese of his
officers and a vau^tage to the king and all the co^munes of the reame And when
y^ people of london saw and knew that thees courts were come ayene And the
king and his people also / thanne the maire and the aldermen with the chief
co^muners of the Cite let gadre a great sum of gold of all the co^munes of
the Cite And ordained and made great rialte ayens his coming to london and for
to have his grace and good lordshipp and also her libertees and frau^chises
granted un to hem ayene as they before times had And than by great instaunce
and prayer of the Queen Anne of her lords and ladies the king granted hem
grace and this was done at shene in sutheceie And than the king withyn ij.
days after come to london And the maire of london shrefs aldermen and all the
worthy me^ of the Cite afterward ridden ayens the king in good array un to the
heth on this side the manner of shene submittyng hem hu^bely and mekely with all
manner obeissaunce un to him as they ought to done.

And thus they brought the king and the Queen to london And when the king come
to the gate of the brugge of london there they presented him with a milk white
stead sadled and bridled and trapped with clothe of gold and read parted to
gedre And the Queen a palfrey all white and in the same arraie trapped with
white and reed And all the condites of london ronnen with wine both white and
read for all manner people to drink of And bitwene seint powles and the cross
in cheep there was made a stage a riall standing upon high and there ynne were
many Augles with diverse melodies and song And than an Augle come a down from
the stage an high by a vise and set a croune of gold pight with rich perle
and precious stones upon the kings head and an other upon the Queen's head And
so the Citezeynes brought the king and the Queen un to westmynster in to her
Paleys And than on the morn after the maier and the shreues and the aldermen
of london comen un to the king in to his Paleys at westmynster And presented
him with two basyns of silver and over gylt full of Coyued gold the sum of
xx. honderd ^ounde prayeng him of his high mercy and lordshippe and special
grace that they might have his good love with the libertees and fraunchises
like as they have had before times and by his lr^ez pa^ntz and his chartre
confermed / And (...) queen and other worthy lords and ladies fell on knees
and besought the king of grace to conferme this Than the king took up the queen
and granted her all her askyng / and than they thanked the king and the queen
and wenten home ayene And in the xvj. yeof king Richardes regne certain lords
of Scotland / come in to england to get wurshipp as be feet of arms These
were the persons the earl of mar and he chalanged the earl marchall of
england to Just with him certain points an horsbake with sharp (...) / and
they ridden to gedres as ij. worthy knytes and lords certain courses / but
not the full challenge that the scottyssh earl made / for he was cast both horse
and man / and ij. of his ribs broke with that fall And so he was borne home
out of smythfeld home in to his in

And within a litell time after he was carried homward in a litter and at york
there he deide And Sir william Darell knight and tho the Ba^er of Scotland was
made an other challenge with Sir Piers cour^eyne knight and the kings banerer
of england of certain courses yet on horsbak: in the same field And when he
had ridden certain courses hit and assaied / he might not have the better / he
^afe hit over and would no more of his challenge and turned his horse and rode
home to his own in And one cokkeborne a squire of scotland chale^gid sir
Nicholl hawbarke knight of certain courses yet with sharp sp^res on horsbake /
and ridden v. courses to gedres / And at every course the scotte was cast a
down both horse and man / And thus our englissh lords thanked be god hadden
the field And in the xvij. year of king Richardes regne deide the good gracious
queen Anne that was wife to king Richard in the manner of shene in the shire of
surre upon witsonday / and than was she krought to london and so to westmynstre
and there was she beried and worthily entered beside seint Edwardes shrine On
whose sold almighty god have pite and mercy. Amen

How king Richard spoused dame Isabell the kings daughter of france in the
town of Caleys and brought her in to england and let her le crouned queen in
the abbey of seint Petres of westmynstre. Capitulo ducentesimo xlij.
IN the xx. year of king Richardes regne he went him over the sea un to Caleys
with Dukes Earls Lords and Barons / and many other worthy squ^ers with great
ar^aye and commune people of the Royame in good a^aye as than longed to soche a
worthy king and prince of his no^^ey and of his own person to done him
reverence and obseruaunce as ought to be done un to her liege lord And so might
a (...) and Emperor in his own to abide and resseyue there that worthy and
gracious lady that should beue his wife a young creature of xix. year of age
Dame Isabell the kings daughter of france and many other worthy lords of
great name both barons and knights with much other ^eple that comen un to the
town of Grauenyng and ij. dukes of france that one was the duke of Burgoyne
and that other the duke of Bar that would no ferther less than they had
plegges for hem

And than the king Richard delivered ij. plegges for hem to go sauf and come
sauf his ij. worthy uncles the duke of Gloucestre and the duke of york And
they ij. wenten over the water of Grauenyng and abidden there as for plegges un
to the time that the marriage and the feste was done and that thees ij. dukes of
france were come ayene un to Grauenyng water And the^n thees ij. worthy dukes
come over the water at Grauenyng and so to Caleys with this wurshipfull lady
Dame Isabell that was the kings donghter of france and with her come many a
worthy lord and eke lady and knights and squyers in the best araie that myt be
And there they metten with our meyny of Caleys the which well comed her and her
meyne with the best honor and reverence that might be And so brought her in
the town of Caleys And there she was resseyued with all the solempnite and
wurshipp that myt be done un to such a lady And than they brout her un to the
king And the king took her and welcomed her and all her fair meyne and made
there all the solempnite that might be done And than the king and his counceill
asked of the frensh lords whethir all the couenauntes and forwards with the
composicion that were ordained and made on both parties should be trewely kept
and hold bitwene hem And they said ye And there they sworn and took her charge
upon a book and made her oath well and trewely it to hold in all manner of
points and couenauntz without contradiction or delay in any manner wise And
than was she brought un to seint Nicholas church in Caleys and there she was
worthily y wedded with the most solempnite that any king or Queen might be
with Erchebisshoppes and bisshoppes and all ministres of holy church And than
weren brought home un to the Castle and set to mete And there were served with
all manner of delicasie of all riall metes and drynkes plenteuously to all
manner of strangiers and all other and no creature warned that feste / but all
were welcome / for there weren great hales and tents set upon the grene
without the castelle to resceyue all manner of people and every office ready to
serve hem all and thus this worthy marriage was solempnely y done / and ended
with all rialte Than these ij. dukes of france with her people token her leave
of the king and the Queen and wenten ayene to Grauenyng water / And there the
frenssh lords that is to say the ij. dukes and all her meyne were comen over
the water to Grauenyng and there they metten / And every took leave of other and
so they departed / and our lords come ayene to Caleys and the frenssh lords
went over the water and so home in to france ayene And anon after the king
made him ready with the Queen and all his lords and ladies and all her people
with hem and comen over the sea in to England and so to london / and the Maire
and the shereues with all the Aldremen and worthy communes ridden ayens hem un
to the blake heth in kent / And thee they metten with the king and the Queen
and welcomed hem and that in good array and every man in the clothyng of his
craft and her mynstrelles to fore hem

And so they brought hem un to seint Georges bar in south work and there
they took her leave And the king and the Queen ridden to kenyngton and than the
people of london turned home ayene / And in turnyng ayene to londen brigge there
was so much prese of reple both an horse and a foot / that there were deed on
the brigge xj. persons of men of women and of children on whose sou^es Almighty
god have pite and mercy Amen /

And than afterward the Queen was brought un to the toure of london and there
she was all night / And on the morwe she was brought through the Cite of london
all over and so forth un to west mynstre and there she was crouned Queen of
England / And than she was brought ayene to the kings paleys and there was
^olden an open and riall feste a^ her coronacion of all manner of people that
thidder come / And this was done the Sunday next after the feste of Seint
Clement in the xx. year of king Richardes regne /

And than the xxv. day of August next after by evil excitacion and falls
counceill and for great wrath and malice that the king had of old time un to
his uncle the good duke of Gloucestre and to the Earl of Arundell and to the
Earl of warrewyke

And anon the king by his evil excitacion and his evil counceill and malice
late in the euenyng on the some day above said made him ready with his strength
and rode in to Essex un to the toun^ of Chelmesford and so come to plasshe
suddenly there sir thomas of wodestoke the good duke of gloucestre lay And the
good duke come to welcome the king anon And the king arested the good duke him
self his own body And so he was lad down to the water and anon put to a
shipp And anon had un to Caleys and brought in to the Capitayns ward to be
kept in hold by the kings commandment of england And that time the earl
marchall was Captain of Caleys And anon after by the commandment of the
king and by his false counceill commanded the Capitayn to put him to the death
And anon certain yomen that had the good duke in keeping took her counceill
how that they would put him un to the death And this was her appoyntement that
they s^old come upon him when he were in his bed and a sleep on a feather
bed And anon they bonnde him foot and hand and charged him to lie still And
when they had done thus they token ij. small towailles and made on hem ij. rid
knottes and cast the towailles about the dukes nekke and than they took the
feather bed that lay under him and cast it above him and than they drowen her
towailles each wries and some lay upon the fetherbed upon him un to the time
that he were deed by cause that he should make no noise and thus they strangled
this worthy duke un to the death on whose soul god for his high pite have mercy
Amen And when the king had arested this worthy duke and his uncle and sent him
to Caleys he come ayene to london in all haste with a wonder great people And as soon as he was come he sent for the Earl of Arundell and for the good Earl of
warrrewyke.

And anon as they come he arested hem him self sir Johan cobham and sir Johan
cheyne knights he arested hem in the same manner till he made his parliament And
anon they were put in to hold but the Earl of Arundell went at large un to the
parliament time For he fond susfisaunt suerte to abide the law and to ansuere
to all manner points that the king and his counceill would put upon him And in
the xxj. year of king Richardes regne he ordained him a parliament at
westmynster the which was called the great parliament And this parliament was
made for to Judge this.iij. worthy lords and other mo as hem list at this time
And for y^ ^ugement the king let make in all have a long and a large house of
tymbre the which was called an hale and covered with tyles over and it was open
all about on bohe sides and at the ends that all manner of men myt see through
out and there the dome was holden upon these forsaid lords and ^ugement yefe
at this forsaid perlement / And for to come un to this perlement the king sent
his wattes un to en^ry lord baron knight and squire in every shire thurghout
all england that every lord gadre and bring his retenue with him in as short
time and in the best array that they might get in mayntenyng and in strengh
thing of the king ayens hem that were his enemies / and that this were done in
all have and they to come to him in pain of deche And the king him self sent
in to chestre shire un to the chiuet^yns of that contre / and they gadred and
brought a great and an huge multitude of people both of knights and of squyers
and principally of yomen of Chestre shire the which yomen and archiers y^ king
took to his own^ court and yafe hem bowge of court and good wages to be kepers
of his own body both be night and by day above all other persons and most
loved and best trust The which sone afterward turned the king to great loss
shame hyndering and his v* terly undoing and destruction as ye shall here sone
after And that time come sir henry Earl of Derby with a great meyne of men of
arms and archiers / and the earl of Rutteland come with a strong power of
people both of men of arms and archiers And the earl of kent brought a great
power of men of arms and archiers / the earl marchall come in the same manner /
the lord spencer in the same manner the earl of northuuberland and sir henry
Percy his sone / and sir Thomas Percy the earls brother / And all these worthy
lords broughten a fair meyne and a strong power and each man in his best array
/ and the duke of lancastre and the duke of york comen in the same manner with
m^n of arms and archiers folewyng the king / and Sir william strope tresorer
of england come in the same manner And thus in this array come all the worthy men
of this land un to our king / and all this people come to london in one day /
in so much that every street and lane in london and in the subarbes weren full
of hem logged / and x. or xij. mile about london every way / And these people
brought the king at westmynstre and wenten home ayene to her logging both horse
and man / and than on the monday the xvij. day of Septembre the perlement began
at westmynstre the which was called the great parliament / And on the friday
next after the Earl of Aru^dell was brought in to the parliament among all the
lords and that was on seint Mathewes day the appostell and evangelist there he
was foriugged un to the death in this hale that was made in the paleys at
westmynstre / And this was his Iuggement / ^e should gone on foot with his
hondes y bound behind him from the place that he was for ^ugged in and so
forth through the cite of lond^n un to the toure hill and there his head to
(...) smyten of and so it was do in deed in the same place / And vj. of the
great lords that sat on his Iuggement ridden with him un to the place there
he was done un to the death / and so to see that the execucion were done after
her dome /

And by the kings commandment with hem wenten on foot of men of arms and
archiers a great multitude of Chestre shire men in strengthyng of the lords
that brought this earl un to his death / for they dradde lest the Earl should
have be rescued and take from hem when they come in to london / Thus he passed
forth through the Cite un to his death / and there he took it full patiently on
whose soul god have mercy Amen And than come the freres Austyns and took up the
body and the head of this good Earl and bare it home un to her house and bnried
him in her quere / And in the morwe after was sir Richard Earl of warrewyke
brought in to the parliament there as the Earl of Arundell was for iugged / and
they yafe the Earl of warrewyke the same Iuggement that the forsaid Earl had
put the lords had compassion of him be cause he was of more age and relesed
him to perpetuell prison and put him in the I Will of man

And than the monday next after the lord Cobham of kent and sir Johan Cheyne
knight weren brought in to the parliament in to the same halle and there they
were Iugged to be honged and draw but through the prayer and great instaunce of
all the lords that Iuggement was foryeue hem and relesed to perpetuell prison
/

And this same time was Richard whittyngdone Maire of london / and Johan
wodecoke and william Askam shereues of london And they ordained at every yate
of london during this same perlement strong wacche of men of arms and
archiers and through out every ward also And the king made v. dukes a duchess
and a markeys and four Earls and the first of hem was the Earl of Derby / and
he was made duke of Hereford / and the second was the Earl of Rutteland and he
was made duke of Awemarle / and the iij / was the Earl of kent and he was made
duke of Surre / and the iiij. was the Earl of Huntyngdone and he was made duke
of Excestre / and the v. was the Earl of Notyngham and he was made duke of
Northfolk / and the Earl of Somersete he was made the markeys of Dorset / and
the lord Spencer was made Earl of Gloucestre / and the lord Neuill of Raby was
made Earl of westmerland / and Sir Thomas Percy was made Earl of wurcestre And
Sir william Scrope that was tresorer of England he was made Earl of wylteshire
And sir Johan Moun^^gu (...) of salisbury And when the king had thus y done he
held the perlement and riall feste un to all his lords and to all manner of
people that thidder would come And this same year died Sir Johan of gaunte the
kings uncle and duke of lancastr^ in the bisshoppes ynne in holborne and was
brought from thens to seint poules and there the king made and held his
enterement well and worthily with all his lords in the church of seint poules
in london and there he was beried beside dame blaunche his wife that was
daughter and heir to the good Henry that was duke of lancastre And in the same
year there fill a discencion and debate bitwene the duke of hereford and the
duke of Norfolk in so much that they waged bataille and cast down her gloves
and than they were take up and enseled And the bataille ^oyned and the day y
set and the place assigned where and when And this should be at couentre And
thidder come the king with all his lords at that day and was set in the feld
and than thees two worthy lords comen in to the feld clean armed and well
araied with all her wepen and ready to done her bataille and weren ready in the
place for to fight at vtteraunce But the king bad hem cese and took the quarrel
in to his hand

And forth with right there present exiled the duke of Hereford for the term
of x. year and the duke of Norfolk for evermore

And Sir Thomas Arondell Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury was exiled the same time
for ever and deposed out of his see for malice of the king And anon th^se
iij. worthy lords weren commanded and defended the kings Reame And anon
they gate hem ships at diverse hauenes and wenten over the sea in to diverse
lands each his wey And the duke of Norfolk went to venice and there he died on
whose soul god have mercy Aman

And than king Richard made a clerk of his Sir Rogier walden Erchebisshopp of
Caunterbury And in the xxij. year of king Richardes regne by falls counceill and
ymaginacion of Covetous men that weren about him were made and ordained blank
chartres and made hem to be en^^^^d of all manner rich men through out the
Reame In so much that they compelled diverse people to set her seal thereto
And this was done for great couetise wherefore all good hertes of the Reame weren
clean turned a way from him that was king ever after

And that was utterly destruction and end to him that was so high and
excellent Prince and king and through couetise and falls counceill falsely
betrayed Allas for pite that such a king myt not see And than king Richard
set his kingdom and his riall land england to ferme un to iiij. persons
the which were these / Sir william strope Earl of wylteshire and tresorer of
england / and sir Johan Bussh and Henry Grene and sir Johan bagot knights
which that turned hem to meschief and death within litell time / as ye shull
find here after written / and than king Richard made great ordinance and went
him over the sea in to Irland and many great lords with him with great hosts
for to strength her king with me^ of arms archiers and much great stuff and
right good ordinance as longs to werre / And or ^e passed the sea he
ordained and made sir Edmond of langeley his uncle the dnke of york his
lieutenaunt of england in his absence with the governance and counceille of
these iiij. knights that hadded take england to ferme of the king / And than
he passed the sea and come in to Irland and there he was well and worthily
resceyued / And these rebels that been called wild ^^ssh men anon her
chiuetayns and her gouernourus and her leders comen down un to the king and
yelden hem un to him both body and goods all at his own will and swore to be
his liege men / and there to him diden homage and feaute and good se^^uce / And
thus he conquered the most party of ^rland in a litell time

And while that king Richard was thus in Irland sir henry of Bolynbroke Earl of
Derby that the king had made before duke of Hereford the which duke the king
had exiled out of this land was come ayene in to England for to challenge the
duke dome of lancastre as for his right and true heritage And he come down
out of France by land un to Caleys And there met him Sir Thomas of Arundell
thas was Erchebisshop of Caunterbury that was exiled out of England / and with
him come the Earl of Arundell his sone and heir the which was in ward and
keeping of sir Johan shelley knight sum time with the Earl of Huntyngdone and
with the duke of Excestre the which was in the Castle of Reigate in southsexe
/ And there he stale him away and come to Caleys and there he was kept well and
worthily till these other two lords weren come to Caleys And than this worthy
duke and the Erchebisshoppe of Caunterbury Arundell shipped in the haven of
Caleys and drowe her course northward and arrived in york shire at Raven spore
fast by wydelyngton and there ^e come and entered the land and these ij.
lords with him and her meyne And than much people of the Reame that herd of his
coming and know were he was anon they drewevn to him and welcomed these
lords and so coraged hem in all manner thing and passed forth in to the land
and gadrrd much people And when king Richard herd and wist that these ij.
lords were come ayene in to england and weren londed Than the king left his
ordinance in Irland and come in to England ward in all the have that he might
and come un to the castle of Flyut and there he abode for to take his
counceill and might best be done but to him come none And than Sir Thomas
Percy Earl of wurcestre that was the kings Stiward wist and knew this Anon
he come in to the hall among all the people And there he brake the yerde of the
riall kings housold And anon they were disperbled And every man went his wey
and forsook her mastir and sovereign lord and left him alloue And thus was
king Richard brought a down and destroyed and stood allone without comfo^t or
socour or any good counceill of any man Allas for pite of this riall king And
anon come tidings that sir Henry of ^olyng broke was up with a wonder strong
power of people and that all the shreues of England raised up the shires in
strengthyng of him ayens the king Richard And thus sone he was come once of the
northcontre to Bristowe And there he met with sir wiliam scrope Earl of
wylteshire Tresorer of England and with Sir ^oh^n Bussh and sir Henry Grene and
Johan Bagot but he (...) from hem and went over the sea in to Irland and these
iij. knyg^tes were taken and her hedes smytten of And thus they died for her
falls couetise And than was king Richard y take and brought un to the duke and
anon the duke put him in fast ward and strong hold un to his coming to london
And was there a romer in london and a strong noise that king Richard come to
westmynster And the people of london ran thidder and would have done much
harm and skathe in her wodenesse And the Maire and the Aldermen and other
worthy men seced hem with fair words and turned hem home ayene to london

And there was Sir Johan slake deen of the kings charell of westmynster take
and brought to london and put in prison in ludgate And Bagot was take in Irland
and brought to london and put in prison in newegate there to be kept and to
abide his ansuere And sone after the duke brought king Richard prinely un to
london and put him in the tonre under suer keeping as a prisoner And than come
the lords of the reame with all ^ un to the toure to king Richard and ^^^den
to him of his mysgonernau^ce and ^xtorcion that he had done made and ordained
to oppress all the commune people and also to all the reame Wherefore all the
commuue people of his reame would have him deposed of his kingdom / And so he
was deposed at that time in the toure of london by all his lords counceill /
and common assent of all the Reame And there he was pnt from the toure un to
the Castle of ledes in kent and there he was kept a while And than was he had
from the^s un to the castle of pounfrete in the northcontre to be kept in
prison and sone afterward right there he made his end And than when / king
Richard was deposed and had resyned his croune and his kingdom and was kept
fast in hold / than all the lords of the Royame with the communes assent and
by accord chosen this worthy lord Sir Henry of Bolyngbroke Earl of Derby duke
of Hereford and duke of lancastre by right line and heritage and for his
rightful manhood that the people found in him before all other they chose him
and made him king of england among hem

Of Sir Henry of Bolynbroke Earl of Derby that reigned after king Richard which
was the iiij. henry after the conquest Capitulo ducentesimo xliij.
ANd after king Richard the ij. was deposed and put out of his kingdom The
lords and the communes all with one ossent and all other worthy of the reame
chosen Sir Henry of Bolynbroke Earl of Derby sone and heir of Johan the duke
of lancastre for his worthy manhood that often time had be found in him and in
deed preued upon seint Edwardes day the confessor he was crouned king of
england at westmynstre by all the Reames assent next after the deposing of king
Richard Than he made henry his eldelst sone and heir Prince of walys and dnke
of Cornewaille and Earl of Chestre And he made Sir Thomas of Arundell
Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury ayene as he was before / And Sir Rogier walden
that king Richard had made Erchebisshoppe of Caunterbury he made him bisshopp
of london / for that time it stood void And he made Earls sone of / Arundell
that come with him over the sea from Caleys in to England / He made him Earl of
Arundell as his fadre had been and put him in possession of all his lond^^.
And there he made homage and feaute un to his liege lord the king as all other
(...) had done And than anon died king Richard^ in the Castle of Pountfrete
in the Northcontre For there he was enfamened un to the death by his keeper For
he was kept there four. or v. days from mete and drink And so he made his
end in this world yet much people in England and in other lands said that he
was a live many year after his death But whethir he ware a live or deed forth
they held her falls opynyons and believe that men hadden in much people / which
come to great myschief and foul death as ye shall here afterward And when king
Henry wist and knew verrailly that he was deed he let sere him in the best
manner and closed it in a fair chest with diverse speceries and baumes and
closed hem in a lynnen clothe all saufe his visage and that was left open that
men might see his person from all other men And so he was brought to london
with torche light brennyng un to seint poules And there he had his mass and
his dirige with much reverence and solempnite of service

And when all this was done he was brought from seint Poules in to the Abbey of
westmynster and there he had all his hole service ayene And from westmynster he
was brought to langeley and there he was beried on whose soul god have mercy
Amen

And in the first year of king Henry's regne he held his cristemasse in the
Castle of wyndesore And on the xij. even come the duke of awemarle un to the
king and told him that he and the duke of Surre and the duke of Excestre and
the Earl of Salisburie and the Earl of Gloncestre and other mo of her Affinite
were accorded to make a mommyng un to the king on the xij. day at night and
there they casten to slay the king in here reuelyng and thus the duke of
awemarle warned the king And than the king come the same night to london
privily in all the have that he might to get him help socour and comfort and
counceill And anon these other that would have done the king to death fledden
in all the have that they might for they knewen well that her counceill was be
wreyed And than fled the duke of Surre and the Earl of Salysbury with all her
meyne un to the town of Cissestre And there the people of the town would have
arested hem and nold not stand to her areste but stood at defense and faught
manly But at they last they were overcome and take And there they smite of the
dukes heed of Surre and the Earls he^d of Salisbury and many other mo and there
they put the quarters in to sakkes and her hedes on poles borne on high / and
so they were brought through the Cite of london un to london brigge / and there
her hedes were set upon high and her quartres weren sent to other good
tounes and Citees and set up there

At Oxenford were take Blounte knight / and Benet Cely knight / and Thomas
wyntersell squire And these were beheded and quartred and the knights hedes
were set on polles and brought to london and set on the brugge / and the
quartres sent forth to other good tounes And in the same year at Prittelwell in
a Mill in Estsexe there Sir Johan Holand the duke of Excestre was take with
the commune of the contre / and they brought him from the Mill un to Plasshe /
And to the same place y^ king Richard had arested Sir Thomas of wodeste the
duke of Gloucestre And right there in the same place they smyten of the duke of
Excestre his head and brought it to london upon a pole / and it was set on
london brigge And in the same year at Bristowe was take the lord spencer /
that king Richard had made earl of Gloucestre and the communes of the town of
Bristowe took him and brought him in to the market place of the town / and
there they smyten of his head and sent it un to london / and there it was set
on london brigge

And in this same year was Sir Barnard Brokeys knight take and arested and put
in to the toure of london and Sir Johan Shelley knight / and Sir Johan Maudelyn
/ and Sir william Fereby persons of king Richardes and they weren arested and
put in to the toure of london And thidder come the kings Justices and sat
upon hem in the toure of london / and there they were dampened all four un to
the death / and the dome was give un to Sir Bernard Brokeys that he should gone
on foot from the toure through london un to Tiborne and there to be hanged and
after his head smyten of / and Sir Johan shelley knight / and Sir Johan
maudelyn and Sir william Fereby persons were draw through out london to
Tiburne and there hanged and her hedes smyten of and set on london brigge

And in this same rere king Henry sent Queen Isabell home ayene in to France
the which was king Richardes wedded wife and yafe her gold and silver and many
other ^eweles and so she was discharged of all her dower and sent out of
England And in the second year of the regne of king Henry the four the was Sir
Rogier of Claryngdone knight and two of his men and the priour of launde and
vi^^. friar menours and sum mastres of divinity and other for treson that
they wrought ayene the king were draw and houged at Tyborne all xij. perso^es
And there began a great distencion and debate in the contre of walys bitwene the
lord Gray rithen and Owen of glendere squire of walys And this owen arered a
great no^bre of walshmen and kept all that contre about right strong and did
much harm and destroyed the kings tounes and lordshippes through out walys
and robbed and slow the kings people both englissh and walsh And thus he
endured a xij. year large And he took the lord Gray rithen prisoner and kept
him fast in hold till he was raunsond of prisoners of the march And kept him
long time in hold And at the last he made him wedde one of his donghtres and
kept him there still with his wife And sone after he died And than the king
Henry knowing this meschief destruction and treson that this owen had wrought
thanne anon he ordained a strong poer of men of arms and of archers and
much other stuff that longed to werre for to abate and destroy the malice of
this false walshmen

And than the king come in to walys with his power for to destroy this owen
and other rebellis false walshmen And anon^ they fledden in to the mountayns
And there might the king done hem no harm in no manner wise for the mou^taignes
And so the king come in to England ayene for lesyng of mo of his people And thus
he sped nouzt there ^n this same year was great scarate of whete in England for
a quarter of whete was at xvj. shilling And there was merchandise of england
sent in Pruys for whete And anon^ they had lade and fregt ships y now and
come home in saufete blessed be god of all his yiftes And in the iiij. year of
king henry's regne there was a sterre seyne in the firmament that showed him
self through all the world for diverse tokenes that should befalle sone after
the which sterre was named and called by clergy Stella Comata And on seint
Marie magdaleyne day next folewyng in the same year was the bataille of
shrowesbury. And thidder come Sir Henry Percy the Earls sone of Northumberland
with a great multitude of men of arms and archiers and yafe a bataille to king
Henry the iiij. through the false counceill and wykked read of Sir Thomas Percy
his uncle Earl of wurcestre and there was Sir Henry Percy slain and the most
party of his meyne in the feld And Sir Thomas Percy take and kept fast in
hold two days till the king had set rest among his people on both sides
And than Sir Thomas Percy anon was ^ugged to be deed draw honged and his head
smyten of for his false treson a^ shrowesb^ry and his head brought to london and
set on london brugge And the other people that there were slain on both
parties the king let herie And there was slain on the kings side in that
bataille the earl of stafford and sir waltier blounte in the kings cote armure
under the kings baner and many mo worthy men on whose souls god have mercy
Amen And in the iiij. year of king Henry's regne come the Emperor of
Costantine noble with many great lords and knights and much other people of
his coutre in to England to king henry with him to speak and to disporte and to
see the good governance and conditions of our people and to know the
co^moditees of england And our king with all his lords goodly and wurshipfuly
him resseyued and w^lcomed him and all his meyne that comen with him and did
him all the reverence and wurshipp that they could and might And anon the king
commanded all manner officers that he should be served as worthily and rially as
it lo^ged un to such a worthy lord and Emperor on his own cost as long as
the emperor waz in england and all his men that comen with him And in this
same year com^ dam^ Jane the duchess of Britaigne in to England and lo^ded at
fallemouthe in Cornewaille And from thens she was bronght to the Cite of
wynchestre And there she was wedded un to king Henry the iiij. in the Abbey of
seint swythynes of wynchestre with all the solempnite that might be done and
mad^ And sone after she was brought from thens to london And the maire and the
aldermen and the co^munes of the cite of london ridden ayens her and her
welcomed and brought her through the Cite of london to westmynster and there she
was crouned Queen of england And there the king made a riall and a solemn
feste for her and for all manner of men that thidder would come And in this same
year dame Blaunche the eldest daughter of king Henry the iiij. was y sent over
the sea with the earl of somersete her uncle and with masti^ Richard Clifford
than bisshopp of wurcestre and with many other worthy lords knights and
ladies and worthy squyers as longed to such a worthy kings dou^hter and comen
un to Coleyn

And thidder come the dukes sone of Bar with a fair meyne and resseyued this
worthy lady And there the bisshopp of wurcestre wedded and sacred hem to gedre
as holy church would

And there was made a riall feste and a great Iustes in the reverence and
wurshippe of hem and of all people that thidder come And when this marriage and
fest was done the Earl and the bisshopp and all her meyne token her leave of
lord and lady and come home ayene in to england in saufte thanked be god And in
the v. year of king Henry's regne the lord Thomas his sone went over see and
the Earl of kent / and many other lords and knights with men of arms and
archiers a great no^bre to chastize the rebels that aforne had done much
harm to our Englisshmen and marchauntz / and to many tounes and ports in
England on the sea coste^^ And the lord Thomas the kings sone come in to
Flaundres to fore a town that is called the skluse among all the ships of
diu^rse nations that weren there And after there they ridden with her ships
among hem / and wenten a land and sported hem there ij. days and comen ayene
to her ships and token the broad see ^ and there they metten with iij.
Carrykkes of ^ene that weren lade with diverse merchandise and well y manned
and there they foughten to gedres long time but the Englisshmen had the
victory and broughten the Carrykkes in to the Cambre before wynchelsee and
there they canted thees goods / and one of this Carrykkes was suddenly there
bren^ And the lords and her people turned hem home ayene and went no forther at
that time / And in the same time Serle yo^ man of king Richard Robes come in to
England out of scotlan^ and told to diverse people that king Richard was a live
in Scotland / and so much people believed in his words wherefore great part of
the people of the Reame weren in great error and grucchyng ayens the king
through ^nformacion of lies and falls lesyng that this Serle had made / For much
people trusted and believed in his seyeng / But at the last he was taken in the
Northcontre and by law Iugged to been draw through every Cite and good burgh
tounes in England And so he was served / and at the last he was brought to
london un to the Gyld halle before the Justice / and there he was Iugged for to
be brought to the toure of london / and there to be ^eid on an hurdell / and
than to be draw through the Cite of london to Tiborne and there hanged and then
quartred and his head smyten of and set on london brigge and his quartres to
be sent to four good tounes of England and there set up / and thus ended he
for his false treson and disceit

And in the vj. year of king henry's regne the iiij. the Earl of Mar of
Scotland by saufconduyt come in to England to challenge Sir Edmond the Earl of
kente of certain courses of werre on horsebake / And so this challenge was
accepted and granted and the place taken in smythfeld at london And this Earl
of mar the scotte come proudely in to the feld as his challenge asked And
anon come in the Earl of kent and rode un to the scotte and manfully rode to
gedre with sharpp speres diverse courses but the Earl of kent had the feld and
gate him much wurshipp and thank of all manner of men for his manf^ll deeds And
in the vij. year of king Henry's regne the iiij. Sir Richard scrope
Erchebisshoppe of york and the lord earl marchall of england gadred un to hem
a strong power ayens king Henry And the king hering there of in all the have
that he might come with his power northward and met with hem at york And
there were thees ij. lords y take and brought to the king And anon the Iugges
were set and thees ij. lords brought forth and there they were dampened un to
the death and both her hedes smyten of and there they made her end on whose
souls god for his pi^e have mercy Amen And when this was done the king come to
london ayene and there rested him Anon god of his great goodness wrought and
showed many great miracles for this worthy clerc Erchebisshopp of york that
thus was done un to the death And in the vij. year of king Henry's regne Dame
Luce the dukes suster of Milane come in to England and so at london and there
was wedded to Sir Edmond Holand Earl of kent in the priorie of seint Marie
ouereies in suthwerk with much solempnite and great wurshipp The king was
there him self and yafe her at the church door And when they were y wedded
and mass was done the king his own person brought and lad this worthy lady
in to the bisshoppes place of wynchestre and there was a wonder great fest y
holden to all manner of people that comen

In the same year Sir Robert knolles knight a worthy weryour died at his manner
in Northfolk and from thens he was brout to london upon a horse bear with much
torche light And so was he brought un to the white freres in fleetstrete and
there was done and made for him a solemn feste and a riall enterement for tho
that thidder would come both ^ore and rich and there he lies beried by Dame
Constance his wife in the mydde of the body of the church on whose soul god
for his pite hane ^ercy Amen

And thus in this same year Sir Thomas Rampston knight Constable of the toure
of london was dreynte at london brugge as he come from westmynster to wards
the toure in a barge and all through lewdenesse

And in the same year dame philipp the younger daughter of king Henry was lad
over the sea with sir richard the dukes brother of york and Sir Edmond
Courteney bisshopp of Norwich and many other lords knights and squyers ladies
and gent^l women that appe^teyned to such a worthy kings daughter and come in
to Denmark with his lords and resceyued this worthy lady for his wife / and
welcomed thees worthy lords and did hem much reverence and great wurship / And
they were brought un to a town that was called london in denmark and there
was this lady wedded and sacred to the king of Denmark with much solempnite /
and there she was crouned queen of Denmark Norway and Swythen / and there was
made a riall feste And when this feste and marriage was done and ended these
lords and ladies took her leave of king and of queen and comen home ayene in to
England in have thanked be ^hesu

And in the viij. year of king henry's regne there was a man that was called
the walssh clerk / and he appelled a knyt that was called sir Perceuall
sowdone of treson / and there they were ^oyned to fight un to vtteraunce
withynne listes / and the day and place and time assigned and lymitted to be
done and ended in smyth field / At the which day the ij. persons comen in to
the field and foughten sore and myghtely to gedres / but at the last the knight
overcome the clerk / and made him yield him creaunt of his false enpecheme^t
that he said on him And than was he despoilled of his armure and draw out of
the field to Tiborne and there was he hanged and the knight take to grace / and
was a good man And in this same year Sir Henry Earl of Northumberland and the
lord Bardolfe come out of Scotland in prejudice and destruction of king Henry
/ wherefore they of the northcontre arisen upon hem and fought with hem and
scomfited hem and took hem / and smyten of her hedes and quartred her bodies /
and sent the heed of the Earl and quarter of the lord bardolfe to london and
there they were set upon the brigge for falls treson that they had purposed
ayene the king And in the ix. year of king Henry's regne was sir Edmond Holand
Earl of kente made Admiral of england for to keep the sea and he went to the sea with many riall ships that weren full well araied and enparelled and
enarmed with many agood man of arms and archiers and of good defense of werre
in the kings name of England / and so he londed at the last in the cost of
Britaigne in the I Will of Briak with all his people / and he beseged the Castle
and sauted it and they withstode him with great defense and strength / And
anon he leid his ord^naunce / and in the lexeng of a gonne come a quarrel and
smo^e the good Earl Edmond in the head and there ^e caught deths wound but yet
they left nouzt till that they had get the Castle and all that were there
ynne And there this good lord died on whose soul god have mercy Amen And than
his meyne come home ayene in to England with the Earls body and was beried
among his Auncestres right worthily And in the same year was a great frost in
England that dured xv. wekes. And in the x. year of king Henry's regne the
iiij. come the Seneschall of henaude with other meyne to seek Auntres and to
get him wurshippe in deeds of arms both on horse bak and on foot at all manner
of points of werre And the Seneschall challenged the Earl of Somersete And the
Earl delivered him manfully of all his chalenges and put his adversary to the
wers in all points and wanne him there great wurshipp and the gre of the field
And the next day after come in to the field an other man of arms of the
Seneschallis party And ayens him come Sir Richard of Arundell knight And the
henaude had the better of him on foot in one point for he brought him on^ his
knee And the thridde day come in an other man of arms in to the feld and ayens
him come Sir Johan Cornewaill knight and manly and knyghtly quytte him in all
manner points ayens his adversary and had the better in the field And on the
iiij. day come an other man of arms of henaude in to the field and ayens him
come Sir ^ohan cheynyes sone and manly quitte him ayens his adversary for he
cast horse and man in to the field And the king for his manhood at that time
dubbed him knight And the v. day there come an other man of arms of the
henaudes party in to the feld And to him come in Sir Johan stiward knight and
manfully quitte him there in all manner of points and had the better And the
vj. day come an other henaude and to him come william Porter squire and
manfully he quitte him and had the better in the field And the king dubbed him
knight the same time And the vij. day come an other henaude in to the field and
to him come Johan standissh squire and manfully he quitte him on his adversary
and had the better in the field and there the king dubbed him knight the same
day And on the same day come an other henaude and to him come a squire of
Gascoigne and proudely and manly he quitte him on his adversary and had the
better And anon the king dubbed him knight. And on the viij. day come in to
the field ij. men of arms of henaude and to hem come ij. soudiours of Caleys
that were brethren that were called Burghes and well and manly quitte hem on
her adversaries and the better in the field / And thus ended the chalenges with
much wurshippes And the king at the reverence of the strangiers made a great
feste and yafe hem rich yiftes and they token her leave and went home to her
own contre And in the xj. year of king henry's regne the iiij. there was a
great bataille done in smythfelde bitwene two squyers that one was called
Gloucestre that was appellaunt. Arthur was the defendaunt / and well and
manfully foughten to gedre long time / and the king for her man fnllnesse and
of his grace took her quarrel in to his hand / and made hem to go out of the
field at ones and so they were divided of her batailles and the king yafe hem
grace And the xij. year of king Henry's regne the fourth Ris die a squire of
walys that was a rebel a riser and supportier to Owen of Glendore that did
much destruction to the people of walys was taken and brought to london / and
there he come before the Justices and was dampened for his treson / and than he
was leid on an hurdell and so draw forth un to Tiborne through the Cite / and
there he was hanged and let down a yene and his head smyten of and his body
quartred and sent to iiij tounes / and his head set on london brugge And in
the xiij. year of king He^ries regne tho deide Sir Johan Beauford the earl of
somersete that was Captain of Caleys and was beried at the Abbey of the
tourehyll / on whose soul god have mercy Amen /

And in the same year the lord Thomas king Henry's sone wedded the Countess of
Somersete And in this same year come the enbassatours of France in to England
from the duk of Burgoyne un to the Prince of England king Henry's sone and
heir for help and socour of men of arms and archiers ayens the duke of
Orliaunce / And tho went over the sea the Earl of Arundell / Sir Guillebert
vmfreuille Earl of keme and the lord Cobham Sir ^ohan Oldecastell / and many
other good knights and worthy squyers and men of arms and good archiers in to
France and come to Paris to the duke of Burgoyne / And there he resseyued and
welcomed thees Englisshmen the lords and all other meyne / And than it was
done him to wit that the duke of Orliaunce was come to semtclowe fast by Paris
with a great nombre of men of arms and arbalastiers / and thidder went onre
Englisshmen and foughten with hem / and gate the brigge of Semtclowe and there
they slow much people of Frensshmen / and Arminakes and the remenaunt fled
and would no longer abide And than our Englisshmen comen ayene to Paris / and
there they token her leave of the duke and comen home ayene in to england in
saufete and the duke yafe hem great yiftes Anon^ fo^ewyng the duke of Orliaunce
sent embassatours in to england to king Henry the iiij. be seching him of his
help and socour ayens his dedely enemy the duke of Burgoigne And than the
king made Thomas his sone duke of Clarence and his other sone Johan duke of
Bedford And his other sone Humfrey duke of Gloucestre and sir Thomas Beauford
Earl of dorset and the duke of awmarle he made duke of york And than the king
ordained his sone sir Thomas duke of Clarence sir Thomas Brauford earl of
dorset and sir ^ohan Cornewaile with many other lords knights and squyers men
of arms and archers to gone over the sea in to france in helpyng and
strengthyng of the duke of Orliaunce And these worthy lords with her retenue
shipped at hampton and sailled over in to normandy and londed at hogs And
there met with hem the lord hambe at her londing with vij.M. men of arms of
frenshmen and iij. sergeauntz of arms with hem And all were put to flight And
taken of hem vij.C. men of arms and CCCC. horse without tho that were slain
in the feld And so they ridden forth through out france and token castelles
and tounes and slow much people of frenshmen that withstode hem and token many
^soners as they ridden And so they passed forth till they come to Burdeux and
there they rested hem a while and set the contre in pees and rested till the
vyntage were ready to saill^ And than the duke with his meyne come home in to
england in saufete thanked be god And in the same year was the kings coin
changed through out England by the king and his counceill that is to say the
noble half noble and f^rthyng of gold And the xiiij. year of king Henry's
regne the iiij. he let make galeys of werre for he had hoped to have passed the
great see and so forth to Iherusalem and thereto have ended his life but god
visited him so sone after with infirmites and great sikenesse that he might not
well endure no while so fervently he was take and brought in bet at w^stmynster
in a fair chamber And as he lay in his bed he asked his chamberlayn^ what they
called that chamber that he lay ynne and he ansuerd and said Ih^lm^ And than he
said that the prophecy said that he should make an end and die in Iherusalem
And than he made him ready un to god and disposed all his will And sone after
he died and was carried by water from westmy^ster in a barge un to Feuersham And
from thens un to Caunterbury by land with much torche light brennyng in to the
Abbey of Crichurche and there he was entered and ^eried beside seint Thomas of
Caunterbury shrine / and thus ended the worthy king henry about midlenten
sunday in the year of our lord a.M.cccc.xiij. on whose soul god have mercy Amen

Of king Henry the v. that was king henry's sone Capitulo ducentesimo xliiij.
ANd after the death of king Henry the iiij. reigned king Henry his sone that
was borne at Monmouth in walys that was a worthy king and a gracious man and a
great conqueror / And in the first year of his regne for great love and
goodness he sent to the freres of langely / there as his fadre had done bery
king Richard the second / and let take his body out of the earth a yene and did
bring it to westmynstre in a riall chare covered with blake velvet and baners
of diuse arms about and all the horse drawyng th chare were trapped in blake
and beten with diverse arms / and many a torche brennyng by all the wey till
he come to westmynstre / and there he let make for him a riall and a solemn
enterement / and ^eried him by Queen Anne his wife as his own desire was on
the ferther side of seint Edwardes shrine in the Abbey of seint Petres of
westmynstre on whose soul god have mercy Amen And in this same year were a
certain of lollardes taken and falls heretics that had purposed through falls
treson to have slain our king and for to have destroyed all the clergy of the
reame / and they myt have had her falls purpose / but our lord would not suffer
it / for in have our king had warnyng there of and of all her falls ordinance
and wurchynge / and come suddenly with his power to seint ^ohanes without
smythfeld And anon they token a certain of the lollardes and falls heretics
and brought hem un to the kings presence / and there told all her falls
purpose and ordinance how they would have done and wrought and they myt have
reigned and had her wyll^And there they told which were her capitayns and her
governors And than the king commanded hem to the toure of london and than
took moo of hem both within the Cite and without and sent hem to Newgate and
to both cou^tres / And than they were brought in examinacion before the
clergy and the kings Justices / and there they were convicted before the
clergy for her falls heresy and dampened before the justice for her falls treson
/ And this was her ^ugement that they should be draw from the toure of london
un to seint Giles f^ld and there to be honged and brent on the galewes / And
also there was taken sir Rogier Acron knight for heresy and eke for treson
ayens the king and the reame / and he come before the clergy and was convicted
for his heresy to be brent / and dampened before the ^ustices to be draw from
the toure of london through the cite to seint Giles field and to be hanged and
brend And in the second year of king hen^^es regne the v. he held a cou^ceill
of all the lords of the reame at westmynstre and there he put him this
demand / and prayed and besought hem of her goodness and of her good
counceill and good will to show him as touching the title and the right that
he had to Normandy Gascoyne and Guyhenne / the which the king of france
withhelde wrongfully and unrightfully / the which his Auncestres before him had
be true title of conqueste and right heritage the which Normandy Gascoyne and
Guyhenne the good king Edward of wyndesore and his auncestres before him hadden
hold all her lives time / And his lords yafe him counceill to send
enbassatours un to the king of france and his counceill and that he should give
up to him his right heritage that is to say Normandye Gascoyne and guy hen
the which his predecessors hadden hold before him / or else he would it win
with dynt of swerd in short time with the help of Almighty god And than the
Dolphine of france ansuered to our embassatours and said in this manner that
the king was over young and to tender of age to make any werre as ayens him and
was not like yet to be no good werriour to do and to make such a conquest there
upon him / And somewhat in scorn and despite he sen^e to him a tonne full of
tenys balls / be cause he would have somewhat for to play with all for him and
for his lords and that become him better than to maynten any werre / And than
anon our lords that were embassatours token her leave and comen in to England
ayene and told king and his counceill of the ungoodly ansuere that they had of
the dolp^yne / and of the present the which he had sent un to the king And
when the king had herd her words and the ansuere of the Dolphine he was
wonder sore agreued and right (...) p^ied toward the fr^^sshmen and toward the
king and the dolphyn / and thought to avenge him upon ^em as soon as god would
send him grace and myt / and anon let make tenys balls for the dolphyn in all
the have that they might be made / and they were great gonne stones for the
dolphine to play with all

And* than anon the king sent for all his lords and held a great counceille
at westmynstre and told un to hem the ansuere that they had of the dolphine
and of his worthy present that he sent to him and to his lords to pleye with
all And there the king and his lords weren accorded that they should be ready in
arms with her power in the best araie that might be done And get men of arms
and archers that might be gotten and all other stuff that longed to werre and
to be ready with all her retenue to mete at southa^pton be lammasse next sewyng
without any delay wherefore the king ordained his nauye of ships with all
manner of stuff and vitaille that longed to such a w^rrour of all manner
ordinance in the haven of Southampton in to the nombre of CCC.xx. sailles

And than fell there a great disese and a fonle meschief for th^r were iij.
lords which that the king trust much on And through falls couetise they had
purposed and Imagined the kings death And thought to have slain him and all
his brethren or he had take the sea The which were named thus Sir Richard
Earl of Cambrygge brothir to the duke of york the second was the lord Scrope
Tresorier of England the thridde was Sir Thomas gray knight of the Northcontre
And these lords before said for lucre of money had made promysse to the
frenshmen for have slain king Henry and all his worthy brethren by a falls
train sodenliche or they had he ware But Almighty god of his great grace held
his holy hand over hem and saved hem from this perilous meyne And for to have
done this they resceyued of the frensshmen a million of gold And that was there
openly preued And for her falls treson they were all there Iugged un to the
death And this was the I^ggement that they should be ladde through Hampton and
without Northgate there to be heded And thus they ended her life for her falls
couetise and treson

Anon as this was done the king and all his meyne made hem ready and wenten to
ship and token and sailled forth with xv C ships and arrived withyn seyne
at kydecause upon our ladies eve the assupcion in Normandy with all his
ordinance. And so went him forth to hareflete And he beseged the town all
about by land and eke by water And sent to the Captain of the town and
charged him for to deliver the town And the Captain said that he none
delivered him ne none he would to him yield but bad him done his best And than
our king laid his ordinance un to the town that is for to say Gonnes Eug^ues
and Trip^ettes and shetten and cast to the walls and eke un to the Town And
cast down both toures and town and leid hem un to the ground And there he
played at the tenys with his hard gonne stones And they that were within the
town when they should play / there song was well away / and Allas that ^uer
any such tenys balls were made / and cursed all tho that werre began / and
the time that ever they were borne And on the morwe the king did cry at every
gate of the town that every man should be ready on the morwe erly to make
assaute un to the town And william Bouchier and Johan Grant with xij. other
worthy Burg^^ comen to the kyug and besought him of his riall Princehoode and
power to withdraw his malice and destruction that he did un to hem / and
besought him of viij. days of respit^ and trewes if any rescue might comen un
to hem / and else to yield up the town un to him with all her goods / And
than the king sent forth the Captain and kept the remenaunt still with him.
And the lord Gaucorte that was Captain of the town went forth to Rone in
all haste un to the dolphyne for help and socour / But there was none ne no
man of rescue / for the Dolphyne would not abide And thus this Captain come
ayene un to the king and yield up the town and delivered him the keys / And
than he called his uncle the Earl of Dorset and made him Captain of the town
of harflete and delivered him the keys / and ^ad him gone to put out all the
frenssh people both men women and children and stuffed this town of Hareflete
with Englisshmen And than the king sent in to England and did cry in every
good town of England that what crafty man would come thidder and inhabit him
there in y^ town he should have house and household to him and to his heirs
for ever more And so thidder went many diverse marchauntz and crafty men and
enhabited hem there to strength the town And weren welcome / And when the king
saw that this town was well stuffed both of vitaille and of men this worthy
Prince took his leave / and went to Caleys ward by land / and the Frensshmen
herd of his coming they thought to stop him his way that he should not pass
that way and in all the haste that they might breken all the brigge there any
passage was for horse and man in so much that there might no man pass over the
Rivers nothir on horse ne on foot / but if he should be drowned And therefore our
king with all his people went and sought his way far up to Paris ward / And
there was all the riall power of France assembled and ready to give him
bataille and for to destroy all his people / But Almighty god was his gyde and
saved him and all his meyne and defended him of his enemies power and purpose
thanked be god that saved so his own knight and king in his rightful titell
And than our king beholding and seeing the multitude and nombre of his enemies
to withsto^de his wey and give him bataille Than the king with a meke heart and
a good spirit left up his hands to Almighty god and besought him of his help
and socour and that day to save his true seruauntz And than our king gadred
all his lords and other people about and bad hem all be a good chere For they
should have a fair day and a gracious victory and the better of all her
enemies and prayed hem all to make hem ready un to the bataille for he would
rather ^e deed that day in the feld than to be take of his enemies for he would
ne^ put the Reame of England to raunsone for his person And the duke of york
fell on knees and besought the king of a bone y^ he would grant him that day
the avaunteward in his bataille And the king granted him his askyng And said
grant mercy cosyn of york and prayed him to make him ready And than he bad
every man to ordeyne a stake of tree and sharp both ends that the stake might
be pight in the earth a slope that her enemies should not o^ come hem on horse
bak For that was her falls purpose and araied hem all there for to over ride our
meyne suddenly at the first coming on of hem at the first brount And all night
before the bataille the frenshmen made many great fires and much revel with
howting and showting and pleide our king and his lords at the dise and au
archer allwey for a blank of her money For they wenden all had been here is the
morn arose the day began spring And the king by good auise let araie his
bataille and his wenges and charged every man to keep hem hole to gedres and
prayed hem all to be of good chere And when they were ready he asked what time
of y^ day it was And they said Prime Than said said our king now is good time
For all England prays for us and therefore be of good chere and let us go to
our ^ourney And than he said with an high vois in the name of Almighty god and
of se^^t George a vaunt Baner and seint George this day thine help

And than these frensshmen come prikyng down as they would have over ridden
all our meyne But god and our Archiers made hem sone to stomble For our
Archiers shet never arowe amys but it perisshed and brought to gronnde man or
horse

For they shoten that day for a wager And our stakes made hem top over ^erue
each on other that they lay on hepes two spear length of heyhte And our king
with his meyne and with his men of arms and archiers that thakked on hem so
thikke with arewes and leyde on thith stakes and our king with his own hondes
faught manly And thus Almighty god and seint George brought our enemies to
ground / and yase us that day the victory and there were slain of frensshmen
that day in the field of Agincourte moo thanne xj.M. with prisoners that were
taken / And there were nombred that day of frensshmen in the field moo than six
score thousand and of Englisshmen not vij. thousand / but god that day faught
for us / And after come there tidings to our king that there was a new
bataille of frensshmen ordained ready to stele on him and comen toward him /
Anon our king ^et cry that every ^an should slay his prisoners that he had
take / and anon araied his bataille dyene ready to fight with the frensshmen
And when they saw that our men killed down her prisoners / thanne they with
drowe hem and brake her bataille and all her array.

And thus our king as a worthy conqueror / had that day the victory in the
field of Agencourt in picardie And than our king returned ayene there that the
bataille was / to see what people were deed of Englisshmen / and if any were
hurt that myt be help / And there were deed in the field the duke of Barrye The
duk of Alaunsome / the duke of Braban / the Earl of Nauerne the chief
Conestable of France and viij. other Earls / and the Erchebisshoppe of Saunce
/ and of good Barons an hond^^d and moo / and of worthy knights of great
aliaunce of cote ar^^ures a thousand and five hound^ed And of Englissh men was
deed that day the good duke of york and the Earl of southfolke / and of all
other of Englisshmen there were not deed passing xxvj. bodies thanked be god
And this bataille was on a friday which was Crispyue and Crispinianes day in
the month of Octobre And anon the king commanded to bery hem and the duke of
york to be carried forth with him and the Earl of southfolke

And there were prisoners the duke of Orliaunce / the duke of Burbone / the
Earl of ^endome / the Earl of Ewe / the Earl of Richemond and Sir Bursigaunt
Marchall of France / and many other worthy lords weren there taken in this
bataille of Agencourt and were brought un to the town of Caleys / and so over
the sea with the king in to England and londed at Dover in kente with all his
prisoners in saufe^e thanked be god almighty And so come to Caunterbury and
offered at Seint Thomas shrine And so forth he rode through kente the next way to
Eltham and there he rested till that he would come to london And than the Maire
of london and the Aldermen Shreues with all the worthy co^muners and crafts
comen to Blakhethe well and worthily ar^^ied to welcome our king with diverse
melodies And thanked to Almighty god of his gracious victory that he had
showed for him And so the king and his prisoners passed forth by hem till he
come to seint Thomas wateryng And there met with him all religious with
process^on and welcomed him And so the king come ridyng with his pasoners
through the Cite of london where y^ there was showed many a fair sight at all
the conduytes and at the cross in chepe as in heavenly array of Angeles
Archangeles Patriarchs Prophets and virgins with diverse melodies sensing
and syngyng to welcome our king And all the conduytes rennyng with wine And the
king passed forth un to seint poules and there met with him xiiij. bisshoppes
reuessed and mitered with sens^ers to welcome the king And songen for his
gracious victory Te deum laudamu^ And there the king offered and took and rode
to westmynster And than the maire took his leave of the king and rode home ayene
And in the iij. year of king Henry's regne the v. come the Emperor of Almaigne
king of Rome and of Hungary in to England and so to the Cite of london

And the Maire and the Aldermen with the shreues and worthy craftis of london
by the kings commandment met with him on the blak hethe in the best array
that they could on horse bake And there they welcomed him and brought him to
london with much honor and great reverence And at seint Thomas wateryng there
met with him the king with all his lords in good array And there was a worthy
metyng bitwene the Emperor and the king and there they kyssed to gedres and
enbrached each other And than the king took the Empour by the hand and so they
come ridyng through the cite of london un to seint Poules and there they alight
and offered and all the Bisshoppes stoden reuessed with sensers in her hondes
sensyng

And than they token her horse and riden un to westmynstere And there the king
logged the Emperor in his own Paleys And there he rested him a great while
and all at the kings cost^ And sone after come the duke of Holand in to
England to come and see there the Emperor And to speak with him and with king
Henry of England And he was worthily resseyued and logged in the bisshoppes
ynne of Ely And all at the kings cost

And when the Emperor had well rested him and sey the land in diverse perties
and know the co^modites than by process of time he took his leave of the king
/ but or he yede he was made knight of the Gartier and resseyued and wered the
livery / And than he thanked the king and all his worthy lords / And than the
king and he went over the sea un to Caleys / and abiden there long time to have
an ansuere of the frenssh king / and at the last it come and plesed him right
noght And the Emperor took his leave of the king and passed forth in gods
name / and onre king come over ayene in to England in all the haste that he myt
and that was on seint lukes eve that he come to lambithe And on the monday next
after he come in to the perlement at westmynstre And in this same year was a
great derthe of corn in england / but thanked be god it lasted not long And
in the iiij. year of king henry's regne the v. he held his perlement at
westmynstre in the beginning of the month of Octobre and lasted un to the
purificacion of our lady than next after / And there was granted un to the
king to maynten his werres both of spirituelte and of temperalte an hole tax
and a d^s^^e / And than anon the king prayed all his lords to make hem ready
to strength him in his right / And anon he let make a new retenue / and
charged all men to be ready at hampton in witson weke than next after without
any delay

And there the king made the duke of Bedeford protector and defen^our of his
Reame of England in his absence / and charged him to keep his laws / and
maynten both spirituelte and temperelte

And when the king had thus done and set all thing in his kind On seint
marks day that was that time hokketewysday he took his horse at westmynstre and
come ridyng to Poules and there he offered and took his leave And so rode forth
through the Cite taking his leave of all manner of people as well of pour as of
rich prayeng hem all in general to pray for him / And so he rode forth to
Seint Georges and there he offered and took his leave of the Maire chargyng him
to keep well his chamber / And so rode forth to hampton and there abode till
his retenue were ready and comen / for there was all his nauye of ships with
his ordinance gadred and well stuffed / as longed to such a riall king with
all manner of vitailles for such a riall people as well for horse as for man /
as longed for such a werriour / that is for to say Armure / Gonnes / Tripgetes
/ eug^nes / sowes / Bastiles / Brigges of lether / Scalyng laddres / Malles /
S^^des / Shoueles / Pykeys / Paueys / Bows / and ar^wes / Bow strings /
Tonnes / Chestes and pipes fulle of arewes as neded for such a worthy werrour
that no thing was to seche when time come thidder come to him ships lade with
gonnes and gonnepoudre And when this was ready and his retenue come the king and
his lords with all his riall host went to shipp and token the sea and sailden
in to Normandy and londed at Touke upon the lamasse ^ day than next And there
he made xlviij. knights at his londing And than the king hering of many
enemies upon the sea that is to say ix. great carikkes hulkes galeies and
ships that weren come to destroy his nauye And anon he commanded the Earl
of the march to be chief chyuetayne and many other worthy lords with him with
men of arms and archiers to go to the sea that none enemies defouled his nauye
ne entered his land in no party for to destoruble his viage ne his Journey And
anon the Earl took his meyny and went to shipp and s^ymmed the sea and kept
the sea costs that no manner of enemy durst route upon the sea And anon the
king sent his heraudes un to the Captain of Touke and charged him to deli^
him his Castle and his town and else he should neithir leave ma^ne child a
live And anon the Captain and iiij. other burgeis of the town brought the
keys to the king and besought him of grace And the king delivered the keys to
sir Johan kykeley and made him Captain and commanded him to put out all
frenshmen both of the town and of the Castle And there beside was the Castle
of lovers and thidder the king sent the Earl marchall with a fair meyne and
sauted the town Anon it was yolde to the Earl and brought him the keys And
he brought the keys to the king And the king took him the keys and made him
Captain of the Castle of lovers and of all that longed there to and charged
him to deliver out all the frenshmen And than the king held forth his wey to
Cane that was a strong town a fair and a riall Castle theryn And anon he
sent his heraudes to the Captain and charged him to deliver the town and his
Castle or else he would hem get with strength of hand And they ansuerd and
said that he took hem none ne none they would deliver un to him And than anon
he laid his siege un to the town and laid gonnes on every side and beat a
down both walls and toures and slow much people in her houses and eke in
streets And the good duke of Clarence laid a down the walls on his side un to
the ground And so withyn a while the king by his counceill sawted the town
all about And anon the duke of Clarence had ^ntred in to the town and slow
down right till he come to the king and spared nothir man ne child and ever
they cried A Clarence A Clarence and seint George And there was deed on the
walls on the kings sides a worthy man that was called springes the which the
king commanded to be beried in the Abbey of Cane fast by william conqueror on
whose soul god have mercy Amen And than the king come in to the town with his
brother the duke of Clarence and many other worthy lords with much solempnite
and myrthe And than the king commanded the Capitayn to deliver him his Castle
and he besought the king to give him xiiij. days of respite if any rescue would
come and if none come to deliver him the keys and the Castle at his
commandment And under this compos^cione was the town and the Castle of
Baious with other tonnes fortresses and villages in to the nombre of xiiij.
upon the hill before the Castle of Cane our king pight all his tents that
seemed a town as much as Cane and by that come tidings that no rescue would
come there And so at the xiiij. day at end the Captain come out of the
Castle and delivered the keys and the Castle to our king and Baious and the
other xiiij. tounes weren delivered un to him also And anon the king delivered
the keys to the duke of Clarence and made him Captain both of the town and
of the Castle and made him Captain of Baious and of all the other tounes
also And so entered the Castle and the town also and there he held seint
Georges feste And there he made xv. knights of the bath there was Sir Lowys
Robersart Salyn Chaynye Mougomery and many other worthy men And the king
commanded hem for to put out all the frenshmen and women and no man so hardy
to defoule no woman ne take no manner good away from hem but let pass in pees
in pain of death.

And there passed out of the town in one day mo than xv. honderd wymmen And
than our king let stuff the town and Castle with Englisshmen and ordained
there two Capitaynes one for the town and an other for the Castle And charged
hem up on her life for to keep well the town and the Castle

And or our king went thens he gate Valeys Newelyne and leid a siege to
Chirburgh And that siege leid the duke of Gloucestre with a strong power and
mighty and by process of time gate it and made there a Captain of the same
town And the same time the Earl of warrewyke leid a siege to Dounfra^nce and
gate it and put therein a Captain And for to speak more of the Earl of the
march that the king ordained to skym the sea and to keep the costs of England
for all manner enemies / the wind arose upon hem / that they wend all to have
be lost / but through the grace of god Almighty and good governance they
ridden before wyhte all that storm / And there were lost ij. Carrikkes and two
balingers with marchaundises and other goods and all the people that were
withynne / And an other Carrik drove before hampton and threw his mast over
the town walls and this was on seint Bartholmewes day And when all this
storm was sesed / this worthy Earl of march took his ships with his me^ne
and went to the sea and londed in Normandy at hogs / and so ridden forth
toward the king / And ever as he come the frensshmen fled And there come to
hem an Anthony pigge and followed the host all that way till they come to a
great water and there they drad to have been deed the water closed hem so that
they might no where get out / But at the last god Almighty and this pigge
brought hem out all saufe / And there they caught a gyde that knew all the
contre about and he brought hem through a quyke sand and so in to an I Will / and
there they took many prisoners in her way toward the king in her ^ourney / and
so they comen un to Cane / And there the king welcomed him and took his ^ourney
at Argentone / And anon it was yold un to the king and they had her lives and
went her way

And than our king remeued to a strong town that was called Cese / and there
was a fair mynster and they yield it anon un to the king / And than the king
went from thens to Alaunsome and wan the town and the brigge / And the king
sent the Earl of warrewyke to a town that was called Belesme with a huge and
a strong power and anon they yield and put hem in the kings grace and in his
mercy / And so did many moo strong tounes and Castelles that were in tho
parties And from thens they went to Vernill in Perch and anon it was yolde
un to the king both town and Castle bodies and goods at the kings grace /
And so the king gate and conquered all the tounes and Castelles Pyles
strengthes and Abbeys un to Pountlarge / And from thens un to the Cite of Rone
And in the v. year of king henry's regne the v. Sir Johan Oldecastell that was
the lord Cobham was arested for heresy and brought un to the tour of london
And anon after he brake out of the toure and went in to walys and there kept
him long time And at the last the lord Powy^ met with him and took him / but
he stood at great defense long time and was sore wounded or he would be take.
And so the lord Powys men brought him out of walys to london in a wherlecole
and so he was brought to westmynster and there was examined of certain points
that were put upon him / and he said not nay and so he was conuicte of the
clergy for his heresy and dampened before the Justices unto the death for
treson. And so he was lad un to the toure ayene / and there he was leid on an
hurdell and draw through the Cite to seint Giles feld / and there was made a
new pair of galewes and a strong cheyne and a coler of yren for him and there
he was honged and brent on the Galewes and all for his lewdenesse and his false
opinions.

ANd in the vj. year of king Henry's regne the v. he sent his uncle sir Thomas
Beaufort duke of excestre with a fair meyne of men of arms and archers to for
the Cite of Rone and there displaied his baner and sent heraudes un to the
town and bad hem yield that Cite un to our king her liege lord / And they said
he took hem none to keep ne none he should have there / but if it were right
dear y bought and meued with her hondes / for other ansuere would they none give
but gonnes And there the duke took good auisement of the ground all about /
And anon there issued out of the Cite a great meyne of men of arms both on
horse bake and on foot and anon our meyne met with hem / and over threw an
hepe of hem and there were slain and take xxx. persons of right good mennys
bodies and the remenaunt fled ayene in to the toun^ And the duke went un to
Pountlarge un to the king and told him all how he had spedde and how him liked
the ground

And anon as he was go they cast a down all her subbarbes about the Cite un
to the hard ground / for the king there no refresshyng should have at his
coming And the friday before la^masse day than next folewyng our king with his
host come before rone and anon he set his siege round about that Cite /
and anon let ley his ordinance un to the town / And the king and his lords
were^ logged in the charterhous and great strength about hem / and that was
in the Este party of the Cite And the duke of Clarence logged him at the west
end in a wast Abbey before the Port Chaux And the duke of Excestre in the
Northside before the Port Bea^uesyn And bitwene the duke of Clarence and the
duke of Excestre was the Earl Marchall logged with a strong power before the
Castle gate And than was the Earl of Ormond the lord harington and the lord
Calbot with her retenue next him / And than sir Johan Corn waille and many
other noble knytes of name with her retenue lay with the duke of Clarence / And
from the duke of Excestre toward the king were logged the lord Roos the lord of
will^by the lord Phehewe and sir william Porter knight with her retenue before
the port of seint hillare / And than was the Earl of Mortayne with his retenue
logged in the Abbey of Seint katerines / And the Earl of Salisbury with his
retenue lay on that other side of seint katerines / And sir Johan Gray knight
was logged at the Abbey that is called mount seint Michell / And Sir Phelipp
leche knight the kings tresorer was logged bitwene the water of Seyne and the
abbey and kept the ward under the hill And the Baron of Carowe was logged
under the water side to keep the passage / And Ienico the squire lay next to
him on the water side / And they ij. squyers kept manly the water of seyne and
fought with her enemies often times And on that other side of seyne lay the earl
of huntyngdone / And Mastir Neuill the Earls sone of westmer land / And Sir
Gilbert vmfreuille Earl of keme / and Sir Richard of Arundell and the lord
feriers with her retenue before Port du pounte and each of thees lords had
strong ordinance / And the king did make at Pountlarge over the water of
seyne a stconge and amyghty cheyue of Iren and put it through great Pyles fast
pight in the ground and that went over the River of Seyne that no vessel
might pass that in no kind / And above that cheyne the king let make a brigge
over the water of seyne that man and ho^s and all other carriage might go to
and fro at all times when need were / And than come the Earl of warrewyke and
had got Dounfront un to the king Henry of England /

And anon the king sent the Earl of war wyke to Cawdebeke to besege it /
And when he come before the town he sent his heraudes un to the Captain and
bad him yield the town upon pain of death And anon he leid his siege / And
the Captain besought the Earl that he might come to his presence and speak
with him / And so the good Earl granted him / And than he come out and four
other Burgeis with him / and entreted so with this ^rle that this same town
was under composicion to done as the Cite of Rone did and the Earl granted and
consented there to upon this condition that the kings nauye with his ordinance
might pass up by hem in saufte without any manner bette or desturbaunce and to
his composicion they set to their (...) And the ships passed up by hem in
saufete and come before the Cite of Rone in to an honderd ships and there
they cast her ankers and than this Cite was beseged both by land and by water
And when all this was done and ships comen up / than come the Earl of war
wyke ayene to the king / and logged him bitwene the Abbey of seint katerines
and the king / till that the Abbey entreted and was yold un to the king / And
than he remeued him thens and logged him before Port marcenuylle And tho was
the Earl of Salisbury commanded by the king to make him ready to ride but there
com^ hasty tydyng and made him to abide / And so he returned ayene and logged
him beside the Earl of Huntyngdon till the siege was ended And than come the
duke of Gloucestre the kings brother from the siege of Chirbourgh the which he
had wonnen and geten and stuffed ayene un to the kings behoue and profit un to
the croune of England And when he was come to the king before Rone anon he
logged with great ordinance before port seint Hillare more nere the town and
his ennemies than any other lay by xl. rods of ^^ugthe withyn shot of quarrel
/ And with him lay the Earl of Southfolke and the lord of Bergeuen^y with all
her retenue and strong ordinance / and manly and proudely fout every day with
her enemies / ever when they issued out of the cite. And than come the priour
of kylmayne of Irland over the sea un to the king with a fair meyne of men of
arms of her own co^tre gyse the sum of xv.C. good mennys bodies and the
king welcomed hem and made hem right good chire And than come tidings un to
the king that the king of France and the dolphyne and the duke of Burgoyne
would come a down to res^ue the Cite of Rone with a strong power of all manner
of nacion^ and break the siege and he casted him to enter on the Northside of
the host / because that there was the best enter and most pleyne ground /
And therefore the king assigned the Priour of kylmayne with his poer and logged
him on the Northside of the host to stop her passage / and was by the forest
of lyous / And of this ordinance they were full glad And so they went forth in
have / and kept ground and the place that the king and his counceill had
assigned hem.

And they quitte hem as good werriours un to her king.

Now wull I tell you which were the chief Capitayns and ^ouernours of the
Cite of Rone Mon Sir Gny Bo^^^ere was chief Captain both of the Cite and of
the Castle And sir Termegan he was Captain of Port de Canx ^ mon Sir de la
Roche he was Capitayn of the disners / Mon sir Anthoyne he was lieutenaunt to
mon sir Gny botiller Henry chantfien he was Captain of the port de la pounte
^ohan Mantreuas he was Captain of the port de la Chastell / Mon Sir de
Preanx he was Captain of the port of seint Hillarie the Bastard of Tyne he
was Captain of the port martenuille / And grant ^akes a worthy werriour he
was Captain of all men of werre / And he was governor outeward both on
horsebake and a foot of all men of arms when they issued out of the Cite of
all the ports he hem araied as they should country with our meyne / And e^he of
these Capitayn^ lad ^.M. men of arms and sum moo / And at the first coming
of our king there were nombred by heraudes in to ^cc.M. of men and women and
children what young and old / and among all thees was many a manfull man of
his hondes and so they preued hem wha^ they issued out of the Cite both on
horsebake and on foot / for they come never at one gate out allone / but at
iij. or iiij gates and at every gate ij. or.iij.M. of good men's bodies y
armed and manfully cou^tred with our Englisshmen and much people slain diverse
times with gonnes quarelles and other ordinance And this siege dur^d xx. wekes
/ And ever they of the town hoped to have be rescued / but there come none / so
at the last they kept so long y^ ^oun that ^he^ deide many thousands within
the town for defaute of me^e of me^ of wymmen and of children / for they had
eten her horse dogs and cattes that w^^e in the town And often times the men
of arms drofe out the pour people out at the gates of the town for spendyng
of vitaille / And anon our Englisshmen drofe hem in to the town again So at
the last the Capit^yne of the town saw the meschief that they were not rescued
/ And also the sca^ate of vitaille / and that the people so deide for defaute of
mete every day many thonsandes And also saw young children lie and so^ke her
modres pappes and were^^ deed Than anon they sent un to the king besechyng
him of grace and mercy and brought the keys of the town un to the king and
delivered the town to him and all the ^oudiours voided the town with her horse
and harneis and the communes of the town for to abide and duelle still in the
town yerly to pay to him and to his successors for a^^e manner customs and
fee fermes and kateremes And than the king entered in to the town and rested
him in the Castle till the town was set in (...) and in governance

How the king of England was made heritier and regent of france and how he
wedded queen katherine Ca.CC.xlv.
ANd anon after that rone was gotten Deep and many other tounes in baas
normandy yaf them over without strok or siege when they understood that the
king had gotten rone / Also this same year had been a pees made and sworn
bitwene the duke of Burgoyne and the dolphyne which were sworn upon o^r
lords body that they should love and assiste each other against their enemies /
And after this contrary to this oath / the duke Johan of Burgoyne was slain and
pitously murthred in the presence of the dolphyne wherefore the frenshmen were
greatly divided / and of verray necessite labouryd to have a trayttye with the
king of england / For the king of England wan daily of them tounes Cast^lles
and fortresses / Also this same year was queen Jane arestid and brought to the
castle of ledis in kente / And one friar randolf a doctor of divinity her
confessor / which afterward was slain by the person of the tour falling at
words and debate / And after Queen Jane was delivered In the vij. year both
kings of france and of England were acorded and king henry was made heir and
regent of france And wedded dame katerine the kings daughter of france at
Troyes in Champaine on trinite sunday And this was made by the m^ne of Phelip
newly made duke of Bourgoyne / which was sworn to king henry / For tauenge his
fadres death and was he come Englissh And then the king with his new wife
went to Paris where he was rially received / And from thens he with his lords
and the duk^ of Bourgoyne and many other lords of france leid s^ege to
diverse tounes and Castelles that held of the dolphynes party / and wan hem /
but the toun^ of Melun held long for theryn were good defendours In the viij.
year the king and queen came over see and londed on Candelmasse day in the
morwe at dover And the xiiij. day of fenerer the king came to london And the
xxj. day of the same month the queen come And the xxiiij. day of the same she
was crouned at westmynster / Also the same year anon after ester the king
held a perlement at westmynster / at which perlement it was ordained that the
gold in englissh coin should be weyed / and none resseyued but by weight / And
anon after whit sontyd the king sailled to Calens and passed so forth in to
france And in march the xxij. day / before the king came over / the duk of
claren^e was slain in france and diverse other lords taken prisoners as the
earl of hu^tyngdon / the earl of somersete with diu^se other And all was be
cause they would not take with hem archiers / but thought to have do with the
frensshmen them self without hem / And yet when he was slain the archers
come and rescued the body of the duke which they would have carried with hem /
god ha^^ mercy on his soul / he was a valiant man / And the same year bitwene
Cristemas and Candelmas the town of Melun was yol^en to the king In the ix.
year on seint Nicholas day in decembre was born Henry the kings first begoten
sone at wyndesore / whose godfadre^ at fontstone was Henry bisshopp of
wynchestre and Johan duke of Bedford and the duchess of holand was godmoder /
and Henry chiche ley Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury was godfadre at conferming
And in the x. year the Cite of M^ws in brie was gotten / which had been long
beseged / And this same year the queen shipped at hampton and sailled ou^r to
the king in france / where she was wurshippfully received of the king / and
also of the king of france her fadre and of her modre / And thus king Henry
wan fast in france and held great astate / and sat at dinner at a great fest
in Paris crouned and the queen also / which had not been seen to fore and all
people resorted un to his court / but as to the king of france he held none
astateue rule but was left almost allone / Also this year the wethercoke was
set upon poulus steple at london / And this year in the month of August the
king wexe sike at boys de vyncent / and when he saw he should deye he made his
testament / and ordained many thyng^s nobly for his soul / and devoutly
resseyued all the rightes of holy church / in so ferforth that when he was
enoynted he said the seruise with the priest / and at the verse of the psalm
Miserere mei deus / that was Benign fac dn^e in bona voluntate tua syon vt
edificentur muri Ihrlm^ / he bad tarry there and said thus / O good lord thou
know that mine intent has been and yet is if I might live to reedyfie the
wallis of Ihrlm^ / and then the priest proceeded forth and made an end / And
anon after this most noble prince and victorious king flour in his time of
christian chivalry whom all y^ world doubted gaf his soul in to y^ hands of
god and deide and made an end of his naturell life at the said Boys de vyncent
beside paris the xxxvj. year of his age / on whose soul god have mercy Amen
Then was y^ body enbamed and cered and lerde in a riall chare and an image
like un to him was leyde upon the corpse open with diu^rse baners and horse
covered richely with tharmes of England and france / and also tholde arms of
seint Edwardis / seint Edmond and other and with great multitude of torchis /
with whom went the king of Scotland and many other lords which accompanyd the
body till it come un to westmynstre by london in England And in every town by
the way he had solempnely his dirige on theuen and mass on the morn / and
much alms was given to pour people by the way / And the vij. day of
nouembre after the ^orps was brought through london with great reverence and
solempnite to westmynstre where he now lies / it was wurship fully buried /
and after was leid on his tomb a riall image like to him self of silver and
gylt which was made at cost of queen katerine / And thus ended and is entered
and buried the noble king henry the fyfte on whose soul and all christian souls
god have mercy amen

Of the lawde of king Henry the fifthe / and what he ordained for king Richard
and for him self after his death Capitulo du^ent^simo xlvj.
HEre is to be noted that this king henry the v. was a noble prince after he
was king and crouned / how be it to fore in his yougthe he had been wild
recheles and spared no thing of his lusts ne desires / but accomplisshed them
after his likynge / but as soon as he was crouned enoynted and sacred anon
suddenly he was changed in to a new man and set all his intent to live
virtuously in mayntenyng of holy church / destroyng of of heretikis / Keeping
Justice and defending of his Reame and subgettis And for as moch^ as his fadre
had deposid by his labor the good king R^chard / and pytously made him to die
/ and for thoffence done to him aye^^st his ligeaunce / he had sent to Rome to
be assoilled thereof / For which offense the pope our holy fadre enjoined him to
make him be p^^^^ed fore perpetuelly / and like as he had done to be taken from
him his ^aturell life therefore he should do found iiij. tapers to brenne
perpetuelly about his body / that for the extinction of his bodily life his
soul may ever be remembered and live in heaven in spirituell life And also that
he should ^uery weke on the day as it comes about of his death have a solemp^e
mass of Requiem on the even to fore a dirige with ix lessons and a dole to
pour people always on that day of xj. shillinges viij. pens to be delid penny
mele / And ones in the year at his annyuersarie his terment to be holden in the
most honest wise / and to be deled that day xx. pound in pens to pour people
/ And to every monk to have xx. shillings which all these things performed
this noble king for his ^adre / for king henry the iiij. his fadre performed it
not ducing his life / whom as it is said god touchid and was a lepre er he
diede / Also then this noble prince let do call all the abbottys and
priours of seint benets order in england And had the^ in the chapitre house of
westmynstre for the reformacion of the order wherein he had comynicacion / And
also with bisshops and men of y^ spu^alte / in so fer forth / that they doubted
sore he would have had the ^emporaltees out of their hands / wherefore by
thauys / labor and procuryng of the spu^alte encoraged the king to challenge
Norman die and his right in france / to the end to set him a work there that
he should not seek occasions to enter in to such matters / And all his live
after he labourid in the werris in conquering great part of the Royame of
france / that by the agreement of the king Charlis had all the governance of
the royame of france / and was proclaimed regent and heir of france / And so
not withstandyng all this great werre that he had / yet he remembered his soul
and also that he was mortal and must die For which he ordained by lys life the
place of his sepulture where he is now buried and every day iij. masses
perpetuelly to be songen in a fair chapel over his sepulture / of which the
myddil mass and the first and less mass shall be as is assigned by him as it
apperith by thise versis following

Henrici miss quinti sunt hic tabulate
Que successiue sunt per monachos celebrate
Die dm^ca Prima sit assumpte. de festo virgiuis alme.
Poscit postremam xpu^s de morte resurgens.
Feria ij. Prima salutate. festo virginis extat
Nunciat angelicis. laudem postrema choris
Feria iij Esse deu^ natu^^e virgme prima fatetur
Co^memorat na^am. sic vltima missa mariam
Feria iiij* Prima celebretur. ad honorem neupmatis almi
^ltima conceptam. denu^ciat esse mariam.
Feria v. Semper prima coli. debet de corpere xpristi
^ltima sit facta. de virgin purificata
Feria vj Condecet vt prima. celebretur de cruce sancta.
At^^ salutate. fiet postrema marie
Sabbato Omnes alij sco^s. est prima colenda su^nos
^ltima de requie. pro defunctis petit esse
Semper erit media. de proprietate dei
And yet the noble kyug henry the v fouuded ij. houses of religion one callid
S^on beside braynford of the order of seint B^igitte both of men and women And
on that other side of the rin^r of t^mise an house of monks of chartrehous in
which two places he is continuelly pray for night and day / for ever when they
of sion rest / they of the chartrehous done their seruise / and in like wise
when they of the chartrehous rest the other goon to / and by the ringyng of y^
bellis of either place / each knows wha^ they have ^ded their seruise which
be nobly endowed / and done daily there great alms deeds / as in the
chartrehous certain children ^en found to scole and at sion certain alms
given daily / And yet beside all this he had founded a recluse which shall be
always a priest to pray for him by y^ said chartrehous / which priest is well
and sufficiently endowed for him and a servant / ^o here may all princes take
ensample by this noble prince that regnyng so litell time not fully x. year did
so many noble acts as well for his soul to be perpetuelly remembered and
prayed for as in hi^ worldly conquestis and he being in his most lusty age
despised and esche wid sin and was virtuous and a great Iustiser in so much
that all y^ princes of Cristendome dradde him and also of hethenes / and had
de^myned iij him self if god would have spared him y^ he would have werred again
the sarasyns / and for to know the aid of other ^nces and all the passages in
that Journey he sent a knyt of henaude named sir hugh de lanoye un to Ihrlm^ /
but e^ he returned he deide at boys du vince^t in the xxxvj. year of his age on
whose soul god have mercy

How king Henry the vj. reigned being a child not one year of age / and of the
bataille of vernoill in perch Ca.cc.xlvij
AFter king henry the v. reigned henry his sone but a child and not fully a year
old whose regne began the first day of septe^bre the year of our lord
M.cccc.xxij. This king being in his cradell was much doubted and drad by cause
of the great conquest of his fadre and also the wisdom and guyding of his
uncles the duk of bedford and the duk of gloucestre / This year the xxj. day of
Octobre deide Charles king of france / and lies buried at seint denis / And
then was the duke of bedford made regent of france / and the duke of
gloucestre was made protector and defendour of england / And the first day of
march after / was sir william Taillour priest degrated of his preesthode and on
the morn aft^r he was brent in smythfeld for heresy. This year sir James
stiward king of scotts married dame Jane the duches daughter of Claren^^ of her
first housbonde therle of Somersete / at seint mary ouerays / Also this year
the xvij. day of August was the bataill of vernaill in perch bi^wene the duke
of B^dtford regent of france and the duke of alaunsone / which was a great
bataille The duke of Bedford had on his side with him the Earl of Salysbury
Mountagu and the lord Talhote and all the poer that they could make in
Normandy the garnyso^s kep^e And also many Capitayns with much people of the
duke of burgoyns And on that other side was the duke of Alaunson / the du^^ of
Curon that was therle douglas / the earl of Boughan with many lords of france
and great company of Scotts and army naks And then the Earl douglas callid
the duke of Bedford Johan with the beden swerd / and he sent him word again
that he should find that day that his swerd was of steell / And so the bataille
Joined on both sides and fought long / that there wyste noman who should have
the better a great while / but at the last as god would the victory fill un to
the Englissh party / For there were slain / the Earl douglas which a litell
before was made duke of Turone / the Earl of bowhayne / the Earl of almarre /
the earl of Tounar / the Earl of vauntedore and the viscounte of Nerhonne
which was one of them that slow duke Johan of Bourgoyne knelyng tofore the
dolphyne and many moo un to the nombre of ten thousand and moo And there was
taken prisoner the duke of Alaunson and many other lords and gentiles of
france / but scotts that day were slain down right the substannce of them
all.

In the thridde year of king Henry the vj. the duke of gloucestre married the
duchess of holand and went over ser with her in to hena^de for to take
possession of his wyfes enheritaunce where he was honorably received and taken
for lord of the land But sone after he was fayn to return home again and
left his wife and his tresour that he brought with him in a town is called
Mounse in henaude / which promised for to be true to him / Notwithstanding
they delivered the lady to the duke of Bourgoyne which sent her to gaunt And
from thens she escaped in a man's array / and come in to zeland to a toun^ of
her own called zierix^e And fro thens she went to a tonne in holand called
the ghowde and there she was strong enough and withstode the said duke of
bourgoyne / And sone after the duke of Gloucestre sent over in to Zeland the
lord fitzwater with certain men of werre and Archers for to help and socour
the forsaid duchess of holand / which londed at a place in Zeland called
brewer^ haven / where the lords of the contre come down and fought with him /
and in conclusion he was fayn to withdraw him and his meyne to the sea agane /
But yet he slew and hurt diverse lords and much people of that same contreye
/ And so returned home again with his meyne and prevailed no thing Also this
same ye^^ Earl of Salisbury / the Earl of suffolk / the lord wylby and the
lord Scalis with their retenue leid siege to the Cite of Manus / the which Cite
was yolden to them in short time with many other strong tounes and Castles to
the nombre of xxxvj. This time all Normandy and a great part of france un to
Orl^aunce was under thobeyssaunce of the king of England / And all the
remenau^t of france was in great trib^lacion and meschief

How there was a great affraye like to have been bitwene the Cardinal and the
duke of Gloucestre / And of the coronacion of king Henry the sixthe both in
england and in france Capitulo ducentesimo xlv.ij.
IN the iiij. year the same night that the Maire of london Johan Couentre had
taken his charge / was a great wacche in london / for affray that was bitwene
the bisshopp of wynchestre and the duke of Gloucestre protector and^ For the
maire with the people of the Cite would abide by the duke of Gloucestre as
protector of the Reame / but by labor of lords that went bitwene and in
especial by the labor of the Prince of Portingale / there was a poyntement
taken that there was no harm done / And after the bataille of verneyll in
perch the duke of Bedford come ^uer in to england / And on whitsonday this
same year at leycestre he dubbed king Henry knight / And forthwith the said
king Henry dubbed all these knights / whose names follow / that is to wete
Richard duke of york / also the sone and heir of the duke of Norffolke / the
Earl of Oxenford / the Earl of westmerland / the sone and heir of the Earl of
Northumberland / the sone and heir of the Earl of ^rmond / the lord Roos / Sir
James butele^ ^ the lord matrauas / Sir Henry Gray of Tankeruile / Sir william
Neuill lord Fawconbrigge / sir George Neuill lord latymer / The lord wellis /
the lord berkley The sone and heir of the lord Talbot / Sir Rauf gray of werk
/ Sir Robert veer / Sir Richard gray / Sir Edmond hongerford / Sir Robert
wynkfeld / Sir Johan boteller / Sir Raynold cobham / Sir Johan passheley / Sir
Ihomas Tunstall / Sir Johan Chidioke / Sir Rauf langford / Sir william drury /
Sir william ap Thomas / sir Richard Carbonell / Sir Richard wydeuile / Sir
Johan Sh^rdelowe / Sir ^icholl blonket / Sir Rauf Ratteclife^ sir Edmond
trafford / Sir william Cheyne / sir william babyngton / sir Johan June / sir
Gilbert Beauchamp Item in the v. year the duke of Bedford with the duchess his
wife went over see to Caleys And a litell to fore went over Harry bisshopp of
wynchestre And on our lady day Annunciacion in our lady ch^rche at Caleys the
bisshoppe of wynchestre when he had song mass was made Cardinal / And he
knelyng to fore the hye auter the duke of Bedford set the hat on his head /
and there were his bulls red as well of his charge as the reioyssyng of his
benefices spirituel and temporel

And this same year was great habundaunce of Rain / that the substance of
heye and of corn was destroyed / For it rayned almost every other day This
same year the good Earl of Salisbury sir Thomas Montagu leid siege un to
Orliaunce at which siege he was slain with a gonne / which come out of the
town / on whose soul god have mercy For since that he was slain english men
never gate ne prevailed in France / but ever after began to lose litel and
litell till all was lost Also this same year a breton murthred a good wedowe in
her bed withonte algate / which wedowe fond him for alms / And he bare
away all that she had.

And after this he took the grith of holy church at se^^t Georges in south
werk / and there took the cross and forswore this land

And as he went it happend that he came by the place where he did this cursed
deed in the subarbis of london / And the women of the same parissh come out
with stones and canel dunge and slow and made an end of him / Notwithstanding
the Constables and many other men being present to keep him / For there were
many women / and had no pite Also this same year the duke of Norfolk with many
ge^tilmen and yomen took his barge the viij. day of Nouembre at seint mary
ouereyes for to have goo through london brigge / and through mysguydyng of the
barge / it ouerthrewe on the piles and many men drowned / but the duke him
self with ij. or iij. lepe upon the piles and so were saved with help of m^n
that were above the brigge wiche casted done Roopes / by which they saved hem
self This same year on seint Lenardes day king Henry being vij. year of age
was crouned at westmestre / at whose Coronacion were made xxxvj. knights This
year on seint Georges day he passed over the sea to Caleys toward france
About this time and before the Royame being in great misery and tribulacion /
the dolphyne with his party began to make werre and get certain places and
make destrusses upon englisshmen / by the mean of his Capitayns that is to wete
la here and po^^n de seyntraylles and especial a maid which they named la
pucelle de dien / This ^^aid ro^d like a man and was a valyant Captain among
them and took upon her many great enterprises in so much that they had a
believe to have recovered all their losses by her / Not withstandyng at the
last after many great feats / by the help and prowess of Sir Johan
Luxemb^rgh which was a noble Captain of the dukes of Burgoyne and many
Euglisshmen Picardes and Burgoygnous which were of our party before the
town of Compyne the xxiij. day of May the forsaid pucelle was taken in the
field armed like a man and many other Capitayns with her / And were all brought
to Roan and there she was put in prison / And there she was Iugged by the law to
be brent / and then ne she said that she was with child / whereby she was
respi^ed a while / But in conclusion it was found that she was not with child
/ and then she was brent in Roan / And the other Capitayns were put to
raunsone and entreated as men of werre been a^^stomed and^. This same year
about Candelmasse Richard hu^der a wollepacker was dampened for an heretic and
burnt at tour hylle / And about midlente Sir Thomas Baggely priest and
vicarie of Mauen in Ests^xe beside walden was disgrated and dampened for an
heritik^ and burnt in smythfelde / And also in this same year whiles the king
was in Frannce there were many heretics and lollars that had purposed to have
made a risyng and cast billi^ in many places / But blessed be god almighty the
Capitayn of hem was taken whose name was william Maundeuile a we^ar of abendone
and bailey of the same town which named him self Jack sharp of wigmoresland
in walys / And afterward he was heheded at abendone in the whitsonweke on the
tewysday This same year the vj. day of decembre king henry the vj. was cr^uned
king of France at Paris in the church of our lady with great so lempnite /
There being present the Cardinal of england the duk of Bedford and many other
lords of france and of england / And aft this coronacion and great feste
holden at paris the king returned from thens to Roan and so toward Caleys / And
the ix. day of F^uerer londed at dover / whom all the comyns of kente met at
beramdoun bitwene Caunterbury and Dover all in read hoodes / And so came forth
till he come to the black bethe / where he was met with the Mayre Johan
wellys with all the craftis of london clad all in white / And so they brought
him to london the xxj. day of the same month This same year was a restraynt of
the wollis of Caleys made by the soudyours by cause they were not paid of their
wages wherefore the duke of Bedford Regent of France being then Capitayn came
to Caleys the tewisday in the esterw^ke And on the morn after many soudiours
of the town were arested and put in ward And in the same w^ke he rod to
terewyne And by the mean of the bisshopp of terewyne he wedded the Earls
daughter of seint Poul and came agyne to Caleys

And the xj. day of Iuyne on seint Bernabes day there were four soudiours of
Caleys that were chief causers of the restreynt byheded that is to wete Johan
Maddeley Johan lundaye Thomas palmer and Thomas Talbot And an C.x. banysshed
the town that same time And before were banysshed honderd and xx. soudiours
And on mydsomer even after came the lord regent and his wife to london
Ca.CC.xlix.
About this time Pope Martyn deyde And after him Eugenye the fourth was Pope
This was pes^bly chosen in Rome by the Cardinals and was very and indubitate
Pope But shortly after he was put and expulsed out of rome in such wise that
he was feign to flee naked In this same time was the Counseill of basyle to
which Counseyll he was cited to come And because he came not they deposed him
but he rought not ne set not there by but gate the Cite of Rome and abode
still Pope xvij. year This year about whitsontyde the heretics of praghe were
destroyed For at two Iourneys were destroyed of them mo than xxij thousend with
her Capitayns that is to wete Procapius Saplico and lupus presbiter Also there
was taken a live Master piers clerk an Englisshman and heretic Also this
same year was a great frost and a strong during xj. wekes For it began on
seint kateryns even and lasted un to seint Scolasticais day in feuerer in
which time the vyntage that came from Burdeux come over shoters hylle This
year was the Counseill of Aras and a great trayttye bitwene the king of England
and the king of France where was assembled many great lords of both perties
at which Counceill was offrid to the king of England many great thingis by the
mo^en of a legate that come fro Rome which was Cardinal of seint Cross which
offres were reffused by the Cardinal of England and other lords that were
there for the king wherefore the duke of Bourgoine which had been long Englissh
sworn forsook our party and retor^ed frensshe by mean of the said legate and
made a pees with the frensh king receyuyng of the king for recompensing of his
fadres death the count pon^^eu / the lordshipp of Macon which much other as is
specified in the said trayttye / And so our ambassadors came home again in
werse caas than they went / For they lost there the duke of bourgoyne which
had been with his bourgoynous and picardes a singular help in all the
conquest of normandy and of france This same year was a great bataill on the sea bitwene y^ Ieneweys and the king of Aragon / of which bataill the Ieneweys
had the victory / for they took the king of Aragon / the king of Nauerne and
the great master of seint James in galise with iij.C. kynghtes and squyers and
much other people / And this was on seint dominiks day This same year were seen
iij. sons attones And anon followed the threfold governance in the church /
that is to wete of Eugenye of the Counseill / and of the neutralite Also this
same year M.CCCC.xxxiiij. was a passing great wind / by which steples houses
and trees were overthrown About this time was an holy maid in holande called
lyd with / which lived only by miracle not etyng only mete This year the duke
of Bourgoyne began his order at lyle of the golden Flies / and ordeynid
certain knights of the order and made statutes and ordinances much
according un to the order of the Garter / Also this same year the fren^shmen
had enterprised to have stolen Caleys in the fisshing time / For many ^ootis of
france had sauf^onduytis to come to caleys for to take hering / And the
soudiours of the town had a custom to come to church and leave their stauis
standing at church door / which stauis the frensshmen which were araied like
fysshers had purposed to have taken so their wepen and win the town / but
one of them lay with a common woman the night to fore and told to her their
cou^seill / And she on the morn told the lieutenau^t which forthwith
commanded that every man should keep his wepen in his hand sakryng time and
other / And when they apperceyued this / that they were myspoynted they sailled
strayt to D^pe and stale and took that town And on Newyers even after they
took harflete And thus Englisshmen began to lose a litell and a litell in
Normandy.

How Caleys and ^uynes were beseged by the duke of Bourctoyne and how they were
rescued by the duke of Gloucestre Capitulo ducentesimo quinquagesimo.
THis year was a great noise through all England how the duke of Bourgyne would
come and besege Caleys / wherefore the Earl of Mortayne with his army that he
had for to have goon with in to france / was countremau^ded and charged that
he should go to Caleys / which was at that time well vitailled and manned / for
sir Johan Ratclife was lieutenaunt of the king in that town / And the Baron of
dnddeley lieutenaunt of the Castle / And the ix. day of Iuyll the duke of
Bourgoyne with all the power of Flaundres and much other people come before
Caleys and s^tce his siege about the town / and every town of Flaundres had
their ten^es by hem self / And this siege endured ^hre wek^s / In the mean
while the duke of Gloucestre being protector of England took the most part of
the lords of England and went over the se^ to Caleys for to rescue the town
or to fight with the duke and his ^ost if they would have ^yden this time london
and every good town of England sent over see to this rescouse certain people
well araied of the best and chosen men for the werre / And the ij. day of
August the said duke of Gloucestre arrived at Caleys with all his army and v.
houndred ships and moo / And the duke and all his ^ost that lay in the s^ege
as soon as they espied the sailles in the sea / before they approached Caleys
haven / suddenly in a morning departed fro the siege / b^uyng behind them much
stuff and vitaille / and fled in to Flaundres and Picardie / and in like
wise did the siege that lay tofore Guynes / where as they of Guynes took the
great gonne of brass called digeon and many other great gonnes and serpentines
/ And then when the duke of Gloucestre was arrived with all his oost / he
went in to Flaundres and was therinne xj. days and did but litell harm
except / he burnt two fair villages Poperinge and Belle / and other houses
which were of no strength / and so he returned home agayn^ Also this same
year the king of scotland beseged Rokesburgh with much people / But Sir Rauf
Gray departed fro the Castle and ordained for rescouse / But as soon as the
king understood his departing he suddenly brake his siege and went his way and
leuyng much ordenaunce behind him where he gate no wurshipp / This same year
he ij. day of Ianiu^r Queen Katherine which was the kings modre and wife to
king henry the fifthe deide and departed out of this world and was brought
rially through london and so to westmynstre and there she l^eth wurshipfully
buried in our lady chapel / And also this same year the xiij. day of Ianiuer
fill down the (...) with the toure on hit on london bag toward southwerke
with two archis and all that stood thereon / This same year was a great
traittie holden bitwene Grauenyng and Caleys bitwene the king and duke of
Bourgoyne where for the king was the Cardinal of england the duke of norfolk
and many other lords and for the duke was the duchess having full power of
her lord as Regent and lady of his lands / where was taken by thauys of both
parties an abstinence of werre for a certain time in the name of the duchess
and not of the duke because he had goon from his ooth and ligeaunce that he had
made to king Henry therefore the king never would write ne appointe ne have to do
with him after / but all in the duchess name Also thi^ same year queen Jane
died the ij. day of Iuyll which had been king henry the fourth is wife and was
carried fro bermondesey un to Caunterbury where she lies buried by king henry
the iiij. her housbond This same same year died all the lions in the tour of
london the which had not be seen many years before out of mind.

How Owayn a squire of wales that had wedded queen katerine was arested / and
of the scisme bitwene Eugenie and Felix Capitulo CC.li.
IN the xvj. year of king henry deide Sigismonde Emperor of Almaigne and
knight of the garter / whose terment the king kept at seint poules in london
rially where was made a riall hearse / and the king in his astate clad in blew
was at eue^ at dirige and on the morn at mass and^. And after him was elect
and chosen Albert duke of Ostrich which had wedded Sigismu^dus daughter for to
be Empero^r / This was taken and resseyued to be king of beme and vngarie
because of his wife that was sigismu^dis daughter which left after him none
other heir This Albert was Emperor but one year / for he was poysond and so
deide / sum say he deide of a flixe / but he was a r^tuouse man and pitefull
so much / that all the people that knew him said that the world was not
worthy to have his presence / This same year one Owayn a squire of walys a man
of low birth / which had many a day tofore secretly wedded queen ketherine
and had by her iij / sons and a daughter was taken and commanded to newgate
to prison by my lord of gloucestre protector of the reame / Aod this year he
brake prison by the mean of a pressed that was his chapelayne / And after he was
taken again by my lord ^emond and brought again to newgate / which afterward
was delivered at large / And one of his sons afterward was made earl of
richemo^d and anothir earl of penbroke / and the iij a monk of westmynstre
which monk deide sone after This same year also on Newyeres day at
baynardiscastell fill dou^ a stake of wode suddenly at af^^rno ne and slow iij.
men meschi^uously and foul hurt other Also at bed ford on a shrireday were
xv^ij. men murtherd without stroke by falling down of a steir as they come
out of their common halle / and many foul hurt In the xviij. year sir Richard
Branchamp the good Earl of war wyke deide at Roan he being that time
lieutenaunt of the king in Normandy / and from thens his body was brought to
warrewyke / where he lies wurshipfully in a new Chapel on the southside of
the quyre / Also this year was a great derthe of corn in all England / for a
busshell of where was worth xl. pens in many places of England and yet men
might not have y nowgh wherefore Stephen Broun that time maire of london sent in
to pruse and brought to london certain shippis laden with Rye / which eased
and did much good to the people / for corn was so skarce in England that in
sum places of England pour people made hem bread of fern rotes This year the
general counseill of basile deposed pope Eugenye / And they chese Felix which
was duke of Sauoye / And than began the scisme which endured un to the year of
our lord Ihesu crist.M.CCCC.xlviij. This Felix was a devout prince / and saw
the sons of his sons / And after lived a holy and denoute life And was chosen
pope by the counseill of Ba^ile Eugenye deposed / And so the scisme was long
time And this Felix had not much obedience / be canse of the n^utralite / for
the most part and well n^gh all cristendome obedied and reputed Eugenye for
very pope / god knows who was the very pope of them both / for both
occupied during the life of Eugenye. This same year Sir Richard wiche vicarie
of hermettesworth was degrated of his presthode at Poulis and burnt at
tourhyll as for an heretic on seint Botulp^us day / how well at his death he
deide a good criste^ma^ / wherefore after his death much people come to the place
were he had he burnt and offered and made a heepe of stones and set up a
cross of tree and held him for a saint till the maire and shereuis by
commandment of the king and of bisshoppes destroyed it / and made there a
dou^hylle Also this same year the shereuis of london fette out of Seint
Martins the grant the sayntwarie five persons / which afterward were
restored again to the Sayntwarie by the kings ^^stices / After Alberte the
iij. Frederike was chosen Emperor / This Frederike duke of Osterike was long
Emperor and differred for to be crouned at rome by cause of the scisme but
after that vuion was had he was crouned with Imperial diadem with great
glory and triumph of pope Nicholas the iiij This was a man pesible. quiet
and of singular patience not hating the church he wedded the king of
Portingales dougter and^.

How the duchess of Gloucestre was arested for treson / and committed to
perpetual prison in the I Will of man / And of the death of master Rogier
^olyngbroke Ca.CC.lij.
IN this year Elianore Cobham duchess of Gloucestre was arested for certain
pointies of treson leid again her / where upon she was examined in seint
stephens chapel at west mestre before the Erchebisshopp of Caunterbury And
there she was enjoined to open penance for to go through chepe beryng a taper
in her hond and after to perpetual prison in the I Will of man^ under the keeping
of sir Thomas stanley / Also that same time was arested Master Thomas south
well a chanon of westmynstre master Johan hume a chapelayn of the said lady /
maist^r Rogger bolynbrok a clerk using nigromancie And one margery Iurdemayn
called the which of Eye beside westmynstre / Thise were arested as for being of
counseill with the said duchess of gloucester And as for master Thomas
southwell he deide in the tour the night before he should have he reyned on the
morn / For so he said him self that he should deye in his bed and not by
Iustise / And in the year xx. master Johan hume and master Rogger bolynbroke
were brought to the guyldhalle in london and there before the maire the lords
and chief Justice of England were rayned and dampened both to be drawn hanged
and qnarterd / but master Johan hume had his chartre and was pardoned by the
king / but master rogier was drawn to tyburne where he confessid that he
deide giltles and never had trespaced in that he deid fore / Notwithstanding he
was hanged / heded and quartred / on whose soul god have mercy / And margery
Iurdemayn was brent in smythfeld / Also this year was a great affraye in
fletstrete by nyghtes time bitwene men of court and men of london and diverse
men slain and sum hurt / And one herbotell was chief cause of the
mysgouernaunce and affraye / Also this year at chesing of the maire of london
the co^munes named Robert clopton and Rawlyn holand Taylourp And the Aldermen
took Robert clopton and brought him at right hand of the Maire as the
custom is / And then certain Tayllours and other hond crafty men cried nay
nay not this man but ra^lyn holande / wherefore the Maire that was padysly sent
tho that so cried to Newgate / where they abode a great while and were
punysshed In this same year were diverse embassatours sent in to Guyan for a
marriage for the king for the Earls daughter of Armynake / which was concluded
/ but by the mean of the Earl of suffolk / it was let and put a part / And
after this the said Earl of suffolk went over the sea in to France and there
he treated the marriage bitwene the king of England and the kings daughter of
S^cyle and of Iherusalem / And the next year it was concluded fully that
marriage by which marriage the king should deliuere to her fadre the duchy of
Angeo / and the Erledome of Main which was the keye of Normandy / Then
departed the Earl of suffolk with his wife and diverse lords and knights in
the most riall astate that might be out of England with new chares and
Palfrayes which went through chepe / and so went over the sea / and resseyued
her and since brought her in the lent after to hampton where she landed / and
was rially received / And on Candelmasse even before by a great tempest of
thonder and lightnyng at afternone / Paulus steple was set a fire on the
mids of the shafte in the tymbre / which was quenched by force of labor /
and specially by the labonr of the morrow mass priest of the ^owe in chepe /
which was thought Impossible / sauf only the grace of god This year was the
Earl of Stafford made and create duke of ^okyngham / the earl of warrewyke /
duke of warwyke therle of Dorset marquys of Dorset / and therle of suffolk wa^
made marquys of suffolk

How king Henry wedded Queen Margarete and of her coronacion Capitulo
ducentesimo lij.
IN this year king Henry married at southwyke Qu^ne Margrete / And she come to
london the xv^ij. day of May And by the way all the lords of England
resseyued her wurshipfully in diverse places / and in especial the duke of
Gloucestre / and on the blake heth the maire aldremen and all the crafts in
blewe gounes browdred with the devise of his craft that they myt be byknowen
met with her with reed ho^des / and brought her to london where were diverse
pagentis and countinaunce of diverse histories shewde in diverse places of the
Cite Ryally and costlew And the xxx. day of may the forsaid Queen was Crouned
at westmynstre And there was Iustes iij. days during / within the sayntuarie
to fore the abbeye / This year the priour of kylmian appeled the earl of vrmond
of treson / which had a* day assigned to them for to fight in smythfeld / And
the lystis were made and feeld dressid / but when it came to point the king
commanded that they should not fight / but took the quarellis in to his own
hond / and this was done at the Instaunce and labor of certain prechours and
doctors of london as master Gilbert worthyngton parson of seint andrew^ in
holborne and other / Also this same year came a great enbassade in to England
out of france / for to have concluded a perpetuel pees / but in conclusion it
turned un to a triews of a year / About this time deide seint Bernardyne a
gray friar which began the new reformacion of that order in many places in so
much that they that were reformed been called obseruauntes which obseruauntes
be^^ encrecyd greatly in Italy and in Almaigne / This Bernardyn was Canonysed
by Pope Nicholas the fyfthe In the year M.CCCC.l. Iohanes de Capestrano was his
disciple / which proufited much to the reformacion of that order / for whom
god showed many a fair miracle also / here is to be noted that from this time
forward king Henry never proufited ne went forward / but fortune began to
turn from him on all sides as well in france Norma^die guyan as in England /
Sum men holden opinione that king Henry gaf co^myssion plenery to sir Edward
hulle sir Robert roos Dene of seint seuerins and other to conclude a marriage
for him with the earl of Armynaks suster / which was promised as it was said
and cocluded / but afterward it was broken / and he wedded queen margret as a
fore is said / which was a dear marriage for the Reame of England / For it is
known verily that for to have her was delivered the duchy of Angeo / and the
erledome of main / which was the keie of Normandy for the frensshe men
tentre And above this the said marquys of suffolk axyd in plain parliament a
fyften^h and an half for to feche her out of france / lo what a marriage was
this / as to the comparison of that other marriage of armynak / For there should
have been delivered so many Castles and tounes in guyane and so much good
should have been yeuen with her / that all England should have been there by
enriched / but contrary wise fill where fore every great prince ought to keep
his promise / for because of breky^g of this promise / and for marriage of Queen
Margret what loss has had the Reame of Engloud / by lo^yng of Normand^e and
Guyan / by division in the Reame / the rebelling of communes against their
prince and lords / what division among the lords / what murdre and sleyng of
them / what feldes fough^en and made / in conclusion so many that many a man
has lost his life and in conclusion the king deposed and the queen with her
sone feign to flee in to Scotland and from thens in to france and so to
lorayne the place that she come first froo / Many men deem that the brekyng of
the kyn^es promise to the suster of therles of Armynake was cause of this great
loss and aduersite

How the good duke of Gloucestre humfrey the kings uncle was arested at the
parliament of bury / and his death / And how Angeo in main was delivered
Capitulo ducentesimo liij.
IN the year xxv. of king Henry was a parliament at bury called seint Edmo^des
bury / about which was commanded all the communes of the contre to be there
in their most defensable array for to awayte upon the king / To which
^arlement come the duke of Gloucestre humfrey the kings uncle ^ which had been
protector of England all the none age of the king / And anon after he was in
his logginge he was arested by the viscounte ^emond the Conestable of England
whom accompanied the duke of Bokyngham and many other lords And forthwith all
his servants were commanded for to depart from him / and xx^ij. of the
chief of them were also arested and sent to diverse prisons / and anon after
this said areste / the said duke was on the morn^ deed on whose soul god have
mercy Amen / but how he deide and in what manner the certeynte is not to me
known / some said / he deide for sorwe / sum said he was murthred bitwene
two fetherbeddes other said that on hot^ spite was put in his foundement / but
how he deide god knows / to whom is no thing hyd / And then when he was so
deed he was leid open that all men might see him / And so both lords and
knights of the shires with burgeises come and saw him lie deed / but wound ne
token could they perceive how he deide / here may men mark what this world is
/ this duke was a noble man and a great clerk / and had wurshipfully tuled
this Reame to the kings behoof / and never could ^e found fault to him / But
envy of them that were governors and had promised the duchy of Angeo and the
Erledome of Main caused the destruction of this noble man / for they drad him
/ that he would have enpesshed that de^^ue^aunce / And after they sent his body
to seint Albons with certain lights for to be buried / And so Sir Geruays of
Clifton had than the charge to conueye the corpse / And so it was buried at
Seint Albons in the Abbey / and v. persons of his haushold were sent to
london / and there were Rayned and Iugged to be drawn hanged and quartred of
whom the names were Sir Rogger Chamburlayne knight on Middelton a squire /
Herbard a squire / Arthur a squire / and Richard Nedham / which v. persons
were drawn from the tour of london through chepe un to Tilorne and there hanged
and late down quyke / and then stripped for to have been heded and quartred /
And then the Marquys of suffolk showed there for them the kings pardon under
his great seal / and so they were pardonned of the remenaunt of the execucion
and had their lives And so they were brought again to london / and after freely
delivered Thus began the troble in the Reame of England for the death of this
noble duke of Gloucestre / All the communes of the Roya^e began for to murmr
for it and were not content After that Pope Eugenye was deed Nicholas the
fifthe was elect pope / This Nicholas was chosen for Eugenye yet hangyng the
scisme Notwithstondyng he gate the obedience of all Christian Royames / For
after he was elect and sacred pope / certain lords of France and of England
were sent in to Sauoye to Pope Felix / for to entrete him to cesse of the
papacy / And by the special labor of the bisshoppe of Norwych and the lord
of Seint Iohanes he cessed the the second year after that pope Nicholas was
sacred / And the said Felix was made legate of France and Cardinal of Sauoye

And resigned the hole papacy to Nicholas / And after lived an holy life and
deide an holy man / and as it is said Almighty god shows miracles for him
This was the xxiij. scisme bitwene Eugenye and Felix / and dured xvj. year /
the cause was this / the gene ^all counseill of Basi^e deposed Eugenye which
was only Pope and Indubitate for as much as he observed not and kept the
decrees and statutes of the counseill of Constaunce as it is aforesaid / N^thir
he rought not to give obedience to that general Counseill in no manner wise /
whereof aroose a great Altercacion among writars of this mat^r pro and contra /
which can not accord un to this day One party says that the Counseille is
above the Pope That other pertie said nay / but the pope is above the cou^seill
God blessed above all thmges give and grant his pees in holy church spouse
of Crist amen / This Nicholas was of Iene come^ of low burth / a doctor of
divinity / an actif man / he reedified many places that were broken and ruynous
/ and did do make a great wall about the palais / and made the wall new
about Room for dread of the turks / And the people wondered of the ceesing and
resignyng of Felix to him considered that he was a man of so humble burth / And
that other was of affinite to all the most part of christian princes / whereof
there was a verse publisshed in Rome in thi^ manner. Lux fulsit mundo cessit
Felix Nicholao

How sir Franceys aragonoys took fogiers in normandy And of the loss of
Constantinoble by the turk Capitulo ducentesimo liiij.
IN the year of king Henry xxvij / being triews bitwene france and England a
knight of the Englissh party named sir Franceys aragonoys took a town of
Norman die named Fogiers / against ^he triews / of which taking began much
sorrow and loss For this was the occasion by which the frenshmen gate all
Normandy and^. About this time the cite of Constantinople which was
imperial cite in all greece was taken by the turks infidels / which was
betrayed as sum hold oppinion and the Emperor taken and slain / And that
riall church of sancta sophia robbed and despoilled and the relics and
images and the Rode drawn about the streets which was done in despite of
christian feith / And sone after all christian faith in greece perisshed and ^essid
There were many christian men slain and innumerable sold and put in capti^ite /
by the taking of this town the turk is greatly enhau^sed in pride / And it is
a great loss un to all cristendome In the year xxviij. was a parliament holden
at westmynstre / And from the^s adiourned to the blak freris at london And
after cristemas to west mynstre again / And this same year Robert of Cane a man
of the westco^tre with a few ships took a great flote of ships coming out
of the baye laden with salt / which ships were of pruys flanders holand and
zeland and brought hem to hampton / wherefore the marchandis of england being in
flau^dres were arestid in bruggis Ipre and other places / and myt not be
deli^ed ner their dettis deschargid / till they had made a pointeme^t for to
pay for thamendes and hurtes of tho ships which was paid by the merchants
of the staple enery penny / And in like wise the marchantes and goods being in
dans^e were also arested and made great amends This same year the frensshmen
in a morning took by a train the town of Pount al^rche and therein the lord
Fa^conbrige was take prisoner / And after that in December Roa^ was taken and
lost / being therinne the duke of Somersete Edmonde / the Earl of shrewsbury /
which by a ^oyntement left plesges and lost all Normandy and come home /
And during the said parliament the duke of suffolk was arested and sent in to
the toure / and there he was a month / and after the king did do fe^che him
out / for which cause all the communes of England were in a great rumor /
what for the deliuerau^ce of Ang^o and mayn and after losing of all Normandy /
and in especial for the death of the good duke of Gloucestre in so much that
in sum places men gadred to gedres and made hem Capitayns ^s blew herd and
other / which were resisted and taken and had Justice and deide / And then
the said parliament was adiourned to leycestre / And thidder the king brought
with him the duke of suffolk / And when the commune house understood that he
was out of the tour and comen thidder they desired to have execucion on them
that were cause of the deliverance of Normandy and had been cause of the death
of the duke of Gloucestre / and had sold Gascoyne and guyan / of which they
named to be gilty the duke of Suffolk as chief / the lord say / the bisshopp
of Salisbury / Danyell and many moo / And for to pease the commons / the duke of
suffolk was exiled out of England v. year / And so during the parliament he
went in to Norffolk and there took shipping for to goo out of the reame of
England in to France / And this year as he sailled on the sea / a ship of
werre called the Nicholas of tour met^e with his ship and found him therinne
/ whom they took out and brought him in to their ship to fore the mastir and
Capitayns and there he was examined and at last Iugged to the death / And so
they put him in a Ca^on and his Chapelayne for to shriue him / And that done
they brought him in to dover Rode / and there set him in to the (...) / and
there smote of his head / and brought the body a land upon the sondes and
set the ^ede there by / And this was done the first day of May / Lo what
auaylled him now all his deliverance of Normandy and^ / and here ye may here
how he was rewarded for the death of the duke of Gloucestre Thus began sorrow
upon sorrow / and death for death and^.

How this year was thynsurrexion in kente of the co^muues of whom Iak^^ade an
yrisman was captayn Capitulo ducentesimo. lv.
THis year of our lord M.cccc.l. was the great grace of the Iubilee at Room /
where was great pardon in so much y^ from all places in cristendome great
multitude of people resorted theder / This year was a great asseble and gadring
to geder of the commons of kente in great nombre and made an insurrexion and
rebelled again the king and his laws / and ordained him a captayn called Johan
cade an Irisshman / which named him self Mortimer / cofin to the duke of
york / And this Captayn held these men to geder and made ordenau^ces among
them and brought hem to blakketh / where he made a bille of peticions to the
king and his co^^rill / and showed what Injuries and oppressions the ponre
comyns suffrid / and all under color for to come to his abone / And he had a
great multitude of people / And the xvij. day of Iuyne the king many lords /
Capitayns and me^ of werre went to ward him to the blakheth / And when the
captayn of kente understood the coming of the king with so great puissaunce
withdrewe him with his people to seuenoke a litell village / And the xxviij. day
of Iuyne he being withdrawn and goon the king come with his army set in
order and enbatailled to the blakheth And by aduys of his counseill sent sir
vmfrey stafford knight / and william stafford sqnyer two valyant Captayns with
certain people to fight with the captayn and to take him and bring him and his
accessaries to the king / which went to seuenoke and there the Captayn with
his felawshipp met with hem and fought against hem and in conclusion slew
them both and as many as abode and would not yield him ner flee During this
skarmussh fylle a great variaunce among the lords me^ and common people being
on blak^eth against their lords and captayns sayyng plainly that they would go
to the captayn of kente to assiste and help him / but if they might have
execucion on the traitors being about the king / where to the king said nay /
And they said plainly that the lord say tresorer of England / the bisshopp of
salisbury / the baron of duddely / the abbot of gloucetur Daniell and treuilian
and many mo were traitors and worthy to be ded / herfore for to plese the
lords meyne and also sum of the kings house / the lord say was arested and
sent to the tour of london And then the king hering tidings of the death and
ouerthrowyng of the staffordes with drew him to london and fro thens to
kyllingworth / For y^ king ne y^ lords du^st not trust their own household
meyne and^. Then after that the Captain had had this victory upon these
staffordes / anon he took Sir vmfryes salade and his briga^tins smyten fulle
of gilt nailles / and also her gilt spores and araied him like a lord and a
Captain and resorted with all his meyne and also moo than he had to fore to
the blakeheth again / to whom come the Erchebisshoppe of Caunterbury / and the
duke of Bokyngham to the blakeheth and spoke with him / and as it was said they
found him witty in his talkyng and his request / And so they departed And the
thridde day of Iuyll he come and entered in to london with all his people / and
there did make cries in the kings name and in his name that no man should
Roble ne take no man's good / but if he paid for it / and come ridyng through
the Cite in great pride / and s^iote his swerd upon london stone in Can
wykestrete / And he being in the Cite sent to the toure for to have the lord
say / and so they felt him and brought him to the Guyldhall before the Maire
and the Alde^men / where he was examined and he said he would and ought to been
Iuged by his peers / And the communes of kente took him by force from the Maire
and officers that kept him / and took him to a p^^ste to shriue him / And
(...) he might been half shriuen they brought him to the standard in chepe /
and there smote of his ^ede / on whose soul^ Almighty god have pite and mercy
Amen / And thus deide the lord say tresorer of England / After this they
set his head on a spear and bare it about in the Cite And the same day
about the mile end crowmer was beheded / And the day before at afternone the
Captain with certain of his meyne went to Phelipp Malpas house and robbed
him and took away much good / And fro thens he went to Seint margret Patyns
to one gherstis house and robbed him and took away much good also / at which
rob^yng diverse men of london of their neighbors were at it and took part with
them / For this robbyng the peples hertes fill from him / and every thri^ty man
was aferd for to be seruid in like wise / For there was many a man in london
that awayted and would feign have seen a commune robbery / which Almighty god
forbede / For it is to suppose if he had not robbed he might have goon (...) er
he had be withstonde / For the king and all the lords of the Royame of
England were departed except the lord Scales that kept the toure of london /
And the fifthe day of Iuyll he did done smite of a mannys head in southwerke /
And the night after the Maire of london the Aldremen and the communes of the
cite concluded to drive away the Captayn and his host / and sent to the lord
scales to the tour and to matthew gogh a Captayn of Normandy / that they would
that night assaille the Captayn with them of kent / And so they did / and come
to london brigge in to southwer^e er the Captayn had any knowledge there of / and
there they fonght with them that kept the brigge / And the kentisshmen went to
harnoys and come to the brigge and shot and fought with hem and gate the brigge
/ and made them of london to flee and slow many of hem / And this endured all
the night to and fro till ix. of the cloak on the morn / And at last they
burnt the drawebrigge / where many of them of london were drowned / In which
night Sutton an alderma^ was slain Rogger heysant and matthew go^e and many
other / And after this the Chaunceler of Engloud sent to the Captayn a Pardone
general for him and an other for all his meyne / And then they departed
from south werk every man home to his house / And when they were all departed
and goon / there were proclamacions made in kent southsex and in other places /
that what man could take the Captayn quyk or ded shall have a M. mark And after
this one Alisander Iden a squire of kent took him in a gardyn in southsex and
in the taking the Captayn Johan Cade was slain / and after beheded and his
beed set on london brigge And anon after then the king come in to kente /
and did his Iustises sit at canterbury and enquere who were accessaries and
chief cause of this Insurrexion / And there were viij. men Iugged to death in
one day / and in other places moo / and fro thens the king went in to sussex /
and in to the westcontre / where a litell before was slain the bisshopp of
salisbury / And this same year were so many Iugged to death that xxiij. heedes
stood on london brigge / attones

Of the field y^ the duke of york took at brentheth in kente And of the burthe
of prince Edward / And of the first bataill at seint Albons where the duke of
somersetee was slain. Capitulo ducentesimo. lvj.
IN the year xxx. The duke of york came out of the march of walys with the
earl of deuenshire and the lord Cobham and great puissau^ce for reformacion of
certay Injuries and wrongs / and also to have Justice on certain lords being
about the king and took a feld at bre^theth beside de^tford in ke^te which
was a strong field / For which cause the king with all the lords of the land
went un to the blakheth with a great and strong multitude of pep^e armed and
ordained for the werre in the best wise / And when they had musterid on the
blake heth / Certain lords were sent to him for to trete and make
appoyntement with him / which were the bisshopp of Ely and the bisshopp of
wynchestre and the Earls of salisbury and of war wyke / And they concluded
that the duke of Somersete should he had to ward and to ansuere to such
articles as the duke of york should put on him / and than the duke of york
should break his field and come to the king / which was all promised by the
king / And so the king commanded that the duke of Somersete should be had
inward / And then the duke of york brake up his field and come to the king /
and when he was come contrary to the promise before made / the duke of Somersete
was present in the field awayting and chief about the king / and made the duke
of york ride to fore as a prisoner through loudon / and after they would hane
put him in hold / But a noise aroose that the Earl of march his sone was
coming with ten.M. men to london ward whereof the king and his counceille fered
/ And then they concluded that the duke of york should depart at his will
About this time began great division in Spruysse bitwene the great mastir and
the knyghtis of the duche order which were lords of that contre / For the
communes and tounes rebelled against the lords and made so great werre that at
the last they called the king of Pole to be their lord the which king come and
was wurshipfully received and laid siege to the Castle of Marienburgh which
was the chief Castle and strength of all the land / and wan it and drofe out
the mastir of dansk and all other places of that land And so they that had
been lords many years / lost all their seygnorie and possessions in tho
lands And the year of the In^arnacion of our lord M.CCCC.liij. on Seint
Edwardis day the queen Margarete was delivered of a fair Prince which was
named Edward / That same day Johan Norman was chosen for to been Maire of
london / And the day that he should take his oath at westmynstre / be went
thidder by water with all the crafts / where before time the Maire Aldremen
and all the crafts / Roode a horsebak which was never used after / For syn
that time they have goon ever by water in barges Ye have well vnderston de
tofore how that contrary to the promise of the king and also the conclusions
taken bitwene the king and the duke of york at brentheth / the duke of
Somersete went not to ward / But a bode about the king and had great reule /
and anon after ^e was made Captain of Caleys / and rewled the king and his
roya^^ as he would / wherefore the great lords of the reame and also the
commons were not plesed / For which cause the duke of york the earls of war
wyke and of Salisbury with many knights and squyers and much people came for to
remeue the said duke of somersete and other fro the king / And the king heeryng
of their coming thout by his counseill for to have goon westward and not for to
mete with hem and had with him the duke of somersete the duk of bokyngham / the
earl of stafford / the earl of Northum^erland / the lord Clifford and many
other / And what time that the duke of york and his felawshipp understood that
the king was departed with these said lords from london / Anon he changed his
way and costed the contre and come to seint Albons the xxiij. day of may and
there met with the king / to whom the king sent certain lords and desired
hem to keep the pees and depart / but in conclusion whiles they treated on
that one side / the earl of warrewyk^ with the march men and other entrid the
town on that other: and fought against the king and his party / and so began
the bataille and fightyng / which endured agood while / but in conclusion the
duke of york obtained and had the victory of that Journey In which was
slain the duke of somersete / the earl of northumberland / the lord Clifford
and many knights and sqnyers / And many moo hurt / And on the morn after they
brought the king in great astate to london / which was logged in the bisshoppes
Palais of london / And anon after was a great parliament / In which perlement
the duke of york was made protector of England / and the earl of warrewyke
Capitayn of Caleys / and the earl of Salisbury chaunceler of england And all
such persons as had the rewle to fore about the king were set a part and
might not rewle as they did to fore / In this same year died pope Nicholas the
fyfthe and after him was Calixte the iij. This Calixte was a Catalane and an
elde man when he was chosen / and continuelly seek wherefore he might not
perform his zele and desire that he had against the turk / conceived / and the
cause of lettyng thereof was his age and sekenes / This Calixte instituted and
ordained the feste of the transfiguracion of our lord to be hallowed on s^int
sixtes day in August because of the great victory that they of hnngary had
against the turks that same day / he was chosen pope in the year of our lord
M.CCCC.lv. And died the year M.cccc.lviij. that same day that ^e ordained the
feste of the transfiguracion to be hallowed / In this same year fill a great
affraye in london against the lumbardes / The cause began because a yongman took
a daggar from a lumbard and brake it / wherefore the yongman on the morn was
sent fore to come to fore the Maire and aldermen and there for the offense /
he was comytted to ward / And then the maire departed from the guyldhall for
to go home to his diner / but in the chepe the yongmen of the mercerye for the
most pert prentises held the maire and shereuis still in chepe and would not
suffer him to depart un to the time that their felaw which was comytted to
ward were deli^yd and so by force they rescued their felaw from prison / and
that done the maire and shereuis departed and the prisoner delivered which if
he had he put to prison had be in Inpardye of his life / And began a Ruuour in
the cite against the lumbardes and the same euenyng the handcrafty people of the
town arose and ran to the lumbardes houses and despoilled and robbed d^^erse
of hem wherefore the maire and aldermen come with the honest people of the town
and drofe them thens and sent sum of them that had stolen to newgate / And
the young man that was rescued by his felawes saw this great Rumor affraye and
robbery ens^ewed of his first me uyng to the lumbard / departed and went to
westmynstre to saynturie / or else it had costed him his life For anon after
come down an Oeyr determyne for to do Instice on all them that so rebellid in
the cite against the lumbardes / on which satte with the maire that time
william Marowe / the duke of bokyngham and many other lords for to see
execucion don / but the comyns of the cite secretly made them ready and did
arm them in their houses / and were in purpose for to have rongen the common
belle / which is named bow belle / but they were let by sad men / which
come to the knoweleche of the duke of bokyngham and other lords / and
incontinent they aroos for they durst no longer abide / For they doubted that
the hole cite should have arisen against them / bnt yet nevertheless ij. or.iij.
of the cite were Iugged to death for this robbery and were hanged at Tyburne /
Anon after the king the queen and other lords rode to couentre and withdrewe
hem from london for thise causes / And a little to fore the duke of york was
sent fore to grenewych and there was discharged of the protectoursipp / And my
lord of Salisbury of his Chauncel^rshipp / And after this they were sent fore
by privy seal for come to couentre / where they were almost deceived and the
Earl of warrewyke also / and should have been destroyed if they had not seen well
to

How the lord Egremond was take by therle of salesteries sons And of the
robbyng of sandwych Capitulo ducentesimo lvij.
THis yerewere taken iiij. great fisshes bitwene Eerethe and london / that one
was called mors marine / the second a swerd fisshe / and the other tweyne were
wales In this same year for certain aff^ayes done in the northcontre bitwene
the lord Egremond and the Earl of Salisburies sons / the said lord Egremond
whom they had taken was condemned in a great sum of money to the said Earl
of Salisbury / and therefore comysed to prison in Newgate in london / where when
he had be a certain space he brake the prison and iij. prisoners with him and
escaped and went his way / Also this year the Earl of warrewyke and his wife
went to Caleys with a fair felawshipp and took possession of his office /
About this time was a great reformacion of many monasteries of religion in
duierse parties of the world / which were ^^formed after the first institucion
and continued in many places / Also about this time the craft of enprinting
was first found in Magunce in Almayne / which craft is mnltiplied through the
world in many places / and books been had great chepe and in great nombre by
cause of the same craft / This same year was a great bataille in the marches
bitwene hungerie and turkye at a place called septedrade / where innumerable
turks were slain more by miracle than by man's hand / For only the hand of
god smote them / seint Johan of capestrane was there present and provoked the
christian reple ^eyng then aferd after to pursiewe the turks / where an
infinite multitude were slain and destroyed / The turks said that a great
nombre of armed men followed them / that they were aferd to turn again / they
were holy angellys / This same year the prisoners of Newgate in london brake
their prison / and went upon the leedes and fought against them fo the Cite and
kept the gate a long while / but at the last the town gate the prison on
them / and than they were put in feteris and yrons and were sore punysshed in
ensample of other In this year also was a great erthequaue in Naples in so much
y^ there perisshed xl.M. people that sank^ there in to the earth / Item in the
year xxxvj. seint Osmond sometime bisshopp of Salisbury was canonysed at Rome by
Pope Caliste / And the xvj. day of Iuyll he was translated at Salisbury by the
Erchebisshoppe of Caunterbury and many other bisshoppes And in August after Sir
Pi^^s de brezei seneschall of normandy with the Captayn of D^pe and many other
Captayns and men of werre went to the sea with a great nauye and come in to
the downs by night / and on the morn erly before day they londed and come to
sand wych both by land and water and took the town and Ryfled and despoilled
it / and took many p^^soners / And left the town all bare / which was a rich
place and much good therein / And lad with hem many rich prisonerz In this
same year in many places of france Almayne flaundres holand and zeland
Children godred them by great companies for to go on pilgremage to seint
Michels mount in morma^die which come fro fer contrees / whereof the people
meruaylled and many supposed that some wiked spirit meued them to so do / but
it endured not long because of the long way and also for lak of vitaill as
they went / In this year Raynold pecok bisshopp of Chichestre was fou^den an
heretik and the iij. day of decembre was abiured at lambhythe in the presence
of the erchebisshopp of Caunterbury and many bisshopps and doctors and lords
temperall / And his books brent at poulis cross / ye have herd to fore how
certain lords were slain at seint albons / wherefore was always a gru^che and
wrath had by theyres of them that were so slain against the duke of york the
earls of warrewyk and of Salisbury / wherefore the king by thauys of his
counseill sent for them to london / to which place the duke of york came the
xxvj. day of Ian^uer with CCCC. men and logged at baynardes Castle in his own
place / And the xv. day of Ianiuer come the earl of salisbury with v.C. men and
was logged in therber his own place / And thenue come the dukes of Excestre
and of somersete with viij.C. men and lay without temple ^arre / And the earl
of northumberland / the lord Egremond and the lord Clifford with xv.C. men and
logged without town And the maire that time Gefferey boleyne kept great
wacche with the commons of the cite and rode aloute the Cite by holborne and
fletestrete with a v.M. men well armed and araied for to keep the pees And the
xiiij. day of Feuerer the earl of warrewyk come to london from Caleys well be
seen and wurshipfully with vj.C. men in read Jaquettes browdred with a ragged
staf behind and before /

And he was logged at gray freres / And the xvij. day of March the king come
to london and the Queen / And there was a concord and pees made among these
lords / and they were set in pees And on our lady day the xv. day of March
M.CCCC.lviij. the king Queen and all these lords went on procession at powlus
in london / and anon after the king and lords departed / In this year was a
great affraye in fletestrete bitwene men of court and men of the same street /
in which affraye the Queen's attorney was slain.

How the kings household made affraye against the earl of warrewyke / and of the
Journey at bloreheth Capitulo ducentesimo lxviij
ALso this same year as therle of warrewyke was at a counseill at westmestre
All y^ kings household meyne gadred them to gedre for to have slain the said
Earl / but by help of god and his frendis he recovered his barge and escaped
their enell enterprise / how well the cooques come rennyng out with spittes
and pestels against him / And the same day he rode toward warrewyke / and sone
after he gate him a co^myssion and went over see to Caleys / Sone after this
the Earl of Salisbury coming to london was encountrid at bloreheth with the
lord Awdeley and much other people ordained for to have distressid him / but he
having knoweleche that he should be met with / was accompanied with his ij.
sons Sir Thomas and Sir Johan Neuill and a great felawship of good men And so
they met / and fought to dedres / where th^rle of Salisbury wan the feld / And
the lord Awdeley was slain and many gentillmen of Chesshire and much people
hurt / and therles ij sons were hurt and going homward / afterward they were
taken and had to Chestre by the queen's meyne After Calixte Pius was pope and
was chosen this year M.CCCC.lviij. And he was called to fore Eneas an eloquent
man and a poet laureate / He was embassatour of the Emperors a fore time /
And he wrote in the cou^seill of Basile a noble traittie for the auctorite of
the same / Also he canonised seint katherine of senys / This pope ordained
great indulgencis and pardon to them that would go werre against the turk / and
wrote an epistle to the great turk / exorting him to become christian / and in
the end he ordained a passage against the turk at Ankone / to which much
people drew out of all parties of cristendome / of which people he sent many
home ayene be cause they suffised not / and anon after he deide at the said
place of Ankoue the year of our lord M.cccc lxiiij. the xiiij. day of August

How Andrew trollop and the soudiours of Cale^s forsook the duke of york and
their mastir therl^ of warwyke in the westcontre / Capitulo ducentesimo lix.
THe duke of york the earls of warrewyk and of Salisbury saw the governance
of the reame stood most by the Queen and her counceill / and how the great
princes of the land were not called to counseill but set a part / and not
only so / but that hit was said through the reame that tho said lords should be
destroyed utterly as it openly was showed at bloreheth by them that would have
slain the earl of Salisbury / Then they for sauacion of their lives / and
also for the common well of the reame thought for to remedy thise things /
assembled them to gedir with much people / and took a field in the westcontre /
to which the earl of warwik come from Caleys with many of tholde soudiours / as
Andrewe trollop and other / in whose wisdom as for the werre he much trusted /
And when they were thus assembled and made their field / The king sent onte his
co^myssions and preuy sealis un to all the lords of his reame to come and
awayte on him in their most defensable wise / and so every man come in such
wise that the king was stronger and had much more people than the duke of york
and the earls of warrewyke and Salisbury / for it is here to be noted that
every lord in England at this time durst not disobeye the queen For she rewlid
peasibly all that was don about the king which was a good simple and Innocent
man And then when the king was comen to the place where as they were / the
duke of york and his felawshipp had made their feld in the strengest wise /
and had purposed verily to abyden and have foughten / but in the night andrewe
trollop and all tholde soudiours of Caleys with a great felawship / suddenly
departed out of the dukes oost and went strayt un to the kings feeld where
they were resseyued ioyously for they knew thentent of the other lords and
also the manner of their feld And then the duke of york with the other lords
seeing them so deceived took a counseill shortly in that same night and departed
from the feld beuyng behynd them the most part of their people to keep the field
till on the morn Then the duke of york with his second sone departed through
walis toward Irland / beuyng his oldest sone the earl of the march with the
earls of warrewyke and Salisbury / which to gedir with iij. or iij. persons
rood strayt in to deuenshire / and there by help and aid of one denham a
squire / which gate for them a shipp which cost.cc.xx. noblis and with the
same ship sailled fro thens in to garneseye / And there refresshid them and
from thens sailled to Caleys / where they were received in to the Castle by
the postern / er they of the town knew of hit / And the duke of york took
shipping in walys and sailled aver in to Irland where he was well received

How therles of march warrewyke and salisbury entrid in to Caleys / and how
therle of warrewyke went in to Irland Capitulo ducentesimo lx.
Then king Henry being with his oost in the field not knowing of this soden
departing on the morn fond none in the field of the said lords / sent a^te
in all have men to follow and pursue after to take hem / but they met not
with them as god would and then the king went to ludlowe and dispoilled the
Castle and the town / and sent the duches of york with her children to my
lady of bokyngham her sustre / where she was kept long after / And forthwith
the king ordained the duke of Somersete Captayn of Caleys / And these other
lords so departed as a fore is said were proclaimed rebellis and great
traitors Then the duke of somersete took to him all the soudiours that
departed from the field and made him ready in all have to goo to Caleys and take
possession of his office / and when he come he fond therle of warrewyke
therinne as Captayn / and therles of march and salisbury also / and than he
londed by scales and went to guysnes / and there he was received And it
fortuned that sum of tho ships that come over with him / come in to Caleys
haven by their fre will / for the shipmen ought more favor to the earl of
warrewyke than to the duke of somersete / in which ships were take diverse
men as Ienyn finkhyll Johan felaw / kailles and purser / which were beheded
sone after in Caleys / And after this daily come men over see to thise lords
to Caleys / and began to wexe strenger and strenger / And they borrowed much
good of the staple / And on that other side the duke of somersete being in
guysnes gate people to him / which come out and scarmusshed with them of caleys
and they of Caleys with them which endured many days / During thus this same
scarmusshyng / much people daily come over un to these lords / Then on a time
by thauys of counseill the lords at Caleys sent oue^ mastir Denham with a
great felawship to sandwych / which took y^ town and therein the lord Rivers
and the lord scales his sone and take many ships in the haven / and brought
hem all to Caleya / with which ships many maroners of their fre will come to
Caleys to serve the earl of warrewyke / And after this the earl of warrewyke by
thauys of the lords take all his ships and manned them well and sailled him
self in to Irland for to speak with the duke of york / and to take his auys
how they should enter in to england again / And when he had been there and done
his erandes he returned again toward Caleys and brought with him his modre the
Countess of Salisbury / And coming in the westcontre upon the sea the duke of
Excestre admiral of england being in the grace of dien accompanied with many
ships of werre / met with therle of warwyke and his flote / but they fought
not / for the substance of the people being with the duke of Excestre ought
better will and more favor to therle of warrewyke than to him / and they
departed and come to caleys in saufte blessed be god / Then the kings
counseill seeing that these lords had gotten these ships from sandwych and
taken the lord Ryuers and his sone / ordained a garnyson at sandwych to abide
and keep the to^ne and made one Mountfort Captayn of the town / and that no
man n^ v. taille ne merchant that should goo in to Flaundres should not goo in
to Caleys / Then they of Caleys seeing this / made out mastir Denha^^ and
many other to go to sandwych / and so they did and assailled the town by water
and by land and gate it and brout mount fort their Captayn over see to
Rysebanke and there smote of his head And yet daily men come over to them out
of all perties of england

How the earls of March of warrewyke and of salisbury entrid in to england /
And of the field of Northampton where diuese lords were slain Capitulo
ducentesimo lxj.
ANd after this the said Earls of march warrewyke and of salisbury come over
to dover with much people and there londed / to whom all the country drew and
come to london armed And for to late the lords of the kings cou^seill know
their troth and also their intent / assembled them and told them that they
intended no harm un to the kings person / sauf that they would put fro him
such persons as were about him And so departed from london with a great
p^^ssaunce toward Northampton / where the king was accompanied with many lords
and had made a strong field without the town / And there both parties met
and was foughten a great bataille / in which bataille were slain the duke of
bokyngham the Earl of Shrowesbury the viscounte beamond / the lord Egremond and
many kuyghtes and squyers and other also / and the king him self taken in the
feld and afterward brought to london / And Anon afterward was a parliament at
westmester during which parliament the duke of york come out of Irland with
the earl of Ru^land ridyng with a great felawshipp in to the palais at
westmynstre / and took the kings palais / And come in to the parliament chamber
/ and there took the kings place / and claymed the croune as his propre
enheritaunce and right / and cast forth in writing his title and also how he
was rightful eyer / wherefore was much to do but in conclusion it was
appointed and concluded that king Henry should regne and be kyug during his
natural life / For as moc^e as he had been so long king and was possessyd / And
after his death the duke of york should be king and his eyres kings after him
/ And forth with should be proclaimed heyer apparaunt / and should also be
protector and regent of England duriug the kings life / with many other
things ordeynd in the same parliament / And if king henry during his life went
from this appoyntement or any article concluded in the said parliament / he
should be deposed / and the duke should take the croune and be king / all which
things were enacted by the auctorite of the said parliament (...) which
parliament the communes of the reame being assembled in the common house comonyng
and treating upon the title of the said duke of york suddenly fill down the
croune which henge then in the mids of the said house which is the frraytour
of the abbey of westmestre / which was taken for a prodige or toke^ that the
regne of king henry was ended And also the croune which stood on the hihest
tour of the steple in the Castle of doner fill down this same year

How the noble duke of york was slain and of the field of wakefeld and of the
second Journey at seint Albons by the Queen and prince Ca.cc.lxij
Then for as much as the queen with the prince was in the north and absented
her from the king / and would not obey such things as was concluded in the
parliament / hit was ordained that the duke of york as protector should go
norward for to bring in the queen and subdue such as would not obey with whom
went the earl of salisbury Sir Thomas neuyll his sone / with much people and at
wakefelde in Cristemas weke they were all overthrown and slain by the lords
of the Queen's party that is to wete the duke of york was slain / the earl of
Rutland Sir Thomas neuyll and many mod / the Earl of Salisbury was taken a live
and other as Johan harow of london Captain of the footmen and hanson of hulle
/ which were brought to pountfrete and there after beheded and their hedes
sent to york and set upon the yates And thus was that noble prince slain
the duke of york / on whose soul and all christian souls god have mercy Amen /
And this time therle of march being in shrewsbury heering the death of his
fadre / desired assystence and aid of the town for tauenge his fadres death /
And from thens went to walys / where at Candelmasse after he had a bataille at
mortimers cross against therles of Penbroke and of wylshire / where therle of
march had victory Then the Queen with tho lords of the north after they had
distressed and slain the duke of york^ and his felawship come southward with a
great multitude and puissaunce of people for to come to the king and defete
such conclusions as had been taken before by thr parliament / against whose
coming the duke of Norffolke therle of warrewyke with much people and ordenaunce
went un to Seint Albons / and lad king Henry with hem And there encountrid to
gedr^ in such wise and fought that the duke of Norffolke and the Earl of
warrewyke with other of their party fled and lost that Journey / where king
Henry was taken and went with the Queen and Prince his sone / which tho had
gotten that field / Then the Queen and her party being at their above sent
anon to london which was on ass^ wednesday the first day of lent for
vitaille / which the Maire ordained by thauys of the Aldremen that certain
Carts laden with vitaille should be sent to Seint Albons to them / And when
tho Carts comen to Crepelgate / the communes of the Cite that kept that gate
took the vitailles from the Carts and would not suffer it to pass / Then
were there c^rteyne Aldremen and communers appointed to gone to barnet for to
speak with the Queen's counseill for tentrete that the northern men should be
sent home in to their country again / For the Cite of london / dredde sore to
be robbed and despoilled if they had come And thus during this trait^ye /
tidings come that the Earl of warrewyke had met with the Earl of March on
Cotteswold coming out of walys with a great meyne of walsshmen / And that they
both were coming to london ward / Anon as these tidings were known / the
traittye was broken / For the King Queen Prince and all the other lords that
were with them departed from Seint Albons northward with all their people. yet
or they departed from thens they beheded the lord bonuyle and Sir Thomas kriell
/ which were taken in the Journey done on shroftewisday / Then the duchess
of york being at london and beriug of the loss of the feld at seint Albons
sent ouersee her ij. young sons George and Richard which went to ^trecht /
And phelipp malpas a rich merchant of london / Thomas vaghan squire maistir
william hatt^clif and many other fering of the coming of the Queen to london
took a ship of andwarp for to have goon in to zeland And on that other coost
were taken of one colompn^ a frenshman a shipp of werre / and he took hem
prisoners and brout hem in to france where they paid great good for their
raunsone / and there was much good and richesse in that ship

Of the deposicion of king henry the vj. And how king Edward the iiij. took
possession / And of the bataille on palmesonday and how he was crouned Ca.CC /
lxiij
Then when the earl of march and the earl of warwyk had met to gedir on
Cottyswold / in continent they concluded to goon to london / and sent word
anon to the maire and to the cite that they should come / anon the cite was
glad of their com^^g hopyng to be relieuyd by them / And so they come to london
/ and when they were comen and had spoken with the lords and estates then
being there concluded for as much as king henry was goon with them northward
that he had forfayted hts croune and ought for to be deposed acordyug un to the
acts maad and passed in the last parliament /

And so by thauys of the lords spirituell and temporell then being at london
the earl of the march Edward by the grace of god oldest sone of Richard duke
of york as rightful Eyer and next enheriteur to his fadre y^ iiij. day of
march y^ year of our lord M.cccc.lix took possession of the Reame of e^glond
at westmestre in the great halle / and after in the church of the abbey and
offrid as king bering the septre royal / to whom all the lords both
spirituell and temporell did homage and obeyssance as to their souerayn liege
and lawful lord and king And forth with it was proclaimed through the cite king
Edward the fourth of that name / And anon after the king rode in his Ryall
astate norward with all his lords for to subdue his subgettes that time being
in the north and tauenge his fadres death / And on palmesonday after he had a
great bataille in the northcontre at a place called towton not fer fro york /
where with the help of god he gate the field and had the victory where were
slain of his ad^saries xxx. thousand men and moo as it was said by men that
were there* in which bataille was slain the earl of northumberland / the lord
Clifford / sir Johan neuile the earl of westmerla^dis brother / andrew trollop
/ and many other knights and squyers / Then king henry that had be king
being with the queen and prince at york heering the loss of that field and so
much people slain and overthrown anon forthwith departed all three with the
duke of Somersete the lord roos and other toward Scotland / And the next day
king Edward with all his army entered in to york / and was there proclaimed
king and obeyed as he ought to be / And the maire Aldremen and comyns sworn to
be his liege men / And when he had tarried a while in the north / and that all
the contre there had turned to him he returned southward / leuyng the earl of
warrewyke in tho parties for to keep and govern that co^tre / And about
midsomer after the year of our lord.M.cccc.lx. and the first year of his regne
/ he was crouned at westmynstre and enoynted king of england having the hold
possession of all the hole reame whom I pray god save and keep and send him
the accomplisshement of the remenaunt of his rightful enheritaunce beyond the sea / and that he may regne in them to the playsir of almighty god health of
his soul honor and wurship in this present life / and well and prouffyt of
all hi^ subgettis / and that there may be a verray final pees in all christian
reames that the infidelis and mysscreauntes may be withsta^den and destroyed
and our faith enhannced which in thise days is sore mynusshed by the
puissaunce of the turks and hethen men / And that after this present and short
life we may come to the ^uerlastuig life in the bliss of heaven Amen

Thus ends this present book of the cronicles of england / en^nted by me
william Caxton In thabbey of westmynstre by london Fynysshid and accomplisshid
the x. day of Iuyn the year of thincarnacion of our lord god M.CCCC.lxxx. And
in the xx. year of the regne of king Edward the fourth

