A breuiat Cronicle contaynynge all the Kings from brute to this day, and
many notable acts gathered out of diverse Cronicles from Willyam Conqueror
unto the year of christ a. M.v.c.lii.

Prynted at Canterbury in Saint Paul's parysh by John Mychell.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.



To the right worshipful knight sir Antony Anchor master of the Kings Iuel
house, John mychell book Prynter wishes health and prosperity.
THe knowledge of histories and cronicles, right worshipful sir Antonye how
pleasant and necessary it is (although part lie I perceue my self and
learned men declare the same at large) the common use and worldly practice
shows evidently, and that it is the record of our forefathers lyfes,
without readinge and knowledge whereof we walk in darcknes, and live like
children new come into the world. But histories and Cronicles faithfully
written set before our face, as presently to look upon all ages, all times, all
chaunges, all states, and all doings, even from the beginning of the world
to our own time, yea, without that we know of no world before our being.
Much praise therefore, and great thanks have they deserved which has truly
travailed in that sort of labor, as did that noble clarke Eusebius, and our
worshipful Contry manne master Beade, whose worthy doings I would some
witty learned man would at this time follow for an exsample. We had in our
English tongue a litell short Cronicle notinge many things worthy of memory,
which book I have by my poor labor sumwhat augme^ted, and enlarged with
more matter, but oh good Lord nothing to the purpose of my good will, if I had
as much knowledge as I have desire of furtheraunce, and because right
worshipful sir Antony I know your good mind, toward the a vauncemente of all
honest learning I dedicate this mine endeavor and labor to your mastershippe
most hartelie desiringe your favorable help against the next Printinge of
the same, by your own examinacion, or else by the diligence of some other, by
your mastershippe to the same assigned. Requiring also and hartelye prayinge
my frences and brothers of the occupacyon of pri^ting to suffer me quietlye to
enjoy the benefit of these mine own labors, and to have the advantage of
mine own inuencion as I shall gladly suffer every of the^ to enjoy the
commodities of his, and the^ we shall brotherlike live in concord one by
another, this wishinge you good life and long. I bid you fare well

At Cantorbury. etc.
To know certain when the.iiii. terms of the year concerning the law
begin and end.
The term next after the Nativity of our Lord, begins the xxiiii. day of
January, and ends the.xii. day of February.

Easter Term begins the the.xviii. day after Easter, rekeninge Easter day
for one, and ends the fourth day after the Ascencion of our Lord.

Trinity Term begins the morrow after Corpus Christi day and ends the
wednesdaye fortnighte after.

Mighelmas Term begins the ninth day of Octobre, and enthe.xxviii. day of
November.

The Escheker is open always viii. days before the beginning of every Term.

A true and perfect rekeni^g, of the years and time, from Adam unto Christ
gathered out of the holy scripture.
FRom Adam unto Noes flood, are.M.vi.c.lxxxxv

From Noes flude unto the departinge of Abraham out of Chalde are.ccc.lxiii.
and.x. days.

From the departing out of Chalde, unto the departinge of the children of
Israel out of Egipte, are cccc.xxx. years.

From the departing of the children of Israel out of Egypt, unto the first
buyldinge of the Temple, or else unto the fourth year of the raygne of
Salomo^, are.cccc.lxxx. years.

From the first building of the Temple, unto the captivity of Babylon
are.cccc.xix. years and vi. months

From the captivity of Babylon unto the new buildinge again of Jerusalem
are.c.xliii. years.

From that time unto Christ are.cccc.lxxxiii. year.

These ben the kings that have been, sith Brute came in to this land first.
BRute came in to this land, after the making of the world, iiii.M.lxxvii.
year. And he lived in the land or he were crowned.lx. year. And after he was
crowned.xx. year Lotrine his son reigned.v. year Madan his son xxx. year
Ebranke his son xl. year. Leyly his son ix. year. Bladud his son. xxi.
year Guentolin his wife xv. year Memps his son xxiiii. year Brute bremenshull
xxx. year Ludebras xiii. year Lyre his son xlviii. year Credell his daughter
v. year Conodage her sister son. xxxiii. year Reynolde his son xx. year
Gorbodyan his son xv. year Denobaud wan the realm by conquest and reigned
xl. year Bellyn his son xi. year Cornabatrus his son xxv. year Guentolem his
son xxv. year Scisille his son xv. year Kymore his son. xix. year
Morwyche his son ix. year Grandobodyan his son xi. year Protegayle his
son xvi. year Petitur his brother v. year Esydur his brother xiiii. year And
after this Esydur, reigned xxxiii. kings, each after other in peace. The first
king of tho. xxxiii. was Borgodyan, and he reigned xii. year. Morgan i. year
Cighnus vi. year Io walam viii. year Rohugo xi. year Voghen xiii. year Catyll
xv. year Porrex. ii. year Cheryn xviii. year Coyll xii. year. Sulgenis xiii.
year Esdad xx. year Audragie xvii. year Vrian v. year Eliud ii. year Eldadan
xv. year Claten xii. year Ouirgunde viii. year Mortan vi. year Bledagh iiii.
year Caph i. year Gen ii. year Seyfell, and king Bled xxii. year Gabreth xx.
year Archinall xiiii. year Croyll xxx. year Rodyngir xxxii. year Hectir v. year
Harpir vi. year Carpour vii. year Dygneyll iii. year Samuel xxiiii. year Read
ii. year Ely vii. months Ludde the last kings son of the.xxxiii. reigned
xi. year Cassibalan his brother xxvii. year Androge^ Luddes first son viii.
year Kembalyn before the Incarnacion of Christ reigned ii. year
The hole sum, from the coming of Brute, till the Incarnacion of Christ
M.C.xxii. year.
Grynder and Armog his.ii. sons. xliiii. year. Koyse Armog son xli. year
Lucy his son reigned an Hethe^ man.xi. year, and a christen man ii. year And
afterward was so great debate in the land that the realm was without a
king. l. year Coil that made Colchester, was king then and reigned xiii. year
Constantine the Romayne, that wedded Sayncte Elyn Coyles daughter xv. year
Constantine that was Emperor, his son reigned. xx. year. Octauian reigned
after that Constantyne was gone to Rome, to be crowned Emperor. xv. year
Maximian wedded Octauians daughter and reigned. xxviii. year In his time saint
Albo^ was slain. Constantine, cosyn to the king of litel Brytayne reigned xii.
year Constantine his son, that was a monk at wi^chester reigned v. year
Forteger that was Earl of Essex reigned xi. year Fortymar his son xiiii.
year Engist of Saxony in the land of Germany, yt was a Sarazyn: wan the land
and reigned. v. year Aurilambros Constantines son slew Engyst, and drove the
Sarazyns away, and reigned viii. year Vter pe^drago^ his brother xvii. year
Arther his son reigned. xxvi. year Co^sta^tine Arthers cousin. xxiiii. year
Guran for Constantyne had none heir, reigned xxx. year Tonagh his cousin
xxiiii, year Syryke reigned xxv. year Saint Ethelbert and Sebert, that were
converted by saint Austine and his fellowship reigned. l. year Elfrede, and
Cadwaller, saint Oswalde, and Cadwalyn reigned, in this realm of England one
after another. lxxx. year Offa Saint Oswaldes brother xlviii. year. Alured the
first, in his time saint Edmunde of Bury was slain of hunger and Hubba: the
kings brethren of Denmark. xxx. year Edward the first his son xxv. year
Edmunde his brother xvii. year Adelstone xxv. year Eldred his brother. x. year
Edwin his third brother iiii. year Edgar his son xvii. year S. Edward the
martyr xii. year Swayne that was king of Denmark reigned xv. year Eldred s.
Edwards brother.ix. year Edmunde Irensyd, and Know Swayne son reigned xx.
year Harolde Harefote knowte son xiii. year. Hardeknowt his brother. xvi.
year Saint Edward the confessor Eldredes son reigned xxiii. year. Harolde
that was Godwyn son, Earl of well sex reigned i. year
Here ends all the kings that raygned before the Conquest.
Wyllyam Conqueroure.
WIlliam Duke of Normandy called conqueror, Of william co^queror duke of
normandy.
Nephew unto king Edward the confessoure began his dominion over this realm of
England the.xv. day of October in the year of our Lord.M lxvii. and
reigned.xxi. years, one month with great cruelnes toward the Englyshmen
chargynge them always with great exactions by means whereof he caused diverse
to flee out of the land, he ordained new laws at his own pleasure
profitable to him self and grievous and hurtful to the people.

In the second year of this kings reygne the cyty of Exeter and
Northumberland, Exiter Rebelled.
rebelled which both were subdued and after grievously punyshed.

King Wyllyam bylded certain castles within this realm and put normans to be
gouerners in them who greatly oppressed the English men. The englysh men
oppressed.


About this time the king caused.ii. Bishops and albotes deposed.
Cardynalles to come from Rome, where by means of the king they deposed
certain, Bysshopes, Albottes, and Prioures, Englyshemen and in their place put
in Normans.

The country above york destroyed.
In the.iii. year of Wyllyam Conqueroure the Danes invaded the North country
and won york, but shortly after the king came and drove away the Danes and
took such displeasure with the enhabitauntes of that prouynce that he destroyed
the land from york to Durham, that.ix. year after it lay unlabored and
untilled.

About this time was a great debate between Thomas Archbishop of york and
Langfranke archbishop of Canterbury for the Primacy of England, A variaunce
between the bishops for the primacy.
but the bishop of Cantorbury optained, and the Bishop of york made to him an
oath of obeysaunce.

In the.x. A conspiracy against the king.
year of this kings reign Roger Earl of Herford and Rafe Earl of Norfolk
conspyred against king Wyllyam he being in Normandy, which were both
outelawed the realm, and Earl Walrefe, that uttered the conspiracy was
beheaded.

About the.xv. A bataile i^ normandy
year of his reign Robert curteyse the kings eldest sone with the help of
Philip the French king made war against his father in Normandye where king
Wyllyam was sore hurt but afterward a peace was made between them.

This king wyllyam made the new forest in hamshere and therefore he cast
down diverse churches by the space of xxx. The making of new forest
miles.

No english man bare office in england.
In his time he kept the Englysh men so low that few of them bare any office of
honor in England.

Also in the.xix. year of king Wyllyams reygne he being in Normandy raised a
great trybute in England and caused to be gathered of every hyde of lands
which contayneeh.xx, A great tribute.
Acres.vi. s

Shortly after the king made war into France where he did much hurt, The
death of william co^queror.
but in this heat he took such a disease that it cost him his life, in his
sekenes he made his testamente, and gave to Wyllyam Rufus his second son the
kingdom of England, and to Roberd Courteise his eldest son the Duchye of
Normandy, and unto henry his third son he gave his treasure, thus he ended
his life in the month of July and lies buried at Cane in Normandy.

Wylliam Rufus
WIllyam Rufus or willyam the Reed began his reygne over this realm the.xvii.
day of Septembre the year of Christ.m.lxxxix. Sone after willyam Rufus had
taken upon him the kingdom, his brother Robert Courteise came out of Normandy
and landed at hampto^ to thentent to have put out his brother from the
kingdom but the king sent to him ambassadors, Agreement between william
rufus and his brother.
so at the last they were agreed that Wyllyam Rufus should be king payinge to
his brother yearly.iii.M. Marks and each of them to be others air.

A rebellion against the king.
In the second year of this king diverse Lords in England rebelled against the
king and assailed diverse towns, but king wylliam vanquyshed the traitors and
chased them out of his realm.

war with the scotes
In the.iii. year of Wyllyam Rufus the scotts warred on england, wherefore
king Wyllyam provided an army and went thither where after diverse conflictes
and scermyshes a peace was concluded so that Malcolyn king of Scotts was
sworn to be true to king Wyllyam.

A great wind in England
In the iiii. year of wyllyam Rufus there was a great wind, in London that
blew down v.c. houses, and the rofe of Bow church, and did great hurt in
vynchester and other places.

The king of wales slain.
In this time also the Welchemen rebelled, but they were subdued their duke or
king called Rise slain which was accounted the last king of Wales.

Also Malcolin king of Scotts rebelled and came with an army into England,
The king of scotts slain:
but the Earl of Northumberlande encountered with him, and there king Malcolyn
was slain.

In the.vi. a viage to Jerusalem.
year of William Rufus there was prepared through christendom a mighty army
of three.c.M. men to win Jerusalem whose soueraygne captain was Godfrey duke
of Loraine and his ii, brethren with many other noble men of Christendom.

At this time many noble men Borowi^g of money for this vyage
laid their lands to morgage to provide for the forenamed viage among which
was Roberd Curtoyse Duke of normandy he laid his dukedom to pledge to his
brother William king of England for a C.M. pound.

Great taxynge.
A bought the.viii, year of william Rufus both England and Normandy were
greuouslye taxed, and also there was a great mortality among men so sharp
that tillage of the earth was put of for that year whereby ensued grease
hunger and scarcity in the year folowinge. Great morallity


Westminster hall builded.
Abought the xi. year of the king he builded Westminster halle.

In this year also the christen men wan Jerusalem after they had beseged it
xxxix. Jerusalem won by the Christen men.
days and Godfry the sovereign captain of the christen men was proclaimed
king of Jerusalem.

The death of william Rufus.
This king William had great pleasure in hunting insomuch that he pulled down
many houses of religion to enlarge the new eorest of Winsore for wild dear,
but a French knight of his named water Cerel by ye glaunsynge of his arowe
upon a branch when he shote at a heart in the said forest, smot the king
and wounded him to death, whereof he shortly dyed in the year of our Lord.
M.C. without any issue of his body, and he raygned.xii. year and.xi.
months and is buried at westminster.

Henry the first.
HEnry the brother of Wyllyam Rufus and first of that name (for his learning
called Beweclarke) and third son to Wylliam Conqueroure was crowned king of
England the.v. day of August the year of our Lord.M.c. and.i.

This Henry was a noble prince in the first year of his raygne he reformed the
measure in England which of long time were corrupted he used the laws of
saint Edward, Mesures restored.
sone after he was king he took to wife Maude the sister of Edgare king of
Scotts. This man favored nothing the usurped power of the bishop of Rome.

The king relesed of his tribut
In the.iiii. year of this king Roberd curtoyse the kings brothere came into
england and was well entreated of the king and Queen and there the duke
released the king of his tribute of.iii.M. marks, but it was not long after
by means of tale bearers and ill reporters that great variaunce fell between
the king, Duke Robert taken prisoner.
and the Duke of Normandy his brother, and shortly thereupon deadlye war was
arrered in thend whereof duke Roberd was taken and kept in perpetual prison at
cardyffe, by his brother, who immediatlye seized upon the duchye of Normandy
and held it in possession.

In the.vi. A rebelio^ i^ england
year of king henry the first, the Earl of shrewysbury, and the Earl of
Cornwall rebelled against king henry and after were taken and kept in
prison as long as they lived.

About this time also the king ordained strayghte laws against thieves and
other that used unlawful means, which were punished, Punishemente for
transgressors.
some with death, some with loss of their eyes, of their stones and other
members of man as their trespass required.

By the means of Anselme bishop of Cantorbury the priests of England were
constrained to forgo their wives which before was lawful to be married. The
priests were co^straned to forgo their wives.


About the.xiii. An earthequake.
year of king Henry's raygne was a great earthquake at shrewsburye and the
river of Trent was so dry that men might go over dry shode.

war between england and France.
In the.xvii. year of king henry's raygne began great varyence between Jews
french king and king henry of England and at the last was fought between
them a cruel battle where the English men optayned the victory and the
french king fled, but shortly after a peace was concluded and wylliam the
eldest son of king henry did homage to the french king for the Duchy of
Normandy

The kings two sons drowned.
In the.xx. year of Henry the first Wyllyam duke of normandye the kings eldest
son, and Richard his brother, and Mary their sister, Richard Earl of
chester with his wife the kings nece, and other to the nombre of a.c. and.vi.
persons passing from Normandy into England by over syghte of the shypmaister
were drowned and none escaped but one man.

About the.xxvi. A law ordaned for priests.
year of this king there was a counsel holden at london where it was
determined that the abominable vices of the prestes should be punished by the
kings offiters.

In the.xxii. maude the empress made air of the Realm.
year of king henry's reign because he had none other issue male, ordained
that his daughter Maude which had been Empress should succeed him in the
kingdom.

A boughte the.xxviii. maude the empress married.
year one Geffery Plantagenet Earl of Angeo married the said Maude and by her
had issue henry which henry after king Steven was king of England.

This king henry the first being in Normandy in the.xxv. The death of king
henry the first.
year of his reign the second day of December in the year of Christ a.M
a.c.xxxv. dyed, some say of a surfeit, and some writers say it was by a fall of
a horse. And his body was brought into England and is buried in the Abbey of
Reding.

Of King steven.
Steven Earl of Boloine, the son of the earl of blois, and Adela william
Co^querours daughter and Nephew to Henry the first, took on him the governance
of this realm of England through the counsel of many Lords of England
contrary to their oath made to Maude the Empress, and was crowned king upon
saint Steuens day the year of Christ.M.c. and xxxv.

Variance i^ england
At this time there was great variance in England for king Steven was thought
to be king unjustly for many of the Lords of England favored Maude the
Empress, and other favored Steven who was king of the which followed great
war.

This king steven beseiged diverse castles that belonged to Bisshops and other
lords and took them by forse, Castelles beseged.
and fortified them with his own knights and servants, to thentente to
withstand the empress whose coming he ever feared.

In the second year of king Steven there rose a great rumor in England that
king Steven was dead which tales rose much variaunce in England for diverse of
the lords got them to their holds which after might scantly be pacefied or
quieted. ill talles does much hurt.


Shortly after the king went A viage to normandy.
into Normandye and kept war with the Earl of Aniowe the husband of Maude
ye Empress which was right air to the Crown of England and when he had
quietted that province he made Eustace his son duke of normandy.

A bataile and the king taken prisoner.
In the.vi. year of king Steven Maude the Empress came in to England by the
comfort of the Earl of Gloucester and the Earl of Chester, and made strong
war upon king Stephen in the end whereof the kings party was over come,
and him self taken prisoner, and was brought to the Empress who sent him to
Bristowe to prison.

Shortly after this bataile the kentish men and londoners rose and took part
with the king, A bataile at wynchester.
and at a feld foughten at winchester they overcame the Empress, and she flede
to Gloucester and Earl Roberte of Gloucester was taken, but shortly after
both the king and earl Roberte were delivered out of prison by exchange.

Shortly after the king gathered a great power, To e^presse beseged.
and the Empress fled unto Oxforde where the king did besege her, but she
fled away by night, and so went to Walyngford, and shortly after with a
small company she went into Normandy to her husband Geffery Plantagenet.

Aboughte the.x. A child crucified i^ despyte of Christ.
year of king Steuens raygne, the Iues that dwelt in England took and
crucified a child at Norwytch on Easter day in derision of Christ and his
relygion.

In the.xi. The death of Gefery Plantaginet.
year of king Steven, Geffery Plantagenet Earl of Aniowe and husband to
Maude the Empress, after he had won from king Steven the Duchy of Normandy
ended his life, and Henry his son succed in that dukedo^.

Henry Duke of Normandy, in the quarrel of his mother Maude the Empress with a
great pusau^ce entered into England, Henri the second entered engand.
and at the first wan the Castle of Malmesbury, then the Tower of London, and
afterward the town of Notyngham, with other holds and Castles, between him
and king Steven were fought many Battayles whereby this realm was sore
troubled.

A peace between the Empress and king Steven.
In the.xviii. year of king Steven peace was agreed between Maude the Empress,
her son, and king Stephen on this condition that Steven should be king
during his life, but for all this peace, king Steven took such thought and
care that he died in the.xv. The death of king Steven.
day of Octobre next following, in the year of Christ.M.C.liiii. for he was
in war and trouble all the term of his life and he was buried at Feuershame.

Henry the second.
HEnry the second and son to Geffery Plantagenet earl of Angeo and maude ye
empress, was crowned king the.xx. day of Decembre the year of Christ.M.c.lv.

This king was a noble man, Henry the second greatly enlarged his kingdom
and much fortunate in wars, and greatly enlarged his kingdom. But diverse
writers which more did favor the doings of Thomas Becket then the truth,
write that in his latter days he was unfortunate, but by his great manhod and
pollycy the syngnory of England was much augmented with the addicions of
Scotland, Irelande, the yles, Orcades, Britain. Poytow, Gyon, and other
prouinceces of france, wherefore it may be euydent to all men that his good will
was to reform in his time the clargie, but as then god had not appointed it.

Defacing of castles.
In the second year of king Henry the second, the king cast down diverse
castles which were set up in the time of king Steven to defend Maude the
Empress his mother.

After that he went into the north parts and received of the king of Scotts,
A voyage into the North country.
Cumberland, and Northumberland, which they said were given to them, by Maude
his mother and set an order in that country

A voyage i^ to Wales.
In the.iii. year of king Henryes reign he went with a strong Army into
Wales and quietted that country, and after builded the strong castle of
Rutland.

About the.v. year of this kings reygne rose a great Schism at Rome for some
of the Cardynals chose one octauian, A schysme at Rome.
and other some would have Alexander to be Bishop, which Schism continued
xx. years and much trouble followed.

In the.vii. The king of scotts taken prisoner.
year king Henry kept such war in to Scotland that he took king Wyllyam
prisoner which afterward was delivered, and the king of Scotts did fealty
and homage to king Henrye.

In the.x. year of this king Thomas Bocket archebyshop of Cantorbury (which
sediciouslye under pretense of defending the liberties of the church (as he
said) Thomas becket fled the realm
spoke and did many things against the kings prorogatyue royal) did flee
out of the realm, and went to Rome to complain upon the king to the Bishop.

In the xvii. year of king Henry Thomas Becket by entreaty of the bishop of
Rome, Thomas becket slain.
and Jews the French king was restored to his Byshopryke, and not long
after by certain gentilme^ was slain.

more falshed of the bishop of Rome.
King Henry in the.xviii. year of his reygne sent Ambassedoures to the bishop
of Rome to pourge him self of the false accusacion of ye death of Thomas
Becket but among other things it was enjoined the king in his penance that
it should be lawful to all his subjects as often as the^ list to apeale to
the sea of Rome, and that no man should be accounted as king until such time
as he were confirmed by the Romysh Bishop. By this all men may perceive that
the Bisshoppes of Rome always desired to have princes and kings ready at their
beck, but this Eniuncion was never fulfiled of the king of England.

In this year also king Henry went into Ireland and subdued it, Irelande
won.
and anexed Irelande to his kingdom.

In the.xxii. The kings eldest son crowned King
year of king Henry he caused Henry his eldest son to be crowned king and
married Margeret the French kings daughter.

Shortly after king Henry the sone at the setting on of the french king and
the king of of scotts, war between the father and the son
with diverse other made war against king Henry his father where were
between them diverse strong battayls but always the father had the victory,
and at the last his son with his alyees were constrayne to bend, and desire
peace which he gentyly granted and forgave their tresspasse. The king of
scotts taken prysonner.


In this war Wylliam king of Scotts was taken prisoner and yielded for his
ransom the city of Carlyle, the castle of Bambroughe, the new castle upon
Tine, and swore for ever to be true to the king, and as well he to do homage as
his successors as often as they should be required.

many Iues in england.
About this time were many Iues in England, which against the feast of Easter,
did use to crucify young children in despyte of christian relygion.

In the.xxviii. year, Henry the eldest son of King Henrye of England ended
his life. war renewed in France.
Shortly after began the war in france for king Philip of France desired
homage to be done to him for the lands of Poytow and other, and for the
castle of Gysours.

The death of king henry the second.
In the.xxxiiii. year of king Henry the second Richard Earl of Poytow maid
war a gaynst king Henry of England his father, and taking part with the
french king wan from his father many towns and castles, for sorrow whereof
shortly after king Henry ended his life in the year of christ m.c.lxxxviii,
and is beryed at founteuerarde in france.

Rychard the first.
RIchard the first, and second son of king Henry the second was crowned
king of England the, iii. day of September the year of Christ.M.c.lxxxix.
This man for his valyantnesse and courage was called Curedde lion.

In the first year of king Richard the Londoners obtained two officers to
gyde their city which were called baylyffes. Two bayliffes governed london:
The Iues spoiled at london


About this time the Iues bare themselves very bold in London in so much that
the people rose against them and did rob and kill many of them without
pytie. But by cause the offenders were so many they ascaped without
punishment.

The king of scotts did ho^age
Also in this first year Wyllyam king of Scotts came to Cantorbury and did
homage to king Richard.

A preraracio^ to recover Jerusalem.
About this time the princes of Christendom made great preparacyon to recover
Jerusalem and to aid the Chrystyans in Asia.

In the third year of king Richard, the isle of cipres conquered.
he with a noble army took his Journey toward Jerusalem and by the way he
conquered the isle of Cypres, and afterward he Joined with the french king in
Asia, and conquired Acon, but shortly after there fell great variaunce between
king Richard of England, and king Philyp of france wherefore king Philip
return whom in to France and invaded Normandy, and also he counsaled John
the brother to king Rychard to take upon him the kingdom of England in his
bothers absence.

Shortly after king Rychard of England restored to the christians the city of
Ioppe, The city Ioppe won,
and in many battayles put the Turks to much sorrow.

In the.iiii. The cruelty of the bishop of Elye.
year of king Richard, and while he was in Assia william bishop of Elye, to
whom king Richard had committed the governance of England, practiced much
cruelty as in depreuing of bishops and Abbottes, and would ride with a.M.
horses whereby he grieved the place where he so iourned. But at the last by
strength ye lords put him out of the land. King richard king of Jerusalem.


King Richard exchau^ged Cipers with Guye of Lesingham for the kingdom of
Jerusalem wherefore the king of England of a long time after was called king
of Jerusalem.

king Rychard taken priso^er
In the.v. year king Richard hearing that king Philip of france invaded
Normandy: and that John his brother aspired to his kingdom took peace with the
Turks for.iii. years and with a small company returned whomewarde by Thrace
and there was trayterouslye taken prisoner by the Duke of Austrych and brought
him to henry the Emperor, and he was kept in straight prison a year, and.v.
months where it is said he slew a Lion and took out his heart.

king Rychard delivered out of prison.
In the.vi. year of king Rychardes raygne he paid his ransom which was
a.C.M. pound and was delivered, and returned to his country, and made sharp
war upon the french king, and John his brother at which time was fought
diverse great batailes to the great loss of both parties.

In the.viii. peace between england and France,
year of king Rychardes reygne there was a peace concluded between England
and france for one year, and John submitted him self to his brother.

In the.x. Auriculen confecion first enue^ted.
year of king Richards raygne, Innocent the.iii. Bishop of Rome, he first
compelled men to Auriculer confession, and forbad the Sacrament to be ministered
to the layetie under both kinds.

Shortly after the war was new arered between England and france wherefore
king Richard sailed again into Normandy and made new war upon the french
king, in which war they speed diversely, for some time the French king wan
holds in Normandy, and some time the king of England wan in France. But at
the last king Richard went to besege a Castle called Castle Gayllarde and as
he rode about the Castle to auew it one marked him, The death of king richard
the first.
and smot him with a Quarrel in the head whereof anon after he dyed without
issue of his body in the year of Christ.M.cc. and in the.xii. year of his
reign. And is buried at Fountuerarde.

King John.
John brother to the above named Richard was crowned king of England the xvii.
king John co^te^yned the bishop of rome of a froward mind
day of July the year above written and reign.xvii. years. This king
contemned the bishop of Romes aucthoryte, which if he had done of conscience
and for religions sake, as he seemed to do for covetousness, and of a froward
mind, undoubtedly he had been worthy hye commendacion. By his cowardnes and
slothful necligence the signorye of England greatly decayed.

In the first year of king John's raygne king Philyp of France (in the quarrel
of Arthur Duke of Brytaine whom sertaine of the lords had named king of
England) made war upon king John and invaded Normandy and took from him diverse
Castles and towns: but after long Scirmishes, war began between England and
France.
to ye loss of both parties, a peace was a greed which continued not long.
The king of scotts did ho^age


In this year the king of Scotts came in to England and did homage, and swear
to be true leage man to king John of of England.

In the second year in yorkshire were seen v, A sharp winter.
mones at ones in ye element and the next winter after was a sharp winter and
hayle fell as byg as hens Eggs.

Arthur of Bretaine taken prisoner:
In the.iii. year of king John's raygne king Philip of france invaded Normandy
and took diverse castles and towns which he gave to Arthur Duke of Bretaine.
But shortly after the same Arther with many other noble men were taken
prisoners by king John and led in to England.

England enterdited
In the.vi. year of this king the bishop of Rome demounced king John with
his whole realm accursed, because he would not admit steven Laughton to the
bishoprike of Cantorbury. But he lyttel regarded his curse nor obeyed him
nothing the rather.

Normandy lost.
In the.vii. year of king John's Rain, king Philyp of France subdued to him
the country of Normandye, which was not under the dominion of France in.ccc.
years before.

About this time the Welchemen and Iryshme^ rebelled, whom king John
constrained to redeem peace with great sommes of money. The welche men and
Irishe me^ rebelled.


About this time Philip Emperor of Almaine was murdered by the treason of the
countye Palentyne. The Emperor murdered


In the.ix, The first mayre of London,
year of king John's rain was first ordained mayres and shyriffes in London,
and the first mayers name was Henrye Fitz Alwyn, and the first shyriffes were
Peter Duke, and Thomas Nele.

About the.xiii. king John reconsiled to the bishop of Rome.
year of king John's rain Philippe of france made sharp war upon England
at the setting on the Bishop of Rome. Insomuch that king John was feign to
submite him self to ye Romish bishop, who was bound, that as well he as his
airs should hold the crown of the bishop of Rome, and should pay yearelye
a M. Mark of silver.

Jews the french kings son entered into england
In the.xvi. year of king John great strife and varyaunce happened in England
between the king and his Lords, and commons of his realm. Insomuche that the
king sent into flaunders for socoure and the nobles sent for Jews the son
of king Phylyppe of france, and him saluted as king, and mayntayned him in
war against king John to the great hurt of this realm of England. During
the time of this war King John ended his life and died of the flixe at
Newewarke upon Trent the.xix day of Octobre the year of Christ M.cc.xvi. The
death of king John.
But some Authors write that a Monk poisoned him at Swynested, and is buried
at Worcester.

Henry the third.
HEnry the third of of that name, and eldest son to king John by the aid of
certain lords of England was crowned king at.ix. years of his age which
king with his aids kept sharp war which Jews the french kings son,
who by comnaunte of certain Lords of England claymed the crown, Jews
returned into france.
but after certagne Skyrmyshes and battayles a peace was concluded, so that
Jews should depart into France and for his travail he had a m. Marks and
so departed

In the first year of king henryes raygne were ordained many laws in England
to the great commodity of his subjects. Magnacarta confirmed.
And the great charter called Magnacarta was confirmed, and diverse articles
added thereto.

In the forth year Alexander king of Scotts married Joan the sister of king
Henry of England. The king of scotts married.


In this year also there was a Proclamacion made througheoute England to
avoid strangers. Strangers put out of the realm.
Because one Foukes de brent held the castle of Bedford against the kings
will.

The commi^g in of the graye friars.
In the.v. year of king Henryes raygne the gray friars of the order of
Fraunces came first into England.

A voyage into bretayne.
In the.xiii. year of king Henry the third he sailed into bretayne with a
noble army against Jews king of France, where after spoylynge of the country
a peace was concluded between the.ii. young Princes.

A varyaunce between the king and his lords.
In the.xvi. year of this Kings raygne, a variaunce kyndled between king Henry
and his lords, because he put from his service English men, and trusted
strangers as well in his counsel as other offices nere about him.

In the.xix. The king married.
year king Henry took to wife Elinour daughter of the Earl of Prouynce.

About the.xxi. year of king henry the university of Paris concluded that no
Priests under pain of deadlye sin should have.ii. No priest ought to
have.ii. benefytes.
benefytes.

In the.xxxi. The liberties of london lost.
year king Henry seyased the Fraunchesse of the city of London for a
Judgment given a gaynste a Wydowe named Margaret vyell. But shortly after
they were restored.

In the.xxxviii. year prince Edward, The first prince of ways
eldest son to king Henry married Elynour daughter to the king of Castle to
whom king Henry gave the principality of Wales, and the governance of Gyen,
and Irelande, whereof began first that the kings of England ordained their
sons prince of Wales.

The battle at jews.
In the.xlviii. year of King Henryes raygne great varyaunce was between the
king and his Lords and commons. In so much that near unto Jews king Henry
and his barons fought a cruel battle, where the king lost the field where
the king himself with Richard his brother king of Romans, and sir Edward
his son and other noble men to the nombre of.xxv. were taken, of the commons
were slain.xx.M.

The king delivered out of prison.
The king and his brother were delivered upon promise made to perform certain
Acts made at Oxforde in the parliament before, for suerty whereof Prince Edward
remained as pledge.

Shortly after fell great varyaunce between the Earl of gloucester and the
Earl of Leyceter and Prince Edward took part with the Earl of Gloucester,
The battle at killingworthe
and at kyllyngworthe was fought a cruel battle the vyctory fell on prince
Edwardes part.

Shortly after sir Symonde mounford Earl of Leceter gathered a new army and
met Prince Edward at Euesham where Sir Symonde the Earl was slain and
diverse other that took his part. The battle at Euesham


About the.liiii, The liberties of london lost.
year of king Henry's raygne was such dyspleasure taken against the Londoners
that the king seized their liberties into his hands. But after the city by
means of friends paid a fine of.xx.M. Marks and so was restored to their
lyberty.

In the.lv. A voyage into the holy land
year of this king sir Edward the kings son took his journey into the holy
land, and there he rescued the city of Acres which was beseiged by the Soudan
of surrey. The death of king henry the third.
Duringe which voyage Prince Edward being in the holy land: king Henry his
father fell sick at Westminster and dyed the.xvi. day of November, the year
of Christ.M.cc.lxxiii. and is buried at Westminster.

Edward the first.
Edward the first of that name and son to Henry the.iii. after he hard of the
death of his father came from the holy land. And was crowned king at
Westminster the.xix. The king of scotts did ho^age to king Edward
day of August the year of christ.M.cc.lxxiii. At which time Alexander king
of Scotts was present and did homage to king Edward.

Lewellyn of wales.
In the second year of king Edward the King went into Wales and subdued
Lewellyn Princes of Wales which paid to the king for a fine.l.m. Marks.

In the.x. year of this king Lewellyn Prince of Wales rebellyd, A bataile in
wales.
but after they pursued so the Welchemen that Lewellin and his brother David
fled, but after Lewellyn was taken by sir Edmond Mortymer who smot of his head
and sent it to the king, and after that his brother was hanged, drawn and
quartered.

In the.xiii. year of this king, The liberties of london seized.
the king seized the liberties of london into his hands because the Mayre took
brybes of the bakers. And suffered them to sell bread under the syse.

In the.xxiiii. A bataile in scotland
year of king Edward the Scotts diverse times rebelled wherefore king Edward
beseiged the town of Barwyke where was fought a cruel bataile, the vyctory
fell to the Englysh me^ and wanne the town where were slain of the
Scotes.xxv.M. and after ward the king of Scotts submitted him self to king
Edward of England.

A battle at fankyrke.
In the.xxvi. year (king Edward being in flaunders (the Scotts rebelled, and
chose them a new king called Wales, and entered Northumberlande. But the next
year after king Edward gathered a great power and entered scotland, and at a
place called Fankerke, he mete with the Scotts where between them was fought
a cruel battle, but at the end the Englyshmen had the victory, and slew
of the Scotes to the no^bre of.xxxii.M. and Walis their new chosen king fled in
to the marysses, and the common people yielded them to the king of England.

About the.xxxii. year Edward the kings eldest son committed diverse ryots
to the great dyspleasure of his father wherefore the king enprysoned his son
and other that were of his company. The king put his so^ in prisons


Also a bout the.xxxiii. year of king Edward the first Wales the Scot was
taken and brought to London and there put to death. A bataile in scotland
Anon after many Lords and bisshoppes of Scotland came and yielded them
selves to king Edward. But Robert le Bruise contrary to his oath rebelled
against king Edward, and shortly after the king with a great host went
into Scotland where he met with Roberte le Bruise at a place nyghe saint John's
town where was fought a cruel battle, the victory fell to the Englysh men,
and.vii.m Scotts were slain, and Roberte le bruce fled to the king of
Norwaye, and diverse lords were taken who were sent to London, and there put
to death.

The death of king Edward the first
In the.xxxv. year king Edward fell syke and dyed the.vii. day of Iulye, in
the year of christ M.ccc.vii. and is buried at Westminster.

Edward the second.
Edward the second of that name, and son of the first Edward and prince of
wales, began his Raygne over England the.xxiiii. day of February the year of
Christ.M.ccc.vii. and raygned xviii. years this edward was fair of body but
unsteadfast of manners, and disposed to lyghtnes. For he refused the company of
his Lords and men of honor, and haunted a monge vylaynes and vile persons,
he gave him self also to over much drynkinge, and lyghtlye would disclose
things of great counsel. And besides that he was given to these vices of
nature, what ill counsel may do
he was much worse by the counsel and famylyaritie of certain evil disposed
persons, as Pierse of Ganeston, Hughe the Spencers, and other, whose wanton
counsel he following gave him self to the appetyte and pleasure of the body,
no thing ordering his common weal by sadness, discresion, and Justice, which
thing caused first great varience between him and his nobles, so that
shortly he became to them odible, and in the end was deprived of his kingdom.

This king in the second year of his raygne, The king married,
went into france and married Isabell daughter to Philip le Belle king of
france, and after with her returned i^to england.

About this time Piers of Ganeston behaved him self ylle against the Lords,
and waxed so proud that he would reuyle them, wherefore they suddenly rose,
Piers of ganesto^ be headed.
and beseiged him in the castle of Scarbroughe, and at the last wan it and
took Piers and brought him to a place nere to Warwike. and there stroke of his
head where with the king was greatly dyspleased.

About ye.vi. year of this king, Robert le Bruise heryng of the division between
the king and his lords came again in to Scotland and there was amytted king,
A battle at banockes borne
wherefore king Edward prepared a great Army and went in to Scotland, and
nere to a place called Banockysbourne he mete with the Scotts where was
between them a cruel battle, but the Englyshmen lost the field, and many of
the lords and great men of England were slain and taken, and the king fled
with great danger into Barwyke.

In the.ix. year of king Edward the Scotts wan Barwike, The scotts won
barwike.
and shortly after they entered Northumberlande and slew man woman and child.

About this time there was a great dearthe in England of all things, Great
plages in England
and after followed great Pestilence, yet all these mocions mended not the
king of his ill living.

In the.xi. A bataile of mitton
year of this king the Scotts entered England and at a place in york shire
called Mitton was fought a cruel battle where the English men lost the field,
and much people of the country slain But the king was all ruled by Hughe
Spenser the father and the son, and the commons had the^ in great hatred.

In the.xii. year of this king there was a Parliament holden at London,
Spe^cers banished.
where by the entreatinge of the lords, Hugh Spencer the father, and Hugh
Spencer the son were banished the Realm. But it was not long after but the
king contrary to that ordinance made in the Parlyamente sent for these
Spencers again, and set them in high aucthorytie.

A batel at brough bryge
Shortly after the Lords rose against the king, and at broughe bryge the
kings Captain called Andrew of Harkeley met with the^ where many of the
Barons of england were slain and taken, and afterward that the Earl of
Lancaster and diverse other of ye Barons and knights were put to death.

In the.xvii. year of this king the queen fearinge the tyranny of the
Spensors, The quen fled the land.
fled with her young son Edward into France to her brother Charles where
she and her son was gentlye received of her brother, which made great promise
to aid her against the tyrany of the Spencers.

Shortly after Charles the french king (fearyng the Manassyng of the bishop
of Rome) forsook his systers quarrel, The queen and her son driven out of
france.
and commanded her to avoid his land.

In the.xix. The queen with her son entered the land.
year of king Edward, queen Isabel and her son by the aid and help of sir
John of Heynalde, with a small company of Heynowayes, returned into England,
to whom the nobles and commons gathered in great nombre and pursued the
king, the Spensers, and other enemies, so narowlye that shortly after they
took them, and kept the king in prison at kenelworth, ye Spensours, the Earl
of Arundell, Robert baldocke, and other Tyrants which of long time had
grieved ye reame were put to death.

Edward the third.
Edward the third of that name and son to Edward the second, and of Isabell;
only daughter of Phillip le Belle, after the deposynge of his father, was
crowned king the second day of February, the year of Christ.M.ccc.xxvi. Of
king Edward the third
when he was but.xv. years of Age. He was a man of excellent modesty and
temperaunce, and advanced such parsons to high dignities, as did most pass
other in integrytye, and innocence of life. In feats of arms he was very
expert, as the noble Prowes by him atchiued do well declare, as Froysart and
other writers do declare at large. Of his lyberality and clemency he showed
many great examples, brefelye, in all Pryncely virtues he was so excellent,
that few noble men before his time may be to him compared. At his beginning
he was chefelye ordered by sir Roger Mortimer, and his mother Isabell.

In the first year of his reygne, The scotts entered england
the Scotts entered into England and the king with a great power came to
them at the Park of stanhope and beset them round about, but by the treason
of Sir Roger Mortimer the Scotts escaped without battle whereby the king lost
that voyage and al his charges.

Shortly after at york the king married Phyllip the earls daughter of
Henaude. The king married.
Then the king made peace with the Scotts and released to them their homage,
and delivered unto them their charter or indenture called Ragman, Peace with
the Scotts.
as it was said by the counsel of the old Queen and sir Roger Mortymer which
anon after was made Earl of March. And the old queen and he took upon them
the rule of ye whole realm whereby many things grew out of order.

Therle of kente beheaded.
About the third year of this king the Earl of Kente, the old kings
brother, supposyng his brother had been alive devised certain letters for the
deliverance of his brother, wherefore he was accused, and by aucthoryte of
parlyament condemned and therefore was beheaded.

Prince edward borne.
In this year was borne at Wedstocke Prince Edward which in process of time
grew to a noble and famous man, and was in his days counted the flower of
Chiualry throughoute all the world.

Sir Roger mortimer beheaded.
In the fourth year of king Edwardes reign, sir Roger Mortymer was accused
for diverse points of treason, and namelye that he was over famylyar with the
old queen Isabell the kings mother for which accusacions he was shortly
after beheaded.

In the.vi. A voyage into scotland.
year king Edward went into Scotland with a great power, and at a place
called Haldowne hill, gave the Scotts battle wherein he optayned a tryumphant
victory. So that he slew of them.viii. Earls.ix.c. knights and
baronettes.cccc. esquiers and xxxiii.m. common soudyers: And of the English
men were slain only.xv. persons at the same voyage he wan the town of
Edenbrough and Barwycke with many other castles, and gave the governance of
Scotland to Edward Baylol, between whom and the Scotts were foughten many
batayles, with great dyuersite and change of fortune.

After this time the Scotts so often rebelled, Scotland suffered much penury.
that king Edward made.iii. voyages into that land within the space of.iiii.
years. And with great manhood always vanqueshed his enemies, and caused them
to swear to him feautlie, and homage. In these battayles were slain well nere
all the nobylyty of Scotland, with infinite nombre of the common people.

War between england and France.
In the.x. year king Edward claymed title to the crown of france, wherefore
open war was proclaimed between England and france.

good they vitels in England
About this time (as Fabyan writes) by reason of scarsite of Money, was such
plenty of vitayles in England that the like had not been seen. For a quarter
of wheat was sold for.ii. s. a fat gose for.ii. d. a pygge for a penny a fate
Ox for.vi. s. viii. d. a fat sheep for vi. d. or.viii. d. vi. Pygions a penny.

In the.xii. year king Edward prepared stronglye to make war in to France,
King Edward went to Antwarpe where he was proclaimed vicar general of the
empire
and for sure stablishmente of Amite between him and the Holenders, Selanders,
and Erabanders, sailed to Antwarpe where he concluded the matter with his alies
and by the consent of the Emperor Jews, was proclaimed vicer geneneral of the
Empire.

In the.xiii. The king held a parliamente.
year king Edward returned into England and called his parliament at
Westminster, and there by the aduyce of the whole realm, took upon him the
title to be king of France, and joined the arms of England to the arms of
France and bare the^ quarterlye as they yet continue, at which parliamente was
granted great sommes of money to maintain him in his wars.

In the.xiiii. A batel on the sea.
year of king Edwardes raygne, he saylyng toward Flaunders nigh to the haven of
Scluce, met with the French kings nauye: where was fought a cruel battle,
whereof the king of England had the victory, and the french fleet, that was
in nombre cccc. sail, was well nere all destroyed, and the Soudiers taken,
slain, and drowned, so that of.xxxiii.M. there escaped not one.

A year for one year.
Shortly after king Henry with a mighty army both of England, and of the
Empire, entered france, and beseiged Torney, but shorlty after (by the means
of the countes of Henand) mother to the Queen of England and sister to the
french king, a peace was made for.xii. months, and king Edward returned into
England.

The scotts trobeled England,
In this time the Scotts (by the setting on of the french men) recovered a
great part of that land and in most cruel wise vexed the English garysons.

In the.xviii. year, The order of the garter first ordained,
king Edward enuented and ordained first the order of ye garter at Winsoure.

About this time the Earl of Darby was sent into Gascoyne where he won
diverse towns and Castles, Gascoine won.
and before Anberoche the Earl of Darby, by polecy of sir Walter of Manni,
with a.M. englishemen discomfited and slew.x.M. frenchmen, and Gascoines, and
took prisoner the Earl of Lay, their chief captain, with diverse other
nobles: and subdued the country.

In the.xx. year king Edward with his son Prince Edward, sailed into
Normandy, and ouerrode and spoiled the country, even to Paris, and gathered
wonderful richesse and prays which he sent into England. Shortly after he
encountered the French king nigh to the forest of Cressy, The battle of
Cressy.
where between them was fought a cruel battle, and king Edward obtained the
victory. In that battle was slain the flower of the Chiualrye of France.
That is to say the king of Boheme, with ten other great Princes, four score
barons.xii.c. knights, and mo than.xxx.M. of the common Soudiers.

Callys won.
After this victory the king went toward Calys and beseged the town the
space of.xi. months during which sege the french king came to raise the sege
but shortly after he departed without battle, wherefore they of Callys yielded
up the town to king Edward.

The king of scotts taken prisoner.
In the time of the seige before Callys, David of Scotland by the settinge on
of the french king, warred on the borders of England But the queen assembled a
strong army, as well of priests as lay men, and nere to Durham took in
battle the king of Scotts prisoner, with many of his greatest Lords and
earls, and slew of the common soudiers.xv.M.

About the.xxii. A great derth thorough out all the world.
year of king Edward the.iii, there was a wonderful famyn and Pestilence
raygned throughout all the world. In Italye scant the.x. person of an.c. was
left on live. In the city of paris in France died.L.M. and in the city of
London (beside the bodies buried in churches and churcheyardes, and
monasteryes, and other places of burial) there was buried in the charterhouse
church yerde.l.M. persons and above, as writes Fabian.

In this year the Captain of Callys conspyred to betraye it again to the
Frenchemen, calis like to betrayed.
the historye whereof declares wonderfully the great manhood, pollycie,
liberalytie, and gentylnesse of the noble king Edward, read Frosarde the.c.
and.v. Chapter of his first book.

The tirany of the bishop of rome. etc.
About this time king Edward was elected to be Emperor But he considering
the trouble and unquietness of the bishop of Rome, refused it. And then they
chose the Marquis of Messena which also refused it.

Gines yielded to the englismen
In the, xxvii. year of king Edwardes raygne the town and castle of Gines was
yielded to ye english me^.

A voyage into Gascoyne.
In the.xxix. year of king Edwardes raygne Prince Edward of Wales, with a
strong company of Soudyers passed into Gascoyne, where he made sore war,
and destroyed Castelles and towns before him with great success and took the
Castle and town of Rehemorentyne, with other.

A voyage i^to france
About this time king Edward sailed to Calys, and began to make war upon
france but shortly after he returned because the Scotts rose and invaded ye
Englysh borders.

In the.xxx. The battle of poytiers.
year of king Edwardes raygne prince Edward of Wales, nie to the city of
Poytiers joined battle with king John of france, on whom the prince wan a
noble victory. In this conflycte king John was taken with his young son
Phillippe, The fifth king taken prisoner.
there were taken.ix. earls, the archebyshop of Sens, and many other great
lords, Baronettes and knights and me^ of name to the nombre of.xvi.c and
there were slain the Duke of Burgoyne, the Duke of Athens, sir John Cleremond
Marshall of France, with many lords, Baronetes, knights, and men of Arms
to the nombre of.xvii.c. and iii.M of other mean persons. And after this
field thus won, the Prince with his prisoners returned to Bordeaux. And
shortly after they sailed in to England where they were of king Edward
noblely received.

In the, xxxiii. year, king Edward with the Prince his son wetne to Calys
and so in to france where he made sharp war, A voyage i^to france
and burned and destroyed the country without mercy. But shortly after by
great entreaty there was a peace concluded on this condition that king Edward
should have to his propre possession the countres of Gascoyne and Guyan,
Poyters, Lymosyn, Beleuile, Exanctes, Calys Guines, and diverse other lordshyps,
towns, Castles and all the lands to them belonging, without knowledge of any
souerainte, The french king raunsomed.
obeysaunce, homage, or subjection for the same, and that the french king
should pay for his ransom.iii Myllons of Scutes, which amounte to.v.c.M.
li. and so king John was delivered.

In the.xxxvii. year of king Edward, The death of the french king
king John of france came into england of his fre will to sport him and had
great chere. And shortly after dyed at the Sauoy at London.

In this year also Prince Edward took possessyon of the Duchy of Guyen and
Acquitaine and did homage to his father for the same. Prince edward made duke
of Guyen.


About the.xl. year of king Edward Dampeter of Spain was expulsed his realm
by his basterd brother Henry, wherefore he fled to Prince Edward which was then
at Bordeaux. A bataile i^ Spain.
But this Peter by ye aid of Prince Edward fought with his brother Henry and
put him to flyghte and slew.v.M. of his men. And restored Peter to diverse
cities and holds which he before had lost. But not long after the Prince
returned home, and henry repaired his army, and warred upon his brother so
fearselye that in the end he utterly vanquished hi^ to death, and then without
resistance possessed the kingdom of Spain.

In the.xlii. year of king Edward new varia^ce began between England and
France, A voyage i^to france
wherefore the duke of La^caster was sent with an army into france and nere
unto Arde the Duke of Burgoyne lodged within a mile of the Englysh army the
space of xviii. days and never proffered battle, but at the last stole away
pryuelye by night, and then entered the Duke further into france as Froysar
shows at large.

In the.xliii. year, sir Roberte knolles entered ye realm of france with a
strong army and wasted and destroyed the country and passed even by Paris
ranged in battle, and without any notable battle returned.

About the xlv. year the french men made sharp war in Gyen, Great variaunce
i^ Gascoine
and many diverse skyrmyshes were between the frenchmen and the englysh men but
most commonly always the englyshemen lost, and the city of Lymoge and other
cities rebelled against Prince Edward. Wherefore Prince Edward perceyuinge all
this, and what for lack of money, and what for sykenes and maladyes that he
had, he departed into England, leuyng behynd him his brethren the Duke of
Lancaster, and the Earl of Cambryge, to rule Gascoyne, but sone after they
came into England.

In the.xlvi. A ba^^^^ (...).
year of king Edwardes raygne the Earl of Penbroke was sent with a great army
to fortefye the town of Rochell. But he was met on the Sea, with a company of
Spanyardes, between whom there was a cruel fight, but the English men were
discomfited, and the earl of Penbroke was there taken with a.c.lx. mo
prisoners, and the most part of his men slain and drowned. And sone after the
town of Rochel was yielded to the Frenchmen.

A voyage i^to france
Also in the.xlvii. year the duke of Lancaster landed at Calys with a mighty
army passed through france robbyng and spoylyng the country eue^ to
Bordeaux, and were never fought with save only at a scirmyshe they lost.l.
Speres and xx. archers.

In the.l. year of this king there was such syckenes and mortalite, A great
death.
as well in Italy as in England ye innumerable of people died

The death of Prince Edward
In the.li. year Prince Edward of England departed out of this life who was in
his time the flower of Chiualry and was buried at Canterburye.

Also in the same year, the.xxi. The death of king Edward
day of June, the year of Christ a.M.ccc.lxxvii. king Edward dyed and is
buried at Westminster. This king Edward when he dyed had.iiii. sons, that is
to say Lyonell Duke of Clarence, John of Gaunte Duke of Lancaster, Edmonde of
Langley Duke of york, and Thomas of Wedstocke Earl of Cambrege.

Rychard the second.
RIchard the second of ye name, and son to Prince Edward eldest son to king
Edward the third being of.xi. years of age was crowned king of England the.xv.
day of July, the year of Christ a.M ccc.lxxvii.

In the first year of king Rychardes raygne the french king sent a great
navy to the sea, The french men entered england
which entered in diverse parts of this realm and did much harm where they
landed, and at the last came into Thames, and so to graves end, and brent
part of that town and returned into france again.

About this time the Earl of Cambrege the kings uncle was sent into france
with.viii.M. A voyage i^to france
me^, and passed the water of So^me, and so forth to Troyse and wan it, and so
passed to the country of Gascoine, and so into Brytayne where sir John of
Mounford duke of Britayne gladly received them.

Jack Straw.
In the.v. year of this king the commons of England arose and specially in
Estsex and Kente, and made them capytaines of who^ the chief they called Jack
straw, which came into the tower of London where the king was, and there they
took the Archebyshop of Canterbury, the Lord of saint John's, and a friar the
kings confessoure, and at the tower hill smot of their heads, and slew and
robbed all strangers in Sothewarke, and burnt the Duke of Landcasters place
called the Sauoy, and did much hurt, and being assembled in Smithfeld, used
them selves very proudely and irreverently against the king. But by the
manhood and wisdom of Wyllyam Waulworth mayre of London, that rude company was
disceuered and their Captain Jack straw was slain. Jack Straw slain.


About this time was a wonderful great earthequake in England the like
whereof was never seen before that day nor syns. A great erthquak


In the.vii. year of king Rychard, A voyage into flaunders,
Henry Spenser bishop of Norwitche went into Flaunders at the commandment
of the bishop of Rome with a great power, and wan Du^kyrke and grauelyn, and
burnt.xl. ships and much goods being within them, but after there fell a
disease of the flickes and other dyseases among his soudiers, that he was feign
to return into England.

The king married.
In the.viii. year king Richard Married the daughter of Viceslaus, Emperor of
Almaine.

A bataile on the sea
In the.x. year of this king the earl of Arundell was sent into Guyan to
strength the soudyers there, but on the sea, he met with a flote of Flemynges
laden with Rochell wine, and set upon them and took them. Among the which was
taken the Admyral of france.

Great variau^ce between the king and his Lords and commons
In the.xi. year there was maruaylous great trouble and dysce^cyon in
England, between the king and his counsel and other nobles and prelates of
the realm. The commons by the aid and comfort of the kings uncles and other
lords of the realm (that is to say the Duke of Gloucester, the duke of york,
ye earls of Darby, of Arundell, and of Notyngham) put to death diverse of the
kings counsel and chief officers, and chased the duke of Ireland and other out
of the realm, for that they caused the king to burden his people with
exactions and could make no just account of the same when they were required.

In the.xv. The liberties of london lost.
year there was a riot in London wherefore the king seized the lybertye of the
city into his hands. But shortly after by the means of the queen, and
doctor Grauesend bishop of London they were restored to their lybertyes.

In the.xviii. A voyage i^to Ireland
year king Richard made a voyage into Ireland which was more to his charge
the^ honor.

Henry the iiii. banyshed.
In the, xxii. year Henry Boling broke duke of Hareford, and son to the Duke
of Lancastre, and the duke of Norfolk were banyshed out of the realm.

Shortly after Henry bolinbroke Duke of Herford, Kinsh Rychard the ii. deposed
which was banished into france, being sent for of the Lo^doners, came into
england with a small power, to whom the commons gathered in so great
multitude, and forsook their Prince, yt not long after at ye castle of Flint,
they took king Richard, and held hi^ as prisoner in the tower of London, where
he yielded up and resigned to the said Henry duke of Hereforde, all his power
and kingly title to the crown of england and france, knowleging that he was
worthilye deposed for his demerites and misgouernynge of the common weal.

Henry the fourth.
HEnry the fourth, son to Ihon of Gaunt, late Duke of Lancaster, and third
son of Edward the third took possession of his realm of England the last
day of Septembre, in the year of our Lord a.M.ccc.lxxxxix.

Anno dn^i.M.ccc.lxxxix. Anno primo Henrici.iiii. Thomas knolles Grocer mayre.
William Hyde Ihon Walderne shyreffes.

In this year dyed king Richard the second. In this year also certain
Dukes and Earls of England and other, A co^spiraci against the king.
were accorded to make a mu^ming on twelfe day at night, traitorously to kill
the kynke, than being at Wyndsore, which being warned thereof, departed
sodaynelye and came to London, and made pursuit after the said conspiratours,
which apprehended and taken, were after by the law put to death. In this
year king Henry sent sir Thomas Persy Earl of Worsiter with a goodly crew of
soudiers into Aquitayne to aid sir Robert knowlles leuetenaunte there, A vyage
into aquitayne.
and to parswad the people to their obeysaunce, who did greatly stomach ye
death of king Richard

An act of Parliamente.
In this year was enacted by auctorite of Parliamente, that no Lord, nor other
man, might give any gowns, or lyueryes to any of their tenau^tes, or other
persons, only but to their household and menyall servants.

In this year also was enacted that all repyers, An other act.
and other fysshers from Rye, Wynchelsee, and other costs of the sea side,
should sell their fysshe their self in Cornehil Chepe, and other streets of
London, to all men that would by them, Fysshemongers, and all other that
would bye the said fisshe to make sale again of it, only except.

Anno domini.M.cccc. an. ii. He^rici.iiii. Ihon Frau^ces goldsmith mayre, Ihon
Wakele, Wyllyam Ebot, shyryffes.

In this year the French king sent Lord James of Burbone with xii.C. the french
me^ made a vyoage into England.
knights and squyres to aid Owen Glendor a squyre of wales against king
Henry, and landed at Plummouthe in Deuenshyre, who shortly after to his great
loss and shame retired back into France

In this year a Priour and viii. friars were hanged at Tiburne for treason.

Anno do. M.cccc.i. anno tertio, henrici quarti. Ihon Shadworth Mayre, Wyllyam
Fremyngham, Wylliam Venour shyreffes.

In this year was seen in England a blasing star.
a comete or blasynge star of a huge quantite.

Anno do. m.cccc.ii. anno quarto herici quarti. Ihon Walcot mayre Robert
Chicheley, Richard Matlowe shereffes.

In this year was the battayl of Shrowysbury.

Anno do. m.cccc.iii. an quinto henrici quarti. Wyllyam Askam mayre. Thomas
Fawkener, Thomas Pole shyreffes.

A co^motio^ in york shyre
In this year began a co^mocion in York shere, but their entente was known,
and for that treason was apprehended Richard Scrope Archebyshop of York, the
Earl Marshall. Sir Ihon Lampley, and sir Robert Plumton, who in whytson weke
were beheaded at York.

In this year the king of Scotts sent his son the Prince into France, The
prince of Scotland taken prisoner.
but by violence of wether was dreuen into England where he co^tynued prisoner
many years after.

Anno do. m.cccc.iiii. an. vi. henrici iiii. Ihon Hynd draper mayre, William
Louth, Steven Spilma^ shyreffes.

Anno do. m.cccc.v. an. vii. henrici quarti. Ihon woodcoke mayre Henry Barton,
Wyllyam Crowner shyreffes.

Anno dom. m.cccc.vi. an. octauo henrici quarti, Rychard wittyngto^ marcer
mayre, Nicolas Wotton, Geffery Broke shyreffes.

An. do. M.cccc.vii. an. ix. he^rici quarti, William Sandon mayre, Henry
Balton, Henry Po^fret shyref.

Anno do. m.cccc.viii. an. x. henrici quarti, Drew Bare^tine goldsmythe Mayre,
Thomas Duke, Wyllyam Norton sheryffes.

Anno do. m.cccc.ix. an. xi, henrici quarti, Rychard Marlow Yrinmo^ger mayre.
Ihon Law, Wyllia^ Chichelye shyreffes.

Anno do. m.cccc.xii. anno he^rici quarti. Thomas knolles grocer Mayre, Ihon
Pen, Thomas Pyke shyreffes.

This year was a byll put into the Parliament against ye spirituality, for
wasting of the te^poraltie.

Anno do. m.cccc xi. an. xiii. henrici quarti. Robert Chichelye grocer mayre,
Ihon Reynwel, Walter Cotton shyreffes.

Anno do. m.cccc.xii. an. xiiii. he^rici quarti, Wylliam Walderne marcer Mayre,
Raufe Leuyngha^, Wylliam Senenoke shyreffes.

In this year king Henry the fourth dyed, the.xx. day of march, The death of
King Henry the fourth.
In the year of our lord a thousand cccc.xii. And when he had reigned xiii.
years five months, and one and twenty days, and lies buried at Cantorbury.

Henry the fyfte.
HEnry the fyfte began his reign the xxi. day of march, in the year of our
lord next above mentioned. And was crowned at westmynster the nynthe day of
Apryll following. In the year of our lord M.cccc. and xiii.

In this year was a general counsel holden at Constance upon the river of
Reyne, a general counsel.
to the which council was sent Richard Earl of warwike and iii. Bishopes
with diverse doctors knights and squiers to ye nombre of viii.C. horses.

In this counsel were condemned to death for heresy Ihon Wicliffe, Ihon Husse,
and Ieram of Prage,

The lord cobha^ accused of heresy.
In this year sir Ihon Oldecastell lord Cobham was accused to the Archbishop
of Cantorbury for certain points of heresy.

Anno do. M.cccc.xiii. an. i. he^rici quinti, Wyllyam Walderne mayre, Raufe
Leuingham, William Seuenoke sheyreffes.

Anno do. m.cccc.xiiii. an. ii. he^rici quinti. William Crowner maire Ihon
Sutto^, Ihon Michel shyre.

A parliament holde^ at Leyceter.
In this year in Apryll was holden a Parliamente at Leyceter, in the which
Parliament were concluded many profitable laws, and among other things was a
byll put into the Parliamente house against thaccesse of the spiritualtye and
was like to take effect, but than the Bishops and Abbottes moved the king
to make war in to France for his title there, so that in all his time after
he had never leser to speak thereof more. And also toward that voyage was
granted by the spirituality such a payment as had not been paid before.

Anno do. M.cccc.xv. an. tertio henrici quinti, Thomas Fakener mercer mayre.
Ihon Mychel, Thomas Alayne shyreffes.

This year the king did prepare an army into France of.xv.C. A co^spiracie
against the king.
ships, and the day before he should depart from Southha^ton certain lords
did co^spyre ye kings death for the which conspiracy was apprehended Rychard
Earl of Cambrege, the lord Scrope, and sir Thomas Gray knight, who at the time
of their execution confessed that they were set a work by ye French king. And
after their execution the king set forward, and on the vigill of the
assu^ption of our Lady he with all his navy landed at Kyd Caux in Normandy. The
winnynge of Herflew.
And on the next day he beseged the town of Herflwe, and the.xxxvii. day
after the said town was yielded to the king.

The battle of agi^ court.
In this year in Octobre was ye battle of Agyn court which victory by the
only provision of god fell to the Englishemen, for king Henry had in his
bataile but only two.M. horsemen and xii.M. fotemen of al sorts. And on ye
French party were almost all the nobility of France with.lx.M. hortemen
beside fotemen. There were slain on the French party above.x.M. persons
whereof were princes and nobles bering baners.C.xxvi. and all the remnaunt
saving.xvi C. were knights, Esquires, and gentlemen. And on the English
part were slain Edward duke of york, therle of Suffolk, sir Richard Kykeley
and Dauy ga^me esquyre, and of al other not above.v. or.vi C. persons.

Anno do. M.cccc.xvi. an. iiii. he^rici quinti, Nicolas wotton draper Mayre,
Wyllyam Cambridge Alayne Euarde shyreffes.

This year in May the Emperor Sigismond came into England to treat of a
peace between king Henry and the French king and was nobely received but his
labor took small effect. The Emperor came into England.


This year was Harflew beseged by the Fre^chemen, Harflew beseged.
both by water and land, but incontinent the king sent his brother the Duke of
Bedforde with a noble army and, A battle on the sea
on the sea encountered the French Navy in nu^bre.v.C. ships, which were by
the Englisheme^ dyscomfyted and almost all taken or drowned, and when the army
by land knew that the Navy by sea was discomfited, raised their sege and
departed.

An. do. M.cccc.xvii an. quinto henrici quinti, Henry Barto^ skinner Mayre,
Robert Whityngton, Ihon Couentre shyreffes.

A voyage into Normandy.
This year in July the king accompanied with his brethren the Dukes of
Clare^ce and Gloucester with a noble army made a voyag into Normandy and won
Caen with the castle and in conclusyon what by force and rendering up wan
almost all ye holds in Normandy. Anno domi. M.cccc.xviii. anno vi. henrici
quinti, Richard Morlowe yremo^ger mayre, Henry Read, Ihon Gedney shyrefes.

In this year sir Ihon Oldcastel knight lord Cobham was hanged in cheines and
after burnt.

In this year the last day of July the city of Roan was beseged both by
water and by land, The city of Roan beseged.
insomoche that by reason of famine they were compelled to fall to treaty and
so the xix. day of January the city was yielded to the king. And immeniatly
after all Normandy yielded them selves also.

An. do. M.cccc.xix. an septimo henrici quinti, Wyllia^ Seuenoke grocer mayre,
Ihon Parues, Rauf Barton, Ihon Bryan shyreffes.

In the time of this war in France there was great variau^ce between the
nobles of France and specially between the Dolphin, variau^ce between the
lords of france
the Duke of Burgon, and the Duke of Orliaunce with other, and there was a
place appointed to mete to treat for a peace and thither came the Dolphin and
the Duke of Burgonne and the said Duke kneling on his knees tellyng his tale to
the Dolphin one Tavagny du chastel smote the Duke on the heed with a hachet and
so most shamefully was mordered.

A communycatyon for a peace.
In this year there was a communycatyon for a peace between England and France
but it took small efecte, wherefore the King went forward with his conquest and
sent an army to Ponthoyse and with forse wanne it, Po^thoise won.
to the great fear of the parisience and all France.

Anno do. M.cccc.xx. anno viii. henrici quinti, Richard whitingha^ mercer
mayre, Robert whitingham Ihon Butler shyreffes.

A peace concluded between France and England
In this year in May was concluded a peace between the King of England and
the French king so that king Henry did mary lady Katheryne the French kings
daughter at Troy in Cha^paigne after which marriage king Henry was proclaimed
heir and regente of France.

In this year at Christmas the king of England kept such a noble house in Roan
as Rege^ of France that to his court all men resorted and few to the French
kings court, and after Christmas he ordeaned his brother ye Duke of Clarence
his leuetenau^t general both of France and Normandy, and on the morrow after
candelmas day the king and the queen took shippyng at Calis and landed at
Dover and on saint Mathues day following the queen was crowned at
westminster. the king returned into England.


Anno do. m.cccc.xxi. an. ix. henrici quinti, Wylliam Cambrydge grocer mayre,
Ihon Butler, William weston shyreffes.

In this year the Duke of Clarence made a rode into Aniowe where by a lu^bard
he was betrayed and so was slain with diverse noble men more. the death of the
duke of clarence.


A voyage into france.
Also in this year in May the king passed the sea with a noble army into
France and pursued the dolphin on such wise that he could scant find any
place to hyde himself in.

In this year the king beseged the city of Meaux in brye during which syege
was borne at Wynsore the kings son named Henry. the birth of King Henry the
syxte.


Anno do. m.cccc.xxii. an. x. henrici quinti, Robart Chychelye grocer mayre,
Rychard Iostlyn, william weston shyreffes.

The death of King Henry the fyfte.
In this year king Henry the fyfte dyed the xxi. day of August. In the year
of our Lord next above mentioned when he had reigned.ix. years and five
months and xxiiii. days, and lies buried at Westmynster.

Henry the syxt.
HEnry ye vi. began his reign the first day of Septembre, in the year of our
lord next above mentioned, and was crown at Westmynster in the eight year of
his reygne, all which time before for insufficiency of age he was admitted to
ye rule of his uncles, the Duke of Bedforde and Gloucester, he was of the age of
viii. months and odd days and not above.

Anno domini.m.cccc.xxxiii. anno primo Henrici sixti. Wyllyam walderne mayre,
William Estfeld Robert Tatersale shyreffes.

This year was the Duke of Gloucester made protector of England, and the Duke
of Bedforde rege^t of France which Regent like a noble captain maytayned the
war against ye Dolphin so long as he lived.

Anno do. M.cccc.xxiiii. anno secondo Henrici sixti, Wyllyam Crowner drapen
Mayre, Nicolas James, Thomas wadford shyref.

In this year the Duke of Bedford Rege^t of France, The battle of vernoyle.
made war upon the Dolphyn of France and unto Englishemen fell the victory
at the battle of vernoyle where were viii.M. Frenchmen slain.

Also in this year was James Steward king of scotts delivered which was
prisoner in England long time before, The king of scotts delivered.
who for ye realm of Scotland did omage to the king of England and married the
lady Jane daughter to the Earl of Somerset and cosyn to the king.

Anno domini M.ccc.xxv. an. tercio Henrici sixti, Ihon Michell Mayre, Simon
Seman, Ihon Bythwater shyreffes.

In this year the Duke of Gloucester protecter of England sent unto his
brother the Regente of France.x.M. men to maintain war against the Dolphin.
A voyage into france.


In this year also was a battle at vernoyle in perch between the Rege^t and
the Duke of Alau^son, The battle of Vernocle in Perch
the victory fell to the Englshe men where were slain of Frenchmen and
Scotts.ix. thousand and vii.C. and of Englyshemen xvi.C.

Anno domini M.cccc.xxvi. anno quarto Ihon couentre marcer Mayre Wyllyam
Mylted, Ihon Brokeley shyreffes.

In this year began a great variaunce in England between the noble men of
the realm for the Bishop of wynchester did envy Of a noble prelat
the lord protector in so much that the Lord Regent of France was feign to
come into England to set them at one.

Anno do. M.cccc.xxvii. anno quinto Henrici sixti. Ihon Raynwell fyshmonger
Mayre, Roberte Arnold, Ihon Heygham shyrefes.

Anno do. M.cccc.xxviii. anno sixto Henrici sixti. Ihon Godney draper Mayre,
Robert Ocle, Henry Frowyke shyreffes.

Orliance beseged.
In this year was Orlyaunce beseged by the thenglyshe men and as sir Ihon
Fastolfe went from Paris toward the army with vytales there met him an army
of fre^chemen where after long conflicte the Englysh men optained the victory
where were.xxv.C. Frenchmen slain and.xii.C. taken prisoners.

Anno do. M.cccc.xxix. anno septimo Henrici sixti. Henry Berton skiner Maire,
Thomas Dushous Raufe Holande shyreffes.

In this year the seage brake up before Orliaunce and wan many towns as
Geneuile, Meu^, and Fort, with diverse other, and as the lord Talbot was coming
to Meu^ with v.M. men he was incountered with an army of Frenchmen to the
nombre of xxiii.M. where was taken prisoners the Lord Talbot and the lord
Scales with other. The lord talbot taken prisoner.
And of Englishemen were slain xii.C. persons to the great reioysynge of the
Dolphin and other of his fact.

In this year also after this victory the Dolphin raised an army and wan by
co^posicion Troys in Cha^payne, and the city of Raynes with diverse other
towns and castelles which Dolphin had in his camp one Ione a stout Ramp
which the Frenchemen did call La pusell de dwe, Of Ione the witch
the maid of God. And afterward in this same year was the Dolphin sacred
king of France at Raynes in the presense of all the noble men of his faction,
The sacred king at Raynes.
and the Dukes of Lorayne and Bar by the name of Charles the syxte.

The duke of Bedford pursues the Dolphyn from place to place.
And the Duke of Bedford Rege^t of France being at Paris hard of this doings
of the French king with an noble army of Englismen and Normans pursued him
from place to place till he came to senles in Berre where both armies might se
other, and after both armies had line in each others sight.ii. days, the
French king like a carpet captain in the dead of the night brake up his
army and fled to Braye which when the Regent perceived mystrustynge the
waueringe Parcia^s returned with his armi to paris.

In this year by the procurement of the bishop of Rone Henry Benford Cardinal
of Wynchester commonly called the rich Cardinal, Me^ sent into france.
was sent into Beam with iiii.M. men to revenge the bishop of Rome, but when
he came to Dover he was countermaunded by the lord protector and went into
France to help the Regent against ye French king.

Anno domini M.cccc.xxx. anno octauo He^rici sixti. William Estfeld mercer
Mayre. Wyllyam Ruff, Raufe Holande shyreffes.

In this year the Rege^t of France left the governance of Paris to the
Bishop of Ely Chaunceller of France, A parliamente at Roan.
and the said Regent held Parliament at Roan animatynge the Normans to their
obeysaunce to the King of England and.c. At which season the French king
sent the Duke of Alaunson and his soceres Ione, the great goddess of the
French men to scale Paris, A sealeng of paris.
from the which they were beaten to their great loss and their capytayne Ione
was thrown into the dykes and had much work to save her life.

In this eight year king Henry ye sixth was crowned at wistminster.

Anno do. M.cccc.xxxi. an. nono Henrici syxti. Nicolas Wauton Mayre. Water
Charsy, Roberte Large shyreffes.

The order of the golden flece.
In this year did Phillip Duke of Borgon mary Lady Isabell daughter to Ihon
king of Portingale and great aunt to the king of England, at which marriage
the said Duke ordained the order of the golden flece.

In this year in Decembre the Englyshmen beseged the town of of Laigny in the
which the pusell was captain with other, who issued out to skyrmyshe with
the Englyshemen and Burgonyons, at which skyrmishe Ione the puzel was taken and
after was sent to the duke of Bedford to Roan wherafter long examinacion was
brent to ashes. Ione the puzel bre^t at Roan.


Anno do. M.cccc.xxxii an. desimo He^rici sixti. Ihon Wells grocer Mayre. Ihon
Aldryle, Steven Brown shyreffes.

In this ten year king Henry the syxte was crowned at Paris, king henry the
syxte crowned King of france in Paris.
which is ye chief city in all france with great triumph and nobility.

After king Henry was crowned king of France he kept a noble house first at
Paris and after at Roan in which time there was a peace concluded for vi.
years between the Englyshemen and the Frenchemen, A peace concluded.
which peace within short time by the Frencheme^ was broken.

Anno do. M.cccc.xxxiii. an. xi. Henrici sixti. Ihon Perueis fyshemo^ger Maire.
Ihon Olney Ihon Paddisly shyreffes.

The peace broken.
In this year the peace in France was broken wherefore on both parties were
armies set forth and towns fortefied, and when the French men could not
prevail they sent forth their accostmed servant called master Treason, and
corrupted Piers Andebeuffe constable of the castle of Roan with money, that the
Marcial of France with ii.C. persons disgysed did enter the castle of Roan
but they were sone espied and so some of them were slain some hanged and some
rau^somed at the Regentes pleasure.

Anno do. M.cccc.xxxiiii. anno xii. He^rici sixti. Ihon Brokely draper mayre.
Thomas Challo^ Ihon Lynge shyreffes.

In this year the commons of Normandy made insurrection, by the setting on of
the French king but they were shortly suppressed, The commons of normandy
rebelled.
and many of them slain.

In this year was Ihon Duke of Burbon delivered out of pryso^ which had been
prisoner in England syns the butayle of Agyncourt xviii. years before, The duke
of Burbo^ delivered out of prison.
and paid for his rou^some xviii.M. pound starling.

In this year also began a veriaunce between ye Rege^t of france and the Duke
of Burgoyne to the loss of England and no gain to Burgony. A variau^ce
between the Regent and the Duke of burgoine


Anno do. m.cccc.xxxv anno xiii. Henrici sixti. Robert Ocley grocer Mayre.
Thomas Barnewel Simon Air shyreffes.

This year was a great frost that endured from the feast of saint katheryne
unto the feast of saint valentyne, A great froste.
so that neither ship might sail nor botte be rowed on ye river of Thames, and
therefore all the vyntage was carried to London by land in Carts.

A peace between the Fre^chki^g and the duke of Burgoyne.
In this year was concluded a peace between the French king and the duke of
Burgoyn to the great dyspleasure and loss of the Englyshemen.

The death of the regente of France.
In this year died the noble Duke of Bedforde Regent of France and lies buried
in our lady church at Roan, in whose sted was elected regente of France
Richard Duke of York.

Anno do. M.cccc.xxxvi. an. xiiii. Henrici sixti. Henry Frowyke mercer Mayre.
Thomas Catworthe, Robert Clopton shyreffes.

paris lost
In this year the Parissioners rebelled against the Englishemen and so rendered
up the city of Paris in to the Frenchemens hands and slew many of the
Englishmen that kept the city.

In this year the Duke of Burgoyne with an army of xl.M. me^ did lay seage to
Calys. Calis beseged.
And during this seage the Duke sent the lord of Croy with a convenient army
to lay sege to Gines, Gines beseged.
who got there but small gaynes.

Shortly after it was noysed in the camp of the Duke, that ye lord protector
of England was shipped with a great army to come to calis to raise the seage,
and suddenly in the night the Duke of Burgoyne raised his seage and likewise
sent to Gynes for the lord Croy and like a valyante captain fled away by
night and on the next day in the morning the lord protector came to land and
entered the camp of his enemies, but they were gone, The duke brake up his
seage and fled by night.
and had left behind them the Tents, ordinance, and vitayles, and all that
they had.

Anno do. M.cccc.xxxvii. an. xv. He^rici sixti. Ihon Michell mayre, Thomas
worsted, Wylliam Gregore shyreffes.

Anno do. M.cccc.xxxviii. an. xvi henrici sixti. William Estfeld mercer Mayre.
Wylliam Chapman, Wylliam Hales shyreffes.

The earl of warwike made Regent.
In this year ye Earl of warwyke was made Regent of France and ye duke of York
discarged, which Earl after his ariuall in France did many noble feats as
Halle writes at large.

Anno do. M.cccc.xxxix. an. xvii. Henrici sixti Steven Brown grocer Mayre.
Hughe Duke, Nicolas Yeo shyreffes.

A darthe in england
In this year by reason of intemperate wether there was a great derthe in
England so that wheat was at.iii. shyllynges.iiii. pens a bushel, and all
other graynes were sold at an excessive price, above the old custom.

Anno do. M.cccc.xl. an. xviii. He^rici sixti. Robert Large mercer Mayre.
Robert Marshall, Philip Malpas shyreffes.

In this year the Duke of York was made again Rege^t of france which
accompanied with the Earl of Oxford and diverse other noble men sailed into
Normandy, the french king fled for fear.
and he hearing that the French king lay at seage at Ponthoyse went
thither with a noble army. But the French king hearing of the English men's
coming break up his seage and went away by night.

In this year was the Duke of Orliaunce delivered out of pryso^ who had been
prisoner in England xxv. years, The duke of orliance delivered out of prison
and for his ransom the Duke of Burgoyne paid iiii. C. M. Crowns.

Anno do. M.cccc.xli. anno. xix. He^rici sixti. Ihon Paddisly goldsmyth Mayre,
Ihon Sutton william wetinghale shyreffes.

In this xix. year many noble feats of arms was do^e in france for ye Duke
of York lord Regent sent the lord Wylloughby with a noble Crew of archers and
men of war into Pecardy which did valyantly. Three armies at ones in France.
Also he sent the lord Talbot to beseage Deep, and he himself accompanied with
the Duke of Somerset set forward in to the duchye of Aniowe where he did many
notable feats.

Anno do. M.cccc.xlii. anno xx. He^rici sixti. Robert Clopto^ mayre William
Combra, Richard rich shyreffes.

This year the steple of Paul's church in London was set on fire by
lyghtnynge.

In this year also began to kindle in England the fire of malis, for the
Cardynall of Wynchester did envy the governance of the lord protector, A
variaunce between the Lords of England.
for which variaunce afterward was ye distructio^ of many a noble man, as after
shall be declared.

Anno do. m.cccc.xliii. anno.xxi. Henrici sixti. Ihon Atherley yronmonger
Mayre, Thomas Bemo^t Richard Nordon shyreffes.

Anno do. m.cccc.xliiii. an. xxii. Henrici sixti. Thomas Catworthe grocer
mayre. Nycolas Wyfolde, Ihon Norman shyreffes.

In this year all the princes of christendom sent their Ambassadors unto
Troyes in Champayne to treat for a peace between England and France, A
treaty for a peace
and a peace was taken for v. years.

Anno do. M.cccc.xlv. an. xxiii. Henrici sixti. Henry Frawyke mercer mayre.
Steven Foster, Hughe Wyche shyreffes.

This year Lady Margret the kings daughter of Ceryll was married to the king,
The king married.
and after crowned at Westminster, which marriage was neither profitable to the
Realm, nor yet honorable to the king, as Halle declares at large.

Anno do. M.cccc.xlvi. an. xxiiii. Henrici sixti, Ihon Olney mercer Mire. Ihon
Herot, Godfrey Bolayne shyreffes.

An insurrection at norwitch
In this year was a great insurrection in Norwyche against the Prior of
Christ's church for raysi^g of new fines of their tenau^tes, the cytezens kept
the gates against the Duke of Norfolk, who came thither to appeace the matter,
but in conclusion they opened the gates and submitted them selfs. The chief
offenders were put to execution, and the Mayre dyscarged of his office, and
sir Ihon Clyfton was made governor till the king had restored the cytezens to
thyr lyberties again.

Anno do. M.cccc.xlvii. an. xxv. Henrici sixti. Ihon Gidnes draper Mayre,
Wylliam Abraham, Thomas Scot shyreffes.

This year dyed the good duke of Gloucester, and is buried at saint Albones.

Anno do. m.cccc.xlviii. an. xxvi. Henrici sixti. Steven Brown grocer Mayre.
Wyllyam Cantlowe, William Marow shyreffes.

In this year the Englyshemen lost many towns in France, The begi^nyng of
lesynge of normandy.
for by cause of the varyaunce between the nobility of England, there was
small prouydyng to send aid into France so that the sowdiers were unpaid to ye
great loss of England.

Anno do m.cccc.xlix. an. xxvii. Henrici sixti, Thomas Challton Mayre. Thomas
Canynges william Holyn shyreffes.

Roan yielded to the French king.
In this year was Roan yielded to the French king by reason that the Cytezens
rebelled against the capitaines and so did almost all the towns of Normandy,
and for lack of aid the Duke of Somerset and the lord Tolbot were feign to
render all into the French men's hands.

A voyage in to Irelande
In this year also the Duke of York was sent with a convenient army into
Irelande to be the kings leuetenaunt there, and to suppress the wild yrishe
who did the^ rebel.

Anno do. m.cccc.l. anno xxviii. Henrici sixti. Nicolas Vyuold grocer mayre.
Wyllyam Dear, Ihon Myddelton shyreffes.

A voyage into France.
In this year was sir Thomas Kyriel sent into France with a M. and v.C. men,
and as he with other capitaines went to rescue Caen they met with a great army
of French men, and after long fight the french me^ obtained the victory, and
there were slain iiii.M. Englyshemen and viii.C. taken prisoners. This was the
first foughten field that ye Frenchemen gate of the English men in many years
before, The first field lost by thynglyshmen.
therefore I can not blame them though they make much of it, they set forth all
and hyde nothing that may be foud to their glory, but they write not how many
of them were slain and destroyed.

Anno do. m.cccc.li. Anno. xxix. Henrici sixti. Wyllyam Gregory skynner maier,
Mathewe Philip, Christopher warton shyryffes.

In this year the Englyshemen lost all the holds and towns in normandy which
were in English men's possession xxx. years before, Normandy lost.
and where conquered by king Henry the fyfte.

Anno do. M.cccc.lii. anno xxx. he^rici sixti. Gefrey Feldyng mayre Richard
Lee, Richard Allay shyre.

A dissimuling peace
This year was a metyng of a great host upon brent heth in kent, between the
King and the Duke of York, and other noble men which was appeased for a
time and the malice dissimuled.

Aquitaine was won by the french men.
In this year was the country of Aquitayne won by the frenchemen, which had been
Englysh.iii c years and odd years and was won by Henri the third.

Anno do. m.cccc.liii. anno. xxxi. Henrici.vi. Ihon Norman draper mayre. Ihon
Walden Thomas Coke shyryffes.

The batel of Chastelon.
In this year the Lord Talbot Earl of Shrewesbury recovered the city of
Bordeaux and after conquered many towns in Gascoyne And at the Batyle of
Chastellon ye said noble Earl was slain and his son also, with diverse
noble and valyante Captains of England, and many taken prisoners. Of this
noble Earl of Shrewesbury search Halles Cronycle and you shall perceive his
vaylyaunt acts.

This year Mahomet the great Turk wan Constantinoble with exceadynnge great
slaughter of Christen people, Constantinople won by the great Turk.
and unto the aduau^sment of the Turkysh empire.

Anno do. M.cccc.liiii. an. xxxii. Henrci sixti. Steue^ Foster mayre. William
taylont, John feld shir.

This year the flambe of Envy bruste out between the Duke of York, who the^
claimed ye Crown, The first bataile of saynete Albons.
and the Duke of Somerset, who ruled the king, and at Saint Albans was fought
a cruel battle and unto the Duke of York fell the victory, and on the
kings part was slain the Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Northumberland, the
Lord Stafforde with.viii.M men more. After this bataile the duke of york
with great reverence brought ye king to London where the said Duke was made
Protectoure of the realm.

Anno do. M.cccc.lv. an. xxxiii. Henrici.vi. Wyllyam Marlowe grocer mayre. John
young Thomas oldgraue shiryffes. The duke of york deposed of his protectorship


By means of the queen and her counsel the Duke of York was deposed of his
protectorshyp which thing was cause of a new grodge and malys.

Anno do. M.cccc.lvi. an. xxxiiii Henrici.vi. Thomas Chaninges mayre. Ihon
Stuard, Raufe verney sheriffs.

A Riot in London
In this year was a great Riot committed in London against the Lombardes and
Italians because a Mercers servant was cast in prison for strykynge an
Italyon.

Anno do. M.cccc.lvii. an. xxxv. Henrici sixti, Godfrey bolayne mercer mayre.
William Edward, Thomas Reynere sheriffs.

In this year the french men perceiving the dyscorde in England sent.ii.
nauies into england and one of them landed in ye downs and they (having
knowledge that the people of Sandwitch were fled the town for death) came and
spoiled the town with great crueltye. Sandwitch destroyed by the frenchmen.


In the city of Men's in Germany was the science of Printing first invented by
one named Iohanes faustius. when and where the science of printinge was found


Anno do. M.cccc.lviii. an. xxxvi Henrici sixti. Thomas Scot draper mayre,
Raufe Iosteline, Richard Nedham sheryffes.

A feigned peace.
In this year was made a feigned peace between the king and ye queen and their
counsel on the one party, and the Duke of York with his confederates on the
other party which agremente endured not long.

Anno do. M.cccc.lix. an. xxxvii. Henrici sixiti. Wyllyam Hull fyshmonger
mayre. John Stocket, John Plummer shiriffes.

The batel on blor Heath.
In this year was the battle on Blore heathe in Shropshyre between the Lord
Audeley on the Kings party, and the Earl of Sallisbury on the Duke of yorkes
party, where the victory fell to the Earl of Sallisburye, and the Lord Audley
was slain, and his army dyscomfited.

Anno do. M.cccc.lx. an. xxxviii. Henrici sixti. Richard Lee grocer mayre.
John Lambert, Richard Fleminge Sheryffes.

In this year the Duke of york assembled a great Army of northre^ men and
welchemen, The duke of york flede.
and the Earl of Warwike came with a great no^bre from Calis, and nere unto
Lodlawe in the Marches of Wales they pytched their field, and toward them came
the King accompanied with the Dukes, of Somerset and Exeter with a mighty
Army, and the night before the battle Andrew Trollop fled from the Duke to
the King, wherefore in ye night the Duke him self fled into Ireland and the
Earls of Salisbury, March, and Warwyke, fled into Deuinshere and so to Calis.

After this departing the Duke of York with his confederates were proclaimed
traitors, The duke of york proclaimed traitor
and the young Duke of Somerset was made Captain of Calys but when he came
there he could not be received because the earls was there before, and so he
was feign to take Gynes.

The battle of north ha^ton.
In this year also the Earls of March, and Warwick came from Calys, and so
landed at Sandewitch, and so came to London and by the way met them diverse
noble men and so came to London where they were gentlye received and after long
consultinge the said Earls with an Army of.xxv.M. men set forward to mete the
king who had provided an Army nere to Northehampto^ where was fought a
cruel battle, the victory fell to the Earl of March, and his company where
were slain on the kings party the Duke of Bokyngham and the Earl of
Shrewsbury with.x.M. tall Englyshmen and the rest fled and left the king
alone, and the Duke of Somerset, The king taken.
ye Queen, and her son fled into the Bishopryke of Duram.

After this field the Earl of March conuaied the King to London where was a
Parliament sommoned at which Parlyament the Duke of York was made air
apparent and all his progenye after him. The duke of york proclaimed air
apparent


In this year Queen Margaret in great have gathered a great company of
Northren me^ and at wake feld in a cruel fight discomfited and slew the Duke
of York, The battle at wakefeld
with his son the Earl of Rutland, and the earl of Salisbury was taken
prisoner, who afterward was beheded at Pomfret and his head sent to york.

The Queen with her retinewe nere to saint Albons discomfited the Earl of
warwike and ye Duke of Norfolk, The second battle at saint Albons.
and delivered King Henry her husband, in this battle was slain.xxiii.c. men
and not above of whom no noble men is remembered but sir John Gray who the day
before was made Knight.

After this battle the king and the Queen (heringe of the coming of the
Earl of March and Earl of Warke with a great number of Marchemen) took their
journey Norwarde and the said Earl came to London, where Edward Earl of
March by the consent of the nobylytie and commons was proclaimed King
the.iiii. day of March in the year of our Lord M.cccc.lx. by the name of
king Edward the fourth. king Edward proclaimed king.


Immediatlye after king Edward was proclaimed king he pursued King Henry
toward york and met with King Henry's Army at a place called Towton with
whom he had then a cruel The battle at towton
battle but King Edward had the victory, In the feld were slain xxxvi.M.
and.vii.c. persons and all Englyshemen. Also there was slain the Earls of
Northomberlande and Westtmerlande, the Lord Clyfford, and diverse other and
King Henri lost all and was feign to flee the land after he had
reigned.xxxviii. years and.vi. months.

After this cruel battle king Henry fled into Scotland and Queen Margeret
with the young Prince fled to her father the duke of Anges. king Henry fled
into scotland


Edward the.iiii.
ANno dommini.M.cccc.lxi. anno primo Edwardi quarti. Hugh Wiche mayre. George
Ireland, John Lock sherisses.

The cronation of king Edward.
This year the.xxix. day of June was king Edward the.iiii. with great
tryumphe crowned at Westmynster.

Anno do. M.cccc.lxii. anno secondo Edwardi quarti. Thomas Coke mayre.
Bartilmewe James, Wylliam Hampton sheryffes.

A bataile at Exha^.
In this year King Henry and Queen Margaret his wife came out of Scotland with
a great Army of Frenchemen and Scotts and in Exam shyre the Lord Mountacute
(gouernoure of the North country) mete him with a noble army where King
Henry was discomfyted and fled, and the Duke of Somerset (who a little before
forsook King Edward) was taken in the chase with diverse other who afterward
were beheaded.

Anno domini.M.cccc.lxiii. an. tercio Edwardi quarti. Mathewe Philip gold smith
maire. Thomas Muscham, Robert bassed shiriffes

In this year king Henry came out of Scotland into England by what means I
have not read, King henry taken prisoner.
but I thyncke not well stablyshed in his wit but boldly he entered the Realm
and as soon as he was entered he was known and taken by one Cantlow and brought
toward the king whom ye Earl of Warwyke met on ye way by the kings
commandment and brought him through London to the Tower and there he was
laid in sure hold. And Queen Margret and her son departed out of Scotland
and sailed into france where she remained with Duke Rayner her father till she
took her unfortunate journey into England again.

Anno do. m.cccc.lxiiii. an quarto Edwardi quarti, Raufe Iostelyne draper
mayre, John Tate, John stone shiriffes,

King Edward married.
This year the Earl of Warwyke was sent into france to treat of a Marriage
between the Lady Bona, daughter to Jews Duke of Sauoy and sister to the French
Queen, which marriage was a greed unto, but in mean season king Edward married
preuely at Grafton the Lady Elizabeth, late wife of Sir John Graye, for which
marriage rose great varience between the king and the Earl of Warwycke his
chief friend and maynteynoure.

Anno domini.m.cccc.lxv. anno quinto Edwardi quarto. Raufe Freney mercer mayre,
The queen delivered of a daughter
Henry Waner, Wyllyam Constantine shyrif.

In this year the Queen was delivered of a fair Lady and was named Elyzabeth
which afterward was wife to the noble prince king Henry the.vii. and mother
to king Henry the.viii.

Also in this year was granted a license that certain cotsehold sheep
should be transported into Spain, A license granted to carye sheep into
spain.
which have so there multiplied and increased that it has turned the commodity
of England much to the spanishe profit.

Anno domini.m.cccc.lxvi. anno sexto Edwardi quarti, John young, grocer knight
mayre, John Brice, John Brown, John stotton shyr.

In this year ye Bastard of Burgon came into England to treat for a marriage
betwne ye earl Chareloyse yeyre of Borgoyne, ^ch^^^ between t^^ (...) s^er^e of
burgoyn^ and the Lord Scales
and king Edwardes sister which marriage was concluded. At which time the said
basterd challenged the Lord Scales for certain feats of war which were done
in Smethfelde, but the lord scales had the victory.

Anno domini.m.cccc.lxvii. an. septimo Edwardi quarti, Thomas Owlgraue mayre.
Humfrey heyford Thomas stalbroke shiriffes.

Anno domini.m.cccc.lxviii, an. octauo Edwardi quarti, Willyam Taylour grocer
mayre, Simon smith Wyllyam Heriot shyryffes.

In this year began the Earl of Warke to Rebel against king Edward and
procured to his part the Duke of Clarens brother to ye king, The earl of
warwike rebe^eld.
the Archbishop of york, and the Marquis Mountacute his brethren, which
Earl with the Duke of Clarence went to Calys where the said Duke married the
Earls daughter of warwike.

Banbury held.
In this year also the commons of yorkeshyre made insurrection at the setting
on of the Earl of Warwyke and his adherentes and made them a Captain called
Robyn of Ryddesdale, and nere unto Banbury the Lord Harbert Earl of Penbroke
and his brother sir Richard harbert with an Army of.vii.m. Welchmen met the
Northren men betwyxt whom was a cruel Battle where the northren men optayned
the victory, and the Earl of Penbroke and his brother Richard taken and
beheaded, and.v.m. Welchmen slain.

After this victory the Northre^ men went to Warwyke where the Earl, King
Edward taken prisoner.
and the Duke of Clarence had gathered a great Army, and king Edward with his
puissau^ce came against them, but suddenly in the night the Earl set on the
kings camp, so that king Edward was there taken prisoner, and so sent to
Middelham castle in york shyre to be kept with the Archbisshop of york the
Earls brother.

Shortly after king Edward (having friendship of his kepers) was suffered
certain days in the weke to ride a huntyng and by the means of sir wyllyam
stanley, king Edward delivered out of prison.
sir Thomas of Borogh, and diverse other his fre^des with a great bond of men
was rescued from his kepers, and so delivered out of Prison.

Losecotefelde.
King Edward after he was come to London, gathered together his Army, and so
met with the Lord Wells, with a great army, the victory fell on the kings
part where were slain.x.m. men at the least, where were taken and beheaded
the Lord wells, sir Roberd Wells his son, The lord wells beheaded.
sir Roberd Democke with diverse other, this battle was called Losecotefelde
because the Lyncolne shyre men did worle away their cotes and ran away.

This year the Earl of Warwyke with the Duke of Clarence perceyuyng their
party weakened fled into france for socoure where they tarried not past.vi.
months. Therle of warwike fled into France.


The Duke of Clarence, Therle of warwike landed
ye Earls of Warwyke, Penbroke and Oxforthe landed at dertmoth, to whom by
means of proclamacions made in king Henry's name the commons gathered to them
in great nombre so that king Edward fearing his part fled into Flanders to
ye Duke of Burgoine king edward fled flanders


After king Edwards fleing, diverse of his friends took saynctuary, King
edward the v. borne in sanctutuarye.
and in especially Queen Elisabeth who was porely delivered in the sainctuary
at Westminster, of a son named Edward.

Then was Henry the.vi. set at large and again proclaimed king by means of the
Earl of Warwyke, king henry restored to his kynglye estate.
and other, and king Edward proclaimed usurper of the crown but that continued
not long.

Anno domini.m.cccc.lxix. anno nono Edwardi quarti, Richard Lee grocer mayre
Robart Draper Rychard Gardener sheriffs.

Anno domini.m.cccc.lxx. anno decimo Edwardi quarti. John stocton mercer
knight mayre. John Crosby, Ihon Ward sheriffs.

In this year also king Edward having king Henri in his company met with the
Earl of Warwyke on Esterdaye at Barnet.x. Barnet field.
miles from London where between them was fought a cruel battle the victory
fell on king Edwardes part where were slain Richard Neuel Earl of Warwike,
and the Marquis mou^tacute his brother with.x.m. men more.

Shortly after this bataile queen Margaret with her son landed at Waymouth in
Dorsetshere, and when she heard of the death of the Earl of Warwike, she and
her son took saynctuary at Beweley in hamshyre, and unto her resorted ye Duke
of Somerset, and the Earl of Deuenshire with other, A bataile at Tewkesburye.
who gathered a great Army, and king Edward with a great Army met with them
nere unto Tewkesbury where was fought a cruel bataile, but king Edward had the
victory where queen Margaret was taken prisoner, and Prince Edward her son
also, who in the kings presence was shamefully mourdered, this battle was
fought the iiii. day of may on a saturday, and on the mondaye after was
beheaded at Twekesburye Edmonde Duke of Somerset the Prior of saynct John's
Jerusalem, with diverse other, and the Queen sent prisoner to London, who
afterward was redeemed by her father, and after sent into france.

After this the basterd Fauconbrydge who was made fese Admiral by the Earl of
Warwike began a new commocion with kentyshe men, A new co^mocion.
and esexmen, who shortly was apprehendyd and put to death.

In this year also upon the Ascencion even next folowinge the dead corpse of
king Henri the.vi. was brought from the Tower of London to Poules where he
lay all night. The death of king henry the vi.
But how this Prince came to his death there be diverse sayings, but commonly
it is said that Rychard Duke of Gloceter king Edwardes brother slew him with
a dager.

Anno domini.m.cccc.lxxi. anno xi. Edwardi quarti William Edward Grocer mayre,
John Aleine John Shelley shiriffes.

Anno do. m.cccc.lxxii. anno. xii. Edwardi quarti, William Hampton fyshmonger
mayre. Thomas Bledlow John Brown sheriffs.

Anno do. M.cccc.lxxiii. an. xiii. Edwardi quarti. John Tate mercer mayre,
wylliam Stocker Robert Byllesdon shiriffes.

Anno do. m.cccc.lxxiiii. an. xiiii. Edwardi quarti. Roberte Drope draper
mayre. Edmond shaa, Thomas Hill shiriffes.

This year king Edward with a noble army went in to france but afterward,
considering the vniustnes of the duke of Bourgone) there was a peace concluded
so that the french king should pay to king Edward.lxxv.M crowns, A voyage
into france.
and yearly.l.M. crowns during king Edwardes life.

Anno dom. m.cccc.lxxv. an. xv. Edwardi quarti. Roberte Basset Salter mayre.
Roberte Colwyche, Hugh Bryce shiriffes.

This year were diverse Bakers of London set upon the Pillorye for making of
light weyghte of bread.

Anno domini.m.cccc.lxxvi. an. xvi. Edwardi quarti, Raufe Iostelyn draper
mayre, Rychard Rauson, Wylliam Horn sheryffes.

This year from Crypylgate to Byshopisgate, London wale was newlye repared.

Anno do. m.cccc.lxxvii. anno. xvii. Edwardi quarti. Humfrey Heyforde goldsmyth
mayre, Henry Colet, John Stocker sheryffes.

This year George Duke of Clarens younger brother to king Edward being
prisoner in the tower of London was there drowned in a barell of Malmesy.

Anno domi. m.cccc.lxxviii. an. xviii. Edwardi quarti, Richard Gardyner mercer
Mayre Robert Harding Robert Bifelde sheryffes

In this year was great mortality in London and throughout all England.

Anno domini. m.cccc.lxxix. an. xix. Edwardi quarti. Bartilmewe James draper
mayre. Thomas Ilam, John ward shyryffes.

Anno domini.m.cccc.lxxx. anno xx. Edwardi.iiii. John Brown mayre, wyllyam
Bacon, wyllyam Daniel shyryffes.

Anno do. M.cccc.lxxxi. an. xxi. Edwardi quarti. Wyllyam Heriot draper knight
mayre, Robert Tate, wyllyam wykyng Richard Caurie shiriffes.

The king made a feast to the maire of London
This year in the month of Iulye the king sent for the mayre with certain of
his brethren, and comeners of the city of London, unto the Forest of waltham,
and there cause ye game to be brought before the^, so that they saw course
after course, and many dear both read and falowe slain. And after that the
king commanded his officers to bring the mayre and his company unto a
pleasant lodge made al of grene bows, and there set them to dinner and served
them with many denty dyshes and diverse wynes good and plenty, and over that
caused the lord Chamberlyn with other Lords to chere the mayre and his
company sundry times while they were at dinner, and at their departing gave
unto them venyson great plentye.

This year also the king seen unto the mayresse of London and her systers the
Aldermens wifes, two hearts.vi. Buckes, and a Tonne of wine, to make them
merye wythall.

Anno do. m.cccc.lxxxii. an. xxii. Edwardi quarti. Edmonde shaa goldsmith
mayre, John Matthew, William white shiriffes.

In the beginning of the.xxiii. year the.ix. day of Apryl, dyed the noble
king Edward the.iiii. at westminster and is buried at winsor, leuinge after
him two sons, that is to say Prince Edward his eldest son and Richard Duke
of york, and.iii. daughters, Elisabeth that after was Queen, Cycili and
Katherine.

Edward the fyft.
Edward the.v. began his reygne over the realm of england the.xi. day of
Apryll in the beginning of the year of our Lord.M.cccc.lxxxiii. the same
Edward being of the age of.xi. years, or there about, this Edward was
never crowned but shamefully murdered by the commandment of Richard the
third that after was king of england.

Richard the.iii.
RIchard the.iii. began his domynion over the Realm of England ye.xxi. day of
June, in the year of our Lord.M.cccc. lxxxiii. and the.vi. day of July the
next folowinge, was crouned at Westeminster.

Anno domini.m.cccc.lxxxiii. an. primo Richardi.iii. Robert billesdon
haberdasher mayre, Thomas Norlande, Wyllyam Martyne shyryffes.

In this year was the Duke of Buchyngham beheaded at Salysburye. The duke of
bokingham beheaded,


Anno. do. m.cccc.lxxxiiii. anno. secondo richardi.iii. Thomas Hyl mayre.
Thomas Bretayne Richard Chester, Raufe Austreye shyryffes.

This year the.xxii. day of August in the year of our Lord. bosworth field.
M.cccc.lxxxv. was the Bataile of Bosworth nere to lecester in the which king
Richard the.iii. in the third year of his reygne, was slain by king Henri
the vii. the which in the same day began his reign over the Realm, King
henry the.vii crowned.
and the.xxx. day of Octobre next following was crowned at Westminster.

In the.xiii. day of September, Two maires of london in one year and both
died of the sweat.
in the year of our Lord last before mentioned dyed of ye sweat the
foresaid Thomas Hille mayre in whose place the.xxiiii. day of the month and
year of our lord last before mentioned, wyllyam stocker knight, was chosen
mayre, which Stocker dyed the.viii. day of the said month also of the
sweat, and the.xix. day of the said month of September, was John ward
chosen mayre, and so continued until the feast of Simon and Jude, next
following.

Henry the.vii.
ANno dom. M.cccc.lxxxv anno primo Henrici septimi. Hughe Bryce goldsmyth
knight mayre. John Tate, John Swa^ shiriffes.

Anno domini.m.cccc.lxxxvi. an secondo henrici septimi. Henry Collet mercer
knight mayre, John Perceiuall Hugh Clopton shirif.

This year the king married king Edwards eldest daughter named Elyzabeth, The
king married.
and in September next after was Prince Arthur borne at wynchester. Prince
Arthar born


Anno do. m.cccc.lxxxvii. anno. tercio henrici septimi. Wyllyam Horn mayre,
wyllyam Remingto^, John Fenkell Shiriffes. The queen crowned.


In this year on saynct Katherins day was the Queen crowned at Westminster.

Anno do. m, cccc.lxxxviii. anno. iiii. Henrici septimi Roberte Tate Mercer
mayre Wylliam Isaac, Raufe Tylney shiriffes.

This year the commons of the North slew the Earl of Northumberland,
Aedmocion in northomberlande.
in the same year was the field of Dykesmew in Flaunders, foughten by the
lord Dawbeney where the Lord Morlaye was slain.

Anno do. m.cccc.lxxxix. anno. v. henrici septimi. Wyllyam White Mayre, Wyllyam
Capell, John Broke shiriffes.

Anno do. m.cccc.lxxxx. anno.vi. Henrici septimi. John Mathewe Mercer mayre.
Henry Coke. Robert Reuil Hugh Pemperton shyr.

This year was the Lord Henry the kings second son, The birth of king he^ri
the.viii
borne in Grenewich in June.

Anno dom. m.cccc.lxxxxi. anno. vii. henrici septimi. Hugh Clapton mercer
mayre. Thomas wod willyam Brown shiriffes.

Anno domi. m.cccc.lxxxxii. anno viii. henrici septimi. Willyam martyne skynner
mayre, william Purchate, William welbeke shiriffes.

This year in the month of Octobre, A fray in London.
was a fraye made upon the Esterlynges by the commons of ye city of London,
and specially by the mercers servants.

Anno do. m, cccc.lxxxxiii. an. ix. henrici septimi. Raufe Austrey fish monger
mayre, Roberte Fabyan, Wyllyam wynger shiriffes.

This year was wheat at six pence the bushel, and baye salt at three pence.
ob. a bushel in the cyty of London.

This year was sir wyllyam Stanley beheaded.

Anno domini.m.cccc.lxxxxiiii. anno.x. henrici septimi, Richard Chawry Salter
mayre. Nicholas Alwyn, John warner shiriffes.

In this year was good chepvittell in England
This year was white Hearing sold for three shyllynges and iiii. pence a barell
at London, and not above.

Anno domini.m.cccc.lxxxxv. an. xi. Henrici septimi. Henri Collet mercer
knight mayre, Thomas knesworth Henry Somiz Shirif.

Anno do. m.cccc.lxxxxvi. anno. xii. Henrici septimi. John Tate mercer mayre,
John shaa, Richard Haddon shiriffes,

This year the.xviii. day of June was Blackeheth field. Blackeheth feld.


Anno do. m.cccc.lxxxxvii. an. xiii Henrici.vii. wyllia^ Purchase mercer mayre,
Bertylmewe read Thomas wyndone shiriffes.

Anno do. m.cccc.lxxxxviii. anno xiiii. henrici septimi. John perciual
merchant tailor mayre, Thomas Braybury, Steven Ienyns shir.

An. do. M.cccc.lxxxxix. an. xv. he^rici septi. Nicolas alwyne mayre James
wyford Rychard Broude shiriffes.

This year was the Earl of Warwyke beheaded. Therle of warwike beheaded


This year the king and the Queen sailed to Callys, A triu^phe at Calis.
and at Saint Peter's they met with the duke of Burgoyne.

Anno do. M.ccccc. anno. xvi. he^rici.vii. william Remingto^ maire, John Hawes,
Wyllyam Siete shiriffes.

Lady katherin landed.
This year the.iiii. day of octobre landed at Plummouth katherin daughter to ye
king of Spain

Anno do. M.ccccc.i. anno.xvii. henrici septimi. John shaa goldesmith mayre,
Laurence Aylmer Henry head shiriffes,

Prince arther married.
This year upon. S. Erkinwaldes day was Prince Arthur married to the foresaid
Lady Katheryne, which Prince dyed in the Easter weke folowinge.

Anno domini.m.ccccc.ii. anno. xviii. Henrici septimi. Bartilmewe Read
goldsmith maire, Henri kebbell, Nicolas Niuers Siriffes.

The death of the queen.
This year the.xi. day of February dyed queen Elizabeth in the Tower of London,
being in child bed and the.viii. day of Auguste was the King of Scotts married
to Margeret the eldest daughter.

Anno do. m.ccccc.iii. an. xix. henrici septimi. Wyllyam Capel draper mayre,
Chrystopher Hawes, Robert warris Thomas graunge Shiriffes.

Anno do. m.ccccc.iiii. an. xx. he^rici septimi. John wynger grocer mayre,
Roger Achilley Wyllyam brown shiriffes.

Anno domi. m.ccccc.v. anno. xxi henrici septimi. Thomas Ioysworth fyshmo^ger
Mayre, Richard Shore, Roger Grouer shiriffes.

In this year was the wethercocke of Poules blown down, The duke of burgon
driven into england by tempest.
and the duke of Burgoyne was driven to land in the west Country.

Anno domi. m.ccccc.vi. an. xxii. Henriri septimi, Richard Haddon mercer
knight mayre, wylliam Copynger wyllia^ Fytzwylliam shir.

Anno domini.m.cccc.vii. anno. xxiii. Henrici septimi, Wyllyam Brown mercer,
Laurence Aymer Mayres, wyllyam Butler, John Kyrby shyryffes.

A great fire at norwytche
This year was a great part of the City of Norwytch burnt.

Anno domi. m.ccccc.viii. anno. xxiiii. henrici septimi, Steven Ienins
marchaunte tailor Mayre, Thomas Exmew, Richard smith Shyryffes.

In this year the.xxi. day of Apryll, dyed king Henry the, vii, at Rychmond
the.xxiiii. year of his reygne and is buried at westminster.

Henry the eyghte.
THe most gracious prince King Henry the viii. began his regyne the xxii,
day of Apryll in the year of our Lord.M. ccccc.ix. and was crowned at
westmynster in the Feast of the Natiuite of saint John Baptyst next folowinge.

Anno domini. m.ccccc.ix. anno primo henrici octaui. Thomas Bradbury mercer
mayre, George Monox. John Dubet shyryffes,

In this year was Emsone and Dudley beheaded. Emson and dudley beheaded.


This year was Sir wyllyam Fytzwyllyam disfraunchesed, because he would not be
shyrffe.

Anno do. m.ccccc.x. an secondo henrici octaui, Henri Kebell mayre John
mylborne, John Rest shirif.

This year Henry the kings son was borne at Richmonde, The birth of king
he^ries first son.
on newyeres day: and Iustes kept at westminster, and on saint Mathewes day
the child died.

Anno domini. m.ccccc.xi. anno. tercio henrici octaui, Roger Achilley draper
mayre, Nicolas Shelton, Thomas Myrfyn shyryffes.

This year was the lord Darsey sent into Spain, A voyage i^to spain
to aid the king of Spain against the Mores, but peace was made before his
aryuynge, and so he returned home again.

This same season was sir Edward Poynynges sent into Gelderlande to aid the
Prince of Chastell. A voyage into gelderlande.


The same time the lord haward took Andrewe berton and a C.lx Scotes, and two
fair Ships.

Anno. domini. m.ccccc.xii. anno quarto henrici octaui, wyllyam copynger
Richard haddon knight mayre, Roberte holderne, Roberte Fenrothern Shyryffes.

This year was Edward Delapole beheaded. Edward delapole beheaded


This year the lord Marquis dorset was sent into Spain with x.M. men, A
voyage i^to spain
and did much hurt in Guien. and returned in winter by reason of the flyx, and
on saynct Laurence day the Regent and the Caricke were burnt, A battale on
the sea
which were two great Spyppes.

Anno domi. m.ccccc.xiii. anno. quinto henrici octaui, Wyllyam brown mercer
mayre. John Dawes, John Brute shyryffes.

This year the said Dawes dyed within the year, and in his place was chosen
Roger Basford. The lord Admiral slain.


This year sir Edward Howarde Lord Admyrall of England was slain on saint
Marks day in Bryttayne by much hardynes. The same year in June the king
besyeged Tyrwyn, and discomfyted the power of France, at Boomie, Tyrwin and
Turney won.
and took the cities Tyrwyn and Turney, and returned without any more battle
offered during which time the king of Scotts enoyed England, The king of
Scotts slain
with an. C.M. men and was slain him self, and.xii. Earls by the earl of
Surry the kings lyefe tenaunte wherefore the king created him Duke of
Northfolke, and his eldest son Earl of Surrey.

Anno domini. m.ccccc.xiiii. an. sexto henrici octaui, Georg monox draper
Mayre, James yarforde, Ihon Mundy shyryffes.

A peace concluded between England and france
This year was a peace concluded between England and France and on saint Denice
day the french king married the Lady Mary the kings sister, and on Newyeres
day after he dyed, and therefore the king sent for her again by the Duke of
Suffolk and other.

In this year was Richard hunne hanged in ye Lollers Tower Richard hun
mordered i^ lolers tower


Anno do. M.ccccc.xv. anno.vi. henrici octaui. Sir william Butler grocer mayre,
henry worle, Rychard Gray shyriffes.

The said graye died within the year and for him was chosen william Bail.

This year in Februarye, was borne at Grenewitche the Lady Mary, the Kings
daughter.

In April the French Queen came into England, The duke of sofolke married the
french Queen.
and was married to the lord Charles duke of Suffolk.

This year Margaret Queen of Scotts, sister to the king fled into England
and lay at Harbottell, The queen of scotts fled in to england
and she was delivered of a doghter called Margaret, and came to London in may,
and tarried there a hole year, before she returned.

Anno domine. m.ccccc.xvi. anno viii. henrici octaui. John Rest grocer maire,
Thomas Semer, Richard Thurstone shiriffes.

A great froste.
This year was such a Froste that al men with carts might pas between
westminster and Lambeth.

ill May day.
This year on may even, was an insurreccion of young persons against Alyens of
the which diverse were put to execucion, and the resedue came to westminster
with halters about their necks, and were pardoned.

And the.xxiiii. day of May the queen of Scotts returned into scotland
again.

Anno do. m.ccccc.xvii. anno.ix. henrici octaui. Sir thomas Exmew goldsmith
mayre, Thomas baudry Richard Simon shiriffes.

In this year was the Term adiourned to Oxford and again to London.

In October the Admyrall of France came into England and Turney was delivered
to the French king again. Turney given our to the (...)


Anno domini. m.ccccc.xviii. an, x. henrici octaui, Thomas Myrfin skynner
mayre, John Alle^, James Spencer shyryffes. Charles the v. elected emperor.


In this year at Fra^ckford Charles the.v. was elected Emperor.

This year the Earl of Surrey was sent into Irelande. a usage in to yrelad.


Anno dom. m.ccccc.xix. anno. xi henrici octaui, Sir James yoxford mercer
mayre, Ihon wyllyam Nicholas Pheteryche shyryffes.

This year the king and the French king met at the camp between Arde and
Guynes, The treumphe at Gynes.
where were great triumphs.

After that the King and the Emperor mete, a treu^phe at Callis
and the king went to Grauelen with him, and he came to Calys with the king,
and had great chere, and the king returned.

Anno domini.m.ccccc.xx. anno xii. henrici octaui. sir John Bruge draper mayre.
John Skeuyngton John Keynde shiriffes.

The duke of bukingham beheaded.
This year the Duke of Buckyngham was beheaded the.xxii. day of may.

In June the Cardinal went to Calys, The cardinal went to Callys
to entreat a peace between the Emperor and the French king and tarried there
till December with out any thing concluded.

Anno domini.m.ccccc.xxi. anno xiii. Henrici octa. Sir John Myl borne draper
mayre. John Brytayne, Thomas Pargetoure shyr.

This year the frydaye before Penthecost, that is to say the.vi. day of June,
Charles the fyfte Emperor was honorably received into the city of London of
the Mayre, Aldermen, The Emperor received into London.
and the Communaltye, our sovereign lord accompanying him. And from London he
went to winsoure, and sat in the stall of the Garter, and from thence to
Hampton, and sailed over the sea, into Spain, a voyage i^ to france.
during which time the Earl of Surrey lord Admiral burnt Morles in
Bryttayne, and after landed at Calys, and entered Picardye, and burnt towns
and castles, and besieged Hesding, but because of winter he taysed his seige
and returned. The scotts i^uaded England.


This year the duke of Albany was entringe into England with a great army,
but when he hard that the earl of Shrowysbury was coming to fight with hi,
he took a truce for.vi. months.

An. do. M.ccccc.xxii. an. xiiii. Henrici octaui. Sir Ihon mondy goldsmith
mayre, John Rudstone Ihon Champnies shiriffes.

The king of Denmark ca^ into england for socoure
This year Christenrne king of Denmark came into England in June.

This year the earl of Surrey burnt Iedworth, A voyage i^to scotland
and many other towns in Scotland.

The Rodes wone by the turks.
In this year the Turk besyeged the Roodes, and upon Chrystmas day he took it.

Anno domi. m.ccccc.xxiii. anno. xv. Henrici octaui. Sir Thomas Baudry mercer
Mayre, Myghell English, Nycolas Ienyns shir.

This year the duke of Suffolk was sent into France, A voyage i^to france
with.x.M. men and passed the water of Some without battle, took and
destroyed many towns, and in december he returned.

The same year the duke of Albany besyeged the castle of warke, The scotts
entered england and shorly after ran away.
and hearing of the Earl of Surreys coming with a great army he cowardly
fled.

Anno dom. m.ccccc.xxiiii. anno. xvi. Henrici octaui. Sir wylliam Bailey draper
mayre. Raufe dodmer william Roch sheriffs.

This year came from the Emperor the lord of Champere and other lords.

This year came out of Scotland the Bishop of Dunkell, Diverse ambassadors came
i^ England.
and other as Ambassadors.

This year on saint Mathewes day was the French king taken by the Emperor.

A co^mocion i^ Norfolk and suffolk.
This year was a metynge in Norfolk and Suffolk for payment of money.

A peace concluded between england and france.

The french king was delivered in March. The french king delivered out of
prison


This year was the coin enhaunced.

Anno dom. M.ccccc.xxv. anno. xvii. Henrici octaui sir John Aleyne marcer
knight mayre, John Cau^ton, Christopher Ascue shirif.

Anno do. m.ccccc.xxvi. an. xviii. Henrici octaui. Sir Thoms Semer mercer
mayre. Steue^ Pecoke, Nicholas Lambert sheryshes.

This year the corn began to fail.

The Cardinal went i^to france with great pomp.
This year the Cardinal went into France with a great pomp where he concluded
a peace between the king and the French king, which both defied the
Emperor and sent an army in to Italy and in Septembre he returned.

In Octobre the great master of France came to London, a leage between
England and France.
with great triumph, for conclusion of the same leage.

Anno do. m.ccccc.xxvii. an. xix. henrici octaui. Sir James Spencer vyntener
mayre, Ihon Hardye, wyllyam Holles sheriffs.

This year corn was very dear, A dearthe of corn.
and had been dearer if ye merchants of the Stylyard had not been, and duche
ships restrained and an abstinence of war between England and Flaunders.

On Saint Denies day a legate came from Rome. A legate came from Rome.


Anno domi. m.ccccc.xxviii. an. henrici octaui. Sir John Rudstone draper mayre.
Raufe waren, John Long sheriffs.

This year in June the legates sat at the black freers for the kings marriage.

The cardynal deposed
This year in Octobre the Cardynall was deposed of the Chaunceller ship.

A peace between the king of england and the Emperor,
This year was a peace concluded between the Emperor and the king.

Anno domini. M.ccccc.xxix. an. xxi. Henrici octa. Sir Raufe Dodmer mercer
mayre. Myghell Dormer, Walter Champion shiriffes.

The emperor crowned.
This year the Emperor was Crowned at Bonony.

Anno domini. M.ccccc.xxx. an. xxii. Henrici octaui. Sir Thomas Pargetoure
salter maire, wyllyam dauney, John Clopynge shiriffes.

This year was the French kings Children delivered.

One boiled in smithfelde for poisonynge.

This year dyed the Cardynalle on saint Andrews even. The cardinal died


Anno domini.m.ccccc.xxxi. an. xxiii. henrici octaui Nicholas La^bert grocer
mayre. Richard Gresha^ Edward Attam sheriffs.

This year the king began to build his place at westminster. the pales at
westmi^ster bilded


In this year was Griffeth Rise beheaded.

This year in Octobre the king went over the sea and met with the French
king.

Anno do. m.ccccc.xxxii. an. xxiiii henrici octaui. Sir steven Pecoke
haberdasher mayre. Richard Reynolde. Richard Pinthon, Ihon martyne shiriffe.

This yerae the king was by due process of the law divorced from lady Katherine
his brothers wife, The king deuorsed from his brothers wif
and he married Lady Anne Boleine, The king married.
which was crowned Queen on whitsonday.

On midsomer day died the french queen, wife unto the Duke of Suffolk.

Lady elizabeth borne.
This year was borne the lady Elizabeth at Grenewetch, on the even of the
Nativity of our Lady

Anno domi. m.ccccc.xxxiii. an. xxv. Henri octaui. Christopher Ascue knight
draper mayre Wyllyam Forman, Thomas Kitson Shiriffes.

The holy maid of kent and her companions put to death,
This year was a Nun called the holy maid of Kente, two monks, and two
frees and a priest hanged and headed for treason, blasphemy, and ypocresye.

This year was a peace concluded with Scotland.

This year was the Bishop of Rome with all his false usurped power abbolished
quite out of the Realm. The bishop of Rome abolished.


Anno domi. m.ccccc.xxxiiii. an, xxvi. Henrici octaui. Sir John Chamnies
skynner mayre, Nycholas Leueson Wyllyam Denham Shiriffes.

This year the earl of Kildare dyed in the Tower, The earl of kildare rebeled.
and his son rebelled and slew the Bishop of Deuilynge, wherefore the king
sent sir Wyllyam Skeuyngton theyther. The first fruit of the spiritualtye
granted to the king.


This year was granted to the King the first fruits and the tenthes of all
spiritual possessions.

In June was the bishop of Rochester, and sir Thomas more, The bishop of
rochester and sir tomas more beheaded.
beheaded for denyinge the king to be supreme head of the Church of England.

And in this year were three monks of the Charterhouse executed for the same
offense. Three monks of chater house put to death.


Anno do. M.ccccc.xxxv. anno. xxvii. Henrici octa. Sir John Allyn mercer the
second time mayre, Humfrey Mommoth, John Cotes shiriffes.

This year was Queen Anne, the lord Rocheforde, Queen an beheaded.
Nores, Weston, Brereton, and Marks beheaded. And the king married Lady Jane
Semer.

This year in Octobre begane a folyshe commocion in Lincolneshire, A co^mocion
in lincolneshere
and in yorkshire, by means of the Lord Dercie, the Lord Husie. sir Robert
Constably, and Robert Ask, which by the kings wisdom and his prudente
counsel were appeased without blood shedynge.

Anno dom. m.ccccc.xxxvi. anno xxviii. Henrici octaui, sir Raufe Warren mercer
Mayre, Richard Paget, Wyllyam Boyer shiriffes.

This year the king and the Queen rode through London, with a goodly company.

In February was Thomas Fetzgaret and five of his uncles hanged drawn and
quartered.

This year the Lord Dersey, sir Fraunces Bygot, sir Roberte Constable, and
other began a new conspyracy, A new co^mocion.
which were attaynted and put to death in June.

This year on saint Edwardes even, The birth of king edward the vi. ano. 1537
was Prince Edward borne at Hampton Court.

This year the.xxiii. day of Octobre, died Queen Jane, and is buried at
wynsore.

Anno. dom, M.ccccc.xxxvii. an xxix. henrici octaui. Rychard Gresham mayre.
John Gresham, Thomas Lewyn shyriffes.

This yete begane the colletion for the poor, and a great nombre were cured
of many grievous diseases, through the Charity thereof.

In May was friar Forest hanged, Friar forest suffered.
and burnt in smithfelde for treason and heresy.

Anno dom. M.ccccc.xxxviii. an xxx. Henrici octaui. Sir Wyllyam Forman mayre,
Wyllyam wylkinson, Nicholas Gibson shiriffes.

The marquis of exetor beheded.
This year in Decembre was the Marquis of Exceter, the lord Montacute and sir
Edward Neuel, beheaded for high treason duly proved.

A noble muster in London.
In May, the Cytezyns of London mustred all in bryghte harnes and cotes of white
sylke, with whit cloth, and chains of gold, in three great battaylles, to the
great wonder of strangers.

Anno dom. M.ccccc.xxxix. anno xxxi. Henrici octaui, sir wyllyam Holleys mayre,
John Fair, Thomas Huntlowe sheriff.

This year in Nouembre, 4. abbotte^s put to death for treason
the Abbot of Redynge Glastenbury, and Colchester, were attaynted of high
treason, and like traitors put to death.

The.xxviii. day of July, Thomas cromwell beheaded
Thomas Crumwell, late before created Earl of Essex, and water Lord
Hungerford were beheaded at the Tower hill for treason.

And the.xxx. day were Barnes, Garet, and Hierom brent for heresye. Also the
same day were Abell Powell, and Fetherstone, drawn, hanged, and quartered, in
Smyth field for treason.

This Somer was a great heat and droughte, so that in many places the people
would have given one bushel, for the grendyng of another.

An examinacion of byshopes.
This year was the Bishop of Chychester, and Doctor wylson, delivered out of
the tower upon the kings pardon.

Anno. dom. m.ccccc.xl. an, xxxxii Henrici octaui, sir Wyllyam Roch mayre,
Wylliam Laxton, sir Martyn Bows shyryffes.

great pity
This year the collection for the poor people seized.

In Decembre were Egerton and Harman put to execucion for counterfetyng of ye
kings great Seal

This year the kings grace began great buildi^g at Calis and Guynes.

In Apryl, certain priests and lay men began a new commocion in yorkeshyre,
A new co^mocion in yorkshire
which were shortly taken and put to death in diverse places, one Leghte, and
two other were put to death at London, the xxvii. day of May, and for that
offense was sir John Neuel knight draune, hanged, and quartered, Due execucion.
at york on corpus Christi even, and xxx. handged for robbery.

This year the.vi. day of May, there was a proclamacion that the Bible should
be had in every parysh Church, within this realm, Gods word set at lyberty
redye for all sorts of people, to read and hear Gods word at convenient
times.

This year the countess of Salisburye was beheaded the.xxviii. day of may.

The.ix. day of June, were two yeme^ of the kings Guard, Right judgment.
hanged at Grenewitch for robberye in example of al other.

And the.x. day of June, was sir Edmond Kneuet knighte arayned in the Kings
Hall there for geuynge a blow in the kings house, and should have lost his
hand, if the kings majesty had not extended his mercy toward him.

The.xxii. day of Iulye, there was another proclamacio^, Abrogacions of holy
days.
that no holy day should be kept (except) our ladies days, the Apostles,
Euangelystes, S. George, S. Mary Magdalene. And ye S. Mark shall not be taken,
ne kept as a fasti^g day, nor S. Laurence even. Neither that Children should
be derked, ne go about upon saint Nycholas, saint Katheryne saint Clement, the
holy Innocents, and such like days.

Also the.xxviii. day of July, was the lord Leonard Gray beheaded at Tower
hill for diverse treasons done in Ireland while he was the kings deputy there.

The same day were three Gentilmen, called Mantell, Roydon, and Frowes, hanged
at sayncte Thomas waterynges, for coming a shameful murder, and making an
unlawful assemble confirmed by a sedicious oath in Sussex, A unlawful assemble
in May last, in the company of the Lord Dacres of the South, which lord
Dacres was on s. Peter's day following led from the Tower through London, by the
Sheryffes on foot to Tyborne, and there hanged.

And the first day of July, was a Welchman drawn, hanged, and quartered for
prophesyinge of the noble king Henrye the eyghtes death.

Anno domini. M.ccccc.xli. an. xxxiiii. henrici octaui. Sir Mighell Dormer
mayre, Sir Rouland Hyl, Henry Suckley shiriffes.

In this year, the.x. day of March there was a maid boiled in Smithfelde
for poysonynge of diverse honest persons that she had dwelled with, in the City
of london

This year, came in the Earl of Desmonde and the great Oneil out of
Irelande, and did submyt them to the kings majesty, yrysh men called to
honor
and after their submission, the great Oneyll was created Earl of Tyron and
his son Baron of Doncannen.

Anno domini. M.ccccc.xlii. an. xxxiiii. Henrici octaui. John Cotes salter
mayre Henry Hobelthorne, Henry Amcotes sheriffs.

Lack of wood in London
In this year the Frost dured so long that many of the poor people cried out
for lack of wode and coals, that the mayre went to the wood wharfes, and sold
to the pore people Byllet and Faggot, by the penny worth.

And this year was an Act of parliamente, An act for wod and cole in london
for wood and cole to keep the full syse, after the purifycacio^ of our Lady,
that should be in the year of our lord. M.ccccc.xliii that no man should
bargayne, sell, bring or conuaye to be uttered or sold, upon pain of
forfiture.

This year the.xxviii. day of Iulye, was burnt at winsore three persons, yt
is to say, one sir Anthony parso^ Priest and two seculer men, and the third had
the kings pardon

Also this year was proclaimed in the City of London the third day of August,
Open war toward france.
open war between our sovereign Lord the king and the French king, so the
kings hyghnes geuinge license and aucthororitie to every of his subjects to
use the said French king and all that depe^ded upon him, to their most
advantage and commodity, as his majesty's enemies has in such like case
heretofore been used and accustomed.

Anno domi. M.ccccc.xliiii. an. xxxv. Henrici octaui. Sir Wyllyam Bower draper,
which deceased being mayre, and after him was chose^ sir Raufe warren. John
Rowles, Richard Dobbes shiriffes.

This year was a great death in London, A great death.
which continued so long, that there was no term kept at London at Mighelmas,
but was removed to saint Albones, and there kept.

A voyage into scotland.
In the year of our lord. M.ccccc xliii. and the.xxxvi. year of our soueraygne
lord king Henry the.viii in the time of the mairaltie of sir Rafe Waren, the
kings majesty sent an army into Scotland the iiii. day of May, and landed
at lith and so went burning and destroyinge the country about, sparinge
neither Castle, town, Pyle, ne Village.

The boroughe and town of Edenborough, with the Abbey called Holy Rode house,
and the kings Palice adjoined to the same, were dystroyed. The town of Lyth
also, and the haven and peyre destroyed. The castle and village of Cragmyller,
the Abbey of Newbottelland part of Muskel borow town the Chapel of our lady
of Lawret, Preeston town and the castle Harintwone with the Freers and
nunnery, a castle of Oliver Sa^cklers, the town of Dunbar, Laurestone with the
Graunge.

Drilaw. Wester crag. Enderlaugh The pyle and the town. Broughton. Chester
felles. Crawned. Dudistone. Stanhouse. The Fycket, Beuerton. Tranent Shenstoue.
Markle. Tarpren. Kyrlande hill. Katherwike, Belton. East Barnes. Howlande.
Buterden. Quicwod. Blacburne. Raunton. Byldy and the tower.
And many other towns and villages burnt by the fleet upon the sea side, A
rode in to scotland
with a great nombre of pyles and vilages which I can not name nor rehearse,
which he destroyed and left desolate, Kyncorne S. Myners, the queen's Fery, part
of Peting ways: and other diverse things done by the Earl of Herford
lyuetenant to the kings majesty.

At Lythe in Scotland were made five and forty knights.

Also this year, the kings majesty prepared an army into france and thither
he went his own person, Buleine and mutrel beseged.
beseiged the strong town of Bullen in Pycardy, as here after ye shall here.

The.xiiii. day of July the kings majesty departed from dover to Callys.

The.xv. day of July, his majesty removed to Morgysen, and there camped one
night.

The, xxvi. day of July, his majesty removed to hie Bulleine, and there camped
on the Northest part of the town.

The.xxvii. day of Iulye my Lord of Suffolk laid syege unto high Bulleyn,
and there camped on the East part of ye town.

The.xxviii. day of Iulye, the watch tower otherwise called, the Old man was
won.

The.xxix. day of Iulye, Base-Bullen was won.

The.xi. day of September was made a great Larum, and the castle was so
shaken with gunpoudre, that the stones which wayed xxx. pound wayght, did
fly twenty score of, the which not little grieved the inhabitours to their
daily pains, and torments.

The.xiii. day of Septembre the town was victoryouslye conquered by the
most dread sovereign Lord king Henry the eight, king of England France
and Ireland, defender of the faith, and in earth supreme head of ye church of
England and Irelande, Bolleyne conquered.
which after the entreaty and humble peticion made of the French men, gave them
license to take bag and bagage with them and so depart.

The.xiiii. day of Septembre, at iii. of the cloak at after none, the town
gate was opened, and the people began to come out, and they held on
until.vii. of the clock at night. And there were in number of men women and
children.iiii. M. and of them.xv.C. able men of war, The kings beniuolence.
and they had with them as much as they could carry both me^, women, and
children, that was able to bear any thing, and their horses and kyne were
loded with as much stuff as they could bear away. And they had.lxxv, wagens
laded with them, what laud and praise ought they to give unto God, what
worthy salutacions ought they to render to such a merciful and valiaunte
Prince. O how ought they to pray daily for the prosperous reign of this
victorious and puyssaunt Prince which showed them such mercy and favor, with
safegarde of their life's.

The.xv. day of September the kings majesty entered into high Bullen with the
nobility of his realm, and trumpettes blowinge, The king entered bulle^ like a
conqueroure.
that it reioysed all the whole host to hear, and would have comforted all
true English men's hearts to have hard, and seen the victory and conquest that
was had by our most dread soueraygne over the maiden town, for the which
honor, praise and glory be given to almighty God, grace and victory from
god the father, unto the King for ever. Amen.

Anno domi. M.ccccc.xliiii. an. xxxvi. Henrici octaui. William Laxton mayre,
John wylford, Andrew Iud sheriffs.

The first day of Octobre, the kings grace departed from Bullen toward Dover.
And at his going he dubbed four knights at the waters side.

A brag of the french mean.
The.viii. day of Octobre, the Dolphin came with a great power out of high
France and camped at Morgysen and sent his trompet with.ii.C. horsemen and men
of arms toward Bulle^, and they marched on the Northeaste side where the
kings grace camped, and the trumpetter came to Bullen gate, and blewe his
trumpet to come to my Lord Deputy, and tarried at the gate from.ix. of the
clock before noone, till.ii. of the clock at afternoon, and then he came
into Bullen to my Lord deputye and said the Dolphyn his master had sent to
somon the town. And my Lord deputy and the Counsel gave answer to the
Dolphin of defiaunce, and then the trumpet and the bushment of horsemen marched
back toward Morgysen.

Shortly after, beside diverse and many sharp skimishes, A skirmish at
Bolleyne.
made by the Frenchemen at Bullen as well by the Dolphyn with a great power
which in the night season, stale upon Base Bullein, taking there a great
sort of sick persons, and women in their beds whom without mercy they
slew. Howbe it so manfully the Englysh men, which escaped out of Base
Bullein, behaved them selfs, getting weapons out of the high town, that
they bet the Frenchemen again out of the Base town and after with help of
the high town, they slew a great number of them, and so again possessed
quietly, the said Base town. And the.x. day of Octobre the Dolphin sent his
trumpetter to the Lord deputy of Bullein to know what capitaines, men of
Arms, and other of his men the English men had taken. The Lord Deputye made
answer and said he had but one. Then the Dolphins trumpeter said, that they
lacked of their captains men of arms and other of their footmen to the
nombre of vii.C. and mo. And the Lord deputy delivered the french captain
and the Dolphin delivered ours.

The.xi. day of Octobre came agreat navy of French shyps right before Bullein,
and they remained in sighe two days, and then sailed forth between Bullein and
Calis, to hear of their master ye Dolphin

This year was taken by the kings ships of the West country and of the
English costs, the nombre of.ccc. French ships and more.

The.xxvi. day of January in the year of.xlv. there camped on ye Weste side of
Bullen beyond the haue^ an army of frenchmen to the nombre of.xviii. M. and
lay there the space of.x. days. And the.vi. day of February they were all put
to flight by the Earl of Harford and the lord Admyral, then being lord Deputy
of Bullen with a small company of men, and without any bludsheding on ye English
side, but diverse of them were slain. And they left al their ordinance with
bag and baggage behind them, after which victory Sir Thomas Poyninges was made
Lord.

This year in July about the xx. day ye frenchmen with a great Navy of
ships enuaded the I Will of Wyghte, The frenchmen enuaded the i will of wight.
where as they were driven back and a great nombre slain.

This yerae in Septembre the Church of Saint Gyles without Cripilgate was
brent.

Anno domini. M.ccccc.xlv. an. xxxvii. Henrici octa. Sir Martyn Bows goldsmith
mayre, George Barnes, Raufe Aleine shiriffes.

This year in February should a woman been burnt in Smithfmithfelde for
clyppyng of Gold, but the kings pardonne came she being at the stake ready
to be burnt.

This year the Cytizyns of london leuaied in the cyty, ii. fyfienes for the
conueyaunce of more water to the city.

This year the.xiii. day of June being whytsonday, and the year of our lord
God. M.ccccc.xlvi. a continual peace was proclaimed in the city of London
between our most renomed Henry the eyghte on the one party. A peace between
england and France,
And the right high and mighty prince the French king on the other party,
with a solemn procession at the time of proclamacion gyuynge laud and praise
to god the auctour of peace, and at night thorowoute the City great fyers
with much joy and gladness.

This year the.xxvii. day of June docter Crome preached at Poules cross,
Docter crome recanted.
and there openly confessed that he had been seduced with noughtye Books,
contrary to the true doctrine of Christ, and in this doing he said he was not
compelled so for to say, neither for fear nor by any other means, but only
of his free and voluntary will.

This year was brent in smithfelde, Anne Ascue, and three more for herisy, and
Doctor shaxston recanted the same time.

In the same year the.xxi. day of Auguste, The conclusion of the year.
came into england to do his duty from the french king Mounscure Deneball
high admiral of France with great tryumphe, and brought with him the Sacre
of Deep and.xii. Galeis well besene in diverse points and so landed at the
Tower, where as he was honorablye received with many nobles and peers of the
realm and with the greatest shotinge of Gunnes that ever was heard or seen,
and so brought to the Bishop of Londons place and lay there ii. nyghtes,
that is to say the xxi. and.xxii. day of August i^ the year of our lord.
M.ccccc.xlvi.

On the monday the.xxiii. day of August, he did ryd to Hampton court, where as
the kings grace lay, and before he came to Hampton Court, my Lord the prince
received him with the noblest company that ever was seen, to the nombre
of.cccc.xl. velvet cotes. And my lord Princes leuery were with sleues of cloth
of gold, and half the cote imbrodred also with gold, there were to the
nombre of.viii.c. horses ryally apparelled, which brought him to the Manner of
Hampton Court to the prudent and redubted Prince his father, and Queen
Katheryne, and on the morrow, the kings grace and the said Mounsure Deueball
brake the hooste between them, for a general peace, and so continued in
banketynge and pleasure triumphantlye with the noblest Maskes and mumminges
that ever was seen, with diverse and sundry chaunges in so much that the torche
berers were clothed in cloth of gold, this continued.vi. days and so returned
into France with many sundry gifts given him and his retynew.

An. do. m.ccccc.xlvi. an. xxxviii herici. viii Henri Hobelthorne marchaunte
Tayloure mayre, Richard Gerues, Thomas Curtes shiriffes

This year the.xix. day of January, was the Earl of Surrey beheaded at the
Tower hyl for treason

This year the.xxviii. day of January departed this present life the noble
king Henry the eight of that name, whose soul God take to his infinite mercy
under whom we his people of England lived long a joyful and a peasable life,
The death of king henry the.viii
reduced from the error of Idolatry to the true knowledge of God and his
word. And was full royally buried at Wynfore, the.xvi. day of February the
same year.

Edward the.vi.
OVre most gracious Soueraygne lord king Edward the.vi. began his raygne
the.xxxi. day of January in the year of our lord.m.ccccc.xlvi, and was
proclaimed king in all his late fathers realms and lands. And the.xix. day of
February, he rode solemply with his uncle sir Edward Seymer, Lord governor,
and Protector, Duke of Somerset, with the nobility of the realm from the
tower to Westmi^ster through the city of London, which was richelye hanged
with couerlites, and carpettes of tapistry and ares, Chepesyde being richely
hanged with clothe of silver and gold. Every condite running wine, Pagentes of
children being rychely aparelled to receive him at every place with Oracons of
his praise. And on the Southe side of saint Poules churcheyard an Argosie came
from the battilment of the same church, upon a cable being made fast to an
anchor at the deanes door, lying upon his breast aidinge him self nether with
hand nor foot, and after, ascended the mid of the same cable, tu^bled and
played many pretye toys, where at the king with other of the peers and nobles
of this Realm laughed hertelye.

The tornacion of king Edward
The.xx. day of February his most noble grace at Westminster was proclaimed,
anointed, and crowned king. Thomas lord Archbishop of Cantorbury and
Meterapolytane of this Realm, minystring the divine Sacraments, and
ceremonies to do ryallye al thing belonginge, and so continued in banketynge
triumphantlye with the noblest maskes and mummeries that ever was seen, with
diverse and sundry chaunges of apparel.

The, xxi. and.xxii. day, sir Thomas Seymer lord Admyrall accompanied with
Deuelox, sir Anthony kingstone, sir Peter Carewe, Knowles, and Shelley, were
Chalengers against al persons defendaunte at the Tylte, bariers and turney,
wherein they behaved themselves like valiaunte men of arms. And this was
finished on Sunday next folowinge, being the.xxvii. day having at even
bankettes, at the which were such diverse and sundry plays with maskes, that
no time tongue, nor pen can express.

In this month of March, sir Andrewe Dudley vise Admiral with the Paunce and
the Heart, being but synglye manned, had a great conflycte with three Scottish
ships being double manned, and tri^med with ordinance in the narowe Seas,
and thanks be to God obtained ye victory, and took many prisoners, and
brought the ships into Orwell haven, where they did remain. For the which
victory, let us praise God, praying God for the prosperous raygne and long
life of our Lord and king Edward the sixte, to ye victory over his enemies,
and for the welthe of this Realm.

Anno domi. M.ccccc.xlvii. an. primo Edwardi sexti. Sir John Gresha^ knighte
Mayre, Thomas White Robert Curtes shiriffes.

In this year was ordained the holy Communion to be received in both kinds.

This year the last day of July Stephen Gardener bishop of Winchester was
commanded to the tower of london.

It Is year was a great mortality in London, then was a commandment given to
al Curates that they should burye none a fore six of the cloak in the morning
nor after six at night, and that the bell should ringe three quarters of an
hour or more.

Anno domi. m.ccccc.xlviii. an. second Edwardi sexti. Henri Ampcotes
fishmonger Mayre, wylliam Lock, John Aylufe sheriffs.

In this year was images put down in all churches through England. Idolatry
forbedden


This year the marriage of priests was granted lawfullye by the laws of God.
Laufull for prestes to be married.


This year doctoure Bonnar was deposed of his bishoppricke ye first day of
October.

In this moves the Duke of Somerfet was committed to the Tower.

Anno domini.M.ccccc.xlix. an. tercio Edwardi sexti. Sir Roland Hyl knight
Mayre. Robert york, John Turk shiriffes.

A co^mocion in Deuenshyre.
This year was a rysynge in Deuenshire and Cornewale about the mids of the
year: which was damage to the^ and other: wherefore their chief captanies were
taken and brought to the tower of London: and the.xxvi. day of January after
was drawn, hanged, and quartered, and three more at tydurne.

Also this year about the same time was an Insurreccio^ in Norffolke and
Suffolk. A co^mocion in norfolk.
And their chief Captain captain Kyte and his brothere were shortly after
taken, and Judged to be hanged at Norwiche in chains.

Also in the year of our Lord God. M.ccccc.l. the.xix. day of January
captain Ga^balde: the captain of ye spainieardes, and an other captain was
slain without New gate in an euenyng by a Fleming: which was taken and hanged
on the even of S. Paul, and iii. more with him in Smithfelde.

The.vi. day of February came the Duke of Somerset out of the Tower.

In the same month went out of England certain Lords of the counsel to
Bulleyne, A peace concluded.
where certain of the French counsel met with them, and after long
consultacion had, and diverse metynges between them, there was a general peace
concluded, which peace was proclaimed the.xxix. day of march folowinge.

Also about the.xxv. day of April folowinge, Bulle^ given to the frenchmen.
the town of Bulleine with the Fortresses thereunto belonging, was delivered by
the english men, into the hands of the French men.

In this year the second day of May was a woman burnt in Smithfeld callled
Ioane Kenll otherwise called Ioane Bocher for the horrible herisie, one brent
for heresy
that Christ took no flesh of the vyrgyn Mary, and at her death did preach
Master John Scory a preacher of Cantor bury, shewinge unto the people her
abhomynable opinions, warnyng al me^ to beware of the^ and such like.

About this time there were certain light persons pretended a new commocion
in Kente, but they were apprehended, and on the.xiii. day of May was for that
trespass hanged at Asheford Richard Lio^, and Goddard Goram and the next day
following was hanged at Cantorbury Richard Irelande for the same trespace.

Anno dom, M.ccccc.l. anno, iiii Edwardi sexti. Sir Andrew Iudski^ner knight
mayre, Austen hind, John Lion shyryffes.

The.xxv. day of May was an erthquake in Sothery and in part of Medelsex. An
earthquake.


This year on. S. Valentines day at feuersham in Kent was comytted a
shameful mourther for one Arden a gentilman was by the consent of his wife
mourthered wherefore she was brent at Canterbury, A sha^full murder.
and there was one hanged in Chains for that mourther, and at Feuersham
was.ii. hanged in chains, and a woman burnt, and in smithfelde was hanged one
Mosby and his sister for the same murder also.

This year was Steven Gardener Bishop of Wynchester called to justice at
La^beth before the kings co^myssioners and the.xvi. Steven gardener deposed.
day of February for his manifest contempt and continual disobedience or
rather rebellion against the kings majesty, whereof he was justly depreued of
his estate of the same.

This year was a duche man brent in Smithfelde for holding of the opinion of
the Auryans.

Anno dom. M.ccccc.li. anno. v Edwardi sexti. Richard Dobbes skinner mayre,
John La^bert John Coper shiryffes.

This year the second day of November the old queen of Scotts came to
london which was honorably received and lodged in the Bishops palace.

A hie flod
In this year the.xiii. day of January the sea brake in at sandwitche
insomuche that it did over flow all the Marshes thereaboute and drowned much
cattle to the great loss both of the town and country.

Finis.
Here I should have put in the notable ways from certain cities to London,
but some of them be not marked truly wherefore I left them out till such time
as I have more knowledge in these ways

Imprinted at Cantorbury in saint Paul's paryshe by John Mychell.


