HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT depiction of the English royal
blazon, crowned and gartered, and flanked by the English lion and Scottish
unicorn depiction of two fisherman in a boat hauling in a netful of fish
depiction of a giant sea fish swimming in the sea with two battleships engaged
in battle in the background HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE depiction of the English
royal blazon, crowned and gartered,
A brief note of the benefits that grow to this Realm, by the observation of
Fish-daies: with a reason and cause wherefore the Law in that behalf made, is
ordained.
Very necessary to be placed in the Houses of all men, especially common
Victualers.
WHere heretofore by the Queens most excellent Majesty, of her clemency and
care conceived, for diverse private benefits that might grow to her loving
Subjects, specially for the better maintenance of the Navy of this Land, has
with the assent of the whole state of her Realm, caused to be made and
published sundry statute Laws and Proclamations, for the expense of Fish and
observation of Fish-dayes, with great penalties to be laid on the offenders:
That by the certain observation thereof, Fishermen (the chiefest Nource for
Mariners) might the more be increased and maintained. The common sort of
people, contemning this observation, to avoid the ceremony in times past
therein used, and not certainly knowing the benefits thereby growing to the
Realm, nor remembering the penalties by the same Laws appointed, do not only
fall into the danger of the said Laws, but by the same has caused a great
decay to Fishing, whereby grows many other great detriments to the
commonwealth of this Realm. For the better instruction therefore of such
persons, as for the benefit of their Country will be persuaded: In this brief
Table is set down the punishment appointed for the Offenders, the
discommodities that happen to the Realm by the said contempt, and the great
benefit that might grow to the people by observation hereof, with the opinion
that ought to be conceived in the eating of Fish, at the days and times
prescribed, being briefly set down as hereafter follows.

THE BRANCHES OF THE STATVTE.
IN the fifth year of her Majesty's most gracious reign, it was ordained that
it should not be Lawful for any person within this Realm, to eat any Flesh,
upon any days then usually observed as Fish-dayes, upon pain to forfeit three
pounds for every time he offended, or suffer three mon^hs of imp^isonment
without bail or mainprize.

And every person within whose house any such offense shall be done, being
privy and knowing thereof, and not effectually punishing or disclosing the
same to some public officer having authority to punish the same, to forfeit
for every such offense forty shillings, the said penalty being great, and
many of poor estate favored by reason thereof, but the offense thought
necessary not to be left unpunished, the Queens Majesty of her great
clemency in the Parliment holden the 34. year of her most gracious reign,
has caused the forfiture for the eater to be but twenty shillings, and for him
in whose house it is eaten, but 13. shillings 4. pence, which being executed,
will prove very damedgeable to the offenders.

In the twenty seventh year of her highness reign, it was further ordained
and remains still in force, that no Inholder, Vintner, Alehouse-keeper,
Common-victualler, Common-cooke, or Common Table-keeper shall utter or put to
sale, upon any Friday, Saturday, or other days appointed to be Fish-dayes, or
any day in time of Lent, any kind of flesh victual, upon pain of forfiture of
5. pounds, and shall suffer ten days imprisonment without bail, maineprize,
or remove, for every time so offending.

THE CAUSE AND REASON.
FIrst for as much as our Country is (for the most part) compassed with the
Seas, and the greatest force for defense thereof, under God, is the Kings
Majesty's Navy of ships: for maintenance and in increase of the said Navy,
this Law for abstinence has been most carefully ordained, that by the certain
expense of Fish, fishing and Fishermen might be the more increased and the
better maintained, for that the said trade is the cheifest Nource, not only for
the bringing up of youth for shipping but great numbers of ships therein are
used, furnished with sufficient Mariners, men at all times in a readiness for
his Majesty's service in those affairs.

The second cause, for that many Towns and Villages upon the Sea coasts, are of
late years wonderfully decayed, and some wonderfully depopulated, which in
times past were replenished, not only with Fishermen, and great store of
shipping, but sundry other Artificers: as Shipwrightes, Smithes, Ropemakers,
Net-makers, Saile-makers, Weauers, Dressers, Cariers, and Vtterers of Fish,
maintained chiefly by fishing. That they hereby again might be tended, the
want whereof, is, and has been cause of great numbers of idle persons, with
whom the Realm is greatly damaged: and this happens by reason of the
uncertainty of the sale of Fish, and the contemp^ which in eating of fish is
conceived.

Furthermore, it is considered, that the trade for grasing of cattle, through
the unlawful expense of flesh, is so much increased, that many Farm houses
and Villages, wherein were maintained great numbers of people, and by them the
markets plentifully served with Corn and other victuals, is now utterly
decayed and put down for the feeding or grassng of Beefs, and Muttons only, by
means whereof, the people which in such places were maintained, are not only
made vagrant; but also Calves, Hogs, Pigs, Gees^, Hens, Chickins Capons,
Eggs, Butter, Cheese, and such like things, does become exceeding scarce and
dear by want of their increase in those places, so that the markets are (...)
nor cannot be served as in times past it has been.

Many other things for confirmation hereof might be spoken, as the great number
of ships decayed, which has been maintained by fishing, the wealth and
commodity that fishing brings to this Realm, the cause that certain days
and times for expense of fish, must of necessity be observed, grown by reason
the provision of flesh for the peoples diet, must be certainly provided,
whereof the gentle Reader shall be more at large instructed in a little book
published to that effect, with sundry other arguments which for brevity is
omitted, in hope the consideration hereof, will be sufficient to persuade such
persons as esteem more the benefit of their Country, then their own lust or
appetite, setting before their eyes the fear of God in obedience to the
Princes commandment, especially in such things as concern the benefit of a
Commonwealth, considering S. Paul says, There is no power but of God: The
powers (says he) that be, are ordained of God: and those that resist these
powers, resist the ordinance of God.

It is further to be considered, that there is no conscience to be made in the
kind or nature of the meat being flesh or fish, as in times past a feigned
ceremony therein was used; neither is the meat concerning it self unlawful
to be eaten at any time, but the use thereof is unlawful, being forbidden to
eat by the Prince, having power and authority from God, and done by the
consent of the whole estate for a Commonwealth, wherein obedience ought to be
showed, not for fear of punishment only (as S. Paul says) but for conscience
sake, not esteeming the meat nor the day, but obedience to the Law and
benefit to our Country and poor brethren: remembering that the Magistrate
bears not the sword for naught, but to take vengeance upon them that do
evil. For S. Paul says further: He that will live without fear of punishment
must do well, and so shall he have praise for the same.

And although fear of punishment will not reform such persons, as by
affection conceived has been addicted from the expense of Fish and the
observation of Fish-dayes: yet the foresaid things considered, let obedience to
their Prince and benefit to their Country, persuade them to bridle their
affectioned lust for a small time, so shall they both see and feel estimate of
the Beefes that were killed and uttered in the City of London and Suburds for
a year, and what number of the might be spared in the said year, by one days
abstinence in a week, by which also may be coniectured, what may be spared in
the whole Realm.

An estimate what Beefes might be spared in a year, in the City of London by
one days abstinence in a week.
First the year are fifty two weeks, for every week seven days, in all
365. The Lent with Friday and Satuday in every week, and the other accustomed
Fish days, being collected together, extend to 153. So in the year is 153
fish days, and 211. flesh-dayes, that is 58. flesh-dayes more then fish-dayes.

So the year being 52 weeks, abate 7. for the time of Lent, wherein no Beefes
ought to be killed, and there remains but 45. weeks. Then let us say there
be three score Butchers, that be Freemen within the City, and every Butcher
to kill weekly the one with the other, five Beefes apeece. The same amounts
to 13500. Beefes.

The Forriners in the Suburbs, and such as come out of the Country to serve
the Markets in the City, as it is credibly affirmed, kill and utter in the
City weekly, four times so many as the Freemen, which amounts to 54000.
So joining the Beefes uttered by the Freemen and Fariners together, they extend
to 67500.

If we will now know what number of Beefes might be spared in a year, by one
days abstinence in a week: let us say in the week are five days
accustomably served with flesh, (for that Friday and Saturday by the Law are
days of abstinence) whereof one being taken away, the rest but four: in like
case, divide the said 67500. into five parts And the fifth part spared, by the
fifth days abstinence, is 13500.

By this is not meant that any more fish-dayes should be ordained then already
are, but that Friday and Saturday might be in better sort observed, for that
Flesh victuals on those days, in most places, are as commonly spent as on
flesh-dayes, and therefore may well be accounted for the expense of one
flesh-day's the due observation whereof, would spare the number of Beefes
aforesaid or more, besides those things sold by the Poulters, and other small
Cattle, as Calves, Sheep, and Lambs innumerable killed by the Butcher.

Seen and allowed by the most honorable privy Council, in the year of our
Lord God, 1593. The 20. of March.
AT LONDON. Printed for Henry Gosson, and Francis Coules.


