

The ART of Contentment.

By the Author of THE WHOLE DUTY OF MAN, etc.

It is but lost labor, that ye hasten to rise up early, and so late take rest,
and eat the bread of carefulness: for so he gives his beloved sleep. Psalm.
127. 3.

At the THEATER in OXFORD. M. DC. LXXV.

Imprimatur,

RAD. BATHVRST. Vice-Cancell. Oxon.
Feb. 24. 1675.
THE PREFACE.
THE desire of happiness is so coessential with our nature, so interwoven and
incorporate with it; that nothing but the dissolution of the whole frame can
extinguish it. This runs through the whole race of mankind, and amidst the infinite
variety of other inclinations, preserves its self entire. The most various
contradictory tempers do yet conspire in this, and men of the most unequal
fortunes, are yet equal in their wishes of being happy.

But this concurrence as to the end is not more universal then the disagreement
about the way. Every man would have happiness, but wherein that consists, or
how it is to be attained, has bin very diversely opin'd. Indeed the ultimate
supreme happiness as it is originally inherent in God, so it is wrapped up in
those clouds and darkness, which, as the Psalmist says, are round about him
Psalm. 18. 11. And we can see nothing of it, but in those gleams and rays he is
pleased to dart out upon us; so that all our estimates as to our final
felicity, must be mesur'd by those revelations he has made of it.

But one would think our temporal happiness were as much a mystery as our
eternal, to see what variety of blind pursuits are made after it. One man
thinks it is seated on the top pinnacle of honor, and climbs till perhaps he
falls headlong. Another thinks it a mineral, that must be dig'd out of the
earth, and toils to lade himself with thick clay, Hab. 2. 6. and at last finds
a grave, where he sought his tresure. A third supposes it consists in the
variety of pleasures, and wearies himself in that pursuit, which only cloies,
and disappoints. Yet every one of these can read you lectures of the gross
mistake and folly of the other, whilst himself is equally deluded.

Thus do men chase an imaginary good, till they meet with real evils; herein
exposing themselves to the same cheat Laban put upon Jacob, they serve for
Rachel, and are rewarded with Leah, court fancied beauty, and marry loathed
deformity. Such delusive felicities as these are the largesses of the Prince of
the Air, who once attemted to have enveigled even Christ himself, Mat. 4.

But Gods proposals are more sincere: he knows how sandy, how false a
foundation all these external things must make, and therefore warns us not to
build so much as our present satisfaction upon them, but shows us a more
certain, a more compendious way to acquire what we gasp after, by telling us
that as Godliness in respect of the next, so contentment for this world is
great gain 1 Timothy 6. 6. It is indeed the unum necessarium, the one point in
which all the lines of wordly happiness are concentred, and to complete its
excellence, it is to be had at home: nay indeed only there. We need not ramble in
wild pursuits after it, we may form it within our own breasts: no man wants
materials for it, that knows but how to put them together.

And the directing to that skill is the only design of the ensuing Tract, which
coming upon so kind an errand, may at least hope for an unprejudiced reception.
Contentment is a thing we all profess to aspire to, and therefore it cannot be
thought an unfriendly office to endeavor to conduct men to it. How far the
ensuing considerations may tend to that end, I must leave to the judgment, and
experience of the Reader, only desiring him that he will weigh them with that
seriousness which befits a thing wherein both his happiness and duty are
concerned: for in this (as in many other instances) God has so twisted them
together, that we cannot be innocently miserable. The present infelicities,
have an appendant guilt, which will consign us to a more irreversible state of
dissatisfaction hereafter.

THE ART OF CONTENTMENT.
SECT. I.
Of the necessary Connection between Happiness and Contentment.
1. GOD who is essentially happy in himself, can receive no accession to his
felicity by the poor contributions of men. He cannot therefore be supposed to
have made them upon intuition of increasing, but communicating his happiness.
And this his original design is very visible in all the parts of his Economy
toward them. When lapsed man had counterplotted against himself, defeated the
purpose of the Divine goodness, and plunged his whole nature into the opposite
state of endless misery; he yet reinforced his first design, and an expedient
as full of wonder as mercy, the death of his Son, recovers him to his former
capacity of bliss. And that it might not only be a bare capacity, he has added
all other methods proper to work upon a rational creature. He has showed him
his danger, set before him in perspective that eternal Tophet, which he is
advised to shun. On the other side he has no less lively described the heavenly
Jerusalem, the Celestial country to which he is to aspire: nay farther has
levelled his road to it, leads him not as he did the Israelites through the
wilderness, through intricate mazes to puzle his understanding; through a land of
drought wherein were fiery Serpents and Scorpions, Deuteronomy. 8. 15. to discourage
and affright him: but has in the Gospel chalkt out a plain, a safe, nay a
pleasant path; as much superior both in the ease of the way, and in the end to
which it leads, as heaven is to Canaan.

2. BY doing this he has not only secured our grand and ultimate happiness, but
provided for our intermedial also. Those Christian duties which are to carry us
to heaven, are our refreshments, our viaticum in our journey: his yoke is not to
gall and fret us, but an engine by which we may with ease (and almost
insensibly) draw all the clogs and encumbrances of humane life. For whether we
take Christianity in its whole complex, or in its several and distinct
branches, it is certainly the most excellent, the most compendious art of happy
living: its very tasks are rewards, and its precepts are nothing but a divine
sort of Alchymy, to sublime at once our nature and our plesures.

3. THIS may be evidenced in every particular of the Evangelical law: but
having formerly made some attemt toward it in another Decay of Christian Piety.
tract, I shall not here reassume the whole subject. I shall only single out
one particular precept, wherein happiness is not (as in the others) only
implied, and must be caught at the rebound by consequence and event; but is
literally expressed, and is the very matter of the duty; I mean the precept of
acquiescence and Contentment. Happiness and this true genuine Contentment,
being terms so convertible, that to bid us be content, is but another phrase
for bidding us be happy.

4. TEMPORAL enjoiments, such as are pleasure, wealth, honor, and the rest, tho
they make specious pretenses to be the mesure of human happiness, are all of
them justly discarded by the Philosopher in his Ethics, upon this one
consideration, that coming from abroad they may be withheld or taken from us:
and our tenure being precarious, we even for that reason are unhappy in our
most desirable possessions, because we still are liable to be so. And therefore
he concludes, that felicity must be placed in the mind and soul, which stands
without the reach of fortune; and in the practice of virtue, which in its own
nature, and not in its contingent use is truly good, and therefore certainly
renders the possessors such.

5. BUT this practice being diffused through the whole extent of Moral duty,
Epictetus thought he had deserved well of human nature, when he drew it up in
two short words, to sustain and abstain: that is to bear with constancy adverse
events, and with moderation enjoy those that are prosperous. Which complexure
of Philosophy is yet more fully, as well as more compendiously expressed in the
single notion of Contentment: which involves the patient bearing of all
misadventures, and generous contemt of sensual illectives. This state of mind
the Greeks express by calling it (...) or self-sufficiency, which, we know
properly speaking, is one of the incommunicable attributes of the divine
nature: and the Stoics expressly pretend, that by it mortal men are enabled to
rival their Gods; in Seneca's phrase, to make a controversy with Jupiter
himself. But abating the insolent blasphemy of an independent felicity,
Christianity acknowledges a material truth in the assertion: and St. Paul
declares of himself, that having learnt how to want and how to abound, and in
whatever state he happens to be in, therewith to be content: he is able to do
all things through Christ that strengthens him, Phil. 4. 11. 12, 13. and having
nothing, to possess all things. 2 Cor. 6. 10.

6. WHICH great event comes about, not only because all good things are
eminently in the divine nature, and he who by Virtue and Religion possesses
Him, thereby by, in a full equivalence has every thing; but also upon human
mesures, and the principles of Philosophy: the compendious address to wealth,
as Plato rightly observed, being not to increase possessions, but lessen
desires. And if so, twill follow that the contented man must be abundantly
provided for, being so entirely satisfied with what he has, as to have no
desires at all. Indeed it is truly said of covetous men, and is equally verified
of all who have any desire to gratify, that they want no less what they have,
then what they have not: but the reverse of that Paradox is really made good by
Contentment, which bestows on men the enjoiment of whatever they have, and
also whatever they have not; and by teaching to want nothing, abundantly
secures not to want happiness.

7. ON the other side this one grace being absent, it is not in the power of
any success or affluence to make life a tolerable thing. Let all the materials
of earthly happiness be amast together and flung upon one man, they will
without contentment be but like the fatal prize of Tarpeia's treason, who was
pressed to death with the weight of her booty. He that has the elements of
felicity, and yet cannot form them into a satisfaction, is more desperately
miserable then he that wants them: for he who wants them has yet something to
hope for, and thinks if he had them he might be happy; but he who
insignificantly possesses them, has no reserve, has not so much as the Flattery
of an expectation: for he has nothing left to desire, and yet can be as little
said to enjoy.

8. HE therefore that would have the extract, the quintessence of happiness,
must seek it in Content. All outward accessions are but the dross and earthy
part: this alone is the spirit, which when it is once separated, depends not upon
the fate of the other; but preserves its vigor when that is destroi'd. St. Paul
whom I before mentioned, is a ready instance of it, who professes to be content
in what ever state. Contentment being not so inseparately linked to external
things, but that they may subsist apart. That those are often without it we are
too sure, and that it may be without them is as certainly true; tho by our own
default we have not so many examples of it. A heart that rightly computes the
difference between temporals and eternals, may resolve with the Prophet, Although
the figtree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labor
of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flocks shall
be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herds in the stall; yet I will
rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. Hab. 3. 17. 18. He
that has God need not much deplore the want of any thing else: nor can he that
considers the plenty and glory of his future state, be much dejected with the
want or the abjectness of his present.

9. YET so indulgent is God to our infirmities, that knowing how unapt our
impatient natures are to walk only by faith, and not at all by sight 2 Cor. 5.
7. he is pleased to give us fair antepasts of satisfaction here, dispenses his
temporal blessings tho not equally, yet so universally, that he that has least,
has enough to oblige not only his acquiescence, but his thankfulness. Tho every
man has not all he wishes, yet he has that which is more valuable then that he
complains to want; nay which he himself could worse spare were it put to his
option.

10. AND now from such a disposure of things who would not expect that mankind
should be the cheerfullest part of the creation: that the sun should not more
rejoice to run his course Psalm. 19. 5. then man should to finish his: that a
journey which has so blessed an end, and such good accommodation by the way,
should be past with all imaginable alacrity, and that we should live here
practicers and learners, of that state of unmixed interminable joies to which
we aspire. But alas if we look upon the universality of men, we shall find it
nothing so; but while all other creatures gladsomly follow the order of their
creation, take pleasure in those things God has assigned for them, we with a
fullen perverseness quarrel at what we should enjoy, and in every thing make it
our business, not to fit it for our use, but to find out some conceled quality
which may render it unfit. We look insidiously upon our blessings, like men
that designed only to pick a quarrel, and start a pretense for mutining. From
hence it is that man who was designed the Lord of the world, to whose
satisfaction all inferior beings were to contribute, is now the unhappiest of
the creatures: nay as if the whole order of the universe were inverted, he
becomes slave to his own vassals, courts all these little sublunary things with
such passion, that if they prove coy and fly his embraces, he is mad and
desperate: if they fling themselves into his Arms, he is then glutted and
satiated; like Amnon he hates more then he loved 2 Samuel 13. 15. and is sicker
of his possession, then he was of his desire.

10. AND thus will it ever be till we can keep our desires more at home, and
not suffer them to ramble after things without our reach. That honest Roman who
from his extraordinary industry upon his little spot of ground received such an
increase as brought him under suspicion of witchcraft, is a good example for
us. God has placed none of us in so barren a soil, in so forlorn a state, but
there is something in it which may afford us comfort; let us husband that to the
utmost, and it is scarce imaginable what improvements, even he that appears the
most miserable may make of his condition. But if in a sullen humor we will not
cultivate our own field, because we have perhaps more mind to our neighbors, we
may thank our selves if we starve. The despising of what God has already given
us, is sure but a cold invitation to farther bounty. Men are indeed forced
sometimes to reward the mutinous: but God is not to be so attaqued, nor is it
that sort of violence which can ever force heaven. The Heathen could say that
Jupiter sent his plagues among the poorer sort of men, because they were
always repining: and indeed there is so much of truth in the observation, that
our impatience and discontent at our present condition, is the greatest
provocation to God to make it worse.

11. IT must therefore be resolved to be very contrary to our interest, and
surely it is no less too our duty. It is so if we do but own our selves men, for
in that is impli'd a subordination and submission to that power which made us
so; and to dispute his managery of the world, to make other distributions of it
then he has don, is to renounce our subjection, and set up for dominion. But
this is yet more intolerable as we are Christians, it being a special part of
the Evangelical discipline, cherefully to conform to any condition: to know how
to be abased, and how to abound, to be full and to be hungry, Phil. 4. 12. to
be careful for nothing ver. 6. Nay so little does Christ give countenance to
our peevish discontents, our wanton outcries when we are not hurt, that he
requires more then a contentment, an exultancy and transport of joy even under
the heaviest pressures, under reproaches and persecutions. Rejoice ye in that
day, and leap for joy Lu. 6. 23. And sure nothing can be more contrary to this,
then to be always whining and complaining, crying in the Prophets phrase, my
leanness my leanness, woe is me. Isa. 24. 16. When perhaps Moses's simile does
better fit our state, Iesurun waxed fat and kicked. Deuteronomy. 32. 15.

12. AND as this querulous humor is against our interest and duty, so is it
visibly against our ease. It Is a sickness of the mind, a perpetual gnawing and
craving of the appetite without any possibility of satisfaction: and indeed is
the same in the heart which the Caninus appetitus is in the stomach, to which
we may aptly enough apply that description we find in the Prophet, he shall
snatch on the right hand and be hungry, and he shall eat on the left and not be
satisfied, Esaias. 9. 20. Where this sharp, this fretting humor abounds, nothing
converts into nurishment: every new accession does but excite some new desire;
and as it is observed of a trencher-fed dog, that he tastes not one bit for the
greedy expectation of the next; so a discontented mind is so intent upon his
pursuits, that he has no relish of his acquests. So that what the Prophet
speaks of the Covetous, is equally appliable to all other sorts of
Malcontents: he enlarges his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be
satisfied, Hab. 2. 5. And sure if the desire accomplished be as Solomon says
sweet to the soul, Prove. 13. 19. it must be exceedingly bitter, to be thus
condemned to endless unaccomplishable desires; and yet this is the torture
which every repining uncontented spirit provides for it self.

13. WHAT a madness is it then for men to be so desperately bent against their
interest and duty, as to renounce even their ease too for company? One would
think this age were sensual enough to be at defiance with the least shadow of
uneasiness. It is so I am sure where it ought not, every thing is laborious
when it is in compliance with their duty, a few minutes spent in prayer Oh what a
weariness is it! Mal. 213. If they chance but to miss a meal, they are ready to
cry out, their knees are weak through fasting. Psa. 109. 23. yet they can without
regret, or any self-compassion, macerate and cruciate themselves with anxious
cares and vexations, and as the Apostle speaks 1 Timothy 6. 10. pierce themselves
through with many sorrows. That proposal therefore which was very rashly made by
St. Peter to our Savior, Master pity thy self, Mat. 16. 22. which we render be
it far from thee, would here be an advised motion to the generality of mankind,
who are commonly made unhappy not by any thing without them, but by those
restless impatiencies that are within them.

14. IT may therefore be a seasonable office to endevor the appeasing those
storms, by recalling them to those sober rational considerations, which may
show as well the folly, as uneasiness of this repining unsatisfiable humor. It Is
certain that in true reasoning, we can find nothing whereon to found it, but a
great deal to enforce the contrary. Indeed it is so much against the dictate of
reasonable nature to affect damage, sin, and torment, that were there nothing
else to be said but what I have already mentioned, it might competently
discover the great unreasonableness of this sin.

15. BUT we need not confine our appeal to reason, as it is only a judge of
utility and advantage; but enlarge it to another notion, as it is judge of
equity and right: in which respect also it gives as clear and peremtory a
sentence against all murmuring and impatience. To evince this I shall insist
upon these particulars. 1. that God is debtor to no man, and therefore what
ever he affords to any, it is upon bounty not of right, a benevolence not a
due. 2ly. that this bounty is not straight or narrow, confined to some few
particular persons, and wholly overskipping the rest, but more or less
universally diffused to all. So that he who has the least, cannot justly say
but he has bin liberally dealt with. 3ly that if we compare our blessings with
our allaies, our good things with our evil, we shall find our good far
surmounting. 4ly that we shall find them yet more so, if we compare them with
the good we have don, as on the contrary we shall find our afflictions scarce
discernible if balanced with our sins. 5ly that as God is Rector of the
universe, so it appertains to him to make such allotments, such distributions,
as may best preserve the state of the whole. 6ly that God notwithstanding that
universal care, has also a peculiar aspect on every particular Person, and
disposes to him what he discerns best for him in special. 7ly if we compare our
adversities, with those of other men, we shall always find something that
equals if not exceeds our own. All these are certain irrefragable truths, and
there is none of them single but may, if well pressed upon the mind, charm it
into a calmness and resignation; but when there is such a conspiration of
arguments, it must be a very obstinate perverseness that can resist them: or
should they fail to enforce a full conviction; will yet introduce those
subsidiary proofs which I have to alledg, so advantagiously, as will being put
altogether, amount unto perfect and uncontrollable Evidence.

SECT. II.
Of Gods Absolute Sovereignty.
1. THE first proposition that God is debtor to no man, is too clear and
apparent to require much of illustration: for as he is a free agent and may act
as he pleases, so he is the sole proprietary and can wrongfully detain from
none, because all original right is in himself. This has bin so much
acknowledged by the blindest Heathens, that none of them durst make insolent
addresses to their Gods, challenge any thing of them as of debt, but by
sacrifices and prayers owned their dependence and wants, and implored supplies.
And sure Christianity teaches us not to be more saucy. If those Deities who
owed their very being to their votaries, were yet acknowledged to be the spring
and source of all, we can with no pretense deny it to that supreme power in
whom we live, move, and have our being. Acts. 17. 28. For if it were merely an
act of his choice to give us a being, all his subsequent bounties can have no
other original then his own good pleasure. We could put no obligation upon God
before we were: and when we began to be, we were his creatures, and so by the
most indisputable right owe our selves to him, but can have no antecedent title
on which to clame any thing from him: so that the Apostle might well make the
challenge which he does on Gods behalf, who has given any thing unto him, and
it shall be recompensed to him again? Romans 11. 35.

2. Now ordinary discretion teaches us not to be too bold in our expectations
from one to whom we can plead no right. It has as little of prudence as
modesty, to press impudently upon the bounty of a Patron, and does but give him
temtation (at least pretense) to deny. And if it be thus with men, who possibly
may sometimes have an interest, sometimes a vanity to oblige us; it must be much
more so toward God, who cannot be in want of us, and therefore need not buy
us: our good, as the Psalmist speaks, extends not to him. Psalm. 16. 2. He has a
fundamental right in that little we are, which will stand good tho it should
never be corroborated by greater benefits. With what an humble bashfulness
should we then sue for any thing, who have no argument to invite the least
donation? being already so preingag'd, that we cannot mortgage so much as our
selves in consideration of any new favor: and surely extravagant hopes do very
ill befit people in this condition. We see the modesty of good Mephibosheth,
who tho he was by a slanderous accusation outed of half the estate David had
given him, yet upon a reflection that he derived it all from his good pleasure,
disputed not the sentence, but cherefully resigned the whole to the same
disposure, from which he received it, saying, Yea, let him take all. 2 Samuel 19,
30. A rare example and fit for imitation, as being adapted to the present case,
not only in that one circumstance of his having received all from the King, but
also in that of the attainder of his blood, which he confesses in the former
part of the verse, for all of my fathers house were but dead men before my
Lord. And alas may we not say the very same? was not our whole race tainted in
our first Parent? So that if God had not the primary title of vassalage, he
would in our fall have acquired that of confiscation and escheat. And can we
think our selves then in terms to capitulate and make our own conditions, and
expect God should humor us in all our wild demands?

3. THIS is indeed to keep up that old rebellion of our Progenitor, for that
consisted in a discontent with that portion God had assigned him, and coveting
what he had restrein'd him. Nay indeed it comes up to the height of the Devils
proposal, the attemting to be as God. Genesis 3. 5. For it is an endevor to wrest
the managery out of his hands, to supersede his Authority of dispensing to us,
and to carve for our selves. This is so mad an insolence, that were it possible
to state a case exactly parallel between man and man, it would raise the
indignation of any that but pretended to ingenuity. Yet this is, without
Hyperbole, the true meaning of every murmuring repining thought we entertain.

4. BUT as bad as it is, who is there of us, that can in this particular say we
have made our heart clean? Prove. 20. 9. It Is true we make some formal
ackowledgment sometimes that we receive all from Gods gift, custom teaches us
from our infancy after every meal we eat to give him thanks (tho even that is
now thought too much respect, and begins to be discarded as unfashionable.) Yet
sure he cannot be thought to do that in earnest, that has all the time of his
eating bin grumbling that his table abounds not with such delicacies as his
neighbors. And yet at this rate God knows are most of our thanksgivings. Indeed
we have not so much ordinary civility to God, as we have to men. The common
proverb teaches us not too curiously to pry into the blemishes of what is given
us: but on Gods gifts we sit as Censors, nicely examine every thing which is
any way disagreable to our fancies, and as if we dealt with him under the
notion of chapmen, disparage it, as Solomon says buiers use to do, it is
naught, it is naught, says the buier Prove. 20. 14. Nay we seem yet more
absurdly to change the scene, and as if God were to make oblations to us, we as
critically observe the defects of his benefactions, as the Levitical priests
were to do those of the sacrifice, and (like angry Deities) scornfully reject,
what ever does not perfectly answer our wanton appetites.

5. AND now should God take us at our words, withdraw all those blessings which
we so fastidiously despise, what a condition were we in? It Is sure we have
nothing to plead in reverse of that judgment. There is nothing in it against
justice: for he takes but his own. This he intimates to Israel Hos. 2. 9. I
will return and take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the
season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax: in which he asserts his
own propriety, my corn, my wine etc* and recalls them to the remembrance that
they were but usufructuaries: and it is as evident that our tenure is but the
same. Nay this proceeding would not be repugnant even to mercy, for even that
is not obliged still to prostitute its self to our contemt. I am sure such a
tolerance is beyond all the mesures of humane lenity. Should any of us offer an
alms to an indigent wretch, and he when he sees it is Silver, should murmur and
exclame that it is not Gold, would we not draw back our hand, and reserve our
charity for a more worthy object? It Is true indeed Gods thoughts are not as our
thoughts, nor our narrow bowels equal mesures for the divine compassions, and
we experimentally find that his long-suffering infinitely exceeds ours, yet we
know he does in the parable of the Lord and the servant Mat. 18. declare that
he will proportion his mercy by ours, in that instance; and we have no promise
that he will not do it in this: nay we have all reason to expect he should; for
since his wisdom promts him to do nothing in vain, and all his bounty to us is
designed to make us happy, when he sees that end utterly frustrated by our
discontents, to what purpose should he continue that to us which we will be
never the better for?

6. BESIDES tho he be exceedingly patient, yet he is not negligent or
insensible, he takes particular notice, not only with what diligence we employ,
but with what affections we resent every of his blessings. And as ingratitude
is a vice odious to men, so it is extremely provoking to God: so that in this
sense also, the words of our Savior are most true, from him that has not
(i.e.) that has not a grateful sense and value, shall be taken away even that
he has Mat. 25. 29. But we may find a threatening of this kind yet more express
to Israel, because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with gladness and with
joifulness of heart for the abundance of all things, therefore shall thou serve
thine enemies, whom the Lord God will send among thee, in hunger and in thirst
and in nakedness and in want of all things Deuteronomy 28. 27. 28. a sad and dismal
inversion, yet founded wholly in the want of that cheerful recognition which
God expected from them. And if Israel the lot of his own inheritance, that
people whom he had singled out from all the nations of the world, could thus
forfeit his favor by unthankfulness, sure none of us can suppose we have any
surer entail of it. In a word as God loves a cheerful giver, so he also loves a
cheerful receiver. One that complies with his end in bestowing, by taking a
just complacence in his gifts. But the querulous and unsatisfied, reproach his
bounty: accuse him of illiberality and narrowness of mind. So that he seems
even in his honor engaged to bring them to a righter apprehension of him, and
by a deprivation teach them the value of those good things, which they could
not learn by the enjoiment.

7. IF therefore ingenuity and gratitude cannot, yet at least let prudence and
self-love engage us against this sin of Murmuring, which we see does abundantly
justify the character the Wise man gives when he tells us it is unprofitable Wis.
1. 11. he might have said pernicious also, for so it evidenly is in its
effects. Let us then arm our selves against it, and to that purpose impress
deeply upon our minds the present consideration, that God ows us nothing, and
that what ever we receive is an alms, and not a tribute. Diogenes being asked
what wine drank the most pleasant, answered, that which is drunk at another
cost. And this circumstance we can never miss of to recommend our good things
to us: for be they little or much, they come gratis. When therefore in a
pettish mood we find our selves apt to charge God foolishly, and to think him
strait-handed toward us, let us imagine we hear God expostulating with us, as
the householder in the parable, Friend I do thee no wrong: is it not lawful for
me to do what I will with mine own? Mat. 20. 15. If God have not the right of
disposing, let us find out those that have, and see how much better we shall
speed, but if he has, let us take heed of disputing with him: we that subsist
merely by his favor, had need court and cherish it by all the arts of humble
observance. Every man is ready to say how ill beggary and pride do agree. The
first qualification we cannot put off; O let us not provide it of the other so
inconvenient so odious an adjunct. Let us leave off prescribing to God (which
no ingenuous man would do to an earthly benefactor) and let us betake our
selves to a more holy and succesful policy, the acknowledgment of past mercies,
and our own unworthiness. This was Jacobs method, I am not worthy of the least
of all the mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy
servant: for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two
bands, and with this humble preface he introduces his petition for rescue in
his present distress, Deliver me I pray thee from the hand of my brother, etc.
Genesis 32. 10. 11. An excellent pattern of Divine Rhetoric, which the success
demonstrates to have bin very prevalent. And we cannot transcribe a better
copy, to render our desires as succesful. Indeed we are so utterly destitute of
all arguments from our selves, that we can make no reasonable form of address,
if we found it not in something of God: and there is nothing even in him adapted
to our purpose, but his mercy; nor can that be so advantageously urged by any
thing, as by the former instances, it has given of it self: for as God only is
fit to be a precedent to himself, so he loves to be so. Thus we find, not only
Moses, but God often recollecting his miraculous favors toward Israel, as an
argument to do more: let us therefore accost him in his own way, and by a
frequent and grateful recounting of his former mercies, engage him to future.
Nor need we be at a loss for matter of such recollection, if we will but
seriously consider what we have already received, which is the subject of the
next Section.

SECT. III.
Of Gods Unlimited Bounty.
1. IT is the known character of an unworthy nature, to write injuries in
Marble, and benefits in dust: and however some (as Seneca well observes) may
acquit themselves of this imputation as to man, yet scarce any do so in
relation to God. It Is true indeed the charge must be a little varied; for God
neither will nor can do us injury: yet we receive any thing that is adverse
with such a resentment as if it were, and engrave that in our memories with
indelible characters, whilst his great and real benefits are either not at all
observed, or with so transient an advertence, that the comparison of dust is
beyond our pitch, and we may be more properly said to write them in water. Nay
so far are we from keeping records and registers of his favors, that even those
standing and fixed ones which sense can promt us to (without the aid of our
memories) cannot obtain our notice.

2. WERE it not thus, it were impossible for men to be so perpetually in the
complaining Key, as if their voices were capable of no other sound. One wants
this, and another that, and a third something beyond them both, and so on ad
infinitum; when all this while every one of them enjoies a multitude of good
things without any remark. That very breath wherewith they utter their
complaints, is a blessing, and a fundamental one too: for if God should
withdraw that, they were incapable of whatsoever else they either have, or
desire. It Is true that some men's impatiencies have risen so high, as to cast
away life, because it was not clothed with all circumstances they wished. Yet
these are rare instances, and do only show such men's depraved judgment of
things. A rich Jewel is not the less valuable, because a mad man in his raving
fit flings it into the fire: but as to the generality of men, the devil (tho a
liar) gave a true account of their sense, when he said, Skin for skin, and all
that a man has will he give for his life. Job. 2. 4. And tho perhaps in an
angry fit many men have with Jonas Chap. 4. 3. wished to die, yet ten to one
should death then come, they would be as willing to divert it, as was the man
in the Apologue, who wearied with his burden of sticks, flung it down and
called for death, but when he came, owned no other occasion for him, but to be
helped up again with his bundle. I dare in this appeal to the experience of
those, who have seemed very weary of life, whether when any sudden danger has
surprised them, it has not as suddenly altered their mind, and made them more
desire life, then before they abhorred it. It Is the common saying, As long as
there is life there is hope: there is so as to secular concerns, for what
strange revolutions do we often see in the age of a man? from what despicable
beginnings have many arrived to the most splendid conditions? Of which we have
diverse modern as well as ancient instances. And indeed it is admirable to see
what time and industry will (with Gods blessing) effect. But there is no work,
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave. Ecc. 9. 10. we can improve
no more when we are once transplanted thither.

3. BUT this is yet much more considerable in respect of our spiritual state.
Our life is the day wherein we are to work. Joh. 9. 4. (yea to work out our
Salvation:) but when the night comes (when death overtakes) no man can work.
Now alas when it is considered how much of this day the most of us have loiter'd
away, how many of us have stood idle till the sixth or ninth hour, it will be
our concern not to have our day close before the eleventh. Nay alas it is yet
worse with us: we have not only bin idle, but very often ill busied; so that we
have a great part of our time to unravel, and that is not to be don in a
moment. For tho our works may fitly enough be represented by the Prophets
comparison of a spiders web, Isay. 59. 5. yet they want the best property even
of that; they cannot be so soon undon. Vices that are radicated by time and
custom, lie too deep to be lightly swept away. It Is no easy thing to persuade
our selves to the will of parting with them. Many violences we must offer to
our selves, a long and strict course of mortification must be gone through, ere we
can find in our hearts to bid them be gone: and yet when we do so, they are not
so tractable as the Centurions servants. They will indeed come whenever we bid
them, but they will scarce go so: they must be expelled by force and by slow
degrees; we must fight for every inch of ground we gain from them: and as God
could not assist the Israelites to subdue the Canaanites, at once Deuteronomy. 7. 22.
so neither ordinarily does he us to master perfectly our corruptions. Now a
process of this difficulty is not to be dispatched on a sudden. And yet this is
not all our task, for we have not only ill habits to extirpate, but we have
also good ones to acquire: it is not a mere negative virtue will serve our turns,
nor will emty lamps enter us into the marriage chamber, Mat. 25. 10. We must
add to our faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance,
etc. 2 Pet. 1. 5. No link must be wanting of that sacred chain, but we must (as
the same Apostle advises) be holy in all manner of conversation. 1 Pet. 1. 15.

4. AND now I would desire the Reader seriously to consider, whether he can
upon good grounds tell himself that this so difficult (and yet so necessary) a
work is effectually wrought in him. If it be, he is a happy man, and can with
no pretense complain of any external want: (he that is fed with Manna, must be
strangely perverse if he murmur for a belly-full of leeks and onions. Number. 11.
5.) But on the contrary he owes infinite thanks to God, that has spared him
time for this important business, and did not put a period to his natural life,
before he had begun a spiritual. For I fear there are among the best of us few
of so entire an innocence, but they may remember some, either habits or acts of
sin, in which it would have bin dreadful for them to have bin snatched away. And
then how comprehensive, how prolifie a mercy has life bin to them, when it has
carried eternity in its womb, and their continuance on earth has qualified them
for heaven? Neither are such persons only to look on it as a blessing in the
retrospect, as it relates to the past, but also in the present and future:
which if they continue to employ well, does not only confirm, but advance their
reward. Besides God may please by them to glorify himself, make them
instrumental to his service; which as it is the greatest honor, so it is also
the greatest satisfaction to a good heart. He shows himself too mercenary that
so longs for his reward, as to grow impatient of his attendances: he that loves
God, thinks himself blessed in the opportunity of doing work, as well as in
receiving wages. Thus we see how life is under all these aspects a mercy to a
pious man, and such as not only obliges him to contentment, but gratitude.

5. BUT supposing a man cannot give this comfortable account of his life, but
is conscious that he has spent it to a very different purpose, yet does not
that at all lessen his obligations to God, who meant he should have emploi'd it
better, and that he has not don so is merely his own fault. Nay indeed the
worse his state is, the greater mercy it is, that God has not yet made it
irreversible, that he has not cut him off at once from the earth and the
possibility of heaven too, but affords him yet a longer day, if yet he will
hear his voice Psalm. 95. 7. This long-suffering is one of the most transcendent
acts of divine goodness, and therefore the Apostle rightly styles it the riches
of his goodness and long-suffering and forbearance Romans 2. 4. and so at last we
commonly acknowledge it, when we have worn it out, and can no longer receive
advantage by it. What a value does a gasping despairing soul put upon a small
parcel of that time, which before he knew not how fast enough to squander? Oh
that men would set the same estimate on it before, and then certainly, as it
would make them better husbands of it, so it would also render them more
thankful for it, Accounting that the long-suffering of our Lord is Salvation. 2
Pet. 3. 15.

6. INDEED did men but rightly compute the benefit of life upon this score, all
secular encumbrances and uneasinesses of it would be overwhelmed, and stand
only as Ciphers in the account. What a shame is it then that we should spend
our breath in sighs and outcries? which if we would employ to those nobler
ends for which it was given, would supersede our complaints, and make us confess
we were well dealt with, that our life (tho bare and stripped of all outward
accessaries) is given us for a prey. Jer. 45. 5. And indeed he that has yet the
great work of life to do, can very ill spare time or sorrow to bestow upon the
regretting any temporal distress, since his whole stock is little enough to
bewail and repair his neglects of his eternal concerns. Were our lives
therefore destitute of all outward comfort, nay were they nothing but a scene
of perpetual disasters, yet this one advantage of life would infinitely outweigh
them all, and render our murmurings very inexcusable.

7. BUT God has not put this to the utmost trial, has never placed any man in
such a state of unmixt calamity, but that he still affords many and great
allaies: he finds it fit sometimes to defalk some of our outward comforts, and
perhaps imbitter others, but he never takes all away. This must be
acknowledged, if we do but consider how many things there are in which the
whole race of mankind do in common partake. The four Elements, fire and water,
air and earth, do not more make up every man's composition, then they supply his
needs: the whole host of heaven, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, Moses will tell us,
are by God divided to all nations under the whole Heaven, Deuteronomy. 4. 19. Those
resplendent bodies, equally afford their light and influence to all. The sun
shines as bright on the poor Cottage, as on the most magnificent Palace; and
the stars have their benign Aspects, as well for him, that is behind the Mill,
as for him that sits on the Throne. Ex. 11. 5. Propriety (the great
incendiary below) breeds no confusion in those celestial Orbs, but they are
every man's tresure, yet no man's peculiar (as if they meant to teach us, that
our love of appropriation descends not from above Jam. 3. 15. is no heavenly
quality.)

8. AND as they make no distinction of the ranks and degrees of men, so neither
do they of their virtues. Our Savior, tells us God causes his Sun to rise on
the good and on the evil, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust, Mat.
5. 45. If now we descend lower to the sublunary creatures, they equally pay
their homage to man, do not disdain the dominion of the poor, and submit to
that of the rich, but show us that that their instinct extends to the whole
nature. An horse draws the poor man's plough, as tamely as the Princes chariot,
and the beggars hungry cur follows him with as much obsequiousness and
affection as the pampered lap-dogs of the nicest Ladies. The sheep obey a poor
mercenary shepherd as well as they did the Daughters of the wealthy Laban Genesis
29. 9. or of Iethro a Prince Exodus 2. 16. and as willingly yield their fleece
to clothe Lazarus, as to make purple for Dives. And as animals, so vegetables
are as communicative of their qualities to one man as another. The corn
nurishes, the fruits refresh, the flowers delight, the simples cure the poor
man as well as the rich.

9. BUT I foresee it will be objected, that these natural privileges are
insignificant, because they are evacuated by those positive laws which bound
propriety, and that therefore tho one man could use the creatures as well as
another, yet every man has them not to use. I answer, that for some of the
things I have mentioned, they are still in their native latitude, cannot be
enclosed or monopoliz'd. The most ravenous oppressor could never yet lock up
the sun in his chest: he that lays house to house and land to land, till there
be no place Esaias. 5. 8. cannot enclose the common air: and the like may be said
of diverse of the rest, so that there are some (and those no mean) blessings,
which continue still the indefeisible right of mankind in general.

10. As for those other things which are liable to the restrictive terms of
meum and tuum, it is not to be denied but there is vast difference in the
dispensing them; as great as Nathans parable describes, when he speaks of the
numerous flocks of the rich man, and the single ewe lamb of the poor, 2 Samuel
12. 2. yet there is scarce any so deplorably indigent, but that by one means or
other, he has or may have the necessary supports of life. Perhaps they fall not
into his lap by birthright and inheritance, yet they are acquirable by labor
and industry, which is perhaps the better tenure. They cannot it may be arrive
to Sodoms fullness of bread: yet if they have not her abundance of Idleness, Ez.
16. 49. they commonly need not want that, which was the height of Agurs wish,
food convenient, Pro. 30. 8. It Is true indeed, if they will fold their hands in
their bosom, if with Solomon's Sluggard, they will not plough by reason of the
cold, they must take his fate in the summer, as they have his ease in the
winter, they may beg in harvest, and have nothing, Prove. 20. 4. But then it is
visible they are the Authors of their own necessities. And indeed to men of
such lazy careless natures, it is hard to say, what degree of Gods bounty can
keep them from want, since we often see the fairest fortunes dissipated as well
by the supine negligence, as the riotous prodigality of the owners. And
therefore if men will be idle, they are not to accuse God, but themselves if
they be indigent.

11. BUT then there is one case wherein men seem more inevitably exposed, and
that is when by age, sickness, or decrepitness, they are disabled from work; or
when their family is too numerous for their work to maintain. And this indeed
seems the most forlorn state of poverty: yet God has provided for them also, by
assigning such persons to the care of the rich; nay he has put an extraordinary
mark of favor on them, given them the honor of being his proxies and
representatives, made them letters of Attorney (as it were) to demand relief in
his name, and upon his account. And tho it is too true, that even that Authority
will not prevail with many of the rich to open their purses, yet even in this
Age of frozen charity, there are still some who remember upon what terms they
received their wealth, and employ it accordingly. And tho the number of them is
not so great as were to be wished, yet there are in all parts some scattered
here and there like Cities of refuge in the Land, Deuteronomy. 19. 2. to which these
poor distressed creatures way flee for succor. And I think I may say, that
between the legal provisions that are made in this case and voluntary
contributions, there are not very many that want the things that are of
absolute necessity: and we know St. Paul comprizes those in a small compass,
food and raiment, and proposes them as sufficient materials of Content. 1 Timothy
6. 8. I say not this to contract any man's bowels, or lessen his compassions to
such poor wretches. For how much soever they lend, I wish as Ioab did in
another case to David, the Lord increase it a hundredfold, 2 Samuel 24. 3. I
only urge it as an evidence of the assertion I am to prove, that no man is so
pretermitted by God or his disposal of temporals, but that even he that seems
the most abandoned has a share in his providence, and consequently cannot
justly murmur, since even this state which is the highest instance of human
indigence, is not without its receipts from God.

12. BUT the number in this form are but few, compared to those in a higher,
for between this and the highest affluence, how many intermedial degrees are
there, in which men partake not only of the necessaries, but comforts of life;
that have not only food and raiment, but their distinction of holy day and
working-day fare and apparel? He that is but one step advanced from beggary has
so much, he that has got to a second has more then is necessary, and so every
degree rises in plenty till it comes to vanity and excess, and even there too
there are gradual risings, some having so much fuel for luxury, that they are
at as great a loss for invention, as others can be for materials, and complain
that there are no farther riots left for them to essay. How many are there who
have so cloi'd and glutted their senses, that they want some other inlets for
pleasure, and with the rich man in the Gospel, are in distress where to bestow
their abundance?

13. AND sure such as these cannot deny that they have reciev'd good things,
yet generally there are none less contented, which is a clear demonstration
that our repinings proceed not from any defect of bounty in God, but from the
malignant temper of our own hearts. And as it is an easier thing to satisfy the
cravings of an hungry, then to cure the nauseous recoilings of a surfeited
stomach; so certainly the discontents of the poor, are much easier allai'd then
those of the rich; the indigence of the one has contracted his desires, and has
taught him not to look farther then a little beyond bare necessaries, so that a
moderate Alms satisfies, and a liberal transports him: but he who by a
perpetual repletion has his desires stretched and extended, is capable of no
such satisfaction: when his enjoiments forestall all particular pursuits, and
he knows not upon what to fasten his next wish; yet even then he has some
confused unformed appetites, and thinks himself miserable because he cannot
tell what would make him more happy. And yet this is that envied state which
men with so much greediness aspire to, every man looks on it as the top of
felicity to have nothing more to wish in the world. And yet alas even that when
attained, would be their torment. Let men never think then that contentment is
to be caught by long and foreign chaces; he is likliest to find it who sits at
home, and duly contemplates those blessings which God has brought within his
reach, of which every man has a fair proportion, if he will advert to it.

14. FOR besides these external accessions (of which the meanest have some, the
middle sort a great deal, and the uppermost rather too much) man is a
principality within himself, and has in his composure so many excellent
impresses of his Makers power and goodness, that he need not ask leave of any
exterior thing to be happy, if he know but aright how to value himself: the
very meanest part of him, his body is a piece of admirable workman-ship, of a
most incomprehensible contrivance, as the Psalmist says, he is fearfully and
wonderfully made; and it is astonishing to think of what a symmetry of parts this
beautiful fabric is made up. Nor are they only for show, but use: every member,
every limb is endowed with a particular faculty to render it serviceable to the
whole; and that admirable contexture of veins and arteries, sinues and muscles,
nerves and tendons, none are superfluous, but some way or other contributes to
vegetation, sense, or motion, nay the most noble and most useful parts are all
of them double, not only as a reserve in case of misadventure of one part; but
also as an instance of the bounty of the Donor. And indeed it is observable of
Galen in his writings, that after he had taken great care to exemt himself and
all of his Profession from taking notice of the Deity, by saying that to
discourse concerning the Gods, was the task of speculative Philosophers; yet
coming to write de usu partium, and considering the frame of humane bodies, and
therein discovering the wonderful contrivance of every part in reference to its
self, and also to the whole; their strength, agility, and various movement,
infinitely surpassing the powers of all Mechanic engines; he seems to have had
the fate we read of Saul in holy Scripture, and against his genius and purpose,
to become a Prophet; breaking frequently out into Hymns and sacred raptures;
saying, these Mysteries are more divine then the Samothracian or Elusinian; and
confessing they both strictly require, and infinitely excel the low returns of
human praise. But beyond the fabric of parts as organic, what an extract of
wonder are our senses, those five operations of the Lord as the son of Syrach
rightly (and by way of eminence) styles them, Ecclus. 17. 5? By these we draw
all outward objects to our selves; what were the beauties of the universe to
us, if we had not sight to behold them, or the most melodious sounds, if we had
not hearing? and so of the rest. And yet these are not only generally given,
but also preserved to the greater part of men, and perhaps would be to more,
did not our base undervaluing of common mercies, force God sometimes to instruct
us in their worth, by making us feel what it is to want them.

15. MULTITUDE of refreshments also God has provided for our bodies,
particularly that of sleep, of which he has bin so considerate, as in his
distributions of time, to make a solemn allotment for it: yet who almost when
he lies down considers the mercy, or when he rises refresht, rises thankful
also? But if our rest at any time be interrupted by the cares of our mind, or
pains of our bodies, then, (and not till then) we consider, that it is God who
gives his beloved sleep Psalm. 127. 2. and think it a blessing worth our esteem.
Thus it is with health, strength, and every thing else, we despise it whilst we
have it, and impatiently desire it whilst we have it not; but in the interim
sure we cannot complain, that Gods hand is shortened toward us, when in the
ordinary course of his providence we commonly enjoy these mercies many years,
which we find so much miss of, if they be withdrawn but for a few hours. And
indeed there is not a greater instance of human pravity then our senseless
contemt of blessings, merely because they are customary; which in true reason
is an argument why we should prize them the more. When we deal with men, we
discern it well enough, he that gives me once a 100. pounds, I account not so
much my benefactor, as if he made it my annual revenue; yet God must lose his
thanks, by multiplying his favors; and his benefits grow more invisible by
their being always before us.

16. BUT the body (with its enjoiment) is but the lowest instance of Gods
bounty, it is but a decent case for that inestimable Jewel he has put in it: the
soul, like the Ark, is the thing for which this whole tabernacle was framed,
and that is a spark of Divinity in which alone it is that God accomplished his
design of making man in his own image Genesis 1. 26. Twould be too long to attemt
an exact survey of its particular excellencies, the mere intellectual powers
wherewith it is endued, have exercised the curiosity and raised the admiration
of the great contemplators of nature in all ages, yet after all, of so subtle
composure is the soul, that it is inscrutable even to it self: and tho the
simplest man knows he has the faculties of Imagination, Apprehension, Memory,
Reflecting; yet the learned cannot assign where they are seated, or by what
means they operate. It Is enough to us that we have them, and many excellent uses
for them; one whereof (and a most necessary one) is a thankful reflection on the
goodness of God who gave them. He might have made us in the very lowest form of
creatures, insensible stocks or stones; or if he had advanced us a step-higher,
he might have fixed us among mere animals, made us perhaps of the noxious, at
best of the tamer sort of beasts; but he has placed us in the highest rank of
visible creatures, and not only given Dominion over the works of his hands
Psalm. 8. 6. but has given us reason wherewith to manage that sovereignty,
without which we had only bin the more masterful sort of brutes.

17. YET still the soul is to be considered in a higher notion, that of its
immortality and capacity of endless bliss: and here indeed it owns its
extraction, and is an image of the first being, whose felicity is coexistent
with himself; this as it is the most transcendent accomplishment of our nature,
so it is most universal. Whatever disparity there may be between man and man in
other respects, yet in this all are equal, the poor beggar at the gate has a
soul as capacious of eternal happiness, as he whose crumbs he begs for (nay
sometimes better prepared for it, as that parable shows Luke 16. 21.) And tho
the dignities of earth are the prize of the rich and noble, the subtle and
designing; yet heaven is as easily mounted from the dunghill as the throne,
and an honest simplicity will sooner bring us thither, then all the
Machiavelian policy. Nay God has not only designed us to so glorious an end,
but has don all on his part to secure us of it, sent his Son to lead us the
way, his spirit to quicken us in it. We need not dispute how universal this is;
it is sure it concerns all to whom I am now speaking, those that are within the
pale of the church: and if it should prove confined only to them, the more
peculiar is their obligation, that are thus singled out from the rest of the
world, and the greater ought to be their thankfulness. The heathen Philosopher
made it matter of his solemn acknowledgment to fortune, that he was born a
Grecian and not a Barbarian: and sure the advantages of our Christianity are of
a much higher strein, and ought to be infinitely more celebrated. The Apostle we
find often applauding this glorious privilege, as that which makes fellow
citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, Ephesians. 3. 19. nay which
elevates us to a higher state, the adoption of sons, Gal. 4. 5. nor only Sons,
but Heirs also of God, and joint Heirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17. And what
ambition is there so greedy which this will not satisfy? yet this is our common
state, the birthright of our regeneration, if we do not degrade our selves,
and with Esau basely sell our title.

18. AND now methinks every man may interrogate himself in the same form,
wherein Ionadab did Amnon 2 Samuel 13. 4. why art thou, being the Kings son, thus
lean from day to day? Why should a Person who is adopted by the King of Kings,
thus languish and pine? What is there below the sun worthy his notice, much
less his desires, that has a Kingdom above it? Certainly did we but know how
to estimate our selves upon this account, twere impossible for us with such
sordid condescentions to court every petty wordly interest, and so impatiently
vex our selves when we cannot attain it. Alas how unworthily do we bear the
name of Christians, when that which carried the Forefathers of our Faith through
the most fiery trials, cannot support us under the disappointment of any
extravagant desire? They had such respect to the recompense of the reward, Heb.
11. 26. as made them cheerfully expose their Fame to ignominy, their Goods to
rapine, their Bodies to the most exquisite tortures, and their Lives to death.
Yet the same hopes cannot work us to any tolerable degree of patience, when we
suffer but the smallest diminution in any of these. What shall we say? Is
Heaven grown less valuable, or Earth more then it was then? No surely, but we
are more infatuated in our estimates: we have so long abetted the rivalry of
the handmaid, that the Mistress, like Sarah, appears despicable. Like Jonah we
sit down sullen upon the withering of a gourd, never considering that God has
provided us a better shelter, a building of God eternal in the Heavens. 2 Cor.
5. 1. Indeed there can be no temporal destitution so great, which such an
expectation cannot make supportable. Were we in Jobs condition sitting upon a
dunghill, and scraping our selves with a potsheard, yet as long as we can say
with him our Redeemer lives. Job. 19. 25. we have all reason to say with him
also, blessed be the name of the Lord. Chap. 1. 21. What a madness is it then
for us to expose our selves to be pierced and wounded by every temporal
adversity, who have so impenetrable an armor? nay what an ungrateful contumely
is it to that goodness of God, to show that we cannot make him a counterpoise
to the most trivial secular satisfaction? on which account sure he may again
take up that exprobrating complaint we find in the Prophet, A goodly price that
I was valued at by them. Zac. 11. 13.

19. BUT how mean soever he is in our eyes, tho Christ seem the same to us in
his glory which he did in his abjection, to have no beauty that we should
desire him; yet he puts another rate upon himself, and tell us that he that
loves Father or Mother, Son or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me. Mat.
10. 37. Now our love and our joy are passions coincident, and therefore
whatever we joy more in then we do in him, we may be presumed to love better;
and if he cannot endure the competition of those more ingenuous objects of our
love he there mentions, how will he suffer that of our vanities, our childish
wanton appetites? And yet those are the things after which we so impatiently
rave. For I believe I may truly affirm, that if there were a scrutiny made into
all the discontents of mankind, for one that were fastened upon any great
considerable calamity, there are many that are founded only in the irregularity
of our own desires.

20. BY what has bin said we may justly conclude in the Prophets phrase, God
has not bin to us a wilderness, a land of darkness, Jer. 2. 31. but has
graciously dispen'st to us in all our interests. Yet the instances here given
are only common, such as relate to all, or at least the far greater part of
mankind: but what volums might be made, should every man set down his own
particular experiences of mercy? In that case twould be no extravagant
Hyperbole we find Joh. 22. 25. That even the world it self could not contain
the books which should be written. God knows our memories are very frail, and
our observations slight in this point: yet abstracting from all the forgotten
or neglected favors, what vast catalogues may every man make to himself, if he
would but yet recollect, what effects he has had of Gods bounty in giving, of
his providence in protecting, of his grace in restraining, and exciting, of his
patience in forbearing? And certainly all these productions of the divine
goodness were never designed to die in the birth. The Psalmist will tell us,
the Lord has so don his mavelous works, that they ought to be had in
remembrance. Ps. III. 4. Let every man then make it his daily care to recount
to himself the wonders God has don, as for the children of men in general, so
for himself in particular. When the Israelites murmured under their bondage,
Pharaoh imputes it to their idleness, and prescribes them more work, as the
readiest cure: a piece indeed of inhuman Tyranny in him, but may with equity
and success be practiced by us upon our selves. When we find our appetites
mutinous, complaining of our present condition, let us set our selves to work,
impose it as a task upon our selves to recollect the many instances of Gods
mercies. And surely if we do it sincerely, and with intention, we cannot have
past through half our stages, before our sullen murmurs will be beat out of
countenance, and retire with shame, when they are confronted with such a cloud
of witnesses, such signal testimonies of Gods goodness to us: for when we have
mustered up all our little grievances, most critically examined all our wants,
we shall find them very unproportionable to our comforts, and to our receipts;
in which comparative notion, the next Section is to consider them.

SECT. IV.
Of the Surplusage of our Enjoiments above our Sufferings.
1. TO regulate our estimate of those things which we either enjoy or suffer,
there are three precedent queries to be made: the first of their number or
plenty, the second of their weight, the third of their constancy and
continuance; for according as they partake more of these properties, every good
is more good, and every evil is more evil. It will therefore be our best method
of trial in the present case, to compare our blessings and our calamities in
these three respects.

2. AND first in that of plenty, the mercies of God are the source of all our
good, are set out to us in holy scripture in the most superlative strein, They
are multitudes, Psalm. 102. 20. Plenteous redemtion, Psalm. 130. 7. as high as
the heaven, Psalm. 103. 11. He fills all things living with plenteousness, Psalm.
145. 16. His mercies indeed are such as come not within the compass of number,
but stretch themselves to infinity, and are best represented by such a
calculation as God made to Abraham, when he showed him the numerousness of his
posterity by the innumerableness of the stars, Genesis 15. 5. Were there but a
single mercy apportion'd to each minute of our lives, the sum would arise very
high: but how is our Arithmetic confounded, when every minute has more then we
can distinctly number? for besides the original stock mentioned in the last
section, and the accession of new bounty, the giving us somewhat which we had
not before; what an accumulative mercy is it, the preserving what we have? We
are made up of so many pieces, have such varieties of interests, spiritual,
temporal, public, and private; for our selves, for our friends, and dependants;
that it is not a confused general regard that will keep all these in security
one moment. We are like a vast building, which costs as much to maintain, as to
erect. And indeed considering the corruptibleness of our materials, our
preservation is no less a work of omnipotence, then our first forming: nay
perhaps it is rather a greater. Our original clay tho it had no aptness, yet it
had no aversions to the receiving a human form; but was in the hand of the
potter to make it what he pleased: but we now have principles of decay within
us, which vehemently tend to dissolution; we want the supplies of several
things without us, the failing whereof returns us again to our dust. Nay we do
not only need the aid, but we fear the hostility of outward things. That very
air which sometimes refreshes us, may at another starve and freeze us: that
which warms and comforts us, has also a power of consuming us. Yea that very
meat which nurishes, may choke and stifle us. In a word, there is no creature
so despicable, so inconsiderable, which may not sometimes serve us, and which
may not at any time (if God permit) ruin us. Now whence is it that we so
constantly, so frequently find the good, the benign efficacy of these things,
and so seldom, so rarely the evil? whence I say is it, but from the active
unwearied providence, which draws forth the better properties of the creatures
for our use, and restrains the worser for our security? which with a particular
advertence watches not only over every Person, but over every several concern
of that person. And how astonishing a contemplation is this? If the mere ebbing
and flowing of the sea, put the Philosopher into such an ecstasy, that he flung
himself into it, because he could not comprehend the inscrutable cause of it;
in what perpetual raptures of admiration may we be, who have every minute
within us, and about us, more and greater wonders, and those too in our favor,
when we deserve rather the divine power should exert it self in our destruction?

3. BUT alas our danger from the visible creatures, is little compared with
those from the spirits of darkness. We wrestle not only with flesh and blood,
but with Principalities and Powers, with spiritual wickedness, etc. Ephesians. 6. 12.
So inveterate is the enmity between the Serpent and the seed of the Woman in
general, that he watches all advantages against us, not only in our souls, but
even our bodies, our goods, and in every part of our concerns. Thus we see he
not only assaulted Jobs soul by the wicked insinuations of his Wife, but (with
more effect) his body with boiles and sores, his possessions by teh Chaldeans
and Sabeans, and the images of himself, his dearest Children, by a wind from
the wilderness. Job. 1. And can we think his malice is now worn out? no surely
he still wishes as ill to mankind as ever, and we should soon see the woeful
effects of it, did not the same power which let him loose for Jobs trial,
restrain him for our safety. Nay had he but power to affright, tho not to hurt
us, even that would make our lives very uncomfortable. We cannot hear the
relation of Sprights or apparitions, but our blood chills upon it, and a horror
runs through our veins: what should we then do if he should make his night-walks
through our chambers, and with his illusory terrors disturb our rest? Yet all this
and much more he would do, if God did not chain up this old Dragon, Rev. 20.
Nay if he were not at the expense of a guard about us, and those no less then
Angels. I shall not dispute whither every person has not his peculiar
Guardian: for tho many have not improbably asserted it, we have ground enough
of acquiescence in the general affirmation of the Apostle, that they are all
ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of
Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. And now if the Reader please to sum up how many are his
concerns, and how many are the dangers which await him in them all, he cannot
sure render the account of those mercies which preserve the one, and divert the
other, in any other phrase then that of the Psalmist. They are more then I am
able to express. Psa. 40. 7.

4. WE may now challenge the most miserable, or the most querulous man living,
to produce causes of complaint, proportionable to those of thanksgiving. He
that has the greatest stock of calamities, can never vye with the heaps of
benefits; the disproportion is greater then that of the Armies of Ahab and
Benhadad. 1 Kings. 20. 27. whereof the one was like two little flocks of Kids,
the other filled the country. God has told us that he afflicts not willingly,
nor grieves the children of men. Lam. 3. 33. whereas on the contrary, he
delights in mercy. Mich. 7. 18. We may judge by our selves which he is
likeliest often to repete, those acts which he does with regret and reluctance,
or those which he does with pleasure and delight. But we need no inferences
where we have the attestation of experience. Let every man therefore make this
his judge in this case, let him every night recollect, how many things within
and about him he is concerned in, and consider how many of those have bin
preserved entire to him, still accounting every thing so continued as a new
donation. If he begin with his Spiritual state, it is too possible he may
sometimes find he has lost his innocence, committed some, perhaps many sins: but
even in these he will find cause to justify God, if he do but recollect with
what inward checks and admonitions, and outward restraints, God has endeavored
to bridle him. If he will break through those fences, that does not at all
derogate from the mercy of God which so guarded him, but it rather illustrates
his goodness, that after so many quenchings of his Spirit, does yet continue
its influence. So that even he that has the most deplorably violated his
integrity, is yet to confess that Gods purpose was to have preserved it entire:
and he might really so have kept it, had he compli'd with those aids which were
afforded him. But in temporal concerns we are not so apt to undermine our
selves, and therefore shall much more rarely find we have suffered detriment in
them, then in our spiritual; but are there ordinarily like to meet with a
better account. Let a man therefore consider what is lacking to him of all the
secular good things he had in the morning, and tell me whither for the most
part he may not give such an account, as the Israelitish officers did of their
men after the slaughter of the Midianites, that he has not lost one. Number. 31.
39. Or if sometimes he do suffer a diminution, yet at the worst he will find
that many more good things have bin preserved to him, then have bin taken from
him. A man may perhaps meet with some damage in his estate, yet it is manifold
odds that that damage is but partial, and that he has still more left then is
lost. Or if it be more entire; yet if he have his health, his limbs, his
senses, his friends, and all things beside his estate left him, so that for one
thing he has lost, he still retains a multitude, he may say of it as the
Disciples of the few Loaves, what is this among so many? Mat. 14. 17.
Aristippus being bemoaned for the loss of a Farm, replied with some shaprness
upon hsi Condoler, you have but one field, and I have yet three left, why
should I not rather grieve for you? intimating that a man is not so much to
estimate what he has lost, as what he has left. A piece of wisdom which if we
would transcribe, we might quickly convince our selves, that even in our most
adverse estate there are as Elijah speaks, more with us then against us, 2
King. 6. 16. that our enjoiments are more then our sufferings, and Gods acts of
grace, do far out-number those of his severity.

5. AND as they do out-number, so also do they outweigh them. The mercies we
receive from God are (as the last Section has showed) of the greatest
importance; the most substantial solid goods, and the greatest of all, I mean
those which concern our eternal state, are so firmly fixed on us, that unless we
will voluntarily quit our clame, it is not in the power of men or devils to
defeat us. Light bodies are easily blown away by every gust of wind, but this
weight of glory, as the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 4. 17. continues firm and
stable, is proof against all storms, like the shadow of a great rock in a weary
Land. Isai. 32. 2. Those dark adumbrations we have of it, might have served to
refresh and deceive the tediousness of our pilgrimage, and therefore the most
formidable calamities of this life are below all mesures of comparison with
this hope of our calling, this riches of the glory of our inheritance. Ephesians. 3.
16. The heaviest and most pressing of our afflictions are to that, but like the
small dust of the balance: Esa. 40. 15. so that if we should here stop our
inquisition, we have a sufficient resolution of the present question, and must
conclude, that God has given us an abundant counterpoise of all, we either do
or can suffer here.

6. IF therefore there be any so forlorn as to temporals, that he can fetch
thence no evidence of Gods fatherly care of him, yet this one consideration may
solve his doubts, and convince him that he is not abdicated by him. We read of
no gifts Abraham gave Isaac, yet to the sons of the concubins it is said he did
Genesis 25. 6. It had bin a very fallacious inference, if Isaac should have
concluded himself neglected, because his far greater portion was but in
reversions. And it will be the same in any of us, if we argue an unkindness
from any temporal wants who have the entail of an eternal inheritance. But
surely God does not leave himself without witness, Act. 14. 17. even in secular
things; there is no man breathing but has some blessings of his left hand, as
well as his right, as I have already mentioned: and unless it be some few
prodigies of Calamity in whose punishment or patience God designs signally to
glorify himself, there are none who enjoy not greater comforts of life then
those they want, I mean such as are really greater, tho perhaps, to their
prejudicate fancies they do not appear so. Thus in point of health, if a man be
disaffected in one part, yet all the rest of his body may be (and often is)
well; or if he have a complication, and have more then one disease, yet there
is no man that has all, or half so many as are incident to human bodies, so
that he is comparatively more healthy then sick. So again it is not very common
for a man to loose a limb, or sense, the generality of men keep them to their
last; and they who do, have in that an overbalance to most outward adversities;
and even they who are so unhappy to loose one, yet commonly keep the rest; at
least the Major part: or if at any time any man is left a mere breathing trunk,
yet it is by such stupifying diseases as dead the sense, or such mortal ones as
soon take them away; and so the remedy overtakes the Malady. Besides it pleases
God very often, to make compensation for the want of one member or faculty by
improving the use of another. We have seen feet supply all the necessary uses
of hands to those who have had none; and it is a thing of daily observation
that men that are blind, have the greater internal light: have their intellects
more vigorous and active, by their abstractions from visible objects.

7. THUS also it is in the matter of wealth, he that is forced to get his bread
by the swet of his brows, it is true he cannot have those delicacies wherewith
rich men abound; yet his labor helps him to a more poignant, more savory sauce
then a whole College of Epicures can compound. His hunger gives a higher gust
to his dry crust, then the surfeited stomach can find in the most costly, most
elaborate mixtures: so verifying the observation of Solomon, the full soul
loatheth the honey comb, but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet,
Prove. 27. 7. He cannot indeed stretch himself upon his bed of Ivory, Am. 6. 4.
yet his sleeps are sounder then those that can. The wiseman tells us, and
experience dos so too, that the sleep of a laboring man is sweet. Eccles. 5.
12. He is not clothed Gorgeously, has not the splendour of glittering apparel,
so neither has he the care of contriving it, the fears of being forestal'd in a
new invention, or any of those unmanly solicitudes which attend that vanity. He
has the proper genuine use of clothing; the preventing shame and cold, and is
happily determined to that which the wiser men of the world have voluntarily
chosen. To conclude, he has one advantage beyond all these; his necessities
rescue him from idleness, and all its consequent temtations; which is so great
a benefit, that if rich men be not their own taskmasters as his wants are his,
if they do not provide themselves of business; that one want of theirs is
infinitely more deplorable then all his: and he is not only happy comparatively
with himself, in having better things then he wants, but with them also.

8. IF we come now to reputation and fame, the account will be much the same,
he that is eminent in the world for some great achievement, is set up as an
object of every man's remark; when as his excellencies on the one hand are
visible, so his faults and blemishes are on the other. And as human frailty
makes it too probable these later will be really more, so human envy makes it
sure that they shall be more precisely, more curiously observed, and more
loudly blazoned. So that upon the whole, a good quiet security, tho it be not
the road to glory, yet is the likliest fence against infamy. And indeed he that
can keep up the repute of a sober integrity within his own private sphere, need
not envy the triumphant sallies of others, which often meet with a fatal turn
at the later end of the day. But twill be said that even that more moderate
sort of reputation is not every man's portion, but that many lie under great
ignominy and scandals. I shall here ask whither those be just or unjust: If
they be just they belong not to our present subject, which relates only to
those inflictions which are the effects of Gods immediate providence, not of
our own crimes; for I never doubted but that by those we may divest our selves
of any, nay of all the good things God has designed us. But if the obloquy be
unjust, it is probable that it is taken up only by ill men, and that the good pass
a more equitable sentence; and then surely the attestation of a few such, is
able to outweigh a multitude of the others. And in this case a man may not only
find patience but pleasure in reproaches. Socrates looked with trouble and
jealousy on himself when ill men commended him, saying what ill have I don? and
sure a Christian has a farther reason to be pleased with their revilings, they
being his security againsts the woe pronounced to those whom all men speak well
of, Luke 6. 26. But sometimes it happens, that even good men are seduced, and
either by the artifices of the wicked, or their own too hasty credulity, give
credit to unjust reports. And this I confess is a sharp trial to the injured
person, yet even this cannot often be universal, there can scarce be any
innocence so forlorn but that there may be opportunities of clearing it to some
or other, and by them propagating it to more, and if the cloud ever come to be
dispersed, their fame will appear with the brighter luster. But if none of this
happen, they have yet a certain and more blessed retreat, even an appeal to the
unerring judge, who never beholds us with more approbation, then when we are
under the unjust condemnation of men. Indeed we have then a double tie upon
him, not only his justice but his pity is concerned in our cause. God
particularly owns himself as the refuge of the oppressed, and there is scarce a
sharper and more sensible oppression then this of Calumny: yet even this proves
advantage, whilst it procures Gods immediate patronage, makes us the objects
of his more peculiar care and compassion, who can make our righteousness as
clear as the light, Psa. 37. 6. if he see it fit; but if in his wisdom he choose
not that for us, it is comfort enough for us that we have approved it to him.
It Was Elkanahs question to Hannah in her disconsolation, Am not I better to thee
then ten Sons? I Sam. 1. 8. And sure we may say the like of Gods approbation,
that it is better to us I say not then ten, but ten thousand Eulogies of men. The
very Echo of it in the testimony of a good conscience is an unspeakable
comfort, and this voice sounds more audibly, more sweetly, among the loudest,
the harshest accusations of men. So that we see even this assault too is not
without its guard, and these waters of Marah. Exodus 15. 23. may be rendered not
only wholesome but pleasant.

9. I have now instanced in the three most general concerns of human life, the
Body, Goods, and Fame, to which heads may be reduced most of the afflictions
incident to our out-ward state, as far as immediately concerns our selves. But
there is no man stands so single in the world, but he has some relations or
friends in which he thinks himself interessed, and many times those oblique
strokes which wound us through them, are as painful as the more direct: yet here
also God is ordinarily pleased to provide some allaies, if we would but take
notice of them. He who has had one friend die, has ordinarily diverse others
surviving; or if he have not that, usually God raises him up others. It Is true
we cannot have a succession of Fathers and Mothers, yet we often have of other
friends that are no less helpful to us: and indeed there are scarce in any
thing more remarkable evidences of Providence, then in this particular. He that
is able out of stones to raise up children to Abraham, Mat. 3 9. does many
times by as unexpected a production supply friends to the desolate. But we do
sometimes loose our friends while they are living, they withdraw their kindness
which is the soul of friendship: and if this happen by our own demerit, we can
accuse neither God nor them for it: nor can we rationally expect that God shall
provide supplies, when we wilfully despoile our selves. But when they are
unkind without provocation, then is the season for his interposition, who uses
to take up those whom Father and Mother forsake, Psa. 27. 10. and we frequently
see signal proofs of his care in exciting the compassions of other friends and
relatives, or perhaps of mere strangers. Nay sometimes God makes the inhumanity
of a man's relations, the occasion of his advantage. Thus the barbarous malice
of Joseph's brethren was the first step to his Dominion over Egypt. And it is a
common observation in Families, that the most discountenanced child often makes
better proof, then the dearling.

10. WE are yet liable to a third affliction by the calamity of our friends,
which by the Sympathy of Kindness presses us no less (perhaps more) sensibly
then our own: but then it is to be considered, that theirs are capable of the
same allaying circumstances that ours are, and God has the same arts of
alleviating their burdens; so that we have the same arguments for acquiescence
in their sufferings that we have in our own, and shall do a more friendly
office in impressing those upon them, then in the most passionate adopting
their sorrows.

11. THE last and greatest discomfort from friends, is that of their sin: and
if ever we may be allowed that disconsolate strein of the Prophet, Esa. 22. 4.
Turn away from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me; this seems to
be the time: yet even this valley of Achor is not without a door of hope, Hos.
2. 15. A vicious person may be recalled, multitudes have bin; so that as long
as God continues life, we ought no more to deposite our hope, then to quit our
endevor. Besides there are few that make this complaint that have not something
to balance, or at least to lighten it. I shall instance in that relation which
is the nearest and most tender, that of a Parent. He that has one bad child may
have diverse good. If he have but one virtuous it is a very great mercy, and it is
another that he may be the better taught to value it by the opposition of the
contrary. But if any be so unhappy as to have many children, and all to consume
his eyes and grieve his heart, 1 Samuel 2. 33. it may be a seasonable reflection
for him to examine how far he has contributed to it either by Elies fond
indulgence, or by a remiss and careless education: or which is worst of all, by
his most impious example. If any, or all of these be found the cause, he is not
so much to seek for allaies to his grief, as for pardon of his sin: and when he
has penitently retracted his own faults, he may then have better ground of hope
that God may reform those of his children. In the mean time he may look on his
own affliction in them as Gods discipline on him, and gather at least this
comfort from it, that his heavenly Father has more care of him, then he had of
his; and does not leave him uncorrected.

12. THUS we see in all the concerns (which are the most common and important
of human life, and wherein the justest of our complaints are usually founded)
there is such a temperature and mixture, that the good does more then equal the
ill, and that not only in the grosser bulk, when our whole state is weighed
together, but in every single branch of it. God having herein dealt with this
little world Man, as he has don with the greater, wherein he is observed to
have furnished every country with Specific remedies for their peculiar
diseases. I have only given these short hints by way of essay and pattern for
the Readers contemplation, which when he shall have extended to all those more
minute particulars wherein he is especially concerned, more curiously compared
his sufferings with his allaies and comforts; I cannot doubt but he will own
himself an instance of the truth of the present Thesis, and confess, that he
has much more cause of thankfulness then complaint.

13. THIS I say supposing his afflictions to be of those more solid and
considerable sorts I have before mentioned. But how many are there who have few
or none of such, who seem to be seated in the land of Goshen, in a place exemt
from all the plagues that infest their Neighbors? And those one would think
should give a ready suffrage to this conclusion, as having no temtation to
oppugn it; yet I doubt it is far otherwise, and that such men are of all the most
unsatisfied. For tho they have no crosses of Gods imposing, they usually create
a multitude to themselves. And here we may say with David, it is better to fall
into the hand of God, then into the hand of man, 2 Samuel 24. 14 it is easier to
bear the afflictions God sends, then those we make to our selves. His are
limited both for quantity and quality, but our own are as boundless as those
extravagant desires from which they spring.

14. AND this is the true cause why contentment is so much a stranger to those
who have all the outward causes of it, they have no definite mesure of their
desires; it is not the supply of all their real wants will serve their turn,
their appetites are precarious and depend upon contingencies. They hunger not
because they are emty, but because others are full. Many a man could have liked
his own portion well enough, had he not seen another have something he liked
better. Nay even the most inconsiderable things acquire a value by being
another, when we despise much greater of our own. Ahab might well have
satisfied himself with the Kingdom of Israel, had not Naboths poor plot lain in
his eye: but so raving were his desires after it, that he disrelishes all the
pomps of a Crown, yea the ordinary refreshments of Nature, can eat no bread
till he have that to furnish him with Sallads. 1 King. 21. 2. And how many are
there now adays whose cloths sit uneasy if they see another have had but the
luck to be a little more ingenuously vain; whose meat is unsavory if they have
seen but a greater rarity, a newer cookery at another Table: in a word who
make other peoples excesses the standard of their own felicities.

15. NOR are our appetites only excited thus by our outward objects, but
precipitated and hurried on by our inward lusts. The proud man so longs for
homage and adoration, that nothing can please him if that be wanting. Haman can
find no gust in all the sensualities of the Persian Court, because a poor
despicable Jew denies his abaisance, Est. 5. 13. The lustful so impatiently
pursues his impure designs, that any difficulty he meets in them, makes him
pine and languish like Amnon, who could no way recover his own health but by
violating his sisters honor. 2 Samuel 13. 14. The revengeful labors under an
Hydropic thirst till he have the blood of his enemy: all the liquor of Absaloms
sheep-sheering could not quench his, without the slaughter of his brother, 2 Samuel 1^. 29. And thus every one of our passions keeps us upon the rack till
they have obtained their designs. Nay when they have, the very emtiness of
those acquisitions is a new torment, and puts us upon fresh pursuits. Thus
between the impetuousness of our desires, and the emtiness of our enjoiments,
we still disquiet our selves in vain, Psa. 39. 7. And whilst we have such
cruel taskmasters, it is not strange to find us groaning under our burdens. If
we will indulge to all our vicious or foolish appetites, think our lives bound
up with them, and solicit the satisfaction of them with as impatient a
vehemence, as Rachel did for children, Genesis 30. 1. give me them or I die: no
wonder that we are always complaining of disappointments, since in these the
very success is a defeat, and is but the exchanging the pain of a craving
ravenous stomach, for that of a cloi'd and nauseated. Indeed men of this temper
condemn themselves to a perpetual restlessness, they are like phantastic
mutineers, who when their superiors send them blanks to write their own
conditions, know not what will please them: and even Omnipotence it self cannot
satisfy these till it have new molded them, and reduced their desires to a
certainty.

16. BUT in the mean time how unjustly do they accuse God of illiberality,
because every thing answers not their humor? He has made them reasonable
creatures, and has provided them satisfactions proportionable to their nature;
but if they will have wild irrational expectations, neither his wisdom, nor his
goodness is concerned to satisfy those. His supplies are real and solid, and
therefore have no correspondence to imaginary wants. If we will create such to
our selves, why do we not create an imaginary satisfaction to them? Twere the
merrier frenzy of the two, to be like the mad Athenian that thought all the
ships that came into the harbor his own: and twere better Ixion like to have
our Arms filled with a cloud, then to have them perpetually beating our own
breasts, and be still tormenting our selves with unsatisfiable desires. Yet
this is the state to which men voluntarily subject themselves, and then quarrel
at God because they will not let themselves be happy. But sure their very
complaints justify God, and argue that he has dealt very kindly with them, and
afforded them all the necessary accomodations of life: for did they want them,
they would not be so sensible of the want of the other. He that is at perfect
ease may feel with some vexation the biting of a flea or gnat, which would not
be at all observable if he were upon the rack. And should God change the scene,
and make these nice people feel the destitution of necessaries; all these
regrets about superfluities would be overwhelmed. In the mean time how
deplorable a thing is it, that we are still the poorer for Gods bounty, that
those to whom he has opened his hand widest, should open their mouth so too, in
outcries and murmurs? For I think I may say that generally, those that are the
farthest removed from want, are so from content too; they take no notice of all
the real substantial blessings they enjoy, leave these (like the ninty nine
sheep in the wilderness) forgotten and neglected, to go in quest after some
fugitive satisfaction, which like a shadow flies still faster in proportion to
their pursuit.

17. AND now would God they could be recalled from this unprofitable chase, and
instead of the Horsleeches note, Give give, Prove. 30. 15. take up that of the
Psalmist, what shall I render to the Lord for all the benefits he has don unto
me? Psa. 116. 12. Let them count how many valuable or rather inestimable
things, they have received from his mercy* and then confront them with those
corrections they have found from his justice; and if they do this impartially,
I doubt not they will find wherewithal to check their highest mutinies; and
will join with me in confessing, that their good things abundantly outweigh
their ill.

18. IF now we carry on the comparison to the last circumstance, and consider
the constancy, we shall find as wide a difference. Let us take the Psalmists
testimony, and there will appear a very distant date of his mercies and
punishments. His mercies endure for ever Psalm. 136. whereas his wrath endures
but the twinkling of an eye Psalm. 30. 5. And accordingly God owns his acts of
severity as his strange work Isa. 28. 21. that which he resorts to only upon
special emergencies; but his mercies are renewed every morning, Lam. 3. 25. and
doubtless we may all upon trial affirm the same. There are many of the most
necessary comforts of life which do not only sometimes visit us as guests, but
dwell with us as inmates and domestics. How many are there who have lived in a
perpetual affluence from their cradles to their graves, have never known what
it is to want? And tho the goods of fortune are perhaps less constant to some,
yet the refreshments of nature are usually so to us all. We eat and drink, we
sleep, we recreate, we converse in a continued circle, and go our round almost
as constantly as the sun does his. Or if God does sometimes a little interrupt
us in it, put some short restraint upon our refreshments, yet that
comparatively to the time we enjoy them, is but proportionable to the stop he
has sometimes made of the Sun, Jos. 10. 13. 2 Kings 20. 8. or of the sea, Exodus
14. 21. which as they were no subversions of the course of nature, so neither
are those short pauses he sometimes makes, a repeal of those fixed and customary
benefits his providence usually allots us. But who is there can say that any
one of his afflictions has bin of equal continuance, or has pressed him with so
few intermissions? Perhaps he may have mist some few nights sleep: but what is
that to a twelve-months, or perhaps a whole lives enjoying it? It Is possible his
stomach and his meat have not always bin ready together; but how much oftener
have they met to his delight? and generally those things that are most useful,
are but rarely interrupted. Nay to a great many even the delicacies of life are
no less constant, and their luxuries are as quotidian as their bread: whereas
unless their vices or their fancies create uneasinesses to them, those that
come immediately from Gods hand, make long intermissions and short stays. Yet
for all this they that should mesure by the uncessantness of men's complaints,
would judge that the scene was quite reverst, and that our good things are as
Job speaks, swifter then a wavers shuttle, Job. 7. 6. whilst our ill, like
Gehazies Leprosy, cleave inseparably to us. 2. King 5. 10.

19. THE truth is we will not let our selves enjoy those intervals God allows
us, but when a calamity does retire we will still keep it in fiction and
imagination; revolve it in our minds, and because it is possible it may return,
look upon it as not gone. Like Aguish patients we count our selves sick on our
well-day, because we expect a fit the next. A strange stupid folly thus to
court vexation, and be miserable in Chimera. Does any man or indeed any beast
desire to keep a distastful relish still in his mouth, to chew the cud upon
gall and wormwood? yet certainly there are a multitude of people whose lives
are embittered to them merely by these fantastic imaginary sufferings. Nor do
we only fright our selves with images and Ideas of past calamities, but we
dress up new bugbears and mormoes, are Poetic and aerial in our inventions, and
lay Romantic scenes of distresses. This is a thing very incident to jealous
natures, who are always raising alarms to themselves. A suspicious man looks
on every body with dread. One man he fears has designs upon his fortune,
another on his reputation, perhaps a third upon his life: whilst in the mean
time, the only ill design against him is managed by himself; his own causeless
fears and jealousies which put him in a state of hostility with all the world;
and do often betray him to the very things he groundlesly suspected. For it is
not seldom seen that men have incurred real mischiefs by a fond solicitude of
avoiding imaginary ones. I do not question but this is a state calamitous
enough, and shall acknowledge it very likely that such persons shall have little
or no truce from their troubles, who have such an unexhausted spring within
themselves; yet we may say to them as the Prophet did to the house of Jacob, Is
the spirit of the Lord straightened? are these his doings? Mich. 2. 7. Such men
must not cry out that Gods hand lies heavy upon them, but their own; and so can
be no impeachment to the truth of our observation, that Gods blessings are of a
longer duration, keep a more fixed steady course then his punishments. The
result of all is, that the generality of mankind have good things (even as to
temporals) which do in the three respects forementioned exceed the ill. I mean
the true and real ills which God sends, tho not those fanciful ones they raise
to themselves.

20. AND now why should it not appear a reasonable proposition that men should
entertain themselves with the plesanter parts of Gods dispensations to them,
and not always pore upon the harsher: especially since the former are so much
a fairer object, and perpetually in their eye, why should we look on the more
sadening spectacles of human frailty or misfortune, through all the magnifying
optics our fancies can supply, and perversely turn away our eyes from the
cheerfuller? Yet this God knows is too much the case with most of us. How
nicely and critically do we observe every little adverse accident of our lives?
what tragical stories of them do our memories present us with? When alas a
whole current of prosperity glides by without our notice. Like little children
our fingers are never off the sore place, till we have picked every light
scratch into an Ulcer. Nay like the leuder sort of beggars, we make artificial
sores to give us a pretense of complaint. And can we then expect God should
concern himself in the cure? Indeed in the course of his ordinary providence
there is no cure for such people, unless it be by revulsion, the making them
feel the smart of some very great and pressing affliction. They therefore put
themselves under an unhappy dilemma, either to continue their own tormentors,
or to endure the severest course of Gods discipline. It Is true the last is the
more eligible, but I am sure the best way is to prevent both, by a just and
grateful sense of Gods mercies, which will be yet farther illustrated if we
compare them with our own demerits.

SECT. V.
Of our Demerit toward God.
1. IT is the common fault of our nature, that we are very apt to be partial to
our selves; and to square our expectations more by what we wish, then by what
we deserve. Something of this is visible in our dealings with men. We often look
to reap where we have not sowed, Mat. 25. 25. expect benefits where we do none:
yet in civil transactions there are still remaining such footsteps of natural
justice, that we are not universally to unreasonable: all traffic and commerce
subsisting upon the principle of equal retribution, giving one good thing for
another equivalent; so that no man expects to buy corn with chaff, or Gold with
dross. But in our dealings with God, we put off even this common equity; are
vast in our expectations, but penurious and base in our returns; and as if God
were our steward not our Lord, we require of him with a confidence proper only
to those who ask their own: whilst in the interim, what we offer to him is with
such a disdainful slightness, as if we meant it rather an alms then an homage.

2. GOD indeed is so munificent, that he prevents us with his blessings, Psalm.
21. 3. gives us many things before we ask: had he not don so, we could not have
bin so much as in a capacity of asking. But tho the first and fundamental
mercies are absolute and free, yet the subsequent are conditional: and
accordingly we find in scripture, that God makes no promise either concerning
this life or a better, but on condition of Obedience. The jews who had much
larger proposals of temporal happiness then Christians have, yet never had them
upon other terms. God expressly articled for the preformance of his commands,
and made all their enjoiments forfeitable upon the failure, as we may see at
large in the book of Deuteronomy. And under the Gospel St. Paul appropriates
the promises as well of this life as of that to come unto godliness, 1 Timothy 4.
8. It will therefore be a material inquiry for every man, whether he have kept
his title entire, and have not by breach of the condition forfeited his clame,
even to the most common ordinary blessings; for if he have, common reason will
tell him he can challenge none: and that the utmost he can hope for, must be
only upon a new score of unmerited favor.

3. And here certainly every mouth must be stopped, and all the world become
guilty before God, Romans 3. 19. For alas who is there that can say his obedience
has bin in any degree proportionable to his obligation? It Is manifest we have
all received abundantly from Gods hand, but what has he had from ours? I may
challenge the best man, to cast up the account of his best day, and tell me
whether his receipts have not infinitely exceeded his disbursments: whether for
any one good thing he has don, he has not received many. Nor is the disparity
only in number, but much more in value. Gods works are perfect, all he does for
us like the first 6 days productions, are all very good, Genesis 1. but alas our
very righteousness is as filthy rags, Esai. 64. 6. we offer him the blind and
the lame, Mal. 1. 9. a few yewning drowsy prayers perhaps, wherein he has the
lest share: the fuller current of our thoughts running toward our secular or
sinful concerns. We drop it may be a scanty Alms, wherein it is odds our
vainglory scrambles for a share with him, if it do not wholly ingross it. We
sit an hour at a sermon, but it is rather to hear the wit or eloquence of the
preacher, then the word of God. Like the duller sort of animals, we like well
to have our itching ears scratcht, but grow sturdy and restive when we should
do what we are there taught. In a word all our services at the best are
miserably maimed, and imperfect; and too often corrupt and unsound. So that God
may well upbraid us as he did Israel, Offer it now to thy governor, will he be
pleased with it? Mal. 1. 8. These very iniquities of our holy things, are
enough to defeat all our pretenses to any good from Gods hand; yet God knows
this is much the best side of us: it is not every one that can make so fair an
appearance as this amounts to. With many, there is no place to complain of the
blemishes of their sacrifices, for they offer none; of whom we may say in the
words of the Psalmist, God is not in all their thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4. I fear
there want not those who drive away the day, the week, nay the year, without
remembering in whose hand their time is, Psalm. 31. 18. or paying him any solemn
tribute of it; who enjoy the services of all inferior creatures, without
considering that theirs are more due to the supreme Lord: in a word, who live
as if they were absolutely independent; had their existence purely from
themselves, and had no Creator to whom they owed their being, or any consequent
duty. And sure men who thus discard themselves from Gods family, have very
little reason to expect the provisions of it: yet even such as these have the
impudence to complain, if any thing be wanting to their needs (shall I say) or
to their lusts; can ravingly profane Gods name in their impatiencies, which
they know not how to use in their prayers: as if the Deity were considerable in
no other notion, then that of their caterer or steward.

4. IF now we seriously reflect, what can be more admirable then that infinite
patience of God; who notwithstanding the miserable infirmities of the pious,
and the lewd contemt of the impious, still goes on resolutly in his bounty, and
continues to all mankind some, and to some all his temporal blessings? He has
no obligation of justice to do so, for it is no part of his compact; he has
none of gratitude, for he is perpetually affronted and disobliged. Surely we
may well say with David, Is this after the manner of men, O Lord? 1 Chro. 17.
17. Can the highest human indulgence bear any proportion with this divine
Clemency? no certainly, no finite patience but would be exhausted with the
thousandth part of our provocations.

5. BUT is not our dealing too as little after the manner of men? I mean of
reasonable creatures: for us who have forfeited our right to all, and yet by
mere favor are still kept in the possession of many great blessings: for us to
grow mutinous, because there is perhaps something more trifling which is denied
us, is such a stupid ingratitude, as one would think impossible to human
nature. Should a Tenant with us have at once forfeited his lease and
maliciously affronted his Landlord, he would sure think himself very gently
dealt with, if he were suffered to enjoy but a part of his first estate; but we
should think him not only insolent, but mad, who when the whole were left him,
should quarrel and clamor if he might not have his Cottage adorned with marble
floors, and gilded roofs. Yet at this wild rate we behave our selves to our
great Landlord, grow pettish and angry if we have not every thing we can fancy,
tho we enjoy many more useful, merely by his indulgence. And can there be any
thing imagined more unreasonable? Let us therefore if not for piety, yet at
least to justify our clame to rationality, be more ingenuous; let us not
consult only with our fond appetites, and be thus perpetually soliciting their
satisfaction; but rather reflect on what tenure we hold what we already have,
even that of superabundant mercy; and fear, least like insolent beggars by the
impudence of our demands we divert even that charity which was designed us. In
short let every man when he computes what he wants of his desires, reckon as
exactly how much he is short of his duty; and when he has duly pondered both,
he will think it a very gentle composition to have the one unsupplied, so he
may have the other remitted; and will see cause contentedly to sit down and say
with honest Mephibosheth, What right have I to cry any more unto the King? 2 Samuel 19. 28. But if it be thus with us upon the mere score of our
imperfectionsor omissions, what an obnoxious state do our innumerable actual
sins put us in? If the spots of our sacrifices are provoking, what are our
sacrileges and bold profanations? If those who neglect or forget God are listed
among his enemies, what are those who avowedly defy him? Indeed he that soberly
considers the world, and sees how daringly the divine Majesty is daily
affronted, cannot but wonder that the perversions of our manners, those
prodigies in morality, should not be answered with as great prodigies in
calamity too; that we should ever have other ruin then that of Sodom, or the
earth serve us for any other purpose then to be, as it was to Korah, Number. 16.
our living sepulcher.

6. NOR is this longanimity of God observable only toward the mass and
collective body of mankind, but to every man in particular. Who is there that
if he ransack his conscience, shall not find guilts enough to justify God in the
utmost severities toward him? so that how much soever his punishments are
short of that, so much he evidently owes to the lenity and compassion of God.
And who is there that suffers in this world the utmost that God can inflict? We
have a great many suffering capacities, and if those were all filled up to the
height, our condition would scarce differ from that of the damned in any thing
but duration. But God is more merciful, and never inflicts at that rate on us
here. Every man's experience can tell him, that God discharges not his whole
quiver at once upon him, but exemts him in many more particulars then he
afflicts him; and yet the same experience will probably tell most of us, that
we are not so modest in our assaults upon God; we attacque him in all his
concerns (as far as our feeble malice can reach) in his Sovereignty, in his
honor, in his relatives, nay sometimes in his very essence and being. And as
they are universal in respect of him, so also in regard of our selves: we
engage all our powers in this war, do not only yield (as the Apostle speaks)
our members instruments of unrighteousness, Romans 6. 18. but we press them upon
the service of sensual and vile lusts, even beyond our native propensions. Nor
are only the members of our body, but the faculties of our souls also thus
employed; our understandings are busied first in contriving sins, and then
excuses and disguises for them; our wills are yet more sturdy rebels, and when
the understanding is beat out of all its outworks, yet sullenly keep their
hold in spite of all conviction; and our affections madly rush on like the
horse into the battle, Jer. 8. 6. deterred by nothing of danger, so there be
but sin enough in the attemt.

7. AND now with what face can people that thus pursue an hostility, expect
that it should not be returned to them? does any man denounce war, and yet
expect from his adversary all the caresses, the obligements of friendship?
self-defence will promt even the meekest nature to despoile his enemy at least
of those things which he uses to his annoiance; and if God should give way even
to that lowest degree of anger, where or what were we? for since we employ our
whole selves against him, nothing but destruction can avert our injuries. But
it is happy for us we have to do with one who cannot fear us, who knows the
impotence of our wild attemts, and so allai's his resentment of our insolence,
with his pity of our follies. Were it not for this, we should not be left in a
possiblity so often to iterate our provocations; every wicked imagination and
black design, would be at once defeated and punished by infatuation and frenzy:
every blasphemous Atheistical speech would wither the tongue, like that arm of
Jeroboam which he stretched against the Prophet, 2 King. 13. 4. and every
impious act would like the prohibited retrospect of Lots Wife, fix us perpetual
monuments of divine vengeance.

8. AND then how much do we owe to the mercy and commiseration of our God, that
he suffers not his whole displesure to arise, Psa. 78. 39. that he abates any
thing of that just severity he might use toward us? He that is condemned to the
Gallows, would think it a mercy to escape with any inferior penalty: why have
we then such mean thoughts of Gods Clemency, when he descends to such low
compositions with us? corrects us so lightly as if twere only matter of
ceremony and punctilioe, the regard of his honor, rather then the execution of
his wrath. For alas let him among us that is the most innocent, and
undeservedly afflicted, muster up his sins and sufferings, and he will see a
vast inequality: and (had he not other grounds of assurance) would be almost
temted to think those were not the provoking cause, they are so
unproportionably answered. He sins in innumerable instances, and is punished in
few; he sins habitually and perpetually, and suffers rarely and seldom; nay
perhaps he has sometimes sinned with greediness, and yet God has punished with
regret and reluctance, How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? Hos. 11. 8. And when
all these disparities are considered, we must certainly join heartily in Ezras
confession, Thou O God has punished us less then our iniquities deserve, Ezra.
9. 13.

9. NAY besides all our antecedent, we have after guilts no less provoking, I
mean our ungracious repinings at the light chastisements of our former sins,
our outcries upon every little uneasiness, which may justly cause God to turn
our whips into scorpions; and according as he threatened Israel Lev. 26. 18. to
punish us yet seven times more. And yet even this does not immediately
exasperate him. The Jews were an instance how long he could bear with a
murmuring generation; but certainly we of this nation are a greater, yet let us
not be high-minded but fear, Romans 11. 20. for we see at last the doom fell
heavy tho it was protracted, a succession of miraculous judgments pursued those
murmurers, so that not one of them entered Canaan. And it is very observable that
whereas to other sins Gods denunciations are in scripture conditional and
reversible; this was absolute and bound with an oath, He swear in his wrath
that they should not enter into his rest, Psa. 95. 11. And yet if we compare
the hardships of the Israelites in the wilderness, with most of our sufferings,
we shall be forced to confess our mutinies have less temtation, and
consequently less excuse; from whence it is very reasonable to infer, as the
greatness of our danger if we persist, so the greatness of Gods long suffering
toward us, who yet allows us space to reform: and sure new complaints sound
very ill from us, who are liable to so severe an account for our old ones. I
fear the most resigned persons of us will upon recollection find, they have
upon one occasion or other out-vied the number of the Israelites murmurs,
therefore unless we will emulate them in their plagues, let us fear to add one
more, lest that make up the fatal sum, and render our destruction irrevocable.

10. UPON all these considerations it appears how little reason any of us have
to repine at our heaviest pressures; but there is yet a farther circumstance to
be adverted to, and is too applicable to many of us, that is, that our sins are
not only the constant meritorious cause of our sufferings, but they are also
very often the instrumental cause also; and produce them not only by way of
retaliation from God, but by a natural efficacy. Solomon tells us he that loves
pleasure, shall be a poor man, and that a whorish woman will bring a man to a
piece of bread Prove. 6. 26. that he that sits long at the wine shall have
redness of eyes, Chap. 23. 29. 30. that the slothful soul shall suffer hunger,
19. 15. and all these not by immediate supernatural infliction from God, but as
the proper genuine effects of those respective vices. Indeed God in his
original establishment of things, has made so close a connection between sin and
punishment, that he is not often put to exert his power in any extraordinary
way, but may trust us to be our own Lictors, our own backslidings reprove us
Jer. 2. 19. and our iniquities are of themselves enough to become our ruin,
Exodus 18. 38.

11. It may therefore be a seasonable question for every man to put to himself,
whether the troubles he labors under; be not of this sort; whether the poverty
he complains of, be not the effect of his riot and profusion, his sloth and
negligence? whether when he cries out that his comeliness is turned into
corruption, Dan. 10. 8. he may not answer himself, that they are his visits to
the harlots houses which have thus made rottenness enter into his bones, Hab.
3. 16. whether when he is beset with contentions, and has wounds without cause,
he have not tarried long at the wine; when he has lost his friend, whether he
have not by some treacherous wound Eccle. 22. 22. forced him to depart: or when
he lies under infamy, whether it be not only the Echo of his own scandalous
crimes. If he find it thus with him, certainly his mouth is stopped, and he
cannot without the most disingenuous impudence complain of any but himself. He
could not be ignorant that such effects did naturally attend such causes, and
therefore if he would take the one, he must take the other also. No man sure
can be so mad, as to think God should work miracles (disunite those things
which nature has conjoined) only that he may sin at ease, have all the bestial
plesures he can project, and none of the consequent smart. We read in deed God
divided the sea, but it was to make the way for the Ransomed of the Lord to
pass over Isa. 51. 10. those who were his own people, and went in at his
command; but when they were secured, we find the waters immediately returned to
their chanel, and overwhelmed the Egyptians, who ventured without the same
warrant. And sure the case is alike here, when any man can produce Gods mandate
for him to run into all excess of riot, to desecrate the temple of the holy
Ghost, and make his body the member of an harlot, 1 Cor. 6. 15. In a word when
God bids him do any of those things, which God and good men abhor, then and not
before he may hope he may sever such acts from their native penal effects; for
till then (how profuse soever some Legendary stories represent him) he will
certainly never so bestow his miracles.

12. But I fear upon scrutiny there will appear a yet farther circumstance upon
which to arraign our mutinies, for tho it be unreasonable enough to charge God
with the ill effects of our own leudness, yet it is a higher step to murmur
because we have not materials to be wicked enough. And this I fear is the case
with too many of us, who tho they are not so dispoil'd by their sins, but that
they can keep up their round of vicious plesures, yet are discontented because
they think some others have them more exquisite, think their vices are not
Gentile enough, unless they be very expensive, and are covetous only that they
may be more Luxurious. These are such as St James speaks of, who ask amiss,
that they may consume it upon their lusts. Jam. 4. 3. and sure to be mutinous
on this account is one of the highest pieces of frenzy. Would any man in his
wits tell another he will cut his throat, and then expect he should furnish him
with a knife for it? And yet to this amount our murmurs against God, for his
not giving us those things wherewith we only design to wage war with him. For
surely if the discontents of mankind were closely inspected, I doubt a great
many would be found of this kind. It concerns the Reader therefore to make the
inquisition in his own breast, both in this and all the former particulars, and
I doubt not, if he do it with any ingenuity and uprightness, he will be
abundantly convinced that for his few mites of obedience he paies to God, he
receives talents of mercies (even temporal) from him: and that on the other
side, that God as much underpaies his sins, as he overpaies his services: by
which God does sufficiently attest how little he delights in our affliction,
how gladly he takes any light occasion of caressing and cherishing, and
over-skips those of punishing us. Which sure ought to make us convert all our
displesures against our sins, which extort those acts of severity from him, to
which his nature is most averse. And here indeed our resentments cannot be too
sharp, but toward God our fittest address will be in the penitential form of
the prophet Daniel, O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face, but to the Lord
our God belong mercies and forgiveness, tho we have rebelled against him, Dan.
9. 8. 9. And as his justice is to be revered in his inflictions, so is his
wisdom also, in so disposing of events to particular persons, as may best
consist with the universal Economy and managery of the world, the
consideration whereof is the design of the next Section.

SECT. VI.
Of Gods general Providence.
1. WHEN God made the universe, he intended not only to glorify himself in one
transient act of his power, and then leave this great and wonderful production
of his, as the Ostrich her eggs in the wilderness, Lam. 4. 3. but having drawn
it out of its first Chaos, he secured it from returning thither again, by
establishing as a due symmetry of parts, so also a regular order of motion:
hence it is that the heavens have their constant revolutions, the earth its
succession of determinate seasons, animals their alternate course of generation
and corruption: and by this wise Economy, the world after so many thousand
years, seems still in its spring and first beauty. But it had bin in vain to
have thus secured the defection of the creatures, if man for whose sake they
were made had bin excluded from this care. His faculty of reason would have
made him but the more fatal instrument of confusion, and taught him the more
compendious ways of disturbing the world. Job compares him to the wild asses
colt. Job 11. 12. which takes its range without adverting to any thing of the
common good. God has therefore doubly hedged in this unruly creature, made a
fence of laws about him (both natural and positive) and besides has taken him
into the common circle of his providence, so that he, as well as the rest of
the creation, has his particular station assigned him; and that not only in
reference to other creatures, but himself; has put a difference between one man
and another, ordained several ranks and Classes of men, and endowed them with
special and appropriate qualifications for those stations wherein he has set
them.

2. THIS, as it is a work of infinite wisdom in God, so it is of unspeakable
advantage to men. Without this regular disposure, the world would have bin in
the same confusion which we read of in the host of the Midianites, every man's
sword against his fellow, Jud. 7. 22. Nothing but force could determine who
should do, or enjoy any thing; and even that decision also would have bin
repelable by a greater force: so that we have all reason to confess the utility
of that order God has set among men: and even he that bears the lowest and most
despicable place in it, is certainly infinitely more happy by contributing to
that general Harmony, then he could be in any state of discord.

3. WERE this now well considered, methinks it should silence all our
complaints, and men should not be so vehemently concerned in what part of the
structure it pleases the great Architect to put them: for every man is to look
on himself only as a small parcel of those materials which God is to put into
form. Every stone is not fit for the corner, nor every little rafter for the
main beam: the wisdom of the Master builder is alone to determine that. And sure
there cannot be a more vile contemt of the divine wisdom then to dispute his
choice. Had God wisdom enough to contrive this vast and beautiful fabric, and
may he not be trusted with one of us poor worms? Did he by his wisdom make the
heavens, and by his understandimg stretch out the clouds, Pro. 3. 19. and shall
he not know where to place a little lump of figured earth? this is certainly
the most absurd distrust imaginable, and yet this is really the true meaning of
our repining at the condition he has placed us in.

4. THE truth is, we are so full of our selves, that we can see nothing beyond
it: every man expects God should place him where he has a mind to be, tho by it
he discompose the whole scheme of his providence. But tho we are so senselessly
partial, yet God is not so: he that comprehends at once the whole concern of
mankind, applies himself to the accomodating those, not the humoring any
particular person. He has made the great and the small and cares for all
alike, Wisd. 6. 7. He is the common Father of mankind, and disposes things for
the public advantage of this great family, and it is not all the impatient
cravings of a froward child that shall make him recede from his designed
method. We are apt enough, I am sure, to tax it not only as a weakness, but
injustice too in a Prince, when he indulges any thing to a private favorite to
the public disadvantage; yet so unequal are we, that we murmur at God for not
doing that, which we murmur at men for doing.

5. BESIDES a man is to consider, that other men have the same appetites with
himself. If he dislike an inferior state, why should he not think others do so
too? and then as the wise man speaks, whose voice shall the Lord hear? Ecclus.
34. 24. It Is sure great insolence in me to expect that God should be more
concerned to humor me, then those multitudes of others who have the same
desires. And the more impatient my longings are, the less in reason should be
my hopes; for mutiny is no such endearing quality as to render any man a
dearling to God. But if all men should have equal satisfactions, we should
puzle even Omnipotence it self. Every man would be above and superior, yet
those are comparative terms, and if no man were below, no man could be above.
So in wealth, most men desire more, but every man does at least desire to keep
what he has; how then shall one part of the world be supplied without the
diminution of the other, unless there should be as miraculous a multiplication
of tresure for men's avarice, as there was of Loaves for their hunger, Mat. 16.
9. It was a good answer which the Ambassadors of an oppressed Province made to
Antony, If O Emperor, thou will have double taxes from us, thou must help us to
double Springs and Harvests. And sure God must be at the expense of a new
Creation, make us a double world, if he should oblige himself to satisfy all
the unreasonable appetites of men: and if he satisfy not all, why should any
particular person look that his alone should be indulged to?

6. YET as unreasonable as it is, the most of us do betray such a persuasion.
No man is discontented that there are lower, as well as higher degrees in the
world, that there are poor as well as rich, but all sensible men assent to the
fitness of it: yet if themselves happen to be set in the lower form, they
exclame as if the whole order of the world were subverted; which is a palpable
indication that they think that Providence which governs others, should serve
them, and distribute to them not what it, but themselves think good. This
immoderate self-love is the spring and root of most of our complaints, makes us
such unequal judges in our own concerns, and promts us to put in Caveats and
exceptions on our own behalf, as David did on his sons, See that thou hurt not
the young man Absalom? 2 Samuel 18. 15. as if God were to manage the government
of the world with a particular regard to our liking, and were like the Angels
at Sodom, Genesis 19. 22. to do nothing till we had got into Zoar, had all our
demands secured to us.

7. IT would indeed astonish a considering man to see, that although the concerns
of men are all disposed by an unerring Wisdom, and acknowledged by themselves
to be so, yet that scarce any man is pleased. The truth is, we have generally
in us the worser part of the Levelers principle, and tho we can very
contentedly behold multitudes below us, yet are impatient to see any above us;
not only the foot (to use the Apostles simile) complains that it is not the
hand, but the ear because it is not the eye, 1 Cor. 12. 15. 16. Not only the
lowermost, but the higher ranks of men are uneasy, if there be any one step
above them. Nay so importunate is this aspiring humor, that we see men are
forced to feed it tho but with air and shadows. He that cannot make any real
advance in his quality, will yet do it in effigy, in all little gaieties and
pageantries of it. Every degree in these respects not only emulates, but
imitates its superior, till at last by that impatience of their proper distance
they make it greater, and sink even below their first state by their ridiculous
profusion. Indeed the world seems to be so overrun with this vanity, that
there is little visible distinction of degrees, and one had need go to the
Heralds office to know men's qualities, for neither their habit nor equipage do
now adays inform us with any certainty.

1. BUT by all these it appears that men look on themselves only as single
persons, without reference to the community whereof they are members. For did
they consider that, they would endevor rather to become the places wherein they
were set, by doing the duties belonging to them, then be perpetually projecting
for a change. A tree that is every year transplanted will never bear fruit, and
a mind that is always hurried from its proper station, will scarce ever do
good in any. This is excellently expressed to us by Solomon, As a bird that
wandereth from his nest, so is a man that wandereth from his place. Pro. 27. 8.
It Is easy to divine the fate of those young ones from whom the damn wanders, and
it is as easy to guess how the duties of that place will be performed, whose
owner is always upon the wing and making toward another. I wish we had not
too costly experiments both in Church and State of the truth of this
observation. Alas we forget that we are all servants to the same Master, and
that he is to appoint in what office we shall serve him. How should we like it
in any of our own families, to have an inferior officer leave his work undon,
because he has more mind to be Major-Domo? Yet this insolence we every day
repete toward God, sullenly dispute his orders, and unless we may choose our
own imploiments, will do nothing.

9. IT IS evident this perverse temper of mankind breeds a great deal of mischief
and disturbance in the world, but would breed arrant confusion and subversion,
if it were suffered to have its full range. If God permit but one ambitious
spirit to break loose in an age as the instrument of his wrath, what
destruction does it often times make? How does it cause the whole earth to
tremble, and shake Kingdoms as is said of Nebuchadnezzar, Isa. 14. 16. and may
be said of many others of those wholesale robbers who have dignified the
trade? But if every aspiring humor should be as prosperous, where would it find
fuel to maintain the flame? No doubt every age produces men of as unbounded
desires as Alexander or Caesar, but God gives them not the same opportunities to
trouble the world. And accordingly in the more petty ambitions of private men
he often orders it so, that those soaring minds can find no benign gale to help
their mounting. He that sets bounds to the sea, saying, hitherto shall thou
come and no farther, and tho the waves thereof toss themselves yet can they not
prevail, tho they roar yet can they not pass over, Jer. 5. 22. does also
depress the swelling pride of men, hangs clogs and weights upon them that they
cannot rise to their affected height. For tho we are all willing to forget it,
yet God remembers that he is the Rector of the Universe, and will assert his
Dominion. The subtilest contrivance cannot circumvent him, the most dareing
pretender cannot wrest any thing out of his hand, the Lord will still be King,
be the people never so impatient, Psa. 99. 1. Twill therefore sure be as well
our prudence as our duty to be still and know that he is God, Psalm. 46. 10.
with an humble dereliction of our own wills acquiesce in his, and not by
ineffective struglings provoke, whom we are sure never to subdue. We may like
unmanaged horses foam and fret, but still God has the bridle in our jaws, and
we cannot advance a step farther then he permits us. Why should we then create
torment to our selves by our repinings, which only sets us farther from our
aims. It Is Gods declared method to exalt the lowly, and it is observable in the
first two Kings of Israel who were of Gods immediate election, that he
surprised them with that dignity when they were about mean and humble
imploiments, the one searching his fathers Asses, the other keeping his fathers
sheep: and would men honestly and diligently exercise themselves in the
business of their proper calling, they might perhaps find it a more direct road
to advancement, then all the sinister arts by which ambitious men endeavor to
climb. Solomon sets it down as an Aphorism, see thou a man diligent in his
business he shall stand before Kings, he shall not stand before mean men Pro.
22. 29. But whether it happen to have that effect or no, it will have a better,
for it will sweeten his present condition, divert his mind from mutinous
reflections on other men's height, and his own lowness, for it is commonly men who
mind not their work that are at so much leisure to gaze. He that carefully
plies his own business will have his thoughts more concentred: and doubtless
it is no small happiness to have them so, for it is their gadding too much abroad,
looking on other men's conditions that sends them back (like Dianah deflowred)
to put all in uproar at home. The son of Syrach speaks with transportation of
the state even of him that labors and is content, and calls it a sweet life,
Ecclus. 40. 18. And certainly it is infinitely more so then that of the greatest
Prince whose mind swells beyond his territories.

10. UPON all these considerations it cannot but appear very reasonable that we
should leave God to govern the world, not be putting in like the sons of Zebedee
for the highest seats; but contentedly rest our selves where he has placed us,
till his providence (not our own designs) advance us. We can no where be so
obscure as to be hid from his eyes, who as he valued the widows mite above the
great oblations of the rich; so he will no less graciously accept the humble
endevors of the mean, then the more eminent services of the mighty; himself
having declared, that he accepts according to what a man has, and not
according to what he has not, 2 Cor. 8. 12. so that in what rank soever a man
is set, he has still the opportunity of approving himself to God, and tho in
the eye of the world he be a vessel of dishonor, yet in the day when God comes
to make up his Jewels Mal. 3. 17. there will be another estimate made of him
who regularly moves in his own sphere. And sure he that sits down in this
acquiescence is a happier man, then he that enjoies the greatest worldly
splendour: but infinitely more so then he who impatiently covets but cannot
attain them; for such a man puts himself upon a perpetual rack, keeps his
appetites up at the utmost stretch, and yet has nothing wherewith to satisfy
them. Let therefore our ease if not our duty promt us to acquiescence, and a
ready submission to Gods disposals, to which we have yet a farther inducement
from that distinct care he has over every man's peculiar, by which he
proportions to him, what is really best for him; of which we are farther to
consider in the next Section.

SECT. VII.
Of Gods particular Providence.
1. IT is the imperfection of our finite nature that we cannot at once attend
to diverse things, but the more vehement our intention is upon one, the greater
is our neglect of the rest. But Gods infinity cannot be so bounded; his eyes at
once see, and his providence at once orders all the most distant and disparate
things in the world. He is not such an Epicurean Deity, as to sequester himself
wholly to the enjoiment of his own felicity, and to despise the concerns of poor
mortals; but tho he have his dwelling so high, yet he humbles himself to
behold the things in heaven and earth, Psalm. 113. 5. Nor does his providence
confine it self to the more splendid and greater parts of managery, the conduct
of Empires and states, but it descends to the lowest parts of his creation, to
the fowls of the air, to the lilies of the field, and then sure our Saviors
inference as to mankind is irrefragable, are ye not much better then they? Mat.
6. 26. If a sparrow (as he elsewhere tells his disciples) cannot fall to the
ground without Gods particular notice, surely no human creature is less
considerable to him; nay if our very hairs are numbered, we cannot think the
excrescence is of more value then the stock, but must conclude that God with a
particular advertence watches over the concerns of every man.

2. NOW God being infinitely good, cannot thus attend us upon any insidious
design of doing us mischief, he watches over us as a guardian not as a spy; and
directs his observation to the more seasonable adapting his benefits: and as he
is thus gracious in designing our advantage, so is he no less wise in
contriving it. All things says the wiseman are not profitable for all men
Ecclus. 37. 28. Indeed nothing is absolutely good but God, all created things
are good or ill in reference to that to which they are applied. Meat is good,
but to a surfeited stomach it is not only nauseous but dangerous. Fire is good,
but if put in our bosoms, not only burns our cloths but flesh.

And as humane wisdom directs the right application of these and the like, so
the supreme and divine orders events according to the disposition of the person
concerned; he knows our frame Psalm. 103. 14. and discerns what operation such
or such things will have upon us, while we who know neither our selves nor them
can make but random guesses, and worse choices. And sure he that does but thus
in the general acknowledge Gods providence, goodness and wisdom (which he is,
no Christian who does not) has a sufficient amulet against all his solicitudes,
much more his repinings. He cannot think he suffers unawares to him who sees
all things. He cannot think his sufferings are designed for ill to him because
they are disposed by him who intends and projects his good. Nor can he fear
those intentions can miscarry, which are guided by an infinite and unerring
wisdom, and backed by an uncontrolable power. And sure this is as the Apostle
speaks Heb. 6. 18. strong consolation if we would but duly apply it.

3. YET because general notions do often make but light impressions on us, it
may not be amiss to make a little more inspection, and to observe how
applicable they are to the several kinds of our discontents. Now those may be
reduced to two, for either we are troubled at the want of something we desire,
or at the suffering of something we would avert; so that the two notions of
privative and positive, divide between them all our affliction.

4. THE first of these is usually the most comprehensive, for there are few who
have not more torment from the apprehension of somewhat they want, then from the
smart of any thing they feel. And indeed whilst our desires are so vagrant and
exorbitant, they will be sure to furnish matter enough for our discontents. But
certainly there is not in the world such a charm for them, as the consideration
that God is more wise to discern, and more careful to provide what is really
good for us then we our selves. We poor purblind creatures look only on the
surface of things, and if we see a beautiful appearance, somewhat that invites
our senses, we court it with the utmost earnestness; but God penetrates deeper,
he sees to the bottom both of us and those things we desire, and finds often
that tho they may please our appetite, they will hurt our health: and will no
more give them to us, then a careful father will to his child those gilded
poisons he cries for. Perhaps this man is taken with the enchanting music of
fame, likes not his own obscure station, but would fain present himself upon a
more public Theater, come into the eye and crowd of the world; but how little
does he know how he shall act his part there: whither he shall come off with a
plaudite or a hiss? he may render himself but the more public spectacle of
scorn; or if he do not that, he may by a better success feed up his vain glory
to such a bulk as may render him too great a weight for that tottering pinnacle
whereon he stands: and so after he has made a towering circle, he may fall back
with more ignominy to his first point. Another it may be no less eagerly
desires wealth, thinks (as once Cresus did) that he that abounds in tresure
cannot be emty of felicity; but alas how knows he how he shall employ it? There
are two contrary temtations that attend riches; riots, and covetousness: and he
is sure a little too confident, that dares promise himself that when there is
such odds against him, he shall certainly choose the one just mean, and if he do
not, he does only inflame his account at the great Audit: Besides the more
wealth he has, the fairer booty he is to the avarice of others; and it has bin
often seen, that many a man had not died so poor, if he had lived less rich.
Another perhaps thinks not himself so much to want wealth as children to heir
it, and complains with Abraham, Lord what will thou give me seeing I go
childless? Genesis 15. 2. yet how knows he whether that child he so much desires
shall be a wise man or a fool, Eccle. 2. 19. a comfort or a vexation to himself
if he live to see his proof? and if he do not, he does but project for an
access to his dying cares in what hands to leave him. Rachel solicited this
satisfaction with the greatest impatience, give me children or I die, Genesis 30.
1. and it is observable that the grant of her wish proved the loss of her life.

5. THUS in these and innumerable other instances we drive on blindfold, and
very often impetuously pursue that which would ruin us: and were God as
shortsighted as we, into what precipices should we minutely hurry our selves?
or were he so unkind as to consider our importunity more then our interest, we
should quickly sink under the weight of our own wishes; and as Iuvenal in his
tenth Satyr excellently observes, perish by the sucess and grant of our
Prayers. I suppose there is no man that soberly recollects the events of his
life, but can experimentally say, he has sometimes desired things which would
have bin to his mischief if he had had them, and that himself has after looked
on the denial as a mercy: as on the other side when he has prosper'd in his
aims, and had what his soul lusted after, it has bin but like the quails to
the Israelites, a conviction and punishment, rather then a satisfaction. And
now surely God may complain of us as he did of Israel, How loug will it be ere
you believe me? Number. 14. 11. After all the attestations he has given of his
care and Providence over us, after all the experiments we have had of the folly
of our own elections, we cannot yet be brought either to distrust our selves,
or rely upon him. We will still be choosing and look on him as no farther
concerned, then as the executioner of our designs.

6. THIS is certainly a strange perverseness, and such as no sensible man would
be guilty of in any other instance. In all our secular affairs we trust those
whom we have cause to think understand them better then our selves, and rely
upon men in their own faculty. We put our estates in the Lawiers hand, our
bodies into the Physicians, and submit to their advice tho it be against our
humor, merely because we account them more competent judges. Yet this deference
we cannot be persuaded to pay to God, but will still be prescribing to him, and
are very angry if his dispensations do not exactly answer our fancies. And can
we offer him a greater affront then thus to distrust him? What is it but
interpretatively to deny either his wisdom, or his goodness, or both? and so
derogate from him in two of his essential attributes. For there can be no
rational account given by any who believe those, why they should not remit
their whole concerns to him. So that the short account is, that in our
distrusts we either deny him to be God, or our selves to be men, by resisting
the most evident dictates of that reason which distinguishes us from brutes.
For certainly there is not in human discourse a more irrefragable Maxim, then
that we ought for our own sakes, to resign our selves to him, who we are
infallibly sure, can, and will, choose better for us, then we for our selves.

7. THIS was so apparent by mere natural light, that Socrates advised men to
pray only for blessings in general, and leave the particular kinds of them to
Gods election, who best knows what is good for us. And sure this is such a
piece of divinity, as extremely reproaches us Christians, who cannot match a
Heathen in his implicit faith in God. Nay indeed it is the vilest defamation upon
God himself, that we who pretend to know him more, should trust him less. So
that we see our repinings do not terminate in their own proper guilt, but do in
their consequences swell higher, and our discontents propagate themselves into
Blasphemy. For while we impatiently complain of our wants, we do tacitly tax
God to want either that wisdom, power, or love, whereby he should supply us.
And sure he must be very Atheistical to whom this will not give a competent
prejudice against this sin.

8. AND this very consideration will equally prejudge the other branch of our
discontents, I mean those which repine at the ills we suffer. And not only our
privative, but our positive afflictions may by it have their bitterness taken
off: for the same goodness and wisdom which denies those things we like,
because they are hurtful for us, does upon the very same reason give us those
distastful things which he sees profitable. A wise Physician does not only
diet, but if occasion be purge his patient also. And surely there is not such a
purifier, such a cleanser of the soul as are afflictions, if we do not (like
disorderly patients) frustrate their efficacy by the irregular managery of our
selves under them.

SECT. VIII.
Of the Advantage of Afflictions.
1. IT were the work of a volume to give an exact and minute account of the
benefit of afflictions. I shall only point at some of the more general and
obvious. And first it is one of the most awakening calls to repentance; and to
this end it is that God most usually designs it. We see the whole scene of it,
Hos. 5. 15. I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
offense, and seek my face: in their affliction they will seek me early: and in
the very next verse we find this voice of God echoed forth by a penitential
note, Come and let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal
us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up. Thus we find the Brethren of
Joseph, tho there had a long interval passed betwixt their barbarous usage of
him, and his feigned rigor to them, yet when they saw themselves distressed by
the one, then they begin to recollect the other, saying, We are verily guilty
concerning our brother, Genesis 42. 21. Prosperity is an intoxicating thing, and
there are few brains strong enough to bear it; it lays us a sleep, and amuses
us with pleasant dreams, whilst in the mean time Satan rifles our tresures,
and spoils us, by the deceitful charms of sin, of our innocence and real
happiness. And can there be a more friendly office don for a man in this
condition, then to rouse him, and bring him to apprehend the designs that are
laid against him? And this is the errand on which afflictions are sent: so that
we have reason to look on them as our friends and confederates that intend our
rescue, and to take the alarm they give us, and diligently seek out those
intestine enemies of which they warn us. And he that instead of this, quarrels
at their interposing, thinks them his enemies because they tell him the truth,
Gal. 4. 16. does miserably pervert the counsel of God against himself, Luke 7.
30. and may at last verify his own jealousies; and by so provoking an
ingratitude, convert those into the wounds of an enemy, which were originally
meant as the corrections of a Father.

2. AND as afflictions do thus in general admonish us of sins, so it pleases
God most frequently so to model and frame them, that they bear the very image
and impress of those particular guilts they are to chastise, and are the dark
shadows that attend our gay delights, or flagrant insolences. The wise man
observes that the turning the Egyptian waters into blood, was a manifest
reproof of that cruel commandment for the murdering of the Hebrew infants,
Wisd. 12. 5. And surely we might in most if not all our sufferings, see some
such corresponding circumstances; as may lead us to the immediate provoking
cause of it. God who does all things in number, weight, and mesure, does in
punishments also observe a symmetry and proportion, and adapts them not only to
the heinousness, but even the very specific kind of our crimes. The only fixed
immutable rule he has given for his Vicegerents on earth to punish by, is that
in the case of murder, which is we see grounded on this rule of proportion, He
that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9. 6. And tho he
have now rescinded the inferior retaliations of the eye for the eye, the tooth
for the tooth, Exodus 21. 24. (probably for the hardness of our hearts, because
he saw our revengeful natures would be too much pleased with it) yet he has not
precluded himself from acting by those mesures, but we see it does very often
signally make men feel the smart of those violencies or injustices they have
used to others. Of this the Sacred story affords several examples (as
Adonibezek, Jud. 1. 6. and Ahab, 1 King. 21. 19.) and profane many more, and
daily experience and observation most of all. And tho this method of
retaliation is not always so evident and apparent to the world, because men's
sins are not always so, yet I believe if men would duly recollect, it would be
for the most part discernable to their own consciences, and they would
apparently see, that their calamities did but trace the footsteps of their sins.

3. NOW if we rightly weigh this, we cannot but think it a very advantageous
circumstance. We are naturally blind when we look inward, and if we have not
some adventitious light to clear the object, will be very apt to overlook it.
Therefore since the end of all our afflictions is our repentance, it is a wise
and gracious disposal, that they do thus point to us those particular sins of
which we are to repent. The body of sin will not be destroyed in the whole
entire bulk, but must be dismembered, pulled to pieces limb by limb. He that
attaques it otherwise, will be like Sertorius's soldier, who ineffectively
tugged at the horses tail to get it off at once, when he that pulled it hair by
hair, quickly did it. Therefore as it is a great part of our spiritual Wisdom
to know in what especial parts the Sampson-like strength of our corruptions
lie, so is it a great instance of Gods care of us, thus by his corrections to
discipline and instruct us in it.

4. In all our afflictions therefore it is our concern, nicely and critically
to observe them. I mean not to enhance our murmurs and complaints, but to learn
by them what is Gods peculiar controversy against us. This is indeed to hear
the rod, and who has appointed it, Mic. 6. 9. Let him therefore that suffers
in any of his concerns, examine whether he have not some corresponding guilt
which answers to it, as face answers face, Prove. 27. 19. He that is
impoverished in his estate, let him consider first how he acquired it, whether
there were not something of fraud or injustice, which like a cancrous humor,
mixed in its very elements and constitution, and eat out its bowels: or whether
some sacrilegious prize, some coal from the altar have not fired his nest. Or
if nothing can be charged upon the acquest, let him consider how he has used
it; whether he have not made it the fuel of his lusts, in riot and excesses, or
the object of his adoration in an inordinate value of it. In like manner he who
is afflicted in his body, groans under the torment of some grievous disease,
may very seasonably interrogate himself, whether it have not bin contracted by
his vice, whether his bones be not (in a more literal sense then Job meant it)
full of the sins of his youth, Job. 20. 11. and his furfeting and drunkeness be
not the cause, that his soul, as the Psalmist speaks, abhors all manner of
meat, and is even hard at deaths door, Psalm. 107. 18. or at least whether the
not employing his health and strength to those purposes for which it was given,
is not the reason of its being withdrawn. He also that is invaded in his
reputation, that lies under some great infamy, is to consider whether it be not
deserved; whether some part if not the whole guilt of which he is accused,
stick not to him: or if he be clear in that particular instance, whether some
conceled sin of his would not if it were known, incur as great scandal: for in
that case he has in right forfeited his reputation, and God may make the
feizure as well by an unjust, as a just accusation. Or if his heart accuse him
not here, yet let him farther reflect, whether his vainglorious pursuits of
praise and high conceits of himself, have not made this an apt and necessary
humiliation for him. Or lastly let him recollect how he has behaved himself
toward others in this kind: whether he have had a just tenderness of his
neighbors fame, or have not rather exposed and prostituted it. In these and
many other instances such a particular scrutiny, would (in all probability)
discover the affinity and cognation between our guilts and our punishments, and
by marking out the spring and fountain head, direct us how to stop or divert
the current. And he that would diligently employ himself in this inquisition,
would find little leisure and less cause to condole his afflictions, but would
divert all his complaints upon himself, accept of the punishment of his
iniquity, and thank the Lord for thus giving him warning, Psalm. 16. 8.

5. A second benefit which God designs us in our afflictions is the weaning us
from the world, to disentangle us from its fetters and charms, and draw us to
himself. We read in the story of the Deluge, that so long as the earth was
covered with waters, the very Raven was contented to take shelter in the Ark,
but when all was fair and dry, even the Dove finally forsook it, Genesis 8. 12.
And it is much so with us, the worst of men will commonly in distresses have
recourse to God (the very heathen mariners in a storm could rebuke Jonah for
not calling upon his God, Jon. 1. 6.) when yet the very best of us, are apt to
forget him amidst the blandishments and insinuations of prosperity. The kind
aspects of the world are very enchanting, apt to inveigle and besot us, and
therefore it is Gods care over us, to let us sometimes see her more averting
countenance in her frowns and storms; that, as children frighted by some ugly
appearance, we may run into the arms of our father. Alas were all things
exactly fitted to our humors here, when should we think of a remove? and had
not death some harbingers to prepare us or him, what a surprising guest would
he be to us? It Is storied of Antigonus, that seeing a soldier in his camp of so
dareing a courage that he always courted the most hazardous attemts, and
observing him also of a very infirm sickly habit, he took a particular care of
him, and by medicines and good attendance recovered him; which no sooner he had
don, but the man grew more cautious, and would no longer expose himself as
formerly; and gave this reason for it, that now he was healthy his life was of
some value to him, and not to be hazarded at the same rate, as when it was only
a burden; and should God cure all our complaints, render us perfectly at ease,
I fear too many of us would be of the soldiers mind, think our lives too good
to resign to him, much more to hazard for him, as our Christianity in many
cases obliges us. The son of Syrach observes how dreadful death is to a man
that is at rest in his possessions, that has abundance of all things, and has
nothing to vex him, nay he descends much lower; and puts in him who is yet able
to receive meat, Ecclus. 14. 1. The truth is we do so passionately dote upon
the world, that like besotted lovers, we can bear a great deal of ill usage,
before we quit our pursuit. Any little slight favor atones us after multiplied
affronts, and we must be disciplined by repeted disappointments, ere we can
withdraw our confidence. But how fatally secure should we be, if God should
permit this Siren always to entertain us with her music, and should not by
some discordant grating notes, interrupt our raptures, and recall us to sober
thoughts?

6. INDEED it is one of the highest instances of Gods love, and of his clemency
also, thus to project our reducement. We were all in our Baptism affianced to
him, with a particular abrenunciation of the world, so that we cannot without
the greatest disloialty cast our selves into its embraces; and yet when we have
thus broken the covenant of our God, Prove. 2. 17. he does not pursue us with a
jealous rage, with the severity which an abused rivaled kindness would suggest,
does not give us a bill of divorce and disclame his relation; but contrives how
he may reclame and bring us back to himself. The transcendency of this lenity
God excellently describes by the prophet in the case of Israel They say if a
man put away his wife, and she become another man's shall he return unto her
again? but thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return unto me
says the Lord, Jer. 3. 1. And this tho a great height of indulgence, is no
more then he daily repetes to us. After we have basely adulterated with the
world, converted our affections from God to it, he does not give us over,
abandon us to our lewd course, and consequent ruin; but still invites our
return, and lest that may not serve, he does with a great deal of holy artifice
essay to break that accured League into which we are entered, pulls off the
disguise in which the world courted us, and makes us see it as it is it self, a
scene of vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1. 14.

6. AND as he does this in general, so also with a particular application to
those temporal satisfactions wherewith we were most transported; the things to
which we are more indifferent do not so much endanger us, it is those upon which
we have more vehemently set our hearts which become our snares, and awake his
jealousy; and accordingly we frequently see that it is in those he chooses to
cross us. How often does it happen that those which are enamoured of
themselves, dote upon their own features, do meet with some disease or accident
which blasts their beauty, withers that fair flower, and makes their winter
overtake their spring? So in our friends and relations it is usually seen, we
soonest loose those for whom we have the greatest, the most immoderate passion.
If there be one fondling among our children, it is odds but that is taken away,
or made as much the object of our grief and sorrow, as ever it was of our joy
and love. When God sees our hearts so excessively cleave to any transitory
thing, he knows it is necessary to sever them, for whilst we have such clogs upon
us, our souls will cleave to the dust. Psa. 119. 1. will not be able to soar
up to the higher region for which they are designed.

7. IN a word God so loves us, that he removes what ever he sees will obstruct
that intimate union which he desires with us, and sure this is so obliging,
that tho he should bid us to our loss, tho he could not recompense us for what
he takes from us, yet we must be very ill natured if we can be angry at so much
kindness. But when to this is added that all this is principally, nay solely
designed for our advantage, that God takes from us all these emty delusory
contentments merely that he may instate us in solid and durable joies; we
betray as much ignorance of our interest, as insensibleness of our obligation,
if we repine that God makes us so much his care. It Is true indeed, the things to
which we have so inordinatly adhered, do stick so close, that they cannot be
pulled away without some pain: yet for our corporal security we can endure the
sundring of parts that do not only cleave, but grow to us. He that has a
gangrend member suffers it to be cut off to save his whole body, and does not
revile, but thank and reward the Surgeon. Yet where our souls are concerned,
and where the things have no native union with us, but are only cemented by our
passions, we are impatient of the method, and think God deals very hardly with
us, not to let us perish with what we love. The sum of all is this, God tho he
be abundantly condescending, yet he will never stoop so low as to share his
interest in us with the world: if we will devote our selves to it, it is not all
our emty forms of service will satisfy him, if he cannot divorce our hearts
from it, he will divorce himself eternally from us. And the case being thus, we
are sure very ill advised if we do not contentedly resign our selves to his
methods, and cheerfully endure them how sharp soever. The only expedient we
have for our own ease, is to shorten the cure by giving our assistance, and not
by struglings to render it more difficult and painful, let us entirely
surrender our wills to him, and when we have don that, we may without much pain
let him take any thing else. But the more difficult we find it to be
disentangled from the world, the greater should our caution be against all
future engagements to it. If our escape has bin as the Apostle says, so as by
fire, Jud. 23. with much smart and hazard, let us at least have so much wit, as
the common proverb allows children, and not again expose our selves: let us
never glue our hearts to any external thing, but let all the concerns of the
world hang loose about us: by that means we shall be able to put them off
insensibly when ever God calls for them, or perhaps we shall prevent his
calling for them at all, it being for the most part, our too close adhesion to
them which promts him to it.

8. A third advantage of afflictions is, that it is a mark and signature of our
adoption, a witness of our legitimation. What son is he (says the Apostle)
whom the Father chastises not? but if ye be without chastisement whereof all
are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons, Heb, 12. 7. 8. Jacob clad his
dearling Joseph in a party-colored Coat, and Gods favorites do here wear a
Livery inter-woven with a mixture of dark and gloomy colors; their long white
robes are laid up for them against they come to the marriage of the Lamb, Rev.
19 7. Indeed we much mistake the design of Christianity, if we think it calls
us to a condition of ease and security. It might suit well enough with the
votaries of the Golden Calf, to sit down to eat and drink and rise up to play,
Exodus 32. 6. but the disciples of the crucified Savior are trained to another
discipline, our profession enters us into a state of warfare, and accordingly
our very Baptismal engagement runs all in military terms, and we are not only
servants of Christ's family, but soldiers of his camp. Now we know in a war men
must not expect to pass their time in ease and softness, but besides all the
dangers and difficulties of the combat, have many other hardships to endure;
hunger and thirst, heat and cold, hard lodgings and weary marches: and he that
is too nice for those, will not long stick to his colors. And it is the same in
our spiritual warfare, many pressures and sufferings are annexed to it, and our
passive valor is no less tried then our active. In respect of this it is that
our Savior admonishes his Profelytes to compute first the difficulties incident
to their profession, and that he may not ensnare us by proposing too easy
terms, he bids us reckon upon the worst, and tells us, that he that forsakes
not all that he has, shall not be his disciple, Luke 14. 26. and that we must
through much tribulatiou enter into the kingdom of God, Act. 14. 22. Indeed twere
very absurd for us to expect easier conditions, when these are the same to
which our Leader has submitted, the Captain of our Salvation was perfected by
sufferings. Heb. 2. 10. and if it behooved Christ to suffer before he entered
into his glory, Luk 24. 46. it were insolent madness for us to look to be
carried thither upon our beds of Ivory, of from the noise of our harps and
viols, be immmediatly rapt into the Choire of Angels.

8. THIS has bin so much considered by pious men, that they have looked upon
their secular prosperities with fear and jealousy, and many have solemnly
petitioned for crosses, as thinking them the necessary attestation of their
sonship, and means of assimulation to their elder brother. Why then should
that which was so desirable to them, appear so formidable to us? or why should
we so vehemently deprecate, what they so earnestly invited? If we indeed think
it a privilege to be the sons of God and fellow-heirs with Christ, why do we
grudg at the condition? The Roman Captain tells St. Paul that he obtained the
immunities of a Roman with a great sum, Act. 22. 28. and shall we expect so
much a nobler and more advantageous adoption perfectly gratis? look that God
should change his whole Economy for our ease, give us an eternal inheritance
discharged of those temporal encumbrances himself has annexed to it This were
sure as unjust a hope as it would be a vain one. When David had that ensnaring
proposal made him of being the Kings son in law, 1 Samuel 18. 21. he set such a
value upon the dignity, that he despised the difficulty of the condition: and
sure we must have very low abject souls, if when so infinitely a higher
advancement is sincerely offered us, we can suffer any apprehension of hardship
to divert us. In a word let us remember that of the Apostle, if we suffer, we
shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 12. And tho our afflictions be in
themselves not joious but grievous, yet when they are considered as the earnest
of our future inheritance, they put on another face, and may rather enamour
then fright us.

9. A fourth advantage of afflictions is, that they excite our compassions
toward others: there is nothing qualifies us so rightly to estimate the
suffering of others, as the having our selves felt them: without this our
apprehensions of them are as dull and confused, as a blind man's of colors, or a
deaf man of sounds. They that stretch themselves upon their couches, that eat
the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall: that
chaunt to the sound of the viol, drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves
with the chief ointments, will not much be grieved with the afflictions of
Joseph. Am. 6. 4. Nay so necessary is our experience toward our commiseration,
that we see it was thought a requisite accomplishment of our high Priest (that
highest example of unboundnded compassion) and therefore says the Apostle, It
behooved him in all things to be made like his brethren, that he might be a
merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people, for in that he himself has suffered
being temted, he is able also to succor them that are temted, Heb. 2. 17, 18.
But if he whose mere sense of our miseries brought him down to us, chose this
expedient to advance his pity, how necessary is it to our petrified bowels? And
since God has assigned our mercies to our brethren, as the standard by which he
will proportion his to us, it is more ours then their advantage to have them
enlarged: so that when by making us taste of their cup, acquainting us with the
bitter relish of their sufferings, he prepares us to a Christian sympathy with
them, it is but a remoter way of obliging and qualifying us for a more ample
portion of his mercy. Nay besides the profit there is honor accrues to us by
it; compassion is one of the best properties of our nature, and we unman our
selves when we put it off; nay more it is an attribute of the Divinity, and the
more we advance in it, the closer approches we make to him. And therefore we
have all reason to bless him for that discipline by which he promotes us in so
excellent, so necessary a grace.

10. A fifth benefit of afflictions is that it is an improvement of devotion,
sets us with more heartiness to our prayers. Whilst prosperity flows in upon us
we bath our selves in its streams, but are very apt to forget its source; so
that God is fain to stop the current, leave us dry and parched that our needs
may make us do what our gratitude would not, trace our blessings up to the
original spring, and both acknowledge and invoke him as the Author of all our
good. This effect of afflictions is observed by the prophet, Lord in trouble
have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastning was upon
them, Isa. 26. 16. And I believe I may appeal to every man's experience whether
his prayers be not more frequent and more hearty too, when he is under some
distress. Then how importunate are we in our petitions? how profuse in our
vows and promises? saying with Israel deliver us only we pray thee this day:
and they put away the strange Gods from among them, and served the Lord. Jud.
10. 15. I confess it is no good indication of our temper that we need thus to be
put in the press ere we will yield any thing? yet since we are so disingenuous,
it is a mercy in God to adapt his methods to us; to extort when we will not give,
and if he can have no free will offerings, yet at least to exact his tribute.
Nor does he design the effect of this should cease with the calamity that
raised it, but expects our compelled addresses should bring us into the way of
voluntary ones, and happily ensnare us into piety. And indeed herein are we
worse then brutish if it do not. We think it a barbarous rudeness to engage a
man in our affairs, and as soon as we have served our own turns, never take
farther notice of him. Nay indeed the very beasts may lecture us in this piece
of Morality, many of them paying a signal gratitude where they have received
benefits, and shall we not come up at least to their pitch? shall not the
endearment of our deliverance bring our deliverer into some repute and
consideration with us, and make us desire to keep up an acquaintance and
intercourse with him? Yet if ingenuity work not with us, let interest at least
prevail, and the remembrance how soon we may need him again, admonish us not to
make our selves strangers to him. God complains of Israel wherefore say my
people we are Lords? we will come no more at thee, Jer. 2. 31. A very insolent
folly to renounce that dependence by which alone they subsisted, and no less
will it be in any of us if we stop our recourse to him because we have had
advantage by it. We have no assurance that the same occasion shall not recur,
but with what face can we then resume that intercourse which in the interval we
despised? So that if we have but any ordinary providence we shall still so
celebrate past rescues as to continue in a capacity of begging more, and then
we cannot but also confess the benefit of those first calamities which
inspirited our devotion, and taught us to pray in earnest, and will be ashamed
that our thanks should be uttered in a fainter accent then our petitions; or
our daily spiritual concerns should be more coldly solicited then our temporal
accidental ones.

11. NOR is it only our devotion that is thus improved by our distresses, but
many other Graces; our faith, our hope, our patience, our Christian sufferance
and fortitude. It is no triumph of faith to trust God for those good things
which he gives us in hand, this is rather to walk by sense then faith, but to
rely on him in the greatest destitution, and against hope to believe in hope,
this is the faith of a true child of Abraham, and will be imputed to us (as it
was to him) for righteousness Romans 4. 23. So also our patience owes all its
opportunities of exercise to our afflictions, and consequently owes also a
great part of its being to them, for we know desuetude will loose habits. What
imaginable use is there of patience, where there is nothing to suffer? In our
prosperous state, we may indeed employ our temperance, our humility, our
caution; but patience seems then a useless virtue: nay indeed for ought we know
may be counterfeit, till adversity bring it to the test. And yet this is the
most glorious accomplishment of a Christian, that which most eminently conforms
him to the Image of his Savior, whose whole life was a perpetual exercise of
this grace; and therefore we love our ease too well if we are unwilling to buy
this pearl at any price.

12. LASTLY our thankfulness is (at least ought to be) increa'st by our
distresses. It Is very natural for us to reflect with value and esteem upon those
blessings we have lost, and we too often do it to aggravate our discontent: but
sure the more rational use of it is to raise our thankfulness for the time
wherein we enjoied them. Nay not only our former enjoiments, but even our
present deprivations deserves our gratitude, if we consider the happy
advantages we may reap from them. If we will perversely cast them away, that
unworthy contemt paies no scores, for we still stand answerable in Gods account
for the good he designed and we might have had by it, and we become liable to a
new charge for our ingratitude in thus despising the chastisement of the Lord,
Heb. 12. 5.

13. AND now if all these benefits of afflictions (which are yet but
imperfectly recited) may be thought worth considering, it cannot but reconcile
us to the sharpest of Gods methods; unless we will own our selves such mere
animals, as to have no other apprehensions then what our bodily senses convey
to us; for sure he that has reason enough to understand that he has an immortal
soul, cannot but assent that its interests should be served, tho with the
displacency of his flesh. Yet even in regard of that, our murmurings are often
very unjust, for we do many times ignorantly prejudg Gods designs toward us
even in temporals, who frequently makes a little transient uneasiness the
passage to secular felicities. Moses when he fled out of Egypt, probably little
thought that he should return thither a God unto Pharaoh, Exodus 4. 16. and as
little did Joseph when he was brought thither a slave, that he was to be a
ruler there: yet as distant as those states were, the divine providence had so
connected them, that the one depends upon the other. And certainly we may often
observe the like overruling hand in our own distresses, that those events
which we have entertained with the greatest regret, have in the consequences
bin very beneficial to us.

14. To conclude, we have certainly both from speculation and experience
abundant matter to clam all our disquiets, to satisfy our distrusts, and to fix
in us an entire resignation to Gods disposals, who has designs which we cannot
penetrate, but none which we need fear, unless we our selves pervert them. We
have our Saviors word for it, that he will not give us a stone when we ask
bread, nor a scorpion when we ask a fish, Mat. 7. 9. Nay his love secures us
yet farther from the errors of our own wild choice, and does not give us those
stones and scorpions which we importune for. Let us then leave our concerns to
him who best knows them, and make it our sole care to entertain his
dispensations with as much submission and duty, as he dispences them with love
and wisdom. And if we can but do so, we may dare all the power of earth and
hell too, to make us miserable: for be our afflictions what they can, we are
sure they are but what we in some respect or other need; be they privative or
positive, the want of what we wish, or the suffering of what we wish not, they
are the disposals of him who cannot err, and we shall finally have cause to say
with the Psalmist, It is good for me that I have bin afflicted, Psalm. 119. 71.

SECT. IX.
Of our Misfortunes compared with other men's.
1. WE come now to impress an equally just and useful consideration, the
comparing our misfortunes with those of other men's: and he that does that, will
certainly see so little cause to think himself singular, that he will not find
himself superlative in calamity; for there is no man living that can with
reason affirm himself to be the very unhappiest man, there being innumerable
distresses of others which he knows not of, and consequently cannot bring them
in balance with his own. A multitude of men there are whose persons he knows
not, and even of those he does, he may be much a stranger to their distresses;
many sorrows may lie at the heart of him who carries a smiling face, and many a
man has bin an object of envy to those who look but on the surface of his
state, who yet to those who know his private griefs appears more worthy of
compassion. And sure this confused uncertain estimate of other men's
afflictions, may divert us from all loud outcries of our own. Solon seeing a
friend much oppressed with grief, carried him up to a town that over-lookt the
City of Athens, and showing him all the buildings, said to him, consider how
many sorrows have, do, and shall in future ages inhabit under all those roofs,
and do not vex thy self with those inconveniences which are common to
mortality, as if they were only yours. And sure it was good advice: for suffering
is almost as inseparable an adjunct of our nature, as dying is: yet we do not
see men very apt to imbitter their whole lives by the foresight that they must
die, but seeing it a thing as universal as inevitable, they are more forward to
take up the Epicures resolution, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die, 1
Cor. 15. 32. And why should we not look upon afflictions also as the common lot
of humanity, and as we take the advantages, so be content to bear the
encumbrances of that state?

2. BUT besides that implicit allowance that is thus to be made for the
unknown calamities of others, if we survey but those that lie open and visible
to us, the most of us shall find enough to discountenance our complaints. Who
is there that when he has most studiously recollected his miseries, may not
find some or other that apparently equals, if not exceeds him? He that stomacs
his own being contemned and slighted, may see another persecuted and oppressed.
He that groans under some sharp pain, may see another afflicted with sharper:
and even he that has the most acute torments in his body, may see another more
sadly cruciated by the agonies of his mind. So that if we would but look about
us, we should see so many foreign occasions of our pity, that we should be
ashamed to confine it wholly to our selves.

3. IT will perhaps be said that this cannot be universally true, for that
there must in comparative degrees be some lowest state of misery: I grant it,
but still that state consists not in such an indivisible point, that any one
person can have the enclosure; or if it do, twill be so hard for any to discern
who that one person is; that I need desire no fairer a composition, then to
have every man suspend his repinings, till he can evince his title. But alas
there are but few that can make any approches to such a pretenec: for tho if we
advert to men's complaints, we should think all degrees of comparison were
confounded, and every man were equally the greatest sufferer; yet certainly in
the truth of things it is nothing so: for (not to repete what was before
mentioned, that probably no man is miserable in any proportion to the utmost
degree of possibility) the remarkably unhappy are very far the less number.
And how passionatly soever men exaggerate their calamities, yet perhaps in
their sober mood, they will scarce change states with those whom they profess
to think more happy then themselves. It was the saying of Socrates, that if
there were a common bank made of all men's troubles, most men would rather choose
to take those they brought, then to venture upon a new dividend. And indeed he
had reason for his supposition; for considering how great a part of many men's
afflictions are of their own making, fictitious and imaginary, they may justly
fear least they should exchange feathers for lead, their own emty shadows for
the real and pressing calamities of others, and cannot but think it best to sit
down with their own, which serves their declamations as well, and their ease
much better. We often see men at a little mis-shaping of a garment, a scarce
discernable error in their cook, or their shortest interruption in their
sports, in such transports of trouble, as if they were the most unfortunate men
in the world; yet for all that you shall hardly persuade them to change with
him whose course clothings supersedes all care of the fashion, whose appetite
was never disappointed for want of sauce, and whose perpetual toil makes him
insensible what the defeat of sport signifies.

4. NAY even where the exchange seems more equal, where the afflictions are on
both sides solid and substantial, yet a prudent man would scarce venture upon
the barter. It Is no small advantage to know what we have to contest with, to
have experimented the worst of its attaques, by which we become better able to
guard our selves: but a new evil comes with the force of a surprise, and finds
us open and disarmed. It is indeed almost a miraculous power that custom has in
reconciling us to things otherwise displeasing; all our senses are taught to
remit of their aversion by familiarity with ungrateful objects: that ugly form
which at first makes us start, by use devests its terror, and we reconcile our
selves to harsh-sounds and ill relishes by long custom. And sure it has the
very same effect upon our minds, the most fierce calamities do by acquaintance
grow more tractable; so that he that exchanges an old one for a new, does but
bring a wild Lion into his house instead of a tame: it may for ought he knows
immediately tear him in pieces, but at least must cost him a great deal of pains
to render it gentle and familiar, and certainly no wise man would wish to make
such a bargain.

5. BY all this it appears that how extravagantly soever we aggravate our own
calamities and extenuate other men's, we dare not upon recollection stand to our
own estimate, and what can be said more in prejudice of our discontents? It Is a
granted maxim that every man must have afflictions, man that is born of a
woman, says Job, is of few years, and full of trouble Job. 14. 4. and we must
reverse Gods fundamental law, before we can hope for a total exemption. All
that any man can aspire to, is to have but an equal share with others, and the
generality of men have so, at least none can prove he has not so; and till he
can, his murmurs will sure be very unjustifiable, especially when they have
this convincing circumstance against them, that he dares not upon sober
thoughts change his afflictions with most of his neighbors. He is an ill member
of a community, who in public assesments would shuffle off all paiments: and he
is no better who in this common tax God has laid upon our nature, is not
content to bear his share.

6. AND truly would we but consider that in all our sufferings nothing befalls
us but what is common to our kind, nay which is extremely exceeded by many
within the verge of our own observation, we must be senselessily partial to be
impatient. The Apostle thought it a competent consolation for the first
Christians that there had no temtation befallen them but what was common to
men, 1 Cor. 10. 13. and we betray very extravagant opinions of our selves if it
be not so to us. Indeed it was scarce possible for us to be so unsatisfied, as
the greatest part of us are, did we in the comparing our selves with others,
proceed with any tolerable ingenuity.

7. BUT alas we are very fallacious and deceitful in the point, we do not
compare the good of others with our good, not their evil with our evil; but
with an envious curiosity we amass together all the desirable circumstances of
our neighbors condition, and with as prying discontent we ransack all our
grievances, and confront to them. This is so insincere a way of proceeding, as
the most ordinary understanding can detect. If I should wager that my arm were
longer then another man's, and for trial mesure my arm with his finger, he must
be stupidly silly, that should award for me; and yet this were not a grosser
cheat, then that which we put upon our selves, in our comparisons with others.
And it is a little strange to observe unto what various purposes we can apply
this one thin piece of Sophistry, for when we compare our neighbors and our
selves in point of morality, we do but reverse the fallacy, and presently make
his vices as much exceed ours, as our calamities did his in the other instance.
They are indeed both great violences to reason and justice, yet the later is
sure the pleasanter kind of deceit. A man has some joy in thinking himself less
wicked then his neighbor, but what imaginable comfort can he take in thinking
himself more miserable? certainly he that would submit to a cousenage, had much
better shift the scene, and think his sufferings less then they are, rather
then more; for since opinion is the thing that usually sets an edg upon our
calamities, it might be a profitable deceit that could steal that from us.

8. BUT we need not blindfold our selves if we would but use our eyes aright,
and see things in their true shapes; and if we did thus, what a strange turn
would there be in the common estimates of the world? How many of the gilded
troubles of greatness, which men at a distance look on with so much admiration
and desire, would then be as much contemned as now they are courted? A
competency would then get the better of abundance, and the now envied pomp of
princes, when balanced with the cares and hazards annexed, would be so far from
a bait, that men like Saul 1 Samuel 10. 22. would hide themselves from the
preferment; and he that understood the weight, would rather choose to weild a
Flayle then a Scepter: yet so childishly are we besotted with the glittering
appearance of things, that we conclude felicity must needs dwell where there is
a magnificent Portico, and being possessed with this fancy we overlook her in
our own humbler Cottages, where she would more constantly reside, if she could
but find us at home: but we are commonly engaged in a rambling pursuit of her
where she is seldomest to be found, and in the interim miss of her at our own
doors.

9. INDEED there is scarce a greater folly or unhappiness incident to man's
nature, then this fond admiration of other men's enjoiments, and contemt of our
own. And whilst we have that humor, it will supplant not only our present, but
all possibilities of our future content: for tho we could draw to our selves
all those things for which we envy others, we should have no sooner made them
our own, then they will grow despicable and nauseous to us. This is a
speculation which has bin attested by innumerable experiments, there being
nothing more frequent, then to see men with impatient eagerness, nay often with
extreme hazards pursue those acquests, which when they have them, they are
immediately sick of. There is scarce any man that may not give himself instances
of this in his own particular: and yet so fatally stupid are we, that no
defeats will discipline us, or take us off from these false estimates of other
men's happinesses. And truly while we state our comparisons so unequally, they
are as mischievous as the common proverb speaks them odious: but if we would
begin at the right end, and look with as much compassion on the adversities of
our brethren, as we do with envy on their prosperities, every man would find
cause to sit down contentedly with his own burden, and confess that he bears
but the proportionable share of his common nature, unless perhaps it be where
some extraordinary demerits of his own have added to the weight; and in that
case he has more reason to admire his afflictions are so few, then so many. And
certainly every man knows so many more ills by himself, then it is possible for
him to do by another, that he that really sees himself exceed others in his
sufferings, will find cause enough to think he does in sins also.

10. BUT if we stretch the comparison beyond our contemporaries, and look back
to the generations of old, we shall have yet farther cause to acknowledge Gods
great indulgence to us. Abraham tho the friend of God was not exemted from
severe trials; he was first made to wander from his Country, and betake himself
to a kind of vagrant life, was a long time suspended from the blessing of his
desired offspring, and when at last his beloved Isaac was obtained, it caused
a domestic jarre, which he was fain to compose by the expulsion of Ishmael tho
his son also. But what a contest may we think there was in his own bowels when
that rigorous task was imposed on him of sacrificing his Isaac? and tho his
faith gloriously triumphed over it, yet sure there could not be a greater
pressure upon human nature. David the man after Gods own heart is no less
signal for his afflictions then for his piety, he was for a great while an
exile from his Country, and (which he most bewailed) from the Sanctuary by the
persecutions of Saul: and after he was settled in that throne to which Gods
immediate assignation had entitled him, what a succession of calamities had he
in his own family? the incestuous rape of his Daughter, the retaliation of that
by the as unnatural murder of Amnon, and that seconded by another no less
barbarous conspiracy of Absalom against himself, his expulsion from Jerusalem,
the base revilings of Shimei, and finally the loss of that dearling son in the
act of his sin. A cluster of afflictions in comparison whereof the most of ours
are but like the gleanings (as the Prophet speaks) after the vintage is don. It
were indeed endless to instance in all the several Forefathers of our Faith
before Christ's incarnation, the Apostle gives us a brief, but very
comprehensive compendium of their sufferings, They had trial of cruel mockings
and scourgings; yea moreover, of bonds and imprisonments: they were stoned,
were sawn asunder, were temted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about
in sheepskins, and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented: they
wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and caves of the earth, Heb.
11. 36. 37. 38. And if we look on the Primitive Christians, we shall see them
perfectly the counrerpart to them, their privileges consisted not in any
immunities from calamities; for their whole lives were scenes of sufferings.
St. Paul gives us an account of his own, in labors more abundant, in stripes
above mesure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths often: of the Jews five times
received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I
stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day have I bin in the deep,
in journying often, etc. 2 Cor. 11. 23. and if his single hardships rose thus
high, what may we think the whole sum of all his fellow-laborers amounted to
together, with that noble Army of martyrs who sealed their faith with their
blood; of whose sufferings Ecclesiastic history gives us such astonishing
relations?

11. AND now being compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, the
Apostles inference is very irrefragable, let us run with patience the race
which is set before us, Heb. 12. 1, 2. But yet it is more so, if we proceed on
to that consideration he adjoins, Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of
our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross,
despising the shame, verse 3. Indeed if we contemplate him in the whole course
of his life, we shall find him rightly styled by the Prophet a man of sorrows,
Isai. 51. And as if he had charged himself with all our griefs as well as our
sins, there is scarce any human calamity which we may not find exemplified in
him. Does any complain of the lowness and poverty of his condition? Alas his
whole life was a state of indigence: he was forced to be an inmate with the
beasts, be laid in a stable at his birth, and after himself professes that he
had not where to lay his head, Luke 9. 58. Is any oppressed with infamy and
reproach? he may see his Savior accused as a glutton and a wine-bibber, Luke 7.
34. a Blasphemer, Joh. 10. 33. a sorcerer, Mat. 12. 24. a perverter of the
nation, Luke 23. 2. yea to such a sordid lowness had they sunk his repute, that
a seditious thief and murderer was thought the more eligible person, not this
man but Barabbas, Joh. 18. 40. And finally all this scene of indignities closed
with the spightful pageantry of mockery acted by the soldiers, Mat. 27. 28. and
the yet more barbarous insultings of Priests and Scribes, verse 41. Is any man
despised or deserted by his friends? he was contemned by his countrymen,
thought frantic by his friends, betrayed by one of his disciples, abandoned by
all, unless that one who followed him longest, to renounce him the most
shamefully by a threefold abjuration. Nay what is infinitely more then all this,
he seemed deserted by God also, as is witnessed by that doleful exclamation, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Mar. 27. 64. Is any dissatisfied with
the hard-ships or laboriousness of his life? let him remember his Saviors was
not a life of delicacy or ease, he was never entered in those Academies of
luxury, where men are gorgeously apparel'd and live delicately, Luke 7. 25. but
he was brought under the mean roof of a Carpenter, and consequently subjected
to all the lowness of such an education. His initiation to his Prophetic office
was with the miraculous severity of a 40. days fast, and in his discharge of
it, we find him in perpetual labors, going about doing good, Act. 10. 38. and
that not in triumph (like a prince bestowing his largesses) but in weary
peregrinations, never riding but once, and that only upon a borrowed beast, and
to fulfill a prophecy, Mat. 24. Does any man groan under sharp and acute pains?
let him consider what his redeemer endured, how in his infancy at his
circumcision he offered the first fruits, as an earnest of that bloody vintage
when he trod the wine press alone Isai. 63. 3. Let him attend him through all
the stages of his direful passion, and behold his arms pinioned with rough
cords, his head smote with a reed, and torn with his crown of thorns, his back
ploughed with those long furrows (Psalm. 120. 3.) the scourges had made, his
macerated feeble body oppressed with the weight of his cross, and at last rackt
and extended on it; his hands and feet, those nervous and consequently most
sensible parts transfixt with nails, his whole body fastened to that accursed
tree, and exposed naked to the air in a cold season; his throat parched with
thirst and yet more afflicted with that vinegar and gall wherewith they
pretended to relieve him; and finally his life expiring amidst the full sense
of these accurate torments. Lastly does any man labor under the bitterest of
all sorrows, importunate temtations to, or a wounded spirit for sin? even here
also he may find that he has an high Priest who has bin touched with the sense
of his infirmities, Heb. 4. 15. He was violently assaulted with a succession of
temtations, Mat. 4. and we cannot doubt but Satan would on him employ the
utmost of his skill. Nor was he less oppressed with the burden of sin, (ours I
mean tho not his own.) What may we think were his apprehensions in the Garden,
when he so earnestly deprecated that which was his whole errand into the world?
What a dreadful pressure was that which wrung from him that bloody sweat? and
cast him into that inexplicable agony, the horror whereof was beyond the
comprehensions of any, but his who felt it? and finally how amazing was the
sense of divine wrath, which extorted that stupendous complaint, that strong
cry on the cross, Heb. 5. 7. the sharp accent whereof, if it do aright sound in
our hearts, must certainly quite overwhelm our loudest groans? And now
certainly I may say with Pilate, Ecce homo behold the man, or rather with a
more divine Author, Behold if ever there were sorrows like unto his sorrows,
Lam. 1. 12.

12. AND sure it were but a reasonable inference, that which we find made by
Christ himself, if these things be don in a green tree, what shall be don in
the dry? Luke 23. 31. If an imputative guilt could nurish so scorching a flame,
pull down so severe a wrath, what can we expect who are merely made up of
combustible matter; whose proper personal sins cry for vengeance? Sure were we
to judge by human mesures, we should reckon to have more then a double portion
of our Saviors sufferings entailed upon us: yet such is the efficacy of his,
that they have commuted for ours, and have left us only such a share, as may
evidence our relation to our crucified Lord: such as may serve only for badges
and cognizances to whom we retain. For alas, let the most afflicted of us weigh
our sorrows with his, how absurdly unequal will the comparison appear? And
therefore as the best expedient to baffle our mutinies, to shame us out of our
repinings, let us often draw this uneven parallel, confront our petty
uneasinesses with his unspeakable torments; and sure it is impossible but our
admiration and gratitude must supplant our impatiencies.

13. THIS is indeed the method to which the Apostle directs us, Consider him
that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be weary
and faint in your minds: ye have not yet resisted unto blood, Heb. 12. 34. Was
he contradicted, and shall we expect to be humor'd and compli'd with? Did he
resist to blood, and shall we think those pressures intolerable, which force
only a few tears from us? This is such an unmanly niceness, as utterly makes us
unfit to follow the Captain of our Salvation. What a soldier is he like to
make, that will take no share of the hazards and hardships of His General?
Honest Uriah would not take the lawful solaces of his own house upon the
consideration that his Lord Ioab (tho but his fellow subject) lay encamped in
the open fields, 2 Samuel 11. 11. yea tho he was sent by him from the Camp. And
shall we basely forsake ours in pursuit of our ease? He is of a degenerous
spirit, whom the example of his superior will not animate. Plutarch tells us
that Cato marching through the deserts, was so distressed for water, that a small
quantity was brought to him in a helmet as a great prize, which he refusing
because he could not help his soldiers to the like, they were so transported
with that generosity, that it extinguished the sense of their thirst, and they
were ashamed to complain of what their Leader voluntarily endured for their
sakes. And surely we extremely discredit our institution, if we cannot equal
their ingenuity, and follow ours with as great alacrity through all the
difficulties he has traced before us, and for us.

14. NOR let us think to excuse our selves upon the impotency of our flesh,
which wants the assistance which his divinity gave him: for that plea is
superseded by the forementioned examples of the Saints, men of like passions
with us, who not only patiently, but joifully endured all tribulations, by
which it appears it is not impossible to our nature, with those aids of grace
which are common to us with them: for certainly the difference between them and
us, is not so much in the degrees of the aids, as in the diligence of employing
them. Let us therefore, as the Apostle advises, lift up the hands which hang
down, and the feeble knees, Heb. 12. 12. and with a noble emulation follow
those heroic patterns they have set us: and since we see that even those
Favorites of heaven, have smarted so severely, let us never dream of an
immunity, but whenever we find our selves inclining to any such flattering
hope, let every one of us upbraid our selves in those terms the Jews did our
Savior, Art thou greater then Abraham, and the Prophets, whom make thou thy
self? Joh. 8. 52. Nay we may descend lower and take in not only all the
inferior Saints of former times, but all those our contemporaries in
sufferings, which are most within our view, and may ask the Apostles question,
what then are we better then they? Romans 3. 9. If we think we are, it is certain
we are so much worse by that insolence; and if we confess we are not, upon what
score can we pretend to be better treated? To conclude, let us not pore only
upon our peculiar evils, but attentively look about us, and consider what
others endure: and since in frolics we can sport our selves with many
uneasinesses for company sake, let us not be more pusillanimous in our soberer
moods, but every man cheerfully take his turn in bearing the common burden of
mortality, till we put off both it and its appendages together, when this
mortal shall put on immortality, 1 Cor. 15. 54.

SECT. X.
Of particular Aids for the gaining of Contentment.
1. WE have now past through all those considerations we at first proposed, and
may trust the considering Reader to make his own collections: yet because
impatience is the vice that has bin all this while arraigned, I am to foresee
it possible, that those who have the greatest degree of that, may be the least
willing to attend the whole process, and therefore I think it may not be amiss,
for their ease to suit and reduce all into some short directions and rules for
the acquiring contentment.

2. THE first and most fundamental is, the mortifying our pride, which as it is
the seminary of most sins, so especially this of repining. Men that are highly
opinion'd of themselves are commonly unsatisfiable: for how well soever they
are treated, they still think it short of their merits. Princes have often
experimented this in those who have don them signal services; but God finds it
in those who have don him none, and we expect he shall dispense to us according
to those false estimates we put upon our selves. Therefore he that aspires to
Content, must first take truer mesures of himself, and consider that as he was
nothing till God gave him a being, so all that he can produce from that being,
is Gods by original right, and therefore can pretend to nothing of reward; so
that whatever he receives, is still upon the account of new bounty; and to
complain that he has no more, is like the murmurs of an unthankful debtor, who
would still increase those scores which he knows he can never pay.

3. IN the second place, let every man consider how many blessings
(notwithstanding his no clame to any) he daily injoies: and whether those he so
impatiently raves after be not much inferior to them. Nay let him ask his own
heart, whether he would quit all those he has, for them he wants, and if he
would not (as I suppose no man in his wits would, those wits being part of the
barter) let him then judge how unreasonable his repinings are, when himself
confesses he has the better part of worldly happiness, and never any man living
had all.

4. IN the third place therefore let him secure his duty of thankfulness for
those good things he has, and that will insensibly undermine his impatiencies
for the rest, it being impossible to be at once thankful and murmuring. To this
purpose it were very well, if he would keep a solemn catalogue of all the
bounties, protections, and deliverances he has received from Gods hand, and
every night examine what accessions that day has brought to the sum: and he that
did this, would undoubtedly find so many incitations to gratitude, that all
those to discontent would be stifled in the crowd. And since acknowledgment of
Gods mercies is all the tribute he exacts for them, we must certainly look on
that as an indispensable duty: and therefore he that finds that God shortens
his hand, stops the efflux of his bounty toward him, should reflect on
himself, whether he be not behind in that homage by which he holds, and have
not by his unthankfulness turned away good things from him, Esa. 59. 8. And if
he find it so (as who alas is there that may not) he cannot sure for shame
complain, but must in prudence reinforce his gratitude for what is left, as the
best means to recover what he has lost.

5. BUT his murmurs will yet be more amazingly silenced, if in the fourth place
he compares the good things he enjoies with the ill he has don. Certainly this
is a most infallible cure for our impatiencies, the holiest man living being
able to accuse himself of such sins, as would according to all human mesures of
equity forfeit all blessings, and pull down a greater weight of judgment then
the most miserable groan under. Therefore as before I advised to keep a
catalogue of benefits receive'd, so here it would be of use to draw up one of
sins committed. And doubtless he that confronts the one with the other cannot
but be astonished to find them both so numerous, equally wondering at Gods mercy
in continuing his blessings, in despite of all his provocations, and at his
own baseness in continuing his provocations, in despite of all those
blessings. Indeed it is nothing but our affected ignorance of our own demerits,
that makes it possible for us to repine under the severest of Gods
dispensations. Would we but ransack our hearts, and see all the abominations
that lie there, nay would the most of us but recollect those barefaced crimes
which even the world can witness against us, we should find more then enough to
balance the heaviest of our pressures. When therefore by our impatient
struglings we fret and gall our selves under our burdens, let us interrogate
our souls in the words of the Prophet, Why does a living man complain, a man
for the punishment of his sin? Let us not spend our breath in murmurs and
outcries, which will only serve to provoke more stripes: but let us search and
try our ways, and turn again to the Lord, Lam. 3. 39. diligently seek out that
accursed thing which has caused our discomfeiture, Jos, 6. 18. and by the
removal of that, prepare the way for the access of mercy. But alas how
preposterous a method do we take in our afflictions? We accuse every thing but
what we ought, furiously fly at all the second causes of our calamity, nay too
often at the first by impious disputes of providence, and in the mean time, as
Job speaks, the root of the matter is found in us, Job. 19. 28. We shelter and
protect in our bosoms the real Author of our miseries. The true way then to
allay the sense of our sufferings, is to sharpen that of our sins. The prodigal
thought the meanest condition in his fathers family a preferment, Make me one
of thy hired servants, Luke 15. 19. And if we have his penitence, we shall have
his submission also, and calmly attend Gods disposals of us.

6ly. As every man in his affliction is to look inward on his own heart, so
also upward, and consider by whose providence all events are ordered. Is there
any evil (i. e. of punishment) in the city, and the Lord has not don it? Am.
3. 6. and what are we worms that we should dispute with him? Shall a man
contend with his Maker? Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the
earth, Isa. 45. 9. And as his power is not to be controlled, so neither is his
justice to be impeached. Shall not the judge of all the earth do right? Genesis 18.
25. And where we can neither resist nor appeal, what have we to do but humbly
to submit? Nor are we only compelled to it by necessity, but induced and
invited by interest, since his dispensations are directed not barely to assert
his dominion, but to evidence his paternal care over us. He discerns our needs,
and accordingly applies to us. The benignity of his nature permits him not to
take delight in our distresses, he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
children of men, Lam. 3. 33. and therefore when ever he administers to us a
bitter cup, we may be sure the ingredients are medicinal, and such as our
infirmities require. He dares not trust our intemperate appetites with unmixt
prosperities, the lushiousness whereof tho it may please our palats, yet like
St. John's book Rev. 10. 9. that honey in the mouth may prove gall in the bowels,
engender the most fatal diseases. Let us therefore in our calamities not
consult with flesh and blood, Gal. 1. 16. (which the more it is bemoaned, the
more it complains) but look to the hand that strikes; and assure our selves,
that the stripes are not more severe, then he sees necessary in order to our
good: and since they are so, they ought in reason to be our choices as well as
his; and not only religion, but self love will promt us to say, with old Ely,
it is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3. 11. But alas we do
not understand what is our interest, because we do not rightly understand what
we are ourselves. We consider our selves merely in our animal being, our bodies
and those sensitive faculties vested in them, and when we are invaded there, we
think we are undon, tho that breach be made only, to relieve that diviner part
within us, besieged and oppressed with the flesh about it (for so God knows it
too often is;) or if we do not consider it in that notion of an enemy, yet at
the utmost estimate, the body is to the soul but as the garment to the body, a
decent case or cover: now what man (not stark frantic) would not rather have
his clothes cut then his flesh? and then by the rate of proportion, we may well
question our own sobriety, when we repine that our souls are secured at the
cost of our bodies, and that is certainly the worst, the unkindest design, that
God has upon us; and our impatient resistances serve only to frustrate the
kind, the medicinal part of afflictions, but will not at all rescue us from the
severe. Our murmurings may ruin our souls, but will never avert any of our
outward calamities.

7. A seventh help to contentment is to have a right estimate of the world, and
the common state of humanity: to consider the world but as a stage and our
selves but as actors, and to resolve that it is very little material what part
we play so we do it well. A Comedian may get as much applause by acting the
slave as the conqueror, and he that acts the one to day, may to morrow reverse
the part, and personate the other. So great are the vicissitudes of the world,
that there is no building any firm hopes upon it. All the certainty we have of
it, is, that in every condition it has its uneasinesses: so that when we court
a change, we rather seek to vary then end our miseries. And certainly he that
has well impressed upon his mind the vanity and vexation of the world, cannot be
much surprised at any thing that befalls him in it. We expect no more of any
thing but to do its kind, and we may as well be angry that we cannot bring the
lions to our cribes, or fix the wind to a certain point, as that we cannot
secure our selves from dangers and disappointments in this rough and mutable
world. We are therefore to lay it as an infallible maxim, that in this vale of
tears every man must meet with sorrows and disasters: and then sure we may take
our peculiar with evenness of temper, as being but the natural consequent of
our being men. And tho possibly we may every one think himself to have double
portion, yet that is usually from the deceitful comparisons we make of our
selves with others. We take the magnifying glasses of discontent and envy when
we view our own miseries and others felicities, but look on our enjoiments and
their sufferings through the contracting optics of ingratitude and incompassion:
and whilst we do thus, it is impossible but we must foment our own
dissatisfactions. He that will compare to good purpose must do it honestly and
sincerely, and view his neighbors calamities with the same attention he does
his own, and his own comforts with the same he does his neighbors; and then
many of the great seeming inequalities would come pretty near a level.

8. BUT even where they do not, it in the 8th place deserves however to be
considered how ill natured a thing it is, for any man to think himself more
miserable because another is happy: and yet this is the very thing, by which
alone many men have made themselves wretched: for many have created wants,
merely from the envious contemplation of other men's abundance. And indeed there
is nothing more disingenuous, or (to go higher) more Diabolical. Lucifer was
happy enough in his original state, yet could not think himself so because he
was not like the most high Isa. 14. 14. And when by that insolent ambition he
had forfeited bliss, it has ever since bin an aggravation of his torment, that
mankind is assumed to a capacity of it; and accordingly he makes it the design
of his envious industry to defeat him. Now how perfectly are the two first
parts of this copy transcribed, by those who first cannot be satisfied with any
inferior degree of prosperity, and then whet their impatiencies with other men's
enjoiments of what they cannot attain? And it is much to be doubted, that they
who go thus far may complete the parallel, and endeavor when they have
opportunity to undermine that happiness they envy. Therefore since Satan is so
apt to impress his whole image, where he has drawn any of his lineaments, it
concerns us warily to guard our selves, and by a Christian sympathy with our
brethren, rejoice with them that do rejoice, Romans 12. 15. make the comforts of
others, an allay not an improvement of our own miseries. Charity has a strange
magnetic power, and attracts the concerns of our brethren to us, and he that
has that in his breast can never want refreshment, whilst any about him are
happy, for by adopting their interest, he shares in their joies. Iethro tho an
alien rejoiced for all the good God had don to Israel, Exodus 18. 9. and why
should not we have as sensible a concurrence with our fellow Christians? And he
that has so, will still find something to balance his own sufferings.

9. Let him that aspires to contentment set bounds to his desire. It Is our
common fault in this affair, we usually begin at the wrong end, we enlarge our
desires as hell, and cannot be satisfied, Hab. 2. 5. and then think God uses us
ill, if he do not fill our insatiable appetites: whereas if we would confine
our expectations to those things which we need, or he has promised, there are
few of us who would not find them abundantly answered. Alas how few things are
there which our nature (if not stimulated by fancy and luxury) requires? And
how rare is it to find them who want those? Nay who have not many additionals
for delight and pleasure? And yet Gods promise under the Gospel extends only to
those necessaries, for where Christ assures his disciples that these things
shall be added unto them Mat. 6. 33. the context apparently restrains these
things to meat and drink and clothing. Therefore take no thought for the life
what you shall eat, or what you shall drink, nor yet for the body what you
shall put on, verse 25. now what pretense have we to clame more then our
Charter gives us? God never articled with the ambitious to give him honors,
with the covetous to fill his bags, or with the voluptuous to feed his
luxuries. Let us therefore, if we expect to be satisfied, modestly confine our
desires within the limits he has set us: and then every accession which he
superadds will appear (what it is) a largess and bounty. But whilst our
appetites are boundless, and rather stretched then filled with our acquest's,
what possibility is there of their satisfaction? And when we importune God for
it, we do but assign him such a task the Poets made a representation of their
Hell, the filling a sieve with water, or the rolling a stone up a precipice.

10ly. A great expedient for contentment, is to confine our thoughts to the
present, and not to let them loose to future events. Would we but do this, we
might shake off a great part of our burden: for we often heap fantastic loads
upon our selves by anxious presages of things which perhaps will never happen,
and yet sink more under them, then under the real weight that is actually upon
us. And this is certainly one of the greatest follies imaginable: for either
the evil will come or it will not, if it will, it is sure no such desirable guest
that we should go out to meet it, we shall feel it time enough when it falls on
us, we need not project to anticipate our sense of it: but if it will not, what
extreme madness is it for a man to torment himself with that which will never
be, to create engines of tortures, and by such aerial afflictions, make himself
as miserable as the most real ones could do? And truly this is all that we
usually get by our fore-sights. Prevision is one of Gods attributes, and he
mocks at all our pretenses to it, by a frequent defeating of all our
fore-casts. He does it often in our hopes: some little cross circumstance many
times demolishes those goodly machins we raise to our selves: and he does it no
less in our fears, those ills we solemnly expected often baulk us, and others
from an unexpected coast suddenly invade us. And since we are so blind, so
short-sighted, let us never take upon us to be scouts, to discover danger at a
distance (for it is manifold odds we shall only bring home false alarms) but let
us rest our selves upon that most admirable Aphorism of our blessed Lord,
Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, Mat. 6. 34. apply our selves with
Christian courage to bear the present, and leave God either to augment or
diminish, as he sees fit for the future. Or if we will needs be looking
forward, let it be in obedience not contradiction to our duty: let us entertain
our selves with those futurities which we are sure are not Chimera's, death and
judgment, heaven and hell. The nearer we draw these things to our view, the
more insensible will all intermedial objects be; they will deceive our sense of
present, and much more fore-stal the apprehension of future evils: for it is our
neglect of things eternal, that leaves us thus at leisure for the transitory

11. IN the last place let us in all our distresses supersede our anxieties and
sollicitudes by that most effectual remedy the Apostle prescribes, Is any man
afflicted let him pray, Jam. 5. 14. And this sure is a most rational
prescription: for alas what else can we do toward the redress of our griefs.
We who are so impotent, that we have not power over the most despicable
excrescence of our own body, cannot make one hair white or black, Mat. 5. 36.
what can we do toward the new moulding our condition, or modelling things
without us? Our sollicitudes serve only to bind our burdens faster upon us, but
this expedient of Prayer will certainly relieve us. Call upon me, says God, in
the time of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall praise me, Psalm. 50.
15. Whenever therefore we are sinking in the floods of affliction, let us thus
support our selves by representing our wants unto our gracious Lord, cry unto
him as St. Peter did, Mat. 14. 30. and he will take us by the hand, and be the
winds never so boisterous or contrary, preserve from sinking: the waves or
billows of this troublesome world, will serve but to toss us closer into his
arms, who can with a word appease the roughest tempest, or rescue from it. O
let us not then be so unkind to our selves, as to neglect this infallible means
of our deliverance! but with the Psalmist take our refuge under the shadow of
the divine wings till the calamity be over-past Psa. 57. 1. And as this is a
sure expedient in all our real important afflictions, so is it a good test by
which to try what are so. We are often peevish and disquieted at trifles, nay
we take up the quarrels of our lusts and vices, and are discontented when they
want their wished supplies. Now in either of these cases, no man that at all
considers who he prays to, will dare to insert these in his prayers, it being
a contemt of God to invoke him in things so slight as the one, or impious as
the other. It will therefore be good for every man when he goes to address for
relief, to consider what of his pressures they are, that are worthy of that
solemn deprecation: and when he has singled those out, let him reflect, and he
will find he has in that prejudged all his other discontents as frivolous or
wicked. And then sure he cannot think fit to harbor them, but must for shame
dismiss them, since they are such, as he dares not avow to him, from whom alone
he can expect relief. God always pities our real miseries, but our imaginary
ones dare not demand it. Let us not then create such diseases to our selves, as
we cannot declare to our Physician: and when those are precluded, for all the
rest St. Paul's recipe is a Catholicon, Be careful for nothing, but in every
thing by prayers and supplications, with thanksgiving, let your requests be
made known to God. Phil. 4. 6.

SECT. XI.
Of Resignation.
1. AND now amidst such variety of receipts, twill be hard to instance any one
sort of calamity which can escape their efficacy, if they be but duly applied.
But indeed we have generally a compendious way of frustrating all remedies by
never making use of them: like fantastic patients we are well enough content to
have our disease discourst, and medicines prescribed, but when the Physic
comes, have still some pretense or other to protract the taking it. But I shall
beseech the Reader to consider, that counsels are not charms, to work without
any cooperation of the concerned person: they must be adverted to, they must be
pondered and considered, and finally they must be practiced, or else the utmost
good they can do us, is to give us a few hours divertisment in the reading: but
they do us a mischief that infinitely out-weighs it, for they improve our guilts
by the ineffective tender they make of rescuing us from them, and leave us
accountable not only for the original crimes, but for our obstinate adhesion to
them in spite of admonition.

2. I say this because it is a little too notorious, that many take up books
only as they do cards or dice, as an instrument of diversion. It Is a good
entertainment of their curiosity to see what can be said upon any subject, and
be it well or ill handled, they can please themselves equally with the
ingenuity or ridiculousness of the composure, and when they have don this, they
have don all they designed. This indeed may be tolerable in Romances and
Play-books, but sure it ill befits Divinity. And yet I fear it oftnest happens
there: for in the former some do project for some trivial improvements, as the
embellishing of their style, the inspiriting of their fancies; and some men
would scarce be able to drive their pedling trade of wit, did they not thus
sweep the stage: but alas how many books of piety are read, of which one cannot
discern the least tincture in men's conversations, which sure does in a great
mesure proceed from the want of a determinate design in their reading, men's
practice being not apt to be less rovers then their speculation. He that takes
a practical subject in hand, must do it with a design to conform his practice
to what he shall there be convinced to be his duty, and he that comes not with
this probity of mind, is not like to be much benefited by his reading.

3. BUT one would think this should be an unnecessary caution at this time, for
since the intent of this tract, is only to show men the way to contentment, it is
to be supposed the Readers will be as much in earnest as the writer can be, it
being every man's proper and most important interest, the instating him in the
highest and most supreme felicity that this world can admit: yet for all this
fair probability, I doubt many will in this instance have the same indifference
they have in their other spiritual concerns.

4. IT IS true indeed that a querulous repining humor, is one of the most
pernicious, the most ugly habits incident to mankind, but yet as deformed
people are often the most in love with themselves, so this crooked piece of our
temper, is of all others the most indulgent to it self. Melancholy is the most
stubborn and untractable of all humors; and discontent being the offspring of
that, partakes of that inflexibility: and accordingly we see how impregnable it
often is, against all assaults of reason and religion too. Jonah in a sullen
mood would justify his discontent even to God himself, and in spite of that
calm reproof, do thou well to be angry? Jon. 4. 9. aver he did well to be
angry even to the death. And do we not frequently see men upon an impatience of
some disappointment, grow angry even at their comforts? Their friends, their
children, their meat, their drink, every thing grows nauseous to them, and in a
frantic discontent, they often fling away those things which they most value.
Besides this peevish impatience is of so aerial a diet, that it is scarce
possible to starve it. Twill nurish itself with Phantasms and Chimeras, suborn
a thousand surmises and imaginary distresses to abet its pretenses: and tho
every one of us can remonstrate to another, the unreasonableness of this
discontent; yet scarce any of us will draw the argument home, or suffer our
selves to be convinced by what we urge as irrefragable to others. Nay farther
this humor is impatient of any diversion, loves to converse only with it self.
In bodily pains, men that despair of cure are yet glad of allaies and
mitigations, and strive by all arts, to divert and deceive the sense of their
anguish; but in this disease of the mind, men cherish and improve their
torment, roll and chew the bitter pill in their mouths, that they may be sure
to have its utmost flavor; and by devoting all their thoughts to the subject of
their grief, keep up an uninterrupted sense of it: as if they had the same
Tyranny for themselves which Caligula had for others, and loved to feel
themselves die. Indeed there is not a more absurd contradiction in the world,
then to hear men cry out of the weight, the intolerableness of their burden,
and yet grasp it as fast as if their life were bound up in it; will not
deposite it, no not for the smalest breathing time. A strange fascination sure,
and yet so frequent, that it ought to be the fundamental care of him that would
cure men of their discontents, to bring them to a hearty willingness of being
cured.

5. IT may be this will look like paradox, and every man will be apt to say he
wishes nothing more in earnest, then to be cured of his present discontent. He
that is poor would be cured by wealth, he that is low and obscure by honor and
greatness: but so an Hydropic person may say he desires to have his thirst
cured by a perpetual supply of drink: yet all sober people know, that that is
the way only to increase it: but let the whole habit of the body be rectified,
and then the thirst will cease of it self. And certainly it is the very same in
the present case, no outward accessions will ever satisfy our cravings, our
appetites must be tamed and reduced, and then they will never be able to raise
tumults, or put us into mutiny and discontent: and he (and none but he) that
submits to this method, can truly be said to desire a cure.

6. BUT he that thus attests the reality of his desires, and seeks contentment
in its proper sphere, may surely arrive to some considerable degrees of it. We
find in all ages men, that only by the direction of natural light have calmed
their disquiets, and reasoned themselves into contentment even under great and
sensible pressures; men who amidst the acutest torments, have still preserved a
serenity of mind, and have frustrated contemts and reproaches by disregarding
them: and sure we give a very ill account of our Christianity, if we cannot do
as much with it as they did without it.

7. I do not here propose such a Stoical insensibility as makes no distinction
of events, which, tho it has bin vainly pretended to by many, yet sure was
never attained by any upon the strength of discourse. Some natural dullness or
casual stupefaction must concur to that, and perhaps by doing so, has had the
luck to be canonized for virtue. I mean only such a superiority of mind as
raises us above our sufferings, tho it exemt us not from the sense of them. We
cannot propose to our selves a higher pattern in any virtue then our blessed
Lord: yet we see he not only felt that load under which he lay, but had the
most pungent and quick sense of it, such as promted those earnest deprecations,
father if it be possible let this cup pass: yet all those displacencies of his
flesh were surmounted by the resignation of his spirit, nevertheless not what I
will, but what thou will, Luke 22. And certainly he that in imitation of this
pattern, does in spite of all the reluctancies of his sense, thus entirely
submit his will, however he may be sad, yet he is not impatient; nor is he like
to be sad long, for to him that is thus resigned, light will spring up, Psalm.
97. 11. some good Angel will be sent like that to our Savior to relieve his
disconsolation. God will send either some outward allaies, or give such
interior comforts and supports, as shall counterpoise those afflictions he
takes not off.

8. INDEED the grand design of God in correcting us is (the same with that of a
prudent parent toward his child) to break our wills. That stubborn faculty
will scarce bend with easy touches, and therefore does require some force: and
when by that rougher handling, he has brought it to a pliantness, the work is
don. It Is therefore our interest to cooperate with this design, to assist as
much as we are able toward the subjugating this unruly part of our selves.
This is that Sheba 2 Samuel 20. the surrendering of whom is Gods expectation in
all the close sieges he lays to us. Let us then be so wise, as by an early
resigning it to divert his farther hostilities, and buy our peace with him.

9. AND truly this is the way not only to gain peace with him, but our selves
too: it is the usurpation of our will over our reason which breeds all the
confusion and tumults within our own breasts, and there is no possibility of
curbing its insolence, but by putting it into safe custody, committing it to
him who (as our Church teaches us) alone can order the unruly wills of sinful
men. Indeed nothing but experience can fully inform us of the serenity and calm
of that soul, who has resigned his will to God. All care of choosing for himself
is happily superseded, he is temted to no anxious forecasts for future events,
for he knows nothing can happen in contradiction of that supreme will, in which
he has sanctuary: which will certainly choose for him with that tenderness and
regard, that a faithful-Guardian would for his pupil, an indulgent father for
his child that casts its self into his arms. Certainly there is not in the
world such a holy sort of artifice, so Divine a charm to tie our God to us, as
this of resigning our selves to him. We find the Gibeonites by yielding
themselves vassals to the Israelites, had their whole army at their beck to
rescue them in their danger Jos. 10. 6. and can we think God is less
considerate of his homagers and dependents? No certainly, his honor as well as
his compassion is concerned in the relief of those who have surrendered
themselves to him.

10. FARTHER yet, when by resignation we have united our wills to God, we have
quite changed the scene, and we who when our wills stood single were liable to
perpetual defeats, in this blessed combination can never be crossed. When our
will is twisted and involved with Gods, the same omnipotenee which backs his
will, does also attend ours. Gods will, we are sure, admits of no control, can
never be resisted, and we have the same security for ours, so long as it
concurs with it. By this means all calamities are unsting'd, and even those
things which are most repugnant to our sensitive natures, are yet very agreeable
to our spirits, when we consider they are implicitly our own choice, since they
are certainly his, whom we have deputed to elect for us. Indeed there can be no
face of adversity so averting and formidable, which set in this light will not
look amiable. We see daily how many uneasinessess and prejudices men will
contentedly suffer in pursuit of their wills: and if we have really espoused
Gods, made his will ours, we shall with as great (nay far greater) alacrity
embrace its distributions, how uneasy soever to our sense; our souls will more
acquiesce in the accomplishment of the Divine will, then our flesh can reluct
to any severe effects of it.

11. HERE then is that footing of firm ground, on which whosoever can stand,
may indeed do that which Archimedes boasted, move the whole world. He may as to
himself subvert the whole course of sublunary things, unvenem all those
calamities which are to others the gall of Asps; and in a farther sense verify
that Evangelical prophecy, of beating swords into plough-shares, and spears
into pruning hooks, Esaias. 2. 4. the most hostile weapons, the most adverse
events, shall be by him converted into instruments of fertility, shall only
advance his spiritual growth.

12. AND now who can choose but confess this a much more eligible state, then to
be always harrassed with solicitudes and cares, perpetually either fearing
future defeats, or bewailing the past. And then what can we call it less then
madness or enchantment, for men to act so contrary to their own dictates, yea
to their very sense and experience, too see and acknowledge the inexplicable
felicity of a resigned will, and yet perversely to hold out theirs, tho they
can get nothing by it, but the sullen pleasure of opposing God, and tormenting
themselves? Let us therefore if not for our duty or ease, yet at least for our
reputation, the asserting our selves men of sobriety and common sense, do that
which upon all these interests we are obliged; let us but give up our wills,
and with them we shall certainly divest our selves of all our fruitless
anxieties, and cast our burdens upon him who invites us to do so. He who bears
all our sins, will bear all our sorrows, our griefs too: if we will but be
content to deposite them, he will relieve us from all those oppressing weights,
which make our souls cleave to the dust, Psalm. 119. 25. and will in exchange
give us only his light, his pleasant burden, Mat. 11. 33. In a word there will
be no care left for us, but that of keeping our selves in a capacity of his:
let us but secure our love to him, and we are ascertained that all things shall
work together for our good, Romans 8. 28.

To conclude, Resignation and Contentment are virtues not only of a near
cognation and resemblance, but they are linked as the Cause and the Effect. Let
us but make sure of Resignation, and Content will flow into us without our
farther industry: as on the contrary whilst our wills are at defiance with
Gods, we shall always find things at as great defiance with ours. All our
subtiletes or industries will never mould them to our satisfactions, till we
have molded our selves into that pliant temper that we can cordially say, It
is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. 1 Samuel 3. 18.

The Close.
1. THIS short institution of the Art of Contentment, cannot more naturally, or
more desirably draw to a conclusion, then in the resort we have given it, in
the bosom of divine Providence. The Roman conquerors as the last pitch of all
their triumphs, went to the Capitol, and laid their Garlands in the lap of
Jupiter: but the Christian has an easier way to Triumph, to put his crown of
thorns (for that is the trophy of his victories) within the arms of his
gracious God; there lodge his fears, his wants, his sorrows, and himself too, as
in the best repository.

2. THE Gospel command of not caring for the morrow, Mat. 6. 34, and being
careful for nothing, Phil. 4. 6. nakedly proposed, might seem the abandoning of
us to all the calamities of life: but when we are directed to cast all our care
upon a gracious and all-powerful Parent, and are assured that he cares for us,
1 Pet. 5. 7. that tho a woman may forget her sucking child, that she should not
have compassion of the son of her womb, yet will he not forget his children,
Isa. 49. 15. this will abundantly supersede all cavil and objection. Whilst
worldly men trust in an arm of flesh, lay up tresure on earth, a prey for rust
and moth, Mat. 6. 19. and a torment to themselves, Jam. 5. 3. the Christian has
Omnipotence for his support, and a tresure in heaven, where no thief approches,
nor moth corrupts, Mat. 6. 20. Whilst bold inquirers call in question Gods
secret will, oblige him to their sub or supralapsarian schemes, their absolute
or conditional decrees, their grace foreseen or predetermin'd; the pious man
with aweful acquiescence submits to that which is revel'd: resolves for ever to
obey, but never to dispute; as knowing that the beloved Disciple leaned on his
Masters bosom; but it is the thiefs and traitors part to go about to rifle it.

3. IT IS surely a modest demand in the behalf of God Almighty, that we should
allow him as much privilege in his World, as every Pesant clames in his
Cottage; to be Master there, and dispose of his household as he thinks best: to
say to this man, Go, and he goes: and to another, Come, and he comes: and to
his servant, Do this, and he does it, Mat. 8. 9. And if we would afford him
this liberty, there would be an immediate end put to all clamor and complaint.

4. WE make it our daily prayer that the will of God may be don in earth as it
is in heaven, with a ready, swift, and uninterrupted constancy. As it is
Giantlike rebellion to set up our will against his, so is it mad perverseness
to set it up against our own; be displeased that our requests are granted, and
repine that his, and therewith our will is don. It were indeed not only good
manners, but good policy, to observe the direction of the Heathen, and follow
God: not prejudg his determinations by ours; but in a modest suspension of our
thoughts, hearken what the Lord God will say concerning us, for he will speak
peace unto his people, and to his Saints that they turn not again, Psa. 85. 8.

5. OR however upon surprise we may indulge to a passionate affection, and dote
upon our illegitimate offspring, our dearling guilts or follies, as David did
upon that Child, who was the price of Murder and adultery: yet when the brat is
taken from us, when the Child is dead, it will become us to do as he did, rise
from our sullen posture on the earth, and worship in the house of the Lord, 2 Samuel 12. 20. It will behove us, as he says in another place, to lay our hand
upon our mouth, because it was his doing, Psalm. 30. 10. and with holy Job Chap.
40. 4. when charged with his murmurings, Behold I am vile, what shall I answer?
Once have I spoken, but I will not answer: yea twice, but I will proceed no
farther.

6. Socrates rightly said of Contentment, opposing it to the riches of fortune
and opinion, that it is the wealth of nature; for it gives every thing that we
have learnt to want, and really need: but Resignation is the riches of Grace,
bestowing all things that a Christian not only needs, but can desire, even
Almighty God himself. He indeed, as the Scholemen teach, is the objective
happiness of the Creature; He who is the fountain of being, must be also of
blessedness: and tho this be only communicable to us, when we have put off that
flesh which cannot enter into the kingdom of God, and laid aside that
corruption which cannot inherit incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. yet even in this life,
we may make approches to that blessed state, by acts of Resignation and denial
of our selves. It was the generous saying of Socrates being about to die unto
his friend; O Crito, since it is the will of God, so let it be: Anytus and
Melitus may kill me, but cannot hurt me. But such a resignation as it is
infinitely a greater duty to a Christian, so it is also a more firm security. In
that case it is not the Martyr, but Jesus of Nazareth who is thus persecuted, and
he who attaques him will find it hard to kick against the pricks, Act. 9. 5.

7. THERE could not be a greater instance of the profligate sensuality of the
Israelites, then that they murmured for want of leeks and onions, Number. 11. 5.
when they ate Angels food, and had bread rained down from heaven. It Is
impossible for the soul that is sensible of God Almighties favor, to repine at
any earthly pressure. The Lord is my shepherd, says David, therefore can I
lack nothing, Psa. 23. 1. And, thou have put gladness into my heart, more then
when their corn, and wine, and oil increased, Psa. 4. 7. and in passionate
rapture he cries out, Psa. 73. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee: and there is
none upon earth that I desire in comparison of thee? my flesh and my heart
fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. And
likewise Psalm. 46. 1. God is our hope and strength, a very present help in
trouble. Therefore will we not fear, tho the earth be moved: and tho the hills
be carried into the midst of the sea. Tho the waters thereof rage and swell,
and tho the mountains shake at the tempest of the same. If God be in the midst
of us, we shall not be removed, he will help us, and that right early. Let us
therefore possess our selves of this support, and as the Prophet advises Isa.
8. 12. neither fear, nor be afraid, in any exigence how great soever; but be
still and quiet, and sanctify the Lord of hosts himself, and let him be our
fear, and let him be our dread.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
SECTION
1. Of the necessary Connection between Happiness and Contentment. p. 1. 2. Of
Gods Absolute Sovereignty. p. 17. 3. Of Gods Unlimited Bounty. p. 28. 4. Of the
Surplusage of our Enjoiments above our Sufferings. p. 56. 5. Of our Demerit
toward God. p. 86. 6. Of Gods general Providence. p. 107. 7. Of Gods
particular Providence. p. 121. 8. Of the Advantage of Afflictions. p. 130. 9.
Of our Misfortunes compared with other men's. p. 156. 10. Of particular aids for
the gaining Contentment. p. 178. 11. Of Resignation. p. 196. The Close. p. 209.

