A RETRACTATION OF SEPARATION.

WHEREIN VI Arguments formerly erected for the service of Separation, upon the
account of Infant Baptism, are taken down:

AND VI Other Arguments for Saints general communion, though of different
persuasion, are erected in their room.

TOGETHER WITH A patheticall Swasive to unity, peace, and concord, as our
generation-work in special.

By WILLIAM ALLEN.

When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren, Luke 22.32.

Go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, Mat.
9.13.

Whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, Phil. 3.16.

Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, To: 14.19.

LONDON; Printed by M. S. for Henry Crips, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the entrance out of Lumbard street into Popes-head-Alley. 1660.

To the godly READERS, both Anabaptists and Pedobaptists.
THe scope of this little piece being in special to close the wound of
division that has been made in the Church of God about Baptism, I shall here
offer a word to both parts divided. First, to the Anabaptists; for so I call
them, as being that name whether proper or improper, by which they are best
known among men. That which I would briefly say to them, partly respects their
opinion, and partly their separation about it.

My humble request to them; First is, That their dissent from other godly
Christians in the point of Infant Baptism, may be held and managed with much
humility and sobriety toward them that differ. That reverence which is due to
the wisdom, godliness, faithfulness and zeal of so great a number as in
former ages have been, and in this present age are of a mind different from
them in this point, calls for it. The sense of their own weakness, and that
they are no more infallible then other men, calls for it. And the peace and
undisturbed state of the Church and people of God, which every Christian is
bound as much as in him lies to preserve, calls for it likewise.

As for those of them that Judge it their duty to uphold a separate state upon
account of this difference; my humble motion to them is, That they would read
the ensuing Discourse, or any other of like nature, with an open and free
mind, and with that inclination to unity, peace, and concord, that ought to
rule in the hearts of all Saints: and to give the arguments and considerations
which oppose Separation, the same law and fair play in their judgments, which
they have been wont to allow to their contrary: and that they would make as
much, if not much more, conscience to lay out and engage their thoughts how to
remove objections against general communion, of Saints, as to make them.
Certainly the great cry of the Scripture for unity, peace, concord, and
forbearance among Saints, and against their dissentions and divisions, and the
experience of their ill effects, is a loud call to this. And so is the law of
true Evangelicall brotherly love, and the principle of it, in whom soever
found, which is still working, if not obstructed, toward a kindly closure with
all that have the like precious faith, and seed of God, remaining in them, and
which makes them desirous and glad of any help to remove out of the way, what
ever keeps them from the closest communion.

And for those that are or shall be convinced of the unduenesse of this
Separation; and yet for fear of offending the weak, conceal their Judgment;
my desire and advice is, that they would set before them the blame which the
Apostle Peter incurred by dissembling his Judgment for fear of offending that
sort of believers which were of the Circumcision, Gal: 2.11, 12, 13. besides
the account which I afterward give, of my own practice in the contrary.

My prayer on the other hand to the godly Pedobaptists, both Ministers and
people, is, That they would use like moderation and tenderness toward the
godly Anabaptists: and not for their different opinion sake in point of
Baptism, to set them at naught, and represent them to the people, and that
without distinction, as such monsters as some do; nor to make an estimate or
representation of the best by the worst, (there being near as much difference
between Anabaptists and Anabaptists, as there is between Pedobaptists and
Pedobaptists;) but to think and speak of them as such, who for a considerable
part of them, at least, are truly tender of the glory of the Lord, and of the
royal authority of his holy Laws; and as desirous to approve themselves with
all good conscience both to God and men; and as such among whom there are as
savoury and experimental Christians, as most in their generation. The want of
this moderation in many of the Pedobaptists, I believe has had a great hand in
the divisions and separations of our times; partly by setting them of the other
Judgment at a further distance from them then otherwise they would have been;
and partly by inclining many who have thought them wronged, to fall in with
them and off from the other.

Suppose the Anabaptists should be in an error: yet certainly their opinion
about Baptism after faith, cannot reasonably be supposed to be of that nature,
if it should be an error, but that it may well consist with an eminent degree
of grace, as many I doubt not of different thoughts from them, do sufficiently
experience. And with what heart then can any who know the worth of grace, and
how to value persons by it, make such to be a gazing stock to the people, for a
supposed infirmity in judgment? Besides; the strong probabilities (not now to
say proofs) which they have for their opinion; may well bespeake a moderate
and sober treatment, from such as dissent. As to matter of fact: what can be
said to evince Infant Baptism a primitive practice, but may be so far
counter-argued, as to leave an enlightened and tender conscience, without
conviction in the case? And as to the reason of the thing: when it shall be
argued that to be baptized, is to be buried; and that burial betokens or
supposes the person buried, to be dead, viz. unto sin; and how incompetent
such a death is to an infant state; and how prepostercus it is to bury persons
before they are dead: is it not very possible that when all is said that can be
said to take away the strength of such a consideration, that yet so much may be
apprehended to remain, by many a wise and holy man, as may hold his conscience
fast? And therefore why should such an opinion that has so much to be said for
it, and hard to be answered, render its friends so criminal in the eyes, in
the reports of their brethren, as sometimes it does? Or if some that be of that
opinion, have espoused any other opinions of worse import; yet why should this
be charged upon the whole Tribe? See Revel: 2.24. and 3.4.

In a word; if the godly Pedobaptists and Anabaptists, would but charitably
consider what each plead for themselves, and would but have their eyes more
upon what is lovely and desirable in each other, and be ready to own and
acknowledge it, and to provide a covering for each others infirmities, (which
yet would be no works of supererogation, but their duty;) how soon would they
delight in one another, and come closer together, and serve the Lord with one
shoulder? and if those of each subdivision among themselves, would do so too;
what a heaven upon earth should we have in comparison of what now we have? But
if each shall still abound in their own sense, and impose that sense upon one
another; and shall still be laying their fingers upon each others sores, and
aggravating every small matter, and construing things in the worst sense, and
harboring jealousies and evil surmisings against one another, where there is
no visible ground; and in the mean while overlook the praiseworthy things
that are visible enough in many on both sides; what can be expected but the
banishing of charity, and with it peace and the holy Spirit, but the increase
of emulations, contentions, divisions, and with these error, heresy, and
apostacy, until we have so far devoured one another, and our religion too,
as at last to expose our selves and our profession, Gospel, Ordinances and
liberties, as a prey to the common Enemy, whose hopes and endeavors of
swallowing up all, are doubtless nourished and strengthened by our divisions.
And what christian heart can bear the thought of being accessory to such
things as these?

Where then there is any true affection left to the interest of Christ, and
safety of souls, which are already so far endamaged and further endangered by
the uncharitable contentions and divisions of professors; let it show it self
by a speedy and compassionate endeavor to find out ways and to improve
opportunities of reconciling dissenting brethren, upon the account of those
many and main things of faith and holiness, wherein they are already one, and
which in reason should sway more to hold them fast together, then those few and
far lesser things wherein they differ, should to divide, scatter, and
alienate them one from another. And so they would if there were no
selfe-interest, or ignorance about the doctrine of forbearance, or pride, or
uncharitableness, to hinder it; which Christians should abhor, not cherish.
Alas, shall the sword always devour? is there no balm in Gilead? is there no
Phycian there? Must we sit down in despair? or must we wait on miracles to
make Gods people on^? Surely if men's eyes were but a little more open, every
one to see their own sin in making, or not cordially endeavoring the cure of
our breaches; reconciliation would be found a work of no such difficulty to
effect among those that are steered by Christ's interest, (and those that are
not, let them be left out, they will but retard the work;) for they would be so
much ashamed of this sin, and the dis-service they have done Christ by it, as
that they would not be able to refrain mutual endeavors on every hand to
quench the flame that is kindled in the house of God, and to call upon one
another to join herein. There Is now some hopeful dawnings of such a day by
agitations now on foot; yet if while the Sun is but peeping out of one cloud,
another should come over it; let no man's heart or hand be weakened upon that
account: if you will but follow after peace with all your might, you shall
certainly at last over-take it and bring it back again: and I am sure, its
company worth running for. Let us therefore follow after the things which make
for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another, Rom: 14.19.

September. 5th 1659. W. A.

A Retractation of Separation.
THe most wise and holy God, at first made and disposed all his creatures in
such subordination and order, as that no division either did or could befall
them, through any defect in his workmanship. But the Devil, the original
Author and founder of division and sinful separation, having himself first
left his own place where God had set him, became head of a faction against God;
and from that day to this, has industriously endeavored to work division
between God and men, and among men themselves. And for this cause was Jesus
Christ the Son of God, made manifest, that he might destroy the works of the
Devil; and counter-work him, in reconciling men to God, and one to another. And
therefore the closer men do follow Christ, and the more they are acted by his
Spirit, the more they are for unity and concord; for healing of breaches: and
reconciling of divided parties. As on the other hand; the more men are acted
and influenced by the spirit of Satan, the more they are for dividing work.
For these two Princes, the one of light, the other of darkness, carry on their
two contrary works of division and union, by the agency of their followers.

And yet the Devil does not carry on this work only by such as are his, but so
out-wits many well meaning men that design serving of Christ and promoting of
truth in the maine, as to make them think they are building up Gods truth and
worship by separation, when they are pulling down his house which is the
pillar thereof, by division: and so do really accomodate the Devils design,
whilst they intend the advancement of the cause of Christ. They think that some
one particular truth which they apprehend to have discovered, will not be seen
enough in a crowd of the contrary minded, (though of the same alliance to
Christ) and therefore they get out of their company, that by the light of their
separation, that truth for which they do separate, might be the better seen
and the more taken notice of, and the more prized, whilst communion with them,
cannot be had without it. But in the mean while they are not aware how they
hinder Christ's work, while they intend to promote it, and befriend the Devils
design, whilst they intend to withstand it.

1. In hindering the reception of that truth if it be a truth, which they
intend to propagate. For by such a separation, they render themselves less
acceptable to them from whom they withdraw, then they were before, and more
suspected too: and so are at a greater disadvantage to commend any truth to
them, then they were before: Prejudice against the Preacher, begetting
prejudice against his doctrine. For which cause also, all their other Christian
applications to them will be less acceptable and less effectual, unless
there be a bundance of grace to prevent it; it faring with them in this case as
it does many times with men who take a kind of conceit against good meat, for
the unacceptablenesse of the vessel in which it is dressed, or dish in which
its brought: that is one way by which unawares, as I conceive, they gratify the
enemy.

2. By such divisions and separations of one part of Gods people from another,
they lay themselves open, and become obnoxious to the temptations and
surprisall of the enemy. Their strength to withstand the enemy, lies under God
in their union and association. When the Apostle exhorts the Christians ( Phil.
1.27.) to stand fast and to maintain their ground against the enemy, he
immediately directs them to [strive together] for the faith of the Gospel. And
if one prevail, yet two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord, is not
easily broken, Eccl. 4.12. But by dividing and separating, they loose their
strength, and become a prey to the enemy. Genesis 49.7. I will divide them in
Jacob, and scatter them in Israel: dividing makes way for scattering and
overcoming. How easy a matter is it for an enemy by his united force to subdue
the greatest Army when they shall fight him only in small parties? he will
first overcome one party and then another, and so all one after another. And
that doubtless is the reason why the enemy has so mightily prevailed, and
taken so many that did wear Christ's colors, prisoners, and led them away
captive under the power and command of mand dangerous and destroying errors and
heresies, since those unhappie divisions and separations among the people of
God, have broken out and so abounded in this Nation. And therefore I conceive
that upon true account it will be found, that where the enemy has drawn away
one other person to become a Quaker, or a Ranter, or the like, he has drawn
away many of those that upon one account or other, had before separated
themselves in their communion, from a great part of the people of God. As
straglers from an Army use to fall into the hands of the enemy, when those that
abide in the main body are safe; even so is it with those that stragle from
the main body of Christ the universal Church in their communion, they are
gathered up by the enemy, here one and there one, when in the mean while those
that abide and keep their rancks in the main body, are more generally kept
safe. Doubtless its not much less dangerous for Saints to separate from
Saints upon account of their differences, considering what advantage is given
the enemy thereby, then it would be for an Army who all engage for the same
cause in the maine, to divide and part upon account of difference among them
about wearing of Colors, or ordering themselves, when they have a potent and
resolved enemy in the field ready to fight them.

For besides the danger already hinted, by such separation they take course to
dis-arme themselves, at least in great measure, and to put weapons into the
enemies hand. Christian Charity is in great part a Christians security; and the
separation I speak of, tends greatly to weaken and by degrees to destroy that
charity, as I shall show afterward. To what degree the enemy draws any of us
out of Christian charity, he draws us out of our strong hold and place of
security. If we love one another, God dwells in us, says the Apostle: and he
that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him, (1 John 4.12, 16.) and
therefore must needs be safe. If God dwell in him, it is to govern and guide
him, to support and uphold him, to save and defend him. Where God dwells, light
and strength dwells. He that loves his brother abides in the light, and there
is none occasion of stumbling in him, 1 John 2.10. But uncharitableness is
quite contrary to God who is love; and where that dwells, he takes no pleasure
to dwell: and if he who is the Christians safety, strength and guide, be but
withdrawn; what can be expected but darkness, weakness, wandering, and the
enemies enterin, and taking possession. He that hates his brother, is in
darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because
darkness has blinded his eyes, 1 John 2.11. Uncharitableness, then, deprives
men of Gods presence, which is their only safety, and makes way for the enemy,
and so betrays them into the hand of error and delusion. The end of the
Commandment (says the Apostle) is charity, from which some having swerved,
have turned aside to vain jangling, 1 Timothy 1.5, 6. Turning aside to vain
langling, is that which follows the swerving from charity. As love departs, so
jangling, error and confusion takes place. 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. I hear there are
divisions among you, and I partly believe it: for there must be also heresies
among you, that they which are approved, may be made manifest. The Apostle
knowing there must come heresies among them, was easily induced to believe the
report that brought him news of the divisions in that Church; as looking upon
those, but as preparing and making way for the other. If you hear of much
contention among brethren, once, for want of charity; expect to hear of
heresies among them ere long. Seasons of uncharitable contentions among
Christian brethren, are gainful advantages for the Devil to deceive in. Mark
and consider that Prophecy of Christ; Mat: 24, 10, 11, 12. Then shall many be
offended and shall betray one anoeher, and shall hate one another. And many
false Prophets shall rise and shall deceive many. When Christ's followers fall a
hating and so a betraying one another, then the Devil sends forth his Prophets
as the fittest season possible to carry away many of those which were grown in
distaste with their godly brethren. And because iniquity in this kind, shall
abound, the love of many shall wax cold, ver. 12. A great decay of affection to
the Gospel takes place, when uncharitableness, error, and Apostasy among the
professors thereof, does abound. And may not I say as Christ in another case
sometimes said? This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. For when the
godly among the Episcoparians, Presbyterians, Independents, and Anabaptists,
fell to siding, party against party; and envy, emmulations, and
uncharitableness increased, then the Devil thrusts out a great variety of
seducers that have carried away many into ways of dangerous error, especially
of those that have proceeded furthest in separation by several subdivisions.
Though God has in the mean while graciously kept such as have retained a
general love to all the people of God, and have managed their differences with
more moderation.

3. Another way by which Separation of Saints from Saints furthers Satan's and
hinders Christ's design, (what ever they themselves design by it) is in
hindering the success of the Gospel in its converting work. For by it
unbelief of the Gospel in ungodly men, is nourished and maintained. The Saints
differences, though but in some lesser matters, when made so public and
notorious by separations, do gratify the unbelieving thoughts which sinful
men have, as if the Gospel were an uncertain thing. When they see those that
pretend to so much knowledge of it, to di^agree in matters so material, as
those that concern their owning one another as Christian Brethren, they think
(its like) that they may suspend a through belief of the whole. Christ prayed
that all those that should believe through his Apostles word, might be one that
the world might believe, John 17.21. They are those that bear witness before
the world that the Gospel is true: but to what degree (as in all Courts) the
witnesses disagree; their testimony is weakened, and their evidence suspected.
When their Trumpet by which they should al^^m the world, gives an uncertain
sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle? They know not what religion
to be of, they say, and will see professors better agreed, before they will be
resolvedly and thoroughly of any. It was the Devils policy of old to raise up
false Prophets in opposition to the true, that while one said one thing, and
another another thing in the name of the Lord, the ignorant people might be
amused, and not know which to follow. And its much to be feared, that he gains
much of the same advantage by the declared published contradictions among the
Saints. Hence is the common complaint touching the paucity of converts, now
adays. There Is much preaching and much discoursive knowledge, but how rare are
those effectual conversions that the Word accompanied with the peace, charity,
and sincerity of Saints in former times, did produce. Now indeed men are
converted from one opinion in Religion to another; but to have stout-hearted
sinners to fall at the feet of Jesus Christ by the power of his Word, and
giant-like transgressors to become like weaned children, I believe (and its not
my thought alone) is a sight far more rare to behold now, then formerly. And
why? Surely not because the Word is less quick and powerful now then it was
then; but because its now more hindered, and clogged by the divisions,
separations, and contrary opinions of professors, and scandalls concurring,
then formerly it was.

And as these divisions and separations have hindered the conversion of some,
so doubtless have they occasioned the subversion of many others, who have
stumbled at this stumbling stone, and forsaken the tents of the Saints of all
persuasions; turning, some Quakers, some Ranters, and Libertines, some Papists,
and some Atheists. Papists and Atheists there were before, but for strict
professors of godliness to become such, was, I think, seldom seen before. The
frequent interressing the weak in doubtful disputations, has been like the
putting of new wine into old bottles, or the sewing of a new piece of cloth to
an old garment; the wine has been spilt, and the rent made worse: their heads
have turned round with the noise of abundance of contrary arguings, of which
they have not been able to make judgment. And upon that account have been
tempted to taste of every water, to be experiencing every way; trying every
thing, till at last they have come to nothing. Such open and violent strivings
about things of doubtful disputations, as to set one Christian at a distance
from another, has proved a sad occasion of subverting the hearers, 2 Timothy 2.14.

These and such like have been the effects of the late years divisions and
separations of Saints, though better things then these, I doubt not, have been
intended by them. And if there has been any discovery of truth by our
contendings; yet I doubt by the ill managing of our differences, if the account
could be cast up, the loss in the total, in relation to the affairs of
Christ, would be found much more then the gain. And I must now say, that the
experience, observation and serious consideration of such things as these, has
occasioned me to review my Arguments for Separation with a jealous eye; and
has prepared the way for such Arguments and Considerations as plead the cause
of general communion among all Saints, to have the readier access to my
understanding. And after some months labor in this search, accompanied with
serious seeking of God about this matter, I have at last found cause (as I have
verily thought) to accuse my self before the Lord, as one too greatly
accessory to the mischievous effects of division and separation; and that not
only in practicing the way of separation my self, but also in strengthening
the hands of others thereto by pleading that cause in print. In the sense of
which, together with other my manifold weaknesses, I have through grace humbled
my self, and desire to lie low before the Lord all my days. Giving him glory
for his great mercy toward me in that presence and those supplies of his which
he has been pleased graciously to vouchsafe me, during the time of this
mistake, my weakness and unworthiness notwithstanding: and now at last to
deliver me from those crooked thoughts (as I humbly judge them to have been)
which caused me to break communion with those Christian Brethren and children
of my father, that were not of my mind in the points of Infant and
after-baptisme. Shall I say the Lord had mercy on me because I did it
ignorantly! for I verily thought my self in a way of serving both God and men,
in what I did therein.

I am not unsencible but that this alteration of thought and way in me; though
but in the point of communion, is for the present, matter of offense and grief
to many, whose grief upon this account cannot but be grief to me, and whom to
please in any thing, in which I should not displease the Lord, would be far
more acceptable to me. I have considered also, that some weak ones will be in
danger of stumbling and taking hurt thereby; for whose sakes I have been the
more graduall, slow, and tender in discovering and putting in execution my
change of thoughts in this particular. And it has been no small trouble to me,
(the Lord knows,) that my former unadvisednesse, should put me upon a
necessity of running such hazards. But when I have considered that there is a
necessity upon him that has gone out of the right way, more or less, to
return into it, when he comes to know it: and that a man may by no means make
himself accessory to a certain evil in himself, to prevent a contingent and
accidental one in another: and that the probable dangers in relation to others
in upholding separation, are more then those that attend the taking it down;
and that where one miscarries by the latter, many fall by the former: And
considering also, that I am under a published engagement in one of my Epistles,
to retract what formerly I have done, upon condition of an after-discovery of
vanity therein; I have thought it my duty, not only to make that late retreat;
but also to be as public in my return out of the way of separation, as I was
in my entrance into it: as judging it not impossible, but that God in time may
make use of this declaration to lead or at least to keep as many and many more
out of the way of separation, then ever my former writings for separation, led
into it. However having herein done what I judged my duty, I shall commit the
issue and success to God.

To vindicate then my present-practice of free communion with reformed godly
Congregations of Pedobaptists; but much more to persuade others to join with
me therein, I shall through Gods assistance endeavor these two things.

1. To take down those Arguments by which I once endeavored to build up
Separation.

2. Propose some Arguments to evince the lawfulness of Church Communion
between the godly, both Pedobaptists and Anabaptists, and the unlawfulness of
denying their communion one with another upon account of their baptismall
difference. In the doing of which, I suppose, I shall have occasion to consider
all that is considerable on the other hand, either of Arguments or Objections.
Which done, I hope will be of good use to cure and prevent the evil of
Separation of godly from godly upon other accounts also as well as this.

My six former Arguments for Separation, taken down.
FIrst, I would here give notice, that my six Arguments, formerly published, in
countenance of Separation of godly from godly upon the account of Infant
Baptism, are laid down for the most part rather Motive-wise, then
Argument-wise; and do not rationally conclude the thing for which they were
brought. I shall therefore contract and reduce them in the best of their
strength, into form of Argument, and then discover in what respects they are
inconcludent of the position touching Separation, which should have been proved
by them.

First Argument for Separation, is to this effect.

Those Churches may not be held communion with, in whose constitution such a
part of the foundation of Christian Churches as the doctrine of Baptism
mentioned Heb. 6.2. is wanting.

But such are the best of the Churches of the Pedobaptists. Therefore etc.

Answ. That it is the duty of every Christian, so far as he contributes any
thing toward the erecting a house for Christ, therein according to the best of
his understanding, and as much as in him lies, to endeavor that it be built
according to the pattern in the Mount, I mean the Scriptures; and that no part
of the foundation through his default be left out; I easily grant and still
assert. But that that part of the foundation which consists in the doctrine of
Baptism, mentioned Heb. 6.2. is wholly wanting in the Churches of the
Pedobaptists, I do deny: or if there be some part of it wan^ing in them; yet
that such a partial defect is any sufficient ground of separation from them, I
do also deny, and shall here offer something to show that it is a great
mistake so to think.

1. That part of the foundation which consists in the [doctrine] of Baptism,
is not totally wanting in the Assemblies of the godly Pedobaptists. For about
the [doctrine] of Baptime, the Pedobaptists do agree with the Anabaptists in
many weighty points, though they differ in some other. 1. They both agree that
water Baptism is an ordinance instituted by the Lord. And 2. To be continued
in the use of it to the end of the world. 3. That all that are converted from
another to the Christian religion and profession, ought upon such conversion,
to be baptized, as those whose Baptism after faith is recorded in Scripture
were. 4. That to be baptized is a professed putting on of Christ, and that
Baptism is a badge of Christ's professed Disciples, distinguishing them from
such as do not own Christ. 5. That all that are baptized, are thereby obliged
to cease living any more to sin, but are bound thereby to live a new and holy
life unto God. 6. That all the Disciples of Christ ought actually to be under
this engagement. In all these they both agree. 7. As the one hold themselves
actually engaged to the laws of Christ by their Baptism after faith, so do
the other by that which they account a sufficient Baptism, though received
before faith. 8. As the one do the things to which Gospel-Baptisme does
oblige, so do the other. Although then the Pedobaptists be supposed to be
defective in the doctrine of Baptism in relation to some of the subjects of
it, (and it is but some) and likewise in relation to the form of
administration; yet agreeing in so many of the substantial parts of the
doctrine of Baptism as is before mentioned; we cannot say justly, that there
is an utter failer in them as to this part of the foundation. There are two
parts of the doctrine of Baptism; the one concerns the putting away of the
filth of the flesh; the other the answer of a good conscience toward God, by
the resurrection of Christ from the dead. If they are defective in that part of
the doctrine which concerns the putting away the filth of the flesh, yet they
are orthodox and sound in that part which concerns the answer of a good
conscience toward God; which according to the Apostle, is the greater and
better part, 1 Pet. 3.21. A partial defect, and that too in the lesser part of
the foundation, does not make a nullity in it; no more then the want of a hand,
or an eye, or a leg, makes a man to be no man. And if a woman should separate
from her husband when wanting any of these, upon pretense that he is no man,
she would not be held innocent. Defects in and about holy things, though great
and notable, do not always cause a privation of the ends of the holy things
themselves. The manner of Jacobs obtaining the blessing, was greatly defective,
and full of sinful mixture, but yet did not nullify the blessing it self. It
was a great defect in the Office of high Priesthood, when God would have but
one high Priest at one time, and him during life, ( Number. 35.25, 28. Heb. 7.23.)
for men to set up two, or else to make an annual election: ( Joh. 11.49, 51.
and 18.13. Acts 4.6.) but yet whoever thought for all that, that all the
administrations of such an high Priest were nullities, and that no body was the
better for them?

2. Its a great mistake likewise, to think that every partial defect in the
foundation of a complete Church constitution, is a sufficient ground of
separation. For

1. Its very probable that something of that which is comprised in the doctrine
of Baptism, a part of the foundation Heb. 6. is wanting (as it was enjoyed in
the primitive Church) in the best constituted and well ordered Church at this
day in the world. For when the Author of that Epistle speaks of the doctrine
of [Baptismes] in the plural number, what can we so reasonably understand by
it, besides the Baptism of water, as the Baptism of the Spirit? And however
all that are Christ's, have his Spirit, ( Rom: 8.9. Gal. 4.6.) yet I have as I
think elsewhere rendered it probable from Mat. Doubt resolved, p. 37.
3.11. Acts 1.5. and 2.3.4. and 11.16. compared, that the Baptism of the
Spirit, was a privilege peculiar to the primitive times, and is not now
enjoyed by any that we know of: Wherein also I know I have the concurrant
judgment of many of the Baptists at least. So that its probable, all Churches
this day in being, as well of the Anabaptists as of the Pedobaptists, are
without this part of the foundation.

2. Its as probable likewise that this Church of the Hebrews, or at least the
Hebrew Church at Jerusalem, which was the first Christian Church in the world,
in many of the members of it, were without another part of the foundation
mentioned Heb: 6. except the doctrine concerning it; and that is that of laying
on of hands. By which understanding (according to the usual and most commonly
received interpretation) the imposi^ion of hands upon baptized Disciples in
order to their receiving the holy Ghost, there is good cause to conceive that
many in that Church never had hands laid on them for that end. For I conceive
no man will think that the Apostles, much less any others, did lay their hands
upon any Disciples for their receiving the holy Ghost till the day of
Penticost, in which they themselves received it. And the holy Ghost being then
given to all the Disciples then and there in being, and that in an
extraordinary measure as well as manner; ( Acts 2.) I conceive that no man will
think that the Apostles or others did afterward lay their hands on any of
those Disciples for their receiving of the holy Ghost, which they had upon such
excellent terms already. And yet of these was that Church first founded, unto
whom the new converts were afterward added. So that the first Christian Church
in the first constitution of it, was (in all appearance of reason) wholly
without this part of the fo^ndation which is called one of the six principles
of the doctrine of Christ, and afterward so remained in that part of it of
which it was first formed. The like, I suppose, may be said of the first
Christian Church of the Gentiles at Cesarea, Acts 10. who received the holy
Ghost in like manner as the first Hebrew Church did, Acts 11.15.

If then the want or absence of any though a lesser part of the foundation
mentioned Heb: 6. were a sufficient ground or reason of separation from a
Church in whose constitution such part is wanting, then it had been the duty of
the three thousand, Acts 2.41. to have kept at a distance from the hundred and
twenty Disciples, in stead of being added to them, since one part of that
foundation in the letter of it, was not to be found in their constitution. And
if neither the want of one of the Baptismes; nor the want of laying on of
hands, both which are part of the foundation mentioned Heb. 6. be no sufficient
ground of separation; it passes my skill, I confess, since I considered it, to
evince a defect in, yea or a mere want of the external part of the doctrine of
Baptism, to be a just ground of separation or denial of communion, when such
defect or want proceeds not from a disobedient will, but from an error in
Judgment coupled with an upright heart and soundness of faith in the main
principles of the Gospel. And I would pray our Brethren that it may be
considered, where the Lord has commanded separation or denial of communion
any more for the want of the one, then for the want of the other; and that we
make no such have to withdraw from our brethren, unless God had bid us to do
so.

It will be sufficient for us to follow the Lord, and to withdraw when he
withdraws: but it does not become us to go before him, and to withdraw where
he abides. Where Christ the only foundation is sincerely held in the main
doctrines of Justification and Sanctification, there the Lord dwells in the
grace of his presence, ( Joh. 6.56. 1 John 4.12, 16.) though otherwise there
may be some spots of deformity and blemishes in respect of the external form
of his house, as well as in the conversation otherwise. And if God can dwell
there and yet not approve of such defects by his presence with them, so may his
servants too. The Lord vouchsafes his presence in such Churches, in order to
their help and healing, and so should his servants. An honest man will not
refuse his wifes society, because of some bodily or moral infirmities, as long
as she is loyal to him in the main, but by his continuance with her,
endeavor her help and cure.

Its true; it would be more acceptable and pleasant to well-growne Saints, to
be yoked in their communion, only with such as are full of spiritual health
and beauty. As it cannot but be thought that it would be a thing more
delightful to Christ Jesus, to converse only with creatures of an Angelical
perfection, if he had not healing-work to do. But if Christ should please
himself in the one; what would become of us? and if the best of Saints should
please themselves in the other; what would become of the spiritually weak and
sickly? But behold thus it is written, and this is our pattern: We then that
are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our
selves; -- for even Christ pleased not himself, etc. ( Rom: 15.1, 3.) You may
know what is most acceptable and unacceptable to the Lord hereabout, by his
complaint, Ezekiel. 34.4. The diseased have ye not strengthened; neither have ye
healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken,
neither have brought aga^ne that which was driven away, neither have sought
that which was lost. Separating from them is not the way to cure them. If they
have but a spiritual being; that which will but denominate them new creatures:
well may their mistakes and infirmities put them under the greater necessity of
your help, and you under the greater obligation of abounding so much the more
in your tender, compassionate, and diligent applications for their increase in
spiritual light, health, and strength, but are far from priviledging you to
withdraw your communion from them. For God has tempered the body together,
having given more abundant honor to that part which lacked; that there should
be no schism in the body, 1 Cor: 12.24, 25.

Second Argument for Separation, thus:
If the primitive believers associated themselves in Church Communion with none
but such as were baptized after profession of faith, then we may not. But the
primitive believers did associate themselves in Church Communion with none but
such as were baptized after profession of faith. Ergo.

Answ. I do acknowledge that all such unbaptized persons then in being as the
primitive believers would not have or had not communion with, we may not now
have communion with their like; and that what was a reason unto them not to
have communion with such, ought to be a reason to us of our non-communion in
like case. And yet I utterly deny the consequence of the Major proposition; It
will not follow that because the primitive believers had communion with none
but such as were baptized after faith, therefore we may have communion with
none but such as are baptized after profession of faith. And the reason of the
inconfecuence is taken from the difference of persons then and now. There is a
great difference in the qualification of the persons that had no Baptism, and
so no Church Communion then, and many of the persons that have no Baptism
after profession of faith now, and so the reason of non-communion varies
accordingly. Those in the primitive times that had no Baptism, and so no
Church Communion, had no faith, nor made confession of any. So that the reason
of the primitive Saints non-communion with such, was not simply their want of
Bapti^me, but their want of faith. And the same non-qualification now would be
a like reason unto us of non-communion. But where persons have faith, and this
faith visible in their profession and conversation, and have also the doctrine
of Baptism in the spiritual part of it, both in judgment and practice, and
are confident they practically have, it too in the litterall part, which is the
case of the godly Pedobaptists, there the difference is exceeding broad and
large between them and those unbaptized persons with whom the primitive Saints
had no communion; and so the same reason of non-communion will not suite both.
If the primitive Saints had no communion with such as the godly Pedobaptists;
it was not because they judged such unworthy their communion, but because there
was none such then in being; that particular difference between Saints and
Saints about Infant Baptism, not being then on foot; but if there had, I shall
offer reason presenly to induce us to believe that communion with them would
not have been refused by the best of Saints then in being, on that ground.

In the mean time let it be considered, that we have no example of the
primitive Saints refusing communi^n with such as the godly Pedobaptists are,
and therefore by their example cannot be obliged to refuse communion with them:
their example of non-communion with unbaptized unbelievers, is foreign and
irrelative to our case and question, and therefore it is altogether impertinent
in its allegation.

But if there were or had been any such in the primitive times, as the godly
Pedobaptists are; yet that we may be confident that the best of Saints in those
times would not have refused communion with them, I shall offer these reasons.

1. We have no approved example of their refusing communion with any
acknowledged godly Christians whatsoever, for any error in Judgment, or error
in practice proceeding merely from an error in Judgment: and therefore this
supposed error of the godly Pedobaptists being but of that nature, we have no
reason to think that they would have found harder measure if they had then
lived amongst them, then all others erring upon like terms, did. And here let
it be observed,

2. When there was any thing stirring among the primitive Saints that did but
tend to or look toward a separation upon account of such errors as were not
repugnant to godliness, it ^id not pass without check and discountenance from
the A^ostles, as is visible in the cases of difference about Circumcision,
days, and meats, (of which more afterward) And therefore the supposed error
of the Pedobaptists being but of the same nature; that is consistent with
godliness as well as theirs, there is no reason to think it would have cast
them out of communion then when the look of such a thing in other like cases,
was so distasteful to the holy Apostle.

3. When the Apostle comes to lay down and ennumerate the causes and things
for which communion with a professor of Christianity is to be refused, there is
none of them of a lower nature or less demerit, then such as do exclude a man
the kingdom of God, as is evident by comparing 1 Cor: 5.11. with Chap. 6.9,
10. as by the mere reciting of the words will appear. 1 Cor: 5.11. But now I
have written unto you, not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother
be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner, with such an one, no not to eat. That every one of these crimes
debar a man the kingdom of God is evident by 1 Cor: 6.9, 10. Know ye not
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived:
neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, -- nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.
And where ever withdrawing from, avoiding or rejecting of a professor of the
Gospel, is enjoined the Christian brethren, you will still find it is either
for crimes of a moral nature, either in kind or end, or heresy; but never
for misprision of Judgment about Ordinances, and matters of doubtful
disputation among the Saints. Peruse for this 2 Timothy 3.1. -- 5. 1 Timothy 6.5.
Rom: 16.17, 18. 2 Thessalonians: 3.6.11. Tit. 3.10, 11. By ought then that can be
gathered from the Apostles writings, an error of that nature which is charged
upon the Pedobaptists, would not have deprived godly persons of the communion
of Saints in the Apostles days. Which is a thing seriously to be laid to heart
by them that are accessory to the keeping up a separation, contrary to the
doctrine, custom and example of the primitive times.

Third Argument for Separation, runs thus.
None are in a regular capacity of holding Church communion with a particular
Church, who are not regularly visible members of the universal Church.

But none but such as are baptized after faith, which the Pedobaptists are not,
are regularly visible members of the universal Church. Therefore etc.

Answ. That none are in a regular capacity of communion in a particular Church,
who are not visibly members of the universal Church, I readily grant. And as
to that clause which speaks of men's being regularly visible members of the
universal Church, I say thus much: That none can be visibly members of the
universal Church, but so far as they are so, they are regularly so: for no
irregularity whatsoever as such, can contribute toward the vi^^bility of a
man's Church Membership, but obscure it. It is very true, that there may be more
of reg^larnesse in the visibility of somes universal Church Membership, then
in others; and so proportionably more of visiblenesse; but where ever there is
this visiblenesse in a greater or lesser degree, there is so much regularnesse
of that visibility.

Having said thus much by way of concession to the major proposition, and that
much for the explication of an impertinent expression touching the regular
visibility of universal Church Membership, I come now to deny the Minor
proposition which does affirm, that none but such as are baptized after faith,
are regularly visible members of the universal Church: and do affirm, that
the godly Pedobaptists are visibly members of the universal Church, though not
baptized after profess^on of faith: and being so, have right to particular
Church Membership.

Whatever it is that gives us ground to judge any of the Pedobaptists godly, or
men fearing God, makes their universal Church Membership visible. For there
are no godly men or holy men, who are not members of Christ's body: and
consequently for the same reason for which we judge any godly, we must judge
them of the body or Church of Christ, if we do but know and understand what we
judge. But touching the visibility of the universal Church Membership of the
godly Pedobaptists, and of their right to communion in particular Churches
thereby, I shall have occasion to speak more particularly and fully in my
first Argument for general communion among Saints, and therefore shall say no
more of it here, but refer you thither.

Fourth Argument for Separation, stands thus:
If according to Gospel order, all Christ's Disciples ought first to be baptized
before they be admitted unto Church Communion, then the godly Pedobaptist^,
although the Disciples of Christ, not being baptized, cannot be admitted to
such communion, without breach of Gospel order.

But according to Gospel order, all Christ's Disciples ought first to be
baptized before they be admitted unto Church Communion. Therefore etc.

Answ. I freely grant with all my heart that it is the order of Christ Jesus in
the Gospel that his Disciples should first be baptized before they desire or
claim communion in a particular Church: For baptizing is that which next
follows discipling according both to the Commission of Christ, Mat. 28.19. and
the constant recorded practice of the primitive times. And so far the
Argument holds good, that if any godly Pedobaptist or other Disciple of Christ,
should desire Church Communion before he is baptized as Christ would have him
baptized, having opportunity of being so, he should therein make himself a
transgressor of that order. And yet for all that it will not follow but that
the godly Pedobaptists may be admitted to Church Communion by the Anabaptists,
without any breach of Gospel order on their part that do so admit them.

And therefore I distinguish upon that phrase [without breach of Gospel order]
mentioned in the close of the consequence of the Major proposition, as it
relates to the admission of the godly Pedobaptists to communion. 1. As it
respects the persons themselves to be admitted, the proposition is true; upon
supposition that the godly Pedobaptists should prove not to be baptized, then
it would be a breach of the Gospel order aforesaid on their part, to claim
Church Communion before they are baptized. But 2. If that passage [cannot be
admitted to such communion without breach of Gospel order] be understood as
respecting the Anabaptists as persons admitting; then I conceive the
consequence of the Major proposition is false, and that it will be no breach of
Gospel order on their part to admit such to their communion, but indeed a
conforming to and a faithful observing of Gospel order, visible in other parts
of the New Testament so to do. For

There is no Gospel order that I know of, that enjoynes baptized believers in
no case to admit believers that are not baptized, into their communion: and
where there is no law there is no transgression, Rom: 4.15. And if Christ have
made no such law, I am sure it will not become us to make any such. When I
formerly built up that way of Separation which now I am laboring to take
down, my soul made diligent search for some Scripture forbidding the baptized
to hold communion with unbaptized believers. And among all which I thought
looked that way, Mat. 28.19. is the chief, Go teach or disciple all nations,
baptizing them. Which being again looked into, I find that all that can be
gathered from it hereabout is only this; that Christ would have all those to
be baptized, that should be made Disciples; or at most to be baptized next
after discipling. These words contain only a law about discipling and
baptizing, but nothing at all about communion: they enjoyne what shall be done
in the one, but forbid nothing to be done in the other. As for the Disciples
after behavior, it is concerned in the next words following, ver: 20. Teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, viz: to teach them.
If then it did appear that the Lord commanded his Apostles to teach the
Disciples when once baptized, not to admit any unbaptized Disciples of his to
their communion in no case, then indeed it would be unlawful for them so to
do. But till that do appear, we had need to take heed of making void another
command of the Lord, that we might establish our own tradition instead of his
command, in this.

Obj. But is not the constant order which the primitive Saints observed, a
Gospel order? and was it not their constant order without so much as once
varying it, to receive only such into Church Fellowship and communion, as were
before baptized? Acts 2.41. 1 Cor: 12.13. And would it not then be a violation
of such Gospel order to do otherwise now?

Answ. I do not know but that it was their constant order as to matter of fact
to receive only baptized Disciples into Church Communion: nor do I think but
that under the circumstances of their case, what they did in that kind, was a
Gospel order; and that under the same circumstances to do otherwise now, would
be a violation of Gospel order. And yet for all that, this their primitive
order of non-admission of unbaptized, does not bind up the Anabaptists to a
non-admission of the godly Pedobaptists to their communion, where the same
reason of non-admission is not in being.

For it is not the mere fact and literal practice of the primitive Saints
simply considered, that is now binding to us; but the reason of it. Men that
are not under the same reason of counting nothing which they possess their
own, are not under the same obligation of selling their possessions and
parting with them, as the primitive Saints were, Acts 4. Nay which is more,
this is not only true in respect of practice and example, but of some precepts
also: there were some precepts which were binding to them then, which are not
so among us now, and that upon this very ground, because the reason of them is
nor in being to us as it was to them. As for example, Mat. 6.17, 18. But thou
when thou fastest, anoint thine head and wash thy face, that thou appear not
unto men to fast. This though the express command of christ to his Disciples,
yet is not binding to us in the letter of it, because the custom of the places
where those Disci^les lived and we now live, do vary so much, as that the
reason of the precept would be crossed should the letter of it be observed. And
surely it is for like reason that we do not hold the holy kiss, (1 These:
5.26.) and the washing of Saints feet, ( John 13.) and some other things of
like nature, though expressly enjoined, to be so obliging to us as to the
primitive Saints. And upon what other ground else could the 120 Disciples (
Acts 1.) be any more excused from having hands laid on them, (supposing it in
it self a duty in those times as part of the foundation Heb: 6.2.) then other
primitive Saints, but only that the end and reason of it was not in being to
them, as it was to others. Upon like ground therefore I think we may safely
conclude, that if the primitive Saints reason of not admitting unbaptized
persons to their communion, be not our reason, or is not in being to us in
relation to the godly Pedobaptists, then their practice cannot be our binding
president, nor our literal variation, a moral violation of their order.

See we then whether the reason of the primitive Saints admitting only
baptized Disciples to their communion, be a reason to us to exclude the godly
Pedobaptists, or rather whether it be not a binding reason to us why they
should be admitted to communion.

The reason of admitting such and such only as they did to the communion of
Saints, must needs be their appearance to be Saints: The saintly qualification
of the person, must needs be the adequate reason of his admission to Saints
communion. When those in Church Communion were still styled Saints in the
inscriptions of the Epistles sent them, they received that denomination from
that which was the ground and reason of their communion. See Rom: 1.7. 1 Cor:
1.2. Ephesians. 1.1. Phil: 1.1. Col: 1.1. The reason therefore why they admitted
baptized and only baptized to their communion in the primitive times, was
because they had reason to esteem such and only such for Saints. Any man that
should then have refused Baptism, (supposing no conscientious scruple about it
then in being among the Saints) it would have been and indeed was argument
sufficient against his Saintship or being a cordial Disciple of Christ. To
deny Christ and to deny to be baptized in his name, was much the same thing
then. Upon which ground the refusing or not desiring of Baptism in whomsoever
found, was ground to the Saints then to refuse or not desire communion with
them. And as it was then, so it is now in like case: where the want of a
regular Baptism now, is as much an argument of no grace as it was in the
primitive times, there it is as much an argument of non-communion with such
persons now as then.

But where the want of any thing which belongs to a regular Baptism, is no
argument of non-Saintship, there I think it can be no argument of non-communion
with Saints. They having that upon which the communion of Saints is sounded (to
wit, Saintship) must needs have a right to the communion it self. If baptism
in the primitive times was a reason subordinately of communion as it was an
argument of Saintship, then by the rule of contraries, the want of it can be no
argument against communion, but as such a want is an argument of non-Saintship.
Of this more afterward.

But most certain it is that the want of regular baptism, which is laid to the
Pedobaptists charge, is no argument of non-Saintship in many of them; it
proceeding not from want of a sincere love to Christ; of which love many of
them have given an ample testimony otherwise both in doing and suffering for
him, but merely from want of light in the thing; they professing (and I believe
in good earnest) that if they did not believe they were baptized already, it
should be one of the first things they would seek opportunity to do, to
become baptized. You see then upon what ground the primitive practice of
holding communion with none but baptized Disciples, is not binding to us but in
like cases.

But what ever the other was, to be sure this was a Gospel order among the
primitive Saints, the moral reason whereof does as well oblige us as them; to
wit, Saints holding communion with such in whom there was the appearance of
Saints, notwithstanding all ignorances, errings, and mistakes o^herwise. And
why any or our brethren should have their eye so much upon that other piece of
Gospel order, and overlooke this, and not think themselves as much and much
more obliged by this then that, especially considering that there is precept
upon precept as well as president in this case, but not so in the other, I am
sure I (not to say they) can give no good reason. But of this more afterward.

Fifth Argument for Separation comes out thus.
If Baptism bear the same relation to the Supper of the Lord, as Circumcision
did to the Passover, then no unbaptized person may be admitted to the Supper
of the Lord, because none uncircumcised might be admitted to the Passover.

But Baptism does bear the same relation to the Supper of the Lord as
Circumcision did to the Passover. Therefore.

Answ. I shall not insist upon the undermining the basis of this proposition,
by asserting that Circumcision was not in all cases absolutely previously
necessary to communion in the Passover: as in the case of women, who were
communicants in that ordinance though not circumcised: and likewise in the case
of near forty years intermission of Circumcision in the wilderness; in which
time there was one Passover, to be sure, if not many more: for I have that
which will be more satisfactory then this.

I shall therefore deny the Minor proposition: Baptism does not bear the same
relation to the Lords Supper, as Circumcision did to the Passover. That
relation which Circumcision did bear to the Passover, as to make the former a
necessary qualification in a person for the enjoyment of the latter, was the
relation of an express command of God, making the one so necessary in relation
to the other, as that the Lord did expressly prohibit any uncircumcised male to
eat thereof, Exodus 12.48. But now the New Testament affords us no such express
Law prohibiting communion in the Lords Supper to such as upon any account are
not baptized.

I do acknowledge indeed that the New Testement does implicitly enjoyne
Disciples of Christ to be baptized before they participate in the Lords Supper;
but not so as to make the latter act, to wit, communion in the Supper unlawful
without the former. Though Baptism be enjoined to be received in its proper
place and season, yet all other after duties of Christianity are not forbidden
in case the other should unknowingly or for want of a natural or moral
opportunity be deferred or omitted. If a man omits one previous duty, as not
knowing it to be his duty, or as thinking he has already done it, when he has
not, it will not follow that he is hereupon bound to omit all other after
duties which he knows and acknowledges to be his duty. It is as much the
duty of Pedobaptists to be baptized before the greatest part of the prayers
they make, the Chapters they read, the Sermons they hear, in order to their
growth in grace already received, as it is for them to be baptized before they
participate in the Supper; and yet who will say that it is a sin for them to
pray, to read, or to hear the word for such an end? And if it be not a sin for
them to do these duties for their growth; why should it be their sin to have
communion in the Supper for the same end? since there is as much reason to lay
aside the one, as to forbear the other, upon the forementioned ground. If they
do sin, their sin lies not in doing that which they know to be their duty; but
in omitting that which is, but is not known by them so to be. And if these
duties be lawful in them to do as Christians, can it reasonably be thought
unlawful for us to join with them in them? May we not join with them and
hold communion with them in that which is lawful (being men having the faith
of our Lord Jesus Christ) because we may not have communion with them, or join
with them in that which is unlawful? Or does our communion with them in that
which is good, make us guilty of their infirmities or mistakes, especially when
they know that we disallow them? If this were so, there would have been no
room for Christian communion between the weak and strong Christians in the
Apostles days; the he^b-eaters and the flesh-eaters; those that were for the
observing of such a day, and those that were not: those that were for
circumcising, and those that were not.

Obj. But was not Christ as faithful in his house, as Moses was in his? Heb.
3.2. If so; has not he been as pa^ticular and as strict in his laws for
communion, as namely that no unbaptized person should taste of his Supper, as
Moses was in forbidding the uncircumcised to eat of the Passover?

Answ. Christ is and has been as faithful in his house, as Moses was in his;
but how? not in descending to so many particularities about external
ordinances as Moses did, but in declaring all that he had received from his
father to make known, John 12.49, 50. and 15.15. As Moses wa^ faithful to the
extent of his Commission, so was Christ to the utmost latitude of his. But then
it will follow, that if Christ has no where given a law in like manner, and
upon like terms, forbidding all unbaptized Disciples communion in the Supper,
as Moses did for the restraining of the uncircumcised from the Passover, that
the reason is because he had no such command from his father, and consequently
that it is not the fathers will to lay the same restraint in the one case, as
he did in the other. This I conceive, may be an answer fully sati factory, to
this fifth Argument.

I might here have showed, that the New Testament makes the Christian
Circumcision, which consists in the putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, Romans 2.29. Phil. 3.3.
(Col: 2.11.) to answer more properly to Circumcision in the flesh, then
Baptism does; and consequently that as the literal Circumcision was the
boundary of communion in the old Testament Church, so the spiritual
Circumcision is the boundary of communion in the New Testament Church: No men
being to be known or acknowledged for Church Members now after the flesh, as
by Circumcision they were wont to be; but now, if any man be in Christ, he is a
new creature: upon that account to be looked upon as one in Christ, (2 Cor:
5.16, 17.) As the want then of a regular Baptism is an argument that the new
creatureship is wanting, so far I shall grant the want of it an argument
against communion with those that want it, but no further as I see.

Sixth Argument for Separation, is to this effect.
If the practice of holding communion with such only as are baptized after
faith, be more safe and more full of Scripture light and evidence, then the
practice of holding communion with Pedobaptists is, then such a practice is
rather to be chosen then the other.

But the practice of holding communion with such only as are baptized after
faith, is more safe, and more full of Scripture Light and evidence, then the
other is: Therefore etc.

Answ. Here the Minor is again denied: It is not more safe nor more full of
Scripture Light and evidence to hold communion with such only as are baptized
after faith, when in the doing of it, communion with other godly Christians of
different persuasion, is rejected. There is no Scripture Light or evidence for
this, neither of precept or example, (as will be further showed afterward) but
is a practice attended with danger and inconvenience both to themselves and
others, and to the affairs of Jesus Christ now abroad in the world, as has
already been showed, and needs not here to be repeated, and will be further
touched on afterward.

And this much shall suffice for the taking down of the old building, which
yet indeed was not old, but new. I shall now proceed to the erecting of that in
its place and room, which as I judge, will be more substantial, beautiful,
and serviceable, then the other was.

Six Arguments for the lawfulness of Church Communion, between the godly
Pedobaptists and Anabaptists, notwithstanding their different persuasion
touching infant and after Baptism.
I. Argument.
ALL those that are visibly of Christ's universal body, have thereby a right to
communion in particular Churches: but some which are for infant Baptism, are
visibly of Christ's universal body: therefore some which are for infant
baptism, have a right to communion in particular Churches.

Before I endeavor the proof of the proposition, take a word for explication
of some of the terms of it.

By the universal body of Christ, I mean all those that are actually united
to him, and are thereby in an actual and present capacity of being saved by
him. Those in Scripture are called the body of Christ; his body the Church; the
whole body; and the general assembly and Church of the firstborn, Ephesians: 4.12,
16. and 1.22, 23. Col: 1.18, 24. Heb: 12.23. Of this number some are invisible,
and some visible. Of those that are invisible, some are in the other world, and
some in this. Those in this world that are of Christ's body, and yet not visibly
so, are such as are united to Christ by internal grace, and have not yet had
opportunity to manifest it by a suitable profession and conversation. Those are
visibly of this body, whose profession and conversation is declarative of this
spiritual union. And of this number are many of those that are for infant
baptism. Thus much for explication; now to our proof of the proposition.

It is affirmed in the Major proposition, that all those that are visibly of
Christ's universal body, have thereby a right to communion in particular
Churches.

1. The truth of this is obvious to common sense; for what can be imagined to
be so essential to communion, as union? In all bodies whether natural,
mystical, or political, communion of parts flows from union with the whole.
Christ being the common head of Christians, and center of union, hence it is
that all that are united to him, are united one to another; or (according to
the Apostles phrase) are members one of another, Rom: 12.5. And being so,
communion in giving and receiving mutual help, is the natural effect and
common right of such union. It would be monsterous in nature (and can it be
otherwise in grace) for one member of the same body to deny the communication
of comfort to the other: No man (says the Apostle) ever hated his own flesh,
but nourishes and cherishes it, as the Lord does the Church, Ephesians. 5.29. And
does the Lord nourish and cherish such because they are his members? and shall
it be denied amongst those that are members one o^ another? God forbid!

2. Communion is the end of union, or that for the sake of which union is made.
Christ took our nature into union with himself, that by communication he
might become Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption to us. And
he has knit together the several parts, that the whole body might increase
and be edified by that which every joint supplieth by the effectual working of
the measure of every part, Ephesians: 4.16. Col: 2.19. And therefore to deny
communion to those among whom there is union, is to cross and frustrate the
very end of union.

3. That which is given and belongs to the whole body, is given and belongs to
every part. But the work of ministration (as the word is rendered) to wit, of
the ordinances of Christ, is ordained for the edification of the whole body,
Ephesians: 4.12. and consequently for every part. All that in common is given to the
Church, (as the ordinances as well as other things are,) is given to every one
that is Christ's, as all those are who are united to him, 1 Cor: 3.21, 22, 23.
And the pasture that is provided for the sheep of Christ's flock, belongs to
every one that by Christ enters into his own sheepfold, John 10.9. To conclude
then; what better, stronger, or more rightful claim, can any have to
communion in a particular Church, then his membership in the universal?

Obj. 1. Against this it may be some will object, that union with the Church
does not give such a right to communion in it, but that some unworthy and
unchristian behavior may be a just bar to ones communion with the Church, at
such time as his union with it, is not denied. The Apostle commands to withdraw
from every brother that walks disorderly, not working at all, but walking as a
busie-body; and yet during the time of this withdrawing, he would have such an
one to be admonished as a brother, and not counted as an enemy: and what is
this less then to acknowledge him as yet a brother in the universal Church,
and yet to deny him communion in their particular society? 2 These: 3.6-15.

Answ. When such scandalls in life or doctrine are found in a person that has
been owned for one of Christ's Church, as does so far contradict that
christian profession by which he was first received into communion with the
Church, as to give just ground of suspicion that there was never that internal
union with Christ and his Church, which such profession did seem to import, or
if there were, that it has been since dissolved by such an offensive walking,
as is justly suspected to be inconsistent with true grace: I say while things
are in such a doubtful and suspicious posture, and in a way of ripening for a
final judgment of the Church about his cutting off; such a carriage of the
Church toward such a Delinquent, seems most suitable, as by which he shall be
declared neither clearly on, nor clearly off the Church, but hanging in
suspense; as namely by suspending him communion as one going off the Church if
not recovered, and yet to be admonished as a brother not yet totally cast off.
And this seems clearly to be the case of those whom the Apostolical rule in 2
These: 3.6-15 concerns. But then this will not be found of force against the
admission of such godly Pedobaptists to Church Communion, who hold their
supposed error upon such terms, as does not at all render their spiritual
and internal union with Christ, and so with his Church, justly suspected in
the account of sober, impartial, and judicious Christians.

1. The disorderly walking in 2 These: 3. contrary to the tradition of the
Apostles, which was to be proceeded against by withdrawing from such as were
guilty of it, was not every disorder that was contrary to Apostolical tradition
or institution, as is most evident. For the Apostles clearly taught such meats
might lawfully be eaten, which some scrupled, 1 Timothy: 4.3, 4, 5. and likewise
some days to be common, which some Christians did count sacred, Col: 2.16, 17.
Gal: 4.10, 11. and Circumcision to be unnecessary, which some Christians
thought necessary, 1 Cor: 7.19. Gal: 5.6. and yet for all that, allowed, yea
required the admission of such godly Christians to communion, who merely
through weakness and want of conviction, were found in these things disorderly
and non-obedient to those Apostolical traditions or institutions, Rom:
14.1.-6. and 15.1, 7. Acts 21.

2. The disorderly walking in 2 These: 3. to be proceeded against by withdrawing
from such as were guilty of it, was of a moral nature, and of public scandal
to those without as well as those within the Church, and not matter of
doubtful disputation among good Christians, as the other things were. For such
was, not working, and playing the busie-bodyes, (1 These: 4.11, 12. 1 Timothy: 5.13,
14. 1 Pet: 4.15.) which yet was the disorder precisely for which the Apostle
enjoynes withdrawing from in 2 These: 3. Yea it was an evil of that nature, and
so contradictious to the Christian profession, that according to the same
Apostles own account, whosoever made himself guilty of it, denied the faith,
and rendered himself worse then an I^ fidell, 1 Timothy: 5.8. And therefore no
marvel if not meet to be continued in communion, when the profession and
conversation, the only visible witness of internal union, is rendered invalid
by so mighty a contradiction.

But what is this to the godly Pedobaptists case? whose supposed error is not
of a moral nature, nor of public scandal to those without, nor such as does
invalidate the testimony of their profession and conversation, as witnessing
their internal union with Christ and his Church; nor so much as rendering it
doubtful, nor justly to be suspected; but a matter of doubtful disputation
among many of those that are truly godly, and not of least discerning in
spiritual affairs.

Obj. 2. It may be yet further objected; that though its true that membership
with Christ, and in the Church universal, gives a remote right to communion in
particular Churches, yet none can have an immediate right without Baptism
after faith, that being the door of entrance into the Church.

To this I answer; 1. That though its true that Baptism is necessary by way of
duty to give a man an orderly and complete right to particular
Church Fellowship, when he has an opportunity of being baptized, yet it will
not therefore follow that its absolutely necessary by way of means or under
penalty, without which such fellowship and communion is not to be had, when the
reason of the want of such Baptism, is the want of opportunity to enjoy it.
The truth whereof appears by this undeniable reason: Baptism is no more
necessary to Church Communion, then it is to salvation. For how can the means
be more necessary to the subordinate, then it is to the principal end? If
Baptism be necessary to Church Communion, it is because Church Communion is
respectively necessary to salvation; for neither of them would be necessary, if
no such thing were as salvation is, to which they both relate. But now Baptism
is necessary to salvation but by way of duty when opportunity occurs, but is
not necessary by way of means, so as without which salvation is not to be had,
when opportunity of doing ones duty in this kind is wanting. This is our
constant protestant doctrine, against the too much rigidity of Popish
necessity. And therefore if Baptism be necessary to salvation but upon such
terms, then surely it cannot be necessary to Church Communion upon higher or
more strict terms; if any thing may be remitted in the strictness of the
terms of necessity, it would rather be as it relates to its less principal
then principal end.

But now that the true reason why the godly Pedobaptists are not baptized after
faith, is the want of a moral opportunity, is a thing not to be doubted. For
all the while they remain unconvinced that it is their duty, or so much as
lawful for them to be so baptized, so long they are clearly under the want of
a moral opportunity of receiving such a Baptism. For they can no more
lawfully be so baptized during the time of such dissatisfaction, then others
can who are satisfied, whilst they want the opportunity of health, water, or a
meet administrator.

It was as much the Israelites duty to be circumcised before their admission to
communion in any part of congregationall worship, (the time prescribed for
Circumcision considered) as it is the duty of believers to be baptized before
admission to Church communion, (yea the Law was more express in that point
then the Gospel is in this,) and yet for want of opportunity of performing the
one, the other was en^oyed without it for a certain season in the wilderness.
The want then of a moral opportunity of doing that which in order of nature
should go before, is not a bar against the doing of all hat which according
to common order should follow after; for then it would as well be unlawful for
the godly Pedobaptists to proceed in a long continued course of hearing,
praying, etc. for their edification in the grace they have received, as it
would be for them to break bread in remembrance of the Lords death; because
their baptism after faith, ought as well to precede the one as the other. But
surely it is not in the heart of any tender Christian, to suspend them the
exercise of these, until they are satisfied touching the other. And I query,
by what law or rule they come under suspension any more in the one, then in the
other? Their supposed sin, then, lies not in this; that they break bread and
perform other Christian duties before they are baptized; but in this, that
they omit Baptism after the proper season of it. And it does not follow that
communion may not be held with them in that which is lawful, yea their duty,
because it may not be held with them in that which is their supposed weakness
in omitting a duty: a consent in the one, and a declared disapprobation of the
other, may well consist.

2. To the objection which supposes internal union with the Church, to give
only a remote right to Church Communion, but Baptism the immediate right, I
further answer thus; Baptism does not of it self constitute a right to
Church Communion, but is declarative of that which does: it is the union by
grace which constitutes a man's right when made visible, and not Baptism
otherwise then as it is declarative of this. That this is so, appears thus:
When such a heresy or scandalous life does occur a man that has been
baptized, as does totally obscure the grace of union, or declare the non-being
of it; his Baptism cannot protect him from being cut off communion with the
Church, as it would do, if of it self it did constitute a man's right. And is
there not the same reason why the involuntary want of regular Baptism should
not deprive a man of communion, if the grace of union which does constitute his
right to it be apparently visible otherwise? If baptism cannot give a man
right in the absence of visible grace; why should the involuntary want of it
deprive him of it in the presence of visible grace?

It is true, Baptism is reputed the door of entrance into the Church: and
the Scripture says, that by one Spirit, we are all baptized into o^e body, 1
Cor: 12.13. But how? Surely not by original constitution, but by way of sign
and solemnization. Which agrees to the nature and usual description of
Sacraments, as they are called, as consisting of outward sign, and inward
grace: the letter of the ordinance as to this use of it, being but the sign of
the spiritual union and communion which by it is professedly declared to be
between him that is baptized, and the rest of Christ's body. So that men's
actual, real, and spiritual union and membership with Christ, and so with
the Church (which is the ground of communion) is supposed and ought to precede
the solemnization of it by way of sign. The sign, to wit, Baptism with
water, delivers the baptized into the visible union and communion of the
Church, by pointing to and declaring their inward and spiritual union and
communion with it, as that which gives them right to outward and visible
communion. If then the grace of spiritual union which fundamentally gives a
man right to Church Communion, may be evidenced and declared by other means
without regular Baptism, (though its every Christians duty to have his
baptism concur in such declaration, when he has opportunity so to do,) it
will not follow then, that the want of such baptism betiding a man through
unavoydable necessity in the want of opportunity, will deprive him of an
immediate right to such communion. But that the grace of spiritual union which
many that are for infant baptism, have with Christ the head, and his body the
Church, is clearly evidenced, though they not baptized after faith, is that
which in the next place I am to undertake the proof of.

My Minor proposition then, was this: But some which are for infant baptism,
are visibly of Christ's universal body: which I prove thus.

1. If those essential and constitutive properties and marks, by which the
visible members of the primitive Churches which were of Christ's universal
body, were described and distinguished from those that were not, are visibly in
some that are for infant baptism, then some that are for infant baptism, are
visibly of Christ's universal body.

But those essential and constitutive properties and marks by which the
visible members of the primitive Churches that were of Christ's universal body,
were described and distinguished, are visible in some that are for infant
baptism. Therefore, etc.

I suppose the consequence of the Major proposition, will not be denied, viz.
that if the same things which essentially made the sound members of the
primitive Churches to be visibly of the universal body of Christ, be found in
Pedobaptists, that then there is all reason to conclude them to be of the same
body, what ever defects otherwise may be found in them. For those properties
and formal differences which are argumentative and declarative of the kind,
do argue and declare all to be of that kind, in whom those properties and
formal differences are found. If a humane body and reasonable soul be
essential to mankind, and that by which that kind of creature does formally
differ from all other; then it must needs follow that all that have a humane
body and reasonable soul, (what ever other defects in nature they have,) are
of mankind.

For the examination of the truth of the Minor; we will consider what those
essential and constitutive properties and marks were, by which those of the
primitive Churches were discerned to be of Christ's universal body, and
distinguished from those that were not: and then consider whether the same
things, properties and marks, be not visible in many that are for infant
baptism. Those that were of Christ's body in Rome, you have distinguished from
the rest in Rome that were not, by this property; called to be Saints, Rom:
1.7. Those in Corinth in like manner by these; Sanctified in Christ Jesus,
called to be Saints: and others of the same body elsewhere, described by this,
that they are such as call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs
and ours; to wit, believingly, and sincerely, 1 Cor: 1.2. Those of the Church
of Christ at Ephesus, thus: The Saints which are at Ephesus, the faithful in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians: 1.1. Those at Philippi, thus; All the Saints in Christ
Jesus, Phii: 1.1. Those at Colosse, thus: The Saints and faithful brethren in
Christ, Col: 1.2.

Now that there are many of those that are for infant baptism, concerning whom
it is meet for us and for all Saints to think, that they are called to be
Saints; sanctified in Christ Jesus; are faithful in Christ Jesus; are
faithful brethren in Christ; and such as call (and that in faith) upon the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours, I hope no sober Christian
will deny: and to think otherwise would argue little skill in Christianity,
and an extraordinary deep poverty in charity.

2. I further prove that some that are for infant baptism, are of the
universal body of Christ, thus. All that do truly believe in Jesus Christ,
are members of that universal body whereof he is the head: but some for infant
baptism do so believe, Ergo, etc. The Minor needs no proof. The Major, viz.
that so many of those that are for infant baptism as do unfeignedly believe
in Jesus Christ, are members of his body; or which is the same, are of his
Church, I prove from Heb: 3.6. But Christ as a Son over his own house: whose
house are we, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope
firm unto the end. Again, ver: 14. For we are made partakers of Christ, if we
hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end. It was their faith
and confidence in Christ (we see) that made them partakers of Christ, and to be
of his house which is the Church, (1 Timothy: 3.15.) and upon their perseverance in
this confidence, did depend their perseverance in this privilege. And the same
faith which did make them partakers of Christ, and to be of his house, when
found in those that are for infant baptism, will produce the same effect, and
procure them the same privilege. The Saints are called the household of faith,
(Gal: 6.10.) as receiving that denomination from their faith which makes them
of Gods house. They are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, that
have faith, Gal. 3.26. and such as are Sons, abide in Gods house for ever, as
members of his family, Joh. 8.35. For God has no children that are not of his
household.

3. If some that are for infant baptism are reconciled to God by Christ's death
on the cross, upon their believing, and so through Christ, and by the Spirit,
have an access unto the father, then such are no more strangers and
forrainers, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God,
Ephesians: 2.16-19.

But some that are for infant baptism, are so reconciled, and have such an
access to the father: This is not without the concession of the
Antipedobaptists, and therefore needs no farther proof. Therefore we may well
conclude, that some that are for infant baptism, are no more strangers and
forreiners, but fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God.

Object. Against the pertinency of the forecited proofs to conclude
Pedobaptists to be visibly of the body of Christ, it may perhaps be objected;
that all those Christians of the several Churches, of which the forecited
Scriptures make mention, were all baptized after the profession of faith; and
that it will not follow, that because faith, sanctification, and the rest of
those qualifications, did denominate such as were baptized after faith, to be
of the Church, that therefore they must denominate such as are not baptized
after faith, to be of the Church likewise. For as they had one faith, so they
had one baptism ( Ephesians: 4.5.) and this did bear its share in their Christian
denomination and distinction, as well as any other qualification.

To this I answer. That it was the faith, calling, and sanctification as such,
and the visibility of these, by which those Christians were described and
denominated to be of the Church, and distinguished from those that were not;
and therefore those that are under the same qualifications essentially (as some
Pedobaptists are,) though perhaps not circumstantially, must needs come under
the same denomination of membership in the Church of Christ If the Apostle Paul
were now alive, and should write an Epistle to the Church of God in London,
inscribing and directing it to all in London that are called to be Saints; or
sanctified in Christ Jesus; or the faithful in Christ; would it not be
reasonable to think that all such Pedobaptists there, as are called to be
Saints, and sanctified in Christ Jesus; were hereby meant as well as those that
are such among those that have been baptized after profession of faith?

1. The most that I think can rationally be said, is, that the Baptism of
those Christians in the primitive Churches, did bear it; share, and was one
ingredient in denominating them persons called to be Saints, sanctified in
Christ Jesus, etc. but not that it did wholly or mainly constitute it. Not but
that the faith, calling, and sanctification of many Pedobaptists is the same in
the maine, with those primitive Saints, (they are partakers of like precious
faith, 2 Pet: 1.1.) only it has not, it may be, all the same ingredients in it
to make it altogether so complete and rich as theirs was. So that if this
defect, and the want of this ingredient of regular baptism, do not nullify
the visibility of the faith, calling, and sanctification of the Pedobaptists,
then they may truly be said to have the same faith, calling, and
sanctification in kind, if not in degree, which the primitive Saints had.
Baptism does not constitute another kind of faith and Saintship then the same
persons had before they were baptized; all that can be supposed, is, that it
tends toward the completing of these in degrees of being and visibility.

2. And yet I doubt not but that taking one thing with another, comparison may
be made between the visibility of Saintship as it was in some at least of those
primitive Saints, and as it now is in many that are for infant baptism, and
that in point of degree. If the visibility of Saintship in Pedobaptists, be
defective for want of regular baptism; may we not well conceive that the
visibility of the sanctification of some primitive Church Members that were
owned as brethren in Christ, was defective much more on another score? Weigh
and consider the erroneous opinions, superstitious customs, uncharitable
contentions and censurings, and other too much sen^uall deportment, that was
yet remaining and found among those that were owned for brethren; visible
Saints, and members of the primitive Church; and then let conscience judge,
whether in the whole; advantages and disadvantages compared in both, the
Christian visibility and sanctification of very many Pedobaptists, do not
shine much brighter, and give a far more distinct and indubitable testimony of
their spiritual and internal membership with Christ and his Church, then many
of the others did. See 1 Cor: 8.7. with 10.11. Acts 15.5. Rom: 14.1, 2, 3, 4,
5. 1 Cor: 1.11. and 3.1, 3. and 11.18, 21.

Argument II.
ALL those whom the Lord now in times of the New Testament has received into
communion with himself, those his children ought to receive to communion with
them.

But some that are for infant Baptism are such whom the Lord has received
into communion with himself. Therefore.

That the Lords receiving persons to communion with him, is now under the New
Testament a sufficient reason why his children should receive the same to
communion with them, I conceive is sufficiently evident by these Scriptures.
Rom: 15.7. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us, to the
glory of God. And again, Rom: 14.1, 3. Him that is weak in the faith receive
you. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: and let not him that
eats not, judge him that eats: [for God has received him.] The case was
this: Some of the believing Jews and Gentiles stood at too great a distance by
reason of their different persuasion touching several things. That by which
the Apostle would convince them of their error herein, and so bring them to
close communion, is by laying before them the dissimilitude that was between
the Lords carriage and theirs toward the same persons, and the conformity and
agreement that ought to be. That they did not receive those whom the Lord had
received, was their fault, but to receive such as he had received, was their
duty. The Apostles Argument is built upon this supposition: that the Lord is a
pattern unto his people in receiving persons to communion: and if cast into
form, would be this. Those whom the Lord receives to communion, his people
ought to receive to communion too: but the Lord receives both Jews and
Gentiles, weak and strong Christians, notwithstanding their different
persuasions, therefore you his people ought to do so too. See the connection of
Rom: 15.7, 8, 9.

Object. These differing Saints who are thus en^oyned by the Apostle to receive
one another, notwithstanding their difference, were all baptized persons, and
therefore that by which they were obliged to receive one another, can be no
rule for such as are baptized, to receive such as are unbaptized, to communion.

Answ. Suppose they were all baptized; yet their receiving one another is not
urged from their baptism, but from the Lords receiving them. Their baptism
here, was no further an argument why they should receive one another, then as
it was an argument that the Lord had received them. And by the same reason, on
the contrary, no error about Baptism can be a reason why such erroneous
persons should not be received, further then it is an argument that the Lord
has not received them: The Lords receiving or not receiving persons, must
regulate his people in their receiving and refusing to receive them.

Object. These differing Saints were all in communion of the Church already;
and therefore their receiving one another to which they are exhorted, cannot
import their receiving one another simply to communion, but only a receiving
one another to a nearer and closer communion: how then can this be a ground for
those that are no^ in Church Communion together at all, to receive one another
to such communion?

Answ. Very well, though that which is supposed in the objection, should be
granted. For that which is a ground of a further degree of communion, must
needs be a ground of communion simply considered: a further degree always
includes and supposes the first. If it be lawful for me to go with one two
miles, it cannot be unlawful for me to go with him one.

Again, Consider Acts 15.8, 9. for further proof of my proposition; And God
which knows the hearts, bare them witness, giving them the holy Ghost, even
as he did unto us: and put no difference between us and them, purifying their
hearts by faith. The question was this; Whether it were needful to circumcise
the believing Gentiles; a thing which some believing Jews imposed as
necessary, not only to their owning them as brethren in communion, but also to
salvation, ver. 1, 5. That by which the Apostle Peter would evince the
contrary, is this: that God put no difference between them. If God made no
difference between the uncircumcised and circumcised believers, then they ought
not among themselves: but God made none, but exhibited an equal testimony of
respect to both, in giving the holy Ghost alike to both.

It is true the comparison in outward form is not alike between the baptized
and not baptized after faith, as is between the circumcised and uncircumcised
believers: but yet there is the like reason why they should make no more
difference among themselves, as to their owning one another as christian
brethren, then was to be made among the circumcised and uncircumcised
believers. For if Gods purifying their hearts alike by faith, and his giving
them his Spirit alike, was conclusive against their disowning one another as
brethren upon account of their differences then in being; then the like equal
distribution of Gods grace and Spirit to persons that are not, as well as to
those that are baptized after faith, is conclusive too against alike disowning
one another upon account of other differences now in being. I pray you let it
be noted that the Apostles argument for reconciliation, is not fetched from the
nature of the things wherein they differed; but from the tenor of Gods carriage
toward them that did differ, in giving them an equal interest in his grace,
no withstanding their difference: which in all reason must be of the same force
to the same end now, to wit, the reconciliation of differing godly parties,
though their differences are not the same.

Of much what like import is that also Acts 11.17. For as much then as God gave
them the like gift, as he did unto us who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ,
what was I that I could withstand God? These words are used as an argument to
justify the Apostle Peter's going into, and eating with the Gentiles: an action
which otherwise was deemed as irregular, as the admission of godly Pedobaptists
to communion can be supposed to be, and at which some of the circumcision,
though believers, were at first offended, Acts 10.28. and 11.2. His argument
constructively, seems to be this; That if after God had given them an equal
share in his love with other believers of the circumcision, testified by giving
them the like gift of his grace and Spirit, (if after this) he should have
continued the wonted difference in his carriage toward Jews and Gentiles, he
should have withstood God who now made no difference, but showed the same
favor to the one as to the other. To keep at a distance then from those to
whom God draws nigh in his special favor and gifts of his grace and holy
Spirit, is to steer a course contrary to God; or a practice by which those that
are guilty of it withstand God. Is not this clearly the doctrine of this text?
And if so, what shall we then think of those separations that abound in our
days of Godly men from Godly upon account of particular differences, when God
in the mean time is alike nigh to both in his special and gracious
communications, and holds communion with both? Is this to be followers of God
as dear children? Ephesians: 5.1.

Obj. But the case of admitting Pedobaptists to communion, is not the same with
Peter's going into and eating with the Gentiles; and therefore the lawfulness
of the one, cannot be inferred from the lawfulness of the other.

Answ. No more was the not muzzling the mouth of the Ox which trod out the
Corn, the same with maintaining the Elders that rule well and labor in the
word and doctrine, 1 Timothy: 5.17, 18. Nor was the Disciples plucking the ears of
Corn on the Sabbath day, the same with David's eating of the Shewbread, and
the Priests slaying of sacrifice on the Sabbath, Math: 12.3, 4, 5. and yet the
general equity and congruity of the things compared, made the legality of the
one practice argumentative of the legality of the other. And so I say in these
two cases of Peter's going into the Gentiles, and of admitting Pedobaptists to
communion; though in other things they differ, yet in this they agree, viz. in
that Peter's action had been as much scrupled by him ( Acts 10.28.) as this way
of communion is by some; and likewise in that there is a like equal share of
special grace vouchsafed by God to the differing parties now, as well as was
then. And therefore why should not this consideration, serve to satisfy this
doubt, and remove this scruple of ours, as well as it did theirs; and to cause
us with Peter to think, that under such circumstances, a maintaining our former
distance in this case, would be a withstanding of God who has taught us to do
otherwise, by his example of vouchsafing equal communion to both. Gods equal
distribution of special grace to parties that differ, seems to be so good a
ground of communion one with another, as swallows up and bears down, all
lesser differences that stand in the way.

III. Argument.
IF Church Communion between the Godly Pedobaptists and Anabaptists, be more
for common edification, their difference notwithstanding, then their separation
upon account of their difference can be; Then their communion is to be chosen
before separation, their difference notwithstanding.

But the communion of such is more for their edification then their separation
would be.

The reason of the consequence why communion is to be preferred before
separation, where common edification is better provided for by it then by
separation, is taken from the end of ordinances, and Church Order, and
communion in these; which is edification. Edification is that for the sake of
which the work of the ministry (which consists in the ministration of word,
ordinances, discipline and order) is given and ordained, Ephesians: 4.11, 12. 2 Cor:
10.8. and 12.19. and 13.10. And edification is the mark at which all
Church-transactions are to aim, and to which to be levelled, 1 Cor: 14.26. Let
all things be done to edifying. And the management of these holy things
themselves, must be regulated by their end, edification, to which they are
subservient; to be used, or their use suspended; to be strained higher or
lower, so as edification may best be provided for, Mat: 9.14-17. Mark 4.33.
John 16.12. 1 Cor: 3.1, 2. Reason and Scripture teach us still to subject the
means unto the end: and is not the contrary preposterous* The holy rest of the
Sabbath in a cesation from servile work and bodily labor, was an ordinance of
God: and yet when a strict observation of this ordinance in the letter of it in
such a cesation, did cross but one end of it, which was the bodily rest and
refreshment of such as were to keep it, ( Exodus: 23.12. Deuteronomy: 5.14.) then such
an observation of it, might lawfully be waved, according to Christ's doctrine in
the case, as I understand it Mark 2.25, 26, 27. Spiritual gifts also, and in
particular that of tongues, were given for the same general end as the
ordinances themselves are, to wit, profit and edification, 1 Cor: 12.7, 10. And
yet when the use of this gift by circumstances in the case, was rendered
unusefull as to its end, viz. edification; the suspention of its exercise was
enjoined, 1 Cor: 14.5, 28. So though regular Baptism, according to ones
opinion in the case, ought indeed to be insisted on as pre-requisite to
communion, where common edification among the godly may be accommodated and not
hindered thereby: yet where a severe insisting on such a regular Baptism in
order to communion, shall cross edification by drawing on separation of godly
from godly, why should not such severity there be waved?

Touching the Minor proposition, to wit, that Church Communion between such
differing Saints as aforesaid, does tend more to their edification then their
separation can do, is easy to apprehend, upon a double account.

1. Because union and communion between Saints and Saints, gives them an
opportunity of a free and full trade in their gifts and graces, by which they
grow spiritually rich. And therefore well does the Apo^tle make the increase of
the body to the edifying of it self in love, to depend upon the joining
together of the parts, and the supply of every joint, and the effectual
working of the measure of every part, Ephesians: 4.16. Whereas on the contrary,
distance and separation, deprives them of that spiritual commerce, and so
tends to their impoverishing. Just as it is between Country and Country; when
differences break out that obstruct their wonted trade, they grow poor upon
it. Or as it is with the natural body, which weakens, wastes and consumes, when
the nutrimentall intercourse between part and part is obstructed. And the sad
decays among professors since their many differences in opinion have
multiplied their separations, does woefully experience the truth hereof. How
many are fallen, and are dead upon this account? and how many more are sick and
ready to die? and shall we then for all this proceed on in so impoverishing and
destructive a course!

2. Communion increases love, and love edifies, 1 Cor: 8.1. It edifies
actively by inclining and disposing men willingly and cheerfully to lay out
themselves in such services by which their brethren may be edified and
comforted; according to that counsel, Gal: 5.13. By love serve one another.
And likewise by enabling them for edification sake to bear burdens; that is,
the infirmities and mistakes of brethren, which are a burden, as is enjoined
Rom: 15.1, 2. For charity bears all things, indureth all things, 1 Cor: 13.7.
It edifieth passively too, by rendering the christian applications of brethren,
and acts of service, the more acceptable, and so the more profitable; taking
all in the best part: It thinks no evil, but believes all things, hops
all things, and rejoices in the truth, 1 Cor: 13.6, 7. But separation breeds
alienation and diminution of affection, more or less, and so weakens
endeavors of edification, and turns them into another channel. For to what
degree the spring of motion grows weak, to that degree motion it self will
be slow. And to what degree love decreaseth, prejudice, jealousies, and evil
su^mises, will increase: and these dispose persons to suck poison from the
sweetest flower: and poison will not nourish. Therefore separation of Saints
from Saints, upon account of differences, is against edification.

Ob^ect. But can two walk together except they are agreed? their different
opinions and different practices, will occasion cotentions, and those
contentions will hinder edification and comfort: and therefore communion on
such terms, may be as much and more against edification, then separation.

Answ. I have sometimes thought so indeed. But

1. Two that are agreed in the most and greatest matters, may and ought to
walk together, though in some fewer and lesser things they disagree. Whereto
we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same
thing, with humble expectation concerning such that in any thing are otherwise
minded, that God shall reveal even this unto them, Phil: 3.15, 16. The 14 and
15 Chap: Rom: is clear for this.

2. Whereas its said those differences will occasion contentions, and those
contentions will hinder edification and comfort: That they may do so through
men's weakness, I grant, but that they must necessarily so do I deny, and do
affirm that when ever such contentions do arise between the godly, as do
hinder edification; it is from want of wisdom, humility and moderation, in one
or both parties: and to what is objected, is no more an argument against the
communion we speak of, then men's insidence to infirmities and fleshly mixtures
in prayer, or any other holy-duty, is an argument against the use of the duty
it self. It is true, the difference among the Christians at Rome, did oocasion
through intemperate zeal, carnal contentions, despisings and judgings one of
another, but it was their sin and shame that they did so, and that for which
they were justly blamed by the Apostle, Rom: 14. Such unchristian distempers
must be mortified, not indulged; prayed against, and not improved against a
duty: for that would be but to justify one fault by another.

Object. But for those that cannot hold Church Communion in breaking of bread
with those that are not baptized after faith, yet if they can hold an
occasional communion with them in gifts and graces, in the word, prayer and
conference, shall they not hereby sufficiently free themselves from the blame
of hindering edification by their separation?

Answ. 1. Its confessed that those that go thus far, have offered fair
toward the demolishing of the wall of separation, and so of freeing themselves
of the evils occasioned by its standing.

2. But though such a partial separation as this, is not so much an enemy to
edification as a total one is, yet if separation of godly from godly in the
simple nature of it be a necessary hinderance of edification, (and whether it
be nor, judge by what is said in my argument) then every degree of such
separation, must to a degree be guilty of the same evil. Without all doubt this
partial separation, is to a degree a hinderance to charity, and consequently
to the same degree a hinderance of edification. Though there may be much love
between parties that come so near together as to hold communion in gifts and
graces, yet questionless there would be yet more, if that which keeps them as
yet at some distance, were also removed. Its well worthy consideration, that
the Law of Commandments contained in ordinances, which were the wall of
separation between Jews and Gentiles, are by the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.15. styled
the [enmity] and the breaking down of this wall, the abolishing the enmity.
And how were they the enmity? but as they were a means of separation; for so
they were an occasion of enmity between those people. And does not this
clearly let us see, that separation as such, is attended with enmity, more or
less?

3. Me thinks that which satisfies them to hold communion in gifts and graces,
word and prayer, with their differing brethren, would lead them to satisfaction
about the lawfulness of communion with them in breaking of bread also, if they
would but follow it. For do they not by joining in prayer with them, and
saying our father which art in heaven, plainly acknowledge them to be children
of the same father, and so their holy brethren: and if children of God, then
believers in Christ, by which belief they are made the children of God: and if
believers in Christ, then members of Christ; and if members of Christ, then of
his body the Church; and if of Christ's body, then that they have communion with
him in his flesh, and blood, and Spirit, and what can they acknoweldge that
amounts to more then this, by having communion with them in the Lords Supper?
Or have they any example or direction in Scripture to join with them in
prayer, with whom they may not join in breaking of bread?

IV Argument.
IF separation of Saints from Saints upon any account of difference that does
not unsaint them, or render their Saintship justly suspected, be void of
Scripture-precept, and of approved Scripture-president, Then the godly
Anabaptists and godly Pedobaptists, need not separate one from another upon
account of their difference about Baptism, (for all conscience of duty, arises
from precept or president.)

But separation of Saints from Saints upon any account of difference that does
not unsaint them, or render their Saintship justly suspected, is void of
Scripture-precept and of approved Scripture-president. Ergo.

That such separation is void of Scripture-precept and of approved
Scripture-president, I take for granted, till the contrary do appear, which I
never expect. We read of many differences both of opinion and practice, and of
divisions thereupon, that were [in] the primitive Churches; but of no approved
separations [from] those Churches upon account of those differences. There were
indeed that did forsake the Saints assemblies upon a carnal account, Heb:
10.25. that went out from them, because they were not of them, 1 John: 2.19. but
they were sensual, not having the Spirit, Jude 19. There were others not so
bad that did not proceed so far, that upon account of difference stood at
some distance one from another; but how were they disallowed and blamed for so
doing? Acts 15. Rom: 14. and 15.

What is wont to be alleged for Scripture-precept in the case; I take to be
impertinent, and to fall short in proof of what its brought for. That Is one in
Rom: 16.17. Mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. 1. These were not Saints which
they were to avoid, but such as served not the Lord Jesus, but their own
bellies, ver. 18. 2. The divisions and offenses caused by them, for the sake of
which they were to be avoided, were not about lesser matters, or such offenses
as would consist with Saintship; for it was so far from being a duty to avoid
one another upon that account, as that it was their sin for which they were
blamed when they did so, Chap. 14. and 15. Or 3. if they were divisions and
offenses about lesser matters, for causing of which they were to be avoided;
then they were not to be avoided for causing such divisions simply, (for so the
Saints did which were to be received, Rom: 14.) but for causing them out of a
carnal design to serve their own bellies.

Another is, 2 These: 3.6. Withdraw from every brother that walks disorderly,
etc. But to this I have spoken already in my first Argument, to which I refer
you.

A third Scripture alleged for separation, is, 2 Cor: 6.17. Wherefore come out
from among them, etc. But this does not call Saints from Saints, but Saints
from infidel Idolaters, as ver: 14, 15, 16. With whom some of that Church had
communion in eating of their Idol-sacrifices in their Idols Temple, 1 Cor: 8.7,
10.

But that Scripture on which I find some to lay the greatest stresse, is, Rev.
18.4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that
ye receive not of her plagues. From which they argue, that God has of his
people in Mystical Babylon, to wit, Rome; and that having hereby given a call
to them all to come out of her, if some will not at first obey the call but
stay behind, the rest that understand it, and have a mind to obey it, must
leave them behind and separate from them.

1. To which first I might say, the passage does not necessarily suppose that
God has in Babylon a people that are by conversion actually his in Covenant,
but a people that in obeying his call shall become such. As when the Lord said
to Paul, Acts 18.9, 10. Be not afraid but speak, and hold not thy peace: for I
am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee: [for I have much
people in this City.] His much people, were not those that did already believe,
at least not all of them such, but such whom the Lord knew should believe upon
his continuing to preach the Gospel there. In like manner when Christ says,
John 10.16. Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold, them also I must
bring, and they shall hear my voice. The saying of Christ does not import that
those other sheep which he calls his, were then his by calling when he spoke
those words, but were afterward to become his, when he should bring them to
hear his voice.

2. Or secondly, if the words do import a people that are Gods by call and
covenant, that live in Babylon, then come out of her my people, etc. may import
Gods call to them for a local remove, though in no actual communion with her,
partly to avoid the temptations of so wicked a place, noted in those words;
that ye be not partakers of her sins: and partly to escape her Judgments,
noted in those words; that ye receive not of her plagues. As God sometimes
called Lot out of Sodom, and his people out of Jerusalem at the approach of
ruin to those Cities. And then the words will no more imply a
Church-separation, then it would do for a man that lives in Paris to remove to
London, for better opportunities of grace, as the late converted Turk did.

3. But thirdly, suppose the words to be understood of such as are actually
Gods people, even then while as yet they are in superstitious communion with
such Idolaters or others in Babylon, as are none of Gods people by Gospel call
and Covenant grace; yet this would be no ground for to withdraw from or deny
communion with a Congregation of godly Pedobaptists that are separated in their
communion from the ungodly of the world, (which is our case) because the case
between the other and them wholly differs.

1. For first if there should be any in the assemblies of the Roman Babylon,
that in the midst of so much wood, hay and stubble of error and superstition,
should have so much of the gold, silver, and precious stones of sound doctrine,
right faith, and true grace, as would denominate them Gods people, yet these
are in their Church-worship, involved among persons that are in some of their
tenants heretical, in their worship idolatrous, and in their conversations
openly profane. Which are such causes of non-communion, as are not to be found
in the well reformed Congregations of godly Pedobaptists, whether
Presbyteriall, or Independent. And therefore where there is not the same or
like cause of separation, there cannot be the same or like reason for
separating. In the one you cannot hold communion with the supposed good, but
you must have communion also with the intollerably bad; and there the
separation is properly and directly from the intollerably bad, and but
accidentally from the supposed good. But what is this to a separation from or a
non-communion with reformed Congregations, where no such intollerably
evill-doers are to be found, from whom to withdraw or with whom to deny
communion, would be a separation properly, directly, and only from the visibly
good.

2. The case differs as much or rather much more, in respect of the communion
it self. For in the Popish Assemblies, you cannot have communion in the Lords
Supper it self (which is so essential a part of Church Communion) but you
must communicate in the superstition or Idolatry which is with them inseparably
annexed to it: He that eats of the sacrifice is partaker of the Altar, 1 Cor:
10.18. But in having communion with reformed Congregations of the Pedobaptists,
there is no necessity of an actual participation in any one act of
superstition. For he that deemeth the sprinkling or baptizing of an infant
superstitious, may suspend his communion in that action, and yet continue it in
others. As our Lord Christ kept the Passover a day or two before the
generality of the Jews, (for the day of his crucifixion, was but the day of
their preparation to the Passover, Joh: 19.14, 31.) they missing (as is
conceived) the punctual time of that feast; and yet denied not his communion
with them in other things wherein he and they were agreed. So that neither does
this Rev: 18.4. any ways appear to me a sufficient ground for one godly
Congregation to deny communion with another, upon account of the difference
before specified, or any other like it.

Object. But for such as are baptized after faith, to hold communion with such
who have not been baptized otherwise then by infant sprinkling, is as void of
Scripture-precept and Scripture-president, as is the separation of godly from
godly: and why then is not the one as unlawful as the other?

Answ. 1. Be it so as to particularity of precept or example: yet in this or
any like case when any are in doubt between two difficulties, the way to come
to a satisfactory resolution which to incline to, is by discovering by which
the peace, love, and edification of the Church of Christ, will be best
promoted; for these ought to sway us and carry us along with them, in all such
cases wherein we are not bound to the contrary by an express rule. Let the
peace of God rule in your hearts, to which you are called in one body, Col:
3.15. Let it rule, reign, or umpire, as the word is rendered. It must then
have the casting voice when things otherwise are in an equapoiz; and as a King
give Laws in such cases. The law of love is the royal Law, James 2.8 it has
the sovereign and commanding power over inferior laws of particular order.
And edification must overruled us in many cases, as being that to which
Church-ordinances and order are subordinate; as I showed in my former argument.
Let us therefore follow after the things that make for peace, and the things by
which we may edify one another, Rom: 14.19. If we are in doubt which to
follow, this or that; here is our direction.

But now that the communion of differing Saints, notwithstanding their
difference when managed with a christian spirit, tends abundantly more to
peace, love and edification, then their separation for their difference sake
would do, is a thing that shines by its own light, and is evidenced in my
former argument.

2. Though we have no particular precept or president in the case objected, yet
we have general rules that reach i^, and such are they already named, and so
is Mat: 12.7. I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. Gal: 6.2. Bear ye one
another burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ. Rom: 14. Him that is weak
in the faith, receive ye. Rom: 15. We that are strong, ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves: and to receive one
another, as Christ has received us, ver: 7. 1 Cor: 14.26. Let all things be
done to edifying; and the like: the face of which is set against dividing,
separating, and rejecting one another for such errors as are but Saints
infirmities, amongst which the mistakes about Baptism in controversy between
them, must certainly be numbered.

V Argument.
THat practice which necessarily makes a schism in the body of Christ, is
sinful.

But separation of Saints from Saints upon account of difference between them,
necessarily makes a schism in the body of Christ. Therefore etc.

That to make a schism in the body of Christ, is a sinful act in whomsoever
found, is evident, because its contrary to the declared will of the Lord, who
would have no schism in the body, 1 Cor: 12.24, 25. God has tempered the body
together, having given more abundant honor to that part which lacked; that
there should be no schism in the body: but that all should be one, Joh: 17.21.
Keeping the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians: 4.3.

That for Saints to divide and separate from Saints, is to make a schism in
the body of Christ, is easy to understand. For those that are indeed Saints,
are all of them of the body of Christ, what ever their difference otherwise may
be, and therefore for them to separate and rend one from another, is surely to
make a schism in the body, if any thing be. And so they do more especially,
when they refuse communion with one another, in the Supper of the Lord. For as
by their mutual communion therein, their oneness is in special signified and
professed, 1 Cor: 10.17. so by their denial of communion therein, that
oneness is denied: and what is this but schism in the formality of it?

Object. When the godly are in their communion, mixed with others that are
ungodly, and such with whom communion is forbidden, then either to withdraw
from such godly ones, is no sinful schism; or else other of the Saints are
necessitated to sin, either in withdrawing from the Saints in such mixed
assemblies, or in holding communion with those with whom communion is
forbidden; which is an absurdity not to be imagined.

Answ. Such a separation is not made from the godly as scrupling their
communion, could they have communion with them alone; but its made from those,
communion with whom is forbidden, and for their sake only. And in all reason,
the separation must receive its denominatien from the cause whence it proceeds,
and so it is not a separation from those that are of the body, but from those
that are not. But however, this objection is irrelative to our question
touching the lawfulness of communion between a godly Congregation of
Anabaptists, and a godly and reformed Congregation of Pedobaptists.

Object. Though we do own the godly Pedobaptists to be members of
Christs-body, yet withal because their visible Church State and ministry, is
founded in infant baptism, we cannot but in that respect judge them to be of
the whorish state, and our separation from them, is not as they are of the body
of Christ, but as they are members of the harlot: and so our schism from them,
respects not their christian, but their harlot or antichristian state.

Answ. 1. When you own the godly Pedobaptists to be of Christ's body, it is
because they are visibly so, for upon no other account can they be known or
acknowledged to be so. And I would have it seriously considered, whether it be
not a contradiction to grant them to be members of Christ's body, and yet to
affirm them to be members of the harlot: and whether its possible for them to
be of the Christian and Antichristian state, both at once. No man can serve two
Masters that are contrary, Mat: 6.24. No more sure can one be a member of two
opposite bodies at once. As by the same actions by which a man makes himself a
friend of the world, he makes himself an enemy to God, James 4.4. So by the
same actions by which a man makes himself a member of the harlot Church, he
(for ought I know) cuts himself off from the body of Christ, or true Church.
And the reason is clearly this; because the mystical harlot, when once she
comes to be so, receives her bill of divorce from the Lord, by which the
marriage-union and relation becomes dissolved, Isa: 50.1. Jer: 3.8. Hos: 2.2,
5. And that which is true of the whole in this case, is true of every part, the
wholenesse only excepted: if the harlot be under divorcement as such, then all
that make up that harlot state are so. And therefore whilst you acknowledge
them members of Christ's body, you cannot rationally repute them of the whorish
state.

2. It is not every erroneous opinion or superstitious practice that is found
amongst them of the whorish state, that will denominate all those to be of that
state that hold them, whilst they are otherwise loyal to Christ in the main;
no more then every wanton or immodest word, look, or gesture, will denominate
a woman to be a whore, who is otherwise loyal to her husband in the main. The
good Kings, Solomon, Asa, and Jehosaphat, were guilty of a little spiritual
immodesty, in using, or at least tolerating the high places, but did not come
under a spiritual divorce from God thereby, as others did, who did that and
more; nor did they thereby become unfit to be held communion with in other
regular acts of Gods worship. There Is a great deal of difference between that
which is essential to the constituting of a state, and other things which
enter not the definition thereof. A bad man may do many good things, and a
good man many evil, by which neither are to be denominated good or bad, but by
what they are and do in the main, by what is predominant in them. So those
that are of the whorish state, may hold many of the same truths, and do some
of the same good deeds which a sound member of Christ's Church may do, and yet
not thereby be worthy the denomination of such a member as long as their
corruptions in doctrine, worship, and life, outweigh these. And its as true
that some that are not of the whorish state, may be tainted with some of her
errors and superstitions, which as to matter of constitution of state, may be
much over-ballanced by soundness of faith, purity of worship, and sincerity of
life in the main. We had need then to take heed of being rash and bold in
judging such to be of the whorish state, upon account of some under-degree of
spiritual lightness, that our consciences tell us, are in the state of grace,
and Spouse-like, love Christ more then they do any other. It would provoke
even a good man to have his wife called whore, whom he knows guilty only of
some lesser faults: and surely it does no less displease the Lord to have such
as are espoused to him, to be so dealt with.

3. It remains then that I add one thing more for the completing my answer to
the objection, and that is; That communion with Saints that are in some things
erroneous and superstitious, does not infer a communion in the error or
superstition it self, whilst you bear your witness against it. This is
plain, otherwise the strong must have been guilty of the error and
superstition of the weak Saints in the Church at Rome, by holding that
communion with them to which the Apostle pressed them, Rom: 14 and 15 Chapters.
Else the few names in Sardis also, could not have kept their garments under led
in holding communion with persons so much defiled, as the rest there were,
which yet they did, Rev: 3.4. It follows then, that such involuntary errors
in persons as do consist with the visibility of true grace, do not render
communion with them unlawful, in such things which are not of themselve
unlawful: we may hold communion with them in their graces, and in their
duties, though not in their errors. Though you may and ought to withdraw your
communion in such acts wherein you are sure they have not communion with
Christ, yet you may not do so in those in which you know they have.

VI Argument.
IF the godly Anabaptists, do hold communion with the godly Pedobaptists, in
that which is signified by breaking of bread in the Lords Supper, Then it is
not unlawful but their duty for them to hold communion in breaking of bread it
self which is the sign.

But the godly Anabaptists and godly Pedobaptists, do hold communion one with
another in that which is signified by breaking of bread in the Lords Supper.
Therefore etc.

That which is signified by the use of the bread and cup in the Lords Supper,
is showed by the Apostle, 1 Cor: 10.16. to wit, communion in the body and blood
of Christ. And that the godly of both sorts, to wit, of Pedobaptists and
Anabaptists have communion by faith in the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
eating the same spiritual meat, and drinking the same spiritual drink, I
think will not be denied, and therefore needs no proof. But that which
requires a further demonstration, is the Major proposition. The reason then why
its not unlawful but a duty for those to hold communion in the sign, that
have communion in the substance, or thing signified, is

1. Because so to do answers the end of the ordinance: whereas a denial of
communion in the sign where it is held in substance, would cross the very end
of the ordinance. The sign is ordained but for the thing sake unto which it
does relate: the outward communion in the sign bread and wine, is appointed to
signify and increase the communicants inward and spiritual communion in the
body and blood of Jesus Christ, and their unity thereby, 1 Cor: 10.16, 17. And
therefore where the thing to be signified is in being, (which is communion in
Christ's body and blood) there to deny the use and enjoyment of the means
appointed by God to signify it, (to wit, communion in the Supper) would be to
cross the very end of that ordinance. If partners that have a joint stock in
trade, and so a joint interest in it, should refuse to acknowledge and declare
to each other their respective interests, by such signs as are customary among
men in such cases, it would be accounted a great piece of injustice. And is it
any less then a piece of spiritual injustice for those that have a joint
interest in Christ's body and blood, to refuse to acknowledge and declare it to
each other, and before all, by such a sign which the Lord has appointed for
that purpose?

2. Because men's right to the sign, proceeds from their right to the thing
signified. As those that have a right to such or such an estate in land, have
thereby a right to the deeds and evidences by which such a right is to be
declared, so those that have a right to the body and blood of Christ in their
saving effects, have thereby right to the Lords Supper, as an evidence
appointed by God by which such their right is to be declared and acknowledged.
And therefore as a detaining of such evidence from him who by having right to
the Land, has right to the evidence, would be an injury; even so a detaining
the Lords Supper from him who by having right to the body and blood of Christ,
has right to the Lords Supper as an evidence and sign thereof, would be an
injury likewise. And as spiritual things are of more value then temporal, so
an injury in them is greater then an injury in the other.

3. Its against common reason and equity to grant them to have communion with
us in the greater and better part, and to deny it them in the less; the
greater still including the less. But to be partakers of like precious faith
with us, and by that to eat of that flesh which is meat indeed, and to drink of
that blood which is drink indeed, and to drink into one and the same Spirit, as
both sorts of godly ones do, is certainly to have, hold, and enjoy communion
together in the greater, better, more spiritual and more substantial part of
it; and therefore to deny it in the outside and letter of it, which is far
less considerable, seems very incongruous and contradictious.

An exhortation to unity, peace, and concord.
HAving said this much by way of Argument touching the unlawfulness of
Separation, and the lawfulness of communion between Saints, though of
different persuasion; I shall now add a little more to quicken the brethren on
both sides, to unity, concord, and peace; which have been too long divided and
too much estranged one from another. For this end let it be seriously
considered;

1. That the heart and soul of our Lord Jesus, is exceedingly set upon the
unity, not only of the Saints of this or that particular and different
persuasion, but of all those that believe through his Apostles word, how
different soever in opinion and persuasion, they otherwise may be. And this
appears; 1. In that Christ made it matter of his solemn address unto his
father, that so it might be. John 17.20, 21. Neither pray I for these alone,
but for them also which shall believe on me through their word: that they [all]
may be one. 2. In that it was the subject matter of one of his last requests to
his father now he was about to leave the world. Those things usually are most
upon the heart, which men bring forth at such a time when they are ready to
die. 3. And which is yet more: among all the things which concern the Saints
here in this world, he singles out this of their unity, as that which was most
upon his heart to form into a solemn request unto his father on their behalf.
There are upon the matter but two things which he prayed for in the behalf of
all those that should believe, contained in that part of his prayer which you
have from v. 20. to the end of John 17. the one of which respecting their
future condition in the other world; and that is that they might be with him
where he is, to behold his glory: and the other respecting their present
condition in this world; and that is that they all might be one. So then
although there be many other things wherein the comfort and welfare of the
Saints in this world are concerned, yet their unity and agreement is that which
Christ singles out from among all the rest, as being most upon his heart, and
as one would think, should therefore be that thing wherein their peace and
welfare is most concerned. 4. Its further most worthy observation, that among
all the things which Christ prayed for in this prayer recorded in John 17. he
does not insist so much upon any one thing as this of unity among the Saints.
And therefore you have him redoubling this petition again and again, and
mentioning it a third and a fourth time also, as you may see in ver. 11, 21,
22, 23. As if his heart were so full of it, as that it could not be all brought
out at once but by degrees: it was out of the abundance of his heart, that he
abounded so much in this one petition.

And is the heart of our dear Lord so much in it? and shall not the heart of
every one to whom he is dear, be much in it too! Can you follow a better
pattern, or write after a better copy? It is without all doubt that the more
you have of the same Spirit that dwelt in him, the more it will enlarge your
hearts this way in conformity to this heavenly temper that was so eminent in
him. And the more you shall find your hearts run out to this thing, as Christ's
did, the more shall you be enriched with an assurance of your dwelling in him
and he in you, 1 John 4.13. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us,
because he has given us of his Spirit. And what way is there in all the world
for you to indeer your selves to Christ more, then in being found according to
his own heart? Do not good disposition'd parents, take most pleasure in those
children that are most of their own temper? and so does Christ in those that
are most like him. How great a praise was it to David to be said to be a man
after Gods own heart! ( Acts 13.22.) and I am sure it will be your glory in
this, to be men after Christ's own heart. Did Christ pray and pray so earnestly
for this thing, that all that are believers should be one? why then let those
that would be like him, and profess to be learners of him, do so too. And not
only pray, but earnestly endeavor by use of means to bring that to pass
which we earnestly pray for. If men were but as willing and desirous to please
Christ Jesus, and to gratify the desire of his soul in this, as they seem to
be in some other things toward which he has given no such apparent
manifestation of his affection, we should certainly have things at another
pass among the people of God, then now they are. And I pray you why should we
not be most for that in which he most delights?

2. And therefore consider further, that love and kindness and cleaving of
heart, and affection of Saints to Saints, is that which Christ among other
things most desires, as being that grace wherein he has most abounded toward
them, and by which they will be most Christ-like, and so most Christian. As the
greatness of his affection to union among the Saints, was expressed by his
praying for it again and again in the same prayer, so does his great longing
after love among all his Disciples, manifestly appear by his fervent and
importunate pressing and enjoining it again and again and again in one and
the same speech or Sermon, and in that also which was his farewell Sermon when
he was now leaving them and the world, wherein to be sure he would insist most
upon that which lay most at his heart. And this he did with a note or sign of
special appropriation fixed upon it, [my commandement] as if that were more
especially his and had more of his heart in it then others. John 15.12. This is
[my commandment,] that ye love one another, as I have loved you. John 13.34. A
new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another; as I have loved
you, that ye also love one another, John 15.17. These things I command you that
ye love one another.

And if Christ's heart ran most upon this, they are in no wise like to please
him, that by contending for some particular point, which has not it may be the
tenth (if any) of the evidence of his mind, will and affection in it, which
this has, do make a breach upon and hinder this. It was said, Has the Lord
as great delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of
the Lord? 1 Samuel: 15.22. And may be said, has Christ Jesus any such delight in
your sacrificing a great part of the peace, charity, and comfort of the Saints,
upon some controverted order or doctrine in the Church, as he has in obeying
him in this great command of his, that carries so much of his heart in it? For
them that think so, let them again hearken to what he says, Mat: 9.13. Go ye
and learn what that means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. And to love
him with all the heart -- and to love his neighbor as himself, is more then
all whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices, Mark 12.33. And yet sacrifice was
more expressly commanded, then most of those things that are the bone of
contention among the people of God at this day. Love, mercy, and judgment, are
the weightier matters of the Law, and therefore may by no means be thrust out
by those that are less, as too commonly they are. What ever goes up, to be
sure Religion and Christianity goes down when charity goes down. Therefore
[above all these things] put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness,
Col: 3.14.

3. Add hereto another very weighty consideration, which is, That what ever
knowledge you have of the mind of God, and what ever zeal you express for
any truth of God, either concerning faith or practice, yet if while you hold
fast other things, you let go charity, your knowledge, your zeal, though it
were to the losing of your life for truth, will profit you nothing. 1 Cor:
13.2, 3. Though I understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and have not
charity, I am nothing. And though I give my body to be burned, and have not
charity, it profits me nothing. And left you should think it meant of that
charity which consists in relieving of the poor, and not of that which
consists in cleaving to and delighting in Saints as Saints, brethren as
brethren; he says also; Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and
have not charity, it profits me nothing, 1 Cor: 13.3. All which nearly
concerns such to mind, that are more careful and tender lest some other
controverted truth should suffer, then charity, brotherly love and concord,
should suffer; and care not what rents and divisions they make among the people
of God, so that they may but propagate their particular opinion. If there be
bitter zeal (as the Dutch translation has it) glory not of thy knowledge, and
lie not against the truth, as if thou were the Gospels friend, when by such a
carriage thou art an enemy to it, James 3.14.

4. Your contentions and divisions, if you maintain them, they will destroy
you in your spiritual trade, and keep you from thriving by the means and
opportunities of grace you enjoy. It was a sad thing wherewith the Apostle
charged the Corinthian Christians, that when they came together to exercise
themselves in the holy ordinances of the Lord, it proved to be not for the
better, but for the worse, 1 Cor: 11.17. But upon what does he charge this
dreadful miscarriage of their going backward in their trade, and of growing
worse and worse by what was provided for their welfare? Verily it was their
divisions that was the cause of all this mischief. Ver. 18. Now in this that I
declare unto you, I praise you not, that you come together not for the better,
but for the worse. How does that appear? For first of all, when ye come
together in the Church, I hear that there be divisions among you. Concluding
that so it must be that their divisions would occasion their decay and loss
under the richest enjoyments otherwise; for they abounded exceedingly with
spiritual gifts, Chap: 1.5, 7. Chap. 14. The truth is, they eat out the very
heart of Religion: men may grow rich in a form of knowledge, and express a
great deal of zeal for the outside of Religion; and in the mean while be
languishing in the very vitalls of Christianity, while they live in division
and strife: For where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every
evil work, James 3.16. This will be as a worm at the root of your tree that
will keep it from prospering, what ever cost you otherwise bestow upon it.

If then you have any mind to keep up Religion in heart among you, and not to
have your wine to become as water, having lost its heart and spirit: If you
would have the Gospel ordinances to yield you their increase, and all your
Religion not to degenerate into form: If you would yield God an acceptable and
pleasant fruit of all his cost, and not such as is starvie, harsh, and
unsavory: If you would not turn the fruit of righteousness into hemlock: If
you would be freed from such a predominant distemper, as will hinder your
spiritual relish, and convert your food into a noxious humor, and subject
you to a languishing disease in the midst of plenty; Then abandon contention,
and lay aside division, and with a spirit of love, meekness, and peace,
communicate your different thoughts, and patiently bear with a conscientious
dissent.

5. If you would secure the Protestant Religion and Cause from being a prey to
the lurking Papist, and from being swollowed up of Atheists, Libertines,
Apostates, Quakers, by all which it is at this day sorely assaulted and
dangerously beset, then unite heart, and head, and hand, to make one strength
to withstand them, that no man take your Crown. For your divisions incourageth
them in their designs, invites them to attempt upon you, and prepares many to
fall in with them. So that as long as you keep up your divisions, they will
grow upon you, and get ground, and by little and little draw away your
strength, and in conclusion over-master you, if by uniting you prevent them
not: A kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand, Mat: 12.25. And
therefore if you shall so labor to maintain one particular Fort, as in doing
it you loose the whole Nation; I mean so maintain a particular opinion in
Religion, as by dividing about it, to endanger the loss of the whole; you will
show your selves (according to the proverb) to be penny wise and pound foolish:
and will Christ ever thank you for such a service?

6. The more you knit together in love for the great truth sake that dwells
in you, the greater and richer [assurance of understanding] shall you have in
the Mystery of the Father and of Christ. Col: 2.2. Being knit together in love,
unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, etc. Being knit
together in love, bears the relation of a means, to the full assurance of
understanding, as the end. Its one thing to know what the Gospel treats of; and
another thing to know assuredly that all that which the Gospel treats of, is
true and is no lie: Many have much of the former, which as it is to be feared,
have little of the latter. And yet some too, that have less of the former then
others, but more love, have more of the latter then they. The Lord takes such
pleasure in the close cleaving of the hearts of his servants one to another, as
that he crowns it with this assurance of understanding: rooting and grounding
them in love; and establishing them in the present truth. Hence I suppose it is
that you have many who though they have less knowledge, yet having more love,
stand fast in the truth, whilst others that have a great deal more knowledge
but little or no charity, are turned up by the roots. Its therefore prescribed
by way of remedy or prevention against being tossed to and fro, and carried
about by every wind of doctrine, and slight of men that lie in wait to
deceive, that the truth be spoken in love: that love, which is a uniting grace,
accompany men's knowledge and profession of truth, Ephesians. 4.14, 15. And truly the
full assurance of understanding, and to have the mind and conscience
established in the truth in these shaking and declining times, is a prize worth
the running for, especially in so pleasant a path, as love and union of heart
and affection is.

7. The more unanimous and harmonious you are, the more perfect you will be.
You have much talk of perfection, and many pretend to it that are far from
it; but to be sure, its the mark and aim of every sincere Christian, and I
think does consist in nothing more next our love to God, then in the Saints
love and unity. This is the cry of the Scripture: That they may be made
[perfect in one] John 17.23. Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace, 2 Cor: 13.11. Above all these, put on charity, which is the bond
of [perfectnesse,] Col: 3.14. If we love one another, God dwells in us, and
his love is [perfected in us] 1 John 4.12. And love is the fulfilling of the
Law, Rom: 13.10. Which is more then can be said of any controverted opinion
among the Saints: and therefore you mistake your way, if in your pursuit of
perfection, you turn aside from love and unity, and make a faction to cry up
some single opinion which is not of the essence of Christianity.

8. The harmony and unity of the Saints, is a lovely object to behold, and an
excellent ornament of your Christian profession, and very taking with others.
Behold, how good, and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity! Psalm. 133.1. And while the believers were of one heart, and of one
soul, great grace was upon them all: and the Lord added to the Church daily,
such as should be saved, Acts 4.32, 33. and 2.47. Which cannot be said of any
particular opinion extra-essentiall to Christianity: and therefore there is not
that weight to be laid on it, as is to be in preserving the harmony, unity, and
community of the Saints. But alas the contrary, works the quite contrary effect
of disgrace and disparagement to our holy profession, and rendering it and the
friends of it, less desirable; of which these days afford us more of the
experience, then of the lovely, beautiful, and desirable effects of the
Saints harmony.

9. If you prize your comfort, prize agreement: for those that are living and
not dead or benumbed members of Christ's body, cannot but be pained with the
rending of one member from another of that body of which they are: If one
member suffer, all the members suffer with it, 1 Cor: 12.26. Was it not a
sorrowful sight to see the man in Mark 5.5. cutting himself with stones, and
an argument that he was possessed with an evil spirit? Every one will grant it.
And pray you how much less doleful is it to see the Saints, children of the
living God, cutting and wounding themselves; for so they do, when they cut and
wound one another; for they are members one of another, Rom: 12.5. Alas, how
unnatural is it! for who ever hated his own flesh? Ephesians: 5.29. Certainly where
thus it is, its an argument they are under a spiritual frenzy and madness,
and so are objects of very great comisseration, and are an occasion of much
trouble and disturbance in their Fathers house. But O the comfort of love, (as
the Apostle phraseth it, Phil: 2.1.) the pleasure of peace, and the delight of
harmony; like a well tuned Instrument, where there is no Jarring. Behold how
good and how [pleasant] a thing it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity.
Its not only good and profitable, but pleasant and comfortable also, Psalm:
33.1. A great part of a Christians comfort in this world, lies in his communion
with Saints. David says, The Saints and excellent, were all his delight, Psalm:
16.3. And therefore a breach in this, must needs make a great breach upon a
Christians comfort.

10. The more you are for union and reconciliation, and making of peace, the
more you will be like God, whose infinite goodness and grace inclines him to
seek after those that are at a far greater distance from him, then any of
the Saints are from one another: He is in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, 2 Cor: 5.19. Yea this is that good pleasure which he has purposed in
himself, that in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather
together in one, all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are
on earth, even in him, Ephesians: 1.9, 10. Sin had divided and scattered his
creatures in their affections as well from one another as from him; but the
soul of the Almighty was so set upon their reconciliation and reunion, that
he sends his Son Jesus Christ in due time, to gather them together into one in
Christ as their common head. And for that end also he appointed the ministry,
and from time to time furnishes them with gifts, First, to persuade men to be
reconciled unto God, (2 Cor: 5.19.) and then to bring them all to unity in the
faith and knowledge of the Son of God, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. This God has done
to procure reconciliation and peace. And therefore blessed are the
peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God, Mat: 5.9. They
whose hearts, and heads, and hands, are in it, that labor at it with desire to
effect it, to bring men, especially the Saints to terms of peace and good
agreement, they tread in their fathers steps, follow the same work, design,
affect, and labor at the same thing; and therefore well may they be called his
children; and followers of God as dear children, Ephesians. 5.1. And being his
children, come under a great blessedness indeed, having such a father, whose
affection and power for their advancement, has no bounds but what an infinite
wisdom sets. And truly if this will not set our hearts on fire to be at this
work, I know not what will. If then you desire to make good unto your own
souls the evidence of your Sonship and relation to God upon the best terms,
it will not be enough for you to be your selves persuaded to reconciliation and
agreement with your dissenting brethren, but to be active and busy in
procuring it in others where its wanting. For otherwise though you may be
peacekeepers, yet you will have little to denominate you [peacemakers.]

11. Its the way to have God with you and delight in you. He is so great a
lover of peace and concord, that he will always make one at this work; you
shall be sure to have his company and presence, both whilst you abide in it,
and when you lift up your heart, hand, and tongue to promote it. Live in peace,
and the God of love and peace shall be with you, 2 Cor: 13.11. Such shall have
God with them as a God of peace, speaking peace to them, evidencing himself to
be at peace with them. I appeal to their consciences who have known the
difference of living in a divided state, and of living in unity with all
Saints, and of making themselves servants to so good a work as to reconcile
Saints, whether they have not more inward peace from God, and a richer
testimony of his love in the time of their reconciliation, union and professed
conjunction with all Saints, then they had in the time of their distance from
many of them. Its most true that he that dwells most in love, dwells most with
God and God with him, 1 John: 4.12, 16. And how they can expect peace from God,
that do not live in peace with all those with whom God is at peace, I know
not. Especially considering that Christ has told them, that if they from their
heart, do not forgive their brothers trespasses, that then neither will their
heavenly father forgive theirs, Mat. 6.14. and 18.35. And what kind of
forgiveness that is that can stand with punishing their brethren for
involuntary misprisions, with rejecting them from their communion, and carrying
themselves toward them as if they were none of the same house, but children of
another father, I desire may be deeply pondered by those whom it concerns.

The Apostle exhorting the Ephesians to this very duty, backs it with no less
then seven motives or reason, Ephesians: 4.3, 4, 5, 6. Endeavoring to keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace. For 1. There is one body; and 2. one
Spirit, even as 3. ye are called in one hope of your calling: 4. One Lord; 5.
one faith; 6. one Baptism; 7. one God and father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in you all. Each of which have very much in them to prevail
with the divided hearts and unpeaceable spirits of professors, to lay aside
their wars and contentions, which are but the offspring of their own lusts.
James 4.1. and 3.15. 1 Cor: 3.3. Gal: 5.20. But I would not be tedious, and
therefore shall not enlarge upon them, hoping that what has been already said,
cannot but come home to the conscience of all those whose uncharitableness
has not exceedingly hardened their heart.

Neither do I doubt but that every one will be ready to acknowledge this which
I have been exhorting to, to be every Christians duty, and will profess their
great affection to unity and peace. But alas, experience shows, that it is too
commonly with this proviso, or inward reserve, viz. so as that they may have
unity and peace upon their own terms: unity in the truth, as they call it,
and that truth, their particular opinion, upon which division is built. The
meaning of which is, that they would maintain peace with all, provided that
none would oppose them in their opinion, but say as they say: having that in
their mouths, Jer: 15.19. Let them return to thee, but return not thou unto
them; which they woefully abuse whiles they apply it to lesser differences. But
if unity and peace, and communion too, were not to be had and held but upon
such terms, what use would there be (in relation to different opinions in
lesser matters,) of those many exhortations of bearing the infirmities of the
weak; of long-suffering and forbearing one another in love; of bearing one
another burdens; of not looking every man on his own things, but every man
also on the things of others? Rom: 15.1. Ephesians: 4.2. Col: 3.13. Gal: 6.2. Phil:
2.4. A cordial and peaceable communion, and forbearance are not inconsistent.
Union, communion, and peace, must be kept and maintained upon Christians
agreement in fundamentalls of faith and holiness, when in the mean while,
bearing and forbearing must be exercised in relation to those things wherein
they otherwise differ. Which being the plain Scripture-road, its much to be
lamented that so many who seem zealous of the Scripture-pattern, should miss
it.

Therefore I beseech all those that love the Lord Jesus, and that love to do
that which pleases him, that you suffer not those few and lesser things
wherein you differ, to prevail more with you to keep at a distance, and to
deny your communion to one another, then those many, great and precious things
wherein you are agreed, to bring and bind you close together, and freely to
afford your Christian communion one to another. Is it reasonable or has such a
thing been heard of in other cases, that the minor vote should carry it against
the major? Lay aside then all prejudice, stiffnesse, and selfe-will'dnesse, and
count it your glory that you can seek to others to receive you into closer
communion, before they seek to you. And in your prosecution of this work of
reconciling distant brethren, do not be beaten off, by others hanging off; but
reckon it so choice a piece of generation-work in these dividing times, as that
you can hardly lift up your heart, your tongue, your hand, to such another.

And you that are Ministers of Christ, who is the Prince of peace, and of the
Gospel, which is the Gospel of peace, and whose work is to guide men's feet into
the way of peace, and the end of whose calling is, to bring all to the unity of
the faith and knowledge of the Son of God: be entreated Reverend and beloved,
to take heed of making the breach wider, and by any undue representations or
aggravations, to frighten Saints of different persuasions, from coming near
one another: but to persuade to christian moderation and forbearance, to a
treating one another with a spirit of meekness, and an overcoming of one
another with love, and herein to approve your selves as patterns. And in so
doing, you shall find more peace in your own souls, and procure more in the
Churches, and find a greater success in your Ministry, make better tempered
Christians, and set a more glorious Crown upon the head of the Gospel, then
otherwise you are ever like to do.

FINIS.

