TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Have Exposed to your view Two Lecture Sermons with some Enlargement; not
with a desire to be in public view my self, especially in my declining years,
were it not the Call of God I am under to it; much less that any thing of mine
should be so: but it was desired by some that were affected themselves, and
found others to be so: And in Hopes it might be of some use in this
Apostatising Time in New England, to Recover Backsliding Children to their God
from their total forsaking the Hope of their Fathers, and others from a
forsaking their First Love, that they might do their first works: God may
confirm his Love to this people, and continue under their Church State; I have
cast in my mite to it, God delights in Exalting his own wisdom and power in
this work, and therefore makes use of such as may not Eclipse but brighten the
Glory. What is weak in it, reckon it to the Instrument, not with too severe
Censure, but with pity, and further your Prayer for him what is of use and
benefit, let God have all the Glory. All I desire is to be counted faithful by
him that put me into the Ministry, and that I may give up my account with Joy
in my watchfulness over any Souls.

Your Souls Friend, James Allen

Man's Self-Reflection, Is the Special Means to further his RECOVERY from his
APOSTASY FROM GOD.
PSALM 119.59. I thought on my Ways, and turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies.


THE Psalms if the Scriptures be Compared to a Body, may well be called the
heart of it; in other parts of it God mainly speaks to man: In this there is
the gracious man's pouring out his Soul to God, and manifests his holy affection
to others, especially in this Psalm. It is parted into Twenty Two Paragraphs,
each begin with an Hebrew Letter Alphabeticaly, the first with Aleph, and so
on; so that we have it thus repeared eight times in the whole, and may well be
called the true Christians Instructor, in which God Teaches him not only by
his Word, but the Examples of Saints the true practice of Godliness. By his
Precepts he tells us, what we ought to do, and the way we should walk in to
Salvation, by Recorded Examples what Saints did that were in this way of
Salvation, which we are to Enquire after for our Imitation. Jer. 6.16. Thus
says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see and ask for the old paths, where
is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your Souls. This
Example before us is thought to be David's, who probably was the Pen man of the
Psalm. In this Paragraph which is the Eighth in order, and begins and ends with
the Letter Cheth. The Psalmist begins with asserting his right in God as his
Portien, verse 57. which he proves.

First. By his Esteem of his Word, and Subjection to his Sovereignty.

Secondly. By the high Esteem of his Favor, which he proves by his Reverend
Sincere and Earnest Supplication for it as an effect of his faith in his
promise, verse 58.

Thirdly. It is further proved by his Consideration and Thoughtfulness of his
ways to further his Repentance and Return to God after straying from him, verse
59.

This is both a proof of his Interest in God, and direction to the Cure of a
Professing Peoples Apostasy from God, where it is total or partial; and of use
therefore to Saints and Sinners, to further their true Repentance and
Reformation. So I shall now Improve it.

In the words.

1. The means he used, I thought on my ways, or, Consideration of his ways.

2. The success of it: I turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. First, The means
used, where

First, The Person that did use it, I David, a King, a Prophet, a Saint, a man
after Gods Heart. So that it concerns Rich and Poor, High and Low, Good and
Bad; as all need Repentance, so should use this means.

Secondly. The act, I thought.

Thirdly. The Object, My ways. The word in Hebrew used as Critics tell us, it
signifies a curious viewing of a thing on every side, and round about it; or
exact Consideration of a curious work; if one thing were amiss or not: So he
did his ways, that is, his actions or way of his heart, the inward movings of
his will and affections in its desire and resolutions. And his External Walk
and Conversation, whether according to Gods Rule of them or not.

2. The success of it, I turned my feet to the Testimonies. I will or shall
turn: It was a Resolution stirred up in him, which he acknowledges to God as
giving success to this means, and his Encouraging Promise, he depended on his
faithfulness in it, to turn the affections of his Soul; and his External
Conversation to Gods Testimonies, the right way and rule of all his Actions; in
which is described his true Repentance and Reformation after wandering from
Duty; or the Cure of his Apostasy.

Whence the Observation is:

DOCTRINE. That due Consideration or thoughtfulness on their ways, is a special
means for the Cure of the Apostasy of Gods Professing People from their due
Obedience to him.
1. Apostasy is a Disease Gods Professing People are subject unto. A Reforming
People are so, that have made the highest profession of Reformation and
Recovery from the first and grand Apostasy in our First Parents. Some to a
total, where not a Saving Change. And the best of Saints to that that is
partial; a David, as he says, verse 176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep,
seek thy Servant.

2. God has appointed means for the (...) of it that they should use, though
God only can succeed it. As the Ministry of the Word, Isa. 58.1. Jer. 8.22. Is
there no Balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there?

3. This of Consideration is a special one, man's own applying to himself, Job
5.27 See it and know it for thy good. Hag. 1.5.7. Thus says the Lord, Consider
your ways, which is Reiterated. Man's Self Application of what he hears, that
Inward Preacher in stirring up Thoughtfulness of a man's own ways.

Reason 1. This Consideration of our ways, is necessary by Gods Precept
requiring it, in order to Repentance. Hag. 1.5. and his dislike where it is
not. Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that there were such an heart, that they would consider
their latter end.

Reason 2. Thence arises an acknowledgment of Sin, and Aversation to God,
which is the beginning of Returning, as he, I turned, wherein is an
acknowledgment of a need of turning, as being out of the way; this is sometimes
put for the whole of what God requires. Jer. 3.13. Psalm. 32.5. And arises from
bethinking themselves, 2 Chronicles. 6.37. only acknowledge your Iniquity. I
confessed my sin, and thou forgavest; if they bethink themselves.

Reason 3. It is perfected our Saving Return to God, by Gods Efficacious Grace
in this way, both in first and after Repentance; so it was here: And I turned,
I will or shall do it, his Resolution was stirred up by the work of Powerful
Grace, and Encouraged to Endeavor it by the same promised grace. Hosea 6.1, 2,
3. Come, and let us Return unto the Lord; for he has torn, and he will heal
us: he has smitten, and he will bind us up. After two days will be revive us,
in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. Then
shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness.

The further clearing and Improving this Text and Doctrine, shall be in Answer
to this practical Question.

Quest. What is this Thoughtfulness of our ways or actions that is such a
special means for the cure of Apostasy in a Professing People of God?

Answ. 1. In general take this description of it.

It is the Exercise of all the powers of the Rational Soul by man's Self
Reflection for the knowledge of his ways or actions, and for his right Judgment
of them with reference to Gods final approving Judgment.

1. It is the Exercise of all the Powers of the Rational Soul, the
Understanding, Will and Affections.

2 In way of Self-Reflection for the knowledge of his actions, which is
peculiar to Rational Creature, and mainly intends his moral actions, as under
the direction of a moral Rule for his Obedience, and Happiness, in Enjoyment of
God, according to his promise, to his obedience. Genesis 2.9.

3. It is for his Right Judgment of them. Man has a Judicature in himself, God
has Authorized in him, and is the supreme and highest on Earth; subordinate
only to God about his own actions in reference to God, and his inward duty to
him. Romans 14.4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own
master he stands or falls. None are to judge others in things that are
indifferent in matters of Religion, or doubtful to true Christians, but
themselves, about the sincerity in them or not. verse. 13. Let us not therefore
judge one another any more, but consider our own ways. The Judge is
Conscience. 2 Cor. 1.12. That is a Witness as well as a Judge, having the best
knowledge of what is in man, next to God. 1 Cor. 2.11. For what man knows the
things of (...) man, save the Spirit of man which is in him? And has Authority
in the man to stir up all the powers in it, for its right judgment, therefore
the Psalmist here says, I thought, being set on work by Conscience that is
seated in the heart or practical judgment, that influenceth the whole. 1 John
3.20, 21. If the heart condemns, (that is Conscience) God is greater, and will
much more condemn; but if it does not, there may be Appeals to God to Justify,
and confidence in it through Christ. Psalm. 130.4. But there is forgiveness with
thee that thou may be feared. Its Knowledge and Authority to stir up the
activity of the Rational Powers is in order to this Judgment.

4. It is with reference to Gods final approving judgment of them. This is the
chief end of the power of Conscience in man. It is to be approved of God; all
our Actions may in his final judgment. 2 Cor 5.11. It was so in man's Innocence,
to prevent sin, to justify in way of perfect Obedience; and since the Fall
under the Gospel its main use is to further escaping Gods Condemnation of them.
1 Cor. 11.32. by judging themselves, and appealing to Gods Gracious Throne for
approbation and pardon through Christ.

2. More particularly, I shall endeavor to show what are those Exercises of
the powers of the Soul when Conscience is awakened to its duty, in order to
true turning to God, are stirred up by it, and in what order.

First. The understanding power of the Soul, it sets that a work, which is the
first Operation of the Soul in order to Returning to God; a seeing and knowing
of our ways or actions. None can rightly judge of what he does not know, and
right knowledge of them must go before any serious thoughts about mending them,
or returning to a right way; we must see we are wrong. For clearing this, take
these Remarks about it.

First. That in man's first Creation. God gave man an Excellent Understanding;
not only into the natures of all other Inferior Creatures, to give them
suitable names thereunto, but also to know his own duty to God as the way to
his Happiness; not only by the written Law of God in his heart, but his
positive Law in the Sanctions of the Covenant with him: He Reveals what is
good, and his way to his Happiness. Genesis 2.9, 17. and what is evil, that which
God forbids. And he had a freedom and power to will and choose the one, and
refuse the other, but Created and Mutable; and so by the abuse of that power
has lost it, and his knowledge with it of moral good and evil, wholly as
saying and any right judgment of it in order to it.

Secondly. In Fallen man there are some Remains, as some call them, of the
light of nature in their Consciences; or as others rather would call them,
common gifts to fallen man; God gives to all men as benefits in common from
Christ's Death to all mankind, that are beneficial to Humane Society, though not
saving to the person. Thus we read, Romans 1.18. Who hold the truth in
unrighteousness, (that is, sin against the light of Conscience) The Heathens
had a natural light about good and evil, as beneficial or destructive to Humane
Society. Verse 29. who know that they that do such things are worthy of death.
And some knowledge of duty to God by the help of the works of Creation. verse
19, 20. Because that which may be known of God, is manifest in them, for God
has showed it unto them, For the invisible things of him from the Creation of
the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even
his eternal power and God head, so that they are without excuse. which though
not saving, yet left them without excuse; and Sins against it, deprived them of
much of Gods common Goodness, and brought them under much of present
displeasure, and the effects of it, which might have been avoided. Romans 2.14,
15. For when the Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law: (That is in that Law written, the Scriptures) these
having not the law, are a law unto themselves. Which show the work of the law
written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and, their
thoughts the mean while accusing, or excusing one another.

Thirdly. But God has provided further help for the knowledge of our ways, and
furthering Saving Returning out of that Apostasy, and after-strays from his
Rule. And that is the Dispensation of his Word. Romans 2.4. Or despisest thou the
riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that
the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows
his word unto Jacob: his statutes and his judgments unto Israel. He has not
dealt so with every nation. Which has the promise of the Spirit in the right
dispensation of it. Isa. 30.20, 21. Their eyes shall see their Teachers, and
shall hear a voice behind, saying this is the way walk in it. and the success
of it depends thereon.

1. There is a further outward light and discovery of Sin, in the sinful and
penal evil of it; the written Law of God makes discovery of the evil nature of
it in that original pravity of our natures since the Fall, and of all our evil
practices. Romans 3.20. By the Law is the knowledge of Sin, and by the Gospel of
the Remedy. verse 23, 24. all have sinned and come short of the glory of God:
Being justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ. The Law strips you naked, and lets you see sin and misery. And the
Gospel discovers the way out of it. Rev. 3.17, 18. and know not that thou
art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Buy of me gold
tried in the fire, that thou may be rich, and white raiment, that thou
may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear, and
anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou may see.

2. There are common gifts of the Spirit, which much heightens the light of
nature in thus seeing Sin and the Remedy, and sometimes powerful Convictions
and Awakenings of Conscience thereby. Acts 2.37. They were pricked in their
hearts, and said, Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved? to stir up
Enquiry after the Remedy.

3. There are saving illuminations of the Spirit in the Dispensation of the
Word, whereby man Fallen is Restored to a true, though not a perfect knowledge
of God and himself, so of the evil of Sin, and good of Obedience, 2 Cor. 4.6.
which is necessary to a right judgment of our ways, to a saving turning to him.
Acts 26.18. called, a turning from darkness to light, and the power of Sin and
Satan to God; a sanctifying all the powers of the Soul, and begins with this,
in giving a spiritual eye, fit to discern a spiritual object. 1 Cor. 2.15. The
spiritual man discerns all things.

1. This is the knowledge to be sought and waited for in the Reading the Word,
and Dispensation of it. Mat. 20.32, 33. for Christ's opening them as to the
blind men he did. Joh. 5.39.

2. It is to be exercised in the knowledge of your ways or actions. Prove. 8.34
Wait at Wisdoms gates, both inward and outward, by seeing them in the glass of
the word. Jam. 1.25. Whosoever looks into the perfect law of liberty, and
continues therein, will be a doer of it, and blessed therein.

3. Making a through search into your hearts, and trial of your ways thereby,
especially under Afflictive Dispensations for sin, an allusion to Judicial
Proceedings, that is in Lam. 3.40. Search and try your ways, and turn to the
Lord. Find out the sin, and all the aggravations of it, by searching and trying
your ways, or Examining. And there is need of Calling in Gods search. Psalm.
139.23, 24. Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts.
And see if there be any wicked way in me: and lead me in the way everlasting.
To avoid deceits of our sinful and deceitful hearts. Jer. 17.7, 10. The heart
is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? I the
Lord search the heart, I try the reins.

The second operation of the Rational Soul to be exercised, is the Memory,
whereby things known are kept and recalled when actually forgotten, and is of
special use in turning to God; and in fixing the thought upon our ways. This is
helped in the first operation of it, retaining things to be thought on.

First. By the right, clear and practical knowledge of them. A good memory
depends on the good Understanding. Those that have the clearest understandings
have the happiest memories, especially where it is practical about sin and
duty, when under the powerful Convictions by the Word and Spirit, to a deep
sense of sin, in its sinfulness and penal evil of it, to stir up to a
Concernedness for deliverance, see Act. 2.37. As they were at Peter's Sermon
that were pricked at the heart. The Apostle James tells us, Jam. 2.25. That
such an Hearer of the Word, that looks into the Law of God, (that is his Word)
that Reveals the whole mind of God for Salvation, as the Angels do into the
Mysteries of man's Redemption, revealed, 2 Pet. 1.12. where is the same word,
exercises his understanding to know it, enquires after it, and has
impressions of the worth and weight of it; he is not a forgetful hearer, but a
doer of it. It is a proverb concerning old men, Quod curant senes meminerunt.
What old men love, they will remember in old age, when memory fails them in
other things. Answerable to that Counsel of Solomon. Prove. 22.6. Train up a
Child in the way he should go, and he will not depart from it when he is old.
The Experience of Christians testify to it, those that most complain of their
weak memories, yet words they have understood, and had impression of on their
hearts, they never forget. David had such a Remembrance of it; that he puts God
in mind of it. Psalm. 119.49. Remember the word, upon which thou have caused me
to hope. And encourages his own faith in him about it, endeavor after such a
knowledge. 2 Pet. 3.18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, as the way to the Remembrance of them.

2. Conscience Records all a man's actions in the memory, good and bad together,
with Gods Dispensations to him by his Word and Providence. It is the Recorder,
and Memory is the Book where they are written in order to Gods judgment of them
finally, and for our judgment to prevent his Condemning judgment. Jer. 17.1. It
is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a Diamond.

Hence 2. The second act of memory is needful and useful to the cure of
Apostasy, which is recalling to mind that which is actually forgotten
concerning Gods Law, his Ordinances and Providence, and our own sins.

1. This God helps in by his Word written, by frequent requiring it in his
people to Remember his word. Prove. 4.4, 5. Let thine heart retain my words:
keep my Commandments and live. Get wisdom, get understanding, forget it not.
His works. Exodus 13.3. Remember this day in which you came out of Egypt. both
merciful and afflictive also. Deuteronomy. 24.9. So their own sins. Deuteronomy. 9.7.
Remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the Lord thy God to wrath in the
Wilderness. So by the Ministry of it, it is one great use of it to put thee in
remembrance. 2 Pet. 1.13. I think it meet, so long as I am in this Tabernacle
to put you in remembrance.

2. By his Providence. 1. Afflictive. Genesis 42.21. They said one to another, we
are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear: therefore is this distress
come upon us. 2. By merciful Providence. Ezekiel. 16.63. Then you shall Remember
your sins, when I am pacified to you, and loath your selves for them.

2 It is our duty to stir up our own remembrance of our ways. And that

First. By looking over the Record of Conscience, as Ahasuerus did the Records
of his Kingdom. Esth. 6.1, 3. When the King could not sleep, and he called for
the Records, which were read before him; and enquired what honor had been done
to Mordecai for saving his life. To see his neglect of his duty, in Rewarding
faithful Service to him; so should we, to see our Omissions of Duty, and
Commissions of Sin, with the aggravations of them, as against the Justice or
Mercy of God to us; see them as written in your heart. Jam. 1.25. see that Law
written in the heart, is a setting sin before you. Psalm. 51.3. My sin is ever
before me. As discovered in the glass of the Law, and bringing your ways to the
discovery of it.

Secondly. Stir up the activity of memory to its duty in it. Deuteronomy. 16.12. Thou
shall remember thou wast a Bondman in Egypt. Isa. 63.7. I will remember the
loving kindness of the Lord, according to all the Lord has bestowed on us.
Psalm. 77.11, 12. I will remember the works of the Lord, surely I will remember
thy wonders of old. Resolve on it, you will remember the words and works of
God, to humble for sin, and encourage to duty.

3. Another operation of the Soul needful to the Recovery from Apostasy, is
Thoughtfulness or Consideration of our ways, which follows that of memory; as
we cannot remember what we do not know, so cannot think of it if we do not
remember; this affords matter for consideration and meditation. Truth is the
food of the Understanding, which it commends to, and stores in the Memory; and
meditation concocts for use and nourishment to the whole man, the will and
affections of the Soul to live and walk in the strength of it, and is
principally here intended and expressed by; I thought or considered my ways,
and turned. The thoughts are the perfecting acts and operations of the Soul,
whereby the Idaea and Image of things are framed in it, which it understands
and remembers, and has the most immediate influence on the will and
affections, as they have on the actions.

As things we outwardly see are represented by the fancy and common sense to
the understanding; so when they are practically known and remembered, it is
conceived in the will and affections, as a Child in the womb, and are therefore
called the first born of the understanding. And though a man does not always
outwardly practice and bring forth to outward view all such thoughts to man's
judgment of him, yet they as in the thoughts are in Gods view, and he judges
his state thereby as good or bad; so he says of fallen man as in his natural
estate. Genesis 6.5. The imagination or figments of his heart are evil, and that
continually. Prove. 23 7. As he thinks, so is he. And therefore he calls for
thy change, as the beginning of our true turn to him. Isa. 55.2. Let the wicked
forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his thoughts, and Return. Jer. 4 14. Wash
thy heart, O Jerusalem, how long shall vain thoughts lodge in you. And he
judges of his true Conversion to him by this beginning of it. 2 Chronicles. 6.37. If
they bethink themselves and turn. So that it is necessary and useful in
Recovery from Apostasy, as that God stirs up Conscience to excite in them that
do turn into the right way. I shall not further enlarge upon what thoughts are,
being limited by my Text, to the Activity of them in our own ways, as the
special subject or object of them, to further turning into Gods ways. And more
specially that it is on the sinful ways of heart and life in us, those that
must be turned, from which God by his Prophet calls his people to do Hag. 1.5
7. as a means of Repentance, and was successful, verse 12. In my Text we have
an eminent Example of it, and in the duty and success of it. To direct and help
in imitation of it.

First. Think or meditate on the sinfulness of your ways, as you should know
the evil of them by the Word, and remember the Convictions by it, with all the
aggravations of them. So think on it, and keep your hearts to it. Psalm. 51.3.
let sin be always before you to humble you, and further seeking pardon and
mortification of it, by seeing your selves in the glass of the Word. Jam. 1.25.

Secondly. Meditate on the penal evil of it, what your sin deserves? What
Afflictions and Effects of Gods Displeasure for your sins? So meditate on Gods
present Providence, as the punishments of your evil ways. Hag. 1.8, 9, 10, 11.
bids them consider the neglect of their duty to God, and his carriage to them,
which was for their sin that he frustrated their expectations of his common
benefits. They did sin in unfruitfulness to him. Isa. 5.4, 5.

The grounds of this meditation or consideration, or helps in it are,

1. A consideration of Gods Mercy, Goodness and Patience; think on this, Romans
2.4. Despisest thou the Riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long
suffering, etc. You that live under Gospel means have more advantage than
others have by the light of nature, having also the Gospel Revelation of the
Remedy against sin, and a continuance in his world, notwithstanding provocation
by often abusing his mercies, all of them in Rebellion against him, using of
them against him, not only his common mercies, but despising that which is the
richest Mercy; Discovery of the way to your being the Subjects of his
Reconciled Favor, that should lead you to the way of it. This highly
aggravated sin in those under the means of Salvation. Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do you thus
requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? It is not only the greatest
ingratitude, but the highest folly to despise your own mercies. Ezekiel. 18.30.
Turn, why will you dye, O House of Israel? Jonah 2.8. A forsaking your own
mercies. Those that might be so, if you did improve the means, and get into the
way of it. Especially, it is a meditation true Converts should most think of,
that are under greater mercy in being the Subjects of his special goodness. 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9. Thus the Prophet did awaken a David to this duty, to think of
what God had done for him. verse 13. And would do further in renewing his
pardon to him. This appears in the discovery of his nature. Exodus 34.6. And the
Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth. In his making his
glory pass before Moses, he has discovered his gracious nature, the free and
full pardoning mercy that is in him. And promises. 1 John 19. If we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. And he is faithful in his
promise to Christ, and that is owing to him, and all in him to encourage this
duty.

2. Meditate and think on the Justice of God. He is just as well as merciful
and holy. 1. In his nature. Exodus 34.7. I will not clear the guilty. In the
Threatenings of his word. Genesis 2.17. He that sins shall die the death. Psalm.
7.11. He will what his Sword against the Impenitent. And his Providence
Recorded in his Word. 2 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6 He spared not the old world, nor Sodom,
which are fearful instances of it. Nay, the Heathens that improved not the
light of nature. Romans 1.18, 26. he manifested his wrath from heaven against
them by spiritual and outward Judgments; nay, his only professing people in the
world. Romans 11.22. If he spared not the natural branches, will he spare you.
Nay, the severest outward Dispensations of Providence is usually on such. Amos
3.2, 3. nay his own Children. 2 Samuel 12.11. Beside consider his Providential
Dispensation among your selves for neglect of duty he calls to, or commission
of sin, Hag. 1.8, 9. He directs to think of the Judgments they were under, in
disappointing their expectations of the good and usefulness of the Creatures to
them.

3. Meditate on the Day of Judgment. Acts 17.31. He has appointed a day in
which he will judge the world. This is a meditation to Repentance, that there
is a fixed day of Gods Final Judgment of all men's ways, good and bad, and their
states, manifesting thereby a Revelation of his Righteous Judgment. Romans 2.6.
It shall go well with the Righteous in their state and way of Gospel Obedience;
but it shall not go well with the wicked. Isa. 3.10. This is that the Lord
after the manner of men affectionately wishes their consideration of. Deuteronomy. 32
29 O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end. There will be an end of your living in this World, the thing
is certain. Heb. 9.28. the time to us uncertain: And there an end of Gods
patience and forbearance, and space of Repentance to the Impenitents, and the
longer it is, the greater treasure of wrath Romans 2.5. And an end of the
patience and exercise under troubles and difficulties to the Godly in their way
of Obedience to God. 2 These. 1.6, 7, 8. Think on this day which will be a day
of Refreshing. Acts 3.19. When the times of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord. To the penitent and gracious reward of your Obedience.

Having given some special helps and grounds of meditation, let me further help
and move to the duty by some Directions and further motives in it under this
Head.

DIRECTION I.
Keep your hearts to it, the heart is very loath and averse to it naturally,
especially on such serious thoughts as these are. Therefore set Conscience to
its work, to apply those things home, and affect the soul with it. Job 5.27.
Know it for thy good, and watch your hearts. Prove. 4.23.

2 Avoid hindrances, especially wandering and vain thoughts. Jer. 4.14. O
Jerusalem, how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee: Get your hearts
free from that: Let them not have lodging; possess the heart, that thoughts are
sin, and though not open to man, yet under Gods observance and judgment.
Eccles. 12.14. God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

3. Avoid Companying with vain and idle persons, and often converse with the
Godly. Mal. 3.16. They that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and
thought upon his Name.

4. Take fit seasons and times for it, and places, (times) the morning and
nights are fit times, sometimes oftener. Psalm. 1.2. He meditates on the Law of
God, day and night. Psalm. 5.2, 3. My voice shall thou hear in the morning, in
the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. For thou art
not a God that has pleasure in wickedness: neither shall evil dwell with thee.
So the Evening. Psalm. 119.148. Mine eyes prevent the night watches: that I
might meditate in thy word. Genesis 24 63. Isaac went out in the evening to
meditate. So (places) in the Field, in the Close, when alone; nay, on the Bed.
Psalm. 4.4. Commune with your own heart upon your bed. And at set times, so set
your selves to it in them.

MOTIVE.
1. It is the way to have Gods Grace given where it is not, and unlooked for
Blessings; though God is not tied to it, yet his ordinary way it is to work on
Rational Creatures suitably to their Reason. And stirs up the exercise of it.
Acts 2.37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said
unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we
do? And to revive it where it is. Psalm. 39.3. My heart was hot within me, while
I was musing the fire burned: then spoke I with my tongue.

The success here in my Text: I turned, which is an acknowledgment to God of
his turning Grace, not only being there, but acted by him, effectually to turn
him.

2. It is the ordinary way of Wise men, in their Concerns of this World. The
Merchant thinks on his way in his Trade, whether right, and how he prospers, by
looking over his Accounts. The Mariner has his Compass and Observation how he
Steers his Course by it, to mend it where it is otherwise then it should be.
And shall we more exercise our Rational Powers for Earth, than for Heaven?

3. Consider. It is an evidence of Gods thoughtfulness of you of Peace and
Salvation, and that from Eternity. Jer. 29.10, 11, 12. I will visit you, and
perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return to this place. For I
know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace,
and not of evil, to give you an expected end. Then shall ye call upon me, and
ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you. And it is pleaded
here by David, as a sign of his Integrity and Effectual Vocation. Jer. 31.3. I
have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore with loving kindness have I
drawn thee. So it is presented for the Consideration of Gods People, to further
their Repentance, as encouraging to Consideration as a means to it.

4. The fourth and last operation of the Rational Soul in exercise for
Returning to God, are his judging thoughts, to make a right judgment of them,
to prevent Gods condemning for them. 1 Cor. 11.31. For if we would judge our
selves, we should not be judged with the World. Prove. 28.13. He that confesses
and forsakes, shall find mercy. This is the turning act, so far as in man's
power, and he does it as under the influence of Gods Grace, therewith he makes
a judgment of his ways, as in or out of Gods Testimonies.

1. There is a judgment of his own ways to be evil, and out of the way of Gods
way of his Testimonies, which is supposed in his turning his feet into them;
this is the first part of true Repentance and Reformation, of their turning
from sin, not only in his outward practice, but also the inward affections
also, that are the feet of the Soul; he sees all is wrong, his heart, his life,
he is going in the way to his destruction, from God as his portion, as his
Sovereign. And as he sees this, so he judges and passes sentence on this his
evil way, and condemns it as that deserves Gods Condemnation, and Justifies God
in his Righteous Sentence in the Law. Genesis 2.17. And justifies God in all the
lesser Executions. Psalm. 51.4. Silenceth complaint of them. Ezra 9.13. Seeing
that thou our God, have punished us less than our iniquities deserve. And
assures them with out Repentance, and the Gospel Remedy, they shall be
Condemned at the Higher Court. 1 John 3.20. And not only passes this Sentence,
if you turn not, you shall dye eternally, but begins Execution in Gods Name and
Authority on the Soul, as Ehud on Eglon. Judge. 3.20, 21. And Ehud came unto
him, and he was sitting in a summer parlour, which he had for himself alone:
And Ehud said, I have a message from God unto thee. And he arose out of his
seat. And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his right
thigh, and thrust it into his belly. So says Conscience to the Sinner, and
runs the Threatenings to the heart, this is that which is called pricking to the
heart. Acts 2.37. at the heart of sin, and wounds it in its course, and sets it
a bleeding, which the Law cannot; he also kills sin and self-confidence.

2. There is a turning the feet to Gods Testimonies, this is the returning to
the right way, by judging aright of Gods way, which he testifies of him, in his
Gospel Revelation of pardon and grace in Christ, for Returning Sinners: this he
judges to be right, the only way of Life, and Salvation. So the smitten Soul
is at first put on Enquiry about it, and mourning for sin, and after the
healing balsome of the Gospel, for pardon and grace in first Conversion, and so
in after Returning, this moves the affections to the getting into this way, and
Renouncing all other, and to be willing to confess and forsake Sin. Prove.
28.13. Whosoever confesses and forsakes, shall find mercy. 1 John 1.9. If we
confess our sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness. And to be in love with thankful Obedience
to the Commands of the Gospel. 1 John 5.3. For this is the love of God, that we
keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous; his feet and
affections will be carried this way of Gospel Obedience. Thus think on your
ways to such a turning, pray for Gods directing of you. Jer. 10.23. O Lord, I
know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not in man that walks, to
direct his steps. And enlarges the heart to Run the ways of Gods Commandments.

Oh! That what has been said, might stir up to this Duty, to think so on your
ways, that your hearts may be turned to Gods Testimonies. I have directed to
the way, and I shall pray that God would put you into it: Do your Duty in
waiting on him for his assistance to do it as you should. Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. I
have (...) Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was
chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned; for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after that I was turned, I
repented: and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was
ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. Is
Ephraim my dear son? Is he a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I
do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I
will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. Oh! that you may so think on
your ways, that you may turn your feet unto Gods Testimonies; that so you may
have Gods acceptance, and manifestation of his Fatherly Love to you.

FINIS.

