A DEFENSE OF THE Answer made unto the Nine Questions or Positions sent from
New England, Against the REPLY THERETO BY That Reverend servant of Christ, Mr.
JOHN BALL; Entitled, A Trial of the New Church Way in New England and in Old.
Wherein, beside a more full opening of sundry particulars concerning Liturgies,
Power of the Keys, matter of the visible Church, etc. is more largely handled,
that controversy concerning the Catholic visible Church; tending to clear up
the Old-way of Christ in New England Churches.

By John Allin Pastor of Dedham Tho. Shepard Pastor of Cambridge
in New England.

Veritas nihil crubescit praeterquam abscondi, Tertul. Sua silentia amat
Spiritus per quae nobis illabitur, seque insinuat cupidis non gloriae sed
cognoscendae veritatis, Melanct. Let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph,
and upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his Brethren, Deuteronomy.
33.16. London, Printed by R. Cotes for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at the
Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard, 1648.

The Preface to the Reader.
IT was the profession of the Lord Jesus before Pilate, when he questioned with
him about his Kingdom, John 18.37. That for this cause he was born and came
into the world, to bear witness of the truth. Many truths about the
spiritual Kingdom of Christ has he imparted to us, if therefore we be born
into the world, or sent into this Wilderness to bear witness to his truth,
it is unto us reward sufficient, that we should be witnesses thereunto, even to
the utmost parts of the Earth. We confess we have been too slow in this
service of Christ, not having to this day set forth an unanimous Confession of
that Form of wholesome words which is Preached, received, and professed in these
Churches of the Lord Jesus; and which we are not unmindfull of, though our
distances, and other difficulties may delay the opportunity. But this in the
mean time we profess in general, That (so far as we know) there is the
same blessed Spirit of Truth breathing in the Ministry of the Country; the
same Faith embraced and professed in the Churches, which is generally received
as the Orthodox Doctrine of the Gospel, in the best reformed Churches, and
particularly by our godly learned Brethren of England and Scotland. And though
errors have sprung up among us, and some are gone out from us, that we fear
were not of us, yet we have borne witness against them, and by the blessing
of God, by the breath of Christ in the mouths of his servants they have been
blasted. Neither do we understand that these Churches are accused of any
errors about the saving truths of the Gospel, and therefore we thought our
selves not so much called of God to such a Confession at present, as to clear
up to the world those Truths we profess about the kingdom and government of
Christ in his Churches, which is the great work of this age, and of this nick
of time. And yet here also we fear that we have been too slack; for though it
be said, We are the Volunteers, such as cry up this way, etc. and so it
seems we are apprehended to be one cause of these present differences: yet
if things be well weighed, we may seem rather to be far behind in the duty
that lies upon us. Indeed some brief Answers sent over to some particular
persons, to satisfy Brethren what our practice is, (with some brief touch of
our reasons) rather then to disc^sse those points, have been printed by some
without our knowledge, or assent, upon what grounds they best know. And some
short Treatises by some reverend Brethren have been published to declare their
affectionate desires of the unanimous endeavors of all our dear Brethren, for
a general and holy Reformation: But what has been said or done that either
may justly offend the minds of the godly, provoke their spirits, disunite their
affections, or hinder a godly Reformation? Yea, we have been too slow to
clear our Doctrine and practice from the many objections, harsh
interpretations, and manifold criminations cast upon the same, wherein we
fear our lothnesse to intermeddle in these Controversies for fear of making
the breach wider amongst Brethren; and our desire rather to attend what light
we might receive from others in these points wherein we profess our selves
seekers after the truth, have made us guilty of neglect in this our duty. But
now we see our selves pressed hereto, by a necessity of justifying our ways
against the many aspersions cast upon them, as well as against the Reasons used
against them, for we perceive by the first Letter of our Brethren, how the
withdrawing of Christians from the Liturgy was imputed to us, and by this
Reply both in the Epistle and diverse passages, we cannot but see what
apprehensions are raised of us; yea, many are apt to think, that if we had said
nothing, yet our very act in forsaking the Churches of God in our dear native
Country, and the Cause of Christ there, together with the practice of these
Churches thought to be so different from the reformed Churches, have been, not
only a great weakening to the hands of the Godly, (that have stood by the
Cause of Christ) but also have caused great disturbance to the Reformation in
hand: To which much might be said, but that we should exceed the bounds of an
Epistle. Yet let us entreat all the Godly wise, to consider and look back upon
the-season of this great enterprise, undertaken by us, and the manner of our
proceedings in it, with the admirable workings of Gods Providence first and
last about it; and we think (though we were silent) they may easily satisfy
themselves, whether this was of God or men, a sinful neglect of the Cause of
Christ, or a manifest attestation to the truth, by open profession against
Corruptions of Worship in use, and for the necessity of reformation of the
Church; and that confirmed by no small degree of sufferings for the same. For
was it not a time when humane Worship and inventions were grown to such an
intolerable height, that the consciences of Gods saints and servants
enlightened in the truth) could no longer bear them? was not the power of the
tyrannical Prelates so great, that like a strong Current carried all down
stream before it, what ever was from the law, or otherwise set in their way?
Did not the hearts of men generally fail them? Where was the people to be
found that would cleave to their godly Ministers in their sufferings, but
rather thought it their discretion, to provide for their own quiet and safety?
Yea, when some freely in zeal of the Truth preached or professed against the
corruptions of the times, did not some take offense at it, judge it rashness,
and to be against all rules of discretion, who since are ready to censure us
for deserting the Cause? Many then thought, it is an evil time, the prudent
shall hold their peace, and might we not say, this is not our resting place?
And what would men have us do in such a case? Must we study some distinctions
to salve our Consciences in complying with so manifold corruptions in Gods
Worship? or should we live without Gods ordinances, because we could not
partake in the corrupt administration thereof? or content our selves to live
without those ordinances of Gods Worship and Communion of Saints which he
called us unto, and our souls breathed after? or should we forsake the
public Assemblies, and join together in private separated Churches? how
unsufferable it would then have been, the great offense that now is taken at
it, is a full evidence. And if in Cities, or some such great Towns that might
have been done, yet how was it possible for so many scattered Christians all
over the Country? It is true, we might have suffered, if we had sought it,
we might easily have found the way to have filled the Prisons, and some had
their share therein. But whether we were called thereunto, when a wide door
was set open of liberty otherwise; and our witness to the truth, (through the
malignant policy of those times) could not be open before the world, but
rather smothered up in close prisons or some such ways, together with our
selves, we leave to be considered. We cannot see but the rule of Christ to
his Apostles and Saints, and the practice of Gods Saints in all ages, may allow
us this liberty as well as others, to fly into the Wilderness from the face of
the Dragon. But if it had been so, that the Godly Ministers and Christians that
fled to New England, were the most timorous and faint hearted of all their
Brethren, that stayed behind, and that those sufferings were nothing in
comparison of their Brethrens (for why should any boast of sufferings?) yet who
does not know that the Spirit who gives various gifts, and all to profit
withal, in such times does single out every one to such work, as he in
wisdom intends to call them unto? And whom the Lord will honor by suffering
for his Cause, by imprisonment, etc. he gives them spirits suitable thereto:
whom the Lord will reserve for other service, or employ in other places, he
inclines their hearts rather to fly, giving them an heart suitable to such a
condition. It is a case of Conscience frequently put, and often resolved by holy
Bradford, Peter Martyr, Philpot, and others, in Queen Mary's bloody days,
viz. Whether it was lawful to flee out of the Land: To which their answer was,
that if God gave a spirit of courage and willingness to glorify him by
sufferings, they should s^ay; but if they found not such a spirit they might
lawfully fly, yea, they advised them thereunto. Those Servants of Christ,
though full of the spirit of glory, and of Christ to outface the greatest
persecuters in profession of the Truth, unto the death, yet did not complain
of the cowardice of such as fled, because they deserted them and the Cause, but
rather advised diverse so to do, and rejoiced when God gave liberty to their
brethren to escape with their lives to the places of liberty, to serve the Lord
according to his Word. Neither were those faithful Saints and servants of God
useless and unprofitable in the Church of God that fled from the bloody
Prelates. The infinite and only wise God has many works to do in the World,
and he does by his singular Providence give gifts to his Servants, and
disposes them to his Work as seems best to himself. If the Lord will have
some to bear witness by imprisonments, dismembring, etc. we honor them
therein; if he will have others isntrumental to promote reformation in
England, we honor them, and rejoice in their holy endeavors, praying for a
blessing upon themselves and labors. And what if God will have his Church and
the Kingdom of Christ go up also in these remote parts of the world, that his
Name may be known to the Heathen, or whatsoever other end he has, and to
this end will send forth a company of weake-hearted Christians, which dare not
stay at home to suffer, why should we not let the Lord alone, and rejoice that
Christ is preached howsoever, and wheresoever? And who can say that this work
was not undertaken and carried on with sincere and right ends, and in an holy
serious manner, by the chief and the body of such as undertook the same? The
Lord knows whether the sincere desires of worshipping himself according to his
will, of promoting and propagating the Gospel, was not in the hearts of very
many in this enterprise; and he that sees in secret, and rewards openly,
knows what prayers and tears have been poured out to God by many alone, and in
days of f^sting and prayer of Gods servants together, for his counsel,
direction, assistance, blessing in this work: How many longings and pa^tings
of heart have been in many after the Lord Jesus, to see his goings in his
Sanctuary, as the one thing their souls desired and requested of God, that
they might dwell in his house for ever; the fruit of which prayers and desires
this liberty of New England has been taken to be, and thankfully received
from God. Yea, how many serious consultations with one another, and with the
faithful Ministers, and other eminent servants of Christ, have been taken
about this work, is not unknown to some; which cleares us from any rash heady
rushing into this place, out of discontent, as many are ready to conceive. We
will here say nothing of the persons whose hearts the Lord stirred up in this
business; surely all were not rash, weake-spirited, inconsiderate of what they
left behind, or of what it was to go into a Wilderness. But if it were well
known and considered, or if we were able to express and recount the singular
workings of divine Providence, for the bringing on of this Work, to what it is
come unto, it would stop the mouths of all that have not an heart to accuse and
blaspheme the goodness of God in his glorious works* whatever many may say or
think, we believe aftertimes will admire and adore the Lord herein, when all
his holy ends, and the ways he has used to bring them about shall appear.
Look from one end of the heaven to another, whether the Lord has assayed to do
such a Work as this in any Nation, so to carry out a people of his own from
so flourishing a State, to a wilderness so far distant, for such ends, and for
such a work: Yea, and in few years has done for them, as he has here done
for his poor despised people. When we look back and consider what a strange
poise of spirit the Lord has laid upon many of our hearts, we cannot but
wonder at our selves, that so many, and some so weak and tender, with such
cheerfulness and constant resolutions against so many persuasions of friends,
discouragements from the ill report of this Country, the straits, wants, and
trials of Gods people in it, etc. yet should leave our accommodations and
comforts, should forsake our dearest relations, Parents, brethren, Sisters,
Christian friends, and acquaintances, over look all the dangers and
difficulties of the vast Seas, the thought whereof was a terror to many, and
all this to go to a Wilderness* where we could forecast nothing but care and
temptations, only in hopes of enjoying Christ in his Ordinances, in the
fellowship of his people; was this from a stupid senslesnesse or desperate
carelessness what became of us or ours? or want of natural affections to our
dear Country, or nearest relations? No surely, with what bowels of
compassion to our dear Country; with what heartbreaking affections, to our
dear relations, and Christian friends many of us at least came away, the Lord
is witness. What shall we say of the singular Providence of God bringing so
many Ship-loads of his people, through so many dangers, as upon Eagles wings,
with so much safety from year to year? The fatherly care of our God in
feeding and clothing so many in a Wilderness, giving such healthfulnesse and
great increase of posterity? what shall we say of the Work it self of the
kingdom of Christ? and the form of a Commonwealth erected in a Wilderness,
and in so few years brought to that state, that scarce the like can be seen
in any of our English Colonies in the richest places of this America, after
many more years standing? That the Lord has carried the spirits of so many of
his people through all their toylsome labor, wants, difficulties, losses, etc.
with such a measure of cheerfulness and contentation? But above all we must
acknowledge the singular pity and mercies of our God, that has done all this
and much more for a people so unworthy, so sinful, that by murmurings of many,
unfaithfulness in promises, oppressions, and other evils which are found among
us, have so dishonored his Majesty, exposed his work here to much scandal
and obloquie, for which we have cause for ever to be ashamed, that the Lord
should yet own us, and rather correct us in mercy, then cast us off in
displeasure, and scatter us in this Wilderness, which gives us cause with
Mich. 7. to say, Who is a God like our God, that pardons iniquities, and
passes by the transgressions of the remnant of his heritage; even because he
delights in mercy? Though we be a people of many weaknesses and wants, yet
we acknowledge our God to have been to us a God of many mercies, in respect of
that sweet peace which he has taken away from so many Nations, yet continuing
the same to us; in respect also of that liberty we have in Gods house, the
blessed Ministry of the Word, the sweet unity and communion of Gods Churches
and Ministers, increase and multiplication of Churches, Christian government in
the Commonwealth, and many other mercies we enjoy, but especially the
gracious presence of Christ to many of our souls in all these. But we will
not insist much upon this subject, being persuaded it is in the consciences and
hearts of many of our dear Contrymen to think that we should be an object
of love and tenderness to that State and people, by whose Laws and unkind
usages we were driven out into a wilderness, rather then to be judged as
desertors of our Brethren, and the Cause of Christ in hand: with whom (excuse
us if we now speak plainly) it had been far more easy unto many of us to have
suffered, then to have adventured hither upon the wilderness sorrows we
expected to have met withal; though we must confess the Lord has sweetened it
beyond our thoughts, and utmost expectations of prudent men.

But passing by this we must desire the Reader to bear with us a little in
removing that apprehension that we are the great stumbling block in the way of
Reformation, which (if it were true) it had been better we had been driven so
far into this wilderness, as never to have been heard of more.

Concerning our affection to this blessed work of a public Reformation, of
the Nation in general, and the particular Churches or Congregations of the
Land in particular, (as it is best known to God) so we think it is not
unknown to men, not only here by our daily prayers for it, and sometime
solemn seekings of God about it; but also we have given some testimonies
thereof both by private Letters, and the public motions of some of Gods
eminent servants among us tending that way.

We conceive two things specially in our Doctrine and practice, that may seem
to be stumbling blocks in the way of this public Reformation, which we shall
here remove.

The first is our practice wherein we seem so much to differ from the reformed
Churches, in receiving to our Churches only visible Saints and believers.

This we do freely confess that our practice and judgment do evidence this
to all, that we think reformation of the Church does not only consist in
purging out corrupt Worship, and setting up the true; but also in purging the
Churches from such profaneness and sinfulness as is scandalous to the Gospel,
and makes the Lord weary of his own Ordinances, Esaias 1.

And we doubt not but this was in the hearts of many, (if not most) of Gods
servants, to desire a separation of the precious from the vile, in the
dispensing of Gods ordinances; and if the charity of some be of larger extent
herein then others, this hinders not agreement in the maine.

This day has discovered what kind of people are to be found every where in
the Parishes of England: Can light and darkness, Christ and Belial agree
together? Popish episcopal enemies and haters of all godliness and
reformation, cleave together in one Church of Christ, with the Saints of God?

Yet neither our Doctrine nor practice do prescribe and limit the way of
attaining this reformation, whereby any should justly from our example stand
off from concurring in such a public work.

It is true, where there is no Church relation, but a people are to begin a new
constituting of Churches, reformation is to be sought in the first
Constitution. This is our case. But where corrupted Churches, (such as we
conceive the Congregations of England generally to be) are to be reformed,
there we conceive that such Congregations should be called by able Ministers
unto repentance for former evils, and confessing and bewayling their sins,
renew a solemn Covenant with God to reform themselves, and to submit unto the
discipline of Christ. By which means such as refuse so to do, exclude
themselves, and others by the severity of Discipline should be purged out, if
falling into sin they remain impenitent in the same.

What some particular persons may have said or done contrary to this our
profession, we cannot say, nor do we justify, but we know nothing that has
come from us to the contrary, to weaken the hands of godly reformers, or to
persuade the people to separate from the Congregations, if by any means they
might attain (with toleration of what can be) the reformation thereof, with
the liberty of Gods true worship therein. If indeed that cannot be obtained,
but men contradict and blaspheme them, as Paul separated the Disciples, so we
see no other remedy the faithful have in such a case.

The second stumbling block may be our Doctrine and practice about
Church Government, when we give Discipline as well as other Ordinances to
particular Churches, not subjecting them to any Government out of themselves;
but only to take the brotherly counsel and help one of another.

But how this should hinder a general Reformation we see not, for if every
Church so reform themselves (as is aforesaid) and have such Officers over them
as the rule of the New Testament requires, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 2. we need not fear
to betrust the Church (having such Officers) with that power which we conceive
Christ has given to the same, other Churches watching over them, counselling
and admonishing them in the Lord.

But if there be not such a reformation of the Churches, nor such guides set
over them, the power of the keys in a Presbytery of such Pastors as may not be
according to the rule, may as much abuse them as a particular Church may do,
and it may be to the hurt of many who would use them better, in their own
Congregations, then they can in a Classis, being over-voted there.

And we cannot conceive but both the care of reforming the matter of a Church,
and the recalling of the power of government to the Church, tends much to
further this work of reformation, no way to hinder the same.

And if we might obtain that of our dear Brethren, which we humbly crave,
viz. That our Doctrine and practice might be taken heartily according to our
plain meaning, and declarations, and not represented unto the World under such
shapes and forms as make it seem rigid (all one with the most rigid
Separatists, Donatists, Arminians, Socinians, etc.) we should hope that we
shall go for lovers and friends to a godly and general Reformation, not for
disturbers of the same; but the contrary dealing we meet with too too often
through the mistakes of Brethren; This learned Author Mr. Ball, though in the
Epistle he desired us to rest assured, that although he had conceived such
thoughts of us as leaning to separation, yet he would gladly receive every
syllable from us that should dislodge such thoughts, yet against our plain
profession sometime he will needs fasten the opinion of separation upon us, and
very frequently sets Mr. Robinson in a parallel with our opinions, (as if we
generally went that way in those things) which are well known to be the
Doctrine of many of our godly and best reformers.

The Learned may plainly see, how easy it had been for us and upon better
grounds to have filled our margents with quotations out of Papists and Prelates
as parallel with many passages of this Reply, but we have purposely abstained
from so doing, that we might not cast any blur or provoke the spirits of
brethren.

And seeing we are enforced to wipe off such aspersions, we humbly desire our
beloved Brethren (whose learned labors we honor) to bear with us if we
lightly touch this sore, for we confess it brings blushing into our faces,
and sadness to our hearts, to read so often such harsh imputations cast upon
us, which we cannot conceive but (falling from such pens) they breed a strange
loathing of us in the stomachs of many that read books without serious
examinations thereof.

First, how often do we meet with that imputation, that we make none members
of a visible Church but such as are really saints and believers, contrary to
our frequent profession, That visible saints that are such in judgment of
charity are fit matter of the Church?

Secondly, that we make a vocal Church Oath or Covenant, the essential form
of a Church, when as we frequently acknowledge that this Covenant which
constituteth a Church, is either implicit or explicit, and that Congregations
in England are truly Churches having an implicit covenant: and it is far from
our practice to use any Oath in our Covenant, and strange to us to read so many
Pages against our Church Oath, and swearing to a Covenant, to make our courses
horrid and too too rigorous.

Thirdly, that we set up a popular government, making the Elders of the Church
no more but moderators, etc. and that Ministers rec^ive their power from the
people, are their servants, and administer in their name, (as Mr. Ball and
others object) when we often profess the contrary, that all autho^ity (properly
so called) is in the hands of the Elders, and the liberty of the people is to
be carried in a way of subjection, and obedience to them in the Lord: neither
does it follow from any Doctrine of ours, no more then from the ordination of
Pastors by the Presbytery, that they are their servants, etc.

Fourthly, that if a Congregation reject a Pastor for no fault, they take both
nomen and esse, the name and nature of a Pastor from him. For this the Reader
is referred to our Answer of the twenty fifth Question of the thirty two
questions sent unto us, where nothing at all is said, but reference is made to
our answer to the nine questions, amongst which the seventh being of this very
point, our answer is quite contrary to what is imputed to us. Our words are
these, Concerning the Minister himself thus deposed, etc. we conceive though
he be by them deprived of the execution of his Ministry amongst them, yet
until he accept of a call to another people, he still remain a Minister of
Christ; in whose account he has true right of administration among the
people. Now if he remain a Minister of Christ, and have true right to
administer, let any judge whether we take away nomen or esse; or that we make
Church censures work ex opere operato, clave errante, as is also imputed to
us. Many such mistakes we find, but let these suffice to inform the Reader
how wary he had need be in receiving such reports against brethren: and this
charity we have cause the more earnestly to crave of all, that they would
reserve one ear to hear what their poor outcast brethren can say for
themselves, because we are placed at such a distance and disadvantage, that
ofttimes it is not possible for us to take notice of such objections, and
return an answer under a year or almost two years, whereby Satan has a
marvailous advantage to work strange thoughts and distastefull affections
toward us, and fasten them so deeply that hardly they will be taken off
again. But thus it falls out too too frequently, that when Brethren,
otherwise dear to each other, differ, in their judgments, and break out to
open contention about the same, they are very apt to make the opinions of the
contrary party as unpleasing and absurd to the judgment of others, as may be,
whence grief, offense, and alienations of affections (through the subtilty of
Satan, and the corruption of our hearts) are ready to follow. And this makes us
both fearful of our selves, lest we should give way to any unloving thoughts
toward the dear servants of Christ, or return any offensive language unto
them; yea, this causes us often to bewail that, which can never be enough
lamented, the sad distances and sharp contentions between such near brethren,
whom the Lord has so conjoined in the same Cause of Reformation. And oh that
our dear brethren would bear with us a little here, and give us leave to
pour out our humble and affectionate requests and expostulations into their
bosoms! We would be very loath to impute any thing to our dear Country and
beloved brethren that is not evident, or to rip up private failings, and make
them public: but when Pulpits and Presses proclaim to the world not only
the distances in judgment, but also alienation of affections; when there is
such straining to make the contrary tenants as odious to the world as may be,
such enlarging of differences, as if the wounds could never be healed; such
gall and vinegar poured on, in stead of the salt of savoury speeches, and the
oil of smooth and soft words to calm and pacify spirits already provoked;
yea, when there want not some that seek all private Letters they can gather
up, and search every corner to discover and publish to the world the seeming
failings of brethren; when contentions are grown to that pass, that such
orthodox, learned, and godly brethren whose faithful labors in the Lords
work, and great service and use they may be of in time to come, might worthily
plead for a room in the bosoms and inmost affections of their brethren, are
cried out against as not to be endured in the Country, because of some
difference in some points of discipline: when these things are so, who that
have any sense of Gods dishonor, or true love to his Countries good, can
forbear from tears, or hold his peace, that have any opportunity to utter his
grief? We will not take upon us to say who began this fray, or who have most
transgressed the rules of charity and to sedome. The Lord give every man an
heart that has failed to be affected with their own, and ready to pity and
pardon one another weaknesses: neither do we hereby blame loving and candid
debating of differences to find out the truth; but give us leave to say thus
much to all, (for our hearts and souls are with all the faithful servants of
Christ, that desire according to their light to promote the kingdom of Christ
Jesus, what ever their distance of judgment from us may be) What, dear
brethren, is there no balm in Gilead, no Physician to heal this wound?
alas, how is it now so wide and deep, that at the first was presented to the
world so small, or scarce any at all? When the Prelates petitioned for their
government, because the Reformers were not, nor could ever agree upon one
Form: it was professed that in six Points (whereof some are now the greatest
bones of contention) all did agree; and doubted not but if the Prelates were
down, all would agree in one. And was this bare words to put off the
Prelaticall petition? or did the Author speak without ground at adventures?
God forbid we should think so; but what the common adversary will think and
speak, it would grieve a godly heart to consider. How comes it then to pass
the breach is grown so great? It rejoiced our hearts to see that ingenuous,
Christian and peaceable disposition in that ever honored brother Mr. Herle,
who brought the distance in his Preface to such a narrow, as if one plaster
more might seem to have healed it; oh that there had been many more of that
peace^making spirit! what heart-burnings and contentions had been prevented.
We thought also that meek Apologetick Narration gave a fair opportunity of
closing with brethren in such things as they professed to concur in, but what
contrary entertainment it found, we lament to consider. And is it now come to
this pass, that these who were in a manner one cannot live together in the
same kingdom? Oh the depth of the malice and subtilty of that old Serpent! Oh
the policy and undermining faculty of the Jesuiticall generation, (who no doubt
have a great influence in this division!) Oh the frailties of flesh and blood
in Gods dearest Saints! Oh the unsearchable depths of the Lords eternal
counsels, that for holy ends leaves his own to such temptations, and yet knows
how, and will assuredly improve all this to his own glory, and the lifting up
of the name and kingdom of Christ in despite of all the gates of hell; and
give his servants once a season to sing together this song of Moses and of the
Lamb in triumph over all their enemies. But what? is the cause past help and
remedy? shall we think, alas, there is no hope, they will not leave until
they have devoured each other, better for us to say nothing, we shall be but
censured and slighted of all? God forbid, have we ventured thus far, and
shall we not presume a little further? Oh that we were worthy and fit to
propound any thing that might tend to mollify this sore: Or that the Lord
himself would speak by such poor creatures any word in season to help (at
least a little) in this sad case! We will not, dear Brethren, make this long
Epistle more tedious by presenting unto you all that might be said to move and
persuade your hearts to study peace and unity, and with one shoulder to set
your selves to further this blessed work of public Reformation, for which
the Lord has put such an opportunity into your hands, as never was the like,
and God knows, whether ever it will be, if this be slipped. We are
persuaded, when the heat of contention is laid aside, the blessed Spirit of
Christ in you does secretly suggest arguments enough unto your hearts. Do you
not often hear such whisperings as these. Are they not Brethren who differ from
us? has not the Lord received them? do they not stand or fall to their own
Master, and how shall we reject or judge them? have we not our ignorances and
frailties? what, is there no consolation in Christ, no comfort of love, no
fellowship of the spirit? or if so, should not this persuade us to be of one
mind in the Lord? do we not hope to live in heaven together, and shall we
stand at such distances here? shall we thus suffer peace to go from us, and
not follow and pursue it? shall we lose the blessing of peacemakers? shall we
by such differences, thus gratify Satan, Jesuits, Prelates, etc. and
strengthen their hands by weakening our own* are we not in the highway to
devour each other, and expose all to ruin* is it not high time for us that
are one in the Orthodox truth, to join heart and hand to pray, and preach, and
write as one, to stop the floud-gate of errors and abominations that Satan
has set open to the drowning of many souls* and the hazard of many of the
sheep of Christ, whiles we are contending about some matters of order which
though they be of moment, yet must give way unto more fundamental truths; and
oh that this mischief were sufficiently laid to heart* and the dangerous
spreadings of such gangrenes looked to in season! What will not all our vows,
covenants and solemn Oaths bind us together? These and many such
heartbreaking considerations we doubt not are before your eyes daily, which
therefore we will not enlarge. Only give us leave to propound what we
conceive in our weak judgment might somewhat tend to heal this distance. We
confess we stand far from the mark, and may miss the matter, but if we
do, let our well-meaning be accepted, and our weakness pardoned.

Two things, as we touched before, we conceive keep our dear brethren from
closing together in one to promote the public and general Reformation.

First, that point of Reformation which concerns the members of the Churches,
and here we fear the distance at present is great. For when it is thought, on
the one hand, that there is no need of ^ending godly Preachers to the ignorant
and profane Parishes to instruct them; humble them, and prepare them for a
gracious Reformation, but that Pastors (if they could be found, should be
sent to them, and minister to them as they are, if they will but join in the
national Covenant, as most have done, (for we see no other required) and when
godly Pastors may not have power to try their people whether they can examine
themselves, discern the Lords body, and walk according to Christ, before they
admit them to the Lords Table, nor may exclude them but upon some scandalous
evil, which seems short of that which even the Common-prayer-booke did allow.
Considering in what a state multitude of Parishes are in England, how full of
Malignants, Atheists, profane Wretches, etc. we must needs acknowledge it
will be very hard for the godly to satisfy their consciences in such
Church Communion, or godly Pastors to minister unto their Parishes in such a
state, and therefore we cannot wholly condemn such Ministers and people as
have been gathered into congregations if there were no hope of remedy in this
case.

Secondly, on the other hand, when some shall gather out of many Congregations
the most godly and able Christians into severed Churches, we must acknowledge
it may occasion grief to the Ministers of such Congregations. But is there no
middle way wherein according to God these two might meet* we suppose there is.
If the Lord would vouchsafe to help his people in these few things.

1 Is it not possible to obtain of that ^ver Renowned Parliament, not only
such liberty for godly Pastors, and their Churches to debar from the Lords
Table such as are not qualified according to the former description of the
Reverend Assembly* but also all favor and furtherance from Authority to purge
out of the Church all such according to rule, that live impenitently in any
known sin and scandalous evil? we cannot doubt but that if brethren would
agree with one heart to petition the same, such as have done so worthily many
things for purging the House of God, would also promote this needful point of
Reformation.

2 If all the godly Ministers would join as one man, and take unto them the
zeal of John Bap. thundering out the direful wrath of God against the pride,
vanity, luxury, profaneness, and late swarms of monstrous errors, (the
usual tares accompanying Reformation) and other sins of the time, to lay all
level before the Lord; and with holy Calvin, resolve to suffer their hands to
be cut off rather, then to deliver that holy seal of grace to the openly
wicked and impenitent sinner; how would the Lord go out with his servants,
Vid. Pet. Mart. Loc. Com. de Excom.
and cut down sin by the sharp sword of his Word, and severity of Discipline,
if all joined together? Whereas we fear sin and profaneness will out-stare
all godly Pastors, when they stand so much divided.

3 If these things being obtained and agreed, all godly Ministers and
Christians, which are the salt of the earth, and might by the blessing of God
season the Congregations wherein they live, they would not cast them off, or
withdraw from them, till first by public and private admonitions and
exhortations they had convinced them of sin, and sought by all good means
their reformation.

Whereby some no doubt might be gained, and what a blessed work were that? And
as for others that prove obstinate and impenitent, there would be just cause
of rejecting them from the ordinances and society of the Church; or if this
part of the kingdom of Christ would not be born in Congregations, with how much
peace and satisfaction to their own souls, and to the consciences of all,
should such godly Ministers and people withdraw themselves from them, to a
nearer communion one with another?

And shall we not hope that England is capable of such a Reformation as this,
if Gods faithful Ministers would with one heart and mind endeavor the same?
Far, far be it from our dear Country, after all those notable steps unto
Reformation, that it should stick in this, which is the life of all the rest.
But if it should be so, that either the great ones should be too big to
stoop down to the Lord Jesus in the ways of his wholesome Discipline; or the
multitude so carnal, worldly, wilful, profane, impenitent, as not to reform
themselves, families, and so their congregations, humbly submitting to the rule
of Christ; or if the Ministers (at least, most of them) should look at
preferment, honor, credit, riches, authority over the people, and not mind
such a work as this is: And this, after all the heavy, humbling, dreadful
judgments of God come upon the Land; after all the glorious out breakings of
the light of the Gospel in many parts of the Kingdom* after all the
protestations, covenants, oaths, whereby so many have bound themselves to this
particular reformation of themselves, and to further the reformation of the
Public; we tremble to speak it, but our hearts cannot but fear it, that
woe, woe, woe will be to poor sinful England. It seems to us to be a
prophetical speech of Mr. Bri^^ly; long since at rest with God, when lamenting
the profaneness of England, with their connivence at Popery, and compliance
with the wicked, he says, That if the Lord of Hosts do call for them,
(meaning the Popish faction) to rise up against us in new conspiracies, or open
violence, and with them all the crew of wicked and ungodly men, in whom we have
so delighted, to take part with those to our destruction, (as they, it is to
be feared, will be as outrageous as the other against all soundly fearing God)
is it not just? yea if he should let them make it bellum prodigorum, the day
of all the spend-thrifts, and of all the vile persons of the Land, to have
their fingers in every man's coffers, and their hands washed in the blood of
them, whom they have hated, Brins Watch, part 3. cap^ 10.
so soon as ever any of the Babylonish designs shall take their effect, could
we wonder at it? And is not this fulfilled in these times? which we wish may
well be laid to heart.

The second thing which we conceive may chiefly hinder this closing, is that
point of Church government, which concerns the power and liberties of
particular Churches or Congregations, and here we must acknowledge the
distance is too great. For (...) the one side* ^ee (...) for either by
Treatises, or by the Directory for Worship, that Congregations are acknowledged
to be complete Churches, especially standing among other Churches, or that any
power or liberty is given to them to administer Church censures, no not so long
as they administer rightly according to the rule, but all such power is when
indeed from the Churches, though in words they are persuaded that it is to
strengthen them; and if this also come down from the Catholic Church, and so
to lesser Synods, the greater part having power over the less, as it were sure
divino, it will (...) ^ore at the liberties and power of particular Churches.
But what here to say of the distance on the other hand, we cannot tell, we
see or read nothing, but that our dear and honored Brethren do freely
embrace communion of Churches in consultation Synods, for the brotherly help
of each other, and the weaker Churches; yea, and in a doctrinall way to declare
the will of Christ, and to threaten his judgments against such as shall refuse
wholesome counsel, and withdraw communion from such as wilfully refuse to hear
what is propounded according to the mind of Christ.

And what should we heresay? but on the bended knees of our souls entreat our
reverend Brethren to consider what power any o^ many Churches can challenge
(...) another, to require them to give up their right to them, to rule in
common, if a sister Church purnished with Officers shall refuse the same; or
what rule binds the Churches of an hundred* or any such civil division to
come into such a combination with those Churches, rather th^n others, fit but
refusing, Churches have just reasons to object against such Churches, or their
Officers. We think the more voluntary and free such consociations are, the
better. Here we shall be hold to propound this one thing, viz. Why may not the
fifth and sixth Articles of agreement publicly professed to the world, in
answer to the Prelaticall petition* obtain amongst our Brethren, that it may
appear to the disappointment of their hopes, that the Treaties being down,
the agreement would be easy; as is there said. Viz.

Ar. 5. Each particular Church has her own power and authority, and the use
and benefit of all the ordinances of Christ, neither is there any thing to be
done without the express or tacit consent of the Congregation, in matters
which are proper and peculiar to a particular Church, whether in election or
ordination of Ministers, or in admitting or excommunicating of members.

Ar. 6. It is in many respects expedient both for the members of each Church,
whether Ministers or people, and for the right governing and well-being of the
particular Churches, in a Nation professing Christian Religion, that besides
their particular Assemblies and Elderships, they meet by their Commissioners,
Ministers, and Elders in greater Assemblies, that matters that concern all the
Churches within their bounds respective may with common advice and consent be
agreed upon for their good and edification.

And we hope the Lord may yet have such a mercy for England, if the crying sins
thereof be not still impenitently against this glorious shining light of the
Gospel, persisted in, which we confess is our greatest fear, Godly Brethren
we hope would agree, if Englands sins hinder not. We confess it was the
saddest news that this year came unto our ears that the Kingdom of Christ
is hardly like to obtain, so much jealousy there is, lest the discipline of
Christ should cross the licentiousness of this age; yea, that generally there
is no more regard of the solemn Covenant, especially in personal reformation;
then if it were never made, that many reject the reformations they seemed to
desire at the first. These, with other sad things come to our ears, which
sadden our spirits. Oh England! England! our beloved England* will thou not be
made clean* when will it once be* will thou still return the Lord Jesus,
(graciously striving with thee for to save thee) such an unkind answer, We will
not have this man reign over us? have thou not yet learned so much wisdom, as
to kiss the son, no not now when he is angry and the sword in his hand? That
voice of God sounds often in our ears, when we think of England, Put off
thine ornaments, that I may know what to do unto thee; but for ought we hear,
the pride of England did never so much testify to their faces as now, when
sackcloth and ashes were more suitable. The Lord humble the hearts of our dear
Contrymen, or else we fear the yoke of Christ will never be born, and how
the Lord Jesus will bear and endure that, we tremble to think.

But what do we thus to take upon us, and let loose our Pen so far? pardon, we
beseech you, Christian Reader, this seeming boldness, it is our hearty
affection to the peace and prosperity of our dear Country, and the Saints of
God in it, that have drawn these things from us. Say not, what calling have
these thus to admonish and censure us? Censure we do not, (that we would do
only to our selves) but faithfully to admonish and exhort in the Lord, we hope
we may presume. Neither have we taken upon us this whole weighty work, of our
own minds, but at the request and call of diverse our reverend Brethren, whose
voice herein we looked upon as the voice of God; nor have we accepted that
call, out of any just we have to contend, or enter the lists of disputation
with any. We love the peace of the Churches, and unity and concord with all
our dear and godly Brethren too well, to have any such ends. And though we
are not unwilling to receive and consider any return that may be made, and we
hope with a mind to submit to the truth; yet we must profess Two things
chiefly inclined us to undertake this work. First, to clear up such truths as
we conceive to be according to the mind of Christ, which were obscured by
this Reply. Secondly, (and that especially) hoping that what we should write,
would tend rather to a peaceable healing of offenses and differences, then
otherwise; and therefore have presumed to Preface thus far, and so to present
these our affectionate requests to our dear Brethren, and Countrymen, which
we heartily recommend to their serious consideration, and to the blessing of
God, who only can incline the hearts of men, to attend to any thing of God set
before them; though we be the meanest and weakest of many, to take upon us,
thus to speak to our dear Countrymen, yet through the grace of Christ who
put us into the Ministry, we have bestowed a great part of our labor in these
parts, neither (we hope) altogether in vain; which makes us somewhat the more
engaged and encouraged to write as we do. And now having thus far in this
Epistle, and in the Book following, testified our love to the truth, and
desires of the peace, unity, reformation, and prosperity of our beloved
England, and the Churches of God therein, we commend both to the consideration
of the Reader, and all to the grace and blessing of Christ Jesus, and rest.

From New England, November. 28. 1645. THO. ALLIN, THO. SHEPARD.


ADVERTISEMENTS TO THE READER.
TO the Epistle of the Author of this Reply we say nothing, because it savours
(for the most part) of love and desire of unity, which we thankfully
acknowledge; only we cannot but take notice of two passages.

1 A complaint made against some standing affected New England ward, who have
carried it so, as if a chief part of holiness consisted in separation; and
that therefore some have separated from all private and public communion
there; others from all public, but not from private; others from the
Sacraments only, allowing public communion otherwise.

To which we answer, that as the Church fell by degrees into universal
pollution, by the Apostasy foretold to be under the Man of Sin; so by degrees
it recovers it out of it again: If therefore separation reach no farther then
separation from sins, and such sins of Churches wherein our selves in
joining with them must be involved, we suppose such separation (all due
respect and love reserved and professed to the Churches themselves) cannot
justly be accounted unwarrantable; and it is the profession of the Author in
his Epistle, to plead for communion with the Churches of Christ, no farther
then they hold communion with Christ: If any transgress these bounds, either
in respect of private or public communion in England, we must profess
openly, that if any mourn for it, we are (or would be) companions with them
in that grief. Whose heart bleeds not to see Gods flock scattered, and
needless rents made? that scarce Truth or error can now adays be received,
but it is maintained in a way of Schism; directly contrary to the gathering
and uniting Spirit of Jesus Christ: A wide Conscience calls evil, good, and
therefore can communicate with any evil; a strait Conscience calls good, evil,
(as Gerson observes) and therefore can readily separate even from that which is
good. When rash and sudden men are grown masters of their Consciences, it
troubles not them from whom they divide, nor whither they run in separate
ways; when weak (yet godly men) are under the tenderness, (yet much
darkness) of Conscience, being very timorous of ways that are evil, grow
many times shy (at least in simplicity are led) from ways that afterward are
found to be lawful and good. It Is the usual misery of English spirits, either
to spin the Spiders web, and swallow down all corruptions in Churches; or so to
break down the gap in forsaking corruptions utterly to abandon the Churches
themselves: The wine of causeless separation has a spirit in it, (if God
graciously prevent not) that hurries men headlong to strange distances, that in
separating from public, they separate from private; in separating from
corrupt Churches (as no Churches) they separate from the purest, even those of
their own; in separating from pollutions of Gods ordinances, at last they fall
to the storming of some, if not to the utter renouncing of all the Ordinances
themselves: we mourn (we say) for such evils, and could with bended knees
desire our dear Contrymen to consider, whether this be the Spirit of
Christ Jesus that so carries them; to reject them whom the Lord Jesus has not
yet wholly forsaken; and not rather with one heart, and with bowels of
compassion (if any liberty can be procured) to study how to heal the bleeding
breaches, and manifold evils of sick and sinful England, that in their own
recovery from pollutions, the whole may arise and share alike with them
therein; tolerating with all long-suffering many things amiss, and mourning
daily after the Lord, till such times come wherein he will give his people his
ordinances, not only in purity, but also in power; when the Lord shall be one,
and his name one, Zach. 14.9. over all the earth. As for our selves, we look
not upon our departure to these parts to be a separation (rigidly taken) but a
lawful secession, or a heavenly translation from corrupt to more pure
Churches, by the hand of our God; and how far we allow of separation, the
ensuing Treatise will declare.

2 The second is, That we dissent one from another as much as others from us,
and perhaps the lesser part of us.

Answ. We confess we know but little, and that but in part, and therefore if
we should say, that in some things we did not dissent, we should not speak the
truth, nor say that we were sinful men; yet this we must speak to his praise
whose we are, and whom we serve with our spirits in the Gospel of his Son; that
although Satan has been often busy to make breaches among us, yet the Ministers
of Christ have been hitherto generally (if not all) of one heart and mind in
the maine and principal things of his Kingdom amongst us: and (which is
observed by many) where ever differences are sown, yet the Ministers never
disagree: and that although some differences have and do arise before their
convening together, yet they never yet met, but grace has over-wrestled
corruption; peace, trouble; and truth, error* and so have most sweetly
accorded in one; the thoughts of which Christ-like peaceablenesse of spirit and
love, as it often sweetens many other sorrows, so we desire to be spared herein*
and that this our crown may not be taken from us by such passages,
(suggesting great differences) as these be.

Now for the Reply it self, we desire the Reader to consider* that we had
neither time, nor Books rea^y at hand to consider some of the quotations made
in (...) argent* and therefore being such testimonies (...) cast not the
balance one way or another, we have passed most of them by with silence.

It had also been easy for us to have Analyzed more orderly the words of the
Reply, then as they are set down; but (because we would not do the least
wrong) we have set them down as we find them in the Book; not every passage
(for that were needless) but those things wherein there seems to be any
observable matter of dispute between us; nor are we conscious of doing the
Author the least wrong in setting down his own words, as hereafter you find
them.

We confess, that in sundry of our Answers, we have studied not only to
answer to the Reply, but have taken in what sundry others godly learned object
against our principles, but without mentioning (scarce any time) their Names,
of which we are sparing for no other reason, but because we honor the men from
our very hearts, and could wish (though differently minded from us in some
things) as Melanchthon did in another the like case, to live and die in their
bosoms. The name of this servant of Christ now asleep, is an ointment poured
out and precious to us; we could therefore have wished it our portion to have
answered the Book without the least reflecting upon him, but the necessity
herein is unavoydable. This only we add, that whatever weaknesses may pass
from us, let them not be imputed to those servants of Christ, that set us on
work, and have wanted leisure to review what is here done; Every one may not
be in all things of the same mind with us, for they may meet us in the same
end, though they use not the same arguments, or become followers of us in the
same path; yet we know we are not alone in any thing, but may safely say this
much, that what is here defended, is generally acknowledged and received in
these Churches of Christ.

A DEFENSE OF THE NINE POSITIONS.
CHAP. I.
Concerning the Title.
WHereas it is called a new Church Way; we little expected that Brethren
studious of Reformation, who have been so exercised with imputations of
novelty, would have so readily, and in the frontispice cast the same upon us,
who with them desire to walk in the first ways of our Lord Jesus Christ and
his holy Apostles; but as in most substantial points of Church Order, we go
along with the best reformed Churches, so we doubt not to make it good that
wherein we (pressing after further Reformation) seem to differ from them; yet
we build upon Scripture grounds acknowledged by many godly and Learned
Reformers, in our English and other reformed Churches* which, if the Lord have
in mercy given us further ^ight, (or rather opportunity to practice) then they
had, let it not be imputed to us for novelty.

A new edition of the old Church Way of godly Reformers, in some things perhaps
corrected and amended, is no new Church Way; or if it be thought the mending of
some crooks in the old way make a new way, we answer with Junius in a case not
unlike; Vt cunque n^vam esse vide^tur, (...) quaecunque sunt vetera, Jun. lib.
1. paral. 6.
fuerunt nova, ac non propter^a nov^tat^^ nomine vitiosa, nisi forte novam pro
renovata and restituta accipitis; quo sensu^ novam esse hanc viam agnosci^^^.

One thing more in the Title page the Reader is to take notice of, that whereas
it is said, This Treatise of Mr. Ball was penned a little before his death, and
sent over 1637. it seems to be a mistake of the Printer; for the Nine
Questions themselves were sent over 1636, the answer returned 38, but
miscarrying, another was sent 39. from which time we longingly expected a
return, but partly for the reason rendered in the Epistle, and what else we
know not, we never in so many years received any, till this printed Reply by
a Friends means came occasionally to our hands, 1644.

Concerning the Epistle to the Reader.
Whereas the publishers of this Treatise impute unto us, or some related to our
Cause, That we are the Volunteers, such as cry up this way, and forward to blow
such things abroad in the world, which pressed them to make this Controversy
public.

1 We may truly profess before the world, that our Epistle sent with our
former Answer, proceeded from a spirit of love and peace, with an humble
willingness to receive further light, by the holy and just Animadversions of
our reverend and bel^^^d Brethren, which we earnestly expected as men (...)
after the truth.

2 That we were altogether ignorant of the (...) of that our Answer; and in
that it was published then, was not without our utter dislike; we have neither
sounded trumpet, nor struck up drum to any (if any such) volunteers, we
heartily grieve that there are any differences between Brethren, much more that
they should be published; most of all, if before they be privately debated,
and brought to some head by mutual consent, are thought fit to be sent out to
public considerations.

3 For our Brethren in England, we know no reason to question the truth of that
Apology of our Brother, Mr. Thomas Weld, in his answer to W. R. page 2. Obj. 3.
Answ. 1. where he professes in the name of himself and others of our way, a
lothnesse to appear in the case, and that although they had Books of this
subject ready for the Press, yet by joint consent they suppressed them,
(happily to the detriment of the Cause) being unwilling to blow a fire; and
whether they appeared in Pulpit or Press without instigation, and how
sparingly, he appeals to all the godly to judge.

4 Lastly, we desire our Brethren to consider the date of Mr. Ball his Book
printed for stinted Liturgies, (one chief part of this controversy) and the
Printed answer to the Nine questions, and let that resolve the question, who of
us came first Volunteers into the field; and if any through weakness, or zeal
without knowledge, have been too clamorous to cry up New England way, with
reproach to others; we desire the world to take notice, that they have neither
patent nor pattern from us so to do, who came not hither proudly to censure
others, but to reform our own.

CHAP. II.
Qu. 1.
That a stinted Form of Prayer and set Liturgy is unlawful.

THis Position cannot bear that meaning which you give it, if you take it
according to our minds, and the plain construction of the words. We never
questioned why you made not use of a Liturgy, etc.

thesis justly admit such limitation to public imposed Forms, where shall we
find any set stinted imposed Liturgies, but in Churches of the Papacy or
Prelacy? no Reformed Churches stinting or imposing their Forms of Prayer, but
leaving Ministers and people at much liberty. Only the English Liturgy
therefore is such, according to the plain construction of the words.

2 Concerning your minds in the Position, we deny not but you might intend to
draw from us an approbation of stinted Liturgies in general, that so you might
have to stay the separation of people from your Liturgy, whereof you complain:
but by that it appears plainly, what your chief scope and aim was in the
Position: according unto which we thought it most safe and pertinent for us to
answer. And this we did the rather, for our reason mentioned in our letter,
because though all of us could not concur to condemn all set Forms as
unlawful, yet we could in this, viz. that though some set Forms may be
lawful, yet it will not follow, that this of the English Liturgy is, therefore
to remove all obscurities, and break all snares, and resolve the question in
the true intent of it, we were forced to distinguish of Forms, and so touch
the true Helena of this controversy; and therefore if any shall narrowly
observe Mr. Ball his large defense of set Forms in general, they shall find
those wings spread forth in a very great breadth, to give some shelter and
warmth to that particular Liturgy, then languishing, and hastening (through
age and feebleness) toward its last end.

It is true, people separate from our Liturgy, because stinted, not because
this, or that, or ours in particular.



But say you, such set Forms used by Preachers are disliked also, and your
reasons, especially the two last, why you admit not a stinted Liturgy,
conclude against both in our understanding.

As for our Reasons in general, or the two last you mention in particular, it
passes our understanding to conceive, how any such inference can be made; if
the Reply had formed the inferences from our arguments, it may be we should
have seen more by the help of such spectacles. But passing over what we say
to the Position, as we interpret it, you think fit to advertise us of some
things, which are six.

Your reasons why you accept not a stinted Liturgy, are ambiguously
propounded, and so, that such as look at stinted Liturgies as images,
forbidden Command. 2. may easily draw your words to their meaning.



The Reasons you bring against a set form of Prayer, do hold as strong
against a set form of Catechism, confession and profession of faith,
blessing, baptizing, and singing of Psalms.



2 If by set Forms of Catechismes and Confessions, be meant (according to the
terms of the Question) stinted Forms, like stinted Liturgies, i. e. beyond,
or short of which, Ministers may not teach, or Christians believe and profess,
then we should say the same of these as we do of stinted Forms of Prayer;
we confess there is danger in casting by all Forms of Confessions and
Catechismes, lest through the instability of ungrounded and heady men,
pretending new light, or searching after further light, the Churches adhere to
nothing: and their Faith (as the learned Leyden Professors term it) become
fides horaria, or menstrua, The faith of an hour or month, and then cast it
off the next. And on the other side there is danger, that by imposing such
Confessions too far, that which is indeed further light be suppressed; we
therefore think it useful and needful to pave out such high ways of
Catechismes and Confessions, so as the subjects of Christ Jesus our King and
Lawgiver may walk therein without shackles, reserving liberty for further
future light, in points less clear, yet standing in a readiness always to
confess and hold fast the present truth which appears most clear.

3 Concerning Forms of blessing, baptizing, singing Scripture Psalms, there is
a far differing reason from this case, for the Lord himself has left us
Forms in these cases, not only for instruction, but allowing the use of the
same, as Numb. 6.23, etc. Luke 10.5. Matthew. 28.20. 2 Chronicles. 29.30. and
therefore such may be used as he has left; yet the Lord has not imposed
(some of these at least) to be used always and only in his Churches, much
less does he allow any man to impose their own Forms upon his Churches, or
conform to such as are tyrannously imposed.

We have not called you at this time to witness for, or against the
corruptions of the Common Prayer Book, this you fall upon by straining the
sense of our demands.

England, and the impositions were more rigid and violent.

The reasons you bring against the Communion-booke, we cannot approve them
all; the exceptions against it we know, but to esteem the whole for some
corruptions found therein a Monument of Idolatry, that we have not learned.

Monument of Idolatry, as the argument of the Abridgement to which we referred,
does prove.

The argument in the Abridgement used against conformity to the Ceremonies, did
not in the judgment of the Authors hold against the Liturgy, of which
judgment we are.



If these reasons be intended only to show why you receive not our form of
administration, it is that which we are persuaded you know we never required
of you, if to disallow the use of the Book amongst us altogether in things
lawful, good, and pertinent, they will not hold weight.

England, we joined in the same Ordinances and purity of worship, and
therefore we might have some just cause to clear up our differing practice
from disusing that form of Administration there, considering that our
differing practice might occasion others to rend off from your Administrations
there, whereof your complain.

2 We doubt not but in the Popish Forms of Mass, Matten, and Evensong, etc.
some things lawful, good, and pertinent may be found, yet would not the godly
allow these very reasons we allege in the Answer sufficient to refuse the
whole Form, and so those good and lawful things in that Form? as that they
are devised by men, without the command of God, imposed by an Antichristian
power, abused to Idolatry and Superstition, wherein the people place much
holiness, and necessity, full of scandal, etc. and if these Reasons do not
hold against this Form in the Communion book, the Reply should have acquitted
it from them: or else the consequence must be yielded in this case, as in the
other, notwithstanding all the good and pertinent things therein. John Simpson,
and John Ardly Martyrs in Q. Mary's days, and faithful Witnesses, made answer
to the sixth article of Bonner, concerning the Mass, that it is of the Pope, not
of Christ, and therefore not good, not having in it any goodness, saving
Gloria in excelsis, the Epistles and Gospels, the Creed and Pater Noster; and
for this cause (they said) they have not, nor will not come to hear Mass: the
same answer was made by six more in those days, mentioned by Mr. Fox. If
therefore corrupt Forms may be used because of some things good and lawful
mixed with them, there should have been shown us some proof for it, but if the
meaning be, that there may be a lawful use of those things which are lawful
and good in it: we say so too, (due circumstances of their use being observed)
but then we fall off from the question between us; otherwise we know that
things lawful and good in themselves, yet (not duly circumstantiated) may be
evil and scandalous in their use. Hear what Paul says, it was lawful for
Paul to eat some kinds of meat, yet if it makes my brother offend, I will
eat no flesh whiles the world stands, 1 Cor. 8.13. Hear what the Authors of
the second admonition to the Parliament say, in Queen Elizabeth's days, the
Book of Common Prayer, which of all others must not be touched, because they
have gotten the State to bear it out, yet he has but a bad conscience, that
in this time will hold his peace, and not speak it for fear of trouble;
knowing that there are such intolerable abuses in it: if there were never an
ill word or sentence in all the Prayers, yet to appoint it to be used, or to
use it, as the Papists did their Mattens and Evensong, as a fit service to God,
though the words be good, yet the use is naught. But if this seem too sharp,
hear what -- a late godly and learned Writer speaks, G. Apol. cap. 7. Q. 2.
Rejicimus illas precum, cultusque publici formulas, quae tyrannide quadam,
conscientiis hominum, ut cultus divini parts essentiales impo^untur; quamvis
quoad materiam sunt legitime dispositae, quoad formam and modum tamen quo
inducuntur, illegitima crudelitatis instrumenta fiunt, and praetextus improbae
malitiae and occasiones violentae tyrannidis in dignissimos and optimos
Ecclesiae filias.

You are generally (you say) loath to med^le with the affairs of other
Churches, unless necessarily called thereunto: but when some upon request (as
we suppose) of private friends, and others out of their zeal and forwardness
have labored to draw many to separate from the sacrament, because ministered in
a stinted Liturgy, we cannot apprehend any just ground of this Apology; the
^ent is wide, and some brethren had their hands deep therein, which made us
crave your judgments and the reasons thereof, to make up the breach.

1 What you impute to some, if justly, we grant will not allow this apology
to be general for all; but how many that some is, or who we know not, it may
be one or two; and if so, one or two exceptions will not much infringe a
general rule, nor hinder this general apology.

2 If such brethren had a necessary Call to speak or write what they did, it
hinders not our apology at all: the desire of private friends, which you
only suppose the moving cause, might be very weighty, the satisfying of
tender consciences of near friends, or such as once depended upon our
Ministry, in such a time of pressing humane inventions upon men, as that was;
might be a very urgent call to interpose: but that any have endeavored out of
zeal to draw many to separation from the Sacrament, upon such a ground as you
say; as we utterly dislike such fire upon the top of the house, so it must be
proved, before we can call to mind or acknowledge any such thing.

object to Mr. P. that his manner of preaching (proceeding it should be) was
disorderly, in carrying to the Classis a matter, before he had declared it to
the Church, etc. and may not we with like reason object that this manner of
proceeding is disorderly, in seeking to draw men to separation, because of a
stinted Liturgy, before you had showed us or other Brethren, whom it may
concren, by Scripture, or reasons that a stinted Liturgy is unlawful?

J. D. objects, we cannot tell, seeing you neither quote the place, nor the
Printer give us his words in any way to make sense; but so far as we guess at
the meaning, the case is very wide from this in hand. J. D. might justly
complain of wrong offered to him and the Church, in neglecting them, to go
immediately to the Classis, and yet some of our Brethren, at the requests of
tender consciences, might declare their judgment, when no rule called them to
write to their Pastors, which perhaps, were bitter persecutors, or if better,
yet such as they had no knowledge of; and if any by such writings did abstain
from the sacrament for such corruptions, as their consciences would be defiled
with, no hinderance from us was in the way, but that you might call them to
account before the Church, and convince and censure them, if there were just
cause; which was the objection against Mr. P. in flying presently to the
Classis.

CHAP. III.
2 Position.
That it is not lawful to join in Prayer, or receive the Sacraments, where a
stinted Liturgy is used: Or, as we conceive your meaning to be in this as in
the former, etc. viz. where and when that stinted Liturgy is used.

IF we mistake not your judgment and practice both, you have born witness
against both that you call the rigid separation, and this more moderate also;
and we humbly wish that the moderate do not degenerate into the rigid ere
long; it is very strange if they take not great encouragement upon your
grounds.

England as no true Churches, the Ministry, as no true Ministry: their
separations from corruptions in Doctrine and Worship, their endeavor to enjoy
all the ordinances of the Lord Jesus in purity, if we be not mistaken, your
judgment and practice with ours, have always approved; and the question now
in hand is not about a new kind of separation more moderate, from the Churches
and Ministry of England; but whether the Liturgy of England be not indeed one
of those corruptions in Worship, which you and we had need reject, as well as
the ceremonies, and no longer conform to the same. And we heartily wish that
the growing endeavors of the godly, after more purity of Worship, and to be
purged from all the pollutions of the man of sin, be not too rashly branded
with the odium of separation: and breach of peace and unity of the Church. As
for degenerating into the rigid separation, we think you need not fear it,
upon our principles, no more then upon the common grounds of Non-conformists,
and you know what they infer upon those principles, now justly it concerns
you to consider, as well as (...); but as it is truly observed in England, it
was the justification and pressing of ceremonies and other corruptions, that
drove many to separation, not the endeavor of further Reformation; so you may
fear, the too too much conformity of Ministers to humane impositions, and
justification of the Liturgy, etc. have and will more dangerously alienate
godly minds from your Churches and Ministry, and so drive to separation; then
all the principles and progress of the godly in ways of reformations: and we
shall refer it to the judicious and common experience, whether the discovery of
the corrupt worship in the Liturgy, or contrary conformity to it, be the
greater block of offense, and strengthens the hands of the Separatists most,
which yet you after object unto us.

We suppose the Worthies of this renowned Parliament, together with those of
the reverend Assembly, would not so soon have removed the whole frame and
fabric of this Book, nor wholly stopped up this pit, if building of
battlements about it, and keeping watchmen near it, to bid passengers take
heed, had been the readiest way to cure separation: nor do we think that
this reverend man of God, would have been in more jealousy and fear of us (if
he had considered how tenderly we returned our answer to the question) then of
those faithful witnesses in Scotland, who separated their lives into the hands
of death, rather then communicate in the use of this Book; and yet we think
they deserve a better place, then to be ranked so near to the rigid
separation; notwithstanding for our selves we are heartily thankful for what
he humbly wishes, and for his jealousy over us so far as it is godly; but
so far as such wishes cast a cloud of evil suspicion over us in the hearts
of others, as if we were going faster then we knew where to stay, we wish
humbly such words had been spared till some other time.

Concerning this distinction, a letter of this subject is cited, printed
without the Authors knowledge, that put a difference indeed between the reasons
of the Separatists proper to them qua tales, and other reasons used by himself,
common to others studious of Reformation. To which we answer.

1 That letter acknowledges no such distinction of separation, rigid, and
moderate, only (if you will) a separation from Churches, and separation from
the sins and corruptions of Churches, which latter is all we profess.

2 Those Reasons which the letter ascribes to them, qua t^les, will we suppose
be found in their Books thus far, that the Prayers, Preachings, Sacraments,
etc. are unlawful, because offered in a false Church by a false Ministry for
the subjects of Antichrists kingdom.

That there should be no Separatists in the world, because none, it is said
none* plead against the Book of Common^prayer as unlawful, because offered up
in a false Church; is strange to us, that this learned Author should not read
or observe the same, exceeding frequently in the Separatists writings; take but
a taste in the first pages of Mr. Smith against Bernard in his parallels,
censures, and observations, his words page 9. are these, He would prove that
an erroneous constitution of a Church, is a real Idol; and the prayers they
offer with the prayers of the wicked, coming from that false constitution, are
tainted with the Idolatry of that constitution. And page 10. It is Idolatry to
offer up service to God in a Church of a false constitution. And page 13. Tell
me Mr. Bernard* can there be a true Ministry, true baptism, true faith, true
prayer, true preaching and administering the supper, true excommunication, in a
Church which is falsely constituted? Did the Lord accept the sacrifice of the
Church constituted by Jeroboam? so page 14. A Church falsely constituted, is not
accepted of God, neither are their actions ecclesiastical, as prayer,
preaching, etc. acceptable in the sight of God. And again, a false Ministry,
Worship, government, may be in a true Church, through ignorance, and the like:
but a true Ministry, worship, government cannot possibly be in a false
Church. We think it needless to recite more testimonies; Aliquando honus
dormitat Homerus, A good memory may sometimes fall asleep, and not see that,
which is sometimes most obvious and visible. But what other arguments they
have, are, or may be common to others studious of Reformation; as their
arguments against ceremonies are common with Non-conformists, and therefore if
some of our grounds be found in them, it does not follow, they are ^afts taken
out of the same quiver, and peculiar to them, as you object.

These reasons shall be common to all, that plead for the purity of Gods
Ordinances, which were never taken to be sound and true, either by the
Reformed Churches abroad, or by the godly Brethren at home, dead or living, or
yet by the most of the Brethren amongst whom they live, and ^old society, or by
any Minister and society holding the unity of the Spirit in the hand of peace,
th^se 1400* years and upward, unless within these few days, and that by a few
only.

England have so openly in their Directory witnessed against such stinted
Forms, and generally the Churches of Scotland renounced that Liturgy of yours,
as a piece of Popery. Besides all the Orthodox Churches in New England, and
Holland, and many godly in England.

As yet we think most of them, that have separated are not so far gone, as
to condemn all our Assemblies as no Churches of Christ.



Your judgment concerning the Position, you deliver in three Propositions (for
so many they be for substance) in respect of the persons reading the Liturgy,
or the thing in self that is read; as if any part of the Liturgy be read (put
case some few select prayers only) by an unable and ungodly Minister, it is
unlawful (say you) for the people to join in that case. But if unlawful for
the people to join, when an ungodly Minister reads some few select prayers,
it is either in respect of the Minister, or the prayers themselves; not of the
Prayers themselves, for they be select and choice, faultlesse, in respect of
matter and manner, (...) is taken for granted* unless the distribution be is
no purpose; if in respect of the Minister; then it is not lawful to join with
such an one, in any ordinance of God whatsoever.

In that you analyze our two Propositions into three, we shall not contend, but
follow your method, yet we cannot but marvel at the liberty that is taken in
stating the first Proposition, both leaving out and adding such things as will
not stand with the terms in our Answer; and indeed this is too frequent in
diverse places of this Reply, which gives a great color of strength unto the
arguments; but when they come to be scanned, it will discover the impertinency
of them.

For, 1 Although the Answer distinguishes of the Liturgy, either of the
whole, or of some select prayers which may be conceived to be less
offensive, yet the application of this of select prayers, is only made in the
second proposition of the Answer, no way intended in the first. Neither does
the Answer confess those prayers, as you say, to be choice and faultlesse for
matter and manner, but which may be conceived less offensive.

2 Whereas the Proposition is of an unable and ungodly Minister, such unlearned
Idol-Priests that are countenanced and established by the Liturgy, and can do
no more then read the same, to the unspeakable hazard and ruin of a multitude
of souls; you carry along your arguments only in the term of an ungodly
Minister, which leaves out one chief ground of our proposition, viz. unable.

To reduce therefore this proposition unto its true state which the answer puts
it in, which is thus, If the question be of joining in prayer with, and when
that whole Liturgy is read, or where that which is used, ( viz. though not the
whole) is read by an unable and ungodly Minister: we see not how it can be
lawful to join, etc. where that which is read by an unable and ungodly
Minister, cannot have reference to the select prayers, but only was put in, to
reach the whole case, lest any should say, may we not join, therefore if they
read not all, (as sometimes such do not, for haste to the Alehouse,
Beare-baitings, etc.) And the case is so well known to our selves and others,
what the manner of such Priests is, how far they are from making any choice
of select prayers: or having any skill indeed so to do; that if any be more
superstitious then others, they would soonest choose them; so that it was far
from our thoughts to impute it to them, to read the select prayers only. The
question being rightly stated, the argument will halt very much; For we say,
it is unlawful in both respects, and the rather, when jointly considered; and
therefore you should first have justified the whole Liturgy, or so much as such
Idol-Priests use to read to be lawful, and also the standing and calling of
those men, before the argument can hold, both which you have wholly left naked
without proof, and argue only about the lawfulness of joining with an
ungodly Minister in the Ordinances of God, which will not reach this case. If
one should affirm it is unlawful to go to Mattens or Evensong, when the
whole is read, or that which is read, (...) done by a popish Priest, and you
should answer then, it is either because of the Prayers or the Priest. Not the
first; for the prayers (if select) may be good, and faultlesse, and not
because of the Priest, for then we may never join with an ungodly Minister in
the Ordinances of God: The answer would be very imperfect and impertinent, and
just so it is here in the frame of the reason, though the corruptions in that
service and this be not alike we grant. But before we answer to the second
part of your dis-junction, let us consider a little here once for all, the act
of the people in joining with the reading of this Liturgy, or so much of it, as
is read usually by such Idol-priests. First, concerning the Liturgy it self,
if you respect the matter and form, or manner of it, it would be too tedious
to rip up, what for matter has been objected by the godly Reformers. Consider
but two things objected strongly by Mr. Cartwright against the form or manner
of it. First, that it is taken out of the Popish Masse-book, concerning which
he affirms, that although there were nothing in it unlawful, or against the
Word of God, (which says he) I wish there were not, yet no Word of God, no
reason, nor example of the Ancient Churches, Jewish or Christian, will permit
us to use the same forms and ceremonies ( viz. with Papists) being neither
commanded of God, nor such as there may not be as good as they, and rather
better established, yea, considering how near the Papists live amongst us, it
were more safe to conform to the Ceremonies of the Turks that are far off.
And this he speaks of the form of Liturgy, as well as Ceremonies, Cartw.
reply to Whitgifts answer to the admonition to the Parliament, page 131, 132.
And although you seem to make light of this objection, after page 15. end, yet
in a like case, when Whitgift had said, it is not material that Deanes, Canons
came from the Pope; Cartwright replyeth thus; It is as if he had said, it
skilleth not, if they came out of the bottomless pit; for whatsoever comes
from the Pope, who is Antichrist, comes first from the Devil, Cartw. Reply,
page 204.

Secondly, he objecteth that absurd manner of chopping and interrupting the
prayers, of which Mr. Cartwright says, That if any man should make such a
supplication to a Prince, he would think him to make his supplication before
he knew what to ask, or that he had forgotten some piece of his suit; Ibid.
p. 138.
or that he were distracted in his understanding. Much more might be added,
but we have only touched this sore, and in the words of that learned and
zealous Reformer, that it may appear, neither the opinion of that Book, nor
the reasons against it, are so new or proper to the Separatists, as is
pretended. Now what comfort can any godly conscience have to join in, or
conform unto such a form of Worship as this is?

Further consider the administration of the Sacraments, according to the Book
(as we speak still of joining in it) who knows not, that such must subject
their children to that gross Idol of the cross, and see and approve the
pollution of Gods Ordinances with the same: and at the Lords table join in
that Idolatrous gesture of kneeling; and therefore how the godly can join
lawfully in the whole, or such parts as those Idol-priests dispense, let all
Non-conformists judge; and it is well known, how superstitiously precise such
are, in pressing all conformity to every gesture and ceremony prescribed in
their Book, which they so idolize, as they have good cause, being that which
maintains them.

Secondly, if we consider the imposition hereof by the Prelates and late
strict pressing thereof upon the people to be present and conform fully to it,
as well as upon Ministers to use it. The very yielding of conformity thereto,
does miserably cast away the liberty purchased by Christ to his Churches,
inthrall the Churches to Antichrist, and lift up the power of Antichrist in his
tyrannous usurpations upon the Churches of Christ.

Thirdly, we might add the dangerous consequences and scandals that follow
from admitting this Liturgy, which being touched in our answer to the first
Position, we here pass over.

These things considered, it appears, not only that there was need to
disprove the first part of your disjunction, which you declined in stating the
question; but also the truth of the Position it self is confirmed. Now let us
consider your proof of the second part of your disjunction; which is thus,

If in respect of the Minister, then it is not lawful to join with such on one
in any Ordinance of God. For if the Minister make it unlawful, then all
communion in any part of Gods Worship with such Ministers is unlawful: and so
the Churches in all ages of the world, the Prophets, our Savior Christ, the
Apostles, and the faithful in the Primitive Church, (...) in holding communion
with such, whe^^ the Priests were dumb dogs, etc. but we never read that the
Prophets, our Savior Christ, the Apostles did ever forbear themselves, or
warn the faithful not to communicate with such in the ordinances of Worship.
Our Savior charged the Disciples to beware of the leaven of the Scribes and
Phariseas, but never forbad them to communicate with them in the ordinances of
God.

England, Readers (as they are called) of the Common-service, we grant it is
not lawful to communicate in a stated way with them, in any ordinance of
Worship properly Ministerial; in any act that private persons may perform,
we may communicate with them, but not in Ministerial work, as Sacraments;
for although being imposed on any Church as Ministers, and so received by them,
their Ministerial acts are not a nullity; yet if we speak of the lawfulness
of such their act of receiving them, then the Church sins in choosing them,
or being imposed, in receiving them, and submitting to their Ministry, being
such as are utterly contrary to the rule of Christ, and rejected of him. And by
the like reason the godly sin in receiving Sacraments, etc. from them, as
Ministers of Christ, knowing they intrude into that office, and have no
authority by the rule of Christ so to do. We may hear a private gifted
Christian prophecy, but if he intrude without a lawful calling into the
Ministry, we may not receive him, nor approve of him therein.

Cyprians speech is commonly noted, that Plebs maxim habet potestatem vel
eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi; yet the occasion of it is
not so generally observed, which is this, Plebs obsequen^ praeceptis Dominicis,
Deum me^uens, a peccatore proposito separare se debet, nec se ad sacrilegia
sacerdotis sacrificia iniscere, cum ipse maxim habet potestatem eligendi, etc.
that is, the people observing divine precepts, and fearing God, ought to
separate themselves from a wicked Minister, neither join themselves to the
sacrifices of a sacrilegious Priest, seeing they chiefly have power of choosing
worthy Ministers, and rejecting unworthy.

Secondly, we see no demonstrative argument that the Priests and Pharisees
were wholly unable for the work of those times, as these we speak of are for
--: though the Priests, Esaias 56.10. were dumb dogs that cannot bark; yet it
seems by the place to be meant actually, rather then habitually, through their
slumbering or security there mentioned, not telling the people of their sins,
nor warning them of judgments, rather then of their total inability. Men of
good parts and able gifts may be actually such dumb dogs, as seldom preach, or
never to purpose, and be spiritually ignorant through much profaneness, yet
not totally deprived of common gifts: It is most evident that the Pharisees
were blind, yet taught the people, and hence the Disciples were permitted to
hear them; but what is this to the question, which is of unable, as well as of
ungodly Ministers?

Peter Martyr in 1 Kings 12. verse 31.
Thirdly, suppose some of the Priests and Levites were unable, yet the Ministry
of the Old Testament was limited by God himself to the tribe of Levi, and
that by succession, which is far otherwise in the New Testament, being left
to the Churches election, and therefore they had no power to reject them, or
withdraw from them, when they had ministered the ordinances of God.

Fourthly, suppose some of them were not called of God, being not lineally
descended of that tribe, yet those things wherein the faithful, Christ and his
Apostles, and others did communicate with them, were necessarily commanded of
God, viz. sacrifices, offerings, etc. in the Temple, which seal of God we see
not stamped upon this Liturgy in question, to make it current. And thus Peter
Martyr answers in the like case, Pet. Mart. Com. Loc. de Idol. in prae^. l. 1.
that though there were many pernicious doctrines taught by Scribes, Pharisees
and wicked Priests, yet sacrificandi ritus, etc. the rites of sacrificing were
not changed; for the same oblations were offered, which the Law commanded, and
therefore the Saints might use them, having the word of God conjoined with them.

Fifthly, what you grant concerning Christ his warning his Disciples to take
heed of the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, no doubt he did the like,
concerning the corruptions of the Priests in their administrations of Gods
ordinances, and we doubt not, John 2.15, 16.
but you will acknowledge that the Prophets and Apostles did or ought to
abstain from all actual communion with those corruptions, and the Lord Jesus
out of question did abstain: which being so, we may retort this argument thus
in regard of conformity to ceremonies, If it be not lawful to partake in the
Ordinances of God, where we must actually join with such ceremonies, then
Christ, the Prophets and Apostles must not have joined in any ordinance of God
in several ages of the Church, when worse or as ill corruptions were admixed
with that worship: But they never refused the ordinances of worship for such
corruptions; Therefore we should not now for these ceremonies abstain; put
case for kneeling at the Lords Supper, etc. If you please to solve this knot,
the same answer will serve our turn as well.

It is not for private Christians to withdraw themselves from the ordinances of
worship, and communion of the Church, because such are permitted to deal in
the holy things of God, whom they judge or know unfit; when men join in the
worship of God with unworthy Ministers, they do not countenance them, their
place and office, but obey the commandment of God, who requires their
attendance upon his highness in that way and means.



Secondly, if we consider wherein the outward call of all Church Officers in
the New Testament lies, viz. in a great part in the choice of the Church, or at
least in their after consent and receiving of them, being chosen by others for
them, Act. 1. and 6. and 14. how can any godly man receive, submit unto, or
acknowledge such unable wretches by receiving Gods ordinances from them, as
Ministers, but they must needs countenance them in their places, and set up to
themselves an Idol or means of worship to edify themselves, which God never
appointed; for let it be proved that ever God appointed readers of a Liturgy
to edify the people.

John read at home? We appeal to all consciences, whether they would approve
of any godly man, that would rest in such means, and not call him to leave all
his outward conveniences, for some godly able Ministry: or at least not to
attend on them, but get where they may be better edified.

To go no further then the Text you quote, Hosea 4.6, 7. Because thou have
despised knowledge I have rejected thee; properly the Text speaks of the ten
Tribes and the Priests amongst them, who worshipped the Calves, etc. whom the
Lord threatens to reject; but neither this nor any other Text proves, that
people joining in worship with such, do countenance them in their places.

Jeroboams Priests of the meanest of the people) and that was all it was
alleged for, and that receiving such as Ministers does countenance them in
their places, was proved before. And if it be meant of Jeroboams Priests, as
you say, the approved practice of the godly in those days, 2 Chronicles. 11.16.
will well justify and lead us to reject and leave these also.

Secondly, there seems to be four arguments, why the people should withdraw
from these kind of Priests: First, in regard of their miserable perishing for
want of knowledge by their means. Secondly, because the people in receiving
them, rejected knowledge, as Calvin notes upon the place. Thirdly, because God
would take a time to disburthen the Church of them, whence Drusius in locum
wishes, utinam tales hodie a ministerio a^verentu^. Fourthly, because the Lord
would cast off their children from being his, for this sin, as Calvin also
notes upon the place; the promise of showing mercy to a 1000. generations,
being chiefly annexed to the observers of the second Command, and the
instituted means of worship, which those Priests never were.

On the contrary, if you will extend this Text to all unworthy Ministers of
what sort soever, whom the Word of God condemns, as not approved Ministers of
God, etc.

Sam. 2.12, 13.17.24. that imputation, Verse 24. They make the Lords people to
transgress, does. not depend immediately on Verse 13, 14.17. but on Verse
22.23. where they are charged to have layne with the women, the other passages
being interrupted by the story of Samuel and his Mother, Verse 18, 19.20, 21.
So Jer. 8.8, 9. Micah 3.11, 12. contain only threats against wicked
Ministers, but not a word to prove people ought to join with them, etc. Phil.
1.15. speaking of such as preach and preach Christ, though not of sincerity,
does not reach such Ministers as the word condemns: for many such may be
approved Ministers by the Word, having a call according to the same; but we
shall not contend in this case, wherein we do not dissent, so that Christians
be left to their lawful liberty of withdrawing from Ministers grossly
wicked, and Teachers of false Doctrine, or idle and unsufficient, when they
cannot reclaim them, or remove them in the use of all lawful means within
their power.

The reasons whereby the ancient Churches condemned the Donatists and
Catharists for their voluntary and seditious separations, and the modern
Churches condemn the Anabaptists for their renting from the body of Christ,
will hold against separation from the Prayers of the Congregation, because they
are read by an ungodly Minister.

We deny that we teach or hold such separation, because read by an ungodly
Minister, as is sufficiently showed before; but what we speak is against
conformity to and communion with the corruptions of the Liturgy especially
used by an unable as well as ungodly Minister, and therefore the arguments
mentioned will hold against our proposition, just as the accusations and
imputations of Donatisme, Puritanisme, Anabaptisme, which the Prelates cast
upon all Non-conformists and men studious of reformation, will hold and fasten
upon them, which is nothing at all.

The second Proposition, where the whole Liturgy is used though by an able and
godly Minister, it is not lawful to join in prayer in that case; We cannot
be of your judgment herein, for in the times of the Prophets, and our Savior
Christ as great abuses no question were found, etc. but they never taught
people to separate from the holy things of God.



Secondly, concerning the argument it runs as full for conformity to all the
corrupt ceremonies of the book as the corrupt worship it self therein, as was
said before, clear the one, viz. nonconformitie to ceremonies, show a reason
why you will separate from the Sacrament, because you will not kneel according
to the book, and you answer your argument here alleged against us: but the
reply proceeds.

And if presence at forms of prayer be not lawful by reason of the
corruptions alleged, there can be no visible society named, since 200.
years after Christ or thereabout, wherein a Christian might lawfully join in
prayer, reading the Scriptures, hearing the word, or participation of the
Sacraments; their Doctrines, prayers, rights being less pure then ours: but no
man we hope will be so bold as to affirm the state of the Churches within
200. years after Christ to be so miserably decayed that the faithful could
not without sin hold communion with them in the foresaid ordinances of God.



Secondly, this is a dangerous kind of reasoning from the practice of the
faithful in corrupt times of the Church, especially when they are declining,
and growing clouds of darkness, and superstition overspread the Churches. It
is no breach of charity to think that through the iniquity of the times, the
godly lived in many evils through ignorance and weakness which after light is
come into the Churches we ought to abandon wholly; these are times of light
and of the consumption of Antichrist, and time for us to abolish his Liturgies
and corrupt forms of worship as well as Images, ceremonies, etc. Who do not
pity the weakness of godly Bilny and others that seeing some gross
corruptions were yet so devoutly obedient to the Church (as they called it) in
many gross superstitions? and the like may be said of those former times, and
we see not but this reason will go far in justification of communion with
many false worships of Antichrists that are not grossly idolatrous.

Thirdly, it is a great charge upon those times to say no visible society
throughout the world can be named since 200. years after Christ, that was not
less pure then England in Doctrine, rites, etc. It may be, that as generally
Churches were corrupt, so they contemned and censured such as professed more
purity: but that there were some visible assemblies more pure may be
conceived by that testimony given to Aerius and many orthodox Christians with
him, though condemned for a Heretic, in that which we all now hold to be an
undoubted truth; also after the Waldenses casting off the Pope and his will
worships, and the following reformed Churches, those of Scotland, Geneva, and
diverse others in France and Switserland, etc. whose Doctrines, rites and
administrations we doubt not will be confessed more pure then English
Churches. It would be too tedious, and in these knowing times needless to
search all records and to compare the purity of the prayers, and rites of
these with former times, we read of very few forms used for 300. years, some
short ones they had which are retained yet in our Liturgy, with many more, and
these forms they had, not imposed nor stinted, which is the great offense of
this, until about the year 406. and there we read in the Milevitan Council
that no prayers should be used in Churches but what were either composed of
able and sufficient men, or approved by the Synods, and this was determined
only in regard of the ignorant Ministry of those contentious and heretical
times, Conc. Miliv. Can. 12.
as Chemnitius observes, ne forte aliquid contra fidem vel per ignorantiam, vel
per minus studium sit compositum. If the Roman Bishops did multiply (as indeed
they did excessively (unless their own admirers err grossly) rites and
forms of prayer, yet it is well known how long it was ere the Churches in
other places submitted to their power, so that this comparison might well have
been spared. To conclude, though we say not that all Churches since 200.
years after Christ were so miserably decayed, that the faithful might not
without sin communicate with them, yet we may be bold to say many of them
were so corrupt, that the faithful did not, nor could not communicate in many
parts of Gods worship without sins of ignorance conforming to the corruptions
themselves; and that if they had seen and discovered the evil of them, they
ought, and we believe would have abstained from diverse ordinances in regard of
the corrupt administrations of them; yea after all means used to purge them
out, and not prevailing, they ought and would have withdrawn themselves to more
pure Churches, or erected such amongst themselves.

The prayers of the Ministers conceived or stinted in a set form be not his
private prayers, but the public prayers of the assembly; but you will not say
the people ought not to join with their pastor therein if ought be amiss,
for matter, manner, or both.



It is all one to the people in this case, whether the fault be personal (as
some distinguish) or otherwise; known beforehand or not known; for if simple
presence defile, whether known before hand* (...) not, all presence is
faulty, and if simple presence defile not, our presence is not condemned by
reason of the corruptions known, whereof we stand not guilty.

First, we distinguish not here between personal and ministerial faults, but
object against the personal act of him that joins with that whole Liturgy,
and so in the corruptions of it, as he must needs do, that joins with the
whole, not only saying Amen to them, but as is known he takes his share in
those shreds of prayers, Responds, etc. which in Mr. Cartwrights judgment is
so absurd, as makes a man seem out of his wits. And therefore his personal,
actual conformity must needs carry guilt, and therefore there is more then
simple presence in this case, as is clear to any understanding.

Secondly, it is not all one whether the faults be known, or not known
beforehand, as appears plainly, 1 Cor. 10.27, 28, 29. where we see, if a man
come to a feast, and know not they eat with reference to the Idol, nor that
any take offense, he may eat without asking any question: but if he know such
things, he may not eat.

Besides, public sinful actions of Ministers are either, 1 Accidental and
occasional, or 2ly. known and appointed in a stated service; now the frailties
of a Minister, which accidentally fall in and are not known before, nor are any
part and essence of the service, unto which men that come, do or should take
themselves to be called, hinder not communion; because they do not prae se
far by their presence to attend and observe them, but the corruptions of the
Liturgy are known and appointed, and to which and with which the imposers
call others to join as in a stated service to God; the use of which if it be
an humane frailty in Gods Ministers, not yet convinced of the evil thereof,
yet for those to communicate herein, who know such evils, have surely passed
the bounds of frailty and infirmity; because in this action of prayer there
is not only communion by way of presence, as it is in hearing the word, but
communion of action: public prayer being the common action of the whole
Church toward God. There can be no prayer by any man offered to God, but there
will be some humane frailties attending on it; if therefore for this cause we
should reject communion in prayer, we should reject the ordinances of God, and
never join in any prayer in this world; but the corruptions of the Liturgy
are not such, but that they may be more easily cast off, then kept.

This case stands not in tolerating faults in another (as the reply makes it)
but in actual joining with the sins of another, wherein he that joyneth is
involved, and therefore whether they be corruptions, that may be tolerated or
not in another, yet if sins, they may not be practiced and so joined in with
another. And therefore the case you put of communion with any person obstinate
in error, till he may be convinced, is nothing to this purpose. For we must
not join with him in his error, no not an hour, though we may tolerate him a
month.

Has not Christian wisdom and experience of humane frailties lessoned you
(dear brethren) to bear one with another in matters of greater consequence,
then any have, or can be objected truly against the form of prayer in use
among us?



And why such corruptions should not be ascribed to humane frailty, we see
not. For if a godly Minister make use of a book, in things which he judges
lawful for matter and manner, the corruption of him that uses it, according
to his judgment, from what cause can it spring but humane ignorance and
frailty?



Secondly, our question is not whether the Minister use the book of humane
frailty, but whether the worship offered therein, be not so corrupt for
matter and manner, as puts a great difference between it, and the prayers of a
Minister that may be subject to faylings of humane frailty. We doubt not,
but Bilney, Latimer, etc. used the prayers and ceremonies of the Church of
Rome, out of humane frailty, yet the service it self and those ceremonies of
holy water, holy bread, etc. which Latimer turned to as good use, as he could,
were evil and no way to be conformed unto by the godly.

Thirdly, there are many things done of others through humane, frailty, that
is, ignorantly and in some measure perversely, yet such frailties, though they
are to be very long tolerated in the man, yet every humane frailty is not so
to be tolerated, as to be communicated with; for the grossest Idolatry in
Popery may in this sense, if ignorantly done, be accounted humane frailty. It
is true, we may be freed from communicating in another sin two ways. 1.
By bearing witness against his sin, or 2ly by withdrawing from the person
committing it. There were times wherein the Lord raised up witnesses against
the growing abominations of Antichrist for many years; and there are times (as
Cameron well observes) wherein the Lord commands his people not only to bear
witness, but to come out of Babylon. The case may be so put as that we may
quit our hands from communicating with other men, in their sinful worship, by
bearing witness only against the sin, yet communicating with them in the
rest; and e eonira the circumstances may be such, as that we best free our
selves from sin, by withdrawing from them in such acts. And we freely
confess we know not how to acquit others that communicate in the whole
Liturgy, without the one or the other.

We rest assured you question not the integrity of many, who make much more
use of the look, then only in a few select prayers.



From the bottom of our hearts, we pray that the Lord would remove out of his
Church what ever offends, and yet all things might be so done, as might be
approved in the consciences of all.



To aggr^vat^ faults, especially when it tends to draw away people from the
ordinances of God, is no less evil then to excuse them, it may be greater.



In them that join according to Christ's command (and liberty of absence from
Christ has not been showed) notwithstanding the corruptions, we hold the
prayers to be an holy and acceptable sacrifice to the Lord, and pleasing to
Jesus Christ.



The corrupt sacrifice is that which the deceiver brings voluntarily, and out
of neglect, having a male in his flock, but the godly brings himself and
godly desires according to the will of God, and the corruptions in matter or
manner are not his, they cleave not to his sacrifice to stain and pollute it.
The Text in Malach. 1. is misapplyed, and we desire such as allege this
passage against simple presence at the prayers of the Liturgy, advisedly to
consider whether God allow them to make such application of his truth, which we
much doubt of, to say no more.

That people joining in the whole Liturgy, voluntarily offer up the same, we
thought had been no question: If any join by fear and compulsion (though the
will in this case is not forced, for ^i^ta actio is voluntaria) [wee think
that will not ease, but aggravate the evil, arguing a reluctance or
doubtfulnesse at least in his conscience; and so what he does is not of faith,
and therefore sin, Romans 14.] 2ly. What you say of the faithful here, might be
said for the faithful in Malachi his time, if any godly man came with godly
desires to Jerusalem to worship, and then carelessly buy and take a corrupt
sacrifice for cheapnesse, ease, etc. shall he not be counted (at least in
part) this deceiver, and bear the curse? And why not so here in this case? Let
a man bring himself, and never so godly desires, yet if he will join in a
known corrupt service, will his godly desires excuse him? shall not his broken
absurd responds, his standing at the Creed, kneeling at the Sacrament, etc. all
which he must do, if he join in the whole Liturgy, shall none of these
cleave to his sacrifice? what though the Minister offer the service? so did the
Priest the sacrifice; But both in the name of the people, and they joining with
him in offering the same to God. 3ly. Concerning Malach. 1.13, 14. the more
advisedly we consider it, the more persuaded we are, the Lord allow us to
make such application of the truth contained in it, and we think others will
be of our mind, not only in respect of the similitude that i^ in this case,
with that in Malachi, but also if we consider, what an argument the Lord uses
to convince them of their corruptions and carelessness in his service, Verse
11. wherein the Lord upbraids the Jews and provokes them to Jealousy, as the
Apostle Paul speaks, by declaring the reverend esteem of his name amongst the
heathen, and that every where Incense should be offered and a pure offering to
his name. And what is that Incense, and pure offering, but the pure prayers,
and worship of God that should be in all Gentile Churches under the Gospel? as
Tertullian, Eusebius, Jerome and Austin with others expound it. And he applies
it again, Verse 14. I am a great King, and my name shall be great amongst the
heathen: If then the Lord oppose the pure prayers and worship of Gentile
Churches to the corrupt careless sacrifices of the Jews, the application is
not only suitable, but the place contains a sad admonition to all Gentile
Churches, that by their corrupt worships, and Incense, so far frustrate (as
it were) Gods expectation and glorying of their pure oblations.

Your third Proposition. That as you are very tender of imputing sin to those
men that join in some select prayers read by an able and godly Minister, so on
the other side, you are not without fear, lest such joining may be found
unlawful, unless it may appear, that the Ministers with whom they have
communion, neither give scandal by reading them, nor give unlawful honor to
a thing abused to Idolatry and Superstition, nor do suffer themselves to be
sinfully limited in the reading of them.

1 We cannot conceive how you should imagine the practice of a godly Minister
in reading some few select prayers to be scandalous, or offensive in the
Congregations, when the people generally in their assemblies and in the whole
land were persuaded of the lawfulness of that course, till now of late times
some have been drawn away to separate; who yet by warrant of Scripture
produce nothing of weight, to countenance that practice.



1 In the words of the answer, where we do not determine any thing
positively, we do not impute sin to any in such a case, we say only that
we are not without feate, lest it may be found unlawful, where any scandal,
unlawful honor, or sinful limiting be found in the Ministers: and if our
fears be needless, we hope, such as know how jealous the Lord is in matters
of his worship will easily forgive us.

2 Because you marvel we should be so timorous in this case, we shall give
you some reasons of it, which perhaps may abate much the marvel or wonder.

First, let it be remembered that these select prayers are yet a part of that
Liturgy, which is acknowledged to be corrupt in matter and manner and clogged
with such evil consequences as are before touched; Taken out of the
Masse-booke, etc. And Master Parker (who was no separatist) doubts not to
affirm, that the touching of Antichrists things makes unclean, for which he
cites, 2 Cor. 6.17. Haggai 2.14. John 4.23. Park of the Cross, part 1. page
137.

Secondly, let it be considered that this book is imposed by an unlawful
Antichristian authority of the Prelates, to whom to give place and subjection
in any thing is justly to be questioned. And we know that a man may
acknowledge his fealty and hold his Lands of the Lord of the Manner by a small
rent, as well as by a greater.

Thirdly, consider this corrupt Service-booke has been overlong tolerated and
borne withal in the English Churches: it deserves not so honorable a burial
as the Jewish worship: but has stunke above ground twice 40. years, in the
nostrills of many godly, who breathed in the pure air of the holy Scripture,
being witnessed against by the writings and sufferings of many godly Ministers
and Christians in England and Scotland.

Fourthly, many godly men (it is well known) have been (of late times
especially) offended at many good Ministers silence in these things, that they
would no more plainly and boldly discover the corruptions in that book, and
at their compliance with the same.

Fifthly, these are times of more light, whereby the Lord is consuming
Antichrist, with the breath of his mouth. And therefore we have cause the more
to fear how we meddle with any thing of his.

Sixthly, consider the season when this answer was sent, was it not at a time,
when superstitious opinions of the whole book and the ceremonies thereof, were
grown to a great height in the minds and hearts of very many? when diverse
superstitious Popish worships, as bowing at the name of Jesus, reading at the
Table set Altar-wise, etc. were added to the heap of former corruptions? when
the tyranny of the Prelates raged in the pressing of the book, and their other
humane inventions? when many Ministers and people (well thought of by the best)
were carried away shamefully with these things? when many weak Christians were
staggering and wavering and looking at the judgment and practice of their
guides, ready to stand or fall with them?

Lastly, consider that things lawful in themselves may be inexpedient;
because offensive in their use, and so far unlawful; which offense we
chiefly looked at in this act, as appears by our answer.

Let all these things be laid together and weighed in an equal balance
(which we hope our brethren are now at some liberty and leisure to do) and
let the consciences of all speak, whether it was not high time, for all the
godly in England to take unto them that zeal and courage, which was soon
after in our Brethren of Scotland, to cast off and wholly abandon the book it
self and all the forms of it, and use of the same in every part and piece
thereof? At least we hope you will cease to marvel at our timerousnesse of
such a season, how ever we confess, we have sometime been more bold in the
dark.

These considerations premised, as they may in a great measure abate the
seeming rigor of the proposition: so they will much take off the edge of the
Reply. For it will appear that all conformity of Ministers and people to any
parcells of that book, at such a season as this was, is a far differing case
from those that are put in some of the replies.

1 To the first reply then, wherein you put it beyond imagination, that such a
practice should be scandalous or offensive, we know not what you have
observed in some particular congregations near you: but what ever have been
the opinions of men formerly concerning this practice, yet you know that the
book in general has been condemned of all godly reformers, and the use of
any part of it has been counted burdensome to many for the reasons named. But
of later times, as the book and conformity thereto was urged more hotly, so
the spirits of very many grew more zealous against it, and began to loath it,
and to withdraw wholly from it; many very inquisitive about the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of joining with it at all, and your selves complain of the
withdrawing of many, from joining in the ordinances, where it was used, so that
we see not, but at least in some persons and at some places and times it might
probably be offensive and scandalous so to practice.

2 We looked not only to the offense of those in your own congregations, but
to the imboldning and hardening of Papists in honoring any part of their
portuises, above the forms of other reformed Churches abroad; and you cannot
be ignorant how many of the Lords witnesses now asleep have testified of the
offense and danger thereof.

You say if the book were an Idolothyte, yet latent offense does not oblige.



The book so far as it is sound and good (by your confession) is no
Idolothyte, nor taken out of the Mass book, in such sense as you object* but
rather the Mass and other prayers added to it; Popery is a scab cle^ving to
the Church, and many truths belonging to the Church, as her proper Legacy, were
stolen, and heaped together in that Den; And why the true man may not
challenge his goods where ever he find them, or the thief plead title to the
true man's goods by prescription we know not.



Secondly, that it was taken out of the Mass book, was proved by the
confession of King Edward; and other evidences are many; but you say, not in
such sense as we object. But rather, e contra Mass, etc. added to it, etc.
But where to find such a legacy bequeathed to the Church in the Testament of
our Lord Jesus Christ, we could never yet see: So that we rather fear all
those forms of prayer, of marriage, burialls, visitations of the sick,
confirmation, etc. are rather the copper counterfeit coin, of a well grown
Antichrist, whereby he cousened the Churches, when he stole away the golden
Legacy of Christ, rather then any part of the true Churches Legacy: and
therefore it had been more happy for the Churches that they had never
challenged the same, but let the theefes prescription to have been a good plea
to hold them still: this further we add, when we say it was taken out of the
Masse-booke, we understand Masse-booke in a large sense, (as it is commonly
taken) for to speak narrowly it was collected out of three Popish books, the
first part of public Prayers, exbreviario; the second part, viz. the order of
administering Sacraments, Matrimony, visiting the sick and burialls, e Rituali;
3. the order of consecration in the Supper, the Epistles and Gospels, and
Collects, e Missali, as the form of consecration of Bishops and Priests was
taken e Pontificali, as the Author of Altar Damasc. shows, page 612.

Thirdly, because those words, Popery is a scab, etc. may be a seed of much
evil, an Egg out of which a Serpent may be hatched, if men zealous of moldy
forms may but have time again to set upon it, if the wheel of these evil
times, (through Gods judgment on this wanton age) turn the Prelates or other
zelotes for this Liturgy uppermost, we shall therefore crave liberty to
examine this speech more narrowly. And because (as it is said) unumquodque ex
sua origin rectissime judicatur, we shall trace the steps of the first times
and so downward, to see what sound parts of Liturgy there was, on which this
scab is supposed to grow.

1. Our blessed Savior taught his Disciples a blessed form, which though it
may be lawfully and comfortably used, the rather, not being of man's, but the
Lords composing: yet it is evident he never appointed his people to use it as
their only form, and therefore the Apostles in the primitive Church, in that
heavenly prayer, Acts 4. did not attend to the words and form of this prayer,
though they might have this in their eye, as the common rule and direction how
to power out their prayers to God, for particular things, which may be an
everlasting witness against their usurpations, that will limit the Churches to
their forms which the Lord Christ would not do to his own.

2. In the first 300. years after Christ, we read of few forms, that the
Churches used, and those rather short ejaculations, then set forms, but
contrarily we read frequently of the exercise of their gifts in prayer. They
prayed sine monitore, quia de pectore, says Tertullian, Tertull. Apol. cap. 30.
i. e. They prayed without a Promptour, because from the heart, which as
Zephirus observes was in opposition to the prompted forms then in use amongst
the Pagans. We read also what they prayed for, viz. pro inimicis, pro
imperatoribus, pro statu seculi* pro mora finis, etc. but of any set forms we
read not. Their persecutions and days of afflictions preserved them from
formalitie in prayer, and taught them how to find their hearts and knees, and
tongues, to pour out their souls to God, while under the Altar they were
pouring out their blood.

3. But after the Churches had enjoyed peace for some space of time, (wherein
security usually makes insensible, and insens^blenesse formal) then indeed
we read of set and imposed forms, which the rather prevailed in regard of the
gross and palpable ignorance of a blind ministry, under a more learned
Prelacy, and therefore it is well observed by Chemnitius that the third
Council of Carthage decreed this; ut nemo in precibus, etc. viz. that no
Minister in his prayers either names the Father for the Son or the Son for
the Father, but when he comes to the Altar, to direct his prayers always to
God the Father, and that no man use his own forms, till he have conferred
and showed his forms to men more able, which we find sometime to be the
Synod.

4 After these times they added the commemoration of Saints to their Prayers
and Letanies, Vid. Chemnit. Ex. de Innoc. Sanctorum.
as appears from manifold instances, whereof take but this one imputed to
Chrysostom: Sanctissimae Deiparae and semper Virginis Mariae, cum omnibus
sanctis, memoriam agentes, nos ipsos and omnem vitam nostram Christo Deo nostro
commendamus. Which Letanies at first being used more seldom at some times of
the year, afterward grew into ordinary use, to every end of which the people
added, Lord have mercy upon us, and Exaudi Domine, We beseech thee to hear us
good Lord.

5 From commemoration of Saints, (being so near the brink) they soon came on to
invocation of them, first in private prayers, then in public, and that by
degrees. For first, they called upon Christ to hear their intercessions for
them. Intercessionibus Sanctorum tuorum, Salvator, salva nos: and thence they
fell to direct and immediate invocation of them. Maria Deo supplica, ut animas
nostras salvet.

6 At last they became so superstitious in their Letanies or Liturgies, that
praying was magnified above all preaching, and almost all preaching was changed
into formal, corrupt, and blind praying; and thus it was generally in the
Churches, till about the sixth Century, as (if need were) might be showed at
large.

7 Though other Churches were thus overgrown with Forms of Worship, yet the
Roman Bishops especially, did multiply Forms and superstitious* Rites
excessively. Rome being (in Gods secret Providence) left to become the very
seat and throne of Antichrist. The Bishops themselves also finding it exceeding
hard to bring in the ^ligion of Christ, without conforming to the Pagan rites,
as Casaubon observes. For it appears even in the time of Theodosius, wherein
Christianity was risen to a great head, Vid. Birth of Heresies, out of
Elasopolitans Comment.
the Senate being sent unto by him to renounce their Pagan Religion, and
receive the law of Christ, they returned answer that they would not, but that
they would observe the ancient law Pompilian, to avoid the ruin of the
Commonwealth, which they feared might come by the change of Religion. The
Roman Bishops also for 400 years together, could never obtain of the Senate,
nor multitudes of the Roman Idolaters, to renounce their inveterate Idolatry,
and receive the Gospel. Hence they conformed their Rites and Ceremonies to the
Pagan and Idolatrous customs, the better to allure them to Christ according to
their carnalll policy. We find all the principal parts of the Mass to be
borrowed from the Idolatrous Pagans, and to have their original from Numa
Pompilius that Conjurer, who lived 700 years before Christ, to adorn and deck
(as the Bishops thought) the Religion of Christ Jesus, to the which with much
ado at last the Romans were converted. To which principal parts, viz.
Vestments, Holy Water, the Confiteor, Organs, Incense, Offertory, etc. other
deckings were added also, as diverse Letanies, and the Kurie Elyson to be sung
nine times, invented by Gregory a Monk at first, well-studied in the laws of
Numa and Tullus Hostilius: Damasus (as Platina and Sabellius show) enriched it
with Gloria Patri, etc. i. e. Glory be to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Sergius, with an Agnus Dei, to be sung three times. Alexander and other Bishops
added the Canon of the Mass; others, the Epistles and Gospels: The Graduall
and Collects were added by Gelasius, anno 493. The Gloria in excelsis by
Symmachus 508. At last came the Host in about 1062. Much more might be said.
All which when we consider, we confess we are pusled to discern the difference
between the sound part and the scab. For if the principal formalities of the
Mass (out of which our Liturgy was taken; as is confessed) arose out of a
politic push to conform the Christian to the Pagan Religion, and the deckings
of it, from the itching humor of the Roman busy Bishops, admirers of humane
inventions and Ceremonies* let the Reader then judge what sound parts are left
beside the scab. We do not speak this to condemn every thing for the matter of
it that is in the Common Prayer Book: Yea, we honor the affection and piety of
the first Reformers, and the godly then, that were glad to hear Prayers in
their own to^e, and according to the glimmering light of those times, aimed at
the winning of Papists to the true Religion by such a Form of Worship. But now
since experience has taught, it rather hardens them against the truth, then
draws them toward it; when we see the pressing of it is rather a temptation to
conform to Popery, then otherwise; we verily believe, if they had lived in
these times of further light, they would have born witness against it, as
others have done.

Lastly, though the original had been good (which yet is contrary) we may
answer in the words of Peter Martyr, to such as did plead for a lawful
presence at Mass, Pet. Mart. loc. ^om* de Idol.
because the original was good; who answers thus: In hisoe rebus non origo,
etc. In these matters, not the Original, but the Nature is to be considered;
for the brazen Serpent had its original from God, and was honored with
miraculous works: yet when abused, Piis hominibus redditus est detestabilis, it
became (most) loathsome to godly men.

It is no hard task to show, that our Service Book was reformed in most things,
according to the purest Liturgies which were in use in the Church, long before
the Mass was heard of in the world. And if that could not be showed, yet forms
of speech generally taken (we speak not of this or that special word or
phrase) is no more defiled by Idolatry, then the light, air, or place where
Idolatry is committed, etc.

Cartw. supra.

put case the Minister in reading give offense, give unlawful honor to a thing
abused to Idolatry, and suffer himself to be sinfully limited in reading? what
is that to the faithful? This can be no ground that the people may not join,
etc.

England, we would have been less scrupulous and doubtful of the matter: but
if by the out-breaking of light, after so long toleration of the book, we see
so many evil effects of it, and see such superstitious opinions of it
increasing, and such pressing the same to the oppression of the Churches, so
many fall, so many weak ones stagger, and look at the example of their Guides:
if now when all are called of God to rise up against it with zeal and
detestation, a Minister godly and able will use any part of it with offense,
etc. we suppose we had cause to fear and leave it doubtful, whether the godly
might lawfully join with them therein, and therefore we desire you to call back
your sharp censure of such withdrawing, as you conclude this passage withal,
or else we shall appeal to the reverend Assembly of Ministers, and their late
and godly Directory herein.

Fifthly, If these, and such like scruples make it unlawful to join in the
ordinance of Worship, we must hold communion with no society under heaven. For
may not the brethren which hold all stinted Liturgies and set Forms unlawful,
say with like reason, it is not lawful to join with others inconceived
Prayers, if they give too little honor to it, as conceiving the other lawful,
or sinfully limiting themselves to one stinted Form, though conceived at first
by themselves, etc.



we have credibly heard, that you hold fellowship with professed rigid
separatists, without acknowledging of their error, and receive them as members,
or communicate with them in the privileges of the Church, though you profess
you approve not their opinion or practice: and if in godly wisdom you can see
grounds to join with them, we marvail you should be so timorous in this
particular.

England, as no Churches; and their Ministers, as no true Ministers; yet we
deny not but some such there may be in some of the Churches. Whence we grant
it may follow that we can have communion in Gods Worship with men of several
judgments, yet we may be justly timorous of joining or approving others to join
in any part of a corrupt Worship, in case of scandal, etc. we think these
things have not the same face or show of reason in them; and therefore so long
as they live peaceably with us, we can well have fellowship with them, as we
have also with other, that think (it may be) better of the Churches and ways
of it, then there is cause, in regard of the corruptions thereof; so we be not
bound to approve their opinions, nor conform to any of their corrupt practices.

Seventhly, if to administer in a stinted Form be scandalous to such as
separate, it is scandal taken, not given; and we should do it the rather, that
they be not confirmed in their error, the truth be not prejudiced, needless
scruples occasioned, etc.



2 Take in the case in all its circumstances, (as before declared) and it will
appear scandal may be given; at least we put the case of a scandal really
given.

3 How far a man in some cases of clear and undoubted truths may do a thing,
the rather for such reasons, though others take offense, we will not dispute:
but if for meat (or by use of our liberty by eating of such meat, as another
accounts unclean) we may destroy the work of God, and therefore must not eat
flesh, nor drink wine, nor any thing whereby a brother stumble, etc. Romans 14
14, 15, 20, 21. how dangerous then to use such corrupt Forms of Worship, or any
part thereof, so much the rather, when a weak brother stumbles at them, we
leave it to the Christian Reader to judge, we doubt it will not agree with the
rules of charity prescribed Romans 14. 1 Cor. 8.

CHAP. III.
3 Position.
That the children of godly and approved Christians are not to be baptized,
until their Parents be set members of some particular Congregation.

4 That the Parents themselves, though of approved piety, are not to be
received to the Lord's Supper, until they be admitted as set members.

WHat is here premised to prevent mistakes, does seem more to raise, then to
abate scruples. You refuse not all communion with all that are not
Church Members, and so much they profess who formerly have gone for, and
professed themselves Separatists from our assemblies; you do not appropriate
these privileges of the seals only to members of your own Churches, etc. If
you mean only that the Sacraments administered in other Churches be true for
substance; it is no more then you will confess of Rome. If you deny not
fellowship with them in the seals, and to receive them to the Sacrament, your
judgment is against your practice, or you exclude the Churches of England from
the number of true Churches.



1 What if some Separatists admit private communion with such, yet they reject
your Churches and Ministry as null, which we do not. And many of them have
refused also such private communion.

2 We marvail how you could fall into such a mistake, as to suppose we only
allow the truth of Sacraments for substance in other Churches, when we speak in
the same sentence of receiving satisfaction by Letters, or otherwise concerning
those we admit to the seals; which plainly show we speak of communion with
such Churches.

3 Concerning fellowship with those Churches, we may admit members of them to
the seals with us, when we cannot always join with them in their
administrations, by reason of some sinful corruptions, wherein we must have
actual fellowship with them; as your selves would not join, in case you must
kneel at the Lord's Supper.

4 Concerning the Dilemma. We answer; 1 Our practice is not cross to this
profession. For such as come recommended from foreign Churches, and give such
satisfaction as is meet, we do receive; and such as have wholly cast off all
relation to English Churches, and live amongst us, we have looked at as
scattered stones, till they join some where in a Church; and themselves
generally so judge of themselves; but if any will hold to their membership in
England, and come orderly to communion with us, we have not, nor shall not
under that notion refuse them, if they be fit for the ordinances; and therefore
we exclude not the English Churches out of the number, and herein we deal no
otherwise with them, then with the members of our own Churches.

All possible care to keep the ordinances of God from contempt, we allow and
commend, so you deny not Church privileges, to whom they are due, nor the name
of Churches to such as God has blessed with means of grace, and have received
the Tables and Seals, and entered Covenant with God. Your liberty to receive
such satisfaction as is meet, is not questioned, nor whether you are to keep
the bond of the spirit inviolable according to order: but whether this be
according to order, to exclude from the Sacrament true visible Christians, or
known recommended Christians, formerly members of visible Churches amongst us,
and their children; and to put such difference between them, and such as are in
your Church order.



2 We have not denied the name of Churches to such as are said to have
plentifully the means of grace, Tables, Seals, and Covenant.

3 Concerning the stating of the question, too much liberty is taken, as in
other cases; for neither in the Position, or in our Answer, do we limit the
question to members in our Church order, (as here it is called) but expressly
extend the same to other Churches of Christ, though through error or humane
frailty, defective in matters of order, yea, to the members of any true Church,
as in the Answer is said. 2. Concerning such as come over, and are for a time
without Seals, it is not because we refuse communion with them, as being
members of your Churches known, or recommended Christians, as you say. For if
any godly man remaining a member in any true Church with you, or elsewhere, come
so recommended, or be well known to the Church, we never under that notion
refuse any, but giving such other satisfaction as is meet, shall readily
receive them, as we always profess, and therefore we must still call for
attendance to the state of this question in its right terms, viz. whether the
children of godly parents, or themselves though of approved piety, are to be
admitted to the seals, not being members of some particular Congregation, or
until they be such.

CHAP. IV.
TO the first consideration: If by the Church be understood the society of men
professing the entire faith, the seals are given to it, as peculiar
privileges, but if you understand a Congregationall assembly, the seals were
never appropriated to it.

page 21. And if no such Church wherein the seals are administered, as we
proved, then the cause it self is yielded, and the seals must belong to
particular Churches.

2 Seeing the main hinge of this question turns upon this point, to what Church
the administration and participation of the seals belong, we shall a little
further open our selves in this point. And because we affect and study peace
with truth; we shall freely acknowledge,

First, that as there is an invisible Church and Body of Christ, consisting of
all the elect, effectually called throughout the world in all ages of it, the
whole family in heaven and earth: so unto Jesus Christ, all the visible
believers and Churches of the world, are as one body to him, he governing,
protecting, instructing all as his visible body.

Secondly, we acknowledge a visible communion of all the true Churches of the
Lord Jesus, in all offices of brotherly love, and in the holy things of Christ,
so far as may appear, the Lord have ordained and commanded, and by his
Providence called them to exercise one with another.

Thirdly, we grant that all true believers, wherever they be, have by faith
in Christ, a true right and interest unto Jesus Christ and all his benefits,
whatsoever he has purchased for them; but here we must first distinguish of
these benefits of Christ, whereof some are merely spiritual, inward, and
flowing immediately from Christ unto them; and therefore peculiar to true
believers, as justification, sanctification, adoption, access to God in
prayer, etc. some are outward and tending to the help and furtherance of our
spiritual communion with Christ, being outward and visible means thereof; and
therefore are also extended to hypocrites being visible believers, as the
Ministry of the Word, Seals, Church Discipline, etc. And these cannot be
dispensed by Christ immediately nor ordinarily, but by means of a visible
Church. 2. We distinguish of right to these outward benefits of Christ; which
is either remote, called, jus ad rem; or near, and immediate, called, jus in
re; right to the enjoyment and fruition of it. Now in the first sense we grant,
all visible believers have a right to seals, etc. But the immediate fruition of
them, they must have mediante Ecclesia visibili: now here lies the true state
of the question, Whether the Lord Jesus have ordained an universal visible
Church, in which, and unto which, by the Officers thereof all these outward
visible privileges and means of Grace, are to be dispensed and immediately
enjoyed of the faithful; or whether (not the remote right, but) the immediate
fruition and administration of all these ordinances by the institution of
Christ, be given to particular visible Churches; and surely to whom one of
these is given, all are given: For there is the same nature, reason, and use of
all, Ministry of the Word, Seals, Discipline, all are outward ordinances,
privileges, means of Grace, belonging to the visible Church, where Christ has
given one, he has given all. But we must confess, however you call this, A
new Church way, it is new to us to read so much of late, of such a Catholic
Church, to which administration of Seals, Censures, etc. belong. We are yet of
the opinion of Baynes, Parker, and Cartwright, etc. that have against Papists
and Prelates maintained, that in the new Testament there is no instituted
Catholic, National, or Provincial Church; but only the Church of a
particular Congregation, both for the reasons alleged in our Answer, as also
for the impossibility thereof in the days of the New Testament, when the Lord
Jesus sent his Apostles into all the world; therefore impossible both in regard
of distance of place, and variety of language almost ever to meet in one, so
much as by representation, and that not only by accident, as may befall a
particular Church, by sickness, persecution, etc. but by the necessity of
nature and invincible hindrances foreseen by Christ, and intended by him. And
therefore, as the Lord limiting his Church to one Nation, united it into that
form of a National Church, ordaining one place, stated times and duties of
Worship, and one Government for the same: so now the lord neglecting all such
things, has ordained a complete administration of all his ordinances in
particular Congregations, and therefore if there be no other instituted visible
Church but of a Congregation, and Seals in their administration be given to the
Church, our first consideration will still hold firm. But seeing in so vast a
subject to say little, is to say nothing; and there is scarce any Truth in this
wily age but is almost disputed out of countenance, and much darkened with
humane evasions; and seeing much depends upon this controversy, it may be so
most useful before we come to the defense of our argument to take into
consideration the nature and order of the visible Church of Christ Catholic
and particular. We are not ignorant of the knots and difficulties of this
question, which of late have so much exercised the minds of many Godly-learned:
And we think the notions of a Catholic Church, as it is now held, being but
newly taken up amongst-godly Reformers, who formerly ran in another channel,
(as is ingenuously confessed by some according to the truth) this new birth
seems not yet so formed to its distinct proportions, as time may bring it unto:
and it might make us afraid (being the weakest of many) to venture upon so
diffuse and knotty a question, when we look upon our own insufficiency to such
a task, and the Learned labors of such in this Point, whom we reverence in the
Lord: yet, when we consider of what great weight and moment the clearing up of
this Truth would be unto the orderly proceedings of the great Work of
Reformation in hand; 2 How unavoydably it lies in our way in this Work the Lord
has called us unto; and that he sometimes does vouchsafe to speak by weak
ones, that the praise may be his own, in hope of his blessed guidance which we
depend upon herein, taking the light of his Word in our hands, we shall (rather
as learners then otherwise) venture to propound what is suggested to us herein.
Concerning which having digressed a while, we shall return (we hope) with some
advantage of clearer evidence to justify the first argument of the Answer,
against what is said in the Reply.

CHAP. V.
A digression tending to clear the state of that controversy concerning a
Catholic visible Church, in respect of the nature, unity, visibility, and
priority of the same.

THe world has been long troubled with the equivocation of the word [Church:]
and therefore (as it is needful) we shall labor to set down our thoughts as
distinctly and plainly as we can in certain Propositions that may be some
ground of our discourse.

Ephesians. 1.23. This whole Church is of the same nature, and one in essence from
the beginning of the world to the end; for this Church Christ laid down his
life, Ephesians. 5.26. Joh. 10.15. and therefore he adds, verse. 16. such as are not
yet of his fold (actually) shall be brought into the same, viz. by effectual
calling, that there may be one Shepherd and one sheepfold: whereby it appears
that the whole fold of Christ to which he stands as one Shepherd, contains all
his members and sheep to the end of the world, and it is one fold in relation
to Christ that one Shepherd.

univoce, and properly members of this body of Christ; yet to men that judge
only by outward effects many hypocrites, Whit. de Eccle.
equivoce and improperly are accounted of the Church; and hence the Scripture
frequently speaks of visible Churches, as if they were all really Saints.



Acts 2.41, 42. first they were added to the Church, and then followed their
fellowship in all the ordinances of the Church; as after will more fully
appear. And hence it is said, Acts 5.14. Believers were added; first they were
believers, standing in that spiritual relation to Christ and his whole body,
and then added to the Church by visible combination.

qua believer, have an immediate right, and actual enjoyment of such benefits
of Christ as necessarily and immediately flow from his internal union with
Christ, as justification, adoption, etc. and such right to Christian communion
with all the Saints in their prayers, gifts, etc. as flow from his spiritual
relation unto them; yea, and also he has a true right to all benefits
purchased by Christ in a due order and manner: yet we say instituted
privileges and ordinances do not immediately flow from spiritual union and
relation to Christ and his members, but are dispensed by Christ to his people
mediately, and in such an order as he has in wisdom ordained: and this the
nature of visible government and ordinances of Christ necessarily requires. And
hence it is, that although the Church in its nature and essence, and in respect
of its spiritual union and relation to Christ and one another, profession of
the same faith, etc. have been always one and the same in all ages, yet both
the visible government and ordinances of Worship, and also the instituted form
and order of Church-societies has been various according to the wisdom and
will of Christ, whereby it appears, that the order, government, forms of
visible Church-societies, to which actual enjoyment of visible ordinances do
belong, cannot justly be deduced from the common nature of the Church
Cathoilck, or any respects of reason or logical notions under which it may
fall: but only this depends upon the will and pleasure of Christ, who has in
all ages instituted the forms and orders of such Societies to whom the actual
enjoyment of instituted ordinances was given: And hence the argument for a
national form of a Church to be in the New Testament as well as in the Old,
drawn from the common nature, essence, profession of faith, etc. of the Church
in all ages, falls flat to the ground, for by the same reason it must then be
in families only now, as it was about Abraham's time.



And therefore (with due respect to the Godly-learned be it spoken) we conceive
many large disputes in this question fall short of the issue that is desired
and intended; for what if it be granted: 1 That there is a Catholic visible
Church, which in some respects of reason (as Mr. Ball says) is one that having
parts visibiles, is a totum visibile.

2 That the visible Church is not only a totum genericum, in relation to all
the particular Congregations, as species specialissimae, of a visible Church in
general, (which respect of reason in some sense we freely consent unto) but
also that it may fall under the notion of a totum integrale, as some contend,
(though we conceive in this notion, they are so entangled in their own logical
principles, as that they cannot get out without breaking them, and flying to
theological considerations) yet we say, what if that also be attained?

3 Yea further, what if this Catholic Church be in some respects of reason and
order of nature also the first Church, and particular Churches, ortae?

4 Yea further, what if it were gained also by such disputes, that the Keys and
Officers, Ordinances, etc. be given firstly to this Catholic Church as to the
object and end? We confess we do not see that what our Brethren contend for,
is by all this obtained. For, first, if the universal number of visible
believers be one totum aggregatum; yet it will be hard to prove that these are
one instituted and political Society, that can enjoy visible communion
together in visible Worship and government; and yet more hard to prove that by
the institution of Christ, these all are to be actually governed as one totum.

Secondly, what though the members of the Church Catholic be in order of time
before particular Churches, as being fit matter for them, and constituting of
them? yet this proves not one political body before they combine, but rather
the contrary.

Thirdly, be it so that this Catholic Church is the first Church to which
Christ has firstly given the Keys, Ordinances, Promises, etc. for which Christ
firstly performed the Offices of King, Priest, and Prophet, and what else
soever can be said in this kind; yet all this may be in this respect that
Christ looked at this Catholic Church firstly as the chief object and end for
whose sake and good he ordained and gave all these things, and this will not
carry the cause; for as the Church Catholic visible in this sense is the first
Church in respect of the particulars, so the invisible body of Christ is in
nature and priority the first Church in respect of visible, as visible; for
Christ no doubt firstly intends and gives all these things to the invisible
Church, as to the object and end of the same for whose good they are all
ordained; rather then for the Catholic visible Church, which contains many
hypocrites and reprobates within the verge of it. But now if we speak of a
subject of the Keys, to which the actual exercise and dispensation of Keys and
instituted Ordinances belong: who do not see that in this sense the invisible
Church qua talis, cannot be that instituted Society to which the Keys, etc.
belong; and by the same reason the Catholic visible Church qua totum, and qua
Catholic, cannot be this instituted Society to which they are given. It is a
known rule in Reason, that, That which is first in intention, is last in
execution; and so it is here, first, Christ propounds this end to himself to
gather, edify, perfect, sanctify, save his Catholic Church, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
and 5.26. and therefore institutes all ordinances as means to farther and
attain this great design; but in execution he may (for all this) give the Keys
and ordinances in regard of the immediate exercise to any form of visible
Societies that he shall be pleased to institute, and it may be that will prove
the least Society sooner then a greater.

And seeing our Brethren otherwise minded make much use of similies in this
dispute: we hope it will not be amiss for us to illustrate what we say by a
similitude, ^tly to make our conceivings the more plain to all whose
edification we seek; and partly, to discover the invalidity of many discourses
of this nature; and because similia arguunt fidemque faciunt, (as he says)
viz. so far as rightly applied) we will therefore propound it in way of
argument. The similitude is this, genus humanum, or mankind in general is the
subject of Civil government in general, and of all the privileges thereof,
as the object and the end: and let the question be, whether this Catholic
number of all mankind is the first subject of all power of Civil government,
and the privileges thereof; and if so, whether such consequences will follow
as our Brethren deduce from the unity, visibility, and priority of the
Catholich Church. Now we reduce what we intend into an Argument, thus: If all
that can be said from Scripture and Reason concerning the unity, visibility,
and priority of the Catholic Church, may as truly be affirmed upon like
grounds of the Catholic body of mankind, then a pari it will follow that
there is no more one Catholic visible instituted totum, that is the first
subject of Church power and privileges in the actual exercise and enjoyment
of the same, then that there is such a Catholic body of mankind that is the
first subject of Civil power, etc. and that actually does or ought to govern
and be governed as one Catholic body in communion: but it will appear from
Scripture and Reason, 1 Cor. 15.47*
that the same things may be said of mankind that can be said of the other;
Ergo.

And it is proved per parts, thus: 1 For the unity; are not all mankind often
in Scripture called the world? Joh. 3.16. So God loved the world, that is,
mankind in the world; which is one. So, frequently all mankind is called man,
Genesis 6.5, 6, 7. I will not strive with man, etc. yea, it is one kingdom, Psalm.
145.11, 12, 13. which (if we view the whole Psalm) must be understood of the
general government of Gods providence over all the world, and especially
mankind therein, 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12. etc. so that all is one kingdom, Acts
17.26. God has made of one blood all Nations; all are one blood, all have
their bounds set by God, etc. that they might seek him, and feel after him; and
as it is said for one Catholic Church, because it has one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism, one Spirit, and are bound to love and pray one for the other, etc.
so there is a like unity here, for the whole number of mankind has one Lord
and King over all, God who is King over all the earth called an head over all,
1 Chronicles. 29.11. yea, Jesus Christ is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and head
over all to the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. All have one Law, the Moral Law, the
common rule of equity and righteousness whereby they are bound to walk toward
God and one another, and this writ in the hearts of all; they have all one
spirit of reason disposing them to society and mutual offices of love, one
faculty of speaking to fit them for communion, one end to feel after God, Act.
17. and seek ye good of the whole kind; all ought to love one another, desire
and seek the welfare of the whole, and of one another, Esaias 58.7. yea, the Lord
as a common head by the working of his common Providence, and out of his love
of mankind, has a common and constant influence into all, giving not only
life and breath, and all good things, Acts 17. but also all gifts of wisdom,
art, skill, for Government, etc. to Kings, Judges, Fathers, Masters, and all
Officers of Civil government, for the good of the whole; and what ever else
may be said to prove the Catholic Church One, may here be applied.

And as for principles of reason, it is easy to conceive that all mankind
will fall either under the notion of one genus homo, whereof the individua are
species specialissimae, or in another respect all persons, all Families,
Cities, Kingdoms may (in a sense) make one totum integrale, or aggregatum.

Secondly, it is as evident that all this number of mankind are one visibile
totum, by the arguments used for the visible Catholic Church, for that which
has visible parts, is a visible totum, it holds here as well as in the other
case. Yea, if the Catholic Church be one visible Body, because it has organs
and visible Officers in it, it will hold here, for all mankind is but one Army
of the Lord of Hosts, who has Armies of heaven, and Armies on earth, and in
this Body God by his Providence has set, and by his ordinance has ordained
Fathers, Masters, Husbands, Judges, Kings, etc. to govern in this Body of
mankind for the good of the whole. Ruling and subjection by the fifth
Commandment of the Moral Law, which is in all men's hearts, is ordained of God
for the order, peace, and welfare of all mankind, and therefore why is not this
by the same reason a totum visibile?

Thirdly, for Priority, it is clear, that as God has firstly in nature and
intention given Christ to the whole Church, then to this and that particular
believer, and the power of feeding and being fed and governed by shepherds.
First, to the whole race of sheep. Secondly, to this or that flock. So in
nature and Gods intention he has firstly given to the race of mankind power of
being governed with Government and Governors, before they are given to this or
that Family, City, Kingdom, etc. So likewise what is said of Promises, given to
the Church Catholic firstly; is it not as true here? Those promises and
blessings increase and multiply, Subdue the earth and inhabit it. The fear
and dread of you shall be on all beasts: and all like promises and privileges
of marriage, of liberty to eat flesh, etc. mentioned, Genesis 2. and 9. and all
over the Scripture, are they not in nature first given to mankind? and then to
this or that person, family, City? So if Church power, and all Officers and
Offices be firstly given to the Catholic Church, not to this or that
particular Church: So it is here, when the Scripture says, Submit to the higher
Powers, for all Powers are of God, Romans 13. By me, says God, Kings reign, and
Princes decree judgment, and such like Scriptures; does this firstly belong to
this or that Kingdom, City, etc. and not rather that God has firstly set up
and ordained Civil Powers for mankind, to be obeyed of all mankind firstly,
and then in this or that state. Is foederall holiness first the privilege of
the Catholic Church? (which in a sense we will not now contradict) so is
legitimation, first the privilege of married society in general in all
mankind, and then of this or that family. Are the members of particular
Churches firstly of the Catholic Church; and is it not so here? the members of
every family, city, etc. first and last of the number of mankind; and so when
the Societies are dissolved, they are still of mankind: and do not all
Societies spring of mankind, and are an additament and increase to it? the one
is true as well as the other.

It would be over tedious to follow this parallel so far as we might, these
may be sufficient instances to guide the Reader to apply whatever else is, or
can be said in this kind from the common nature and logical notions under
which the Catholic Church visible may be considered: What is said that may
more properly concern the case under the notion of an instituted Society, we
shall consider in due place.

Now from that which has been said, the Conclusion, as we conceive, does
easily and naturally follow, That as notwithstanding all that is said, there is
no Catholic visible Body of mankind, to which, or to the Officers whereof is
given the power and privileges of Civil government to rule this Catholic
Body, either as one totum politicum; or the parts of it, Families, Cities,
Kingdoms in communi, by subordination of all Societies with reference to the
whole; or so as every King, Major, etc. should be an Officer of the whole. So
these, and like consequences will not follow in respect of the guides,
government, privileges, etc. of the Catholic Church, notwithstanding all that
is said from these considerations of unity, visibility, priority of nature, etc.

If any shall Object, the case is not alike, because in this Catholic Church
were universal Officers set up, as the Apostles; not so in the world of
mankind.



Secondly, we say likewise, at the first for a time Adam, and after Noah, had a
general power over mankind, though after them none had the like, as it is
here. And therefore the comparison still runs clear.

If any object, as some do, in answer to an argument somewhat like this, that
this similitude holds not, because there is not that external union of visible
communion in the Commonwealths of the world, as in the Church; if one say, God
has placed Kings, Dukes in the Commonwealths, as in one organicall Body who
have one head, who gives influence to so many organs of head, feet, etc. as
the Apostle speaks of the Body the Church, 1 Cor. 12. then indeed all the
Commonwealths of the world would make but one body.



Secondly, if we compare Civil societies, as Families, Cities, Commonwealths
with instituted Churches, it is as possible, and as well the duty of all
Commonwealths in the world, by principles of humanity, and the Moral Law in
all men's hearts, to maintain external union of leagues of friendship, and
communion in all Offices of Civil society, as it is possible, and the duty of
all Church societies, by the principles of Christianity, and rule of the Gospel
to maintain external union of visible communion in the duties of Church
society.

Thirdly, (not to dispute here whether there be such an external union of
visible communion amongst all the visible Churches, as parts of the Church
Catholic) if the reason alleged be sufficient to prove the same, viz. because
there is one head in the Church, who gives influence to so many organs of
head, feet, eyes, etc. in the Church.

Then still our parallel will hold; for as this Head is no other then Christ
Jesus in his spiritual Kingdom, the Church giving that influence named; so the
same Lord that is King and Head over all, 1 Chronicles. 29.11. Ephesians. 1.22. does
give influence to many organs in this Body of Mankind, even to all Kings,
Judges, Fathers of Families.

And Christ is the same in respect of all authority, power, gifts,
administrations Civil, etc. to this Kingdom of Men, as he is to the Kingdom
of his Church of all power spiritual: And although the Church be a Body of
nearer relation to Christ, then the Body of mankind; yet in regard of a common
relation between a Head and Body there is a similitude, which is sufficient in
this case.

There is one thing more we meet withal that here we shall remove, viz. when
it is objected that the Catholic visible Church cannot be one, because it
cannot convent together in one Society; it is answered usually, that such
coming together in one society is not needful, because as a Kingdom may be
one, though all parts of it never meet together, having the same King, Laws,
etc. And as an Army may be one, having the same General, the same Laws of
Discipline, the same cause, etc. though the several Brigades should never be
drawn up into one body: So the Catholic Church having the same King, Laws,
Cause, Enemies, is but one though it never meet.

To this we shall here Reply so far as it lies in our way: 1 As all union is
for communion, and all communion flows from union; so look of what nature the
union is, such, and no other is the communion; and look of what nature the
communion ought to be, of like nature ought the union to be, else it will not
reach the end. And therefore here as the mystical spiritual union of the
Catholic Church to Christ the head by faith, and to one another by love, is
sufficient to afford spiritual communion with the same: So unto Political
communion there must be a Political union into one policy. And as the nature
of Political communion is, such must the nature of the union be, that it may
reach the end.

To apply this, a Political Church is instituted of Christ for communion in
all the Worship and Ordinances of Christ instituted in the Gospel, as the
Ministry of the Word, the Seals and Discipline; now no Church as One can have
communion with Christ and one another in these things, but it must have a
Political union suitable thereunto, that is, they must be one Society that can
at least meet to combine together.

And therefore if all Churches make one Political Body, for Political
communion, it must be such an union as will reach that end, which cannot be
imagined in such a Catholic totum politicum as the Catholic Church. It Is
true, distinct Churches (as distinct Kingdoms) may have communion in some
political privileges answerable to their union, consisting in a fraternall
relation one unto another, yet not make up one Body Political; of which we
speak.

Secondly, to the similitudes brought, we answer, This whole Kingdom or Army is
properly and clearly one Political Body under one Political head the King or
General, as stands by Covenant as members of that one Policy; and those who
have right to choose their King or General, may and do some time or other
convene. Let the like be showed in the Catholic Church, that all Political
Churches are molded up into one Political Body, either de jure, or de facto,
or that it is possible (as the case stands) so to be, and then the similitudes
would be of some use.

Thirdly, in a Kingdom or Army, suppose they never meet, yet there is such
political union as fully reaches the political communion for which end it was
combined, viz. that they should enjoy peace and justice in and by a just
Government, or by the protection of the Army. But if such a political Body
were combined to have such communion as a Church Communion is, then it would
require conventing together, as elsewhere we shall more fully manifest: For our
parts, we do not see that Christ has ordained the whole Catholic church as
One, to have political communion together, which is impossible.

And therefore we see no need of such a Political combination, but as he has
ordained a Brotherly communion of counsel and helpfulnesse one to another, as
need requires; so a spiritual relation and brotherly consociation of Churches
together is union sufficient for such a communion.

And thus far we have endeavored to take away all those arguments which are
built upon the general considerations of the unity, visibility and priority of
the Catholic church, which we leave to the consideration and examination of
the judicious.

We shall now, (as the Lord shall help us) come to clear the state of this
knotty controversy, as we think it ought to be stated and carried. Viz.

What is that form of a Political Church which Jesus Christ in the Gospel has
instituted and appointed as the subject of Church power of government, and
administration of all the ordinances of the Gospel for actual communion with
Christ, and one with another therein? And here give us leave before we enter
into the question it self, to make a little further use of our former
similitude for illustration; and then we will show where the ne plus ultra, as
we conceive must stand. It has been showed in respect of the body of mankind,
that although much may be said for the unity, visibility, and priority thereof
before any parts of it, yet no reason will enforce that it is the first subject
of Civil power, etc. in respect of actual administration, and immediate
enjoyment thereof, and so here in respect of the Church. We will now add but
this one thing more, that notwithstanding all such reasons, yet in execution
for the good of the whole, the least civil society, yea, a family may be, and
is the first subject of civil power, and privileges of civil government; so
the least political Church society may be the first subject of these Keys of
Church power in the exercise thereof, and of immediate communion in all visible
ordinances, and we think that there by Divine institution it is seated, and the
edification and perfection of the Catholic Church may best be attained thereby.

Concerning Families, we see no footsteps in the propagation of mankind from
Adam and Noah, of any sovereign or universal government, further then in the
first Fathers of mankind, after whom as they increased, families went out, and
combining made cities, and so Commonwealths by mutual consent, as in Genesis 10.
and other Stories appear, except by the tyrannous usurpations of some as
Nimrod, the rest were brought under; and this no doubt amongst any free people
is still the most orderly, just and safe way of erecting all forms of civil
government; Families to combine into Towns, Cities, Kingdoms, or
Aristocraticall States. But here some will say; If so, that according to this
similitude, a particular congregation may be the first Church that have the
Keys of Church power, and Church communion; then as families should combine
into Towns and Cities, and they into greater Commonwealths, for the good of
all mankind; so here these first Churches may not stand independently, but
ought to combine into greater Bodies, till they come to be one whole Church; to
this we say, this will not follow upon this evident reason, because civil
societies and government thereof, is herein left to rules of humane prudence by
the Lord and governor of the whole world; and therefore may admit various forms
of Government, various Laws and Constitutions, various privileges, etc.
according as men shall conceive best for themselves, so they be not against the
common moral rules of equity, and the good of those Societies: but here in the
Kingdom of Christ as we must attend what kind of Church he has instituted,
so we must cleave to such rules, privileges, and forms of government and
administrations as he has ordained, not presuming to go one step beyond the
same. And hence it is not in the power of any Church to alienate the power,
rights, or privileges Christ have set in the same, or to mould up any other
political Churches then he has appointed; and here we conceive stands
immovably the ne plus ultra of this similitude between the visible Church, and
the estate of mankind in reference to power and government, etc. All which
things well weighed, to us seems to overthrow all such intermediate forms of
Churches, or the usual Churches, as Mr. Ball calls the same; as, Classical,
Provincial, Diocesan, National, Patriarchicall, etc. which we see not how
according to the rule of Christ they can be constituted either descendendo,
from the common nature of the Catholic Church; or ascendendo; from the
combination of particulars, except institution can be found for the same. We
find indeed, that some endevor to build such forms upon the foundation of
Moral principles, and the Law of nature; as, That God has given government to
be over a multitude, and that of many Societies, as well as persons, that one
Society may not suffer as well as one person; and that therefore must be given
of the God of grace to a society and multitude of little Churches power of
external government.

To which we answer; 1 That there is no such principle in nature that generally
binds free Societies to submit to one common government; must many Kingdoms,
etc. by consequence all kingdoms combine in government, lest one kingdom be
hurt, i. must Moab, Ammon, Edom, Tire, Sydon, Judea, etc. being so contiguous
in near vicinity to each other, combine in one government? 2 Is it not as
suitable to morality and reason, in such combinations, that they set up One to
rule over them, when many grow ignorant, evil, or heady, to preserve peace,
and prevent wrong, as to set up many? 3 Did Abraham, Lot, Melchisedeck, and
such family Churches, walk against grounds of morality and nature, that did not
so combine? We might add more, but forbear; but we could desire our dear
Brethren to be wary of scattering such principles; for though in the matters of
the Church, and Worship, and Government of Christ, grace does not destroy
nature, yet look as a particular Church constitution and government was never
erected by the Law of nature; but Divine institution, so for the governing of
many over one, why should there not be the like institution?

But to come more near to the case it self, we shall endeavor to clear two
things:

1. That there is no Catholic political Church society instituted by Christ,
to which the actual administration and participation of Church government and
communion in the instituted ordinances of Christ, is given as to the first
subject thereof.

2. That the true form of all Church societies instituted by Christ, to which
he has given the actual administration and immediate participation of Church
government, and all other instituted ordinances, as the subject thereof, is
only Congregationall.

First, concerning the first, to make our discourse more distinct and plain, we
shall premise here, that we do not here at all take in, or respect that
question about the power of the Keys, whether it be in the fraternity or
guides, (we shall God willing have a fit place to speak something of it) but
here (that we may not intermingle things) we look only at the true subject, in
which, and unto which the actual and immediate dispensation and participation
of Church government and outward ordinances is given by the institution of the
Gospel. And here we first reason thus, Such a Church society as Christ
instituted, the Apostles of Christ constituted and governed in: But the
Apostles never constituted such a Catholic church society, or governed it in
such a manner as is said: Ergo. The Proposition is evident, because the
Apostles were to do whatsoever Christ commanded in Matthew. 28.20. and were
sufficiently furnished with power and wisdom so to do: Besides, the Apostles
having all power from Christ as he received from the Father, John 20. and the
whole number of believers being then at the fewest, there was never since such
an opportunity or possibility to constitute such a Church, if Christ Jesus had
instituted such a thing. The assumption or second part of the reason is proved
thus, If the Apostles ever constituted and administered in such a Church
catholic, it was either that at Jerusalem mentioned Acts 1, and 2. etc. or
that assembly that met, Acts 15. (for we meet with no other that can with any
color of reason be supposed) But neither of these were such a constituted
Church; Ergo. 1 Concerning the Church named, Acts 1. carried on, Acts 2. etc.
we freely grant it was a constituted Church, wherein the Apostles with Elders
and Deacons afterward chosen did govern, for as it is called a Church, Acts
2.47. so likewise we see there were in it elections, Act. 1. and 6 and
administrations of instituted ordinances of worship, Acts 2.41, 42. admission
of members, Chap. 2.41, 47. and by the same reason there might have been
excommunication also: But that this Church was not the Catholic Church, we
prove thus: If it were the Catholic church, then it was such either in respect
of the whole essence of the Catholic church, or in respect of representation;
but neither ways: Ergo. The first it could not be, because it consisted at the
first but of 120. which was a very small part of the Catholic number of
visible believers; for, 1 Cor. 15.6. there were above 500 Brethren to whom
Christ appeared at once, which was but some few weeks before, besides all that
in the Jewish Church were converted and baptized by John, which were very many;
yea, if we speak of the Catholic church, properly all the Jewish Church, not
yet dissolved, were part of the Catholic church of that age visible. Lastly,
if it had been the Catholic church, believers being already of it, could not
be said to be added to this; as, Acts 5.13, 14. Secondly, it was not Catholic
in respect of representation, for if so, then in respect of the Apostles only
as the Catholic guides, or in respect of the whole assembly with them, Acts 1.
not the first, for then the Apostles only should have had power to set apart
Barnabas and Ma^thias, but it is evident that that election was by Peter
himself committed to, and acted by the whole company called the Brethren and
Disciples, Acts 1.15, 16, 26. where it appears that as he spoke to all, so it
was concluded with the common suffrages of all.

Secondly, if so, because the Apostles were Catholic guides, then wherever
they met was a Catholic church, yea, where two or three, or any one of them
was, there was the Catholic representative church, and so many such churches,
for any two or one had the catholic power as well as all; Paul ordains, rules,
and orders of discipline in all the churches, as well as if all the Apostles
had met, 1 Cor. 7.17. 1 Cor. 16.1. 2 That assembly was not the representative
catholic church, because, first, there were the women in the same, now women
are no way capable of being messengers to represent churches: secondly,
besides, these could not be representative messengers from other churches,
because this was the first constituted church; we see no color of reason that
there were any other constituted visible churches before this. Lastly, all the
actions of that Church mentioned, especially those in Acts 2.41, 42. of
admission of members, baptism, word, seals, fellowship day by day in such
ordinances, choice of Deacons, etc. speak aloud against a representative
Church, we should rather have heard of constitutions, censures, etc. from such
a representative Catholic church of general counsel.

That it was the Catholic Church, because they elected a Catholic officer for
the whole Church, viz. an Apostle.

Paul's argument to prove his Apostleship had not been strong; because he was
not called by man, but by Christ himself, and had seen the Lord, etc. Gal. 1.1.
1 Cor. 9.1. 2 The act of the Church was only a preparatory act thereunto with
an after consent: the election was properly done immediately by a lot, and what
was done might as well be done in the first particular Church guided by the
infallible spirit of the Apostles, as by the Catholic Church it self.

Many of these were men of Galilee, which by their habitation could not pertain
to the Church in Jerusalem.

Galilee, but they had forsaken all to follow Christ, and were commanded by
Christ to remain a time at Jerusalem, and then to go forth to Samaria, Judea,
and the utmost parts of the earth, Acts 1.4, 8. and therefore no Church relation
in Galilee could hinder them from joining in this first constituted Church, or
give any color that they came as members representative from any Churches in
Galilee. And so much for the plea for a Catholic church from Acts 1. etc. Now
concerning that which is supposed of a Catholic church representative in Act.
15. If it were such, then in respect of the Apostles (the catholic Officers)
only, or in respect of the body of the Assembly also, but in neither respects:
Ergo.

1 Not the first, for then as was said, any one Apostle may make a
representative Catholic church, having the whole power, as much as all of them
together; for though they would meet often to consult and assist one another; yet
not for defect of power in any one; and we think our brethren here will not say
it was in respect of the Apostles alone, supposing here they acted rather as
Elders with the rest, then out of their Apostolical power.

2 Not in respect of the whole Assembly, for then that assembly must consist of
the messengers of all the particular Churches, and the decrees should have been
directed to all the Churches; but neither of these can appear; For, first, we
read of no other messengers but those from Antioch, and how to evince more then
the Scriptures reveal, is hard. Secondly, if we look back and consider how far
the Gospel was spread before this assembly, it will appear very strange and
absurd to suppose such a thing; for Paul had been in Arabia before ever he came
to Jerusalem, Gal. 1.17. and when he and Barnabas went sent out from Antioch,
Acts 13. they went to several Islands and Countries, as Cyprus, Paphos,
Salamis, etc. besides what other places scattered Christians and Apostles had
preached in: now there is no probability of messengers sent from all these
places.

Secondly, the decrees were expressly directed to the Gentiles believing, in
Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia, where it seems this question had troubled the
minds of the Disciples, Acts 15.23, 24. which was far short of the Catholic
church; neither is it proved that the Churches of Syria and Cilicia had any
messengers there, much less that all the Churches had their messengers.

they might have had their messengers there, if they would, and therefore they
were bound to the decrees as of a general Council.





But Christ has not instituted that the Catholic church should combine into a
Society. Ergo.



How came Israel to be one National church, but by a National covenant? and
that before it had Officers; or how comes any national, provincial,
classical Church that are pleaded for to be such, but by some such
combination? Why is this Church of this Classis not of another but by
combination? Secondly, in a political body, the whole has power to order
every part, but this power among persons that are free, is only by combination.



Secondly, Christ ordained combination for communion in his Worship, but this
communion also is impossible to the Catholic church as one: Ergo.

Thirdly, corrupt Churches are visible Churches, but it is hard for us to
believe, or any to prove that Christ has instituted such combination of all
Churches, Asian, African, European, American, corrupt and incorrupt, for
prudent men may easily foresee the heavy consequents thereof.



But the Catholic visible Church has not such power: Ergo.

Act. 14. Tit. 1.

Secondly, (according to our Brethrens principles) if a particular Church may
choose a Pastor, much more the Catholic, because all privileges are primarily
given to the Catholic church, and what belongs to the part of a similar Body,
(as a part) that much more belongs to the whole.



Secondly, the Reasons against an universal Bishop are strong here, as that
their office is not described in the Word, nor their power able to reach all
Churches.

If it be said, that the Catholic church can choose her Pastors in the parts
or particular Societies, which are Pastors of the Catholic church, though not
Catholic Pastors of the Catholic church.

parts partium, and so parts totius) then they come to our hand, for thus it
appears that there is no Catholic t^tum, that is the subject of officers but
in its parts.

But the question is, Whether all particular Churches having the officers in
them, do make one political Body or Catholic church, and so have power to
choose Catholic Pastors.



But such a Catholic church political destroys policy: Ergo.

Matthew. 18. the power of excommunication is seated in such a Church, as
whatsoever it binds on earth, is bound in heaven by the highest Judge, in the
highest Court; and from the sentence of this highest court and Judge, how can
there be any appeal?

But now supposing such a Catholic church having power of excommunication, and
that as the highest Church, hence no inferior Church can bind on earth, so as
that the same is bound in heaven, seeing appeals may be made from them to an
higher power on earth.

If it be said that the sentence of an inferior Judge, proceeding rightly (as
in an inferior Sanhedrin) is ratified in heaven, yet may we appeal from him.



Secondly, suppose there were such a binding in civil Courts, and appeals may
be yet made from them, yet this is because there is supposed a supreme Court in
being, to which the appeal may be prosecuted and there determined, (as in the
highest Sanhedrin of Israel.) But there is not in the Church, nor like to be,
such a supreme Court where such appeals may be ended: Ergo.

If it be said, that what a particular Church binds on earth is bound in
heaven, except they err, but then appeals may be made, and their power is
gone.

Nazianzen and others of the time passed; yea, they may be as much inclined to
err, considering the greatest part of Churches in the world are for the most
part corrupt, yea, though they may have better eyes, yet they are further from
the mark; if particular Churches have no power of excommunication, because they
may err, be corrupt, be partial, or be divided; upon the same consideration,
neither Classical, National, or oecumeniall Counsels have any such power;
for they may err, grow corrupt, be partial, and be miserably divided, as well
as a congregationall Church; other Churches may admonish in case of scandal,
and counsel, when a particular congregation wants light; and moderate (if
desired) in case of difference; but still the power is in the particular Church.

Other arguments might be added, but seeing this controversy, as we hope, will
be more fully and purposely disputed by a far better hand, therefore we shall
fall to the consideration of such Scriptures, and some few general Arguments
which we meet withal in Mr. Ball briefly propounded, and in diverse other
Authors more largely insisted upon; which if the Lord be pleased to help us to
vindicate and clear up, we think other reasons and Scriptures of less force
will fall of themselves.

And first we find, Cant. 6.4. etc. to prove the whole Catholic church
visible to be one Ministerial Body, because it is called One, compared to an
Army terrible with Banners, in respect of the order of Discipline, and
described as being an organicall Body having eyes, hair, teeth, etc.

Theologia Symbolica non est argumentativa, except it can be made clear that
the parable is applied according to the true scope of it, and no further, which
here is very hard to evince: we know the whole Book of the Canticles is
variously applied by good Interpreters, Vid. Brightm. An. in Loc.
Brightman (none of the meanest in this kind of Scriptures) applies this place
to the church of Geneva, and the times of purer Churches to arise after it,
which are said to be terrible as an Army with Banners; not in respect of
Discipline, but in respect of warlike power, whereby that state of the church
shall defend it self.

2 But suppose that it is a description of the catholic church visible, yet it
cannot be a sufficient argument that it is one Ministerial church: For, first,
the catholic church is the same in all ages, and therefore by this reason it
was a catholic Ministerial body, as well in the days from Adam to Abraham,
etc. as in the New Testament. Secondly, by this argument we may prove Christ
the head and husband of the church to be an organicall body, as he is the Head
of the Church, for Cant. 5.10, 11. etc. the Church does allegorically describe
the beauty and excellency of Christ, in several organs and parts: but we
suppose though Christ Jesus in his humane nature has members, yet the scope of
the Church is not at all to set forth the members of his humane body, but the
glorious excellencies, and spiritual perfections of Christ as the Redeemer and
Savior of his Church, according to the manner of Lovers, who are taken with
the beauty of their spouses in all their members; When the spouse says, Cant.
1.1. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth; it were too gross to apply
it to the humanity of Christ, or to argue from thence that Christ the husband
of his Church is an organicall body.

Thirdly and lastly, when the Church is called One, the only one of her
Mother; though it is true she is one, it seems rather to set out her excellency
as rare, and but one, then her unity: and so the other descriptions all tend to
set forth her beauty in the eye and esteem of Christ; neither is it any thing
that the Church is compared to an Army terrible with banners, for in the same
Chap. verse. the last, she is compared to the company of Mahanaim, or two
Armies, (which is all one) for the company of Mahanaim consisted of two Armies,
Genesis 32.1, 2, 3. where Jacobs host meeting an host of Angels, he calls the
place Mahanaim, or, two Hosts; and therefore we may as well say the Catholic
church is terrible, with two Armies of Banners, as one.

Cor. 12.12, 13. etc. Whence the reason stands thus* That church wherein
Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, etc. are set, is an organicall Church.

But those are set in the Catholic visible Church; Ergo.

For the better clearing of this Scripture, it is needful, that we attend the
scope of the Apostle, who coming now to another branch of the things this
Church had written unto him about, Chap. 7.1. and 8.1. and 12.1. and this about
spiritual gifts, wherein they abounded, Chap. 1.7. being the occasion of all
their contentions and disorders, Chap. 1.12, 13. hence he is studious the more
to reunite them again, Chap. 12.13. and to direct them how to improve their
gifts orderly to edification, Chap. 14. and in this Chapter he persuades their
minds to unity who were divided, partly through pride in their own gifts;
partly, by disdain of others not so gifted; hence he puts them in mind; 1 What
once they were following dumb idols. 2 That all gifts are from the free
dispensation of God, and that one God, one Lord, one Spirit. 3 That God in his
wisdom has dispensed great variety of gifts, operations and administrations. 4
That all are given to profit withal, and these things he illustrates by a
simile taken from a natural body, which having largely presented and applied
to this Church, verse. 27. he concludes with the variety of administrations in
such things wherein they so much differed, Chap. 1.12, 13. God has set, says
he, in the Church not only Apostles, or Prophets, or tongues, etc. but all
these; are all Apostles? are all Prophets, etc? no, but the wisdom of God has
given you variety of these gifts and administrations; and therefore, Chap. 3.
to quiet them, he says, Paul an Apostle, Apollos an Evangelist, etc. all are
yours; and as this is the scope of the Apostle, so we see nothing in the
Chapter but is appliable to Corinth in particular, yea, applied unto them by
the Apostle, as what he spoke verse. 22. of one body, he applies to them, verse.
27. what he spoke, verse. 28. of Apostles, and other gifts set in the Church, he
applies also to them, Chap. 14. whereas he speaks of the exercise of diverse
gifts in that Church, when the whole Church came together, verse. 23, so he
speaks the same of himself an Apostle, verse. 6. When I come, etc. We take
notice of diverse reasons alleged from the Chapter, that he spoke of the
Catholic church, but they do not enforce it; for grant such things are true
of the Catholic church in a sense, viz. that in it God works all in all, in it
are diversities of gifts, etc. yet the Apostles scope is to speak to this
Church, as has been showed, and all are truly applyable unto it, this Church
came behind in no good gift, Chap. 1.7. this Church was one body, verse. 27.
and baptized into one body, whether Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, the members
of this Church needed the help one of another, must not make schisms in the
Body, must care one for another, etc. yea, Apostles as well as other gifts were
in the church, 1 Cor. 3.1. 1 Cor. 14.6. So that from the scope and drift of the
Apostle, all these Offices and gifts might be, and were set in Corinth, and
therefore this place will not evince a Catholic organicall body; yet we mean
not that Apostles were wedged in here, but they were set also in every church,
as also Teachers are in every church, but each according to the nature of the
Office, the one limited, the other not.

Secondly, we deny not but in this discourse the Apostle also, verse. 12, 13.
intends the whole mystical body of Christ, which is one Christ, neither do
we deny that these gifts of Apostles, Prophets, etc. are given to this Church,
but this will not prove it to be an organicall Church. For what is this body of
Christ, this one Christ into whom all are baptized, etc. It is properly the
whole company of true believers in all ages, and so contains the invisible
body of Christ; which Catholic body of all ages, cannot properly make an
organicall body: and be it so, that this body is visible, having visible
ordinances, baptized and drunk into one body, yet the Apostle respects the
^eall union of all the members to Christ; and therefore I (...) understand
spiritual and effectual baptism, containing the inward virtue with the
outward sign.

Again, the Apostles were (...) for the gathering (...) of the elect amongst
all the heathen and (...), but that proves not all those elect (who also are a
part of Christ's sheep, John in ^^.) were an organicall Church, or a part of it,
till called and added to the Church.

In a word, Apostles, Prophets, etc. were given to, and set in the mystical
body of Christ, as the chief object had and for whose sake and good they were
intentionally ordained of Christ, but not set in it as one organicall body, for
the actual and immediate administration of the visible ordinances of Christ to
it, but thus (...), as gathered into such Church societies as the Lord has
(...) for that end, and in this sense we agree with (...) Mr. (...) of the
right (...) page 2^1.

A^^ (says he) to what and, and to what first principal subject has the Lord
given reason, and the fa^ulty to disco^ as it is Peter, John, etc. as to the
first subject, and to them as for their good* No, no, it is (...), and for the
race of mankind. The case is just so here, 1. Cor. 12.^8. God has set
Apostles, etc.

We say also it is just so here, as God has given reason in respect of the end
to mankind first, and then to the individu^^; so God has set in the mystical
Church for the good of it, as chiefly intended by Christ, Apostles, Prophets,
etc. but now as in the (...) all dispensing of this gift of reason for the good
of mankind, Reason is not given to any such body, as the whole race of
mankind, to descend to John, Peter, etc. but first to John, Peter, and all the
individualls, that so by induction of all particulars, the whole kind of
reasonable man may be made up, and the end attained, and so it is here: God in
giving Officers and gifts for the good of the mystical body of Christ firstly,
yet in execution gives these Officers, and sets them in particular Churches,
that by the edification and perfection of all particulars, the whole may be
attained.

Thirdly, Apostles, Prophets, and all gifts and offices in general and
indefinitely, are given to the Church indefinitely considered, but particular
officers, Paul, Cephas, Apollo, Titus, Arabippus, etc. are given or set in
particular Churches; we mean, according to the several natures and extents of
their offices; As unto Bees in general ingi^^^ a power to gather honey, and
order themselves in their hives; but in their exercise of this power it is
given to the several swarms in the hives, who have their Queens, etc. to order
themselves. But as this power in general makes not a universal organicall
body of Bees; no more here an universal organicall Church.

Lastly, to speak more particularly, we conceive that the place in the utmost
latitude of it is meant of the mystical body, that one body into which all are
baptized; verse. 13. And that the fundamental mistake of our Brethren is this,
that because the Church here mentioned has Organs and political Officers in
it, that therefore it must needs make one political Church, where some Organs
are to rule in common, and every part is to be subject to the whole. For
although the mystical Church has Organs and political Officers in it; yet it
follows not therefore that it is one political body. For the invisible Church
conjoined with the visible, has political Officers set in it, and given to it
as invisible, as well as visible, in respect of Gods general designation and
particular application of them to this whole Church; yet it follows not that
they are one political body by actual combination thereunto; actual
combination, we say, for although Christ's institution must warrant and
prescribe all forms of political bodies, yet it will not be found that ever
there was any political Society without actual combination, whether civil or
sacred, whether national or more particular. The mystical Church may be said
to be organicall in respect of the Officers amongst them in the several parts
thereof; every part being a part of the whole spiritually, though not
politically. But it does not thence follow that the whole is one political
body, but mystical. Political Officers may, and must suppose some part of the
Church to be visible, but not that the whole should be Political. For the
Apostles (by extraordinary Commission for their time were officers of visible
believers, fit matter for a combination, as well as of particular combinations:
yet it follows not that visible believers existing out of combinations were a
political Society that would never meet to combine; but they were only a
visible number of Saints.

We have been thus large in clearing this Scripture, because we conceive the
chief strength of the contrary opinion to lie in it. And this being answered,
the light of it we hope will scatter the darkness that is brought upon diverse
other Scriptures which are drawn to prove such a kind of Catholic Church, as
Romans 12.4. etc. Col. 1.25. 1 Timothy 3.1^. Ephesians. 4.11. In which last Scripture we
never doubted but that the Officers were given, not for that particular Church
of Ephesus only, much less to such a diminutive Congregation consisting of
40, 60, or 100 only, as if we intended to i^pawn all power in this or that
Congregational body; but to a congregationall Church considered as the genus of
all particular Congregations of the world. Neither to this congregationall
Church only, but to all that are to be gathered to the unity of the faith. But
does this argue one political body consisting of all these? For though, ve^s.
16. the whole body be said to be compacted; yet that this should be understood
of a political, not spiritual way of compacting, we confess (with
submission) our weakness cannot apprehend.

The last Scripture which we find cited that seems to look this way, is 1
Pet. 5.1. Feed the flock which is among you.

James 2.2. where writing to the Jews of the twelve Tribes scattered abroad,
yet he speaks of a man coming into their Assembly; which cannot be meant
collectively, as if they had one assembly amongst them all, but distributively
of any assembly.

2 Though they be called a flock, not flocks, yet this, as R^imes observes,
was not because it was one flock really in themselves, but in some respect of
reason; which also he expounds to be per internam (we had rather say,
spiritualem) unionem, but not per externam combinationem; in respect of which
spiritual union, that is true which Mr. Ball cites out of Cyprian, Cypr. lib.
3. Epist. 13. Cypr. lib. 4. Epist. 7.
Etsi Pastores multi sumus, unam tamen greg^m pascimus. As also that there is
Episcopatus unus and Ecclesia una in ^oto mundo.

Hence also may appear an answer to diverse arguments, the chief whereof we
shall run through.

If by baptism we are not admitted into one particular Church, but into the
whole Catholic visible Church, 1 Cor. 12.13. then there is such a Catholic
Church.

Ball will not grant, and indeed would bring in endless confusion into the
Churches of Christ. Besides, no man can be a member of any combined society
without their consent, for otherwise so many may crowd into the Church because
baptized, as shall overthrow the edification thereof, and that against the
consent of the Church, and all the Officers thereof.

When any scandalous person is delivered to Satan, he is cast out of the whole
Catholic church, Ergo, he was a member of the whole Catholic Church, for he
cannot be cast out who was never within.

consequenter, by reason of communion of Churches; neither do we see that this
is taken away by saying, that, As when the left hand cutteth off a finger of
the right hand, it is not the left hand only that cuts it off, but the whole
man, deliberate reason and will consenting: For if this similitude would suit,
then the whole Catholic church must be called to consult and consent
antecedenter, before a particular Church can cut off any member, which
ordinarily is impossible to be attained.

2 But further according to our former principles laid down, we say he that is
justly cast out of one Church, he is morally excommunicated out of all, but not
politically and formally: For to excommunicate politically and formally, is by
virtue of a superior authority next under Christ; so that what is bound by
them, is bound in heaven. In which act the Minister does not only bind the
person, but also by virtue of his Office charge the Church not to have
communion with him. But we do not think that our Brethren will say that one
Church puts forth such an act of superior authority binding or charging all
Churches politice and judicialit^r not to have communion with him; for so one
Church should exercise jurisdiction over all Churches, and that without their
actual approbation, for, quod spectat ad (...), debat ob (...) approbari.

If it be said, That a particular Church does excommunicate by an intrinsecall
power not only in it self, but intrinsicall in the whole body; the question
will be, What is that intrinsicall power? Is it natural or voluntary?

To say it is natural, were too absurd; it voluntary, then neither
Congregations, Classes, Provinces, Nations, have power to excommunicate without
the previous consent of the whole Catholic church, which must voluntarily
concur thereunto. And if the Catholic Presbytery (as (...) said) have no
next, but a a remote power of excommunication, and this remote power be
extraordinary, or rare contingens, or almost never, then the ordinary power of
excommunication, (which is enough for us) is not from an intrins^call power of
the Church catholic. On the other side (if it be said) this power is in the
whole, but not derived from the whole to the parts, as the power of seeing is
first in the man, then in the eye, yet not derived from hands, legs,
shoulders, etc. and as the great body of the Sunn has intrinsecall light in
every part, not by derivation from one part to another; so this power of the
Keys is from Christ the Head to all the integral parts in points that severally
concern the same.

First, if this be so, then every particular Congregation receives its power of
the Keys immediately from Christ, not by derivation from any Presbytery, or the
Catholic Church, and is in that respect Independent. Neither also can
Congregations derive the power seated in them to Presbyteries, nor any greater
bodies take it from them.

Secondly, though we acknowledge this intrinsecall power of excommunication in
particular Congregations, as being there properly seated by Christ; yet that
there are any such political Churches, Classical, Provincial, National, or
Catholic, that have any such intrinsecall power as is in the Sunn, this is not
yet proved to our understanding* We deny ^ot the use of lesser and greater
Synod^, nor of such Doctrinall power o^ the pa^^ern Acts 15. holds forth, and
which is all that Learned Right of Presbyt. page 482.
M^. Rutherford conceives to belong to a general Council; for thus he says,
Verily, I profess I cannot see wh^^ power of jurisdiction t^ censure scandalls
can be in a general Council, there ma^ke some (...) Doctrinall power in such
a C^uncell, if such could be had and that is all. And how a National,
Provincial, or Classical Synod being lesser parts of the whole, can put forth
such acts as the whole cannot do, ipsi vid^rint. It Is true, a particular Church
may formally cast out a scandalous member according to the rule, Matthew. 18. yet
the argument from proportion will not hold in (...) of the power of
excommunication in greater assemblies against any particular Church offending,
(though other means appointed by Christ we deny not) for if excommunication
casts out an offender out of all Churches, then such a particular Church
cannot be excommunicated, except it could be cast out of it self, though it may
be deprived of the communion of other Churches.

Lastly, if it be no sin, (as is said) but a cross, that the Catholic Church
cannot meet to put forth its supposed int^insecall power, then let the
particular Churches enjoy that power till the Catholic Church can meet. a It
seems to us very strange that the Lord Jesus should institute such a supreme
power in a Catholic Body, which (a^ is said) de jure, should be till the
coming of Christ, and yet should be interrupted by the sin of man so many
ages, and which (for ought appears) never orderly met to this day.

If all Pastors be Pastors of the Catholic Church, then there is such a
Catholic Church; but all Pastors are Pastors of the Catholic Church: Ergo.

Cor. 12.28. formerly opened by us.

But if this Argument intend that they are Pastors of the Catholic Body as of
One Political Church, then we deny the Assumption upon this ground; because a
Pastoral Office consi^ts properly i^ having a charge and power over those to
whom he is a Pastor, Act. 20.^8. but he has no charge of the whole; for if so,
he must give account to Christ of the whole; neither has he power over such a
Catholic church, being never chosen by it, ^or it subjecting to him. If it be
said, such are made Pastors by Ordina^ion of the Presby^^^^* not the election
of the people who only appropriate him to themselves* who is a Pastor of the
whole Church then he is either a Catholic Pastor that has power to into (...)
in all Churches, as the Apostles had, which we think none will ye^l^ them* or
else they are Pastors only in name, without power which is absurd* Nor does
the similitude of a (...) made Doctor of Physic at large by a College of
Physicians, help in this case. For it supposes him to be made such ^ Doctor
before he be elected by any people to exercise this faculty; which apply^d to
this case of a Pastor, ^s having Ordination to make him a Pastor at large,
before election to th^^ or that people is utterly against all examples of
Scri^^ure, (...) Act^ 1. and ^. and 14,

That whi^^ belongs to a little part of a similar body (and t^lis) belong to
a greater part much more, and therefore if the imm^di^te exercise of the Keys
b^long to a single congregation, then much more to the whole, and to (...) of
the whole.

nomen and naturam totius, and so every believer is a Church; or if they so
divide this Catholic similar body, as to make a particular Congr^gation that
can join in Gods ordi^anc^^, the (...) quod st^ then particular visible
beleever^ considered as existing out of these Congregations cannot be m^mbers
formally of the Catholic visible Church.

2 We a^ knowledge the Catholic church considered as visible and invis^^^^, i^
one spiritual or mystical body, yet this Catholic body is under ^o Catholic
policy; but only in the several parts of it, ((...) has been proved before)
and in this respect the Church, which is spiritually one body, is politice many
bodies: so that the parts of this spiritual totum are not distinct bodies
(...), (for then every company of women are a Church body) but (...); and hence
though the Catholic church (...) body spiritually, (due cautions and
interpretations observed) yet it is not one similar Body politically; and hence
every society of believers is not a Church. Hence though it be true, that what
belongs to a part of a similar body, as a part, belongs much more to the
whole; and that therefore what belongs to a particular Church, belongs much
more to the whole: It is true in this sense, viz. what belongs to the part of
the whole as spiritual, and so participates the nature of the whole, belongs
much more to the whole, because the whole is spiritual: yet what belongs to
the part as political, does not much more belong to the whole, because the
whole is not political: Exempli gradi^, consider a particular Congregation, as
a number redeemed, called to Christ, (...) to him, this much more belongs to
the whole; and so if any privilege belong to them as such, much more to the
whole. Ye^ consider a Church as a combined Body, so what belongs to this part,
belongs not to the whole. For it belongs to the part to elect and enjoy
constantly Pastors over it, but this does not belong to the whole as a totum.
The Catholic mystical Church is indeed the prima materia, out of which
political Churches by their combination are formed, but it is no first formed
political similar Church, whence every particular Church immediately
participates of the nature of that whole; having (...) tem talis materiae and
partem form^.

If there be Church communion between all Churches, then there is one Catholic
Church: but there is Church communion of all Churches in hearing, receiving
Sacraments, exhorting one another, praying one for another, etc. Ergo.

We deny the consequence; for there may be a ^ra^^^nall, Ecclesiastical
communion, not only internally, but externally, without such an union as makes
one political combined Body, such as here we dispute of; as, two or three
Congregations may have communion together, and yet not be one political body:
Twenty synagogues might have communion together in the Jewish policy, and yet
were not one political Body: so the Churches of Galatia might have communion
together, yet were distinct Churches, not one Church, a^ also, the Churches of
New England have sweet and blessed comm^nion, yet are distinct. And though the
Churches of Gala^ia were called a whole l^mp, (as is objected) yet were they
thus by political combination, or as Dr. Downam (to mould up a Diocesan
Church) compares the first Church to a great lump of dough, or batch of bread,
out of which particular Churches were formed into many loaves; or not rather
called a lump by spiritual union and relation, common profession, and
fraternall communion, being all the same Contrymen; so also the Apostles had
Church communion, yet were not a political body. Kingdoms so may have civil
communion and commerce, yet not be one Kingdom.

If the Keys be given to a particular Church under the notion of the Spouse of
Christ, a flock of redeemed ones, etc. and then much more to the Catholic
visible Church, which is the Spouse of Christ, and flock of redeemed ones
primarily, and to a particular Church only secondarily; but the first is
affirmed by such as deny such a Catholic Church: Ergo.

Colos. 1.18. Ephesians. 5.25, 26. and 2.19.

2 The Church which is the Body of Christ existing in this age, the Keys are
given to it primarily, in comparison of particular Churches coexisting with it,
as to the chief object and end; but not to it as a political Body, in respect
of actual and immediate dispensation thereof: for (as we have often said) if in
respect of Political dispensation the Keys belong firstly to the Body of
Christ as his Spouse and redeemed ones; then the Church invisible as invisible,
rather then visible, must have the dispensation of the Keys primarily.

3 It is not said, that the Keys are immediately given to a particular Church
abstractly, as a number of redeemed, but as consociated and politically
combined: And in this respect that may be attributed to the part, a particular
Congregation of redeemed ones, which cannot be attributed to the whole. Ex. gr.
such a Congregation is combined, so is not the whole, nor can be; such a Church
may choose a Pastor over it, but so cannot the whole; so a man may tell the
particular Church, who may convene together, not so the whole.

Thus far (through the help of Christ) we have endeavored to clear the first
Point propounded concerning a Catholic instituted Church. We come now to prove
the second Point, viz. That Jesus Christ has instituted in the Gospel a
particular Church of one Congregation, in which, and unto which the actual and
immediate dispensation and participation of all instituted Worship do
regularly and ordinarily belong.

And here we shall show: 1 What such a particular Church is. 2 How the
dispensation of Church power and privilege do belong unto it. For the first,
we shall declare our selves in these Five Propositions.

1 It must be a visible Society, for One man cannot make a Church, nor can many
visible believers living severally, without society in several Nations make
One Church.

2 It Is not every Society of visible Professors that do make a Church, for
then every family of such Professors are a Church: Then two or three (which our
Brethren so much condemn) are a Church; and then a Society of Women professing
the truth may be a Political Church; then many members of several Churches
met to hear a Sermon, or any like occasion, make a Church; then a number of
Professors may constitute a Diocesan Church, or any like form; for out of this
block, That any number of believers made a Church, Dr. Downam hewed out his
Diocesan Church, and so made a fit seat for his Diocesan Mercury. Lastly, then
particular Churches should have no more any set Form prescribed, then Civil
government, which is as variable as humane wisdom sees meet, for hence a
particular Church may be melted into any form or mould of civil Society; for
imagine a number of professing believers, cohabiting either in a City, Hundred,
Wapentake, Shire, Province, Nation, Empire, etc. there shall then be so many
forms of Churches contrary to the principles and unanswerable arguments of our
best Reformers, who accounted it a great absurdity that the heavenly Kingdom
of Christ should be molded and framed according to the weakness of humane
wisdom and policy.

3 It must therefore be a Society combined, and that by a Covenant explicit or
implicit, for it must be such a combined Society where the whole have power
over its members; now whatever power one has over another, if it be not by way
of conquest or natural relation, (as the father over the child) it is by
covenant, as husband and wife, Master and servant, Prince and people; other
powers are but usurpations: it is noted as a profane speech in Bronnus, who
professed he knew no other rule of Justice, then for the greater to subdue the
less. Again, it is such a Society as has an ordinate power, to subject it
self to Officers, by electing of them to administer ordinances amongst them;
but this is only a federall Society.

Again, it is such a Society, to the making up of which is required something
more then faith, Acts 5.14. Believers were added to the Lord, or to his Church;
so that they were first believers, before they were added to the Church; for
there may be a number of believers converted at one Sermon, and immediately
scattered into many Towns or Countries: Now, if faith professed alone, makes
not a Church, but somewhat more is required, what can that be but foederall
combination?

Lastly, that, the dissolution whereof does unchurch a people, does constitute
a Church: but breaking the combination dissolves the Church, whether by
consent, schism, or when God himself removes the candlestick: Ergo.

4 Though a Church be such by combining, and so subjecting themselves to the
power of others, yet it must not be herein illimited, but according to the form
and mould expressed in the Word; for if they have this power to combine as
many, and as largely as they will, then a Diocese, Province, Nation, may
combine, and so put themselves under the power of a Diocesan, Provincial*
National society, which is unlawful; for the Church must be such a form as a
man may ordinarily bring offenses unto it, according to Matthew. 18. Tell the
Church; but that cannot be in a Diocese, much less in a Province or Nation,
where the Members can neither take notice of the offense, nor ordinarily so
much as consent unto any censure acted by any Officers in such a Church; nay,
further, if their power be unlimited, they may choose a Diocesan Pastor, one,
or many to feed all, or one to rule (like Beza his Episcopus humanus) with
subjection in case of error to the censure of all; nay, hence we see not, but
they may choose an universal Pastor, and so give away the power to one, if all
will agree.

In a word, they only may combine into a Political Body, where the whole may
excommunicate any part; but this cannot be in a combination of many Churches
into one whole, because no particular Church is capable of excommunication, for
it is impossible to be cast out of it self, as was said before.

5 A particular Church therefore must be such a Society as is so combined
together, that it may ordinarily enjoy Church communion, to exercise Church
power, to be fed by her Officers, and led by them; hence Titus was to set
Elders in every Church, and these Elders were such as could ordinarily feed
them, by preaching the Word, as well as rule and govern them.

Now that such a Congregationall Church is the institution of the Gospel,
appears first by those many Scriptures that speak of the Churches of one
Country, and in small compass, as several Churches, not as one, as the
Churches of Judea, Samaria, and Galilee, Acts 9. the Churches of Galatia, Gal.
1.1. yea, not only in one small Country, but in Cities, or near unto them; we
read of distinct Churches, as Corinth, though God had much people* there, yet
it was one Congregation, 1 Cor. 14.33. and had another Church near to it, viz.
Cenchrea: Also Rome, whom the Apostle saluting, sends also salutations by them
to Aquila and Priscilla, with the Church in their household, which show they
were not far from that Church of Rome. To these add, that Jerusalem the first
Church that was constituted by the Apostles, and whose number was the greatest
of any that we read of, yet it was but one Congregation, as is evident by Acts
1. and Chap. 2.41, 42. What is objected against this to prove it the Catholic
Church, was answered before; other objections against this, and like examples,
shall be considered in their due place, as we meet with them.

But we shall not need to say much, that a Congregation furnished with its
Officers is a Church according to the institution of the Gospel, but there are
more objections against the compleatnesse thereof, which yet is proved thus,
That Church which has power of all the Keys given unto it for actual
administration within it self, is a complete Church: But so has a particular
Congregation, Ergo. The first part is evident; because where all the Keys are
with full power to administer the same, there nothing is wanting; the
Assumption is proved thus, If all those Officers to whom is given the
authoritative power of exercising the Keys, be given to a Congregation; then
all the Keys are so given to it, but so it is; for since Apostles and
extraordinary Officers ceased, there are no other Officers but Pastors,
Teachers, and Rulers, called sometimes Bishops, sometimes Elders: but these
Officers are given to such a Church, as is proved Acts 14. Tit. 1.4. and is
acknowledged in all Reformed Churches, who ordain such Officers in particular
Churches of one Congregation: Ergo.

If it be said, that though a Congregation has such Officers as have the power
of the Keys, yet that such must combine with others in way of co-ordination to
govern in common, and so to be helped and completed by them.



It cannot have a Synod, which is one ordinance of God, therefore it is not a
complete Church.



Though a Town or family being cast alone, may govern as a complete body; yet
when it stands in a commonwealth, as in England, it may not be so independent,
but submit to combinations: so here when a particular Congregation is alone, it
may govern as complete; not so when amongst other Churches.

Abraham having a complete government in his family was not bound to combine
with the governments he came amongst, neither did he; in prudence he joined in
a league of amity and for mutual help with Aner, etc. but not to submit to
their government: so here a Church having complete Officers is not bound to
submit to such combinations, except it be proved that any superior power of
other churches can command the same.

Secondly, though a family not having complete civil government in it self
must combine where it stands in a commonwealth, yet never to yield up its
family-government over wife, children and servants to rule them in common with
other Masters of families, no civil prudence or moral rule taught men ever so
to practice; and therefore why in such a case should a Church give up the
government of it self to Pastors of many Churches to rule it in common, and not
rather as a Classis is overawed by the Provincial only in common things; so
in congregations Pastors should govern their flocks, and only in things common
be under a Presbytery. If it be said, That the Classis do act in such things
only; for in excommunication of an offender, the offense is common to all. We
answer, if so, then why should not the Provincial and National Churches by
this reason assume all to themselves from the Classis? for the offense of one
is common to all: As also upon this ground, why should not the Classis admit
all the members of every Congregation under them? for this also may concern
them all.

Thirdly, here is a great difference, for civil Societies are left to civil
prudence; and may give up themselves to many forms of government: but Churches
are bound to use and maintain such order of government as Christ has set in
the church, and not to give it up to many, no more then to one* If testimonies
were needful, we might produce Zanchi, Zwinglius, Parker, Baines, and others,
who are fully with us in this doctrine of a particular church; yea, Dr. Downam
himself confesses; that the most of the churches in the time of the Apostle
Paul did not exceed the proportion of a populous congregation; and this
confession puts us in mind of a witty passage of his Refuter, or his
Epistoler, who against the Bishops maintains the doctrine of congregationall
churches with us; with whose expressions, (for the recreation of our selves and
the Reader) we will conclude: The Papist, (says he) he tells us (just as the
Organs go at Rome) that the extent of a Bishops jurisdiction is not limited
but by the Popes appointment, his power of it self indifferently reaching over
all the world. Our Prelatists would persuade us (to the tune of Canterbury)
that neither church nor Bishop has his bounds determined by the Pope, nor yet
by Christ in the Scriptures, but left to the pleasure of Princes, to be cast
into one mould with the Civil State. Now the plain Christian finding nothing
but humane uncertainties in either of these devises, he contenteth himself with
plain song, and knowing that Christ has appointed Christians to gather
themselves into such Societies as may assemble themselves together for the
worship of God, and that unto such he has given their peculiar Pastors; he, I
say, in his simplicity calls these Assemblies, the Churches of Christ, and
these Pastors, his Bishops.

Thus much concerning the nature of a particular church, and that it is
instituted in the Gospel.

Now in the second place we are to show how church government and Ordinances
are given to it as to the proper subject of the same. Where we shall propound
these Theses for explication of our selves.

First, Though Pastourship considered as an office in relation to a people to
feed them authoritatively, be one of these Ordinances given to a particular
church: Yet Christ has given it for the gathering in of his elect unto the
church, and therefore we grant some acts of the Ministry, viz. the preaching
of the Word, is to be extended beyond the bounds of the church.

Secondly, Seals and other Privileges although de jure, and remotely they
belong to the catholic church, or the number of believers: yet de facto and
nextly they belong properly to this Subject which we speak of, (as we hope
to make good.)

Thirdly, They are not so appropriated to such congregations only as to
exclude the members of those congregations which are under the government of a
common Presbytery or other forms of government, for we have a brotherly
esteem of such congregations, notwithstanding that tertium quoddam separabile
of government, (as Mr. Baines calls it) being a thing that comes to a church
now constituted, and may be absent, the church remaining a Church.

Fourthly, although it be said by some Divines, that as faith is the internal
form of the church, so profession of faith is the outward form, and that
therefore bare profession of faith makes a member of the visible church, yet
this must be understood according to the interpretations of some of them who so
speak, for there is a double profession of faith; Personal, which is acted
severally by particular persons; and common, which is acted conjointly in, and
with a Society: The first makes a man of the catholic number of visible
Saints, and so fit matter for political church-society: the other makes a man
of the political church formally and completely; and in this latter sense
profession of faith is the external form of a visible church, but not in the
other.

Now that in and to this subject so professing, the seals and other ordinances
belong may, be proved thus:

Ergo. For that Church which is incapable of actual dispensation of seals,
censures, etc. is incapable of the participation thereof in an orderly and
ordinary way; But the Catholic number of visible believers as Catholic, and
out of particular Societies, are not capable of dispensing the same; Ergo.

The Proposition is evident, for it cannot be showed that any Church in the New
Testament was ever capable of participating in seals, that was not capable of
dispensing them, at least not having a next power to elect Officers to do it.

The Assumption is evident from what has been proved, that it is no political
Body (the sole subject of Church administrations) neither in the whole, nor in
the parts as existing out of Congregations.



But they are bound to join in such Societies for that end, for otherwise there
is no necessity of erecting any particular Churches in the world; and so all
the glory of Christ in this respect should be laid in the dust, and these
particular temples destroyed, and thus a door of liberty is opened to many to
live loosely without the care and watch, and communion of any particular Church
in the world.



Didoclavius, and him that writes concerning Perth Assembly against private
Baptisms, be considered, and it will be found that most of them do strongly
conclude against administration thereof to any but Church Members.

Ball in this his dispute against our Conclusion: yet in his Discourse let fall
sundry things that confirm it; Page 22.
as when he describes the Catholic Church to be the Society of men professing
the faith of Christ, divided into many particular Churches. Whence we argue, if
the Catholic church existeth only in these particular Churches, the seals
must only be given to them and the members thereof; also, Page 68.
That Baptism is a solemn admission into the Church of Christ, and must of
necessity be administered in a particular Society: Whence three things will
follow; First, that Baptism sometimes administered privately by the Apostles is
not an ordinary pattern. Secondly, that Baptism is not to be administered to
believers (as such) immediately, if of necessity it must be administered in a
particular Society. Thirdly, joining to some particular Society being an
Ordinance of God of so great concernment; and if Baptism must be administered in
it, why ought not, why may not such join to that Society? (at least as members
for a time.) Also when he says diverse times, That men are made members of the
Church by Baptism, (speaking of such Churches as choose Officers over them;)
yea, that the Apostles constituted Chrches by Baptism, and the like, (which we
shall note in the answer;) Now what do these argue but a yielding of the
cause? for if the Apostles made members, and constituted Churches by Baptism,
this was only sacramentally, and if so, then of necessity they must be really
members of such Churches before Baptism.

Thus we have run through this large field of the Catholic and particular
Church, which has detained us longer then we intended; yet, to prevent
mistakes from any thing that have been said concerning the union, communion,
and combination of the Churches; we shall add these two things.

1 We observe that the Scripture speaks of the Church, sometimes as One body,
sometimes as many, and therefore called Churches; and hence our care is to
preserve not only the distinction of Churches, (as many by particular
combinations) but also their unity, as being one by spiritual relation.

2 Association of diverse particular Churches we hold needful, as well as the
combination of members into one; yet so as there be no schism of one from
another, nor usurpation of one over another, that either one should deprive the
rest of peace by schism; or many should deprive any one of its power by
usurpation; hence a fraternall consociation we acknowledge; consociation we
say, for mutual counsel and help, to prevent or remove sin and schism; yet
fraternall only, to preserve each others power; consociation of Churches we
would have cumulative, (not in words, but in deed) to strengthen the power of
particular Churches, not privative, to take away any power which they had from
the gift of Christ before.

For as on the one side it may seem strange that One Church offending should
have no means of cure by the conceived power of many; so on the other side the
danger may appear as great, and frequently falls out, that when many Churches
are scandalous, one innocent Church may be hurt by the usurpation of all. And
hence we see not, but that fraternall consociation is the best medicine to heal
the wounds of both.

We utterly dislike such Independency as that which is maintained by contempt,
or careless neglect of sister Churches; Faciunt favos and vespae, Tertul. lib.
4. Com. Mar.
faciunt Ecclesias and Marcionitae, says Tertullian.

We utterly dislike such dependency of Churches upon others, as is built upon
usurpations and spoils of particular Churches.

Having thus largely digressed for the clearing of the foundation of the
dispute in hand, we desire to be excused if we be the more brief in our answers
to particulars, which now we shall attend unto as they lie in order.

CHAP. VI.
THe seals are given unto the Church not only in ordinary, (as you say) but
also in extraordinary dispensation, etc. And when you say, the dispensing of
the seals is an ordinance given only for the edifying of the Church gathered,
must it not be understood of extraordinary dispensation as well as of ordinary,
etc. added these words [ordinary dispensation] were, to prevent the objection
which you foresaw might be made from the Apostles practice and example, but so
as they cut asunder the sinews of the consideration it self, and make it of no
force.

ordinary dispensation;] which being rightly understood, it will appear that it
no way cuts the sinews of the consideration as is objected. For whereas, first,
you extend the opposite term, [ extraordinary dispensation] to the whole
general practice of the Apostles and Evangelists; and secondly, take it for
granted, that their practice was not to baptize members of particular Churches*
we neither intended the first, nor do we grant the second; as for the first,
we acknowledge freely that the Apostles and Evangelists ordinarily and
generally practiced according to common rules in this point of baptizing, as
well as in other, and left their practice for our pattern, and therefore their
ordinary practice in this thing we shall stick to; yet they having not only
extraordinary power above Pastors and Teachers, but also having sometime an
immediate call unto some acts and special guidance of the Spirit to warrant
what they did, therefore there were some of their actions, especially in
respect of some circumstances thereof, which ordinary Pastors (not so assisted)
may not do; as in this case when they baptized in private houses, in the
wilderness alone, and not in the face of a Congregation, etc. and therefore if
in some few cases some do think they did not baptize into a particular Church;
yet if their ordinary practice were otherwise, we ought to imitate the
ordinary, not some extraordinary cases; and thus the sinews and force of the
consideration remains strong, notwithstanding this word of [ ordinary
dispensation:] and that this was our meaning, was not hard to discern, by the
Scriptures cited in the answer, to prove the seals are given unto the Church
in ordinary dispensation, amongst which, Acts 2.41, 42, 47. containing the
Apostles first practice in this kind are expressed; and Mr. Ball took notice
thereof, as appears by his own reference to the same afterward, though in his
printed Reply those quotations be wholly left out.

2 Let us consider whether the Apostles ordinarily did not baptize into
particular Churches; and this may be proved from the stories of their ordinary
practice: First, it will be easily granted that the Apostles did gather
disciples into particular visible Churches, but there is no other time or
season of doing it can be showed in all the stories of their Acts; yea,
sometimes they were so suddenly called away, or enforced away by persecution
after they had converted disciples, that it is very improbable, if not
impossible, they should do it at all, but when they converted and baptized
them, as Acts 16.40. and 17.5. etc.

But to come more particularly unto the story it self, the Apostles first, and
exemplary practice being the best interpreter of their commission, and of their
ordinary proceeding therein; the first converts which the Apostles baptized
after the visible kingdom of Christ was set up, were those in that famous
place, Acts 2.41. concerning whom observe, first, that the Apostle Peter not
only preached unto them repentance and faith in the name of Christ, with
promise of remission of sins* and that they should be baptized, but according
to that commission, Mat. 28. with many other words he exhorted them, saying,
Save your selves from this untoward generation, being the very scope of his
exhortation; and this implies a gathering of themselves to the fellowship of
the saints; and all this Word they gladly received before they were baptized.

2 When the holy Ghost, verse. 41. declares their baptizing, he records withal
their adding to them, the latter being an exegesis of the former, and that the
same day, as being performed at the same time; and indeed when a convert
publicly professes his faith in Christ, is it not as easily done* to re^eive
him to a particular visible Church, as into the Catholic before Baptism; but
first to baptize them, and then the same day to add or join them to the Church,
is altogether unprobable. And that this adding was to a particular Church, is
sufficiently proved before.

The next place you may note, is Acts 5.14. where the Holy Ghost omitting the
baptizing of those believers, yet speaks of their adding to the Lord, as if the
one employed the other; and that their adding to the Lord, was by their joining
to the Church, is evident by the opposition between verse 13 and 14. Of the
rest durst no man join himself to them, but believers were the more added to
the Lord.

3 In the conversion of Samaria, although so great a work is declared in so few
words in one verse, Act. 8.12. yet the text puts a manifest distinction of
Philips doctrine between the things of the Kingdom of God, and the name of
Jesus Christ: which plainly enough shows, that they taught the observing of
the order of the Kingdom of Christ, as well as the Doctrine of the name of
Christ, the object of saving faith. And this they received by faith, and
professed before they were baptized.

Now the first and most famous examples of the Apostles persuading that so they
practiced, why should we doubt of their like practice in other examples when
nothing is said that contradicts the same? as Acts 10. in the baptizing of
Cornelius his house, where so many were met, and the Holy Ghost fell on all;
why should we think the Apostle Peter baptized them, and left them out of the
order of Christ, wherein they should worship him, and be edified in the faith?
If we doubt of it, because the Scripture is silent therein, we may as well
question whether those believers, Acts 4.4. and 9.35. and verse. 42. whether any
of these confessed their faith, or were baptized, for nothing is said thereof:
So likewise Acts 11. where we read of many believing, turning to the Lord,
verse. 21. of the adding others to the Lord, verse. 24. but nothing of their
confession of faith or baptism, and yet they are called a Church; whereby it
appears that the holy Ghost sometime expresses their baptism without joining
to the Church; and sometimes joining without baptism, and sometime he
expresses both, Acts. 2.41. And therefore hence we may conclude the like of
the case of Lydia and the Jailer; considering the former practice of the
Apostles: and that the Apostle speaks so expressly of a Church at Philippi in
the beginning of the Gospel, Phil. 4. at which time we have no more conversions
expressed but of those two families; at least, they were the most eminent
fruits of Paul's Ministry at that time; and it is very probable the Church was
gathered in Lydia's house, seeing Paul going out of prison to her house, he is
said to see the Brethren, and comfort them, so departing, verse 40. Besides,
why might not the Apostle baptize them into that particular visible Church in
such a case, as well as into the Catholic, or all Churches, as some say, they
professing subjection to Christ in every ordinance of his, with reference to
that Church he had there constituted? The fullness of power in the Apostles
might do greater matters without breach of order, though no rule for us so to
do; neither is it strange from the practice of those times to begin a Church in
a family, seeing the Apostle speaks of Churches in three several families,
Romans 16.5. Col. 4.15. Phil. 2. which though many understand to be called
Churches in regard of the godliness of those families; yet if we consider;
First, how many eminent Saints the Apostle salutes, (who no doubt had godly
families) not so much as naming their households; much less giving them such a
title, but only to these three named. Secondly, how distinct his salutations
are, first the Governors, and then the Church in their house. Thirdly, that the
Apostle does not only send his salutations to the Church in the house of
Aquila and Priscilla, Romans 16.5. but also keeping the name of a Church, he
sends salutations from that Church to the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 16.19. All
which do strongly argue there is more in it, then that they were godly
families, and therefore may persuade us that there were indeed constituted
Churches in those Families, though other Christians also might join with them.

Philip so to do; so also there was a special reason thereof, the Lord
intending thereby, rather by him to send the Gospel into Ethiopia, then to
retain him in any other place, to join with his Church: And the Baptism of
Paul, who as without the Ministry of the Word he was converted by the
immediate voice of Christ, so he was baptized by the immediate call of Ananias
so to do. Now let us proceed to consider what further is replied.

The seals Baptism and the Lord's Supper are given to the Church, not only in
ordinary, but also extraordinary dispensation: True Baptism is not without the
Church, but in it, an ordinance given to it. The Sacraments are the seals of
the Covenant to the faithful, which is the form of the Church tokens and
pledges of our spiritual admittance into the Lords family. Hence it is
inferred, that if the seals in extraordinary dispensation were given to the
Church, and yet to members of no particular Church, then also in ordinary
dispensation it may be so.

1 It will not follow; for first, if the Apostle in extraordinary cases
baptized privately, will it follow that in ordinary dispensation it may be so?
Secondly, if because the Ministry be given to the Church, and extraordinary
Officers were not limited to particular Churches; will it therefore follow that
in ordinary dispensations, Ministers ought not to be given only to particular
churches? Thirdly, as we have often said, that seals belong de jure to all
believers, as such, as members of the Catholic church, (they being given unto
it firstly, as to its object and end) and all that are truly baptized, are
baptized into it, and thus never out of it, as being tokens of our spiritual
admittance into the Lords family both in ordinary and extraordinary
dispensation; but does it hence follow that actual fruition of the seals (of
which the question is stated) may ordinarily be had or given to such as set
loose from all societies? the Apostles had extraordinary power, being general
Pastors over all persons believing as well as Churches; and therefore at some
times by special guidance of the Spirit they might do that which ordinary
Pastors may not do.

as the seals, so the Word of salvation preached and received, is a privilege
of the Church, etc. If by preaching be meant the giving of the Word unto a
people, to abide and continue with them, and consequently the receiving of it
at least in profession, then it is proper to the church of God.

viz. That the Word is not such a peculiar privilege of the Church as the
Seals, in that the one is dispensed not only to the Church, but also to others
for the gathering of them, which is not so in the Seals, for the Word of God
received in Corinth abiding with them, professed of them, was not so peculiar,
but an Idiot coming in might partake in the same, but not so in the
Sacraments, 1 Cor. 14.

The Word makes Disciples, the Word given unto a people is Gods covenanting
with them, and the peoples receiving this Word, and professing their faith in
God through Jesus Christ, is the taking of God to be their God, the laws and
statutes which God gave unto Israel, were a testimony that God has separated
them from all other people: the Word of reconciliation is sent and given to the
world reconciled in Jesus Christ, and they that receive the Doctrine, Law, or
Word of God, are the disciples, servants, and people of God.



1 There is a coven^nting between God and man, which is personal, and so
whosoever receives the Word of Gods grace by faith sent unto him by God, enters
into Covenant to be his, and that before he makes any visible profession
thereof, and so every believer is a disciple, a servant of God, and one of Gods
people, but many thousands of these considered only in this their personal
relation to God, do not make a visible Church, many such might be in the
world, but no members of the visible Church, until they came and joined to the
Church of Israel of Old, or to the visible Churches in the New Testament.

2 There is a sociall or common covenanting between God and a people, to be a
God to them, and they a people unto God in outward visible profession of his
Worship; and so the Lord took Abraham and his seed into Covenant, and renewed
that Covenant with them, as an holy Nation and peculiar people to him; and in
this covenanting of God with a people, whereby they become a Church, there is
required, first, that they be many, not one. Secondly, that these many become
one body, one people. Thirdly, that they make visible profession of their
Covenant with God really, or vocally. Fourthly, that this Covenant contain a
profession of subjection to the ordinances of Gods Worship, wherein God
requires a Church to walk together before him: and all these may be seen in the
Church of Israel, who received Gods laws indeed, but so as they became one
people to God, visibly avouched God for their God, received and submitted unto
all the laws of his Worship, Government, and other Ordinances. And this is
expressly or implicitly in every true visible Church, though more or less fully
and purely.

Now if you intend such a covenanting of a people with God, by a professed
receiving of his Word, and subjection to his Ordinances; we grant such to be
true Churches, and to such the seals do belong; and therefore we willingly
close with the Conclusion that follows, They that have received the Word of
salvation entirely, and have Pastors godly and faithful to feed and guide
them, they and their seed have right to the seals in order. And they that join
together in the true Worship of God, according to his will, with godly and
faithful Pastors, they have right to the sacraments, according to Divine
institution. These conclusions we willingly embrace, and infer, that if the
seals belong to such a Church, then to particular Congregations. For where
shall we find a people joining together with godly Pastors, but in such
particular Assemblies? For we doubt not our Brethren do disclaim all Diocesan
Pastors or Provincial, etc.

That there is now no visible Catholic Church in your sense, will easily be
granted, etc.

If this be granted in our sense, so that there be no such Catholic church
wherein seals are to be dispensed; then it will fall to be the right and
privilege of particular Congregations, to have the seals in the administration
proper to them; and so the cause is yielded; but because there is so much here
spoken of the Catholic visible Church, and so much urged from it, we shall
refer the Reader to what is said before, only one thing we shall note about
the instance of Athanasius, that a man may be a member of the Catholic visible
Church, but of no particular Society.

You say it is evidenced, in that a Christian (as Athanasius for an example)
may be cut off unjustly from the particular visible Church, wher^in he was
born, and yet remains a member of the Catholic visible orthodox Church.

clavis errans non ligat: and in respect of men, and communion with other
Churches in the seals, if they receive him, being satisfied that he is unjustly
cast out; they may receive him, not for his general interest in the Catholic
church, but in respect of his true membership in the particular Church, that
unjustly cast him out. Whereas, if the Churches were not persuaded but that he
were justly cast out of the particular, they ought not to admit him to seals,
were he as Orthodox as Athanasius himself in doctrine, and as holy in his life.

Though there be no universal Congregation, nor can be imagined, yet there are
and have been many visible Assemblies or Societies, true Churches of Christ, to
whom the prerogative of the seals is given, which have not been united and knit
together into one Congregation or Society in Church Order. For every Society in
Covenant with God, is the true Church of God. For what is it to be the flock,
people, or sheep of God, but to be the Church of God? and where there is a
Covenant, there is the people of God, etc.



First, if this be so, that every Society in Covenant with God, be the Church
of God, then men may set up as many Forms of visible Churches as they please,
(if the people be in Covenant with God visibly at least) the Archdeacon with
his Commissary, Priests, Churchwardens, etc. being in Covenant with God, are a
true Church: So the Diocesan Bishop in his Cathedral with his Clergy, or any
such Assembly, are the Church of God; or what other form-soever men will
devise, may go for the Church of God, and to them belong the seals, and (you
may as well say) discipline, and all Ordinances of God, if they be the true
Church.

Secondly, upon this ground every company of godly Christistians in Covenant
with God, meeting in fasting, prayer, etc. are the true Church of God, and to
them (as such) the seal^ belong, and sending for a true Minister of the
Catholic church, they may have Baptism and the Lord's Supper administered, and
by the same reason discipline also: yea, if but two or three (as you say) being
in Covenant with God, meet together in their travail at an Inn, etc. are the
Church of God, especially every Christian family i^ the Church; for they
profess the entire faith* join (daily) in prayer and thanksgiving, receive the
truth of God to dwell amongst them, are in some measure obedient unto the
command^ of God, and in Covenant with God:

And therefore being the Church of God, why not call for a Minister, and have
seals ordinarily dispensed to them?

Thirdly, upon this ground a company of Christian Women in Covenant with God
are a Church, to whom the seal ^ belong; and who sees not, how all orderly
dispensation of Gods Ordinances, and the whole order of visible Churches in the
Gospel would be overturned by this assertion? We verily believe this Author was
far from admitting these things, but the Position it self will unavoidably
enforce the same. Neither can we impute this assertion to any
inconsiderateness through heat of disputation. For if any shall maintain the
personal Covenant of people with God to be sufficient to constitute visible
Churches, and not admit a necessity of a more public or general Covenant
explicit or implicit, whereby a company of Christian^ are made one people,
joining in one Congregation to worship God in his holy Ordinances, and walk
together in his way^, they must of necessity acknowledge every Society in
Covenant with God to be a Church, as here is said; and therefore admit all
forms of Churches, and all Families, etc. to be Churches, and so bring in the
confution objected, which we desire may well be considered.

All your Arguments stand upon that ground of personal covenant with God,
which is too weak to bear up that conclusion, to make all such visible Churches
to whom the seals belong, as the absurd consequences thereof show.

These Reasons, and the Scriptures in the margent (some of them) will prove
them fit matter for visible Churches, and that they have a remote right unto
the seals of that Covenant, (which we grant) but they will not prove every
Society of such to be true Churches, having immediate right to have the seals
dispensed unto them.

If it be granted that the seals are the prerogative of particular visible
Churches, known and approved Christians amongst us are members of such
Churches, and so to be esteemed amongst you, etc. and every visible believer
professing the pure entire faith, admitted to the right and lawful
participation of the sacraments, is a visible member of the true Church, if he
has neither renounced the Society, nor deserved justly to be cast out by
excommunication, or Church censure, etc. And if known and approved Christians,
members of our Churches coming to New England, shall desire to have their
children baptized, or themselves admitted to the Lord's Supper, before they be
set members amongst you; we desire to know upon what grounds from God you can
deny them, if you acknowledge our Churches, Ministry and Sacraments to be
true, (as you profess) and the members of the Church be known and approved,
orderly recommended unto you.



Secondly, if any yet have not so far renounced those Churches they belonged
unto, yet they are not orderly recommended unto us, which also you grant ought
to be, and indeed otherwise we may often receive persons justly excommunicate, or
such as are no members of Churches any where, or otherwise under great offense,
as frequent examples amongst our selves do she^e, though the Church may think
well of such as offer themselves. What else follows in this Paragraph, is the
same in substance, and much of it in words also, that we have answered before;
and therefore we pass it over; and that of the Jewish Church we shall speak to
after. As for that you desire leave to set down, and us to examine what may be
objected against that we affirmed, That the distinct Churches named in the New
Testament were Congregationall Societies; we shall consider as follows:

The number of believers were so great in some Cities, that they could not
conveniently meet in one place as one Assembly to worship God according to his
will, and for their edifying, as in Samaria, Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus.

Baine, Parker, etc. with whom we join; and we might refer you to them for
answer to this beaten. Objection of the Prelates; yet we are not unwilling to
examine what is said in this digression. The Argument stands thus: If the
number of believers were so great in some City, as could not meet in one
Assembly to edification; then there was some other form of a Church besides
Congregationall; But so it was in Samaria, etc. Answ. We deny the consequences,
for when they grew to so great a number, they might fall into more
Congregationall Churches, and so no other form arise from the multitude; but we
suppose you mean of such a multitude as is called a Church; and therefore to
answer to your Assumption, we deny that any such multitude of believers as is
here called a Church were so great as could not meet to edification: And first
concerning Samaria.

That there was a Church gathered in Samaria, will not be denied, for they
received the Word, and were baptized; but that the Church in that City was
only a Congregationall Assembly, is more then can probably be concluded.

Samaria, and we accept your reason as good, because they received the Word,
and were baptized wh^e (by the way) you grant what we pleaded for before, That
the Apostles gathered Churches, when they baptized them: but that there was but
one Congregationall Assembly, lies not in (...) prove, until you prove that
all the believers were called a Church, or one Church, which does not appear in
the whole story, (...) nor any other where that we can find* and it is, very
probable that as Philip converted and baptized so great a multitude at several
times, and gathered them into the Church or Churches as he baptized them, so he
might gather several Churches, as well as one, seeing that none doubt but that
Congregationall Churches (...) an ordinance of Christ, what ever men contend
for beside* And therefore be the number of believers in Samaria as great as you
would have it, it proves nothing.

The Church at Jerusalem was one, and distinct, yet increased to 3000, then to
5000, etc.

viz. until they scattering by the persecution about Stephen, Acts. 7.8. which
is evident by these two arguments. First, Acts 2.41, etc. where we see the 3000
added to the 120. they have their communion together described: 1 In regard of
their spiritual communion, to be in the Apostles doctrine, fellowship,
breaking of bread and Prayer, verse 42. Secondly, in regard of their outward
communion in the good things of this life; they had all things common, and sold
their possessions, etc. verse 44, and 45* Now the manner of both parts of this
communion in respect of time and place is described, verse 46. viz. in their
spiritual duties, They continued daily with one accord in the Temple. And
secondly, in respect of their outward communion in their States, They eat their
meat from house to house; this latter requiring many tables and many houses to
provide for them; so that although in their outward communion, it was in
private houses, yet their spiritual communion it was with one accord in one
place, viz. the Temple, where they had room enough; being the place erected for
a National Church; and having favor with all the people, were not interrupted
therein by any persecution. We need not step out of our way to reply to all
that is said against this reason. It is enough for us to note, that they daily
with one accord (...), and that in the Temple, which is not ans^ered by any
(...).

2 This appears, Acts ^.1, 5. where it is evident the election of Deaco^^ was
before, and by the multitude, verse 1. by the whole multitude, verse 5. and
this was the last Church-meeting and Church act we read of before their
scattering; neither can ^t appear that the Jews and ^recians, whose Widows
murmured were two distinct Congregations; but the contrary is evident, in that
the Deacons were chosen al by the whole, and for the whole, not distinctly so
many for this, and so many for that Church, as it was needful if they were two
Churches. These proof being so clear* the inconveniences objected are of no
force, and sufficiently answered by many examples of as great Assemblies
meeting ordinarily to edification; as beside the Auditory of Chrysostom, cited
by others; the Assemblies of Stepney in London, Yarmouth in Norfolk, and others
in our experience. Beza, a man not loving to hyperbolize, says, that being in
Paris, there met at a Sermon Calvin Epist. 332.
24000. And of a Synodall Assembly that they received the Lords supper no less
then 10000. Beza Epist. 65.

Without question the number of believers at Antioch was not small, of which it
is expressly said, That a great number believed, and that a great multitude were
added to the Lord by the preaching of Barnabas, etc. and therefore we may think
the Church rose to such a^ bigness as could not well assemble in one
Congregation, Acts 11.21. and 14.27.

Acts 11.21. the great number that believed, was the fruit of all the scattered
Christians at Phenice, Cyprus, and Antioch; for the hand of the Lord was with
them all, and their whole success is summed up together, nothing said before
of the other places.

2 Though Paul and Barnabas taught much people, yet it proves not that this
much people were converted to the Church.

3 Though much people were added to the Lord, yet does it follow they were more
then could meet in one Congregation? and if first Disciples were there called
Christians, must it needs be for their number, and not rather for eminent
likeness to Christ, with other specialities of providence?

4 It is expressly said, the Church was gathered together, Acts 14.27. which is
not meant of the Elders only, as if they only could meet; for Chap. 15.30.
They gathered the multitude together; so that it was no^ (...) but (...) to
g^ther in (...) place.

The number of believers was great at Ephesus, where Paul preached two years;
all that dwelt (...) heard (...) and effectual ways open (...) the (...) of
Di^na her Temple were in danger to be se^ a^ ^ought; (...) those (...), burnt
their books openly: which could not (...) great danger of the Church, unless a
great part of the City had (...), Acts 19.10, 19, 27.

Paul, were of the Church of Ephesus, for then all (...) should be of that
Church, ( Acts 19.10.) who did hear the Word (...) Jewe and Gentiles; As for
the danger of the Shrines, and Diana's Temple to be set at naught, a little
spark might ^indle such fears, and raise such outcries in the covetous
Craftsmen, by whom the whole City was see in a superstitious (...); our own
experience may teach, how soon a profane people will cry our against a
faithful Minister before he has converted ten (...) in a City.

2 That they could not burn their books openly without danger to the Churches,
except a great part of the City believed, seems a strange reason* as if
believers (...) not profess openly, except they had a great number to maintain
them with club-law: open profession in those times even amongst a few, was not
wont to be daunted with the grim looks of persecution.

3 And lastly, we grant Ephesus might be a numerous Church; yet neither there,
no^ any thing that is said from Rev. 2.7. ( Hear what the Spirit (...)) can
persuade us that it was any more then one Congregation; for that argues no
more, that Ephesus was a compound of many Churches, then that it was compounded
with all the other six Churches of Asia; yea, the Churches of all the world*
for what the Spirit speaks to one Church, is spoken for the use of all.

It is not essential to the Church to (...) together in one place ordinarily,
no^ is the Society broken off by persecution^, when (...) together in one place
be interrupted.

thus to meet together, yet it is necessary to the communion thereof in all
Ordinances. It is not necessary to the unity of a Classical Presbytery to meet
ordinarily in one place, but unto the communion thereof it is necessary. When
the Papists to maintain their private Masses, say, That place is but
accidental to the ordinance: And that Christians are not bound to the
circumstance of place (as H^rdin objects) any more, then to observe days,
moneth^ times, condemned as beggarly Elements by the Apostle, Gal. 4. As also,
that all the faithful are united together by the Sacraments though they meet
not in the same place, as the Ancients ^o tell, Chamier de Euchar. cap. 13.
How does learned Chamity answer them* he tells them, That although this or that
particular place is not necessary, yet a place indefinitely taken is ^ And that
the Sacrament is restrained to be administered in a place, because it cannot be
administered but conventu fidelium* and this conventus must be in some place:
And he adds, That although all the faithful have communion in the Sacrament,
though they meet not in one and the same place; yet this (he says) is to be
understood of spiritual, not sacramental communion; Nunquam ^rim auditum, qui
Hierosolymis erant, sacramentaliter communicasse cum iis qui Alexandrie: and
therefore he thought communion in one place together necessary to
Church Communion, as we do.

Seeing then both the seals in ordinary and extraordinary dispensation, etc.



CHAP. VII.
Consid. 2.

Reply To the second Consideration of the Answer.
THe Preposition is granted, That the dispensation of the Sacraments both
ordinary and extraordinary, is limited to the Ministry; but in that you
allege for confirmation some things may be noted: 1 The first institution of
Baptism is not contained in that passage, but confirmed, for the seals were
instituted before his death, etc.

Mat. 28.19. being (we doubt not) pertinent in the Authors own judgment, as
well as ours; Brotherly love might easily have passed over greater mistakes
then the answer seems to have fallen into: for, by First institution here, we
meant no more, then that it is the ordinance of Christ himself, instituted in
that first time of all Divine ordinances. We were not so ignorant to think
there was no use, and so no institution of Baptism before the death of Christ;
and therefore this confutation might have been spared.

We see not how you can apply that Text, Matthew. 28 19. to preaching by Office;
which by your exposition is a dispensing of a fit portion to every one of the
household; and it is plain the Apostles were sent to preach to every creature,
etc.

Matthew. 28. did not authorize them also, and require them to dispense fit
portions to the Churches* did not the care of all the Churches lie on the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 11.28. so also 1 Cor. 7.17. were not Apostles given to the
Church for the edifying of the body of Christ, etc. as well as other Officers?
Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.28. and therefore this note also might well have
been spared.

If under the power of the Keys you comprehend preaching by Office, dispensing
seals, etc. we deny the power of the Keys to belong to the Church, or community
of the faithful, in those passages which speak of this power, the execution of
this authority is given to them to whom the authority is committed.



1 It is well known that it is no new opinion to hold, that the Church is the
first subject of the Keys, and to allege Matthew. 16. and 18. for the same, and
therefore might as well have been set in the margent; many ancient Divines, and
our own Modern, as Fulke, Whittaker, Baine, Parker, and others, as Robinson, if
there were not a desire to possess people with that conceit, that we go in
new ways with the Separatists alone.

2 We distinguish between power and authority: there is a power, right, or
privilege, as Joh. 1.12. which is not authority properly so called; the first
is in the whole Church, by which they have right to choose Officers, Acts 6.
and 14. receiving members, etc. Authority (properly so called) we ascribe only
to the Officers under Christ to rule and govern, whom the Church must obey. Now
we grant that where authority is given, there power to exercise it is given
also, as Mat. 28. Joh. 20. etc. it is given to the Apostles and Ministers; and
so where power is given to the Church, there power to exercise the same orderly
is given also, as Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 2.10.

If the power of the Keys be given to the Church, the Apostles themselves must
derive their authority immediately from the Church, and not from Christ; for
the power must be derived from them unto whom it was given, etc.

Mat. 10. before he instituted the Church of the New Testament, after he was
pleased to use the Ministry of the Church, Acts 1. to choose two, and take one
of them immediately by a lot; and when Paul was called he appeared to him
immediately, and called him both to the faith, and to his Apostleship, whereby
it is clear that their call is a reserved case.

If Ministers dispense the seals as the stewards of Christ, from whom they
receive their authority immediately; then the power of the Keys is not in the
community of the faithful; if as the servants of the Church, from which they
derive their authority; then the Office of a Minister is not the immediate gift
of Christ; nor the Minister so much the servant of Christ, as of the Church
from whom he must receive Laws, in whose names he must do his Office, and to
whom he must give account.

Pet. 5. and yet his outward call to this Office, whereby he has authority to
administer the holy things of Christ to the church, is from Christ by his
Church, and this makes him no more the servant of the Church, then a Captain
(by the leave of the General) chosen by the Band of Soldiers is the servant
of his Band. We see in this reply here and elsewhere how apt men are to cast
this odium upon this Doctrine, and to rank us with Separatists in it, but it
is easily wiped off and sticks as fast upon the Classes, Synods, Catholic
Church, or any other subject of this power.

If the community of the faithful have to do in all matters of the body, to
admit members cast out, make and depose Ministers, etc. by authority from
Christ, we cannot see how in your judgment the execution of the power of the
Keys is concredited to the Ministers.

obedientially following and concurring with their guides, so long as they go
along with Christ their King and his Laws, and cleaving in their obedience to
Christ dissenting from their guides, when they forsake Christ in their
ministrations; if there need an ocular demonstration hereof, it is at hand in
all civil administrations wherein the execution of Laws and of justice in the
hands of the Judges and the privilege power or liberty of the people in the
hands of the Jurours. Both sweetly concur in every case both civil and
criminal; neither is the use of a Jury only to find the fact done, or not
done, (as some answer this instance) but also the nature and degree of the fact
in reference to the Law that awards answerable punishments; as whether the fact
be simple theft, or burglary, murder or manslaughter, etc. and so in cases of
damages, costs in civil cases; whereby it appears, that although the power
and privilege of the people be great, yet the execution authoritatively may
be wholly in the Officers.

That which you add, that God will not vouchsafe his presence and blessing to
an Ordinance but when it is dispensed by those whom he has appointed
thereunto, must be warily understood, or it may occasion errors and
distractions not a few, etc.

not, our words were sound, and safe enough, but it seems your tenderness of
the standings of Ministers and Ordinances in England occasioned this wariness,
and we deny not what you say, that Gods presence, and blessing upon his
ordinances dispensed by us gave some approbation to our standing and to his
Ordinances, the Lord mercifully passing over our many corruptions: but this
will no way give allowance to the many gross corruptions, and defects which
cleaved to our standings, and administrations, nor to the continuance of any in
such corruptions after the discovery thereof.

As for the assumption, that Pastors and Teachers are limited to a particular
Church or society, but that flock-is not ever one congregationall assembly
meeting in one place, neither the bond so straight, whereby they are tied to
that one society that they may not upon occasion perform some ministerial act
of office in another congregation, or to them that be not set members of their
proper assembly.



1 When we say the Ministry is limited to a particular Church, we do not so
limit it to a Congregation under her own Presbytery, as to exclude from
communion in the seals, many Congregations standing under one common
Presbytery, as we have formerly said, we honor the reformed Churches of
Christ Jesus, and the godly members thereof.

2 When we say the seals are limited to a particular Church or Congregation
because the Ministry is so limited; our meaning is not of that congregation
only whereof the Ministry is, but of any Congregation in general.

3 When we say that where a Minister has no power, he may not do an act of
power, this is to be so understood, that he cannot perform such an act, as an
Officer over them or unto them as to his proper flock, the office being (as we
said) founded in the relation between the Church and the Officer, such a
stated power as an Officer over his own flock, he has not to those of other
Congregations partaking in his own Church, or in any act of his Office in
another Church; yet an occasional act of power, or precaria potest^s,
charitatively to put forth an act of his Office to those in an other church,
over whom he is no Officer, we see not but he may; but then this act of power
is not toward them as over his own flock; for two things are clear to us.
1. That an Officer of one Church, is no Officer over those of an other Church,
as not being his proper flock, for there being no Office of Pastor at large
without power of Office, and the power that a Pastor has over others, being
by the election of those that chose him their Officer, who thereby become his
proper flock, hence he has no power as an Officer over those of an other
flock, unless he should (...).

That such an officer may put forth acts of his office toward those that are
not of his proper flock. E. g. A Minister ex officio, and as a Pastor, not
barely as a gifted man only may preach for the gathering in of those that are
out of the Church, as well as for the edificaon of those that are within, Ephe.
4.11, 12. and yet these are not his proper flock; it is the office of every
Pastor to preach the Gospel, the means of converting, and therefore not only
to intend but to attend the conversion of men, (especially in preaching to his
own Congregation) for Christ has sheep, (which are his flock) to be gathered
into his fold, which are not the Ministers proper flock, and the Pastor is the
Minister of Christ, as well as the Pastor of his own flock, and therefore he
is to intend their gathering in as well as the good of his own flock.

Again, as he has the Keys of Office by preaching the Gospel, to open the
Kingdom of heaven to believers, so also he may ex officio, shut it against
impenitent sinners and unbeleevers that reject his Doctrine, Matthew. 16.19.
Matthew. 10.14. Jer. 1.10. and yet these are not of his proper flock.

Again, a Pastor may administer the Seals, (which is an act of Office) to
members of other Churches, in his his own Congregation, (if they desire it)
who yet are not his proper Flock. Lastly, a Deacon of one Church may perform
an act of his Office occasionally to those out of the Church, or the poor of
another Church; yet be no Officer or Deacon of the other Church, and so it is
here.

To illustrate this, A Captain of a Band of Soldiers is an Officer only over
his own Band, but it is an act of his Office to subdue enemies, and to bring in
those that submit. A Steward is an officer over his Masters family, not over
others: yet it is an act of his Office to provide for the intertainment of
Strangers that come to his Lords table.

Thus far it is clear: But now whether a Minister may administer the Seals in
another Congregation, is not so evident, yet we will not deny but that
occasionally being called thereunto by the desire of the Church, he may
lawfully do the same, yet it is no foundation of a stated Presbytery out of a
particular Congregation, for in all such acts the Church still keeps her power
in her own hands, while the Minister has no authority, nor can put forth any
act of his Ministry, but at her desire, and according to her own necessity,
neither does this make a Minister a Pastor of the universal Church, for
pastoral Office consists in taking charge of a people, and having power of
authority to exercise the same toward his Church: But all that is said does
include neither of these, nor does it follow that because they may set up a
Presbytery over themselves in the same Church, that therefore they may combine
and set up a Presbytery of many Churches, the first being their duty enjoined
by Christ, not the other; for it is necessary for them to have such amongst
them as may ordinarily feed, teach, watch over them, and rule them (the end of
a Ministers Office) but it is not necessary so to submit to others, who may
find work enough to feed and rule their own, and therefore look as it is
not in the power of many Congregations to join together, to set one Pastor
over them successively to feed them, (for so they make a Pluralist, and the
Bramble the King of trees) nor yet in their power to set up (as in the first
ambitious time) a (...) with power over all singly, but under all jointly, so
neither is it in their power to set up many Pastors, who by their plurality of
votes may wholly drown that power of their own.

Nor lastly does it follow, that if they may desire the benefit and exercise of
an others Office occasionally, that they may or should do it constantly, no
more then because they may desire sundry Ministers to preach amongst them every
Sabbath for a time in the want of Officers, that therefore they should content
themselves to live altogether without any of their own.

Now for application of these things to the assumption of our argument.
Although a Pastor (in the sense explained) may put forth acts of Office in
another Congregation, or to others in his own Congregation, yet will it hence
follow, that a Minister may administer Seals to such as are of no
Congregation? which is now the question.

Now to remove those 2013 objections of Mr. Ball, which only reach the
question in hand, whereof the first is Reply the 8. When ordinary Elders in the
Primitive Church were to labor the coming of the Infidels to God, these being
converted were to be baptized of the Elders ordinarily in the Cities, though
the number might be so great in they could not well meet in one Congregation,
nor be subject to the same Pastor: and therefore either the Pastors must
Baptize them, being no members, or they must remain without Baptism till they
grow into a body, and choose Ministers to Baptize them, which is contrary to
all precedents in Scripture.

viz. the Pastors might baptize them unto their own Congregations so long as
the numbers did not exceed beyond edification, and then dividing their numbers,
might make diverse Churches of one, and they call Pastors over them, and so we
see Act. 2. they added 3000. and after more, till they were scattered: and when
peace was restored, Act. 9. the Churches were not only edified but multiplied,
Verse 3. and so the consequence of your 9. Reply is also taken away.

There is no precept or example in Scripture warrants the admitting of set
members of one Congregation to the Seals in another, more then the admitting
of approved Christians that are not set members, The Pastor is no more the
Pastor of the one then of the other, neither of them set members, and both of
them may be members for the time being.

Romans 16.1. we have a plain example of orderly receiving the members of one
Church to Communion in an other, being recommended thereunto by the Apostles,
we have not the like for any not in Church order at all; and though there be a
parity in respect of particular relation with that Pastor and flock, yet that
is a disparity in regard of immediate right that the one have to the ordinances
of Christ and privileges of a Church, which the other have not, being out of
that order of Christ prescribed in the Gospel, in which order of a visible
Church, visible ordinances are to be dispensed, as has been proved before.

If a Synod consisting of sundry members of particular Churches, met together
in the name of Christ about the common and public affairs of the Churches
shall join together in prayer, and Communion of the Supper, we can see no
ground to question it as unlawful, although that assembly be no particular
Congregation or Church, has no Pastor over them, etc.

Ecclesia orta; yet not properly such a Church as has Ecclesiastical power,
authority and privilege belonging thereto: they may consult and doctrinally
determine of cases of that assembly, Acts 15. but further to proceed, we see no
rule, nor pattern. Besides, if such an assembly of many Churches may administer
Seals, why may not any other assembly of Church members or Ministers do the
same? and so this power will be carried without limitation, we know not how
far, if they once depart from a particular Church.

CHAP. VIII.
Consid. 3.

TO the third consideration, this whole reason as it is propounded makes only
against it self; who ever thought that the Seals were not proper to
confederates, or the Church of God; of old visible believers in the Covenant of
grace were of the visible Church, and in Church order according to the
dispensation of those times, though not joined to the society of Abraham's
family: to exclude Job, Melchisedeck, etc. because not of the visible Church,
is welnigh a contradiction, and so to debar known approved Christians, etc.

Ball himself has cleared, when he stated our consideration truly in the
words following, as will appear, however here he somewhat troubles the waters
needlessely, that the ground may not appear, for there is nothing in our
answer which deny Melchisedech, Job, etc. to be of the visible Church
according to the manner of those times, indeed we instance in them as persons
under the covenant of grace, not mentioning their membership in family
Churches, as being enough for our purpose, if they had not right to
Circumcision by virtue of their right in the covenant of grace, except they
joined to the Church at first in Abraham's family, and so after to the same
Church in Israel; and the more special Church relation in Abraham's family was
required to Circumcision, the stronger is the force of our reason, not the
weaker. For so much the rather it follows, that seals are not to be
dispensed to believers (as such) though visibly professing the faith, except
they join also to such a form of the visible Church, to, or in which the
seals are instituted and given.

The true and proper meaning of this consideration is, that as Circumcision,
and the Passover were not to be dispensed to all visible believers under the
Covenant of grace, but only to such as were joined to Abraham's family, or the
people of the God of Abraham, no more may Baptism, and the Lords Supper be
administered now to any believers, unless they be joined to some particular
Congregation.



The strength of it stands in the parity between Circumcision and Baptism,
but this parity is not found in every thing, as your selves allege. To unfold
it more fully, we will consider three things. First, wherein the Sacraments
agree, and wherein they differ.

viz. Concerning the persons to whom Circumcision and Baptism do belong, we
shall take what is granted, and leave the rest. For thus it is said,
Circumcision and Baptism are both Sacraments of Divine institution, and so
they agree in substance of the things signified, the persons to whom they are
to be administered, and the order of administration, if the right proportion be
observed* Now that we hold the right proportion in the persons, may appear^,

First, in that (as was granted) Circumcision sealed the entrance into the
Covenant, but this Covenant was not simply, and only the Covenant of grace;
but that whole Covenant, that was made with Abraham, whereby on Gods part they
were assured of many special blessings, (whereof Lot, and others not in this
Covenant with Abraham, were not capable) and whereby Abraham his seed, and
family were bound for their part to be a people to God, and to observe this
sign of the Covenant, which others in the Covenant of grace were not bound to.

Abraham, and his household, and the seed of believing Jews that were the
persons to be Circumcised, and therefore not visible believers, (as such) for
then Lot had been included: so by right proportion not all visible believers as
such, but such as with Abraham, and his family are in visible Covenant to be
the people of God according to the institution of Churches when, and to which
the seal of Baptism is given; and therefore as all family Churches but
Abraham's being in a new form of a Church were excluded, so much more such as
are in no visible constituted Church at all.

As for the proposition it self, certain it is, Circumcision and the
Passover were to be administered only to the visible members of the Church,
i. e. to men in Covenant professing the true faith, but that in Abraham's time
none were members of the visible Church, which joined not to Abraham's family,
we have not learned.

Abraham's family, and so after in the Church of Israel. Secondly, what faith?
not only faith in the Messiah for life, and salvation, but withal faith in
the promises made to Abraham, and his seed with subjection to the visible
worship of God in that Church, and to circumcision in particular. Thirdly, that
there were no others of the visible Church besides Abraham's family, is not
said, but being so it strengthens the argument, as was showed before.

In the first institution of Circumcision God gave it to Abraham, as the seal
of the Covenant formerly made with him, but of any Church Covenant, whereinto
Abraham's family should enter, we read not.

Abraham, Genesis 17. or that before, Genesis 15. we will not contend, neither is it
material, be it the same covenant he entered into before for substance, yet
it is evident, 1 That this covenant was not simply and only the covenant of
grace, but had many peculiar blessings belonging to Abraham, and his posterity,
and family contained in it. Genesis 12. and 15. 2 It is very considerable that God
made this Covenant with Abraham, when he called him out of that corrupt state
of the Church in Ebers family to worship God more purely according to his
institutions, Genesis 12.1. with Josh. 24.2. Thirdly, this covenant, Genesis 17. is
more explicate, and full then before, and especially in that promise, which
most properly concerns Church covenant, viz. that God would take Abraham and
his seed into covenant with himself, even an everlasting covenant to be a God
unto them, Verse. 7. and this in a special manner is that, which the Lord says
he would now establish between Abraham and himself, viz. by this sign of
the covenant, Verse. 9, 10, 11. Fourthly, this is the very covenant, which the
Lord renewed with Abraham's seed afterward, when he established them to be a
Church or people to himself, as is evident, Deuteronomy. 29.12, 13. this the Lord is
said often to remember, viz. to remember his covenant with Abraham, when he
visited his seed with any mercy: Exodus 6.5, 6, 7, 8. Psalm. 105.8, 9. and
therefore it must needs be a Church covenant. Fifthly, as Genesis 17. the Lord
instituted a visible token, and seal of this covenant, so he strictly
enjoined the observation of the same in all the seed and family of Abraham, and
that in all their generations: all which things especially jointly considered
make it evident, that Abraham and his were not only a people, but established
a people to God in a Church covenant, and that the same covenant, which was the
foundation of the national Church of God, that was after in his posterity, and
to this covenant the seal of Circumcision was added.

Melchisedeck, Lot, Job might be circumcised, though we read not of it, (as
we read not that John Baptist, or the Apostles were baptized) or if they were
not circumcised, it may be that institution was not known to them, or they
were not required to join to Abraham's family, and if they had, they should
have transgressed, and so the reason was not, because they were not in Church
order, but because Circumcision was appropriated to Abraham's family in some
peculiar respects.

John Baptist, the Apostles, and many others, yet we read of a rule that
required it of them, and it was a part of that righteousness, of which the
Lord Jesus says to John, Thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness,
Matthew. 3.15. not for the institution of Circumcision did bind Lot, Job, etc.
yet that they were forbidden to join to Abraham's family, and so be
circumcised, we cannot say; seeing afterward Proselytes were reecived into
the same Covenant and Church, and so circumcised.

Secondly, that it was so appropriated to Abraham's family, as that it was
unlawful for them to join to Abraham's covenant, and be circumcised, this is
more then can be showed; or if Lot, Melchisedeck, Job were excluded, yet out
of question Abraham might and did enlarge his family, and so might take in
proselytes visible believers in the covenant of grace, and circumcise them, and
so still the appropriating of circumcision to the Church, and Covenant of
Abraham's family, does not weaken, but strengthen the argument, in as much as no
visible believer in the Covenant of grace might partake of the seal but by
joining in visible covenant with that Church to which it was given.

Thirdly, suppose Job, Lot* etc. and their families were circumcised, (as
Junius alleges Jerome for it) yet how will it appear it was not by taking
hold of the Covenant of Abraham, to which Circumcision was applied? yet it
seems more probable, that Lot, and other families in Abraham's time were not
partakers thereof, God intending (as the effect shows) not to establish them
nor theirs to be his people, as by Circumcision he established Abraham and
his seed; as for Job, if he were of Abraham's seed, and had Circumcision
hereditarily a materno, paternoque sanguine, (as some think) yet this makes
nothing against the argument we have now in hand.

After the Church of the Jews was constituted (when we cannot imagine any
Church amongst the Gentiles) we find none must be admitted to the Passover
that was not circumcised, but nothing was required of a stranger, but that he
profess the true faith, and avouch the God of Abraham to be his God, which
must be done before he could be reputed a visible believer, or under the
covenant of Grace.

Abraham's family, yet the case is so clear in the following story of the
Church, as you must needs grant the proposition, (as you do) and the Church of
the Jews is still but the same Church, that was in Abraham's house, and the
covenant the same, for Genesis 17. God established the Covenant with him and his
seed for an everlasting Covenant to be a God unto them; and in Egypt the Lord
challenges them as his own, his first borne, etc. and therefore there is the
same reason of circumcision, first and last in respect of the Persons, that had
right unto it, but say you nothing was required to circumcision, but to
profess the faith. But we demand first, What was it to a vouch the God of
Abraham to be his God? Was it not to subject himself to all the Statutes,
Commandments, and judgments of God in his Church to walk in them? as is
clear: Deuteronomy. 26.17. Was there not the same Law for the stranger, and the
home-borne? Secondly, Where must they profess this faith, and avouch this God?
Was it in any place where they dwelt, and so might they circumcise themselves?
must not this be done amongst, and before the people of God in his visible
Church? whence such were called Proselytes, and reckoned of the Commonwealth
of Israel, Esaias 56.3, 4, 5, 6. And is not all this to join themselves to the
visible instituted Church before they were circumcised? Lastly, it is not true
that no man could be reputed a visible believer before he did all this. That
which follows page 40. is answered before.

If Lot, Job, etc. were not circumcised, there is not the like reason for
Circumcision, and baptism in this particular.

Lot, Job, etc. that were not circumcised, and those not to be baptized, it
would little avail in the case, but we shall consider your differences
particularly.

First, If ever circumcision was appropriated to Abraham's family, and might not
be communicated to other visible believers, it was in the first institution,
but in the first institution of baptism, it was not so observed, that
believers should be gathered into a Christian Church, and then baptized. Mat.
3.7. John baptized such as came to him, confessing their sins, the Apostles
baptized Disciples, such as gladly received their doctrine, etc.

Abraham's family was in Covenant before Circumcision was given, only the
Covenant was more fully explained and confirmed: and so when John baptized, he
baptized the members of the Jews Church in Covenant before, to whom he was
sent to turn the heart of the fathers to the children, etc. and to prepare a
people for the Lord, and baptism was then given to the Church of the Jews
with reference to so many as would receive the doctrine of John, concerning
repentance and remission of sins by faith in the Messiah now come amongst
them, and therefore Christ himself, and his Disciples remained yet members of
that Church.

Secondly, Though the visible Kingdom of Christ was not yet to be erected in
Christian Churches, till after Christ's death and Resurrection, whereby he did
put an end to the Jewish worship, and therefore no Christian Churches could be
gathered by John, yet there was a middle state of a people prepared for the
Lord, gathered out of the Jewish Church, which according to that state were
made the Disciples of John, by solemn profession of their repentance or
conversion to God, and acknowledgement of Christ the Lamb of God already come,
to whom the seal of baptism was appropriated. As for the instances, Act.
2.37. etc. and 8.37. and 10.47, 48. they are spoken to before in the first
consideration.

Lot, Job, etc. were not bound to join to Abraham's family, and be
circumcised, but now all visible believers are bound to seek baptism in an
holy manner.



Your third difference is often pressed, and answered before.

If Circumcision be appropriated to the family of Abraham, it is because that
Covenant was peculiar to Abraham's posterity, namely, that Christ should come of
Isaac, but baptism is the Seal of the Covenant of Grace without peculiarity
or respect.

Abraham's family, yet Circumcision sealed the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.
to them being in visible Covenant with the Church, as baptism now does.
Secondly, this peculiar respect you speak of, no way hinders the joining of
many servants to Abraham's family, and Covenant, nor any proselytes to the
Church afterward of any nation, no more then now in respect of baptism.
Thirdly, the true reason was, because although the Covenant was made with
others, yet not established, nor enlarged toward them; and hence if they would
partake of such a Covenant, they must join in this; which also is the glory of
the rich grace of Christ shining forth in Church Covenant with all that will
become a people to him to this day.

The first difference is answered in the first and second.

CHAP. IX.
Consid. 4.

TO the fourth consideration, first, Men are capable of Church censures, either
as having power to dispense them: or as being subject unto them, etc. In the
second sense, many are capable of Church privileges, who are not subject to
Church censures: as the children of Christian Parents are capable of baptism,
and approved members of any true Church are capable of Seals in other
Congregations amongst you, who are not subject to the censures of the other
Congregation, spiritual Communion in public prayer, whereof visible beleivers
(not in Church order) are capable, but not subject to common censures in your
sense.



Secondly, Members of any true visible Church are subject, and so capable of
censure, (though not in another Church) which is not in in the proposition. 2.
Also they are capable of censures mediately by and in that other Church, if
they there offend: for that Church may admonish and prosecute the admonition in
the Church to which they belong, and refuse society with them, if they repent
not, which cannot be said of such as are not members of any visible Church,
who cannot be prosecuted to excommunication in any place.

Thirdly, Public prayers of the Church, though they be an ordinance of
Christ, and the Church have a special Communion in them, in which respect
others do not share, yet they are not a privilege or peculiar ordinance,
wherein none but the Church may share, for an Heathen or Infidel may hear the
word and join in the prayers, being cultus naturalis, saying Amen unto the
same; which cannot be said of seals and censures, being cultus institutus.

A Person baptized, is not baptized into that particular Congregation only,
but into all Churches, and in every particular Church has all the privileges
of the baptized person, and so to be esteemed of them. Now the privil^dge of
the baptized person, walking in the truth, and able to examine himself, is to
be admitted to the Lords Supper, as all circumcised persons had right thereby
to eat the Passover in any society, where God should choose to put his name
there, Exodus 4.47. Deuteronomy. 16.1, 1.

jus ad rem, or a remote right unto the privileges of the Church every where,
but that therefore he has immediate right to the fruition of all, when he is
severed from that particular church wherein he was baptized, that follows not:
for as he had this latter right in the first Church wherein he was baptized,
so he must have it in any of the Churches of Christ afterward; now if in the
first Church the fruition of ordinances came by orderly joining to it: so it
must be afterward, for as we said before, such as the communion is, such ought
to be the union, he that would have political communion with the political
Churches of Christ, must be some where in political union with them, otherwise
one may have communion in all Churches and yet never unite himself to any one,
which loose walking we are persuaded Christ Jesus will not allow. 5 The
similitude from a circumcised person will not hold. First, because there is no
parity between several families in the same Church, and several Churches in
the New Testament, but rather several seats of communicants in the same Church
answers, several ^amilies eating the passover in the Church of the Jews.
Secondly* an Edomite circumcised though he were converted, and acknowledged the
true God in his own country never so fully, yet might not eat the passover
till he joined to the church of Israel as all other Proselytes did: and so is
it here.

Thirdly, there is not the same reason of every Church privilege; one may have
right to some who may not meddle with others, as members of one Church may
join in hearing and prayer with another Church: but not medale in election and
ordination of their Teachers, and therefore the pr^position is not so evid^nt
to be taken without proof, that they have no power to admit a believer into
communion in any Church privilege, who have no power to excommunicate.

viz. outward ordinances of Christ ordained by him for the edification of his
Church and jointly given to his Church: and therefore look to what Church he
has given the one, he has given the other also: if the one, viz. censures,
be given to the Church of a visible Congregation, then the other: they are all
(both seals and censures) contained in the keys which are given to the visible
instituted Churches of the New Testament: not to the Catholic (as such:) for a
godly man justly cast out of the particular Church, yet cannot be cast out of
the Catholic.

That visible believers baptized into a true Church, professing the true faith,
and walking in holy obedience, and their seed should be judged such as are
without in the Apostles sense, because they are not externally joined as set
members to some peculiar Congregation in Church Covenant, is affirmed, not
proved.

Cor. 5.12. and in applying hereof we do not affirm that such are simply
without in the Apostles sense, but in some respect only, viz. in regard of
visible church Communion.

It does often fall out that the true members of the Catholic Church and best
members of the orthodox Church, by a prevailing faction in the Church, may be
no members of any distinct society, and shall their posterity be counted aliens
from the Covenant, and debarred from the Sacraments, because their parents are
unjustly separated from the inheritance of the Lord?

Athanasius, and it is answered by the Reply it self in the next words* Surely
as parents unjustly excommunicated, do continue still visible members of the
flock of Christ (understand that particular Church out of which they are cast,)
so the right of Baptism belongs to their Infants: which being so, they are not
without that Church, though debarred unjustly of the present communion with it,
unless he renounce that Church, or other.

If such Churches renounce it as are no members of a politic spiritual
fellowship be without, then the m^mbers of one Church are without unto another,
etc.

This objection we have had and answered often before* In a word, there cannot
be the like reason, no not in respect of that other Church, who may in a due
order of Christ persecute the censures against them, though not completely
amongst themselves* which cannot be^ said of such as have not joined themselves
to any Church* and therefore we deny that the Apostles reason was because they
were without to Corinth* but without to all Churches.

The fornicators of this world) do they not explain whom the Apostle points
unto by the title of being without Verse the 10.11. such as had not received
the Covenant of grace?

a certain respect, or as our words are, in regard of visible Church
communion, such as are in no Church society are said to be without, what great
offense have we given? For first, is not a godly man (if justly e^communicate)
without in this sense. Secondly, does not the Apostle John expressly call them
without that forsook the fellowship of the Church, 1 John 2.19. saying they
w^nt out? Thirdly, were not the Catechum^ni of old in this respect without, and
the lapsed in times of persecution, and the like^ who (in those zealous and
severe times of Church discipline) were not only said to be without, but
stood without, though weeping and praying as penitents at the Church doors,
sometimes for two or three years? and after this degree of preparation for
entrance into the Church which they called (...)* there were three more before
they were received to the Lords Supper: which severity though we approve not,
yet it may mollify the minds of the godly learned that are apt to be
offended at such a word from us. Fourthly, our Savior himself expressly says
(and that not only of those of no Church) but such as were even of the visible
Church, and his ordinary hearers, that many of them were (...) or men without*
and therefore this application of 1 Cor. 5.12. need not be called insolent, or
raise such an hubbub abroad, as we perceive it does.

Church order is necessary we deny not, but that a man should be a constant
set member of a particular society by Covenant to make him a member of the
visible Church, or to give him title or interest to the public order, this is
not taught of God.

This is but a bare denial of the position it self, but what is meant by
public order we know not: or where the order of Christ (which is granted to
be necessary) can be found but in particular Churches, we are yet to learn,
neither is it anywhere taught in this Reply, and we would gladly learn how
that Church should orderly deal with such a man in case of offense that is of
no particular Church.

Paul divides all men into two ranks, the first and greater without, the last
and lesser within, but that believers, etc. and their children should be
reckoned without, we read not in any Scripture, but in Scripture phrase
heretics themselves are within. 1 John 2.19. 1 Cor. 11.19.



This has not been believed in the Church?



Without are Dogs, etc. Rev. 22.15. not such as are faithful, holy, etc.



They that are without in the Apostles sense are Aliens from the commonwealth
of Israel, strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no hope, and without
God in the world; but we hope you will not pass such rash censure upon the
brethren who be not gathered into the society as set members.



Ninthly, (...) shall ^ee without (...) that is not (...) of the particular
combination, (...) reformed. Churches that ascribe the (...), and not to the
community* and some amongst (...) also.

And therefore we (...) approved Christ (...) are either without or not
capable of Church censures: if they offen^, though no set members, for (...)
themselves (...) ordinances for a time, and (...) ^ffending (...).

Cor* 5.1^, seeing (...) never limited the position to Churches of the same
judgemen^, or in like degree of order to ours; it is only a forced (...) which
is cast upon us, but we can (...) our brethren ^and^, neither do we know any
Church o^ (...) that (...) the power of the Keys to the Presbytery or Classi^,
excluding the community amongst us.

Secondly, for that objection that such pu^ themselves under the ordinances of
Christ for the time; if with profession of faith and subjection to the
government of Christ, they desire seals, it is something; but that the (...)
de^i^ing of seals does include such a subjection in it self, being (...) for
this or that act of administration, we cannot understand: but let this be
really made good, that defiting seals it being a way, that subjects themselves
to the Church as members, and the case will be issued, being understood of
such approved Christians as the position speaks of.

Lastly, to proceed against such as a^ not members, or of another Church, as
with an offending member of our own, is not much unlike the proceedings of
Victor in his contentious time or may sow the seeds of such usurpations, which
we leave to the godly wise to consider of.

If upon good reason a passage of Scripture can be cleared to prove that for
which it was never alleged by any writer, we are not to except against it
for want of man's testimony, only in such cases our reasons must be
convincing, but for the exposition of this Text we have not observed one
substantial ground or approved author to be alleged. Dr. Ames showing the
necessity of Christians joining themselves to some peculiar Church gives this
reason; Quoniam alias fieri non potest quin conturbentur signa illa quibus
fideles ab infidelibus discerni possunt, 1 Cor. 5.12. But herein Dr. Ames
manifestly shows that by them without, heathens and unbeleevers must be
understood, and not believers, though of no settled society for the time; for
thus we conceive he argues. The signs whereby the faithful are to be
discerned from unbeleevers must not be confounded: but unless Christians make
themselves actual members of a Church, the signs whereby the faithful are
discerned from unbeleevers, will be obscured and darkened: and if this be his
reason, how can that Text be alleged unless by men without, infidels be
understood?



Secondly, That we have one approved author so alleging it, viz. Doctor
Ames, shall appear in clearing his meaning from your objections. 1. Grant that
by men without (according to Doctor Ames his reason) Infidels be understood by
the Apostle, yet how shall the signs discerning believers from unbeleevers,
be confounded by such as join not to some particular Church, if those
believers do not in some respect stand without amongst unbeleevers? and the
consequence is so plain that the own Syllogism whereinto you cast his
argument would have concluded so much, if it had been suffered to speak out in
the conclusion. For in stead of saying, except such join to some Church, the
signs will be darkened and obscured; the reason rightly concluded would have
said ( fieri non potest) it cannot be but the signs will be confounded: and
therefore in his judgment it is unavoidabl^ that such mix themselves with
unbeleevers, that are without indeed properly in the Apostles sense.

Again, Doctor Ames, lib. 4. cap. 17. speaking of Infants to be received,
says it is required, first, that they be in the Covenant of Grace by outward
profession, etc.

Ames, we confess shows that he was very large in his charity about the
baptizing of Infants, extending the same to the child of a Papist, etc. but it
may seem by some passages that he understood by profession of faith, such as
live in the visible Churches, and looks at the child of a Papist as one of a
visible Church for substance, though so exceedingly corrupt: but all this do
not disprove that he understood 1 Cor. 5.12. otherwise then has been said.

What you allege out of his second Manuduction concerning the Churches of
England we consent unto, neither do we deny seals to any, if they demand
them as members of any true Church in England, and in an orderly way.

CHAP. X.
Consid. 5.

TO the first consideration, If it be repugnant to divine institution to admit
of approved Christians lawfully baptized, walking in the faith, members of the
visible Churches, and partakers of Church privileges amongst us, to the Lords
Supper, or their children to baptism, because they be not entered into
Church Fellowship according to your order, then it is unlawful though no such
evil consequences are to be feared, but if by accident some abuse should fall
out, the evil is to be prevented by all lawful means, but the faithful are
not to be debarred utterly of the order of God, whereto they have right and
title by his free grant and gracious institution.



Secondly, If it be unlawful by divine institution, may not evil
consequences be added, and if both hold, are not our reasons the more strong?
What needs then such a Reply?

Thirdly, We have often granted a remote right, but next and immediate we still
deny, and we conceive no other order of God in his Churches to prevent such
evils, then by joining to the instituted Churches of Christ*

Seals may be profaned when the dispensers cannot help it: but here is no
fear or danger of such consequences necessary to follow: for we speak not of
all sorts, at random, but of Christians professing the faith entirely,
lawfully baptized, known and approved to the wise and judicious visible
members of the Churches amongst us sufficiently known to you, or orderly
recommended, etc.

themselves, yet the application of this description in the first part of it
would open a door wider then many can imagine, for many such (in the judgment
even of the wisest) coming into this state of temptations prove far
otherwise, (even your selves being Judges, if you were here) we suppose the
experience of the discoveries God has made in these late trials of England,
amongst forward professors, will teach our brethren to consider how many
professors may prove here. Yet secondly, if you add such as retaining their
membership in your Churches, are recommended unto us by your Churches, or by
known godly Ministers, we can then according to order receive them, and avoid
the confusion and inconveniences we objected. Thirdly, if also it be taken
into the description, known and sufficiently approved of our selves, then the
door is open to them to the communion of the Church and all the privileges
thereof, though they cannot settle in the place of their present abode, and
this way of order would prevent the inconveniences: but if we come to put a
difference any other way, we cannot avoid it but great offense will be given
to many, and the inconveniences objected in some degree at least will follow
here with us, and it may be much more in some other places.

You profess high respect to your brethren in Old England, but it seems you
judge them insufficient to give you orderly testimony of the sincerity of
approved Christians well known and living amongst them, which two cannot well
agree.



We speak not of such, who against light refuse to profess subjection to the
Gospel of Christ, or to join to some approved Church, etc.



No question but many have been admitted by the Church, who in truth are much
too light, and some refused, who are better deserving then they that cast them
off.

ought to be used, and this we may before the Lord profess, that the purpose
and desire of our hearts are, as well to embrace the weakest humble Christian,
as to keep out the proud Pharisee* and we have seen a gracious presence of
Christ in his Churches, blessing our endeavors therein, whatsoever any
discontented persons returning back, may clamor to the contrary.

CHAP. XI.
Consid. 6.

TO the sixth consideration, this conclusion is not to the question propounded:
for we speak of such as cannot, not of such as refuse to join themselves to
the Churches; or if they do not join, it is not out of contempt, or wilful
neglect, but for lack of opportunity, or through their default, that should
admit them, but do not.

Ergo no christian can expect by the appointment of God, to partake in the
seals, till he has joined himself in Church Fellowship, and in the call of
the Minister; and this is fully to the question propounded: and we marvel^ it
should not be observed, but the last words of the answer should be put in
stead of it, which are only a secondary deduction from the former, as an
absurdity, which may follow: if the other be not granted. And yet hence
occasion is taken to charge us with injurious and tyrannical dealing toward
such as are not admitted, which we leave to the Lord to judge of, and of us.
You say, you accuse not the discretion of our Churches, but impute it to the
rashness of the zealous multitude, but if it were so practiced, as is
conceived, the Churches and their guides should show little wisdom, and
faithfulness to the Lord, and the souls of his people.

When a reason is demanded of your judgment, why you debar approved
Christians from the seals, and we dislike it, you should put this note upon
them, as if against light they refused orderly to subject themselves to the
Gospel of Christ. What warrant you have thus to censure, what use of this
manner of dispute, we leave it to your godly wisdom to judge.

run out to condemn us for so much c^nsoriousnesse of others without cause,
whether our manner of dispute be here so without use, we leave to the
judicious reader to judge. And that we are far from such censures of godly
approved Christians amongst us, we can approve our selves to God, and the
consciences of many that live amongst us, we do not say that all who do not
join with us, do refuse against light, yet we find it true too often, that
forward professors in England here discover evidently an heart refusing against
light to submit to Gods ordinances, and therefore we had cause to say, it were
unreasonable such should have equal liberty with others.

In the consideration it self there are many propositions couched to be
examined, the first, That none have power to dispense seals but such as are
called to the Ministry, is freely granted. The second, That no man can be so
called, till there be a Church to call him, needs explication. For by the
Church you must understand the community of the faithful, as they are one body
without officers, and such a Church there cannot be, without a ministry to
call, and admit them into Church fellowship.

divertic^l^ i^ rather clouded, then the argument fairly answered, This second
proposition being too plain to be denied, interpretation^ are sought, but
they are rather objections, to which we shall answer in order. First, though
we grant the Lord ordinarily gathered Churches by the ministry of men in
Office, as the Apostles, Evangelists, etc. yet not always so, as is evident,
Acts 11.20, 2^. The story of Waldus is well known, and we suppose you will
grant those Waldense^ the name of a true Church. Origin when he was not
allowed of the Church to be a Ministe^, yet converted many who died Martyrs.
The story also of Frumentius is well known, with diverse others. Secondly,
Ministers by Office are of two sorts, either such as are called immediately or
mediatly, such as were immediately and extraordinarily called, were before
Churches, and were called together and begin Churches, (as the Apostles, Matthew.
28.20. Act. 1.8.) But all ordinary officers that are to administer in a Church
do necessarily presuppose a Church to call them, unless any will adventure to
say in plain English, that the calling of a Minister may be without the
antecedent election of the people, and then we shall find what to Reply.

The Apostles ^aptized not themselves, but by the help of others, and those
not called of the people to baptize, 1 Cor. 1.17.

Corinth Paul baptized not many but by others, yet first we demand, By whom did
Paul and the Apostles baptize? It was either by Evangelists, and so it is all
one, as if the Apostles, as extraordinary officers did it, or by the Pastors
newly chosen and ordained in the Churches newly gathered, who might baptize the
rest; and then the Church was before such officers: or else by private persons,
which is denied expressly in the Reply to the first proposition.

The Apostles appointed by election Elders in every City or Church, and so
there was a Church before Elders, but this Church was a society of believers by
Baptism admitted into Church fellowship, and therefore there must be Ministers
to baptize, before there can be a Church to call a Minister. For a company of
unbaptized men cannot choose a Minister to baptize them.



A company of converts unbaptized ought to desire baptism, but they have no
power to elect one amongst themselves to dispense the s^^les unto the rest,
etc. It can never be showed in Scripture that any society of unbaptized did
first choose from among themselves a Pastor or Teacher by whom they might be
baptized, you cannot produce one example or other proof in Scripture of one
man teaching the Gospel ministerially, but he was baptized and a member of a
true Church or of a society, who made choice of a Pastor or Teacher, but they
were baptized persons.

Act. 2. and so had no Officers chosen by themselves, but by Christ immediately
for them, yet as when the Apostles left them, they must choose Officers if they
will enjoy ordinances: So when there is no such Apostles nor Evangelists, nor
no need of baptism, (as is usually the cause of Christians arising out of
popery) in this case we say such Churches can partake of no ordinances without
they choose officers, and yet this varyeth not from the Scripture pattern
neither. But only so far as the state of those believers differ, when Paul
found about twelve believers at Ephes^s, who were baptized by John the Baptist,
Act. 19.1. etc. If these were by the Apostle set into a constituted Church, as
is probable, (being called on further to the knowledge of Christ and his will
and ways) there was no need of baptizing them again with water, but only
with the holy Ghost, as the Apostles were at Pentecost, Act. 1.5. with 2.1.2.
and yet no varying from the rule in so doing: and the like is our case now.

2 If this be so as here you urge, then those former assertions must needs
fall to the ground; as, That every society in covenant with God is the true
Church of God, page 23. and that it is simply necessary to the being of a
Church, that it be laid upon Christ the foundation, which being done, the
remaining of what is forbidden, or want of what is commanded, cannot put the
society from the right and title of a Church. If these were so a company of
unbaptized persons may be a Church, being in Covenant with God and laid on
Christ the foundation, though they want baptism.

3 Though no such example of unbaptized persons choosing a Pastor among
themselves can be showed, when there was no need thereof; (Apostles being at
hand to baptize them) yet why in absence of Apostles, etc. might they not
choose some other baptized Christian, who coming into some far remote
country of Infidels, is a means of their conversion; we see nothing to
hinder: it would be hard for any to show an example of Presbyters holding a
Synod or ordaining of Elders, without Apostles or some extraordinary officer,
yet we suppose, you make no doubt of such things.

4 If an example of one unbaptized that preached and baptized Ministerially
would satisfy, the example of John the Baptist might answer your demand, for
whether he baptized himself, or were baptized by some other at first, an
unbaptized person did baptize, but we see no need of such an example:
Scripture grounds are sufficient to guide us in these cases, be they rules,
examples or good consequences deduced from them, and we reason thus; a Church
of believers professing Christ have liberty from Christ to choose their
Officers: But a company of unbaptized men professing the entire faith in a
combined society, is a true Church: and therefore may choose their officers.

The third proposition: That the power of calling Ministers is given by Christ
unto the Church, must also rightly be understood, by the Church must not be
understood the faithful alone, but their guids and Officers with them, who are
to go before them and to govern and direct them in their choice, neither can
we say two or three believers linked in a society is such a Church, to whom
the call of Ministers do belong, but that right was given by Christ to such
Churches, as were gathered by the Apostles.

Bellarmine says, that our Ministers intruded themselves into Churches; no,
says Dr. Field, for the people elected them, which they might lawfully do and
separate from wicked Ministers, which he proves by the testimony of Cyprian,
writing to the Bishops of Spain not to communicate with Basilides and
Martialis, who fell to Idolatry in times of persecution, Quando ipsa plebs
potestatem habet, etc. Also from Ocham, who says, Si Papa and maxim celebres
Episcopi incidunt in haeresin, ad Catholicos devoluta est potestas omnis
judicandi: to which he adds this reason, either they must separate from them,
and choose others, or consent to their impieties. Field lib. 3. cap. 39. What
follows in this place being little to this point, and for the most part not
scrupled by us: and what is not acknowledged by us, we shall have a fitter
occasion to speak to it, therefore here we pass it over.

Proposi. 4. That all those who desire seals are bound to join themselves in
Church fellowship, that so they may call a Minister to dispense the seals unto
them, will not follow from the former rightly understood: for they must partake
of the seals before they can join themselves together in Church estate.

Acts 2. they were baptized and added to the Church the same day: and it is
granted the Apostles gathered Churches by baptism.

Such as for lack of means and opportunity cannot join in such estate, or be
dispersed persecution or destitute of Pastors or Teachers, may for a time seek
the seals in other societies.



The people also who are deprived of right and liberty to choose their pastor,
may desire the seals of him that is set over them.



These propositions being allowed for current; a nation or people plunged into
Idolatry or Infidelity, or otherwise dischurched cannot by ordinary means
recover into a Church estate, wherein they may lawfully and according to Gods
appointment desire or expect that the seals of the Covenant shall be
dispensed unto them.

e contra, our Protestant Divines, as Chemnitius, Field, Brentius, Whitacher,
Luther, etc. make peoples power of electing their Ministers the best foundation
of a peoples recovery of a true Ministry and Church estate.

The fifth Proposition rises beyond measure, That no Christian can expect by
the appointment of God to partake in the seals, till he have joined himself
in Church fellowship and in the call of the Minister* We conceive you will not
say that children and women have to do in the call of the Minister. If some
part of the Church do not consent in the call of the Minister, must they
separate from the ordinances of worship, etc.



Here you say people must join in the call of a Minister before they can
lawfully desire and be admitted to the seals. And another has zealously
affirmed, It is a presumptuous sin to choose an Officer not trained up and
tried in deba^ing, dis^ss^g, c^ying and contriving Church affairs, in
ad^nishing, ^ch^ting, comforting, etc. L^y these together and consider how long
many a poor soul converted to the faith must be compelled to w^t Gods
ordinances.

Robinson as another of the same sort as it were. For such as would gladly
receive every Syllable from us that may dislodge their thoughts of separation
in us (as we are heartily desired to be assured of in the Epistle to this
Reply) we think would not so closely join us with such they would have us
parted from; and upon so little occasion and to so little purpose, unless they
do much forget themselves.

Secondly, when it cannot be denied but the choice of Ministers is in the
Church, and that hands should not rashly be laid on any man: and Deacons the
lowest Office should be proved and then Minister being found blameless; yea
he says and these also proved, implying that others also should be so, 1 Timothy 3.10. what fault can be found with the substance of what either Robinson
or our selves speak, if our meaning, and his were but charitably taken? If his
word be over-zealous to say it is a presumpteous sin to do otherwise, what is
that to us?

Thirdly, For the delay of ordinances, if both these be taken together: in most
cases it need not be long, where God affords able and fit men for office. But
if some delay be, and that a church want some ordinances, and cannot by
Communion with other Churches enjoy them, (which is rare,) yet is it not better
to forbear some ordinances a while, then miscarry in so great a work as the
choice of officers, upon which the following comfort and good of the Church
does so much depend? The demand following is answered in this whole discourse,
and we hope not with words but proofs; especially in our answer to the Reply
in the first consideration: neither do we see any such difficulty, but that
such Christians may as easily join to such a Church for a time, as desire to
enjoy the ordinances, and to sit loose from it: for transient members we
disallow not.

If the propositions may stand for good, I fear we shall scarce find that ever
in ordinary way the Sacraments were lawfully dispensed or received in the
Christian Churches of God since the first foundation of them.



CHAP. XII.
TO the seventh consideration, The practice of the Church of Strangers in
London, recorded by John Alasco, is far differing from your judgment and
practice in the point in question. For first, say they, Paul testifies that
the Church it self, without exception of any member of it, is clean or holy by
the administration of baptism.



They hold Communion with the Church of England as one with theirs.

England they call it not, but the English Churches: and we deny not the same
in an orderly way: as they also required Testimony of their piety, if any did
but present a child to baptism in their Church. We have often professed this,
and by your own grant most of the approved Christians amongst us are not
members of the English Churches, having renounced their right of membership and
Commuion with the Church they were of there.

This order was observed by them to prevent the impostures of some that
pretended to the English they were joined to the Strangers; and contra.

avoiding all Churches, etc. which plainly shows they looked further then
such according to our practice: even their own country men fled for religion,
as we are: they yet received them not till by public profession of faith and
subjection to discipline, they joined themselves to some Congregationall Church.

Secondly, this shows what disorder and abuse of ordinances will follow from
such a liberty to admit such as are not joined to some Church: for by this
means many will neglect all order and discipline, if they may but have the
seals.

Thirdly, to put all out of question that their practice and judgment in
effect was the same with ours in this point, note the first question propounded
by them, Are these Infants which you offer the seed of this, Church that they
may lawfully be here baptized by our Ministry?

CHAP. XIII.
THus far we have answered to the Reply made to the considerations in our
answer to the 3. and 4. positions. Now whereas we took notice of three
objections against our first consideration, and answered the same: It pleases
the learned author to take up only two of them, and with much enlargement to
urge the same as his reasons against the positions, and to apply our answers
thereunto; by which means our answers to the objections briefly set down may
seem not so apt and full here as they would appear in their proper places:
and therefore it will be needful for us to enlarge our selves somewhat in
answering some passages at least in the reasons as they are here propounded,
before we come to the Reply.

That sacred order God has set in his visible Church, etc.



For first, The baptism of John was true baptism, etc. but he never demanded
of those he received, whether they were entered into Church Covenant, etc.



The second reason in substance is this, because from Christ and the constant
practice of the Apostles we learn, that such as are called of God, received
the holy Ghost, believe in the Lord, profess their faith in him with
repentance and amendment of life, have a right to baptism, and desiring it are
wronged if they be deprived thereof.

jus ad rem, but not jus in re, and the immediate fruition of them.

By a lively faith a man has internal Communion with Christ, by profession of
the entire faith joined with conformity of life in righteousness, holiness and
fellowship of love, he is a member of the visible Congregation or flock of
Christ, though no set member of a free Independent society: and baptism is a
seal of our admission into the flock of Christ; not ever more, but by
accident, of our receiving into a particular Congregation.



Secondly, We deny not but such have a right to be in the particular Church,
and so to baptism and all ordinances? but as by such profession they are not
members of any particular Church, so neither have they immediate right to the
privileges thereof without admittance into the same. Fit matter, such are for
a particular visible Church that profess the entire faith, etc. But it does
not admit them actually thereunto: and your own expression secretly implies
as much, when you say baptism is a seal of our admission into the Church or
flock of Christ; If baptism be the seal of our admission, then there is an
admission thereunto before baptism: but who does admit, and where, and when is
any admitted to the Church, but in particular Congregations? Can any be
admitted into a Church, that whole Church being ignorant thereof? but a man may
profess the entire faith, and live accordingly amongst the Heathen, where
neither any Church nor member of it take knowledge thereof; and therefore bare
profession does not admit men, but make them fit to be received and admitted
into the visible Church.

Your fourth Reason we have had twice before, and answered the same.

To our answer of the first objection; from the Instances of the Centurion,
Lydia, the Jailour, and the E^nuch.

First, If where the holy Ghost is given and received, and faith professed
according to Gods Ordinance, there none may hinder from being baptized (scil.
by such as have power to baptize them,) then either such are members of the
Church, or baptism is not a privilege of the Church; then it is not
essential to baptism in the first institution that it should be dispensed to
none but members of a Congregationall assembly.

Church. Secondly, that such as profess the faith, and have received the Holy
Ghost, are members of the Church, (if by Church ^ee meant the Church mystical
considered as visible, though not always political) Thirdly, that these may
receive baptism by such as have power to baptize them; but immediately to
baptize them, none had power but by an extraordinary call of God so to do, as
has bin formerly showed. But it will not hence follow, that ordinary officers
have such a power, (wanting such extraordinary call) because the members of the
Church Catholic having right unto the seals; yet the immediate fruition of
them, they must have by ordinary officers in a political body, the only
subject according to order of all such institutions: otherwise we must admit
private baptismes, if the extraordinary examples of the Apostles be pressed for
our pattern.

Then the Apostles in dispensing seals walked by rules of Scripture and
grounds common to us, and then the difficulty remaining is only this: Whether
a Pastor may dispense seals to such as have right to them and do orderly
desire them, though he be not yet a set member of a Congregation.

sano sensu) upon common and moral grounds, and yet may not be done by others
upon the same grounds. To give one instance in stead of many: the Apostles
preached the Gospel to gather in the elect of God and to edify the Church etc.
and Ministers upon the same common grounds must now preach the Gospel also: yet
in that the Apostles on those grounds preached to all Nations, this does not
warrant Ministers now to do the like: so here though we baptize believers as
they did, yet we may not do it to all in all cases as they did. And therefore
the rule holds only when all circumstances are alike as well as the Common
grounds.

In the instance given, it is not probable that baptism was evermore
administered by the Apostles or Evangelists. For before the death of Christ the
Disciples baptized, when they were neither Apostles nor Evangelists properly.
After the death of Christ, etc. If Philip, Ananias, and others might baptize
such as were no members of particular Congregations, then may ordinary Pastors
do the like.

showed in the first consideration, to which this objection and answer belong.
For we do not make all the Acts of the Apostles and Evangelists
extraordinary, but generally orderly in the way we profess. Secondly, we
answer to the particulars* (not to wrestle with the Ghosts of humane
imaginations and conjectures, whether any besides the Apostles baptized the
3000. Act. 2.) As for Philip and Ananias if they baptized, did they baptize as
private men, or as Church Officers? If the second, what Officers were they?
ordinary or extraordinary? We think it will not be thought they were
ordinary who were honored with such extraordinary work: But in what Office
soever they were, those particular actions (in baptizing the Eunuch and Paul)
were done by an immediate call of God, as is evident in the story.

It is very improbable that the persons baptized were in Church State, or
Order. If they were members of the Jewish Church not yet dissolved, this is not
to the purpose, for men have not right to baptism, because members of the
Jewish Church, but because Disciples, and as you say, joined together in
Covenant, etc.



If the Eunuch, and Centurion were proselytes, and of the Jewish Church, the
Sam^ritans whom Philip baptized were not so, and that any Gentiles, or the
Jaylour were set members of a Christian assembly, is very strange, etc.

Act. 2. to join men to the Church when they baptized them, need not seem
strange.

In the Apostles practice two things are to be considered. First, the
circumstance of the action. Secondly, the substance or quality of the Act. In
some circumstances the baptizing of some of these might be extraordinary, but
the substance, and quality of the action was grounded upon rules perpetual,
and common to us and them. That is done in an extraordinary way, etc.

one, that the Eunuch was baptized alone in the Wilderness, not in any visible
assembly of Saints. Wherein ordinary Pastors may not imitate that Act: and this
comes not far short of what we say: for the chief proof that they were not
received into a particular Church, lies in their absence from such an assembly:
and if they might be admitted to the Catholic Church without the presence of
any Christian (but him that baptized them) why not into a particular Church as
well? 2 The large discourse about the Apostles extraordinary power, and doing
things upon common grounds: is so often said for substance, and answered before,
that it were vain to trouble the Reader again with the same thing.

Secondly, an argument follows necessarily from a particular example to a
general, when the proof of one particular to another is made by force of the
similitude common to the whole kind under which those particulars are
contained. Now in this matter we speak of; no reason can be named why we
should think it lawful for the Apostles to baptize such as were no set
members, and the same should be unlawful in all cases for Pastors of
particular Congregations.



Fourthly, the practice of the Apostles in receiving the faithful, etc. is
backed on divine precept, etc.



Fifthly, In the first consideration you prove the seals to be the privilege
of the Church in ordinary dispensation by this passage of Scripture, Then they
that gladly received the word were baptized: but if the Apostles baptiz^d by
extraordinary dispensation in your sense this testimony is insufficient for
that purpose.

Although the printed Copy of our answer omit this proof wholly, and also,
Romans 9.4. yet in our true Cypy we alleged, Acts 2 41, 42.47. wherein you will
find not only this passage, Then they that gladly received the word were
baptized: but withal that they were added to the Church, and such a Church as
continued steadfastly in the fellowship, etc. of the Apostles.

Likewise Verse 47. that the conversion, and baptizing of Disciples being
omitted, the joining or adding to the Church is put in the stead thereof, which
proofs as they are omitted wholly in the printed Copy, so also you make no
reply unto them.

Secondly, by these proofs it might easily have been seen that we did not
look upon all the Apostles acts in this case of Baptism as extraordinary, but
that their first and leading examples were ordinary, and in that order we
plead for: which if it had been regarded, much labor had been saved in this
dispute, which has been spent to little purpose. And,

Our second Reason.

In due order the seals belong to them to whom the grant is given, but the
grant is vouchsafed to the faithful, and their seed, forgiveness of sins,
etc. and the benefits of the Covenant are so linked together, that where one is
granted none is denied, etc.

sigillum sequitur d^num; let them take this gift and the seal is ready for
them. And this may answer the first part of the Reply about Romans 4.11. as also
all the rest which follows being things so often repeated, and answered before,
as make it tedious to all.

CHAP. XIIII.
Position 5.
THat the power of excommunication is so in the body of the Church, that what
the major part shall allow must be done, though the Pastors and Governors, and
the rest of the assembly be of another mind, and that peradventure upon more
substantial reasons.

This question is much mistaken, for the demand is not, Whether in the
Congregation matters should be carried by number of votes against God, as you
interpret the position, but whether the power of excommunication so lie in the
body of the Congregation as that sentence must proceed in externo foro,
according to the vote and determination of the major part, and so in admissions
of members, etc. and though they have no power against God, but for God, yet in
execution of that power they may be divided in judgment, and one part must
err^. Now hence the question is moved, Whether the power be so in the people,
that what the major part determine must stand.

Parker as consenting with him. In the second part to the position as stated,
our answer is plainly negative, that excommunication is not so seated, neither
ought to be so in any of the Churches of the Lord Jesus. What follows is our
reason grounded upon the last clause of the position, because Churches ought to
carry things not by number of votes against God (as this position implies) but
by strength of Rule and Reason according to God, and for edification, 2 Cor.
13.8. 2 Cor. 10.8. Now let any judge whether the position does not imply such
an absurdity so often as things should be carried by the major vote against the
Officers, and the rest having better Reasons, and therefore we are apt to
think that if the learned author had been so ready to embrace any syllable that
lends to dislodge these thoughts of us as leaning to separation, he would have
believed our plain negation of this position, which indeed is according to our
constant practice never following the major part of votes against the Officers,
but counting it the duty of the Officers in such cases either to satisfy the
consciences of the major part (or lesser) by the rule of the word, or to yield
not to the vote but reasons if they be stranger; or to suspend the business,
and refer to the counsel of other Churches, if they cannot agree but a
division arise according to the pattern, Act. 15.

Amongst them that hold the power of the Keys to be given to the Church, some
(as Fenner, Parker, I. D.) distinguish between the power itself which they
give to the Church, and the execution which they confine to the Presbytery,
others give the power of the Keys with the exercise thereof to the whole body
of the Church; or if in the dispensation they attribute any thing to the
Officers, it is but as servants of the Church from whom they derive their
authority, and here lies the stone at which the Separation stumble, and which
we conceive to be your judgment and practice, wherein we required your
plain answer, but have received no satisfaction. You refer us to Mr. Parkers
Reasons to prove the power of the Keys belong to the whole Church, who are of
far differing judgment from him in the point it self, and if your judgment
and practice be as the Separation (as we fear) you dissent from him and we
from you in these considerations.

Parker as concurring with him, should give him any satisfaction to the
contrary. But if that be the judgment, and practice of the Separation which
is here imputed unto them, viz. That the power and exercise of the Keys is in
the body of the Church, and what the Officers do therein is but as servants of
the Church from whom they derive their authority; if our profession may be of
any use to satisfy, we do freely, and heartily profess to the contrary:
affirming that the authoritative power of transacting all things in the Church,
is in the hands of the Officers who minister in the name and power of Christ to
and over the Church, and that the power or liberty of the community whereby
they may and ought to concur with their guides, so long as they rule in the
Lord, is to be carried in a way of obedience unto them, and when upon just
cause they dissent from them, still they are to walk respectfully toward
them, and we think our brethren are not ignorant that Mr. Parker and Fenner
give as much to the Church in excommunication, as we have pleaded for in any
of our public writings. But seeing we are led by this learned author from
this particular question about excommunication to that beaten controversy of
the power of the Keys in general, and the first subject thereof, whereby we
are forced to declare our selves herein; we shall briefly gleane up some few
of our scattered apprehensions, as may most concern the case in hand.

1 There are diverse Keys that are diversely distributed to several subjects in
respect of execution, and therefore the question should have been first
stated: and what Keys are denied to the people and appropriated to the
Officers. And what to some Officers, not to others, should have been showed
before Arguments were pressed.

Pet Mart. de Excom. Loc. Com.
2 The state of the Church being mixed of an Aristocracy to which belongs
Office, and Democracy to which belongs privilege; hence the power of the Keys
is twofold. 1 Official.
Official power. 2 Fraternall. The first belonging to the guides of the
Church, the other to the fraternity thereof.

3 The official power of the Keys is a power to act with authority in the
name of Christ ministerially in opening and shutting, binding and loosing, etc.
In respect of which Office (while the Minister acts according to the will of
Christ) he is over the Church in things properly Ecclesiastical, because he
stands in the room of Christ, and comes in his name, and hence in those Church
acts which are not proper to him, but common in some cases to the fraternity,
yet there is an office-authority upon them, which is not upon the like acts
materially done by others. Ex. gr. Any brother may and ought to exhort and
rebuke, 1 These. 5.14. Heb. 3.13. Titus a Minister is exhorted to do the same
thing, but with all authority, Titus 2.15. some able and gifted, though not in
Office, may occasionally open and apply the word, yet not with an
Office-authority. But an Officer preaches as an Ambassador of Christ, 2 Cor.
5. So also in admission of members, and casting out of offenders (wherein
though the fraternity have a power whether in consenting or otherwise) yet they
act obedientially in respect of their guides, declaring the rule, going before
them in example, and commanding them (if need be) in the name of Christ to do
his pleasure. But the Officers act in these things in the name and authority of
him in whose room they stand, and hence we think that in case the fraternity
without Officers should cast out any, yet it is not altogether the same with
that which may be dispensed by the Officers thereof, it being no official act.

2 Fraternall power (in public Church acts) is a joint power of liberty or
privilege (in some sense, and in some cases) to open, and shut, which power is
not in any one or more severally; but in the whole jointly, for as they have
power to combine, and so to receive others into the communion, so by like
reason to shut out offenders from their communion; but thus they do
fraternally, not officially: and as they have such a power of election of
Officers to them, so they have also a fraternall power (due order being
attended) to shut them out (when there is just cause) according to the common
received rule, Cujus est instituere, ejusdem est and destituere.

These things which might be more fully explained and confirmed, we have
only briefly set down both to wash off the blot of popular Government from
the ways of Christ, as if all authority were taken from the Ministers, or
nothing left them but to dispense the seals, and in all other things to ^it
merely as a moderator in the Churches of Christ, which we utterly disclaim.

And also to make way for our more clear answer to what is objected here in
the Reply: We grant therefore the first argument and the conclusion thereof
thus far, that the official power of the Keys was not given to the whole
multitude, but only there is given to them a power to choose Officers, which
Officers should execute the same.

If Christ gave this power to the community, was it from the beginning of the
Church, or took it effect after the Church was planted? Not the first, for
then the Apostles themselves should derive their power from the community,
which they did not.



The Apostles and other Governors were given of Christ to the Church as for
their end, and all their authority was given unto them for the Church, as for
the whole: but the authority it self was immediately derived from Christ, and
is not in the Church as the immediate subject, nor derived from the Church, but
from Christ the King of the Church. The authority of Governor is given of
Christ for a gift to the Church, but not a gift absolute. That it may reside in
the power of the whole Church, but for a conditional gift communicated to the
Governors for the good of the whole. Parker, pol. lib. 3. cap. 8.

Paul expressly distinguishes Gal. 1.1. Paul was an Apostle, not of man, nor by
man, but of God, and by Jesus Christ; false Teachers are of man, and by man.
True Pastors as Thomas, John, etc. are of God by man, and if Christ communicate
this Office, and the authority annexed unto it mediatly by man, not immediately,
the question is, Who is the subject of this power to call, and so to apply this
office in the name of Christ to this or that person, John, Thomas, etc. We
hold this fraternall ministerial power (under Christ) is in the Church, and so
far we shall defend this position, and wherever it be else placed it will
be subject to all the absurdities that are imputed to us. To the sentence of
Parker we answer, that the misinterpreting one word of his sentence does
pervert his whole meaning, his words are Pro dono conditionali ut Rectoribus
communicetur, i. e. that the Church might not communicate that power to
Officers, nor keep it in her own hand. Or that it might be communicated from
Christ by the Church. And this will appear his meaning, and it agrees with
that position he holds so strongly, that the Church is the first subject of
the Keys.

After the Churches were established, it took not effect, for it is no where
found in Scripture that Christ first committed this power to the Apostles, and
after to the community; the Ministers and guides were immediately of Jesus
Christ from whom immediately they derive their power and authority, by whom
they are set over their charge, in whose name they execute their Office, etc.
Yea Pastorship is the gift of Christ as well as Apostleship; and every Pastor
is not immediately called, but the office and order of Pastors, the calling,
authority and jurisdiction is immediately from Christ, not from the Church.

Act. 28.8. Ephesians. 4 8. etc. do not prove that all Officers are immedately
from Christ, though they be set in the Church by Christ and over the Church by
the Holy Ghost, etc. This the Lord can do, and does do by the means of his
Church walking according to his rule and institution, and therefore you must
come at last home to our tenent, (as here you do) that Pastorship, the office,
power, jurisdiction, etc. annexed to it, is immediately from Christ, viz. by
his institution in the Gospel: but Pastors every one that receive this office,
has it from Christ, but by his Church calling them to the same, and in the
name of Christ applying it to them: and thus far we agree with you.

The Steward is appointed of the Master of the family alone, and has all his
authority from him. Every Ambassador in the cause of his Embassage does
immediately depend upon him from whom he is sent: but if the function, order
and authority of Pastors and Teachers be immediately from Christ, then it is
not received from the Church as the immediate receptacle.

Answ. First, though Pastors in respect of the exercise of their function
dispense the Word and other Mysteries of Christ as from him immediately, and so
are fitly compared to Ambassadors and Stewards, yet in the call of the one and
other to that work there is a plain dissimilitude, the one being called
Mediately, the other Immediately by their Masters, and therefore in this case
it proves nothing.

What does this argument conclude? if only that the function and order is not
from the Church as the first subject, we readily grant it; if the application
of the office to such a person, (so far as may be done by an outward call)
it follows not at all, for the function and office may be from Christ, and
the application thereof by the Church.

Thus Protestant Divines dispute against Papists, if Bishops receive their
power and authority of exercising immediately from Christ by Mandate, Mission
and commission from him, then not from the Pope, and so for Presbyters in
regard of the Bishop.

Peter, whence all must ^ee derived to all Bishops, etc. be they never so
orderly chosen and ordained in their own esteem, and so indeed usurps the
Prerogative of Christ the head of the Church. The like usurpation i^ its degree
was in the Bishops over Presbyters: But here the case is far different, the
Church claming no such power, but only Ministerial in the outward call of
officers according to his direction, and so the application of that office unto
the persons, which has sufficient ground of Scripture from Christ, and
therefore we grant the conclusion. viz. That they derive not their power from
the people, but from Christ: by means of the Church Ministerially and
instrumentally applying that office to them, whereunto Christ has annexed that
power. Lastly the like argument may be objected against any other subject of
this power you can or will suppose, even the Presbytery it self.

It is usually obj^cted that the Church cannot convey what she never had: but
the people may elect their Pastor.

Whereunto the answer is direct and plain, nothing can give that it had not
formally or vertually, unless it give it as an instrument ministering to one
that has it, but so it may give what it never had, nor is capable of. A
Steward may give all the offices in his Masters house as ministerially
executing his Masters pleasure.

Confer vim ad effectum: and so far, or in what sense it gives any thing to
the effect in that sense, and so far it must needs have vertually or formally
the same in itself. If a Conduit convey water ministerially from the fountain
to the house, it has water in such a sense, as it does concur to the effect:
and so the Church cannot give the Keys to the Officers as an instrument of
Christ, but it must be granted she received them from Christ vertually to give
them to the Officer. Secondly, for the instance; if it be meant of a Steward
giving the offices to such persons as his Master has named thereunto, and he
instals them into the same, the case is not alike yet, here he must have some
power and authority so to do so that he has these offices vertually in his
hand, but if it be his Masters will, he shall choose what persons he sees fit
according to rules given him, (which is the case here) then he has this power
vertually in his hand.

Thirdly, if Ecclesiastical and spiritual power be in the multitude and
community of the faithful, the Church does not only call, but make Officers
out of power and virtue received into her self, and then should the Church
have a true Lordlike power in regard of her Ministers.

Robinson, though we do not approve the sentence you cite out of him, yet we
doubt whether you do not go beyond his sense and meaning: but according to
our sense of this position before laid down, neither this absurdity of
Lordship over the Officers, nor any others that are instanced in, under this
reason do at all follow; and they may be as strongly urged against the
Presbyteries, Classes, Synods, Catholic Church, or any subject of the Keys
that can be named: And the objection, viz. That God will have the Church choose
Officers to execute the power committed to her, is so answered in the same
page, as will serve us as well as you, viz. God will have her elect Officers of
his designment (that is, such as the rule directs her to choose) to do his
work according to that Power which he has given them, and by his direction,
and then they are Gods servants and not the Churches, and receive that charge
and function immediately from God, and not from the people; we mean no
otherwise then by that outward call instrumentally applying that Office unto
them; and in this sense we close with you herein: and indeed this power of
electing Officers does not ever include authority over them whom they choose,
but rather willing subjection unto them, and setting them up to rule; as when a
woman chooses a husband, she makes him her husband in a sort, but withal her
head and ruler; so when a people choose a Major, etc.

Fourthly, if the Power of the Keys be given first and immediately to the
community of the faithful, what reason can be alleged why in defect of
Officers the Church might not rule, feed, bind, loose, preach, and administer
Sacraments; or if any fail in Office, why she might not supply that want by
her power, for the power of the Keys does contain both authority and exercise,
power being given that it may be exercised, as it is vouchsafed: but the
Church cannot exercise these acts of rule. Ergo.

The reason is, because the Church has not received some of the Keys formally
but only vertually, and (as was said out of Parker) not as a gift absolute but
conditional, that it might be communicated to the Officers. Such power as the
body of the Church has received formally she may and does exercise, as a
power of choosing Officers, a power of judging in censures, 1 Cor. 5.12. and
the like, the power of preaching properly so called and dispensing Sacraments,
etc. being acts of authority, the Church has them only vertually, and
therefore must choose Officers, to whom Christ her Lord has given authority in
the Church. A Corporation that by Patent from the King has many Privileges,
the power is given to the Body incorporated, and so it is the first subject of
it, yet many acts cannot be put forth, but by Officers duly chosen: and so
here.

For these Reasons (not to insist on any more) we judge the community of the
faithful, not to be the immediate receptacle of ecclesiastical authority,
and so the Power of excommunication, not to belong unto them.

Parker, with whom he seems to be friends. Secondly, the power of
excommunication may belong to the Church or community in respect of a
fraternall power of judging, though official authority be not formally given
to the Church but to the Officers.

If consent of Churches be asked in this point, to omit others, the Churches
of Scotland speak fully and expressly for us in the second book of Discip.
Cap. 1. The Church as it is taken for them that exercise spiritual functions
in the Congregation of them that profess the truth, has a certain power
granted of God according to which it uses a proper jurisdiction, etc. Beza de
Presb. page 60. Helv. Confess. Cap. 18. Belgic, etc.

Fulke, Whitaker, Parker, Peter Martyr, Musculus and others, besides many of
the ancient Divines and Counsels, Gerson and the Parisian Divines well known
to the learned concerning quotation of the Scottish discipline, the first words
lay so weak a foundation as leave the building ready to fall, in these words.
The Church as it is taken for them that exercise spiritual functions has a
certain power, etc. but where is the Church so taken? not in all the New
Testament that can be proved with any solid Reason, notwithstanding all
wrestling of men to find it out; but generally for the company of the
faithful, either the universal or particular Church; and this sometime
considered with her Officers: and diverse times as distinguished from them, as
Acts 14.23. and 20.13.28. Jam. 5.14. Revel. 2.1.8.12. etc. but never contra,
for the Officers distinguished from the Church or body of the Congregation; and
therefore if the Keys be given to the Church, and the plea of the power of the
Keys to be given immediately to the Officers be in and under the name of the
Church, it will fall to the Church of the faithful, if the Scripture may
judge: indeed among the Papists, and so the Prelates, the Clergy have long got
and held possession of the name of the Church, but the testament of Christ will
not bear this foundation, but we will not trouble the Reader farther about
humane testimonies.

CHAP. XV.
Position 6.
THat none are to be admitted Members but they must promise not to depart or
remove unless the Congregation will give leave.

It is one thing abruptly to break away when and whither they please, and
forsake fellowship another thing, not to depart or remove habitation unless
the Congregation will give leave; also it is one thing mutually to compound and
agree, not to depart from each other without consent and approbation, and other
to require a promise of all that be admitted into society that they shall not
depart without the Churches allowance, if such a promise be required of all
members to be admitted, we cannot discern upon what grounds your practice is
warranted.

that we judge it expedient and most according to rule, that brethren should
not forsake fellowship, etc. but in removalls approve themselves, etc. Now this
is far short of what the position affirms; for first, that none are to be
admitted without such a promise, includes a necessity; the answer speaks only
of expediency and agreeableness to rule, not to break off abruptly. Secondly,
the Position affirms the necessity of a promise; the answer speaks only of
the case in practice, as in many cases besides, for the watch of the Church
reaches to such particular acts of which we make no promise express in the
entrance. Thirdly, the Position speaks of the Churches leave, the answer
acknowledges only that brethren removing should approve themselves to do
that which is lawful, and take counsel in such weighty affairs. By all which
it appears that we do not own this position, in judgment nor practice, and
therefore in effect our answer does deny the same, and is negative. Secondly,
if the words of the answer be not full enough: (because we see our brethren
here run upon it as a question if such a promise be required, and Mr.
Rutherford and others take it up as a confessed practice) we do therefore
clearly and plainly deny the position and affirm that we do not think
that none are to be admitted without such a promise; neither is there any such
practice in our admissions of members to require such a promise; we only
count such removalls (especially of families) an action amongst many others
whereunto the watch of the Church does extend, to prevent sin where there is
any just ground of suspicion thereof, and to further the best good of such as
are under our charge by counsel, prayers, etc. If any Minister and people of
old acquaintance and dear affection, or any other Christians cleaving together
in love have privately resolved or agreed together, not to part from each others
in any Church, it is the most that we have taken knowledge of, and we think
that has been very rare, but for any such public promise, Covenant, or
Church oath, (as some straining things to the height have called it) it is not,
nor has been required or practiced amongst us: this being so, there needs no
grounds of that which we practice not.

First, you exclude all such as be not set members from the seals, and yet
hinder them from entrance into the Church society, because they cannot promise
continuance in the place they are resident in for the present; here we desire
to be satisfied by the word of God by what you require it* etc.



Secondly, It may be in some cases, some may be advised by the counsel of
their private friends in a Church to forbear till they be some way settled. But
that any are debarred from Communion when they desire it, because they cannot
promise continuance, (unless other just causes hinder) it neither suites with
our judgment nor practice; and if any should practice other ways, we do not
allow of the same, and therefore it is needless to give you reasons of what we
practice not.

It pertaines not to the whole Congregation to take notice or be acquainted
with or judge of every particular members removal* may not a servant remove
from his Master to another Congregation, or a father bestow his child in
marriage to one of another Congregation, but the whole Church must be called to
counsel in the matters, etc. when Churches grow populous they must be
negligent or weary of such a task, and for the present to challenge so much
authority over one, another is usurpation, etc.

We judge it expedient, etc. That none forsake fellowship and abruptly break
off, etc. This does not imply a necessity of calling the whole Church to
counsel in every plain and easy case; many times, and for the most part such
removals are so plain and free from suspicion of abrupt breaking off or
forsaking fellowship, that there is no need of counsel, as in case of servants
marriages, etc. and therefore no trouble to the Church: and in some removal of
families also, the case is clear, and openly carried in the knowledge of many
of the Church, none scruple it, and therefore at the first demand of dismission
or letters of recommendations, the same are granted: but in removal of some
members, and in the manner of the same, there are such difficulties and dangers
as need the prayers and counsel of the Officers and whole Church, (as is
confessed after) nor do we say, it pertaines to the whole Church to be
called to counsel and judge of every particular members removal, for they may
approve themselves to the consciences of all mediately by advising with some
who may satisfy the rest, if need be.

Let it be showed, that ever by divine right, this power was committed to the
Church, and we will confess it expedient, but till then, we think the Church
over rigid, and the members busy bodies, etc.

The rule of love whereby we are bound to exhort, admonish, seek the
edification and good one of another, and that not only in general (as of all
Christians) but as members of so near relation in one Church body, who are
bound to serve the Lord with one shoulder, Zeph. 3.^. and to uphold the worship
of Christ therein, as this does reach to all the actions and ways of one
another, so in a special manner to such an action as this i^: and we think
this ground is sufficient to satisfy our practice as we have declared, which
may wipe off the aspersion of being rigid or busybodies.

In the multitude of counselors is peace, but over-many counselors often
causes distractions, and different apprehensions breed delays.



The nature of your Church Covenant infers not a necessity of bringing every
such business to the Church; for you bind your selves mutually to watch one
over another, etc. but this essentially tyeth not any man to a perpetual
residence in one place, for then even occasional absence should be a breach of
Covenant, without consent of the Church.



You say you bind your selves to no new duties, but in the word of truth, it is
not required neither directly nor by consequence, that no member of a Church
should remove or occasionally be absent from his habitation before he have
acquainted the Church whither he goes, and on what occasions, etc.

etc. to the counsel of the whole Church. Secondly, he would by consequence
infer the like of occasional absence* and now he weaves in that also, as if
it were practiced by us to require men to acquaint the Church with the place
whither they go, and the occasions of their occasional absence, which is
far from us.

And if such business must be determined on the Lords Day, etc.



As for the Covenant it self, etc. but if ye constrain men to meddle with
things that belong not to them, and wind them up higher then God, would, and
strain every thing to the pitch you seem here to do, a godly sober mind may
well pause before he make such a promise.



If any shall not middle with every business of this kind, as questioning
whether it do belong to him or no, or not ask the advice of the whole
society, as knowing the most be unfit to counsel in such a case, does he
break his Covenant therein, and so commit a sin in a sort like the sin of
Ananias and Saphira? Judge your selves if in other cases you would not censure
this to be an high incroachment upon Christian liberty, and a strict binding
of men's consciences by humane constitutions.

Ananias, etc. we entreat our reverend brethren and the Christian Reader to
consider, that in the answer, this stands in the third thing noted in the
nature of the Covenant, and has reference to the duties of the Covenant in
general, and is not applied to this particular case by us, nor well appliable
in the manner here expressed. Secondly, it is moderated in the answer which
says (in some sort he shall commit that sin.) If these things do not
satisfy, we wish it expunged, or any other seeming harshnesse, rather then
offense be given to any. Lastly, that you may not impute unto us the
infringement of Christian liberty herein, we would acquaint all men with these
two things. First, that removals from one town and Church to another and from
full to new Plantations, are frequently practiced amongst us, with consent and
approbation. Secondly, that we find in experience, that as there is in sheep
a wandering disposition, so in this large Wilderness, (wherein the Lord has
exercised his people with various temptations, by liberties, by offers of large
outward accommodations, by wants and straights, by various opinions vented by
Satan and his instruments, etc.) In these respects the Sheep of Christ are so
subject many times to outrunnings, that we find more then ordinary need of
care and wisdom in this point of our watch in many cases; and many that have
broke loose from the counsels of their officers, friends, and of the Church,
have deeply smarted for it; How said a case is it when some brainsicke master
of a family, transported with a fancy, an odd opinion, will needs carry his
whole family with himself to the grief and hazard of his godly wife and
hopeful children, etc. from all Ordinances of Christ to a people full of
fanaticall errors! were it Christian liberty, or dangerous licenciousnesse to
leave such a man to his own counsels, and not meddle with him?

May you not hear from your own grounds, that herein you have devised an
expedient or necessary rite or custom to prevent the dissolution of the body,
which never came into ^he mind of the Lord Jesus the Savior of his body, and
in so doing (if your exposition hold good) you break the second Commandment;
and to press customs only expedient for the time as standing rules necessary
for all times and all persons, to put that authority into the hands of men
which God never put upon them, to obliege men to meddle in the affairs of men
beyond warrant, to bind consciences under so heavy a penalty as that of
Ananias and Saphira, where God has not bound them, to debar approved
Christians from the seals, because they cannot promise as settled members to
abide in the society* and yet charge them as men that against light refuse
subjection to the Gospel, this is that which we cannot approve, which yet we
suspect will follow from your judgment, and desire to be resolved in your
practice.



Here it is imputed unto us that we have devised a rite to preserve the unity
and prevent the dissolutions of the body, which we conceive is intended of
this promise of not removal without leave, which promise is not required of us
nor made in our Church Covenant, (as we have said) and the ground of this
imputation is also a mere mistake arising from the confounding of a second
answer to the objection against our first reason, with the second reason of our
practice, which are distinct and have a different scope, for whereas some might
object, that this reason from the Covenant, holds with such as grant such a
Covenant lawful, the answer says that some indeed question the necessity of
it: but we hope you do not question the lawfulness, and thereupon the answer
first gives reasons and proofs of the lawfulness of it. And secondly, for the
necessity which is taken from the nature of all societies incorporate, which
by a fundamental rule, do require of all that enter into them, and partake of
the privileges thereof, to conform to all such lawful rites and orders as
are expedient for the well being of that society; the contrary whereof would
be injurious to him to offer, and confusion in them to accept; and from hence
it easily follows, that a Church being a body of a people enjoying privileges
together, it is necessary fundamentally that they should be joined in some
promise or Covenant, which Covenant (though in civil societies it may consist
in rites and orders devised by themselves for their good) yet in the Church
which is the body of Christ, this Covenant is no other but to perform the
duties required in the Gospel toward God and one another, without any rites or
order, devised by themselves, as we professed in setting forth the nature of
the Covenant; and this being the true scope of those words, let any judge what
ground is given by us of such an imputation of devising rites, etc. Neither
does the second reason in the answer give any ground of this imputation; for
though it dispute from the necessary ruin of the Church, and all Churches, if
it were lawful for any member when, whither and wherefore he please to depart
from the Church without consent: yet there is not one syllable that gives an
hint of any rite, custom or order devised by us, to prevent the same, but for
the avoiding thereof we still wholly and only bind our selves to the rule of
the Word, to direct, order, and reform all actions of this nature, and to show
unto men whether they may lawfully remove or not remove, not requiring any
express promise to the contrary in this particular no more then in others; and
thus we hope we have resolved you of our practice, as you desired. To
conclude this passage, give us leave without offense to say thus much.

Although (through the grace of Christ) we desire humbly to submit to this part
of our trial, even to go through evil report as well as good, yea all the
reproaches and cruel mockings of the world, knowing that we have deserved
much more from the hand of that God without whose providence a tongue could not
move against us* yet we cannot but account is one of our poorest afflictions
to suffer in this kind, from the pens or tongues of our dearly beloved
brethren, for whom we daily pray, and to whom we hope we shall never be*
provoked to return any other language then savouring of love and respect. But
we must confess we meet with so many sore criminations, (often upon mere
mistakes) cast not only upon our selves, but the truth and ways of God, which
we profess, and that both by this learned author and some others, that we
cannot be so senseless of the dishonor is reflected upon the truth of God
herein, as wholly to be silent, and groan out the grief of our spirits to
him that knows our hearts: wherefore we humbly beseech all our godly
brethren, to bear with us a little, if after all the harsh passages of this
Reply, such an heap of accusations as are here thrown upon us, move us to
present to the Reader a short view of such things as are unjustly and
ungroundedly cast upon us, and which we cannot but think has drawn a black
cloud over the glory of the holy Discipline of Christ which he has here set
up among us.

To omit the general frame of this Reply, in presenting our opinions and ways
to the people as if we concurred generally with those of the Rigid separation,
and differed almost in every thing from such godly brethren as have breathed
after purity of Ordinances and Reformation.

To omit also the frequent inserting of such terms unto our questions and
arguments contrary to the true state thereof, which render every thing harsh
and full of rigidnesse to the ears of the Reader as have been observed by us.

And omitting also diverse other suppositions and objections, we shall only
desire those who have taken up evil thoughts concerning these Churches and the
ways of Christ we walk in from this Reply, to note these particular
imputations in this short Chapter, and upon what grounds they are built.

As page 79. That we hinder men from entrance into Church society, because
they cannot promise continuance in the Place, and running upon this strain he
says:

Was it ever heard of in the Church of God from the beginning thereof unto this
day, that any such thing was propounded unto and required of members, to be
admitted into Church fellowship? Here is a loud outcry, and who would not think
but that we usually propound and require such a thing in our admissions, (which
yet is nothing so.) But what is the ground of all this? Look a little before
and he says, If such a promise be required.

Again ibidem says he, we think the Church is over-rigid in exacting such
a condition of the members, and the members go beyond their measure as busy
bodies, and what is the ground? It follows, If they arrogate such a power to
themselves.

So page next 80. In the word it is not commanded that no member should remove
or occasionally be absent from the place of his habitation before he have
acquainted the congregation whither he goes, on what occasion, etc. To what
end is this inserted if not to suggest that there is such a practice among us
that a man may not occasionally be absent, etc. which is far from us? And what
is the ground see a few lines after, The Church shall burden herself, etc. If
she take upon her to intermeddle in all such occasions.

And immediately after, we fear the time appointed for religious exercises
should be profaned by unseasonable disputes.

But what is the ground of this fear conceived and published to the world,
viz. If such businesses must be determined on the Lords day? and that before
the Ordinances, etc. because it seems Robinson in case of some notorious
obstinate offender, would have some censure passed to prevent pollution of an
Ordinance; and is this ground sufficient?

Again in the same page (for these things are thick sown) Herein, says he,
you have devised an expedient or necessary rite or custom to preserve unity,
etc. but if you seek a ground it will be found a mistake, as is showed
before, and contrary to the express profession of the Answer, That we promise
no new duties, but only such as the Gospel requires of all Saints in Church
order, much less do we set up new rites and customs.

And as if all these particular imputations in the compass of one leaf were
two little, Page next 81. we have a whole Catalogue gathered together from
other places and this, that by laying things together the odium raised might
stick the deeper: for thus the words are, But to press customs expedient for
the time as standing rules, necessary at all times and all persons; To put
authority in the hands of men which God never put upon them, and to oblige them
to intermeddle; To bind the consciences of men, and that upon so heavy a
penalty as the sin of Ananias and Saphira, where God has not bound it; To
de^arre known Christians from the seals, because they cannot promise so abide
in the Church at settled members; and yet charge them in the mean season
against light to refuse subjection to the Gospel. Concerning all which we do
not know any of them to be true, not approve any such thing in any, if it
should be found among us. And what is the ground of all this? Truly weak
enough (as has been showed in our discourse) and here it is the suspicion of
the Author, for thus he adds, This is that we cannot approve, and yet we
suspect will follow from your judgment.

These things we have thus briefly presented in one view not to dishonor the
learned and reverend Author, whose memory we honor; two things we charitably
take notice of, to remove over hard thoughts of him: First, we consider his
spirit might be over grieved and provoked to this harshnesse by the
withdrawings of many Christians from the Ordinances of God because dispensed
according to the corrupt Liturgy, in which cause he stood too far engaged,
and supposing New England ways the cause of it, he was the more sharp.

Secondly, we consider that this Reply was not intended by him to be published
to the world, but to be sent unto us, and therefore he is in our hearts the
less blamable.

But seeing these things are now published, and the harshnesse thereof may do
much hurt, we were pressed to clear our selves, wherein if any thing reflect
upon the Author or Publishers, we cannot avoid it.

Neither do we write thus as if we would wholly justify our selves and all
the particular miscarriages that happily at one time or other, in some Church
or other may have happened; we have much cause to humble our selves before our
God and abase our selves to the dust before men, for all the weaknesses,
sins, errors and miscarriages that have been found among us, in one kind and
another.

Only this we may profess before the Lord and his people, that in the maine
scope of our hearts and endeavors of our lives we have sought after such a
form of worship, and frame of discipline, as we could conceive by the Word of
God and the help of the best Reformers to be according to the will of Christ,
not allowing our selves in any evil discovered unto us, but bewayling our
great defects in all.

And here we crave leave to put you in mind of what you have considered
already* That the Church and every member have entered into Covenant, to take
God for their God, etc. but we never find that they were called to give
account of the work of grace wrought in their souls, or that the whole
Congregation were to be judge thereof. You stand here all this day (says
Moses) before the Lord your God, etc. that thou should enter into Covenant
with the Lord thy God. All that were borne in the wilderness Joshua
circumcised, but it is uncredible to think there was none that did not give
good testimony of the work of grace, etc.

Because it is a principal thing, especially in the builders of the Church, to
know their materials, and because the reverend and learned Author steps
somewhat out of his way to call us to give answer in this controversy of such
great weight, (especially in this present turn of times) we shall therefore
gladly accept of this occasion to declare our selves, with as much brevity as
we may, to the two branches of the question.





Whether the members of the Church be called, etc.

For answer to which we shall express our selves in these particulars, to
prevent mistakes. First, that the question is not of what may keep a Church
already constituted from being accounted no Church, but of what is to be
required of such as join unto a Church, for a Church may be a true Church,
and yet be very corrupt, (as is generally observed by Protestant writers, both
out of the examples of some Churches in the New Testament, and that of the Old
in the great Apostasy thereof) we think (in this same) Doctor Fields
expressions may be safely received: Lib. 1. cap. 6.7
Some profess Christ (says he) but not wholly and entirely, as Heretics:
some profess the whole saving truth, but not in unity, as Schismatiques: some
profess it in unty, but not in sincerity, as prophaine persons and Hypocrites:
some in unity and sincerity: all these are partakers of the heavenly calling by
profession of the truth, and consequently in some degree and sort the Church
etc. But (we think that (this is no argument, that either Heretics,
Schismatickes, profane persons, or Hypocrites (if convictively discovered that
such are meet matter to be joined to a Church.

Secondly, when a work of grace is required and desired of those who are to
join to a Church, the meaning is not as if we allowed none to ^ee of the
Church, but real Saints, and such as give demonstrative evidence of being
members of the invisible Church; for we profess (according to the Scripture
and general doctrine of all reformed Churches (what ever their practice be)
that it is not real, but visible faith, not the inward being, but the outward
profession of faith, (whence men are called visible Saints) that constitutes a
visible Church, which faith so professed is called visible, not in the
judgment of certainty, from such infallible signs of it, as may demonstrate
the hidden being of it within; but in the judgment of charity which hopes the
best. (^ Cor. 12 7) in the weakest Christian and meanest profession, even when
it sometimes fears the worst, and is not able at the present, to convince the
contrary.

Thirdly this judgment of charity (concerning the truth of another profession,
or that which is called the work of grace) is to be regulated by the word,
which Christ has left as a complete rule, not only of faith but also of love,
and charity to guide both in their acts unto their ends: and hence large
professions and long relations of the work of grace (though full of exceeding
glory, when humbly and prudently made) we exact not rigorously and necessarily
of all, because the rule of charity directs us not so to judge; because many
Christians may be drawn to Christ, and have a seed of faith, yet may
sometimes not know it, sometimes remember not the working of it, sometimes
(through bashfulnesse, fear, want of parts, nor not trained up under a knowing
Ministry) not be able to profess it so fully and clearly; hence also to
keep out others from Communion out of groundless fears, that all their
profession might be in hypocrisy, we allow not, because no man in his
charity is to be ruled by his fears, but by the word; hence also to account
any unfit for the Church, because their hearts cannot close with them, or
because they like not their spirits, speak not with favor or any such like
principles, and yet can give no rule or convicting argument from the word, why
thus they do, we think is rigor, not charity regulated by the word; for
humane charity does not make Gods Church, but such persons which from God
according to the rule of Gods charity, is to receive, and therefore the rule is
to be attended here: it is necessary to look for a ground of certainty to
faith, but not for charity, which cannot be infallibly certain of another
estate, and therefore upon a hopeful supposition that the premises their
profession is true, hopefully only makes the conclusion.

The question ^eing brought to this narrow, it will here lie, viz.

First, Whether profession of the work of grace, and faith be not required of
those that enter into the Church.

Secondly, With what profession of the work of grace, charity (according to a
rule) is to rest satisfied.

Exodus 19. or in the New Testament, Acts 2. and in other like Scriptures, did
call for a profession of the Doctrine of faith only, but especially of the
work of faith; for when the Lord promised to be a God to his people, Exd. 19.
Deuteronomy. 29. it was not with this condition* if they did believe his word to be
true, etc. but if they will hear his voice, and keep his Covenant, which (in
a prepared people) is a manifestation of a work of grace. So when the Apostles
were required to go preach to all Nations, and baptize them and teach them,
look as they did require such a faith as was saving, (he that believes shall
be saved) so upon the profession thereof they did receive them, as also
appears, Acts 2.38. (which therefore could not be of the doctrine of faith,
for that the devils do, and tremble, and profane men of much knowledge, may
do, and yet unfit to be received, and therefore it was of the work of faith,
and therefore Act. 8.37. Philip not only requires faith, but a believing with
all the hear^ of the Eunuch, and upon such a profession baptized him: and hence
the Churches erected by the Apostles at Corinth, Colosse, Ephesus, etc. are
called Saints, and sanctified of God in Christ Jesus, etc. How! was it because
debito and de jure only, they should be so? then all who hear the Gospel
(though they reject it) might be called a Church, for de jure, they ought to
be so; Or was it because there were some that were truly such amongst them,
and so in concreto, are called a Church and body of Christ? not only so, for
there may be some visible Churches of visible Saints, and yet none among them
of the invisible Church, unless any will think, that to be of the Church
invisible is essential to the being and title of a visible Church: and
therefore it was from their profession of saving faith which they maintained
being a Church, as it was required to the gathering into a Church: John Baptist
also, (though he baptized none into a new Church, (and therefore might require
the less) yet as he really promised remission of sins by the Messiah, so he
required that very faith and repentance which might make them partakers of this
heavenly benefit; and therefore, if what he required, they manifested by their
profession, and confession of sins, it was not only to believe the doctrine
of faith, but a saving work of faith which they held forth. And therefore it
is not an outward profession of faith, according to a Creed which is required,
for then a Papist is fit matter for a Church, nor willingness to hear the
Word and receive the Sacraments, for then heaps of profane persons are to be
received into the Church, but it is profession of a work, and saving work of
grace, which being ever required in the purest times, is no novell invention of
some more rigidly inclined in these things.



We answer, that there is a breadth in charity according to rule and
profession of faith being but testimonium humanum, or a man's own testimony
concerning himself, therefore as in the most eminent profession, potest
s^besse salsum, there may be hypocrisy latent, (it being no divine testimony)
so in the weakest profession of the work of faith, potest subesse verum,
idest, there may be truth in the bottom: hence (man leaving all secrets to
God) the work of grace wherewith charity is to be satisfied, is one of these
two. First, either with that which is only verbal, and appears to be false
by conviction from the word: Or secondly, with that which appears to be
real, which however it may be false, yet it is beyond the power of man to
convince (by a rule) that so it is. We confess we are fearful as of opening
the door too wide, so of shutting the doors upon any whom God would have us
to receive in, but for what yet we see or read, from the arguments here
alleged in this Author, or the writings of others godly learned: we think
that Church charity is not to rest satisfied with the first, but with the
latter; for let the profession of the work of faith be never so short, or so
weak, let it be by their own immediate relation or by question, yet if it may
but appear to a regulated charity so as to hope that is is real, it is to
rest satisfied then, till God make discovery to the contrary; we intend not to
heap up arguments, nor answer scruples but these four things seem^ to ^vince
as much.

1 That the Apostles in the 3000. converted Acts ^* as they were very ready to
receive them to the fold of Christ, and therefore in one day immediately
received so many thousands (which could not be by large profession of every
one) so also they attended to the truth of that profession, and therefore it was
not bare profession of faith, but (as it is set down for our pattern) it was
such a profession as was evidently joined with humiliation, pricking at the
heart, mourning, and crying out before the Apostles What shall we do to be
saved, gladly receiving the word, which are real testimonies of some real
change from what they were but a little before, and upon this ground the
Apostles received them.

2 The Apostles charge to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.5. From such as have a form of
godliness and deny the power of it, turn away; if bar^ profession were
sufficient, why should Timothy turn from them? (but rather receive them who
had a form of profession.) And if it was in his power to avoid them, why
should he not reject them, and that not only from private but Church communion
also, supposing them such as not one^y had a form, but might be by a rule
convinced thereof?

Rev. 2.2 and 3.9.
3 Lying and apparent untruth cannot make a man* fit matter for a Church, and
therefore cannot be a ground for charity to rest on, that so he is: but
verbal profession, which appears not to be real but false, is palpable
lying, and indeed more fit to destroy the Church then to make the Church. Hence
Sanctius in Zach. 14.14 observes that the greatest enemies of the Church are
such, qui cum fidem retineant sanctitatem abjecerunt.

4 If bare profession of faith is a sufficient ground to receive men into the
Church, then an excommunicate person cast out in one hour should be
immediately received in again, if he will but renew his general profession of
faith; nay then the Indians in Maryland, who will put on and put off this
profession, as their ghostly fathers the Popish Priests will bestow or withhold
garments and shirts upon them; should in charity be received into the Church.

But if it should be asked how charity may know the reality of this
profession, we answer; so long as the rule be attended we leave every one to
the wisdom of Christ, to make application thereof, only this we do add in
general for more full satisfaction.

1 Such a faith professed with the mouth, which is confirmed by an innocent
godly conversation in the life, so as not to live in commission of any known
sin, or omission of any known duty, we say this conversation makes faith
appear real, James 2.18. Rev. 22.14. we conceive more is required to make a
man appear a fit member of a Church, then of a Commonwealth, to be only
bonus civis, and bare civility is sufficient for this latter, but not for the
former, and therefore such a profession of faith is needful, as is confirmed
by a not only a civil, but a godly life.

2 Such a faith as is joined with evident repentance, and sorrow, and mourning
for sin (although there be no experience always of such a holy life
antecedently seen) for thus it was Act. 2.37, 38. for the riches of Christ's
grace is such as not only to receive experienced christians into his family
and house, but also the weakest and poorest (who may stand in most need of
Christ's Ordinances) and that as soon as ever they seem to be brought in; and
therefore experience of a blameless life is not always necessary for
admission into the Church: some think indeed that the Apostles received in the
first converts, ( Act. 2.39.) so soon, because they had an extraordinary
spirit of discerning, but if they had so: yet they did not receive them in here
according to that, for they received diverse hypocrites in, as Ananias and
Sapphira, etc. and if all other of their acts in this chapter were exemplary,
why should this only be thought to be otherwise and extraordinary?

3 When there is full and sufficient testimony from others of their faith and
piety, although their humiliation, faith and conversation be not so well
known, for we see the Church received Paul, when Barnabas had declared what
God had done for him; and if it may be just to condemn another by the
testimony of two faithful witnesses, it may not be unchristian to receive an
other into the fold of Christ (much more readily) upon the testimony of able
and faithful Christians, especially then when they be not able openly, and
publicly to speak so fully for themselves, and thus much for answer to the
first question

2 Question, Whether this profession is to be judged by the Church.

Answer, 1. The faithful as they did at first combine into a Church, so it is
their duty to receive others to themselves, as the Church did, Acts 9.26, 27.
encouraged by Barnabas and the Apostles, and as the Apostle commands, Romans
14.1. which although it was of fellow members into their affections, yet the
proportion holds strong for receiving comers into the Church. Joh. Ep. 3.8, 9,
10.

2 If they be to receive them, they must by some means know them, to be such
as they may comfortably receive into their affections, a little leaven
leavening the whole lump. 1 Cor. 5.

3 The Officers of the Church, (who are first privately to examine them) and
prepare them for admission) are to show the Church the rule on which the Church
is to receive them, and themselves are ready to admit them. Act. 10.37. Can any
forbid water, etc.

This rule was best seen by that public profession before the whole Church,
and if no just exception be made (as none should be without conviction) they
are to be admitted by the Officers with the consent of the members hereunto,
for if public profession is needful at least before the Church, though not
the world always (as Didoclavius observes) to the entrance into the Covenant and
Church by baptism; we see no reason, but persons formerly baptized, and
entering anew into the Church, but they should openly profess their faith
again: the visible Church being built upon this rock, Matthew. 16.16, 18. viz.
Profession of the faith of Christ; and lastly, if there should be no necessity
for such a profession, yet if this be desired of the people of God, for the
increase of their own joy to see God glorified, and Christ's name professed,
and his virtues held forth, and for the increase of their love to those that
join with them, why should it not be done before Saints, which should be done
before persecutors? 1 Pet. 3.15.

What is now said, we think sufficient to undermine what is opposed herein by
others, and may easily give answer to the three arguments of the learned
Authour^, from the example of the Church of Israel, John Baptist and the
Apostles, and so clear up our practice, and judgment to the world from the
aspersion of our rigidum examen for which we are by some condemned, but for
further clearing, we shall answer to the particulars.

Now to your Reasons more particularly against this from the Old Testament, and
the manner of entering and renewing Covenant then.



Secondly, They did not immediately enter into Covenant, but the Lord was long
before preparing them for it, for they were humbled much in Egypt, in so much
as their sighings came up to God, Exodus 2.23, 24, 25. They had seen the glory
of God for their good against Pharaoh, and all that Land, by many miracles,
they had Gods visible presence in the Cloud; were instructed by Moses
concerning the Covenant of grace made with them in Abraham; they were mightily
delivered at the Red Sea, so that they believed Moses and feared the Lord and
sang his praise, Exodus 14.31. Psalm 106.12. They were also instructed again
concerning the Covenant, and were to sanctify themselves three days legally,
(which was for spiritual ends, and of spiritual use, Exodus 19.10.) and thus
being prepared as fit matter for Covenant, they then entered thereinto. And
they were all of them (for ought we know) thus externally and ecclesiastically
holy, though many were internally stiff-necked, blind and profane.

And for our parts we desire no more then such a preparation in some work of
grace, if appearing (though not indeed) real as may make way for Church
Covenant, among a people now as we see was then.

When John Baptist began to preach the Gospel, and gather a new people for
Christ, he admitted none but upon confession of their sins, but we read of no
question that he put forth to them to discover the work of grace in their
souls, or repelled any upon that pretense that voluntarily submitted
themselves.

John speaks,) yet he that advisedly considers the case, may see the
profession of a work of grace in all that were received by John to his baptism.

First, John was sent with the Spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts
of the fathers, etc. to cast down every high hill, etc.

Secondly, His baptism is called the baptism of repentance, for the remission
of sins, Mark. 1.4.

Thirdly, confession of sins is ever put for true repentance, when there is a
promise of pardon made to it, Prove. 28.1^. 1 John 1.9. and therefore when he
requires confession of sins, was it without remorse or sorrow for it? was it
not with profession of faith in the Messiah, which he pointed unto, Joh. 1.29.
and required with repentance, Act. 19.4.

Fourthly, did not he fall upon the Pharisees with dreadful thundering of
Gods judgments, for coming to his baptism without conversion of heart, and
fruits meet for repentance? Mat. 3.7. and this Luke says, he preached to the
multitude, Luke 3.7. and whether any were received that embraced not that
Doctrine, and showed the same in their confession, viz. that their hearts were
humbled, and that the renounced their high thoughts of their privileges of the
Law, etc. and professed amendment and fruits meet for the same, it will be hard
for any to prove: and thus much is evident: on the contrary that Pharesees and
Lawyers distinguished from the People and Publicans rejected the counsel of
God in not being baptized of him, and what counsel but that wholesome doctrine
of John, Luke 7.29, 30? Lay all these together, and let any whose thoughts are
not prepossessed with prejudices, say, whether this confession was not such a
profession of faith and repentance, which a discerning charity ought to take
for a work of grace.

Acts 2 38.8.^7.19 17, 18, ^.
It appears many ways that when the Apostles planted Churches, they made a
Covenant between God and the people whom they received. But they received men
upon the profession of faith, and promise of amendment of life, without strict
inquiry what work of grace was wrought in the soul, so in after ages, etc.
Now the profession at first required of all that were received to baptism, was
that they believed in the Father, Son and holy Ghost. This was the confession
of the En^uch, when he was baptized: I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God.

Act. 2.38* and 8.37. and 19.17, 18, 19. alleged in the margent show, then
still it appears they admitted men into planted Churches when they baptized
them, and the refore the Apostles ordinary and first leading practice and
examples are for those Position, not against them.

2 You grant here that Acts 2. and 8. and 19. there was a profession of faith
and promise of amendment of life, and so we must suppose though not expressed,
for how else could the Apostles distinguish such as gladly received the word,
from the mockers and others?

Now let us consider what kind of profession this must be by the story it
self. The Apostle Peter in his doctrine presses three things. 1. Conversion
or repentance for their sins* 2. Faith in Christ in those words, Be baptized
in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, Verse 38. 3. With many other words he
exhorted them, saying, Save your selves from this untoward generation, that is,
this was the scope of and substance of his exhortation, which includes a
gathering themselves to the Church. Now the Text says, in respect of the
first, That they were pricked to the heart* and cried out Men, and Brethren
what shall we do? 2. They gladly received the word, that is of faith in
Christ, and the duty of obedience to the Gospel, and how did all this appear,
but by their profession? and what kind of confession can any man think* such
souls would make, but a broken hearted gracious confession, which to any
discerning charity must be taken to argue a work of grace? so that the very
character given of them by the holy Ghost, in so brief an History, does
clearly evince what we contend for.

Consider also the story, Acts 8. and first, not to pass over what is said of
Simon Magus, of whom it is said, He believed, was baptized, continued with
Philip, and wondered, so that no doubt they took him for a true believer, but
when Peter discovered his falsnesse, see what he says, Verse 21. Thou b^st no
part nor lot in this matter, and the reason is, For thy heart is not right in
the sight of God. Let any here consider, that if he had no part nor lot in
Christ and baptism, etc. because not right, whether the Apostle Peter or the
Church would have received him, if such had been discovered before.

And for the Eunuch, Philip requiring his profession of faith, If thou
beleevest with all thy heart, looked for a sound work of grace, and though it
was delivered in those words which are the Fundamental truth, That Jesus is
the Son of God, yet it includes true faith in him for salvation: as we see
our Savior Christ takes that confession of Peter for true faith, Flesh and
blood have not revealed the to thee, but my Father: and promised to build the
Church on this rock, Matthew. 16. Yea it includes subjection unto him as the
Son of God, the Prophet and King of his Church, and this is no rare, but a
common thing in the New Testament, by one fundamental truth, believed and
confessed, to include true faith and profession of the whole truth that suites
with that foundation, as Romans 10.9. so expounded, Verse 10, 11. as being more
then historical faith, so 1 John ^.1, 2. and 5.1.

The like characters of a penitent and gracious carriage and confession may be
observed, Act. 19.17, 18, 19.

And seeing you have given us this occasion to lay down some grounds of our
practice from the first patterns, we shall add a word or two to take away the
conceit of novelty, which is imputed to us in this point as much as in any
thing else. Tertullian says in his book of prescriptions, We admit no man to
any disputation about divine things, unless he first have showed us of whom
he received the faith and became a Christian; and secondly, whether he admit
and hold the general principles, wherein all Christians do and ever did
agree, otherwise proscribing against him as an alien from the Commonwealth of
Israel. And if in those times they were so strict in admitting men to
disputations, no doubt much more in receiving men to Church Communion. But if
this seem not full enough, take another: in the Churches of old, there were
Catechumeni, instructed for entrance into the Church by baptism, with whom
they took much pains in sanctifying them, before; by fasting and prayer, and
often preaching to them. And for their admission, there were four things in
use among them, 1. Nominis professio, 2. Scrutinium, 3. Abrenuntiatio, 4. Fidei
professio. Their Scrutinium which they call Examen competentium, or the
examination of such as were competent, or fitting for admission, This Examen
was very strict as is observed out of Alcuinus, by learned Cham de Bap. lib. 5.
cap. 1^.
Chamier, Fiant scrutinia, ut explorentur saepius, an post renuntiationum
Satanae, sacra verba datae fidei radicitus cord defixerint, i. e. Let
examinations be made, that if often may be tried, whether they have deeply fixed
in the heart the sacred words of their professed faith. And what ever any may
think of the strictness of that their discipline, in this point Chamier gives
a large testimony, by way of approbation of the same, whose words upon it are
these, Certe nemo it ^are potest, seriam in tam sanctis rebus diligentiam, ne
quantum fieri poterit lateant Simones, etc. i. Certainly no man can disallow
such serious diligence, to prevent pro^anation of sacred things, lest (so far
as it is possible) such as Simon Magus may lie hid: And says he, the Apostles
went before in their examples, for Philip, Acts 8. being demanded of the
Eunuch, What hinders me that I may not be baptized? he answers not simply
thou may, but with this supposition added, if thou beleevest with thy whole
heart. Now this profession of their faith was either by reciting the Creed in
an eminent place before all the people, and that praeclara fiducia, with full
affiance, as he observes out of Clement and Augustine, or else respondendo
interroganti Sacerdoti per singula in subsidium forte pudoris aut memoriae, i.
e. By answering to the Minister propounding questions, concerning their faith
for help of their bashfulnesse, or want of memory.

Also Beza in his Epist. 14. Commending much the severity and zeal of former
Pastors and Churches in this kind, and bemoaning the negligence of such as
followed, from whence he says it is, that the Church without a miracle could
not rise out of its filth, he concludes thus, Itaque frustra disputabitur tum
voce tum scriptis, nisi conversione cordium and (...) initium instaurationis
sum^tu^.

Reverend Mr. Hildersam in his treatise of the doctrine of the Lords Supper, to
that question, whether the people that come to the Lords Table, be bound to
make known their knowledge and spiritual estate to their Pastor. Answers
thus, yes verily, for seeing, Matthew. 3.6. Acts 8.37. God required of them, that
(being of years of discretion) were to be baptized, that they should make
known to the Congregation or their Minister their, faith and repentance, he
does every whit as much require this of them that are to come to the Lords
Supper. Whereby we see, 1. that his judgment was that, Act. 8. and Mat. 3. the
people did make known their spiritual estate to the congregation or Minister,
when they professed faith and repentance: and secondly, that the same ought now
so to be. Lastly, We may appeal herein to the consciences of very many godly
Ministers, in our dear England, whether they groan not under the mixture of
the precious with the vile, in the Ordinances of Christ, and would not gladly
have it otherwise, which cannot be without such a way of admissions into the
Church as we plead for, or else in constituted (but corrupted) Churches, by
casting out such as after admonitions appear impenitent in sin, by the
severity of discipline.

And this was evident by the qualifications of persons to be received to the
Lords Table, voted at first by the present Reverend Assembly, and presented in
their Directory to the Parliament, if we be not misinformed: whose words are
these, None are to be admitted thereto (meaning the Lord Suppers) but such as
being baptized are found upon careful examination by the Minister, before the
other Church Officers, to have a competent measure of knowledge and ability to
examine themselves, and profess their willingness to submit themselves to all
the Ordinances of Christ, and are of approved conversation according to Christ:
the ignorant and scandalous are not to be admitted, nor those of another
Congregation, unless they have sufficient testimony or be very well known.

If it be objected, that some of these instances concern unbaptized persons
only, which is not our case; Answ. 1. Multitude of baptized persons in these
days are as ignorant and profane as some unbaptized; and therefore as apt to
pollute Gods Ordinances: 2. Chamiers reason, why unbaptized persons were to go
under such strict examination, holds good in our case. 3. Such profession of
faith was required by John and the Apostles of those that were Church members
before.

The Creed is honored by the Ancients with glorious titles, as the rule of
faith, etc. by which they understood that rule of faith given by Christ, when
he was about to ascend, and commanded his Disciples, saying, Go teach al
Nations. In after times some Articles were added for explanation, to meet with
the heresies of those times, but for substance, the Church never required other
acknowledgement, etc.



If you put man to declare that work of grace* God has wrought in this or
that way, which perhaps is not determined by the word of grace, at least not
agreed upon amongst your selves, we beseech you to consider by what authority
you do it, and upon what ground you stand.



CHAP. XVI.
Position 7.
That a Minister is so a Minister of a particular Congregation, that if they
dislike him or leave him unjustly, he cease to be a Minister.

The question is of Ministers unjustly forsaken or driven from the Church, and
your answer is for most part of Ministers, set aside or deprived by their own
default: we never purposed to speak one word for an unworthy Minister, whom
Christ has put out of Office, and therefore your labor to prove that such
justly rejected by the the Church, are no longer Ministers, might well have
been saved.

new elected and ordained to his Office, being no Minister upon his just
deposing.

But we will examine your conclusions upon which you build the sentence which
you pass against them; first it is certain, etc.



The power of feeding, which the Minister has, is neither confined to one
society only, nor nextly derived to him from Christ by the Church. The Office
and authority of a Pastor is immediately from Christ, the deputation of the
person which Christ has designed is from the Church ministerially, but neither
vertually nor formally.



The power of the Church in electing her Officers is so clear in the
Scripture, and so confessed a truth by the godly learned, that it cannot be
denied, yet here seem to be given so many restrictions in the case, that they
much abate and weaken this great and precious liberty and power given by the
Lord. 1. That the power and Office of a Pastor is immediately from Christ by
his institution is granted, but the question is, how this man comes to have
this Office applied to him; if immediately, then he is in this an Apostle, if
mediately, it is by the Church, or else show by whom. 2. That the Church choose
Ministerially, and ought to choose whom Christ has described in his word, and
fitted with gifts, and so far designed by Christ we grant, but what if there
be twenty such? Which of them does Christ design, but whom the Church freely
choose? and therefore that is no diminution of their power, that they must
choose ministerially, and whom Christ so designs. The case is alike in all
other Ordinances dispensed, Examination is immediately from Christ, by his
institution, the person to be censured is designed or described by Christ, a
notorious or obstinate sinner: the Church pass this sentence only
Ministerially, and yet puts forth a great power of the Lord Jesus Christ, in
applying the sentence to this or that person: and so here: and therefore it is
strange to us, that any should say they depute this Officer neither vertually
nor formally, when as the act which they put forth, (which is the outward call
of the Officer) must needs come from a power formally in the Church to do the
same, as well as when the Church or Officers censure an offender, etc.

The consent of the people is requisite in the election of Pastors and
Teachers, we grant, the direction of the Elders going before, or along with
them, Acts 1. Peter declared what an one should be taken, etc. Acts. 6. Deacons
were chosen by the consent of the Church, etc. but in this election the people
did first choose, when most commonly the Apostles instructed the people, and
went before them in the electon, and they consented. Act. 14.23. The Apostles
by consent choose, etc.

This restriction of the peoples power to an after consent, at least
ordinarily, will not hold: if the evident light of Acts 6. could not be denied,
and the other places were more obscure, why should not that place with its
light clear the rest? but that in Act. 1. is as evident, Peter proves the need
of such a choice to be made, shows it must be one that had so long conversed
with Christ, to witness such things, and further he does not lead them, there
might be twenty such, but they choose two, as a preparative act to Apostleship,
Verse. 23. and who were they, but such as they speak unto, viz. the Disciples,
Verse. 15. whom he calls Men and Brethren, Verse. 16. so Act. 14.23. lifting up of
hands is the sign of election, not of an after consent.

Lastly, by this Doctrine how shall the Church come by Officers, when she has
none to go before her in choosing for her? must she loose her right, or take
whom others will choose for her, and impose upon her?

In the primitive times, after the Apostles, one Church might elect a Pastor
for another, etc.



2 We grant in a safe sense there may be Communis electio, whereby a fit man
is propounded by Churches or Ministers to be chosen by another people, and thus
the Philadelphians might elect a fit Pastor for the Church at Antioch, (as
Ignatius exhots) with sundry like instances in the first times after the
Apostles, and this we deny not may lawfully be now. But this is nothing to
that electio singularis, whereby a people choose one to be their Minister, of
which we speak, for it is evident from the Testimony of Cyprian often alleged,
that it is in the power of the people to choose worthy Ministers, and reject
the unworthy; and Ambrose thinks that he is worthily thought to be elected
divine judicio, whom all the people desire. Ambros. lib. 10. Ep. 82.

It is very true, that as the times grew worse, the elections were often
disturbed, sometimes by the Clergy choosing without the people, (of which
Athanasius complains) sometimes by the peoples carrying it tumultuously:
sometime the Emperors interposing.

But this and like corruptions cannot forfeit the liberty of the Church which
Christ has given it, and therefore he that was no great friend to the peoples
liberties, yet ingenuously says that although the people is Bellua multorum
capitum, and most apt to be tumultuous, yet this is not inn^ted to a believing
people, qui non minus nunc quam oli^ gravis esset in electionibus, as publicae
utilitatis studiosissima, Spalta. de Rep. Eccles. Lib. 3. Cap. 3.

If here it be questioned, whether your election of the people be essential to
the calling of a Minister, we answer, First, A thing is essential two ways,
either as absolutely necessary, so as the thing can have no existence without
it; or necessary to the integrity of a thing, so that it is maimed ^i bout it.
Again the people be either few in number, and simple, unable to judge of the
sufficiency of a Minister, or they be more in number, increased in wisdom,
sound in faith, and able to discern of things that differ. In the first sense
the election of the people is not necessary or essential, in the second, his
calling in that respect is maimed.

England should elect or call a Lord Major for London, be they never so many
and wise, it is a mere nullity, and why? Because the right of election is not
in them, but if the Citizens in whom the right lies, do elect (though weakly)
he has the true essence of the call: if others electing a Major the City will
receive him, submit to him, and so give their consent, he may be said to have
the substance of that call, though not an orderly and lawful election, and so
maimed: so it is here.

Secondly, if in our election of the people (being the Scripture way of
election,) the proper right and power be seated by Christ in the Church, unto
whom they are to minister, then it must needs follow, that the very essence of
a Ministers call stands in their election, or at least in their after consent
and subjection to his Ministry, in which case we grant though the calling be
maimed, yet it has the substance of a true calling. But if the people will not
receive such as are imposed upon them, he has no call at all, but usurpes the
same, and it is a mere nullity. And therefore it concerns Churches the more to
consider, what they do in receiving and submitting to such unworthy Ministers,
as are often imposed upon them; but if the right and power of electing Ministers
be in any other Persons, let it be showed from the Scriptures, for we are not
much moved in such cases with the corrupt customs of aftertimes.

And this also shows what kind of call such men have that are ordained by
Prelates at large without any election at all, if they be Ministers to the
Catholic Church, then the Catholic Church is bound to receive them, and
submit to their Office, but no part of the Catholic Church, and therefore not
the whole is bound to submit to them, and therefore indeed they have no office
nor calling as Pastors or Teachers, except it can be proved they be
Evangelists, Apostles or Prophets.

If the people be few and simple, they stand in ^^re need of guidance from
their own Elders and other Churches; If many and full of wisdom, their
liberty to choose is the greater, and the greater wrong to be deprived of it.
The practice of the Apostles and Primitive Churches show this for many ages,
sometime men were propounded to the Church to be chosen, sometimes the chief
left wholly to them.



In reason this is evident, for the Child's consent is required in marriage, but
the more able he is to choose for himself, the more liberty may Parents grant,
the less able the more watchful must they be.

This similitude utterly fails in two essential things, that concern the
case for which it is applied. 1. Because a child is under the authority of the
parents, whose right is such that a Child cannot lawfully choose without them.
But there is no Church or others have such a right and authority over any
Church in their choice of Officers. 2. Whatsoever the power of parents be, yet
the essence of the marriage consists in the mutual consent and promise of the
children that marry, and so here the essence of a Ministers call must lie in
the election of the Church and acceptance of the Minister which is not avoided
but by the similitude confirmed.

It is a duty of neighbor Churches to lend their help to their brethren in
election of their Ministers, when the Scripture wills us to exhort one
another or admonish one another, it is not only a command to every singular
person toward his fellow, but also to any whole company.

Junius so, as that Charitatis jure and Communione sanctorum, one Church have
power to choose for another, other ways, then by advising them to elect such
an one for themselves, we see no reason for that, nor do we think it is his
meaning: neither does Paul, Romans 12.12. lay any foundation of such usurpations,
but only of mutual brotherly helpfulnesse by counsel, etc. and the contrary
is not Policy, but some degree of tyranny.

It is a blemish in the call of a Minister, if either the people be not fit to
choose, or being fit they be shut out from the chocie, but this maime does not
make a nullity in his calling.

and if they do not consent nor submit to such a one called by others, it will
make it a nullity, as was showed before. What authority has he to Minister to
any Church, if they will refuse him? or who shall censure them for refusing, by
any rule of Christ?

The saving truth of God and a lawful Ministry are both essential to a true
Church.

Answ.What then becomes of the Church when the Minister is dead?

The true Church has continued by the blessing of God where the election of
Ministers has been given away by the people or taken from them.



As for the second branch of your answer we know not well your meaning; if this
be your mind, that a Minister lawfully called and set over the Congregation,
is to be esteemed a Minister in the usual Church, a^ the particular Church
has unity with, and is part of the universal or Catholic, and as a party
baptized is not baptized into that Congregation only, but into all Churches,
and that the Ministry is one, cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur, as
Cyprian speaks, and therefore though the Minister be unjustly cast off by one
Congregation, yet he is not to be esteemed as no Minister, we freely consent.
But if your meaning be, that he is only by right a Minister of that
particular Congregation, because unjustly deposed, as formerly in the execution
of his Office, he was a Minister to them only, and to no other society
whatsoever, or in what respect soever, your opinion is contrary to the opinion
of the universal, and tends to destroy the unity of the Church, and that
Communion which the Churches of God ought to have one with another.

First, If our meaning be doubtful, seeing these expressions do not well
suite our notion, nor fully enter into our understanding, we shall give the
meaning of our answer distinctly, and then consider what is here said.

First, there is a difference between the unjust leaving or casting off a
Minister, without all orderly proceedings against him, and the unjust deposing
him in an orderly way of Church censure: if the question be taken in the first
sense, he remains every way and in every respect by right a Minister as he
was before, except he reject them, and so dissolve the relation that was
between them. But if the question speak of an orderly censure of deposition
unjustly, then we judge of that case as we would do in any other, censure of a
member by excommunication, and therefore we say, he is still a Minister, in f^ro
interno before Christ, for clavis errans non ligat. Secondly, in respect of
that Church he has still right truly to minister to them, and is their Minister
though unjustly hindered in the execution of his Ministry, as a member
unjustly censured has a true right to the Ordinances, and membership, though
unjustly hindered from the same, though in foro externo, we grant to them or in
their account he is no Minister, as a person excommunicated is to them no
member.

Thirdly, in respect of other Churches, if it does appear unto them that he
is unjustly deposed, they may and ought to esteem him still, and receive him
and have communion with him, as a true Minister of Jesus Christ, in the Church
he does belong to, as they may do with a member unjustly cast out, but til that
appear unto them, they cannot so esteem and honor him, (being orderly deposed
but must at least suspend their judgment til the case be cleared.

Fourthly we answer clearly and plainly to the chief scope of the question,
If a Minister be unjustly deposed or forsaken by his particular Church, and he
also withal renounce and forsake them, so far as all Office and relation
between them cease, then is he no longer an Officer or Pastor in any Church
of God, whatsoever you will call it. And the Reason is, because a Ministers
office in the Church is no indelible Character, but consists in his relation to
the flock: and if a Minister once ordained, his relation ceasing, his Office
of a Minister, Steward of the mysteries of God shall still remain; why should
not a ruling Elder or Deacon remain an Elder or Deacon in the Church as well?
all are Officers Ordained of Christ alike given to his Church, Officers chosen
and Ordained by laying on of ^ands alike, but we^, suppose you will not say a
Deacon. In such a case should remain a Deacon in the Catholic Church,
therefore not a Minister.

Secondly, we shall now consider what is here said, and first this language of
a Minister in the usual Church as a particular Church has union with and is a
part of the universal, it is an unusual expression to us, and to the
Scripture phrase, and therefore bear with us if we fall short of your
meaning; the usual Church in England has been either the Archdeacons Church
in the Deana^ies, or Diocesan in the Bishopric, or Provincial or National,
but we hope that there is no such intended here, yet to all this and the
jurisdiction thereof particular Churches have been subject as parts there.

But if by usual Church you mean a Classical, Provincial or National
Church, we must entreat better grounds for any of these, and therefore we
must confess our mind and meaning is not so, that we look at a Minister of
a particular Church in any such relation to the usual and intermediate Church
between it and the Catholic. The second sense therefore we own and
acknowledge as before. But whether this be contrary to the judgment and
practice of the universal Church, we know not, because it is hard for us know
what the universal Church judges, except we could hear it speak or see its
practice; if the only head Prophet and Shepherd of the Church Jesus Christ be
fit to declare her judgment, we will be tried thereby, who we know has set
Elders in every particular Church, Act. 14.23. to watch over their particular
flock, Act. 20.28. but not over any other Church that we can find. Neither
does this destroy the unity or Communion of the Catholic Church, nor of
particular Churches one with another as is said, for Churches may enjoy
brotherly Communion one with another, without such stated forms, under the
power and authority of one another, as has been showed before.

For if he be not a Minister to other Churches, then are not the Churches of
God one, nor the Communion which they have together on, nor the Ministers one,
non the flock which they feed one.

Pastor, or Council that must be the supreme, which can scarce ever be had. If
you mean an unity by brotherly Communion in office^ of love and mutual
helpefulnesse of Churches and Ministers, without usurpation, such an unity and
Community is not destroyed, and the argument does not follow: Cannot many
distinct societies of Towns or Corporations make up one County, except the
Major or Constable in one Town be a Major or Constable in others also? By this
Reason the Deacon of one Church is the Deacon of all, or else the unity is
destroyed.

If the Pastor derive all his authority from the Church, when the Church has
set him aside, what right has he to administer among that people?



As they give right to an unworthy man to minister amongst them, if they call
him unjustly, so they take right from the worthy, if they unjustly depose him.

in foro externo, but as in the call, his outward call consists in the election
of the calling, and the acceptance of the called, to complete his power of
administration. Now this by Christ in his Church may be destroyed in a ^ust
censure without his consent, but cannot unjustly be wrung from him without his
consent, and therefore he may hold his right, till either he be justly deposed
or willingly relinquish the same upon their injurious interruption of the use
of his right.

And whereas you say the Minister is for the Ministry, and the Office for the
execution, and so the Pastor and the flock are relatives, and therefore if
their election gave him authority among them to feed, their c^sting him off
has stripped him of the same power they gave him.

be excluded out of all Churches, and cannot censure or reprove his Catholic
or usual Church for the same, therefore he is indeed no Minister, and and has
no Office in the Church of God.

^HAP. XVII.
Position 8.
THat one Minister cannot perform any Ministerial act in another Congregation.

The Preaching of the Word and public Prayer in the Congregation, meet
together solemnly to worship God, etc. are properly Ministerial, etc.

viz. that he does not put forth such a Ministerial act of authority and power
in dispensing of Gods Ordinances, as a Minister does perform to that Church,
whereunto he is called to be a Minister, for so he does not perform any
Ministerial act with that authority: he does to his own which further
cleares up our expression in the second consideration, viz. that he is a Pastor
of none but his proper flock, although some acts of his Office may extend
beyond his own flock, as we have showed before; and therefore in this sense
we may still conclude, that if the question be put to any Minister (so
exercising in another church) which was once put to our Savior, By what
authority do thou these things? let him study how to give an answer, for we
have not yet learned it from this Reply. We confess there are some godly
learned servants of Christ, who possibly may be otherwise minded, and think
that a Minister preaching in another Congregation, does it only as a gifted
man; as the Refuter of Doctor Downam (with others in former times of
Reformation) believed also. But we desire that if any difference appear
herein, it may be no prejudice to the same cause for substance we maintain,
if by sundry lines we all meet at last in the same point.

FINIS.

