ENGLAND's DISTEMPERS, THEIR CAUSE and CURE. According to the Judgment of
Famous Princes, Peers, Parliaments etc. OCCASIONED By a Book of a Learned
FRIAR, Accusing the whole Nation of PERJURY For Abjuring TRANSUBSTANTIATION.
And sent unto the Author for a Reply.

Written in defense of The true Catholic Faith, By R. A. Pastor of the Church
at Henfield in Sussex.

Psalm. 60.2. -- Heal the breaches thereof, for it shakes.

London: Printed for the Author; to be sold by Thomas Dring, at the Harrow at
Chancery Lane end in Fleetstreet. 1677.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty, CHARLES II. by the grace of God King of
England, etc. Defender of the true, ancient, Catholic and Apostolic Faith.
Dread Sovereign!
I Am one of your Majesty's poor Subjects, that always loved Peace and
Privacy: But like him that was born dumb, and never spoke, till he saw his
Father ready to be murdered; so when I saw my dear Mother, the Church of
England, ready to be strangled between two Thieves, the Roman and Rakovian, who
have already robbed her of her Goods and good Name, and now have caught her by
the throat, to take away her Life; I could not choose but cry out for Help; and
to whom should I cry, but to your Majesty, the great Patron of our Church? The
common Cry is, that the Church of England must go down: I humbly beseech your
Majesty, she may have a fair hearing, which she never had yet since the
Reformation, but has always been oppressed with monstrous Outcries and railing
Accusations. And not only the Protestant Religion, but Christianity it self
lies at stake, whilst your Majesty's good Subjects are deceived, deluded, and
divided with vain Words, without Truth, right Reason, or common Sense; as in
some particulars I have made appear in this ensuing Discourse. And I humbly
beseech your Majesty, to continue your Royal Favor to the poorer Clergy, who
are many ways grievously oppressed, to the great scandal of the Church, and shame
of the whole Nation. I never begged any thing for my self, though I have lost a
fair Temporal Estate in the Service of Your Royal Father. For at Your Majesty's
happy Return, I found Your Majesty pestered with swarms of importunate Suitors,
that rather than be troublesome, I sat down with that resolution of
Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 19.30. Yea, let [them] take all, forasmuch as my Lord the
King is come again to his own house in peace. The Lord give your Majesty all
the Blessings of this Life, and that to come; the Heart of David, the Head of
Solomon, and the Hand of Gideon: And let all the Enemies of Peace and Truth
flee before the Sword of the Lord and King Charles; the daily Prayer of

Your Majesty's most Humble, Faithful, and Obedient Subject, RICH. ALLEN.

To the Right Honorable HENEAGE Lord FINCH, Baron of Daventry, Lord High
Chancellor of England. AND To the Honorable Parliament.
Most Noble Senators and Patriots,
THe Noble Lord Chancellor, in his excellent Speech, May, 1662. calls to mind
the excellent temper of the Time of Queen Elizabeth; the blessed Condescension
and Resignation of the People then to the Crown; the awful Reverence they had
then to the Governors and Government both of Church and State: And we may
better remember the sweet times of King James, when we went all together to the
House of God as Friends. Now to reduce the People to their ancient sweet
temper, must be the work of God; and under him we have no hopes but only in
the great Wisdom of his Majesty and this Noble Parliament. His Majesty has
done so much already, as if he had studied to do for this Nation, what a Roman
Caesar said of his City, Marmoream se relinquere, quam lateritiam accepisset.
(Suet.) And Your Honors have failed of nothing belonging to your high Trust.
The first Cause of Breach clearly discovered, would doubtless point out the
right way of Peace. The famous Parliament of Paris told their King once, That
the only way to extirpate Heresy, Schism, etc. was first to reform their own
Church after the example of the Primitive, who resisted Heresy with Preaching
the Word of God. The Church of England is of an excellent Constitution; if all
her Members were of as good a Complexion, her Beauty would allure many
Thousands to return to her Communion, that now are gone astray. The Doctrine of
our Church is pure, her Discipline good; neither of these so much as our
vicious Lives, that opens the mouths of our Adversaries so wide against us.
There be other Crimes more heinous in their own guilt, but Drunkenness is the
greatest Eyesore: If that beastly Vice were suppressed, our Adversaries could
have nothing to say, but what we can well answer and stop their mouths. False
Brethren have always done more mischief, than professed Enemies. This present
Discourse I was provoked to by the Challenge of a Learned Friar, and humbly
present it to your Honors grave Judgment. The most wise God be with you, and
direct you in all your Consultations, to the good of our Church and Nation.

Your Honors most humble servant, RIC. ALLEN.
May 21. 1677.
THE PREFACE.
A Most Noble King of this Nation was of opinion, That Discord among Subjects
did alienate their minds, not only one from another, but also from their
Prince; insomuch that the Bond of Unity, Peace, and Love, could never hold long
between the Prince and his People, if the People were at discord among
themselves. Moreover, That the cause of Difference among People, arose chiefly
from difference in Religion; and that difference in Religion was fomented with
nothing so much, as with names of Faction. Hereto assenteth a Learned
Remonstrant, Groninchaev. who says, That names of Faction were the Devils
device, and served to no other end, but to make and maintain Division. And
hereof it seems his Majesty was very sensible, as appears in his gracious Act
of Oblivion. There is a necessity of Names for distinction sake, to avoid
Confusion; but the mischief is, when Names or Titles are given and taken
falsely, to blast the reputation of some, and make them odious to the world; and
advance others in the opinion of the world, with Names and Titles that no ways
belong unto them; so that the world is merely cheated with vain Words, false
Names and Titles without Truth, falsely imposed on Persons and things; as I
shall endeavor to show in these following particulars.

ENGLAND's Distempers, THEIR CAUSE and CURE.
CHAP. I. Of Transubstantiation.
THis barbarous word has been the occasion of much Idolatry, and the cause of
many Troubles in the World; and I am engaged to take notice of it in in the
first place upon this occasion. A Person of Honor told me, That my History of
Transubstantiation should be answered. After two years, a learned Friar sends
me a Book called An Answer; wherein he charge our famous Church and Nation
with Perjury, for abjuring Transubstantiation, in subscribing a Declaration set
forth to that purpose, by Authority of his Majesty and the Parliament;
requiring of me a Reply. My Reply is, That the very first words of his Book are
a notorious untruth, as all the Nation can witness; and but little truth in the
rest, save in two or three places, where the poor Infidel confesses his
Ignorance of the true Faith, and some other things that every Schoolboy knows.
A full Reply I shall give him in four Assertions.

1. That Transubstantiation was never heard of, or known in the Church, till
above 1000 years after Christ, neither name nor thing.

2. That it was never generally received by Learned Papists themselves, till
the Council of Trent.

3. That their Grounds and Reasons for it, are too weak to support it, and that
monstrous weight of Doubts and Difficulties that depend upon it.

4. That the Doctrine of the Church of England in this point, is most agreeable
to Holy Scriptures, and to all pure Antiquity, and may be called Transmutation.

I. To the first, the Friar says, It was ever known and believed in the
Church, quoad rem, though not quoad nomen: (i. e.) by certain equivalent terms;
and for that cites Five Fathers, all rejected for spurious by their own Learned
Men. His equivalent Terms are, Mutatio, Transmutatio, Transelementatio: the two
first we admit in the same sense that the Fathers used them; the last is a
change, Etiam ad materiam primam, says a famous Schoolman, and will not serve
his turn. There be other terms used by the Fathers, that will do him as little
good; but I shall take no notice of more than he sends me.

Anno Christi 420.] About this time lived St. Augustine, who Lib. 3. de Doctr.
Christ. printed at Paris, Anno 1517. says, Those words, Except ye shall eat
the flesh of the Son of man, etc. are a Figure; and a little before has these
words, Literam sequi, and signa pro rebus quae his significantur, accipere,
servilis est infirmitatis. This I am sure of, let the Friar make the best
construction of it he can, St. Augustine was a famous Bishop, sat in several
Councils, and was President of some himself, and must needs know the Catholic
sense of the Church at that time, better than our Friar.

Anno 850.] About this time lived Bertram a famous Presbyter, who in his Book
De Corp. and Sang. Christi, says, That according to their substance the Bread
and Wine remain in the Sacrament, after Consecration. The bold Friar calls this
an Impertinency, when the whole University of Doway, in their censure of it,
could neither deny the Book, nor answer it.

Anno 1057.] About this time lived Berengarius, Archdeacon of Anjou, who denied
Transubstantiation. Pope Nicholas 2. Council. Lateran. 2. made him recant and
make this public Confession, That the very Body and Blood of Christ, in the
Sacrament, was truly and sensually broken and bruised in pieces with the teeth
of the Faithful; and this Confession the Pope and Council allowed for
Catholic. Our bold Friar says it is false; I shall prove him a Liar
presently. For this Confession is recorded by Lombard. l. 4. did. 12. D. and
De Conser. did. 2. Ca. Ego Berengarius. And their own Carranza testifies, That
the Pope did force and compel him to it: And that it was allowed for Catholic
by Pope and Council, appears clearly; because Lanfranc of Canterbury, who sat
in that Council, sharply rebukes Berengarius for recanting that Confession, as
afterward he did. This Confession was as near the Capernaites as could well
be. But where is now our bold Friars Catholic sense of the Church for
Transubstantiation? Here is no appearance of it, name or thing, according to
the Friars own terms.

Anno 1150.] About this time lived Peter Lombard, Bishop of Paris, the
likeliest man alive to know the Catholic sense of the Church; because he made
it his study and business to search the Fathers, and collect Sentences out of
their Writings; and yet he says ( l. 4. did. 11. A) Si autem quaeritur, etc.
If it be demanded, what manner of Conversion is in the Sacrament, or of what
kind, Definire non sufficio: I am not able (says he) to determine. We
acknowledge a Conversion as well as they; but if Lombard, in all his reading,
could not learn what manner of Conversion it was; then it may be the same that
we allow, and the Fathers understood no other.

II. My second Assertion is, That Transubstantiation was never generally
received by Learned Papists themselves, till the Council of Trent. For their
most eminent Schoolmen (some of them Cardinals) say, That they receive it out
of reverence to the Church, because she has so decreed; but otherwise in their
own judgment, rather approve that Opinion which says, That the substance of
Bread and Wine remains in the Sacrament, as most agreeable to holy Scripture
and right Reason; and that Transubstantiation was a rash Opinion, having no
ground in Scripture. This was the more common Opinion of the Schoolmen for
above 200 years. The Friar says, I wrong the Doctors, and will prove it; I
know not when. But let him unmask himself, that I may see the right face, and
then I shall return him his own challenge, and let him put it to trial when he
dares.

III. My third Assertion is, That their own Reasons or Grounds for
Transubstantiation, are too weak to support it, and the monstrous weight of
Doubts and Difficulties that depend upon it. Their general ground is the power
and truth of Christ, God Almighty, who made all the world by his word; hence
they infer Possibility, Verity, Necessity. The Answer is, that an Argument from
the Creation, is but a particulari ad particulare, and holds not; nor a posse
ad esse, from Possibility to Verity: as to say, It may be so, therefore it is
so; or, God can do this and that, therefore he does it, or it is done; all such
Arguments are inconsequent, irrational, and ridiculous. An Argument may well
follow from the Will of God to his Power, but not from his Power to his Will.
Particular Reasons or Grounds they have.

1. The Time when Christ spoke the words; a time (say they) when all Figures
were ended; but that is apparently false: for there is a plain Figure in the
Cup, which they neither deny nor can avoid.

2. Some argue thus; The Bread which Christ gave in his last Supper, came down
from Heaven; But Bakers bread came not down from Heaven; therefore he gave not
Bakers bread, but the substance of his own Body. It is retorted thus; The
substance of Christ his natural Body was taken of the B. Virgin, and came not
down from Heaven: But the bread which Christ gave came down from Heaven:
Therefore the Bread which Christ gave, was not the substance of his natural
Body. Considering the weakness of their Argument, and inconvenience of the
retort, they fly to other grounds; as

3. To Ubiquity, through Personal Union of both Natures: But this overthrows
the grounds of their own assertion. For as they handle the matter, their
Vbiquity is not ubique, (good Mr. Friar.) But the direct answer is this;
Although both Natures are united in one Person, yet the essential properties of
either are reserved to each nature, and not communicated. So that as Christ
God-man died, but not the Godhead; so also Christ God-man is every where, but
not the Manhood. That follows in Concreto, which does not follow in Abstracto.

4. Another ground for Corporal Presence, is our Incorporation into Christ,
Ephesians. 5.30. We are Members of his Body, flesh and bones: and 1 Corinthians. 10.16.
The breaking of bread is the communion of the Body of Christ. By corporal
presence. But it is Communio, not Commixtio, as their own Learned say; and
Communio effective operans, not needing Corporal presence, but only the
presence of a Supernatural, Sacramental Grace, Power, and Virtue from his Body.
Our Savior's words are plain to this purpose, Joh. 6.35. He that believes in
me, shall never thirst, never hunger, but be satisfied with my body and blood
by Faith in believing. And (ver. 56.) He that eats my flesh, etc. dwells in
me, and I in him: What manner of dwelling it is, the Apostle tells you, Ephesians.
5.17. Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith. And sure the Apostle knew the mind
of Christ better than all the Friars in the world.

5. They have another Argument, From the long continuance of their Doctrine in
the Church, ever since the Apostles time. It has been disproved already, and
proved, That the Church in all Ages taught the contrary, till a few years
before our age. Another Argument they have from the promise of Christ, To keep
his Church from error. The promise is true, and holds good; but their Argument
so vain, that I will not spend Paper about it.

Now the Doubts, Difficulties, and Absurdities that accompany
Transubstantiation, are, Locatum sine loco; Quantum sine quantitate, etc. In a
place, possessing no place; a body without quantity, or other accidents; and
accidents subsisting of themselves, without a body or subject. Fraction, or
breaking in the Sacrament, and yet nothing broken, but only in show or
appearance. And the Apostle calls it breaking of Bread, because it seems so to
the eye. If there be any Jugglers in the world, these are plain Jugglers, who
cast a mist of senseless words before men's eyes, to make them believe they see
that, which is not. The Friar professes to keep close to our Savior's words;
but where then does our Savior say, This is my spiritualized Body; or, This is
a Spirit? Or, This is my body under the species of bread? Or where does St.
Paul say, The species of bread which we break? etc. The Friar may be ashamed of
these shifts. I desire the Reader to take notice of Three things.

1. That Species, a word used by the Fathers, is taken by them for substance of
bread, and is commonly taken so at this day, for substance, especially by
Physicians.

2. To Consecrate never signified to Transubstantiate, but only to dedicate a
common thing to a sacred use.

3. It is an usual manner of Speech in Scripture, when it speaks of Sacraments,
to call the Sign by the name of the thing signified.

IV. My Fourth and last Assertion is, That the Doctrine of the Sacrament held
by the Church of England, is most agreeable to Holy Scripture and to all pure
Antiquity. We may call it Transmutation, a word found often in old Writers, and
allows a change great and mavelous, not in substance, but in Virtue, Power
and Operation. There must be a wonderful Change, else there could not follow
such a powerful Operation: But this change is not in substance, for that
remains still unchanged. For proof whereof, I refer the Friar to the usual
Argument of the Fathers against the Eutychian Heretics, and from thence
downward to all Learned Writers, even their own best Doctors; let him search
and see. We acknowledge, that the very Body and Blood of Christ are in the
Sacrament, truly received, truly eaten, etc. We contend not about the matter,
but the manner; we receive the very Body of Christ by Faith, in a Spiritual
divine manner. The Friar promises to give my little History another broad
side; but to save a labor, he fairly yields the cause, ( page 10. of his Book)
in these words: His natural Body to eat in a spiritual divine manner; and (
page 9.) His true body existing in a spirtual divine manner; and so I hope we
shall agree at last.

CHAP. II. Of Consubstantiation.
THis Opinion also has been the occasion of much Superstition, and cause of
much Trouble, especially in Germany, upon this occasion. Zuinglius observing
how near the Decree of Pope Nicholas, and his Council of Lateran, drew to the
Capernaites; he withdrew as much to the other side, showing his Arguments to
one Carolostadius. Carolostadius uttered the same in his own name at Wittenberg
and other places, allowing less than Zuinglius did, nothing but Bread and Wine,
with bare figure and signification of Christ's Death. He offered a Defense of
his opinion against Luther; but Luther drew him so far from his grounds of bare
figure, that he was ashamed of his attempt, and recanted his, Error. Luther
made the Question public, and allowed the corporal presence of Christ's Body
and Blood, jointly and together with the Bread and Wine, calling it
Consubstantiation. Oecolampadius, and at last Zuinglius, oppose against Luther
at Zurich; and this Contention continued very sharp between them and their
Copartners above forty years. At last the Reformed Ministers of France, in
their Synod at Charenton, 1631. took this Doctrine of Consubstantiation into
consideration; and conceiving there was no great venom in it, by their public
Act they received the Lutherans into their Communion. God send Peace and Truth,
Unity in Verity.

CHAP. III. Of Roman Catholics.
THis glorious Title makes a great gap in our Nation, and many thousands are
dazzled and drawn away with the splendor of it, merely for want of a right
understanding. For this title does no way belong to those that appropriate the
same to themselves, but most properly to Protestants, especially of the Church
of England. For St. Paul was the first Founder of the Church at Rome, where he
planted the Christian Faith, once famous all the world over, Romans 1.8. Spoken
of throughout the world, and that was Catholic enough. Now this very same
Catholic Faith that St. Paul taught the Romans, we of the Church of England
teach and profess to a syllable; let St. Paul himself in all his holy Epistles
be our Judge: And therefore we are the true Roman Catholics, and not they that
have deserted the true Roman Faith. The common talk of St. Peter's Chair at
Rome, where they say he sat as Bishop twenty five years, are but vain words
without proof. For what should St. Peter's Chair do in St. Paul's Church,
planted by him? to whom was committed the Gospel of the Uncircumcision, as the
Gospel of the Circumcision was unto Peter, Galat. 2. and thereupon they were
agreed; and verse. 9. St. Peter gave St. Paul the right hand of fellowship, that
he should go to the Gentiles. Now if St. Peter set his Chair at Rome, it was
contrary to his own covenant or agreement. Or (2.) If St. Peter's Headship is
so necessary a point of the Faith, for the good of the universal Church, sure
our Savior would have spoken of it in more solemn plain words. Or, (3.) St.
Paul in his Salutations or Greetings sent to the Saints at Rome, would surely
have remembered the chief Pastor, if there had been any such; or if St. Peter
had been the man. Or, (4.) If St. Peter was ordained Universal Pastor and Head
of the Church, St. Paul did not well to take upon him the care of all the
Churches, 2 Cor. 11.28. when that belongs to the chief Pastor; except they
will say, that St. Paul was St. Peter's Curate. However, it is not the Chair,
but the Doctrine; nor a succession of persons, but truth of Doctrine, that
makes a true Church. People are then much mistaken, to call Popery the old
Religion, when the Protestant Religion is the most ancient, clearly founded in
Holy Scripture; and the other but new, not to be found in Holy Scripture, nor
in any Record of pure Antiquity. So that we have no difference with the true
Church of Rome, but with a prevailing Party or Faction, called in our Laws, not
Roman Catholics, but Popish Recusants.

CHAP. IV. Of Tradition.
TRadition is a Monster that lives merely by Air. Our learned Friar calls it,
Uncontrollable Tradition. If he takes it for the manner of delivery, called
Oral Tradition; or for the matter delivered, called, Unwritten Verities; they
are both controllable, and controlled by daily Experience, and found guilty of
falsehood. The Council of Trent it self has overthrown Tradition, with their
too much zeal to establish it: For by joining it with Holy Scripture, instead
of building it up, they cast it down; because Tradition is no more able to
stand with Holy Scripture, than Dagon before the Ark of God. Hereof a learned
Carmelite, present in that Council, gave them warning; advising them to
consider first, Whether the Christian Doctrine has two parts, one written by
the Will of God, the other forbidden to be written, but only to be taught by
word of mouth: or whether in the whole body of Christian Doctrine, it happened
accidentally, that all being taught, some part of it has not been committed to
writing. It is (said he) that in the Old Testament God showed a necessity of
writing it, and therefore writ the Decalogue with his own finger, and laid it
up in the Ark, to be kept. In the New, as the Holy Ghost did direct the
Apostles to write and preach the Truth, so he did not forbid them to write any
thing, and hold it in a Mystery, as in some false Religions they do. For then
how were the Apostles Successors able to write that, which was forbidden of
God? And if it happened accidentally, that derogates from the Providence of
God, in directing the Apostles to compose the New Testament. And therefore he
thought it not fit to make it an Article of competition against the Holy
Scriptures. Thus reasoned the Learned Carmelite, to whom the Council gave no
other but a check, by the mouth of Cardinal Pool. But we may reason thus: If
Holy Scriptures, the same that we receive as well as they, be the Word of God,
as that Council has decreed, then they are of Divine Authority and Credit
sufficient to be believed for themselves, and whatsoever they say is divine
truth; and if so, then Tradition is clearly cast out, as useless or needless.
For Holy Scriptures say of themselves, that they are sufficient and most
certain: Joh. 20.30, 31. Jesus did many more things, but these are written that
we may believe, and believing may have life through him. The written Word is
sufficient of it self, Luc. 1.3, 4. It seemed good to write unto thee, that
thou might know the certainty of those things wherein thou art instructed.
For Scripta manent, and are a certain Rule; when Instructions by word of mouth
vanish, or in time are mistaken. And it is incredible to imagine, that stories
for 1600 years, passing through so many mouths of men, of various Judgments,
Tempers, or Affections, etc. should not be altered, or corrupted; when we see
it is so, by daily experience, in very short time. Tradition now is quite out
of doors, cast out by the Word of God; which will not endure the fellowship of
such an Idol, and Teacher of Lies. And if this main Pillar fail, their whole
Religion falls to the ground.

CHAP. V. Of the Council of Trent.
I Had not spoken of this famous Council, but that the Friar provokes me to it
with his learned follies. I question not their great wisdom and learning; I
believe many of them were devout holy men in their mistaken way; but most of
them, I believe, more politic than pious, seeking their own more than the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ. The Protestants have many Objections against this
Council; the two principal, the Actions of the Council it self, and some
Concessions of R. H. in his Considerations upon that Council, will make good,
though Soane, or Padre Paul had never writ a word.

CHAP. VI. Of the Church of England.
THe Friar tells me, that the Church of England, meaning (says he) the
Prelatical Protestants, is no universal, but a particular Sect; no Church or
Sect in the world agreeing or communicating with it. No, Mr. Friar? The Harmony
of Confessions tells you what you are; and so do many other Writings between us
and all the Reformed Churches, full of Kindness, Unity and Love, yea between
our Doctors and some of yours; there were many passages of love and kindness
passed between your Bellarmine and our learned Whitaker, whom the Cardinal had
in great esteem for his great Learning: as every valiant man loves a man of
valor, though his enemy. But it has been long observed, that our English
Jesuits, Priests, etc. are more bitter enemies to our Church, than any
Strangers of foreign Parts; as Bishop Bramhall and others, by their own
relation found true by experience, when they were in France, during our late
Troubles; they found Strangers civil and kind, our own very uncivil: hereupon I
conclude our Friar is an Englishman, by his uncivil language.

But for a full Reply I say, That the Church of Christ is Universal or
Particular; Universal absolute, or respective: Absolutely considered, it is the
whole company of Believers, of all times and places, elect of God to Salvation
in Jesus Christ, called in Scripture, The Spouse of Christ, Household of God,
etc. In this Church there is no Condemnation, as out of it no Salvation. Or,
the Catholic Church is taken respective, in respect of Men, Places, Times,
Doctrine, and particular Congregations. Now though the Church of England be a
particular Church, part of the universal, and called, The Church of England,
from the place where it is seated; and the Church of Rome was no more at the
best: yet the Church of England is Catholic in respect of her Doctrine,
agreeing with all true Churches, yea with the true Church of Rome it self. And
in this respect the Church of Rome (now so called) is not Catholic, because
she is fallen from the true, ancient, Catholic Faith. I have done now with our
Friars scandalous Libel, charging our Nation with Perjury, which all the Friars
in the world will never be able to prove.

CHAP. VII. Of Dissenters in Opinion.
OUr Church is at Unity in it self; and has no differences, but such as our
Adversaries themselves scatter and cherish about in corners, with feigned words
deceiving the hearts of the simple. The most considerable party of Dissenters
is not so far gone, but may easily be reconciled. I know no difference between
us, but two words of one signification, and one word plainly mistaken. I should
be sorry to grieve the hearts of any that are truly Godly, and have no other
design but to keep a good Conscience, and to live in the fear of God. I desire
them in love to consider the distracted condition of their Native Country, and
not stand upon terms, that have no ground in Scripture, whereto the Covenant
does no way oblige them, and whereof the Learned Reformed of Foreign Churches
are quite weary, as they told our Divines at Dort. Other Dissenters our
Adversaries have sent, as Pioniers to undermine us. The most troublesome are
Quakers, a poor deluded people; but if they would speak directly to some few
Questions, I believe a short Answer would stop their mouths.

CHAP. VIII. Of Dissenters in Life and Manners.
SUch are all Drunkards, Blasphemers, Liers, etc. And these make the greatest
breach in the Nation of all the rest. I was told once, that all I could say,
was, that they drew the Judgments of God down upon the Nation. I never thought
to hear such an answer from the mouth of a Christian. But these lewd Livers are
the greatest Schismatics; they are a scandal to our Church; a shame to our
Religion; a reproach to our Nation; bring contempt upon our good Laws and
Government. Specially the beastly Sin of Drunkenness ruins many a hopeful
Youth, brings them to Beggary or worse; and makes all that use it,
unserviceable and unfit for public Employment. One good Law, such as our
Honorable Parliament has given an excellent pattern of already, would remedy
all. Let the bleeding condition of our Neighbors make us beware, before it be
too late; Repent of our Sins, lest our Land mourn too, and the people languish
for all their Abominations.

Psalm 50.22. Consider this, ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces,
and there be none to deliver.

ERRATA.
IN the Preface, Page 1. l. 16. read Groninchou. p. 7. l. 2. dele and. ibid.
read to a trial. p. 8. l. 18. after Christ, put a Comma. p. 11. l. 8. dele he.
p. 14. l. 23. r. manifest (said he). p. 15. l. 9. r. no other answer.

FINIS.

