A SERMON Preached in Bridgewater, The next day after the ELECTION OF BURGESSES,
FEBRUARY 27. 1680/1. BY WILLIAM ALLEN, B.D. and Vicar of Bridgewater, Somerset.

LONDON: Printed for G. S. in the Year 1681.

To the Worshipful RICHARD CAN MAYOR, John Gilbert Senior, and John Harey,
Aldermen of the Borough of Bridgewater.
Gentlemen,
THe Presenter of this Epistle is very much the Servant of Col. Ralph Stawel;
as any man must needs be, that loves either his Prince or his Country, and has
the Honor to know that worthy Gentleman. He has likewise the Happiness to be
of the acquaintance of the Minister that Preached this ensuing Sermon. Now
knowing full well how great a Reverence and Esteem your Worships have for the
Honorable Colonel, and this Reverend Divine, this your Supplicant could do no
better than recommend the Honorable Colonel, and the Reverend Divine
aforesaid, to your Fatherly Care and Protection.

It is most certain that the Generous Colonel has been extremely abused behind
his back, by some that he deserved better from, upon occasion of the late
Election; and the Divine likewise has born his part in Reproaches about his
late Sermon. I am not a person to name People, in any case of scandal; and
therefore I shall content my self to give your Worships a Hint of what passed
lately concerning these Gentlemen, and leave the rest to your Worships Wisdom
and Consideration.

It is said for a certain, that in some Company not unknown to your Worships,
upon occasion of Discourse with some People of this Neighborhood, there were
some very ill words spoken, and ill things done by a Knave, a Fool, and a
Cuckold, with relation to the Noble Colonel, and this worthy Divine. If you can
either guess at the Men, or if you have heard of the thing, this is humbly to
beg of you, that you will interpose your Discretion and Authority in the
matter, that it may go no further; and that you will be pleased to keep this to
your selves. This comes from a man that must be nameless, and that beseeches
you over and over, not to let either the Fool, the Knave, or the Cuckold (if
you should happen to stumble upon them) to have any knowledge how This comes to
your hand.

The Lord have you in his keeping.
PROVERBS 21. v. 15. It is a Joy to the Just to do Judgment.


IT would be happy with the World, (says Plato) were Kings Philosophers, or
Philosophers Kings; Their Wisdom instructing them in all the Methods of Peace,
and their Tempers more than inclining them to the practice of them. But we have
a more sure word of Prophecy to give heed to, and a greater than Plato tells
us, Pro. 14.34.
that Righteousness exalts a Nation. When it goes well with the righteous,
the City rejoices; and 11.11.
and by the Blessing of the upright the City is exalted. But it is one of the
greatest plagues can befall a People, or a Body-politick, when Children are
given to be their Princes, Isai. 3.4.
and Babes shall rule over them; and that not so much in Age, as Understanding:
And yet that defect would not be so mischievous neither, if they had honest
hearts, and that it were a joy to them, as just, to do Judgment. And this
refers not so much to Kings as Supreme, as to those that are in Authority under
them. And happy would it have been for this Kingdom, if the Righteousness
established by its Laws had been the measures of subordinate Magistrates
proceedings; and that it had been a Joy to them, as just both to God and their
King, to have done Judgment. In accounting for the words, which is the
Wiseman's Doctrinal remark, I shall undertake to show these following Truths;

First. That an Habitual Righteousness, or Justice of Mind, fits a man for
Government, or doing Judgment, if called to it as a Magistrate.

Secondly. That the People rejoice in the Administrations of such men, thus
qualified, to whom it is a joy to do Judgment.

Thirdly. We are to consider the Satisfaction the Just man, or Magistrate, has
in doing Judgment.

It is a Joy to the Just to do Judgment. In accounting for the first, I say,
That the Holy and Righteous God is the great Rector of the World: He is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords; and because He is Holy and Righteous, all things are
dispensed in Number, Weight and Measure. And tho there are some Intrigues in
his Providence, and Arcana's of Kingdom, Romans 11.33.
which we cannot fathom or comprehend, For his Judgments, or procedures, are
past finding out; yet every thing is ordered [(...)] according to the Council
of his Will, which is not arbitrary, but according to his own Wisdom, Justice
and Goodness. And as the Kingly Prophet declares God to be Judge; so the Father
of the faithful assures, that the Judge of all the Earth will do right. It Is he
alone that by his Power and Wisdom prevents and defeats many of those Designs
of Mischief, that evil Spirits or evil men would plague the world withal.

And as it is He that sometimes turns the hearts of Princes, Prove. 21.1.
[which are in his hands] as the Rivers of waters; so it is he that stills the
raging of the people, and brings to light the hidden works of darkness. And
what no eye can see, but the All-seeing One, he exposes to open view.

Those Malefactors which come not under the Cognizance of humane Judicatures,
He brings forth to the Bar. And we know by Experience, that the Treason some
time since directed against the Lord's Anointed, and the murderous Hostilities
of others committed against their Brethren, has been by a wonderful Providence
detected, even to the astonishment of the world.

In these and the like other instances, God may be said to execute his
Vengeance, and declare that he himself is Judge: And by such extraordinary
proceedings convince the world of that excellent Saying of the Psalmist, Except
the Lord keep the City, Psalm. 127.1.
the Watchman waketh but in vain.

Neither has he given us proofs only of his Governing the World, in remarkable
Examples of his Punitive Justice; but in the expressions of his Grace and Mercy
toward those that love and fear him: by rewarding their Virtue, in advancing
their Persons; by making them conspicuous and great in the world, glorious in
men's eyes, as well as gracious in his.

And because he is Righteous, he pleads the Cause of the Fatherless and of the
Widow, and hears their Prayers when they cry unto him, and avengeth the wrong
done unto them, when others concerned, either would not, or could not. And ever
when it consists with the innocent and injured's real advantage, (which God
knows best) he delivers them out of all their troubles. So that, though he
reserve many things for the determination of the great Day of Retribution; yet
that all may know, that there is a God that now judges the earth, he makes men
even now sensible, that in this world they are rewarded according to their
Works. And every man's own Conscience tells him, though none else is conscious
of it, that God to him is just, and righteous in all his dealings.

But though God be Judge, and that eminently so, and the righteous Judge, yet
has he deputed Men as his Substitutes; the King as Supreme under him, and
other Magistrates as ordained by the King. Magistracy, which is but a Power
over others for a common Good, is a pious and primitive Institution derivative
from God, the great and sole Monarch of the World: First founded in the
Paternal Relation, and that afterward expanded but as Families increased.

And Honor thy Father and thy Mother, which is the first Commandment with
promise, engages us equally, if not more, to Obedience to the Pater Patriae,
to Kings and Queens, as Nursing-Fathers and Nursing-Mothers, as to our
proximate or dearest Relatives. And therefore the Hypothesis of Hobbes and
Calvin, are as absurd as mischievous, in making Kings and Magistrates the
creatures of the People. Justin the Heathen tells us, Principio rerum Gentium
Nationumque Imperium penes Reges erat: That in the beginning of time the
Government of the World, in all the Kingdoms of it, was managed by Kings and
Monarchs.

I say, both profane and Scripture-History assure us, that Kingly Government
was the first Establishment. And though the Mosaical Government be urged as a
refutation of this proposal, yet it is rejoyned, that that was a Theocrasie;
nay and as humane it was Monarchical too, Deuteronomy. 33.5.
for Moses is said to be King in Jesurun. And it is evident from Josephus and
the Machabees, and other Writers, that when that people fell under the
Government of a Sanhedrim, that is, a Presbytery, they soon fell into ruin,
and became not a people. But not to animadvert upon their Misfortunes, nor to
make that an Argument of the Justice or Injustice of any particular Polity; It
is very clear from the Records of the first Times, that the Government of a
Commonwealth is but an Apostasy from (if not a Rebellion against) the first
Model. And as Christ said of Polygamy, that from the beginning it was not so;
the like may we affirm of the whoredom of Republics. And as the one was but
permitted the Jews, so the other at this day is but permitted of God, for the
hardness of men's hearts.

Having thus by the way adjusted the Right of Monarchical Government, and
withal showed you, that that Government, more than any, is from God; and that
persons entrusted with it, bear his Authority, and as they are his Vicegerents,
they are to do his work, and to personate a Righteous God; which Righteousness
they are to display in the vindication of Gods Honor, in the defense of Gods
Laws, in the protection of Gods people, in the punishment of Gods enemies; and
this must be done with respect to God as the chief Judge, to the common good as
the subordinate end, and that for the discharge of their own Consciences, as
they will give an account of their Stewardship at the great Day of Judgment. So
likewise Under-Magistrates are the Kings Vicegerents, and their Righteousness
consists in this; not only in being true to their God, but faithful to their
King: In preserving his Prerogatives, in defending his Person, in promoting his
Honor, in executing his Laws, and every way in their places securing the
present Establishment. Which brings me to the Second Particular general.

Secondly. The peoples Security and Satisfaction in such Governors, or Rulers:
They will do Judgment, and therefore all Good and Loyal men will bless God for
such a Prince, and such Magistrates; because they are at once assured of God's
protection, and their King's, and those that are employed and authorized by
both: now (if ever) shall they lead their lives in all Godliness,
Peaceableness, and Honesty. Blessed certainly are the people that are in such a
case! For as Children are often blessed for the Piety of their Parents, and
according to God's own promise it is to descend to many generations: So for the
sake of David, a Prince and Ruler after God's own heart, Judah shall be
blessed. And though indeed for his sins the Land did mourn, yet upon his
Repentance they and he were restored to God's favor. And why may I not make
this Remark [by the way,] that for the sake of our late English David, for the
Piety and Constancy of Charles the First, the Defender of the Faith, yea of
that Faith once delivered to the Saints, and that even to the Death, God in
mercy remembered the sinful People of this Land, and knocked off those Chains we
enthralled our selves in; and brought us out of the Land of Egypt, out of the
house of Bondage, and disabled our many Pharaohs and their Hosts from making us
a continued prey?

Why may we not impute the Blessings we now enjoy in the many years of our now
lawful Prince, and those to the Prayers and Piety of that Glorious Martyr,
whose Memory ought to be dear and precious to us? And would to God that all the
Subordinate Magistrates of this Realm, who hold their Power by Patent-Royal,
would defend the same Faith, as he and his Successor do, and worship God
faithfully in the same way, and plead for, and Christianly and courageously
appear for that Righteousness which is established by a Law: then might we the
people of this Realm confidently hope, Isa. 48.18.
that our Peace should be as a River, and our Righteousness as the waves of the
Sea.

For this satisfaction would farther ensue, (that the Inhabitants of the Land,
and every distinct Corporation, and every Member of the same) that they might
sit peaceably under their own Vines, and eat the Fruit of their Labors. And
that satisfaction shall arise not only from God's promise given to a people so
Isai. 1.19.
governed, but from the confidence we shall have in such Governors: For they
that will not act contrary to God's Law, nor to Magna Charta, that will not be
imposed upon against the Law of the Nation, and the Religion established by
Law, they will be a terror to Evildoers, and a praise to them that do well.
And when we are thus guarded by God's Blessing and the Magistrates Power, a
wall of Brass or of Fire cannot be more our Security, than this double Bulwark
of Defense.

Besides this Security, and in it, this satisfaction from such just Rulers
would arise, that the Hypocrites in Sion would tremble, and be afraid. The
resolved and exemplary Loyalty both to God and the King, in such men, would awe
the most impudent and daring Delinquents into a sneakiness of temper, and into
an external, tho not a real compliance. The same Bravery and Goodness of Mind
in a private person, we by experience find, puts oftentimes a check upon the
most dissolute and disaffected. Naked and unarmed Virtue is too powerful for
the powers of Darkness, and a little light will dispel the shades below. But
when the Righteousness of the righteous breaks forth as the light, and shines
more and more unto perfect day, then will the Sinners of the night, or of the
day, either hide their heads, or themselves, for shame. If now these lesser
Luminaries are so dazzling and powerful, how much more the Sun and Moon in the
Firmament? for so the Scripture Emblematically denotes Magistrates to be. When
you Magistrates display the rays of Righteousness, you will not only discover
all the corners of nastiness, but purge them too. Factious and seditious
Sinners would shun the light of your presence, and dread your persons, and
would not dare to blaspheme God and the King; there would be neither railing
nor reviling in our streets, at least not against the Lord's Anointed.

The Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 1.9, 10.
The Law is not made for the righteous man, but for the lawless and
disobedient, for the ungodly and sinners; and amongst the rest that he
instances in, these are some; for Murderers of Fathers, for Manslayers, for
Menstealers, for Liars, for perjured persons; and if there be any thing that is
contrary to sound Doctrine. And nothing can be more so, now adays, than binding
Kings in chains, and Nobles in fetters of iron. Nothing can more subvert the
Law of the Spirit of Life and of the Land, than those Principles which the
Papists and our Dissenters at this day insist upon. And therefore would but our
inferior Magistrates be true to God and the King, to the Law of the Gospel,
and to that Righteousness as now established by Law, we need not yet fear the
Sons of Corah, nor all the Machinations or Designs of the Conventicle, or of
the Conclave. But for this I shall farther account for, under the Applicatory
part of this Sermon. And so I pass to my last Consideration, which is,

Thirdly. The satisfaction the Just-man has in doing Judgment. It is a joy to
the just to do Judgment. And herein Magistrates with other just men are
concerned, and what is a comfort to one, is to either, the testimony of their
Consciences, that in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom,
but by the Grace of God, they have managed the Affairs of Civil Government in
the world; to allude to the Apostle's expression. 2 Cor. 1.12
For nothing more refreshes the Mind, than a reflex upon its own Innocence;
nor any thing affords more solid peace and pleasure, than a good Conscience
kept void of offense both toward God and man. The just Steward can look back
upon his Disbursements, and upon his many and great employs and dealings with
men, with a calm and a cheerful mind: For he is ready to give up his his
Account with Joy. Such Just Men they have confidence Godward, and because they
have been faithful both to him and to their Office, they will be able to hold
up their heads in the day of Judgment.

Samuel, you know, he was not only a Prophet, but a Judge in Israel; and tho a
wanton and licentious people were uneasy under his Presidency, and would not
be satisfied with his management of Affairs, but sought by multitude and murmur
to discharge him from his Government; yet this is his comfort, that as a just
man he had done Judgment: and for this he has not only the testimony of his
Conscience, but he challenges it from the people too; Behold, here I am, 1 Samuel
12.3.
witness against me; whose Ox have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have
I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe, to blind mine eye
therewith? That is, in other words, Wherein have I acted contrary to the Law?
wherein have I been perjured? with whom have I basely complied to the
subversion of Government, and the present Establishment? Thus in a triumphant
manner he descends the place of Judicature, and resignes his Office, and
satisfies both the People and his own Conscience. This was that which comforted
and buoyed up the Spirit of Job under his sore Afflictions; and you know he was
a great man in the East, and had others under his Conduct and Government, as
you may collect from Job 31.21.

It is possible that those that have sat on high, may be brought to sit in the
dust, and that those that have judged others, may fall into condemnation: But
such a reflex as this, that they have done Judgment, will renew their Joy even
in the day of Sorrow.

These words, It is a Joy to the Just to do Judgment, have these various
Paraphrases: that is, Just men do Judgment as their work; and that not an
uneasy one, but as a labor of Love, and an office of Kindness and Charity to
a distressed world. And it is their joy to do Judgment, implying, that it would
be a pain and torment to them to do otherwise; and it is the very comfort of
their Office, as well as the Duty of it, to do Judgment.

And now, Sirs, you that are to judge others, will do well to pass Judgment
upon your selves, that the Romans 2.1.
Obrade of St. Paul may never recoyl on either of you. But in the Application
of this Discourse, I shall address my self to all my Auditory, as being as much
concerned in the subsequent part, as you to whom I have particularly spoken.
Beloved, it is granted by all,

First, That they are to be esteemed only just men, that act up, or according
to their Principles; that is, to those measures, which they are convinced are
Canons, or Rules, by which they are to square their actions. St. Paul had the
testimony of his Conscience, that he had been an honest and just man, that he
was always true to that way, in which he thought Righteousness was to be
advanced. When he was a Pharisee he did as a Pharisee, the righteousness of a
Pharisee he pursued, and would establish. And hence it is, that he declares for
his own Justification, I have lived in all good Conscience, even unto this day;
that is, he had acted according to his Convictions, he was sincere in his way;
he was not so much a Fool or a Knave, as to betray his Cause, or abuse his then
Conscience, by any base compliance, in contradiction to his Principles and
Profession. And when afterward he had been blessed with a new Light, and a
better Rule of Righteousness than that of the Scribes and Pharisees, he is as
faithful and constant as ever he was before.

Sequaciousness is always a sign of a weak or a wicked mind; they are Children
in Understanding, that are tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine. And
they that will meddle with those that are given to change, have bad heads and
worse hearts. A man cannot more plainly proclaim himself a Wretch and a
Traitor, than to side with those that he knows are Enemies to his Truth, and
would by all or any means subvert it. Judas is not so much branded for his
Cowardice and his Covetousness, as for the Villainy of betraying his Master and
his Gause.

And now, my Brethren, I appeal to your own Consciences, Do you not believe
that we are happy and blessed in the Government of a great and a gracious
Prince? Are not the Laws of this Land, under which we live, not only just, but
good? Are we not happy, and may be so under the present Establishment both in
Church and State, as now settled by Law? What Privilege can the Subject either
reasonably desire, or enjoy, than what he has? What as a Christian, or Member
of a Christian Society, can any man as much as wish for, that he is not blessed
with in the Communion of this Reformed Church of England?

Brethren, you believe, I hope you do believe what I say: You are of our
Communion, you are of us, and amongst us; you are Subjects of the same King,
and Members of the same Church, we have hitherto walked together as Brethren:
The Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy is our Bond of Peace. The Covenant which
you made with God in your Baptism, by which you were admitted into Christ's
Church and the Church of England, is that Unity of Spirit, by which we are
united to Christ and to one another. I pray ask your own Consciences, and tell
me, whether they would not accuse and condemn you for perfidious men, if any
worldly respect should so far prevail upon you, as to be in any instance
instrumental in your Sphere, to disturb or subvert a righteous and peaceable
Establishment, either in Religion, Church or State.

The true and first Protestants of the English Nation under Edward the Sixth,
Queen Elizabeth, King James, blessed God for our Reformation; and many of them
rather parted with their Lives, than flinch from the conduct of so excellent a
Church. And why, O why should we cast a sham upon our Forefathers! and disgrace
a wise and holy Constitution, by yielding to those Beasts of prey, those
devouring Wolves, those wild Foxes that would destroy our Vineyard, and make
our Temples once again Dens of Thieves? Be this far from us, say you. But then
what means this bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear!
Why are the most Loyal and the most Faithful obraded with being Papists in
Masquerade, and therefore railed at and reviled for being faithful to God and
their King, and that I cannot say by the Friends, but the Foes in our own
Household? How comes it to pass that any of us should herd it with the Fanatic
drove, and by noise or Suffrage, or what is worse, by malicious Stories, and
impudent Defamations, blacken that Constitution, and that Church, in which we
live, and move, and have our being, yea our well-being, either as Men or
Christians? It is apparent to all, that have Eyes to see, or Understandings to
consider, that the divided Sects amongst us join hands and hearts together, and
are so far Brethren, as to carry on their work of Iniquity, to turn once more a
peaceable Land into Blood; and to effect what our more open enemies the Papists
designed, the ruin of our English Monarchy and Protestantism. O my Soul, come
not into their Secret, unto their Assembly mine Honor be not thou united; for
in their anger they slew a man, yea the best of men and of Princes, the Lords
Anointed, and in their Self-will they dug down a wall; this they have done,
and this they are complotting to do again. Cursed be their Anger, for it was
and is fierce; and their wrath, for it was and is cruel. May God so divide them
in Jacob, and scatter them in our Israel, that all their Counsels and
Machinations may be brought to naught, and they may be as water spilt upon the
ground. And let no man prosper that wishes ill to our English Sion.

Hold fast, my Brethren, the profession of your Faith without wavering, and be
not imposed upon by crafty men that lie in wait to deceive, and with fair
Speeches and smooth Words would draw you off from your stedfastness. Remember
that ye are Englishmen and Christians; be true therefore to your Sovereign as
your Sovereign, and to your Church, as Reformed according to the truly ancient
Apostolic Form and Catholic Faith.

And I add, Secondly. It argues our Sincerity, when we are as zealous as
sincere; Gal. 4.18.
It is good, says the Apostle, to be zealously affected always in a good
thing. For coldness of Affection, and indifferency of Mind, argues either the
badness of our Cause, or our Hearts; either that we are not in the Right, or
not right in the right way. It is a base and disingenuous affectation, to glory
in that new-form'd Nickname, a Linsie-wolsie man; Rev. 3.16.
which is such an one whom Christ says, He will spew out of his mouth; and
really he deserves to be hated and deserted by all that pretend to any
Principle of Honesty. These Moderate Men (as sometimes they call themselves)
are the Foes of our own Household; they as soon as any would give us up as a prey
into the hands of our Enemies. All heads, and hearts, and hands, I am afraid,
are now on work to pluck up and pull down, even that Vineyard which God has
planted, and that House which he owns as his House of Prayer. And now, if ever,
ought we to stand in the gap, to show our selves true and sincere Protestants,
and that not only in declaring against the Conclave, but the Conventicle and
the Classis. These are the Vermin and the Vipers that would eat through their
Mothers Belly. And being for these many years warmed by the benign Influence
and Government of a Gracious Prince, begin now to hiss, and more than to show
their Sting. Ah Lord! If we have any love for God or our Country, for Church or
State, let us not unconcernedly look on, and see both running into Ruin,
without giving a helping hand to prevent such a desolation. Let us be as active
in the right way, as our Enemies are in the wrong. And let us who are of one
Communion, be of one Heart and of one Way; let us join together as Brethren,
that have the same Father and Mother, and the same Interest. Let us learn Zeal
and Union, even from our Enemies; for so those are that would upon any account
alter the present Establishment, under which we may be blessed in Body, Soul,
and Estate.

But, my Brethren, if there are any amongst us that, like Judas, put their
hands into the Dish with us, and then go forth and betray; let them assuredly
know, that if they meet not with his Fate in this world, they may expect his
Portion in the other.

FINIS.

