A CONFESSION OF FAITH, Of the several Congregations or Churches of CHRIST in
London, which are commonly (though unjustly) called ANABAPTISTS. PVBLISHED. For
the Vindication of the truth, and information of the ignorant; likewise for the
taking off of those aspersions which are frequently, both in Pulpit and Print,
unjustly cast upon them. Unto which is added, HEART -- BLEEDINGS for Professors
abominations: OR, A faithful General Epistle (from the same Churches)
presented to all who have known the way of truth, fore-warning them to flee
security, and careless walking under the Profession of the same, discovering
some of Satan's wiles, whereby also wanton persons and their ungodly ways are
disclaimed.

But this I confess unto thee, that after the way they call heresy, so
worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things that are written in the
law and the prophets, and have hope toward God, which they themselves also
allow, that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and
unjust. Acts 24. 14. 14. For we cannot but speak the things we have seen and
heard. Acts 4. 20. The fourth Impression, corrected.

Printed at Leith, 1653.

To the impartial READER.
THe consideration of those many errors that is this day abroad in the world,
by which many poor souls are deluded through the instigations of Satan,
together with the inventions of men, by reason of that gross ignorance which
over-spreads the hearts of people: we find our selves engaged to bear witness
to that truth of God which we profess and practice, which is so much mistaken,
vilified and rejected: We therefore are willing to re-print this ensuing
Confession of Faith, together with Heart-bleedings for Professors abominations;
it being formerly set forth by the Churches assembling in the order of the
Gospel in London as that which does contain the principals and substance both
of theirs and our Faith and Order. And surely if the Lord give an understanding
heart, and enlightened eyes in the reading hereof, it will be a means to take
off that prejudice which generally rests in the minds of many. We find that
most persons in these days are subject to one of these three extremes viz. To
sit down in a state of wickedness, without God in the world, or else to clothe
themselves with a form of godliness, without the power of it: and so walk short
of the golden rule of the Gospel in contenting themselves in a Babylonish state,
or become national under pretended enjoyments, trampling the Lord and his truth
under-foot, as legal, and too contemptible for them to walk in: but if any
hereby shall gain information and a heart made willing to follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, God shall have the glory, themselves shall reap the
benefit, and we shall receive our reward, who subscribe ourselves faithful
friends to all that wish well to Sion.

Leith the 10. of the first Month, vulgarly called March 1652 / 3. Signed in
the name and by the appointment of the Church of Christ, usually meeting at
Leith and Edinburgh. THO. SPENSER. ABRA. HOLMES. THO. POWELL. JOHN BRADY.


THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THere is nothing wherein Saints should be more conversant then in promoting
the Honor of the Lord and his Christ, striving and studying to walk before him
agreeable to the Truth, recorded in his Word; the consideration of which, is a
strong inducement unto us to engage (to the utmost of our abilities) in this
Work, that when other men content themselves by living below the Rule, we may
strive to walk close thereunto, (suitable to the Pattern left us by God in his
Word) and when many account it their glory to turn their backs upon what they
professed to have received from Christ, we may strive to honor God, by a
steadfast continuance in what we have received, and in diligent speaking the
things which we have seen and heard from him; the weight of which at first
prevailed upon us to declare unto the World this our Confession of Faith, and
faithful Epistle, which we have again reprinted, and made public, for the
Reasons following.

First, The invitations and earnest solicitations of several of our Brethren,
from all parts of the Nation, whose hearts long to behold (in public) our
stability and perseverance in the way and truth of our God, that by it they may
have where* with, to put to silence those who have lately taken liberty to
reproach and undervalue the Truth professed by us.

Secondly, That the World may behold that through Grace (by which alone we
stand) we are preserved from backsliding or revolting from the way and truth,
we for some years have followed God in, In which (through faith and obedience)
we trust to be continued, unto the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, That we might prevent Satan and his accomplices in their enterprises,
who have of late abounded more then ordinary, with stratagems and inventions to
circumvent poor Saints, in their stabili^y and love unto the Truth; amongst
which, this was no small one (in several rem^te parts that we had cast off all
our former profession and practice, so that none remained together, worshipping
God in his way, owning themselves the Churches of Christ, but were grown up to
a further attainment and light (as they say) to live more immediately with God
and Christ, then in such low, mean and contemptible a way as Ordinances,
thinking thereby to stumble and disharten many whose hearts were approved to
God.

Fourthly, That we might take off prejudice from the hearts of those (many of
which we have comfortable hopes) who are, or may be prejudiced against us, from
these many invectives, and bitter unjust reproaches, we are* or may be (for
worshipping our God according to our conscience and the rule of truth) exposed
unto, and they if it be the good pleasure of our God) come to understand our
practice, and subject themselves to the Lord in his commands.

Lastly, The remembrance of what good this our undertaking has formerly done
in the Countries where it has been spread (of which we have had particular
notice from several) whose hearts have been refreshed therewith) is n^ small
inducement to us to bring this forth again in print.

Courteous Friend, We desire thee soberly to weigh and consider what we have
professed before Men and Angels, out of the simplicity of our hearts, and let
not prejudice prevent thy profitting, but make it thy great care and study to
give up thy understanding to love and receive the Truth, as it is in Jesus,
delighting thy self in that Government, which is by his own hand established
in his h^^se; be not disheartened although thou should hear of the
miscarriage of some, knowing that in many things we sin all, and come short
of the Grace of our GOD, nor if thou should be advertised of the falling
away of any one, do but consider we live in the last ages of the world, Wherein
many shall depart from the truth, neither is it a new thing for men to
relinquish their profession)

But strive thou to follow GOD fully, and to stand fast in the simplicity of
the truth; and GOD our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ be with thee, and be
thy guide and Counselor.

Signed in the name, and by the appointment of the aforesaid several Churches,
meeting in LONDON. William Kiffen, John Spilsbery, Joseph Sanson, Hugh Gosnell,
Thomas Pault, Joseph Patshall, William Conset, Edward Harrison, Richard Graves,
Edward Roberts, Thomas Waters, Henry Forty, Thomas Young, John Watson.


A CONFESSION of FAITH of the several Congregations or Churches of Christ in
London, which are commonly (though unjustly) called ANABAPTISTS.
I
THe Lord our God is but 1 Cor. 8. 6 Isa. 44. 6 Chap. 46 9
one God, whose Exodus 3. 14
subsistence is in himself; whose estence cannot be comprehended by any but
himself; who only has immortal^ty, 1 Timothy 6. ^6
dwelling in the light, which no man can approach unto, who is in himself most
Isa. 43. 15.
holy, every way Psalm. 147. 5
infinite, in Deuteronomy. 32. 3
greatness, Job 3^. 5
wisdom, Ier. ^0. 1^
power, love; Exodus 3. 67
merciful and gracious, long suff^ring and abundant in goodness and truth, who
gives Acts 17. 28 Ro^. 11. 36
being, moving and preservation to all creatures.

II
In this divine and infinite being, there is the Cor. 1. 3
Father, the John 1. 1
Word, and the Chap 15. 26
holy Spirit, each having the whole divine Exodus 3. 14
essence, yet the essence undivided; all infinite without any beginning,
therefore but ^ Cor. 8. 6
one God, who is not to be divided in nature, and being, but distinguished by
several peculiar relat^ve properties.

III
God has Isa. 46. 10 Ephesians. ^. 11. Romans 1^. ^3.
decreed in himself, before the world was, concerning all things, Psalm. 115 3
and 15. 6
to work, dispose, and bring them about (according to the counsel of his own
will) to his glory: yet without c Psalm. 33. 15 1 Samuel 10. 9. 26.
being the Author of sin, or having fellowship with any therein) in which
appears his wisdom in disposing all Prove. 21. 6. Exodus: 21. 13 Prove: 16. 33
Psalm: 144 Isai 4^. 7 Jer: 14 12 Man: 6 2^, 30 Col. 1. 16, 17 Nu: 23. ^9, 20 Rom
3. 4 Jer. 10. 10 Ephesians: 1. 4 5 Jude 46 Prove: 10. 4
things unchangeablenesse, power, and faithful^esse in accomplish^ng his
decree: and God has before the foundation of the world, foreordained some men
to eternal life, through Jesus Ch^^st, to the praise and glory of his grace;
leaving the rest to act in their sin, to their just condemnation, and to the
praise of his justice.

IV.
In the Gen: 1 1 Col: 1. 16 Isai 45. 12
beginning God made all things very good, created man after his own 1 Cor: 15.
45, 46
Image, filled with all meet perfection of nature, and free from all sin, but
Eccle: 7 29
long he abode not in this honor, Satan using the subtilty of the Gen: 3. 1,
4. 5 2 Cor. 11. 3
Serpent, to seduce first Eve, then by her seduci^g A^am; who without any
compulsion, in eating the forbidden f^uit, 1 Timothy 2. 14
transgressed the command of God, and fell, whereby Gal. 3. 22 g Romans 5. 12 18,
19 Chap. 6. 22 Ephesians 2. 3
death came upon all his posterity, who now are conceived in sin, and by nature
the Children of wrath, the servants of sin, the subjects of g death, and other
miseries in this world, and for ever, unless the Lord Jesus Christ set them
free.

V.
God in his infinite Job 38. 11
power and wisdom, does Isa^ 46. 10 11 Eccles 3. 14
dispose all things to the end for which they were created, that neither any
thing befalls any by chance, or without his Mat. 10. 29, 30 Exodus 21. 13 Pro.
16. 33
providence; and, that whatsoever befalls the Elect, is by his appointment, for
his glory, and their Romans 8. 28
good.

VI.
All the Elect being Jer. ^. 2
loved of God, with an everlasting love, are Ephesians. 1. 3, 7 Chap. 2. 8, 9 1
These. 5. 9
redeemed, quickened and saved, not by themselves, not their own works, least
any man should boast, but only and wholly by God, of his free Acts 13. 38 1
Cor. 5. 2^ Jer. 9. 23, 24
grace and mercy through Jesus Christ, who is made unto us by God, 1 Cor. 1.
30, 31. Jer. 23: 6.
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, and all in all, that
he that rejoices might rejoice in the Lord.

VII.
And John 17. 3 H^b. 5, 9
this is life eternal, that we might know him the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom he has sent. And on ^ Thessalonians 1. 8 John 6. 36
the contrary, the Lord will render vengeance in flaming fire to them that know
not God, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

VIII.
The rule of this knowledge, faith and obedience, concerning the worship of
God, in which is contained the whole duty of man is (not Col. 2. 23 Mat. 15. 9,
6
men's laws or traditions, but) only the Word of God, contained in the holy John
^. 39 2 Timothy 3. 15 16, 17 Isa. 8. 20 Gal. 1. 8 9 Act. 3. 22, 23
Scriptures, in which is plainly recorded whatsoever is needful for us to know,
believe and practice, which are the only rule of holiness and obedience for
all Saints, at all times, in all places to be observed.

IX.
The Lord JESUS CHRIST, of whom Genesis 3. 15 Chap. 22. 18 and 49. 10 Dan 7. 13.
and 9. 24, 25, 26
Moses and the Prophets wrote, the Apostles preached) he is the P^ov. 8. 23
Jo^. 1. 1, 2, 3 H^b. 1. 8
Son of God, the brightness of his glory, etc. by whom he made the World, who
upholdeth and governs all things that he has made; who also when the Gal. 4.
4.
fullness of time was come, was made of a woman, of the Tribe of Judah, of the
seed of Abraham and Da^id; to wit, of the Virgin Mary, the holy Spirit-coming
down upon her, the power of the most High Heb. 7. 14 Rev. 5. 5. with Genesis 49.
9, 10. Romans 1. 3. and 9. 10. Mat. 1. 16. with Luke 3. 2, 26. Heb. 2. 16. Isai
52. 3, 4, 5. Heb. 4. 15.
over-shadowing her; and he was also tempted as we are, yet without sin.

X.
1. Tim. 2. 5 Heb. 9. 15. John 14. 6
JESUS CHRIST is made the Mediator of the new and everlasting Covenant of grace
between God and man, ever to be Isai 9 6, 7
perfectly and fully the Prophet, Priest, and King of the Church of God for
evermore.

XI.
Unto this Office he was appointed by Prove. 8. 23 Isa. 4^. 6. and 49. 15
God from everlasting, and in respect of his Manhood, from the womb called,
separated Isa. 11. 2, 3* 4, 5. and 61. 1, 2. with Luke 4. 17* 22. John 1. 14,
16. and 3. 34.
and anointed most fully and abundantly with all gifts necessary', God having
without measure poured out his Spirit upon him.

XII.
Concerning his Mediator-ship, the Scripture holds forth Christ's call to his
O^fice: For Heb. 5. 4, 5 6
none takes this honor upon him, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron,
it being an action of God, whereby a special promise being made, he ordains
his Son to this Office, which promise is, that Christ should be made a
sacrifice for sin, that he should see his Isa. 53. 10. 11
seed, and prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his
hand: John 3. 16 Romans 8. 32 1 Timothy 2. 5 Heb. 7 24
all of mere free and absolute grace toward Gods Elect, and without any
condition foreseen in them to procure it.

XIII.
This Office to be Mediator, that is, to be Prophet, Priest, and King of the
Church of God, is so proper to Christ, that neither Dan. 7: 14 Acts 4. 1^ Luke
^^ 33 John 1^: 6
in whole, or any part thereof, it cannot be transferred from him to any other.

XIV.
This Office to which Christ is called, is threefold, as Deuteronomy. 8: 15 with Acts
3, 22, 23
a Prophet, H^b: ^: 1 and 4. 14, 15
Priest, and Psalm. 2. 6
King: this number and order of Offices is necessary; for in respect of our 2
Cor. 5. 20 Acts 26. 18
ignorance, we stand in need of his Prophetical O^fice: And in respect of our
great Col. 1 21
al^enation from God, we need his Priestly Office to reconcile us: And in
respect of our aversness and utter inability to return to God, we need his
Kingly O^fice to Joh. 16. 8
convince, Psalm. 110 3
subdue, Cant. 1. 3. John 6. 44.
draw, Phil. 4. 13.
uphold, and 2 Timothy 4. 18.
preserve us to his heavenly Kingdom.

XV.
Concerning the Prophecy of Christ, it is that whereby he has ^ohn 1. 18. and
12. 49, 50 and 15. and 17. 8 D^ut ^8^5
revealed the will of God, whatsoever is needful for his Servants to know and
Mat. 23. 10
obey; and therefore he is called not only a Prophet and Docto^, and the Heb.
3. 1
Apostle of our Profession, and the Mal. 3 1
Angel of the Covenant, but also the very 1 Cor. ^. 24 Col. 2. 3
Wisdom of God, in whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and knowledge,
who for ever continues revealing the same Truth of the Gospel to his People.

XVI.
That he might be a Prophet every way complete, it was necessary John 1. ^8
Acts 3. 2^ with Deuteronomy. ^8. 15. Heb. 1. 1
he should be God, and also that he should be man: for unless he had been God,
he could never have perfectly understood the will of God; and unless he had
been man, he could not suitably have unfolded it in his own Person to men. That
Jesus Christ is God is wonderful, clearly expressed in the Scriptures: he is
called, The mighty God, Isa. 9. 6. That word was God, John 1. 1. Christ who is
God over all, Romans 9. 5. God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16. The same is
very God, ^ John 5. 20 He is the first, Rev. 1. 8 He gives b^ing to all things,
and without him was nothing made, John 1. 2 He forgives sins Man 9. ^. He is
before Abraham Ioh. 8. 58 He was, and ^s, and ever will be the s^m^, Heb. 13 8
He is always with his to the end of the world, Mat: 28: 20 which could not be
said of Jesus Christ if he were not God. And to the Son he says, ^hy Throne, O
God, is for ever and ever, Heb* 1. 8 John 1. ^8. Acts 20. 28. Also, Christ is
not only perfectly God, but perfect Man, made of a woman, Gal 4 4 made of the
seed of D^vid, Romans 1. 3. Coming out of ^he loins of David, Acts 2. 30. ^f
Jesse and Judah, Acts 13. 23. In that the children were partake^s of flesh and
blood, he himself likewise took part with them, Heb. 2. 14. He took not on him
the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham Verse 16. So that we are bone of
his bone, and flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5. 30. so that he that sanctifies, and
they that are sanctified, are all of one, Heb. 2. 11. see Acts 3. 22. Deuteronomy. 18.
15. Heb. 1. 1.


XVII.
Concerning his John 17. 19 Heb 3. 7. ^, 9, and 10. 12 Romans 5. 19 Ephesians. 5. 2
Coloss. 1. 20 Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. 16 Romans 8. 34 Hbe. 9. 24 and 8. 1. 1 Pet. 25
Joh. 4. 23, ^4
Priesthood, Christ having sanctified himself, has appeared once to put away
sin, by that one offering of himself a sacrifice for sin, by which he has
fully fin^shed and suffered all things God required for the salvation of his
Elect, and removed all rites and shadows, etc. and is now ent^ed within the
vail into the Holy of Holies, which is the presence of God. Also he makes his
people a spiritual House, an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifice,
acceptable to God through him. Neither does the Father accept, or Christ offer
to the Father any other wo^ship or worshippers.

XVIII.
This Priesthood was not legal or temporary, but according to the order of Heb
7 ^7
Melchiledec, and is stable and perfect, not for a Heb. 7. 16, 18, 19, 20, 2^,
24. 25
time, but for ever, which is suitable to Jesus Christ, as to him that ever
lives: Christ was the Priest, Sacrifice and Altar: he was a Priest according
to both Natures, he was a Sacrifice according to his Huma^e Nature; whence in
Heb. 5. 6
Scripture it is attributed to his Body, to his Heb. 10. 10 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19
Col. 1. 20. 21
Blood: yet the effectualness of th^s Sacrifice did depend upon his Divine
Nature, therefore it is called the Blood of God. He was the Altar according to
his Heb. 9. 1^ Acts 20, 28
Divine Nature, it belonging to the Heb. 9. 14, and 13, 10, 12, 15 Mat. 2^. ^7
John 17, 19
Altar to sanctify that which is offered upon it, and so it ought to be of
greater dignity then the sacrifice it self.

XIX.
Concerning his Kingly Office, 1 Cor. 15, 4 1 Pet: 3, 21, 22 Mat. 28, 18, 19,
20 Luk: 24. ^^ Acts 1: 1: and 5 30, 31: John 19 36: Rom: ^4: 9 John 5: 26, 27
Rom: 5: 6, 7, 8 and 14, 17: Gal: 5: 22, 23: Mar: 1: 27. He: 1: 14 John 16, 15
Job 1. 8: To: 1 21, 17, ^^ Ephesians: 4, 17, ^8 2 Pet: 2 1 Cor: 15, ^4 28: H^b 9, 28
2 ^hess: 1, 9, 10 1 Thessalonians: ^, ^5 16, 17. John 17. 21, 26 Ephesians. 1. 14 Heb 5. 9.
Mat. ^2. 1. Ioh. 17. 6 Heb. 7. 25. 1 Cor 2. 12 Romans 8. 29. 30 1 Ioh ^. 12 John
15. 13 John 3 16.
Christ being risen from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, and having all
power in Heaven and earth, he does spiritually govern his Church, and does
exercise his power over all Angels and men, good and bad, to the preservation
and salvation of the Elect, and to the overruling and destruction of his
enemies. By this Kingly power, he applies the benefits, virtue and fruits of
his Prophecy and Priesthood to his Elect, subduing their sins, preserving and
strengthening them in all their conflicts against Satan, the World, and the
Flesh, keeping their hearts in faith and siliall fear by his Spirit; by this
his mighty power he rules the vessels of wrath, using, limiting and
restraining them as it seems good to his infinite wisdom.

XX.
This his Kingly power shall be more fully manifested when he shall come in glory
to reign among his Saints, when he shall put down al rule and authority under
his feet, that the glory of the Father may be perfectly manifested in his Son,
and the glory of the Father and the Son in all his Members.

XXI.
Jesus Christ by his death did purchase salvation for the Elect that God gave
unto him: These have interest in him, and being called, have fellowship with
him, for whom he makes intercession to his Father in their behalf, and to them
does God by his Spirit apply this Redemption, as also the free gift of Eternal
life and glory is given to them, and none else.

XXII.
Faith is the a gift of God, wrought in the hearts of the Elect, Ephesians. 2. 8 Io^.
6 9. and 4. 10 Phil ^. 29 G^^, 5, 22 John ^7, 17 Heb: 4* 11, 12 John 6. 62
by the Spirit of God; by which they come to know and believe the truth of the
b Scriptures, and the excellency of them above all other writings, and all
things in the world, as they hold forth the glory of God in his Attributes, the
excellency of Christ in his Nature and Offices, and of the power and fullness of
the Spirit in its workings and operations, and so are enabled to cast their
souls upon this truth thus believed.

XXIII.
All those that have this precious [Faith] wrought in them by Mat 7. 24, 29
John 1^, 10 Joh 10, 2^, 29 1 Pet, ^: 4, 5, 6 Isa* 49, 13, 14, 15, 16
the Spirit, can never finally nor totally fall away, seeing the gifts of God
are without repentance, so that he still begets and nourishes in them faith,
repentance, love, joy, hope, and all the graces of the Spirit unto immortality;
and though many storms and floods a^^se and beat against them, yet they shall
never be able to take them off that foundation and rock, which by faith they
are fastened upon; notwithstanding, through unbeleef and the temptations of
Satan, the sensible sight of this light and love be clouded and overwhe^med for
a time; yet God is still the same, and they shall be sure to be kept by the
power of God unto salvation, where they shall enjoy their purchased possession,
they being engraven upon the palms ^f his hands, and the^^ Names having been
written in the Book of life from all eternity.

XXIV.
Faith is ordinarily Rom, 10, 17 1 Cor: ^, 28
begotten by the preaching of the Gospel, or Word of Christ, without respect to
Rom 9, 9
any power or agency in the creature; but it being wholly Ezekiel, 16, 16 Rom, 3,
12
passive, and dead in trespasses and sins, does believe, and is converted by no
less Rom, 1, ^6 Ephesians, 1. 19 Col, 2, 12
power then that which raised Christ from the dead.

XXV.
The preaching of the Gospel, to the conversion of sinners, is Joh. 3. 14, 15.
and 1, 12 Isa. 55. 1 John 7. 37
absolutely free; no way requiring as absolutely necessary, any qualifications,
preparations, or terrors of the Law, or preceding Ministry of the Law; but only
and alone the naked soul, a 1 Timothy ^. 15 Romans 4. 5 and 5. 8. Act. 5. 30, 31.
and 2. 36. 1 Cor, 1. 22. 24
sinner and ungodly to receive Christ crucified, dead, and buried, and risen
again, who is made a Prince and a Savior for such sinners as through the
Gospel shall be brought to believe on him.

XXVI.
The same power that converts to faith in Christ, carries on the 1 Pet. 1. 5 2
Cor. 12, 9
soul through all duties, temptations, conflicts, sufferings; and whatsoever a
Believer is, he is by 1 Cor. 15. 10
Grace, and is carried on in all obedience, and temptations by the same. c
Phil. 2. 12, 13. Joh. 15. 5 Gal. 2. 19, 20


XXVII.
1 Thessalonians. 1: 1 John 17: 21 and 20: 17 Heb. 2: 11 1 Ioh. 4: 16
All Believers are by Christ, united to God; by which union, God is one with
them, and they are one with him; and that all Believers are the Gal: 2: 19, 20
Sons of God, and joint heirs with Christ, to whom belong all the promises of
this life, and that which is to come.

XXVIII.
Those that have union with Christ, are justified from 1 John: 1: 7 Heb. 10: 14
and 9: 26. 28 or: 5: 19 Rom: 3: 23 Act: 13: 38, 39. Rom: 5: 1 and 3: 29, 30
all their sins by the blood of Christ; which justification is a gracious and
full acquittance of a guilty sinner from all sin by God, through the
satisfaction that Christ has made by his death for all their sins, and this is
to be applied to the Spirit through believing.

XXIX.
All Believers are an holy 1 Cor: 11 1 Pet. 2: 9
and sanctified people, and that sanctification is a special fruit of the Ephesians:
1: 4 1 John 4. 16 Mat: 28 20
new Covenant, and an effect of the c love of God manifested in the soul,
whereby the Believer presses after an Heavenly and Evangelical obedience to
all the Commands, which Christ as Head and King in the new Covenant has
prescribed to them.

XXX.
Al believers through the knowledge of 2 Cor. 5: 19 Rom: 5: 9, 10
that justification of life given by the Father, and brought forth by the blood
of Christ, have as their great privilege of that new Isa: 54: 10: and 26: 12
Covenant, peace with God, and reconciliation, whereby they that were afar off
are made nigh by Ephesians. 2. 13, 14
that blood, and have Ephesians. 4. 7
peace passing all understanding; yea, joy in God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom we have received the atonement. To. 5. 10. 11


XXXI.
All believers in the time of this life, are in a continual Romans 7. 23, 24.
Ephesians 6. 10, 11, 12, 13
warfare and combat against sin, self, the world, and the Devil, and are
liable to all manner of afflictions, Heb. 2. 9, 10 2 Timothy 3. 12
tribulations, and persecutions, being Romans 8. 29 1 Thessalonians. 3: 3 Gal: 2: 19, 20
2 Cor: 5: 7 Deuteronomy. 2. 5
predestined and appointed thereunto, and whatsoever the Saints possess or
enjoy of God spiritually, is by faith; and outward and temporal things are
lawfully enjoyed by a Civil right, by them who have 2 Timothy 4. 18
no faith.

XXXII.
The only strength by which the Saints are enabled to encounter with all
oppositions and Joh 16; 33
trials, is Joh. 15. 5 Phil. 4. 11
only by Jesus Christ, who is the Captain of their salvation, being made
perfect through Heb. 2: 9, 10
sufferings, who has engaged his faithfulness and strength to assist them in
all their afflictions, and to uphold them in all their temptations, and to
preserve them by his power, to his everlasting Kingdom, and glory.

XXXIII.
a Mat. 11. 11 2 Thessalonians. 1. 15 and 1 Cor. 1. 2 Ephesians. 1. 1
Jesus Christ has here on earth a spiritual Kingdom, which is his Church,
whom he has purchased and redeemed to himself as a peculiar inheritance, which
Church is a company of visible Saints, Rom: 1: 7 Act. 19. 8, 9. and 26. 18. 2
Cor. 6. 17. Rev 18. 4.
called and separated from the world, by the Word and Acts 2. 37. with 10. 37.
Spirit of God, to the visible profession of the faith of the Gospel, Rom: 10,
10. Mat: 18: 19, 20 Act. 2. 42.
being baptized into that faith, and joined to the Lord, and each to other by
mutual consent in the Act: 9: 26. 1. Pet. 2. 5.
practical enjoyment of the Ordinances, commanded by Christ their Head and
King.

XXXIV.
To this Church he Mat. 28. 18 19, 20.
has made his promises, and given the signs of his Covenant, 1 Cor. 11. 24 and
3. 21. 2 Cor. 6. 18. Romans 9. 4. 5 Psalm. 133. 3
presence, acceptance, love, c blessing, and To. 3. 7. 10
protection. Here are the fountains and springs of his heavenly graces Ezekiel.
47. 2.
flowing forth to refresh and strengthen them.

XXXV.
And all his servants, of all estates (are to acknowledge him Act 2. 41, 47 ^4.
3. 1 Co. 12. 6, 7, 12, 18 Ez. 20. 40. 37
to be their Prophet, Priest, and King;) and called thither to be enrolled
among his household servants, to present their bodies and souls, and to bring
their gifts God has given them, to be under his heavenly conduct and
government, to lead their lives in this walled sheepfold, and watered Cant. 4.
12.
Garden, to have communion here with his Saints, that they may be assured that
they are made Ephesians. 2. 19. R^m 12. 4, 5 6. Col. 1. 12. and ^. 5, 6. ^9
meet to be partakers of their Acts 20. 32.
inheritance in the Kingdom of God; and to supply each others wants, inward and
outward; (and although each person has a Acts 5 4.
propriety in his own estate, yet they are to supply each others wants,
according as their Acts 2 44. 45. and 4 34, 35
necessity shall require, that the name of Jesus Luke 14 26. 1 Timothy 6. 1.
Christ may not be blasphemed through the necessity ^f any in the Church) and
also being come, they are here by himself to be bestowed in their several
order, due place, peculiar use, being fitly compact and knit together Ephesians. 4.
16
according to the effectual working of every part, to the edifying of it self
in love.

XXXVI.
Being thus joined, every Church Acts 1. 23. 26 and 6 3. with ^5 22, 25.
has power given them from Christ, for their well* being, to choose amongst
themselves meet persons for Romans 12. 7. 8.
Elders and Deacons, being qualified according to the Word, 1 Timothy 3. 2 6, 7 8.
1 Cor. 12. 8. 28. ^e 1^. 7. ^7 1 Pet. 5 1, 2, 3.
as those which Christ has appointed in his Testament, for the feeding,
governing, serving, and building up of his Church. and that none have any power
to 1 Pet 4 5. H^b 5. ^. John ^0. 3. 4 Acts 20, 28* 29. Romans 12. 7. 8. Heb. 13.
7. 17. 1 Pet 5. 1, 2, 3.
impose on them either these or any other.

XXXVII.
That the Ministers lawfully called as aforesaid, ought to continue in their
calling and place, according to Gods Ordinance, and carefully to feed the flock
of God committed to them, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind.

XXXVIII.
Baptism is an Ordinance of the Mat. ^8 18. 19. John 4 1. Mark 16. ^5* 16 Acts
2. 37, 38 and 8 36, 37 38. and ^8.
new Testament, given by Christ, to be dispensed upon persons professing faith,
or that are made Disciples; who upon profession of faith, and desiring of it,
ought to be baptized, and after to partake* of the Lords Supper.

XXXIX.
That the way and manner of the Mat. 36. 16. Mark* ^5 9 reads [into Jor^an] in
Gre^k, John 3 23 Acts 8 38
dispensing this ordinance, is dipping or plunging the body under water, it
being a sign, must answer the thing s^^^ified, which is, that interest the
Saints have in the Rom 6. 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 15. 28, 29. The word Baptiso,
sign^fies to dip, or plunge (^et so as convenient Garments be both upon the
Administrator and subject with all modesty) which is also our practice, as many
eye. witnesses can testify.
death, burial, and resurrection of Christ: And that as certainly as the body
is bu^ied under w^ter, and risen again, so certainly shall the bodies of the
Saints be raised by the power of Christ b Rev 1. 5 and 7 14. with H^b. 10. 22.
in the day of the resurrection to reign with CHRIST.

XL.
Isa. 8. 16 Ephesians ^. 7 Mat. 28. 19. Ioh. 4. ^. Act 20. 7. 1 Cor. 11 24. with 1
Cor. 10. ^6, 17. To. 16. 2. Ma^k 16 15, 16. Acts 8 12 compared with chapter 11. and
20. and 2^. Act 9. ^8. compared with 10. Act 8 38. Mat 18. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 4. 13
13 with 12. 6. 2. ^. 2 Cor 2. 6 7 Mat. 8 16, 17, 1^. Act 11. 2, ^. 1 Timothy 5 19.
20, 1 Col 4. 17. Act. 15 1, 2, 3. Act 20. 27 28. Heb. 13. 17 24. Mat. 24 ^5 1
These. 5. 2, 14 Jud. 3. 20. H^b 10. 34, 35. and 12 15. 1 Cor. 14. 3 etc Romans 12.
6 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11 1 Cor. 12. 7. 1 These. 5 19, 20, 21. Rev. 2. and 3. Chapter.
Act. 15. 12. 1 Cor. 1. 10 Jud. 19. Rev 2 20, 21, 22. Act. ^5 1. 2 Romans 14 1.
and 15. 1, 2, 3.
The person designed by Christ to dispense Baptism, the Scripture holds forth
to be a Disciple; it being no where tied to a particular Church Officer, or
person extraordinarily sent, the Commission enjoining the administration, being
given to them as considered Disciples, being men able to preach the Gospel.

XLI.
Christ has likewise given power to his Church to receive in, and cast out,
any Member that deserves it, and this power is given to every Congregation, and
not to one particular person, either member or officer, but in relation to the
whole body, in reference to their faith and fellowship.

XLII.
And every particular Member of each Church, how excellent, great or learned
soever, is subject to this censure and judgment; and that the Church ought not
without great care and tenderness, and due advice, but by the rule of faith and
truth, to proceed against her Members.

XLIII.
Christ for the keeping of this Church in holy and orderly communion, places
some special men over the Church, who by their office are to govern, oversee,
visit, watch, so likewise for the better keeping thereof, in all places by the
Members, he has given authority and laid duty upon all to watch over one
another.

XLIV.
Also such to whom God has given gifts in the Church, may and ought to
prophecy according to the proportion of faith and so to teach publicly the
Word of God, for the edification, exhortation, and comfort of the Church.

XLV.
Thus being rightly gathered, and continuing in the obedience of the Gospel of
Christ. None are to separate for faults and corruptions (for as long as the
Church consists of men subject to failings, there will be difference in the true
constituted Church) until they have in due order, and tenderness sought redress
thereof.

XLVI.
And although the particular Congregations be distinct and several 1 Cor. 4.
17 and 14. 33. 6. and 16. 1.
bodies, every one as a compact and knit Ps. 122. 3. Ephesians ^. 1^. 19. with Re. 2^
City within it self; yet are they all to walk by 1. Tim. 3. 15.
one rule of truth; So also they (by all means convenient) are to have the
counsel and help, Act ^5. 2, 3 Cant. 8. 1. 4. 13, 1^
one of another, if necessity require it, as members of one body, in the common
faith, under Christ their head.

XLVII.
A Civil Rom: 13: 1, 2, 3, 5 1 Pet 2: 13, 1^ 1 Timothy: 2. 1, 2, 3
Mag^stracy is an Ordinance of God, set up by him for the pun^shment ^f ^vil
doe^s, and for the praise of them that do well; and that ^n a^l lawfu^ things,
(...) manded by them, subjection ought to be given by us in the Lord, not only
for wrath, but for conicience sake; and that we are to make supplications, and
prayers for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that under them we may live a
qu^^t and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.

XLVIII.
That we have great cause to bless God, and to be thankful for the peace and
liberty we en^oy in the service of our God under the present Government; b^t if
the Mag^strate should not favor us herein, Acts 2: 40, 41. and 4 19 and 5: 28,
29, 41. and 20: 23 1 Thessalonians. 3: 3 Phil. ^. 28, 29 Dan: 3: 16, 17 and 6, 7, 10.
22 23
yet we dare not suspend our practice; because we believe we ought to go on in
obedience to Christ, in professing the Faith which was once delivered to the
Saints, which ^a^th is declared in the holy Scriptures, and this ou^ Confession
of Faith a part of them, and that we are to witness to the truth of the old and
new Testament unto the death, if necessity require, in the midst of all trials
and afflictions, as his Sai^ts of old have do^e; not accounting our goods,
lands, wives, children, fa^hers, mothers, brethren, sisters; yea, and our own
lives dear unto us, so we may finish our course with joy, remembering always
that we ought to 1 Timothy 6: 13 14, 15 Rom: 12: 1 8 1 Cor: 14: 37
obey God rather then men, who will when we have fi^^shed ou^ course, and kept
the faith, give us Rev* 2: 20
the crown of righteousness; to 2 Timothy: 4: 6, 7 8. Rom: 14 10* 12. 2 Cor. 5. 10.
Ps. 49. 7. Ps. 50: 22 Act: 8: 38. and 10: 1, 2. 35: 44. Rom: 16 23. Deuteronomy: 6:
13. Rom: 1. 9 2 Cor. 10, 11. Ier. 4. 2. Heb. 6: 16. 1 These. 4: 6. Romans 13. 5,
6, ^. Mat. 22. 21. Tit. 3. 1 Pet. 2. 15, 17. and 5: 5 Ephesians. 5. 21, 23 and 6. 1,
9 Tit. 3. 1, 2, 3
whom we must give an account of all our actions, and no man being able to
discharge us of the same.

XLIX.
It is lawful for a Christian to be a Magistrate or Civil Officer; and also it
is lawful to take an Oath, so it be in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness, for confirmation of truth, and ending of all strife; and that by
rash and vain oaths the Lord is provoked, and this Land mourns.

L.
We are to give unto all men whatsoever is their due, as their place, age,
estate requires; and that we do defraud no man of any thing, but do unto all
men as we would they should do unto us.

1. There shall be a Act. 24. 15. 2 Cor. 3. 10.
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust, and every one shall
give an account of himself to God, that every one may receive the things done
in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad.

The Conclusion.
THus we desire to give unto Christ that which is his, and unto all lawful
Authority that which is their ^ue, and to owe nothing to any man but love, to
live quietly and peaceably as it becomes Saints, endeavoring in all things to
keep a good conscience, and to do unto every man (of what judgment soever) as
we would they should do unto us; that as our practice is, so it may prove us to
be a conscionable, quiet, and armless People, no ways dangerous or troublesome
to humane society, and to labor and work with our hands, that we may not be
chargeable to any, but to give to him t^ at needs, both friends and enemies;
accounting i^ mere excellent to give then to receive. Also we confess that we
k^ow but in part, and we are ignorant of many things, which we desire and seek
to know, and if any shall do us that friendly part to show us from the Word of
God that w^ see ^et, we shall have cause to be thankful to God and them. But if
any man shall impose upon us any thing, that we see not commanded by our Lord
Jesus Christ, we should in his strength rather embrace all reproaches and
tortures of men, to be strip^ ^f all outward ^^m arts, and if it were possible,
to die a thousand ^ea^hs, ^ather then to do any thing against the least tittle
of the truth of God, or against the light of our own consciences. And if any
shall call what we have sai^ Heresy, then do we with the Apostle ack^^wle^ge,
That after the way they call Heresi^, worship we the God o^ our fathers,
disclaiming all Heresies (rightly so called) because they are against Christ,
and to be steadfast and immovable, alwa^es ^bounding in obedience to Christ, as
knowing our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

Psalm, 74. 21, 22. Arise, O God, plead thine own ca^se; Remember how the
foolish man blasphemeth thee daily.

O let not the oppressed ret^rn ashamed, but let the poor and needy praise thy
Name.


Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.
To all the Churches of God sanctified in CHRIST JESUS, called to be Saints,
with all that in every place profess the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both
theirs and ours.
Beloved Brethren,
HAving these many years, through the grace and free mercy of our God, been
kept in the profession of the Name of Christ, contained in the Holy Scriptures
of the Prophets, and Apostles; and finding the exceeding benefit and comfort
of walking with God in some measure suitable to what he has made known unto
us; and well knowing that we are called to live in the last Ages of the world,
where^ iniquity abounds, and the love of many waxes cold; as likewise
considering those peculiar times spoken of, in the second of Tim. 3. 1, etc.
are come upon us, wherein men who sometimes have made large profession of God
and godliness, are turned aside to commit all manner of uncleanness with
greediness, having turned the grace of our Lord Jesus into lasciviousness,
calling darkness light, and light darkness, by means of whom the way of truth
is evil spoken of; and many poor souls through temptations ready to quite
their professions, and to be taken with their snares; we thought it our duty to
declare our utter dislike, abhorring and detestting of all such evil persons,
and ways, who shall under an^ pretense whatsoever plead for, or practice any
way of ungodliness.

And having been through the goodness of our God, enabled to discern the
secret and subtle designs, and snares of Satan, which he has laid to entrap
poor souls in, by carrying them from step to step, until they have been wholly
captivated in his snares, and fitted by him to do him service.

We could do no less then according to that measure of light we have received
from the Lord, to discover his Wiles, and Stratagems, and to Caution all that
profess the fear of the Lord, to watch over their own hearts, and ways, and
take heed least they fall unto the same condemnation.

For this we have found, that that way which God in his infinite wisdom,
takes to bring souls unto himself by, viz. the presenting unto men his great
love, in giving Jesus CHRIST to suffer death, and his great salvation to all
that believe on his Name, Satan that old Serpent through his instruments under
the specious pretense of beating men off from all false rests, endeavors with
all his strength to oppose and make void; persuading the sons and daughters of
men, that what is declared concerning the death of Christ at Jerusalem, and his
bearing our iniquitie^ in his own Body upon the Cross, is but a mere hysto^y
and shadow, that the Scriptures are but a Letter, and the Ordinances of God but
fleshly forms, thereby laboring to beget in the peoples minds, a contempt, and
slight esteem of Christ, his Word, and Ordinances; and that he might cheat them
to purpose, tells them of a God within, and a Christ within, and a Word within:
And that God and Christ and they are one, without any true distinct knowledge
of the true meaning of that which is expressed; whereby poor souls with great
and swelling words of vanity, triumph in a great mystery of mere nothing but
emptiness, and confusion, speaking things whereof they know not; and many poor
souls knowing such expressions to be Scripture Phrases, do greedily embrace
them, without a true, distinct, and clear understanding the sense of what is
spoken, having the persons of those who speak such language in great
admiration, as the chief, tender, charitable, knowing, high and spiritual
Christians; whereas indeed although the words spoken by them, are many of them
true in themselves (without which Satan could not so effectually deceive) as
that God and Christ, and the Spirit dwell in us, and that God and Christ, and
the Saints are one; Yet are we to understand this union to be only in a way of
relation through participation of the same spirit, and this dwelling to be only
in respect of grace, and powerful operation and influence, working in the
hearts of believe^s, recording to the tenor of the New Covenant, in making men
holy and humble, purifying their hearts, causing them to walk in all good
con^c^ence toward God and man, all which by them is trampled under foot, and
another kind of union, and indwelling driven at in their discou^ses, which
although cover^ly expressed, until by craft and subtilty, they have prepared
the hearts of simple and unstable souls, to receive whatsoever they shall
suggest into them; yet then is openly discovered, being indeed the root of all
bitterness, and desperate profaneness, and blasphemy, that can be imagined in
the world: for from thence they conclud^, that themselves are God and Christ,
and what God is they are, and what they are God is; for say they, there is no
Spirit but one, and so deny any created Angel or spirit, holding upon the same
account the living soul in man to be uncreated, and so consequently to be God
himself, and not created by God. Now this being the groundwork of their
delusion, the building is answerable.

For first, Concluding the reasonable soul to be God.

Secondly, They affirm that this soul being clothed with their humane bodies,
or flesh, is Christ, or God, or God in flesh, hereupon they imagine that Jesus
Christ spoken of in the Gospel, as being born of the Virgin Mary, accused by
the Jews, delivered by Pilate to be crucified, dying at Jerusalem upon the
Cross, rising the third day, and ascending into heaven; is only to be
understood parabolically or figuratively, speaking of one thing, and ^ntending
another; pointing at, and prefiguring a work only within us, conceiving the
Virgin Mary, the Je^s, Pila^e, Jerusalem, the Cross, Christ rising and
ascending, spoken of in the Scriptures, to be al^ within them, and no such
thing substantially, or in truth without.

As they conclude all things spoken of Christ to be but in a ty^ical, or
figurative manner, intending and typifying out this God within, or God
incarnate in their flesh, still meaning their reasonable souls, conceiving this
to be the substance of all those shadows; so also upon this ground they are
forced to conclude the wh^le new Testament, with all the Doctrines, Laws,
Rules, and Administrations of the same, to be but a shadow or figure, holding
forth a substance within. As for instance, Moses and Aaron, being but figures
of the substantial Savior, and Priest to come, so the administrations* of
Moses as Mosaicall, were but fleshly and carnal administrations to be abolished
when the substance was come, they being only shadows of good things to come;
in like manner do they understand Christ in his person, to be but a shadow of
Christ within, and all his heavenly and spiritual Gospel to be but a Letter
and carnal history put to an end and abolished, when they once come to
apprehend that the substance of all is within. They coming also to believe
that the soul is God. do thence infer that they are perfect, and that they are
in as happy estate as can be, and for this they urge, 1 Cor. 15. 24. to the 28.
to show when the Kingdom is delivered up to the Father, all his people come to
a more immediate enjoyment of God the Father, and then Christ cease his
Mediatorship, and consequently, all his New Testament cease: Now they
conclude, that all this is accomplished when they come to discern there is but
one Spirit, and their soul that spirit, which is God, and then they are in the
possession of all things.

And seeing that the Scripture declares that before our full possession of God
and glory, there must be a temporal Death, and Resurrection of the Body, and
eternal judgment, they upon the former grounds, judging themselves already
glorified, do understand this death of the body in all such Scriptures
mystically, and that the resurrection and eternal judgment, are passed
already in the soul, as Hymeneus and Philetus did, 2 Timothy 2. 18. compared with
1 Timothy 1. 19. Thence also they conclude, that faith and Justification by
Christ, together with all the Ordinances of Christ are abolished, as fleshly
forms, like unto Christ that appointed them, above and without all which, they
triumphantly (in their own fancies) live when they once have attained this
super-eminent life (as they speak) of being in the full fruition of God,
comprehending that infinite Being (which they blasphemously affirm themselves
to do) intruding themselves into things they are altogether ignorant of:
Hereupon is it that they, as Peter says, scoff at any second coming of
Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. and mock at the holy Scriptures, those heavenly Oracles
of God, denying them to be the Word of God, or that Law by which they ought to
conform their lives, conceiving and uttering that there is no Law nor Rule, but
what is in man, his Light being his only Law, that is to say, what ever that
spirit that dwells within (which they call God within) dictates to them, that
ought to be done by them, strengthening themselves with this opinion, That
there is no sin but what contradicts a man's own light, (which is a man's only
law) and sin is only sin to him that thinks it so, and that there is no hell
but that torment that men sustain through cros^ing their own light (which God
k^owes is nothing but thick da^k^esse) from these principles the desperately
wicked and deceitful hearts of men fortified in their sins, having now their
conscience seared with an hut iron, account it their only misery and hell,
that they are troubled at any thing, be it never so abominable: thus casting
off all trouble and remorse for sin, they follow the Law of their own mind,
(as they needs must, conceiving their own souls to be the only Eternal GOD)
and whatsoever their evil hearts are naturally inclined to, whether
Drunkenness, Cursing, Swearing, or Whoredom, (although for a time their
principles do not put such horrid impieties in execution) yet at length being
violently hurried on through the assistance of the strong impulsions, and
restless suggestions and instigations of the devil, (the judgments of God
being also hei^htened upon them) they now commit the same with greediness, and
that with such a high hand, as they account it their perfection, and the
highest pitch of their glory, to give up themselves to such abominations,
pleading for them, ashrming that they have made a League and Covenant with sin,
death, and hell, and have communion with God in all these, seeing all these,
and what ever evils can be imagined, reconciled to God, and so good, accompting
all their actions for good, being acted by their own spirits, which (as they
think) are God, saying that God (but t^uly not God, but their own accursed
spirits) willed that they should cur^e and swear, and be drunk, and fill
themselves with all ^ncleannesse, which they esteem to be perfect
righteousness, calling that holiness and righteousness, which consists in a
spotless conformity to the Laws of Christ revealed in the Scripture, which
cur^s the insolency of the flesh, and the lusts of the ^eart, a plaguey and
nasty holiness, that must be destroyed: so that those amongst them, that can
with the greatest impuden^y, without the least check or control of conscience,
commit the most horrid abominations, (which we tremble to think of) they are
the most perfect, and the most swallowed up in the will of God; To justify
these their abominations, they say, the Angels of God swear with glory and
Majesty, which Angels are God in them, (for all ^reated Angels they deny) who
therefore may swear as they will, and that with glory and Majesty; Yea, so
great is their thraldom and cap^iv^ty, that now the Prince of the power of the
air, that (...) in the hearts of these children of disobedience, has so far
the mastery and dominion over them, as that they are ready, not ^ne^y to fight
against GOD himself in his spiritual Ordinances, but against C^oil Societies,
violating the Bonds of Marria e, and Laws of Families, against the very
principles and li^ht of nature, which common justice remaining amongst the
Heathens) wo^ld soon adjudge to merit severe punishment: and certainly those
that shall thus transgress all Civil bonds, do not only ly liable to the
just and fearful judgment of God, but jus^ly incur the punishment of the
Rulers ^f this World.

Having thus laid open some of the principles and evil practices of these men,
even that root of bitterness, from which such their sinful branches grow; by
which every one whose eyes are opened, may discern what a fearful thing it is
to leave the Holy Word of God, and give heed to the motions of a deceitful
heart, and to the dictates of a lying spirit: we shall now endeavor briefly to
make man^fest the sandinesse and dangerousnesse of the foundation whereupon
t^ese things are built; which we shall essay to do by proving, That the soul of
man is not God, but a creature, created and made by God: which will appear both
by Scripture and reason, if you consider.

1. That God is incomprehensible, the Heaven of Heavens cannon contain him, but
the soul of man is comprehended and contained in the body.

2. God is Almighty, but the soul of man is not: what ever God will, that he
can do; but man desires many things, and has not power to accomplish them.

3. God knows himself, and all things, the secrets of all hearts, things
past, present, and to come; but alas! the soul of man knows not the Being of it
self, nor of the least creature, he knows not what is done in another house
next to him.

4. The soul is made and created, 1. Cor. 15. The first Adam was made a living
soul, Jer. 38. 16. Isa^. 47. 16. It is written, As the Lord lives that made us
this soul, now to be made and created, argues a beginning; but God is without
beginning, therefore the soul cannot be God.

5. God is the God of the spirits of all flesh, Number. 16. 22. there is a spirit
in the body, of which God is the F^ther, Heb. 12. 9. which God forms within
man, Zech. 12. 1. with which spirit the Spirit of God bears witne^s, Romans 8.
16. which plainly proves our spirit or soul to be a creature: the truth of
which further appears in that God can destroy the soul, or east it into hell
fire, Mat. 10. 28. in that the soul may be converted, Psa. 19. 7. in that it
stands in need of deliverance and redemption, Psalm. 13. 19. 34. 22. 49 8. But
now God cannot be destroyed, neither needs he any redemption at all. By this is
it clear that man's soul is not God; and if not his soul, much less is his body,
that is subject to such variety of distempers; and so neither body nor soul.
Ol^ therefore, what a horrid thing is it, for men to affirm, they are God, that
made and created all things, that governs the World, and the like, and to
father all their abominations upon the Lord, thinking him to be altogether such
a one as themselves are^ From hence we may safely conclude:

1. That if the spirit be created by God, and is united to the body, then those
actions that are done by the body, are the actions of the man. Oh! how some men
fighting against the light, cry out, that it is God in man only that acts, that
shall be saved, and the like, whereas it is evident that it is the man that
acts, either good things, viz. the man that believes, prays, conformeth, and
is blessed of God, or it is the man that sins and walks in disobedience, which
man is the subject of destruction.

2. That if the spirit be created by God, it must be subject to the will and
Law of the Creator: things created are for the praise of the Creator. We are
made by God to show forth his praise, and by our obedience to declare our
selves to be his Children, we are not left at liberty to run from God: This was
that that involved A^am at ^^st in misery, and still keeps his Offspring in
sorrow and confusion.

3. That sin is the defection, variation from, o^ the transgression of the Law
of our Creator, and not of our own willswhen we do the things God forbids, or
leave undone the things commanded, we sin against God the Lord, the Creator of
soul and body.

From the not right understanding of the creatures subjection, and relation
unto God, flow also those vain allegorizings of those texts of Scripture that
speak of Christ himself. For if we search the Scripture we shall see clearly,
that Christ Jesus was not a figure or shadow of a substance to be e^joyed now
or hereafter (as these men dream) but the true subst^ntial good it self, the
tr^e Mediator God and man, the substance of a^l figures, and sh^dows under the
Law, which was a Schoolmaster unto Christ, Gal. 3. 24 The Apostle tells u^, The
Aaministrations under the Law, were a shadow of good things to come, the body
or substance whereof was Christ, or wa^ in Christ; now it is against common
sense and reason, that one shadow should tipe out another, and that as carnal
and fleshly as it self, but the contrary hereof is most certain, for Moses and
Joshua being tipicall Saviors, redeeming the spiritual Israel out of Egypt
into earthly Canaan, must needs hold out a substantial Savior, that most
effectually shall redeem the Spiritual Israel, for says the Apostle, He is
able to save to the utter most all that come to God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7. 5. He is the Alpha and Omega, the
Begi^ning and the ending, the first and the last, Rev. 1. 18. who said to John,
Fear not, for I was dead, and am alive for evermore, Amen: and I have the keys
of Hell and of Death. This Jesus is not only true man, as touching flesh, but
also God over all, blessed for ever, or the most high God, Romans 9. 5. John the
Baptist test fying of Christ, Joh. 3. 31. says He that comes from above is
above all, and this is true of Christ as touching his Godhead, who also is
truly man, soul and body, consisting of a humane soul, and fleshly body, and
that after his resurrection, as appe^rs Luk 24. 39. In reference to the
Conjunction of both humane and divine nature, he says, I lay down my life, and
I tak^ it up again: As man he died, as God he raised himself from the dead; now
that a^y should be so vile and wretched as to count the everblessed Lord, who
is the most high and blessed Savior, a fleshly form and shadow, because
according to the infin^^^ wisdom and love of God, he assumed man's nature,
that he might thereby become a more fi^ and suitable Savior unto them; we are
wounded in our souls to think thereof and tremble to think what ha^dness of
heart, ingratitude and blindness of mind, such souls are given up to; and
though they may talk of being above the dispensation of Christ, the Kingdom
being in them resigned up to the Father, they say they know not what; for
before the office of Christ's mediatorship ceases, and the Kingdom be resigned
to the Father, the Scripture expressly tells us, all enemies must be subdued
under his feet, Psalm. 110. 1. Psalm. 8. 6. 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25. Heb. 2. 6, 7.
which is not yet effected, for Christ's enemies, viz. the Devil, Sin, Babylon,
Antichrist, the oppostie oppressing civil powers of the world, death, and the
grave, and the rule and authority they bear rule with, are not yet wholly by
Christ put down, therefore the Office of his Mediatorship still stand in force;
Hence we may safely conclude.

first, That if Christ be a substantial Mediotor, truly spiritual, his Gospel
then, which he and his Apostles has declared, is not a bare outward Re^ation,
History, or carnal Letter, but a spiritual and substantial Truth and Mystery,
containing the whole Mind, Will, and Law of God, for us and all Saints to
believe and practice throughout all Ages.

Secondly, It must needs be as durable as the Mediator is, for the Law of
Christ's Priesthood is as durable as the Priesthood it self, the Law depending
upon the Priesthood; for the change of the Priesthood and Law goes together,
and so the Priesthood of old being changed, the Law then, and not till then was
changed also, Heb. 7. 18. So when Christ's Priesthood is changed, then the Law
of that Priesthood, and not till then shall be changed also.

Thirdly, It must also be g^a^ted, That the Scriptures which do declare this
great mystery of Jesus Christ and his Gospel, be the holy Scriptures, and the
infallible Word of God, for it could never have entered into the heart of man
to have known or manif^sted those hidden mysteries, had not God himself by his
own Word revealed them from Heaven; now the Scriptures are Gods Word, declaring
his mind, making known his Counsel, being able to make the people of God wise
unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus, being given by the
inspiration of God, and are profitable for Doctrine, for R^pro^f, for
correction, for Instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly fur^sshed unto all good works. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16. and
therefore not to be slighted and undervalued, as a dead Letter, a bare History,
a carnal empty Story. Therefore dear^y beloved brethren, we beg and entreat
you, and every one that loves his soul, to fear and tremble at the thoughts of
slighting and despising Christ and his Gospel, or any one of his laws, or holy
commandments revealed in his word, for know, that God will set his son upon his
holy Hill of Sion, Psalm. 2. 8. and will call all his enemies that will not have
him to reign over them, and slay them before him. He is to be received to rule
over us as King, as well as to be an oblation for sin; as he is a Priest and
Sacrifice, so also a Prophet and a King, to teach and govern his People, being
the author of Eternal Salvation to all that obey him. Therefore that man that
departs from the way of subjection to Christ in his holy Commandments and
Ordinances, refuses Christ to be his Lord and King, and judges himself
unworthy of eternal life; Wherefore we in tender compassion to your souls, and
zeal for the glory of God, do beseech and exhort you, That you still keep the
holy Commandments, as they were d^livered unto you; that you do show the same
diligence to the end (for he that endueth to the end shall be saved) that ye
stand fast, and earnestly contend for the Faith o^e del^vered to the Saints,
that no man ta^e your crown from you, and that you take heed that ye be not led
aside with the workers of ^^quity. Oh! let none of us dally with the ways of
God, lest we be given up to the error of the wicked, even to those horr^ble
delus^ons before mentioned, for God is a just and holy God. Oh that God would
give his People this w^sdom in all Nations, to keep his holy Commandments, for
holin^ss becomes his house for ever. Oh that Gods severity might prevail with
all that profess his Name, to search their own hearts, lest not rece^ving the
truth in the love thereof, they be given up to strong delusions, to believe a
lie; lest they making sin their work and pleasure, God make cond^mnation to be
their wages, and disannulling their league with hell and death, he pull them
down from the top of their vanity, whither they have above the heights of the
clouds exalted themselves, and laugh at their destruction, and mock when their
fear coms.

Obj. But many may be ready to object, That those who have fallen into such
desperate abominations, were sometimes Members of our Congregations, and from
thence are apt to contemn our Profession, and question whether our way be of
God or no, saying, You see what your judgment leads to.

Sol. In answer to this we say,

1. That it is a great mistake to judge that those persons were all of our
Societies, for this we can clearly evince, That mary, if not most of them were
never Members with us.

2. Suppose they had been all of us (which yet is not so) yet we say, That none
may thence reasonably condemn our Profession, nor our selves scruple it, as not
of God; which we doubt not, but they will confess, if they consider:

1. That from the undeniable truths of God, and from the Churches gathered
immdiately by the holy Apostles themselves (which by all are granted to be the
purest) many Professors have gone astray, and fallen into great condemnation:
Hymeneus and Alexander made shipwreck of Faith and of a good Conscience, 1 Timothy
1. 19 affirming (as many of these in our days do) that the Resurrection was
past already, destroying the faith of some, 2 Timothy 2. 18. several in Corinth
denying any resurrection at all, 1 Cor. 15. 12. others falling into very great
abominations; Jude tells us, v. 4. That there were certain men crept in unawars,
before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of
God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ. To add one instance more for all ( John says) Little children it is
the last time, and as you have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are
there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time; they went out
from us, but they were not of us, Joh. 2. 18, 19.

2. The Spirit of God forseeing such things should be, that we might not be
stumbled when they come to pass, has expressly foretold them; As to the Elders
of Ephesus, Act. 20. 28, 29, 30. says Paul by the Spirit, Take heed to feed
the Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood; for I know this,
that after my departing shall grievons wolves enter in among you, not sparing
the flock: Also, of your selves shall men arise speaking perverse things, to
draw away disciples after them; so also by the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2,
etc. There shall be (says he) false teachers among you, who privily shall bring
in damnable heresies, denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction, and many shall follow their pernicious or
lascivions ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.
Jude excites the Saints to remember the words of the Apostles of our Lord
Jesus, how they foretold there should be mockers in the last time, who should
walk after their own ungodly lusts, separating themselves, sensual, having not
the Spirit, verse. 17, 18, 19. And from whom shall they separate, but from the
true Churches of Jesus Christ, professing the faith of Christ, and being
paptized in his Name (the Scripture no where approving any other Churches that
we read of) Paul also tells Timothy, the time would come (and surely those
prophesits are now fulfilled) when they would not endure sound doctrine, but
after their own lusts, heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears, that
should turn away their ears from the truth, giving heed unto fables.

3. God in his wisdom permits these things, that those which are approved, may
be made manifest, and those that seem to be what they are not, may be
discovered; for Hypocrites have and will be creeping into the Church. (and that
no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light) but
because they receive not the truth in the love thereof, God sends them strong
delusions, that they should believe a lie, that they all may be damned, who
believe not the truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10,
11, 12 etc. 1 Job. 2. 18. 19.

4. We cannot wonder, that those who draw near to God in the visible profession
of his Name, being destitute of the power of godliness, do thus fall away: for
God will be sanctified in them that draw nigh to him, either in making them
conformable to his Will to the praise of his grace, or else in discovering
their falsehood, hypocrisy and madness, making them dreadful examples of his
wonderful severity, to the glory of his justice. Nadab and Abihu, for offering
strange fire, which the Lord commanded not, were destroyed by fire from Heaven,
Lev. 10. 1, 2, 3. The Lord himself proclaims from Heaven, that his ways are
righteous, and the just shall walk in them, but transgressors shall fall
therein, Hos. 14. ult. The narrow path of the Saints righteous walk, suits not
with the licentious principles and interests of carnal men; and though sinners
may be in Sion for a time, yet fear surprises them, and by reason of the purity
and brightness of the ways of God, they cannot abide therein, but cast Christ's
yoke from their necks, because it will not be subservient to their own lusts. A
remarkable example of Gods severity against those that sometimes professed the
truth, whose hearts were not right before God, we may see in Judas, and in
Ananias and Sapphira, who for lying against the Holy Ghost, were suddenly
destroyed, to the great fear of all the Church of Christ. As in Nature, the
corruption of the best things is the greatest corruption, so the greater
profession men make of the truth, when once they be corrupted, they fall into
the grossest abominations. The truth is, this is no ground to suspect our
profession, because some fall from it: for who is it that sins the unpardonable
sin, but one that professed the truth of the Gospel, Joh. 1. 5, 6. Who are
those that are twice dead, plucked up by the roots? except those that by
profession were formerly alive in the truth.

Fifthly, and lastly, We do acknowledge, though some eminent Professors of the
same truth with us have fallen foully (which has been the occasion of much grief
to us) yet it has been hitherto, and we hope ever shall be our care (as they
have been by the righteous judgment of God discovered) according to our duty to
put them from amongst us, endeavoring to preserve our selves from all
iniquity, and not to have fellowship with the unprofitable works of darkness,
but rather to reprove them. We conclude this, s^ying of them that are gone from
us, and fallen into such notorious wickedness* as John says, They went from us,
because they were not of us; for if they had been of us, no doubt they would
have continued with us, but they went out from us, that they might be manifest
not to be of us.

If any shall judge what we have here declared does savor of
uncharitableness, rigidnesse, censoriousuesse and bitterness of spirit to
them that dissent from us, we desire all such seriously to take notice, that
true love and charity is not the soothing of any in their sins, the healing of
wounds slightly, the crying peace, peace, when sudden dest^uction is at hand;
it is not the daubing with untempered mortar, but it is a true love to the
Truth, and to all for the Truths sake, consisting in plainness and simplicity,
engaging us to endeavor the restoring of them that are fallen, to pull them as
brands out of the fi^e, to contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints,
to note such persons that walk disorderly, to endeavor the preserving of them
that are sound in the faith.

While some men cry out against us for uncharitableness, in crying down sin and
sinful practices, O how uncharitable in truth are they, that can suffer GOD to
be dishonored, his Son to be vilified, his Truth trampled under foot, his
Ordinances fleighted, and their own and thousands of poor souls in danger of
being utterly seduced, to their own destruction, and yet have not a heart to
relent for such practices, nor a tongue to plead against them, whereby others
might be fore warned of their swift approaching danger; our consciences bear
witness, that the honor of God, the love of his Truth, zeal for his Name, and if
possible, the saving of souls from death, has been the prevailing argument
with us, thus to express our selves; beseeching the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus, that by the same power which raised him from the dead, he would make
this isntrumental to confirm those who yet abide in the Truth, to restore all
the simple in heart, who are ready to turn aside from the voice of the true
Shepherd, and to follow strangers, and the cunning sleights and devices of the
Destroyer* that walks up and down as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour, who has cast down many wounded, and st^^n many strong men: And that it
may also to all men more fully discover the desperate folly and madness of
those who triumph in their pro^d imaginations against the Truth and Scepter of
the Lord Jesus, that all may clearly see their house is the way to hell, going
down to the chambers of death, least they (poor souls) through feigned
speeches, being enticed to yield, and forced through the flattering of their
lips, should go after them stra^ght way, As an Ox goes to the slaughter, or as
a fool to the correction of the stocks, till a dar^ strike through their liver,
hasting as birds to the snare, not knowing that it is for their life; and we by
uncharitable silence would become guilty of their blood. Now brethren, we
commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to bu^ld you
up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified, praying
that you may stand upon your watch, clothed with the whole armor of God, and
that you may be kept blameless, living by faith, until the coming of our Lord
and ^aviour Jesus Christ, not casting away your confidence, which has great
recompense of reward: For yet a little while, and he that shall come, will
come, and w^ll not ^arry. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.

Amen.
FINIS.

