AN ABRIDGMENT Of the late REMONSTRANCE OF THE ARMY.

With some Marginall Attestations, for the better Understanding, Remembrance,
and Judgment of the PEOPLE.

Collected by special Order for more public satisfaction, and to undeceive
the Kingdom as to the false Glosses by some put upon the said REMONSTRANCE
Printed.

By the Appointment of the Lord General, and his General Council of Officers.

December. 27. 1648. Signed, JO RUSHWORTH.

LONDON, Printed for Laurence Blaiklocke, and are to be sold in the Old Bailey.
1648.

An Abridgment of the late Remonstrance of the Army, with some Marginall
Attestations, both for the better understanding, remembrance, and judgment of
the People.
To the Right Honorable the Commons of England assembled in Parliament, the
humble Remonstrance of his Excellency Lord General Fairfax, and his General
Council of Officers, held at Saint Albanes, Thursday November 16. 1648.
Our tender reguard to the Freedom of Parliament and the offense taken at our
least interposing in any thing of Civil consideration to the Parliament, have
made us attend in silence the Councels of Parliament. But finding you upon
those transactions, whereupon the life or death of all our Civil interest does
depend, and As in publik fires all must lift up their voice and hands, bringing
what ladders, buckets, or other assistanc they can, non expectandus praefectus
vigilum si obdormiat, non praefectus urbis si cunctetur; Certatim quisque aquam
hauriat tectum s^andat, flammam arceat oportet
seeing no effectual help from elsewhere to appear, we cannot be wanting in
ought we can honestly say or do to hold off impending ruin As a part of the
people in Arms, or an Army interposed against the standding authority for the
life of good Jonathan. 1. Sam. 14.45
from an honest people and a good cause.

We are not ignorant that the rule Salus Populi suprema Lex, is most apt to be
misapplyed, some men framing pretenses of public extremity.

Therefore though we are full of sad apprehensions of the extremity at hand,
yet Commanders of the forces of the Kingdom have been taken into the Council
and execution of important matters, as in the deposing of a Tyrant and
enthroning a young King upon terms or agreement. 2. Chro. 23.1.14 20. 2. Kings
11.1.7. so in the slaying of Ioram and making Iehu King. 2. King 1.9. ^ea David
consulted with such in matters of Religion. 1. Chron. 13.1.15.25.25.1. Trajan
the Emperor making Captain of the Praetorian band by the ceremony of giving
him a Sword, said, use this for me if I Reign well, and against me if ill.
we shall first with all soberness and clearness (as God shall enable us)
remonstrate to you our apprehensions both of the danger at hand and of the
remedy with our grounds in both.

We must first mind you of your votes once past concerning no more addresses to
the King, and our engagement to adhere to you therein.

In this none can say you were acted beyond your own free judgments, we are
sure by no impulsion from the Army, the juster resolutions of the House did in
this reclaim us, it pleased God instantly to lead you into such order, whereby
the burden of free quarter was taken off, supernumerary forces disbanded, the
rest put into an established way of pay; but when the house being called on
purpose for a settlement began to entertain motions tending to the
unsettlement of what they had resolved, the minds of men without also became
propor^ionably unsettled in expectations which way things would bend, seeing
such uncertainty of any end of troubles upon the Parliamentary account alone;
then began your Enemies to hope and work your trouble, and their own
advantages, and in all the disturbances, so to execute all the other interests
pretended, that at last they might set up that of the King and their own above
all others. Thus the Army which would not be won to disert the Parliamentary
and public interest to serve their turns, was by them rendered the only
common Enemy, and this new formed party at first profess for a full and free
Parliament, and to free it from the force of an Army, as Joseph was accused to
his master Genesis 39.8 3.17.
Whereas the latest quarrel against it was that it would not force the
Parliament to comply with the interest of the King. They likewise pretended to
be for the easing of the people of taxes to an Army, whereas indeed their
workings did necessitate the Parliament to continue an Army, and taxes for it.
They also pretended for the Covenant against an Army of Sectaries, and for all
these ends a Personal Treaty with the King must be held forth as the only
Sovereign salve. And thus the People were taught mainly to depend upon the
King for all, and to Petition for these things, and in pretense of them to levy
War against the Parliament on the Kings behalf, and his party is brought
into the manage of it. Yet they drive on the whilst the Treaty to deceive you
by old Malignants, and a late discontented party in City and Parliament, the
Lords closeing readily with the desires of them and the Prin^e, though in the
War for your and the Kingdoms defense, or in declaring with you against the
Scotch Army and others, they would neither lead nor follow. And when in any
thing of the Treaty concerning the very life of your Cause you made some stick,
clamorous Petitions with Menaces come thick upon you, and forces listed daily
about you, the City neither taking course, nor suffering their Major General
to do it. And thus you were at their mercy whiles your Army was engaged at
distance against your enemies in Arms. Therefore we cannot conceive that in
those resolutions for a Treaty, the judgment of Parliament was with due and
former freedom. And we wish you to consider the evils of this Treaty in
laying designs for the Kings escape, and settling future correspondencies, and
further whether it can be just or safe in relation to public interest.

The sum of public interest of a Nation in relation to common Right, and in
opposition to tyrrany of Kings or others, is, that for all matters concerning
the whole they have a Parliament consisting of Deputyes or Representers freelly
chosen and with as much equality as may be, And that the power of making or
altering Laws and of final judgment be in them, and that it may not be left
in the will of the King, or any other particular persons to make void their
determinations or proceedings. And where the offense is in public Officers
against their trust, this same Counsel may call to account and punish such
offenders either according to the Law, or where it has not provided Which is
the ground of their enacting any Law
according to their own judgment.

Against these matters of public interest this King has all along his Reign
opposed to uphold the interest of his and his Posterities Will, and Power:
First that there might be no such Common council to restrain him, but that all
things of Supreme trust concerning safety might rest in his breast alone
without limit from any, or account to any on earth. 1639.
And for this he raised his first and second Arms against his people in both
Kingdoms; 1640.
then he fell to play lower that none of those things of Supreme and absolute
trust might be exercised by any others without him, no not by all the Trustees
of the, Land, nor in any case though never so necessary for releife or saving
of the People, 1641.
and for this he raised his third Arms, and when these his other claims so
far failed, he would make you know that neither Parliament nor any power on
earth (what ever ills he had done) might meddle with his sacred person, no not
so much as to secure him from doing more evil; and for this last part of his
Interest his fourth Arms were raised. There have also fallen in other
particulars with these interests, 1648.
as on the Parliaments part to protect Religious men, and to give Freedom to
the Gospel and take away those corrupt forms by which snares were laid for
such conscientious men* But on the Kings part the interest was to do contrary*
So that the Parliamentary and public interests has been made very much one
with the interest of the Godly, and the King interest one with their greatest
opposites, now we suppose that where a person trusted Romans 13.3.4. Paul
speaks of authority or Magistracy in its constitution (not of a person
abusively exercising it) to be Gods instrument of good to every one, and an
encourager of good in every man, and an enemy to evil. Therefore the Kings of
the Israelites must know the Law for a Rule, Deuteronomy. 17. And Ioash being 7.
years old had a Crown put upon his head, and the testimony in his hand 2.
Kings 11 12. that being elder he might remember the rule which David avoucheth
to be from Heaven as a rule for all Rulers 2 Samuel 23.3. he that rules among
men, must be just ruling in the fear of God.
with limited power to rule according to Laws, shall not only pervert that
trust but assume also hurtful powers never committed to him, and take away
foundations of liberty and redress, such a person so doing forfeits all that
power and trust he had, and 2. Chron. 21 10 Lib^ah which a City belonging to
(the Priests. Josh 21.13) revolted ne subjecti esset ei [Iunt) from all
subjection, because he had forsaken the Lord God of his Fathers.
absolving the people from the bonds between him and them, does set them free
to take their best advantage and proceed in judgment against Him: Much more
when he on these terms shall maintain a war, and by division within and
invasions from abroad lengthen it well to uphold the interest of his will and
power against the Common interest of his people; such a person we may justly
say is Guilty of the highest treason against the which is the safety of the
People.
highest law amongst men, now we may conclude that this King has been the
Author and contriver of an unjust War, and so is Guilty of all the blood and
mischeife to the Kingdom; and then how can the public justice of the kingdom
be satisfied, the blood avenged, Numb. 35.4. hang them up that the fierce anger
of the Lord may be turned away from Israel. Deu 19.13. thine eyes shall not
pity him, but thou shall put away the guilt of innocent blood from Israel,
that it may go well with thee. 2. Sam. 21.3.5.6.14 wherewith shall I make the
atonement that ye may bless the inheritance of the Lord, and they answered the
man that consumed us, and that devised against us that we should be destroyed,
let 7 men of his sons be delivered to us and we will hang them, and the King
said I will give them; and after that god was entreated for the Land.
the wrath of God for the same appeased without judgment executed against him,
and consequently how far can an accommodation with him (when God has given him
so clearly into your power to do justice) can be just before god, or good men
without so much as a judicial trial or evident remorse for his fault he has
so long in word and practice denied it, and never Not so much as Acban who yet
suffered Ios, 7.20, 25
confessed it till all other ways of force and fraud had failed him, and now
confesses it conditionally so as you satifie him in other things which is
great Job. 34 30. that the Hypocrite reign not least the people be ensnared.
hypocrifie, and while he thus in word confesses it yet in Proverbs 28.13.
Divine mercy to confessing and forsaking, but Ex. 9.17 34. Pharaoh hardened to
destruction, though he Confesses, yet when the dreadful thunders are gone his
sin returns.
practice he denies it by continuing Commissions to the Prince and other
English Rebels and Revolters, yea to Ormond and his associate Irish. And what
public benefit can be from reunion of such contrary principles of Tyranny,
and liberty, godliness and superstition?

Concerning the safety of such an agreement for his restitution especially
supposing no real remorse or change, but the same principles and affections
first, how apt are princes in such case to take advantages for a breath, and
secondly how easily may they do it after such agreement. For the former how apt
it such a prince to do it when the What other right soever any Prince has,
there must be such bonds Covenant or Agreement between him and his people,
Besides Samuells anointings from God, David had that o Judah, 2. Iam. 2.4. and
made a League with all Israel before the Lord. 2. Sam. 5.3. and afterward they
anointed him King over Israel. And at the Coronation of Ioash, 2. K. 11 17.
There is a Covenant also between the King and people. Therefore 1. Pet. 2.13.
the particular form and Subject of Government is called an humane creature.
bonds once accepted by him with unquestioned freedom at his admission to the
Throne and the Oath of God betwixt him and his people, would not hold him, but
of his own mind have been all violated by him, and to justify the same the law
of force set up to the utmost? how can it be expected that the bonds of new
concessions and agreements imposed by force and vincible necessity should be of
more power to hold him when an advantage to recover what he lost does offer it
self, for the faith keeping of this King his Accords with the Scottish Nation
do witness for his revengefullnes; these petty revenges after several
parliaments which were taken against such patriots as had appeared for Common
liberty against his INTEREST.

Next for Dan 8.25. through his policy shall he cause craft to prosper in his
hand, and he shall magnify himself in his heart, and by peace shall destroy
many, Dan. 11.23.24. and after the leag^^ made wi^h him he shall work
deceitfully, he shall enter peaceably even upon the lat^ places of the
Province and shall do that which his Fathers have not done, nor his Fathers
Fathers,
facillity of Princes finding occasion and quarrel after such agreement, and
yet with some co^lerable saving to his honor, we know the Court maxims
concerning some Crown Rights which a King cannot give away nor oblige his
Heirs in; besides some matters of supreme trust are in the propositions
barganed for with and taken as by Lease from the King, so as to confirm his
claim of Right; but from the force or necessity lying upon the King in this
Treaty, there is a ground of evasion from the whole agreement as not obligeing
him what soever is drawn from him, and this is avowed publicly by the Prince
and his Council in answer to the Earl of Warwick, where the Prince clearly
says, the King in truth is still in prison. And consider the Prince as heir,
it serves to acquit himself, and as the next visible head of the Kings party,
the King being in durance, it may serve on behalf of the King and his heirs
and party as a protestation against any conclusion by his Treaty; and the King
himself has insinuated the same sense of the Treaty, and that not without
grounds to gain belief, he being still confined within your Garrisons and
guards and upon his paroll; so that if you proceed upon so rotten a foundation
and be cousened, ye cosen your selves, and cannot blame him or his. And the
King coming in thus may rest secure and wait his advantage (having go your
hands bound) till he finding it shall strike the first stroke which it is like
he will make a sure one if he can. To proceed, the King comes thus in with
reputation of having long sought peace and that in a Personal Treaty, which
you after a long denial at last granting are rendered by his friends as
refusers of peace, so long in that the Kings way he comes also with the
reputation of having granted for peace sake, all that stood you upon, although
it will apeare nothing at all to the public interest. And if after this
accommodation to satisfye the people you shall disband your forces, you are at
the Kings As the Sheep dismissing their (...) with the wolves. And have the
English people suffered so many things in vain.
courtesy still, and are but where you were at first. But the King in much
fairer possibility to revi^e the old quarrel and carry it without fighting:
for after so much blood and trouble for no thing, it is not like, you will find a
competent party for the opposing of him; and if you continue a sufficient
strength and taxes they will be the more grevous, because deemed unnecessary,
the King having granted what your selves did ask, we might reflect upon his
numerous party engaged by interest, or necessity to serve him, so long as he
remains in possibillity to head them, while he by his supposed impunity
whatsoever he does, has encouragement to make all possible trial of them, and
they hope if he ever prevail, he may make them amends: whereas this being once
confuted by an example of justice upon him for such attempts, they would not be
feared in relation to his posterities heeding of them; besides these, we cannot
but consider the vast possibilities after his restitution to make or use
factions amongst your selves, and your adherents, and do not all men
acknowledge him most exquisite at it? and if he had that faculty to avail at
distance, much more in your bosoms, each party will be apt to strive which
shall most and first comply with him, of which you and we have seen sad
experiences already; yet we refused ought of private contract or trust with him
and his; and all was with saving for the public interest; yet in that degree
of our compliance with him, we find matter of acknowledgement before the Lord
concerning our error therein; and we bless him that preserved us from worse*
And if from the divisions we have, such complyances have been with, and such
advantages given to the Kings party while acknowledged enemies, what worse may
we not expect, when by a Peace made they shall have the reputation of friends?
To conclude this, we confess our fears from the act of this Parliaments
unlimited continuance. If he form As he often has in particular Votes.
a ballancing party in the house of Commons for his interest, that which should
be our conservative, would be our baine, and yet we should be debarred from
change of medicine; or if a period be set to this Parliament, and no provision
for certain succession, and sitting of Parliaments, without dependence on the
Kings will; or if no provision for a more due constitution by more equal
Elections; then the success will be less hopeful and safe then the present,
and you have not in this Treaty made any provision for any of these things. But
to proceed, to show the certain insecurity to public interest, in an
accommodation with a restitution of the King. For you the supreme Judicatory
of the Kingdom (when he is in your power to do justice upon) to decline that
way, and instead thereof to seek to him your Prisoner in way of Treaty, what
speaks it less then that he is indeed above all humane And Laws which is to
be more then man as Persian and Roman Emperors have been flattered to be; for
just Laws being from God ( Themis the daughter of Jove) who is not ever under
them, ownes not his subjection to God, whereas God has not put that distance
betwixt a King and other men, they are his brethren though his subjects, Deuteronomy.
17. ult. So David calls his subjects 1 Chro. 28.2.
justice not accountable to or if any King because a King be unpunishable by
men, then all Kings are so, and no man may justly punish any King, but when a
people to be punished, should spare their King as Saul (the people then
admiring happily the persons as well as government of Kings) spared Agag, 1 Samuel
15.9. but we find Gods Instruments fixing more solemn punishment on wicked
Kings then on their wicked people, Iosuah slayes all their Kings Ios. 11.17.
being thirty one, 12. Cap. last, and hangs up some Josh. 10.24.28.30.40. Gideon
more solemnly executes the Kings of Midian then other enemies, Judges 8.1.21.
Ebud slayes King Eglon, Judge. 3.21. So Iehoiadah, and the Commanders put
Athalia to death, 2 Chro. 23.14. and if it be said that these two last Princes
came to the Crown by force and blood, and so were without a title, it may be
replied, that such was the ontrance of the first of the English, French, etc.
Royal race from whom the present Kings claim; live further, these two had
Reigned, and the people been subject to them (which makes the most usual
title,) the one for 18. years, Judge. 3.14. the other six years, 2 Chro.
22.12. Iehu did slay both the Kings of Israel and Iedah 2 Kings 9. and Asaph
Psalm 83.11. prays that Nobles and Princes of Enemies may be used after
former examples. And as this rank of men is opposing Christ in the last times;
so are they by him and his people to be punished Psalm. 2. Psalm. 110.5. the
Lord (...) right hand shall strike through (Kings in the day of thy wrath Psa.
149.8.9. to bind their Kings with Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters of
Iron to execute upon them the judgment written Rev. 19.17.18. the fowls
invited to eat the flesh of Kings and Capt. are slaughtered by the Lambs As for
David sparing Saul, it was necessary for David a private person, and under
private and personal hate and injury, and therefore could not within his
bounds, and without scandalous appearance of revenge or ambition have done
otherwise, and it was only declared against the succeeding of his Race not the
continuance of his person, but the State and people not taking course against
Saul, did smart in his other way of punishment, as for David, it appears that
he forbore him not merely out of reverence to his authority, for he took up
Arms to defend himself against him and would (if that part of the people would
have joined) have maintained Kailah against him, 1 Samuel 23. now all this was
contrary to subjection, and intimates that David, if he had been put to it,
and he could no otherwise have escaped, would have used force against Saul, and
as for David being spared, who can thence conclude that he should be so; and if
he should be spared then who can conclude the like for every offending King,
since there was something special in his case not applyable to every case,
besides other there was his publik repentance undoubtedly acknowledged by God
to be true, also Gods declaring how he should be punished himself, taking the
matter in hand, yet so, that the people shared in his sufferings further, his
miscarriage was but an act, and against a person not a cause (or against a
Nation.)
punishable do any power on earth, what ever he does, and that kings cannot
err or do wrong, whereas one example in this kind made, would be of more
terror and avail then the execution of his whole party, yea then all
satisfaction you can imagine.

If our King claim by And in no other way will the people yield themselves to
the discretion of a Prince to be distroyed or not.
conquest: God has given you the same against him to fix your justice first
upon the head, and thereby let his successors see what themselves may expect if
that they attempt the like. This may hopefully discourage them from heading any
more what Instruments they might find in the like quarrel; but to punish only
Instruments, and let the head go free, leads 2 Chr. 23. ul^ And the City was
quiet afte^ they had slain Athaliah with the Sword.
to endless trouble; besides it seems a most unequal Number. 25.4, 5, 9. The
chief men guilty were first hanged, being 1000; and then inferior men slain,
being 23000 as 1 Cor. 10.8. both making 24000.
and partial way of justice; and the same principles that exempt Kings from
justice would As for infalliblenesse and superiority to the Law would excuse
Abraham in slaying his son, Genesis 22. and did the Israelites in robbing, Exodus
12.35.
absolve their inferior Ministers for what they do in pursuance of such
commands.

If any object the Covenant as obliging us to perpetual addresses to the King
as being the only way consistent with the preservation of his person and
authority. We answer, the Covenant engages to matters of public interests,
primarily, and absolutely without limitation, and after that to the
preservation of the Kings person and authority with the restriction to wit, in
the preservation of the true Religion and liberties of the Kingdoms, so that
it obliges thereto no further, nor in any other way then shall be consistent
with this restriction, yea this obligation to preserve his person and authority
should be fulfilled in the preservation and defense of Religion and Liberty,
otherwise the whole proceedings of both Kingdoms ins making war against him
for preservation of Religion or liberties, were questionable for breach of
Covenant since that way of preserving them did tend probably to the
destruction, and was not with any safe provision for his person or that
authority which is in conjunction with it, also where several persons joining
in Covenant for the good and union of themselves (who are present and parties
to it) do withal make a clause to the benefit of another person to the end he
might join with them in the agreement, and partake the benefit thereof; if the
absent party do not accept, but refuse the agreement, as he keeps himself
free from it, so he excludes himself from claim to any benefit there from.
Upon all the reasons and considerations aforegoing we propound.

First, that it may be expressly declared and provided by you, that
notwithstanding any thing concluded in the Treaty, the person of the Even a
servant by the Civil Law may accuse his Master as guil^y of Treason, ^o,
liberti certis le causis p^ssant capitalem accusationem adversus patronos
in^^ituere.
King may and shall be proceeded against in way of justice for the blood spilt,
and other evils and mischiefs done by him or by his Commission or procurement,
and in order thereto shall be kept in safe custody as formerly.

Secondly, that for other Delinquents, you would lay aside that particular
barganing proposition, and declare that all Delinquents shall submit to the
judicial power of the Parliament, to be thereby proceeded against according to
justice or mercy, as cause shall appear, and that none shall be exempt
therefrom, nor pardonable by any other power then that of the Kingdom in
Parliament.

The power of Justice and mercy being thus saved, we proceed in order to the
actual dispensing thereof in relation to the late wars, and to peace with God,
and quiet amongst men, to propound, as follows:

First, that the God hates all workers of iniquity, Psalm 5.5. and excepteth
not the person of Princes, nor regards the rich more then the poor, Job 34.19.
and therefore he says, Levit. 19.15. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in
judgment, thou shall not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the
person of the mighty; Reformation were better begin at the Majorites then the
Minorites, Number. 25.17. and the 31 etc. Midianites* and Psalm 140.9. David
prays against the head of those that compass him about; and he gives a
general Law for punishment of murderers, Genesis 9.6. and Number. 35.33. So you
shall not pollute the Land wherein ye are, for blood it defiles the Land, and a
Land cannot be cleansed of blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him
that shed it, 2 Chronicles. 25.27. Now after the time that Amaziah did turn from
following the Lord, they made a conspiracy against him, Vajiksher gnalaiv
kesher, ligaverunt contra enim ligationem or ligam, some copies of 70 read
Syndesmos, a Combination, League, or confederacy against him; the words
signifies any conjunction, as Job 38.31. of the Pleiades, and Nehem. 4.6. of
the wall, and it is of a warrantable combyning of Iehu, 2 Kings 9.14. and this
against Amaziah was in Jerusalem the seat of the chief State or great Council
of the Kingdom, and it was done (as it seems) by public Authority, for he
fled to Lachish, and there as Iunius. 2 Kings 14.21. lived a private life for
eleven years, in the mean while when they so conspired or combined against
him, the whole people of Judah made Azariah King instead of his father; yet
though they deferred the execution, they did not omit it, but after the said
years, sent after Amaziah to Lachish, Vbi morte offecerunt eum vamitha hac
Ethana to Sea, they put him to death. So that this was done in an open
public, (not in a sudden and clandestine, or tumultuous) way, which it self
was not afterward punishable, as in this case of Amaziahs father, 2 Kings
12.10. and 14 chap. 5. and of wicked Ammon, the people slew them servants of
his that slew him in his own house, 2 Kings 21.23, 24.
Capital and grand Author of our troubles, the person of the King, by whose
procurement, and for whose interest only of will and power, all our wars have
been, may be brought to Justice for the Treason, Blood, and mischief he is
therein It cannot be unjust to desire justice, and that on, and as a guilty
man, and no further.
guilty of.

Secondly, that a timely day may be set for the Prince of Wales and the Duke of
York to come in, by which time if they do not, that then they may be
immediately declared incapable of any government or trust in this Kingdom or
its Dominions, and thence to stand exild for ever as Enemies and Traitors, to
die without mercy if ever after found and taken therein. Or if by the time
limited they do render themselves, that then the Prince be proceeded with as
on his appearance he shall give satisfaction, or not. And the Duke as he shall
give satisfaction, may be considered as to future trust, or not. But however
that the Revenue of the Crown (saving necessary allowances for the Children,
and for Servants and Creditors to the Crown) be sequestered; And the costly
pomp suspended for a good number of years; and that this Revenue be for that
time disposed toward public Charges, Debts and damages, for the easing of
the people, so as the estates neither of friends to public interest, nor
alone of inferior enemies thereto, may bear wholly the burden of that loss
and charge, which by and for that Family, the Kingdom has been put unto.

Thirdly, that capital punishment be speedily executed upon a competent number
of his chief instruments also, both in former and latter wars; and that some
of both sorts be pitched upon as are really in your hands or reach.

Fourthly, that the rest of the Delinquents English, may upon rendering
themselves to justice have mercy for their lives; and that only Fines be set
upon them, and their persons declared incapable of any public trust, or
having any voice in elections thereto, at least for a good number of years. And
that a short day be set by which all such Delinquents may come in, and for
those who come not in by that day, that their estates be absolutely confiscate
and sold to the public use, and their persons stand exild, as Traitors, and
to die without mercy if ever found after in the Kingdom, or its Dominions.

Fifthly, that the satisfaction of arrears to the Soldiery, with other
public Debts, and competent reparations of public damages may be put into
some orderly way. And therefore that the Fines and Compositions of Delinquents
be disposed to those uses only, as also the Confiscations of such who shall be
excluded from pardon, or not come in by the day assigned.

Now after public justice thus far provided for, we proceed in order to the
general satisfaction and settling of the Kingdom.

First, that you would set some reasonable and certain period to your own power.

Secondly, that with a period to this Parliament, there may be a settlement of
the peace and future government of the Kingdom.

First, that there may be a certain succession of future Parliaments, annual
or bienniall, with secure provision, 1. For the certainty of their sitting,
meeting, and ending. 2. For equal elections. 3. For the peoples meeting to
elect, provided that none engaged in war against the Kingdom may elect, or be
elected, nor any other who oppose this settlement. 4. For clearing the future
power of Parliaments, as supreme only, they may not give away any foundation
of common Right. 5. For liberty of entering dissents in the said
Representatives, that the people may know who are not fit for future trust, but
without any further penalty for their free judgments.

Secondly, that no King be hereafter admitted 2 Chro. 23.3. All the
Congregation made a Covenant with the King, 2 Samuel 16.18, whom the Lord and his
people and all the men of Israel choose, his will I be.
but upon election of, and as upon trust from the people by such their
Representatives, not without first disclaiming all pretense to a negative voice
against the determinations of the Commons in Parliament, and this to be done in
some form more clear then heretofore in the Coronation Oath.

These matters of general settlement we propound to be provided by the
Authority of the Commons in this Parliament, and to be further established by a
general Contract or agreement of the people with their subscriptions
thereunto. And that no King be admitted to the Crown, nor other person to any
Office of public trust, without express accord and subscription to the same.

For our parts, let but that way of justice be effectually prosecuted, and the
settlement of the public interest be assured to us and the Kingdom, we shall
desire discharge from our present service, and shall be ready to disband all or
part, as shall be thought fit, the Arrears of the Soldiery being satisfied: We
therefore desire that you would leave all private matters, and things of
ordinary Justice and Right to the Laws and proper Officers, and commit all
ordinary matters of State to the manage of a fit Council of State, and apply
your counsels to such things as are the proper work of Parliament, to wit, the
Reformation of evils in present Laws and administrations. And in order to such
things that you would in time and place consider the Petitions of welwishers to
public good. We again desire that even from henceforth the aforesaid liberty
of entering dissents may be admitted amongst you, as in the Scotch Parliament;
or at least, that such liberty be taken by all honest and faithful Members.

By the appointment of his Excellency the Lord General, and his general
Council of Officers, Signed J. RUSHWORTH, Sce.
December. 27. 1648.
FINIS.

