A DEFENSE OF True Protestants, Abused for the Service of POPERY, Under the
Name of PRESBYTERIANS. In a Dialogue between A. and L. two Sons of the Church.
Where it is Debated, Whether Discenting Presbyterians be as Bad or Worse than
Papists; And other Popish Assertions are Detected.

LONDON, Printed for N. P. and Sold by Rich. Janua, in Queens-Head Court, in
Paternoster Row, 1680.

A Defense of the Protestants, etc.
L. SIR, I am glad to meet you here, but something amused to see you so Pensive.


A. Our present Circumstances may make us all so, seeing we are in the greatest
danger of Popery, which threatens to ruin us in Estate, Body and Soul, and our
Children after us. And yet there are many not apprehensive of it, too many
among us of the Clergy, which does not a little amuse me, since they are
Prudent Persons, sensible enough of their Interest, and better, I would hope,
then to secure it by throwing their Religion overboard, and yet there is no
other way visible to do it, if the Popish Designs succeed.


L. They are very artificial men I Will assure you, and many things may be
alleged for them. It may be Popery is not a thing so formidable to them as it
is to some hotter men. Or it may be they have found out some expedients to
reconcile the harsher points of Popery to their own moderate sentiments. Or it
may be they are overawed by persons of great eminency on whom they have their
dependence. Or --


A. What you allege for them, makes them far worse than I hope they are. For
the first signifies that they are but indifferent Protestants. The next, that
they have found out a plausible way to be Papists. And the third that they are
not like to be true to either Religion. For if those on whom they depend would
have the People turn Turks, Jews or Heathens, they must not vote not petition
(although they may legally do either) to hinder it: for they are still
overawed, and must not Disoblige their Superiors, lest they desert them when
their Interest is otherwise in hazard.


L. You interrupted me, or else I had mentioned another thing which will
Justify them. They are afraid of another Party, who if the Papists were too
much suppressed, and the Balance not kept even, might prove more dangerous then
they.


A. What Party do you mean?


L. I mean the Presbyterians, who are as bad or worse then Papists.


A. Do you consider what Religion they are of, when you make this comparison,
and give the Papists the preference?


L. Yes. That also considered, that they profess themselves to be Protestants.
I know their Religion well enough.


A. I am much surprised to hear this from you. I always took you to be a
Protestant.


L. And does this signify that I am a Papist?


A. He that understands these two Religions and passes this Judgment, not in
heat nor disordered by Passion, but sedately and with consideration, is either
a Papist, or sufficiently prepared to be one when occasion serves.


L. How does this appear?


A. Very plainly and easly. For a Presbyterian holds all the points of the
Protestant Religion. If then he be worse then a Papist, a Protestant is worse
then a Papist, and the Protestant Religion will be worse than Popery.


L. I understand not this.


A. That may be from your Will rather than your Reason. Not because it is not
clear, but because you would not have it so. It is plain enough to those that
have Eyes and will open them. If you should hear one that judges a Christian,
in point of Religion, to be worse then a Mahumetan, you would not question but
that man is a Turk. He, that speaking of the Religions in France, should
determine that the Protestants are worse then the Papists, would thereby show
himself a Papist, nor need one wish a clearer Demonstration of it. And can they
be better who thus determine of Presbyterians in England, then he that does it
in France, when all the Protestants there, are Presbyterians? Indeed all the
Protestants in other Contries are involved in this censure, and Condemned as
worse then Papists. For all the Protestants in France, Switreland, the Low
Countries, and very many in Germany, Transylvania, Poland, etc. are
Presbyterians. And the Lutherans in these and other Countries cannot with any
reason be exempted: for none except themselves will pretend, that those things
wherein as Lutherans they differ from other more Reformed Churches, do make
them better: and so if the Presbyterians in all these Churches be worse then
Papists, the Lutherans must be so too. Nay, there are few in England will
escape this censure, and so there will scarce be any in this Kingdom but must
be worse then Papists, save Papists themselves. For I see the late House of
Commons in several Pamphlets condemned as Presbyterians, and with them the
Commons of England are cast, who choose such. And if the House of Lords be not
of a better Religion then that of the House of Commons, they must be both
together worse then Papists. So that unless the Lords and Commons can be
persuaded by such Judicious Censurers to be of a better Religion then that of
the Presbyterians, which is the same and no other, then the Protestant, we are
like to be in an ill Condition. Nay, the Bishops and the best sons of the
Church, will be worse than Papists, unless those things wherein they vary from
other Protestants, (such as are no part of that, nor any Religion else) can
make them better. Besides, that those who are not yet Papists, are by this
persuasion thoroughly prepared for Popery, is very apparent: for if Papists must
be preferred before Presbyterians; then their principles must be worse then
those of the Papists. Whereas even those wherein they differ from the Church of
England, and for which alone they are obnoxious, are in the account of the most
judicious Prelates and Doctors that this Church has bred, tolerable Points,
no parts of Religion, scarce any but matter of indifferency, and such wherein
others Reformed Churches agree with them. Now if for these they must be counted
worse than Papists, then the worst things in Popery, must pass for better then
tolerable and indifferent things: Then all the Popish Idolatries; their absurd,
impious and pernicious Doctrines in matters of Faith; their gross Impostures,
their practical Maxims, subverting Morality, Humanity and human Society; must
not be thought so bad, as some tolerable mistakes, and who then but some silly
Fanatics will stick at them? It is plain you hereby leave your self and
others little or no reason to baulk the very worst things in Popery,


L. I did not so well consider the consequence of what I asserted. However you
have not yet made good the ground of your Inference, nor can do. For do not
these Presbyterians differ in many things from the Religion of the Church of
England.


A. No. Not from the Religion of this Church in any thing that I know.


L. That Is strange. Do they not differ in the Rites and Ceremonies, the public
Liturgy, the Discipline and Government of the Church?


A. Call you these Points of the Protestant Relgion?


L. Why not, I pray? Are not these considerable Parts of the Religion of this
Church as it is established by Law.


A. These are no Parts of the Religion established by Law: for they are no
points of Religion at all, but matters of Indifferency, as the Church of
England declares them to be, and no Religion is to be placed in things
Indifferent. And the Reason is obvious. For Religion, if it be True, must be
Authorized by God, or Instituted by Christ, but things Indifferent are neither
commanded nor forbiden.


L. This is true of the Ceremonies, the Church signifies that they are in their
own nature Indifferent, and declares withal that no Religion is to be placed in
things Indifferent. But will you have the Sacred Liturgy to be a thing of this
Nature, and of no more value than that which in it self, is neither Bad nor
Good?


A. I pay all due Reverence to our Liturgy; but no Veneration should blind us,
or hinder us from discerning the true Nature of things. Prayer in general is an
eminent Part of Religion, and Divine Worship, and necessary both by the Light
of Nature, and Revelation; but this or that Form of Prayer, how exact soever,
is in it self no other than Indifferent. This all acknowledge who understand
any thing concerning these Matters.


L. But what Religion do you then leave those, who by their Heats for these
things, and their Indifferency as to others, show that these only are their
Religion, or the Principal part of it?


A. I leave them all they had, if they had lest themselves any, but indeed
those who place all their Religion herein, have no Religion at all; and those
who make these the Principal Part of their Religion, make less of that which is
Religion indeed, than of an Indifferent thing: and so indeed are Indifferent as
to this or that Religion, Protestantism or Popery: or which is worse,
indifferent as to any Religion, or none. And those that have any Love for the
Souls of People, should endeavor to undeceive them therein, and not leave them
under such Conceits as make them too easy a Prey to Popish Seducers, who need
desire no more than that we should value the whole Protestant Religion less
than some matters of Indifferency.


L. But must our Church Government pass under the same Account?


A. So far as it is not of divine Institution, it is in it self no better than
Matter of Indifferency, and of the very many branches of our Government, there
is but one that pretends to an higher Original. And about that one, viz. The
Power and Superiority of Bishops, they themselves are divided, some asserting
the Divine Right of Prelacy, others denying it. It is denied to be of divine
Institution, by Archbishop Cranmer, and our first Reformers in Henry the
Eighth and Edward the Sixth's Times, by Archbishop Whitgift, Bishop Bridges,
and others in Queen Elizabeth's Time, by King James See these with many more,
in Ed. Stillingfleet, Iren. Page 393. 394.
himself, etc. Now you cannot well conclude, that they differ from us in any
point of Religion on this account, till we be agreed amongst our selves, that
this is a point of Religion. Or-if you will have it concluded by a major Part,
take Episcopacy as it is now stated, for a distinct Office, invested with the
sole Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, and of those Bishops who have writ
most in defense of Prelacy among us, it will be carried against you by two for
one, that such Prelacy is not of divine Authority, and so no part of Religion.
And those that plead for the highest Title, make it a point of very small
Moment. Peacemaker, page 46. 47.
Bishop Hall one of the most Zealous Asserters of Episcopacy by Divine right,
declares it as the Sense of all Protestants, Episcopal as well as others, B.
Gawden Pres. to Hooker's Eccl. Policy.
that they can see no reason, why so poor a Diversity, should work an
Alienation of Affection in us toward one another. Another of our Bishops tell
you, the things forementioned, are no Fixed Parts of our Religion, but
Circumstantials, and Ornaments. A third will have them the Skin of an Apple,
which must not be pared of, if you would have it keep. Not to mention others
(as not worthy of regard) who will have them more like the Core of. an Apple,
when it has been kept too long. So that what Stress soever Interest lays upon
these and such like points, Religion lays little or none thereon.


L. But there are many who will lay the greatest Stress upon this, and are
greatly concerned to do it, they are sensible, and you may easily apprehend,
how much depends on it.


A. I know their Wealth and Grandeur may seem a little concerned in it: but if
they will count those who are of the same Religion worse than Papists, because
they think them not friendly enough to their worldly Interest, they will be
suspected to value the World more than Religion.


L. But, which I had almost forgot, they differ from us in the Doctrine of
Predestination, and other Points that depend thereon.


A. You mean, I suppose, the Oppinions of Arminius and his Followers,
concerning Conditional Election, the equal Redemption of all, Free Will, the
indifferent operation of Grace, and Falling-away from the state of Grace.


L. Yes, these I understand, and these you cannot deny to be Points of Faith
and matters of Religion.


A. They are no parts of the Protestants Religion, nor of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, being not contained in the Confessions of any of the
Protestant Churches, nor in the Articles of the Church of England, but rather
the contrary. So that herein they differ not from the Church, who never owned
these Opinions; but from some particular Persons in it; and differ no more from
them, then many other Sons of the Church do at this day; and all in a manner
did for many Years after the Reformation. In all Queen Elizabeth's Reign I find
not above three of any note, among all the Clergy and in both Universities,
that maintained these Doctrines, and two of them censured for it. Afterward
King James promoted the Condemnation of the Arminian Tenets by the Synod of
Dort, sending Eminent Divines from hence, who concurred with others from the
Reformed Churches in the censure of them. He himself declared K. James
Declaration
Arminius to be an Enemy to God, and his followers to be Atheistcal Sectaries.
In the late Kings time, several Parliaments declared against Armianism as an
Innovation of pernicious consequence. And those who most loved it, and had the
greatest advantages to influence the Clergy in favor of it, durst not venture
it to the Test of a Convocation, as one Heyl. Life of A.L. page 153.
who had a passionate Fondness for it confesses. So it is, says he, that the
truth in these Opinions not being so generally entertained among the Clergy,
nor the Archbishop and the greater part of the Prelates, so inclinable to
them, as to venture the determining of these Points to a Convocation. How far
then were these Opinions from being counted the Doctrine of our Church, when
there was no expectation that they would be accounted Truths by our Church
representative? Sure they act more agreeably to the sense of the Church of
England thus far, who reject these Arminian Tenets then they who embrace them.


L. But though the Presbyterians hold all the points of the Protestant
Religion, yet they maintain other Opinions besides, such as are pernicious to
Civel Government and Secular Princes, upon this account they may be said to be
worse than Papists, their Principles of this nature being more dangerous.


A. I have heard some such thing said diverse times, but I must do them this
right as to declare, that I never saw it proved, nor ever expect it. Upon a
strict Inquiry I find their principles about Civel Government, to be no other,
than what the eminentest of our Prelates and learned Divines, such as Bishop
Jewel, Mr. Hooker, Bishop Bilson, Bishop Morton, etc. have owned, or defended,
so far is it from being true, that their opinions herein are as bad or worse
than the Papists. And they may challenge all the Papists in England, masqued
and unmasqued, to make it good from the Writings of any considerable Divines
approved by those of that Denomination. But that you may have a more particular
satisfaction, let us take a view of some Popish Principles respecting Civel
Government and Humane Societies, some wherein we are particularly concerned,
and then compare them with those charged on the Presbyterians by their
bitterest enemies.

They hold, That all Protestants are Heretics, and as such, excommunicated and
accursed.

That, no sort of Protestant Magistrates or others, have any just Title to
Estate, Liberty or Honor, but may lawfully be stripped of all.

That, they ought to be put to death and burnt alive when they are in their
Power.

That, when they cannot proceed judicially against them, they ought to destroy
them by open Wars and Massacres or Assassinations.

That, all Laws, Divine and Humane will have them destroyed.

That, it is not only lawful, but a Pious and Meritorious Act to slaughter them.

That, it is no more sin to kill them than to kill a Wolf or a Dog.

That, by what obligations soever, either of Kindred, Friendship, Loyalty or
Subjection, they be bound unto them, they may, or rather must, take Arms
against them, being Heretics; and then must they take them to be Heretics,
when their lawful Popes adjudge them to be so.

That, those who will not promote the Catholic Interest by Wars and Arms,
ought to be proscribed and a Reward proclaimed to those that kill them.

That, they are worser than Turks, and that it is more just and necessary to
exterminate them by force of Arms than to overcome the Turks.

That, no Peace is to be made, no Commerce to be kept with them.

That, no Faith is to be kept with them though confirmed with Oaths.

That a foreign Bishops is supreme Governor of these Dominions in all matters
Ecclesiastic, and in temopral matters also in order to Spiritual Concerns.

That, England is the Popes Kingdom, and the King of England is the Popes
Subject even in Temporals, and holds his Dominions of him in Fee.

That, no Maegistrate among us has any Jurisdicton.

That, they are not obliged to Answer their Interrogatories, nor owe them any
more reverence or subjection than to mere private Persons.

That, they may delude them with Equivocations in Assertions or Oaths, and may
usesuch Equivocations when they are sworn before the Magistrate not to
Equivocate.

That, it is no Mortal Sin to Charge false Crimes upon, or bear False Witness
against any in their own Defense.

That, it is no Sin to kill those who go about to discover the Crimes they are
guilty of.

That, Bishops are not the Subjects of Secular Princes.

That, they cannot be Guilty of Treason.

That Churchmen are exempted from all Jurisdiction of Civel Magistrates

That, the Pope may exempt Laymen as well as the Clergy.

That, no Protestants, Nobles or Commons, can be Members of Parliament.

That, Laws not agreeable to the Roman Decrees are of no moment.

That, since a Wife owes no Conjugal Duty to an Husband, who is not a Papist,
nor a Slave, any Service to his Master, and Parents loose the Superiority and
Dominion which they have by the Law of Nature over their Children; therefore no
man should wonder that in the like case a Sovereign should loose his
Superiority and Right over his People and Kingdoms.

That, the Pope may command the King's Subjects not to Obey him.

That, he may Compel them into Rebellion.

That, he can absolve Subjects from the Oaths of Allegiance and Obedience to
their Prince; and the Princes from Oaths Oblieging them to their Subjects.

That, an Heretical or Protestant King is no King.

That, he is a Tyrant and Usurper, and may be used accordingly.

That, to acknowledge such a King, is to advance a Dog to be Sovereign over Men.

That, he has no real Majesty or Sovereignty.

That, no Treason can be committed against him.

That, he can enact no Laws, nor is capable of any Acts of Sovereignty.

That, Acts of Jurisdiction done by his Authority are Void and Null, by the Law
of God and Man.

That, no War can lawfully be denounced or waged by him, though the Cause be
never so just.

That, no Leagues, Treaties, Confederacies, for his advantage, as a Heretic,
however confirmed, do obliege Catholics.

That, they may lawfully betray their Trust, and deliver up to the Enemy, what
their Prince commits to their Charge, Garrisons, Troops, Magazines, Treasure,
etc.

That a Prince falling from Popery, loses all his Authority and Dignity, even
before Sentence.

That after Sentence, no Man can lawfully Serve, or give Aid unto such a Prince.

That, he not only may lawfully, but ought in Conscience to be Dethroned;
Subjects being bound to it by the Divine Precept, and upon their Salvation.

That, it is the Subjects Duty, to take up Arms against him.

That, the Pope may Depose a King, not only for Heresy, or Tyranny, or
Sacrilege, or Perjury, or Breach of Promise, or Effeminacy, or any of these
many Faults which are liable to Excommunications; but also for favoring
Heriticks, or tolerating Schismatics, or for Profuseness in spending the
Public Treasure; yea, or for Ignorance, or Negligence, or Insufficiency, or
Weakness of Mind, or Body.

That if a Prince be never so well qualified for Religion, or other
Accomplishments, the Pope may Dethrone him, if his Holiness think it but
Expedient. Nay, he may do it without any Cause, and dispose of his Kingdom as
he lists.

That if Princes be Protestants, he has as much Right to throw them out of
their Thrones, as we have to drive away Wolves, or Mad Dogs, or Wild Asses.

That not to believe the Pope has this Power, is Madness and damned Heresy.

That not one Catholic Author can be brought, who denies it.

That Christ had not been sufficiently careful of the Church, if he had not
given the Pope this Power over Kings.

That he had not sufficiently provided for our Salvation, if Kings might not be
thus deprived.

That the Popes only have not this Power, but even Inferior Prelate, may throw
down Kings. Bishops, how poor and weak so ever, have this Authority, for Kings
are but their Subjects, and a Priest is as much above a King, as a Man is above
a Beast.


L. Do their approved Authors publish such things as these?


A. Yes, And I will show you their own Words for it, in their own Language,
when you please. Indeed they have made the Proof of such a Charge very easy by
their other Principles. We need not trouble our selves to show, that this or
that Practical Assertion is decreed by a General Council, or entertained by
their whole Church; it will be evident enough, if it be made appear, to be the
Judgment of some of their Grave Doctors: for it is a received Maxim, That in
Matters of Morality, a Probable Opinion may be followed with a safe Conscience,
and an Opinion is made probable by the Authority of the Doctors who deliver it.

Caramuel assures us four Doctors will do it currently.

In Father Abbot Antilog. Cap. 13. P. 191.
Garnet's Judgment, two or three will be sufficient: but many hold that one
Grave Doctor is enough.

Verricelli Opuse. Page 56.
(as Guimenius tells us) quotes twenty four of their Authors that maintain
this. I suppose he might have made them up Forty, by what I have seen. And
those that require the Concurrence of four, in an Opinion to make it probable,
must grant that one will suffice, unless they will contradict themselves, since
there are more than Twenty Four who hold that One Doctor is sufficient. Now
there is not the most extravagant Assertion among all these forementioned, but
the Authority of One grave Doctor, at lest, may be produced for it; and this is
enough to make it lawful in practice, past all scruple. So that there needs no
more but the Opinion of any one grave Casuist or Confessor to assure the
lawfulness of the most Horrid Villainy that ever was, or can be acted; Be it the
Killing of a King, or all the Princes on Earth that are Heretics. The Life of
Queen Elizabeth was diverse times atrempted with an assurance the Attempt was
Lawful, upon no better Authority. Or the Burning of such a City as London,
though it is like there was a Concurrence of more in this. Or the blowing up a
Parliament, the Opinion of Harry Garnet alone, satisfied the most scrupulous of
the Conspirators, that the Fact was both Lawful and Meritorious.


L. I think these last Maxims upon which they raise their Doctrine of
Probability will prove as pernicious, as any before mentioned, since they are
virtually all that is wicked. And Papists must be more dangerous Persons than I
was willing to suspect, since a Priest can make any thing Lawful for them. The
Opinion of One Doctor is as good for this purpose as a Popes Bull, or the
Decree of a General Council.


A. True. These might make it more Certain, but there is no need of Certainty in
the case, a mere Probability makes their Practice safe enough in Conscience.
And though a constitution of a Pope or Council might make it more Certain and
more Safe, they are not Concerned for that, but may Lawfully act according to
an Opinion that is both less Probable and less Safe (that is their common
Doctrine) and so follow the Opinion of One, though a weaker Doctor, rather than
the Judgment of many how eminent so ever. For Instance, suppose Forty or an
Hundred of their best Divines determine that it is unlawful to suborn
Witnesses by false Oaths to take away the Reputation, Estate or Life of a
Protestant, and Two or Three, or but One Priest, of repute among them. conclude
that this is Lawful; a Villian bribed to do it, may be secured in Conscience
of the lawfulness of it by his sole Authority. And thus the Just or more
Specious Determinations of the better sort of their Divines will signify
nothing, and we shall be deluded if we rely on them; one obscure Doctor or
Confessor, of whom we have no notice, may carry it against them all; for the
Lawfullness of a Design or Attempt to Ruin Particular Persons, or a whole
Country Prince and People.


L. God bless us from Men of such Principles.


A. I have given you a taste, of the Priests Principles, can you show me any
owned by the Priesbyterians like to these?


L. It may be their are not so many, nor quite so bad, but they are bad enough.


A. Be it so. But that will not make them worse, nor so Bad as Papists, as you
declared them to be before; No nor worse than your self, and those that
Symbolize with you in this Censure of your Fellow Protestants. For you will not
Presume that you are better, than the best on Earth; and even those are bad
enough. But pray where may we see those Principles of theirs which you count
bad enough? For I have reason to believe, that it is either Passion or Malice
that manages this charge, and neither of these are to be trusted further than
we can see.


L. I will not send you far for this. You may see it in a late Print,
Entitled, The Cloak in 'its Colors, where 'its Demonstrated from the Writings
of Calvin, Beza, Knox, and Buchanan.


A. I have seen that Pamphlet some Months since, and find these four Authors
cited, whose Sayings alleged right or wrong, must pass for a Demonstration
against the whole Party; and yet they are the very same Persons whose words the
Jesuit Parsons long fince abused to prove that the Protestants Principles are
in this Particular worse than the Papists. By which we may discern whose
Disciple this Scribler is, and what Difference they make between Protestants
and Presbyterians. Both must fall under the same Reproach, as they intend both
shall Fall by the same Execution, if their Plot Succeed. There needs no other
Vindication of the Presbyterians, but Doctor (afterward Bishop) Morton's
Answer to the Jesuit in behalf of the Protestants, for they must stand or fall
together, and he that runs at those, Wounds those through their sides, and
forgets, if he be a Protestant, his Duty to the Common Interest, to serve his
Particular Passions. Parsons and his Page 7.
Second (towave the Foolish and nauseous language with which he ushers it in,)
make Calvin Speak thus; Earthly Princes do deprive themselves of all Power when
they Oppose God, nay, they are not worthy to be held in the number of Men, we
must therefore rather Spit in their Faces than Obey them. To this Dr. Morton
Answers, having showed the Jesuits Ignorance in abusing Calvin's words at
large, (too large to be transcribed) he shows his Deceit also thus; Calvin
says, (say you) that such a King is to be bereaved of all Authority. It Is
noted of Satan's Temptation, that in alleging a Text of Scripture ( he has
given his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy Ways the subtle
Tempter left out the words of greatest Importance, in all thy ways. I will not
charge you with the Imitation of that Spirit of Lying by Substracting, for you
do but add only one word (all) bareaved of all Authority. But Calvin, abdicant
se Potestate, bereaved of Authority, meaning only in that case of contradiction
against God. A little before having delivered Calvin's Doctrine in his own words
Full Satisf. Page 118, 119.
(Page 108) too clear for the Ignorance of this Scriber, or the Malice of a
Jesuit to deface it, the Learned Doctor concludes thus, Page 109. But read and
Examine all the Lines which ever Calvin Penned, and you shall not find one
Syllable that can Prejudice his Loyalty. But this was in an Age when Calvin had
more Friends in England, and Popery more Enemies: Bishop Bilson Vindicates him
thus; Calvin is so well known to those that be Learned or Wise, for his great
Pains and good Labors in the Church of God, that a few Snarling Friars cannot
Impeach his Name, though you never so Wretchedly Pervert his words. By Abdicant
se Potestate, he means not they forfeit their Crowns, but that they loose
their Power to Command in those things, which in other Cases that be Lawful
they notwithstanding retain. And though the Phrase to Spit upon their Heads
seems somewhat hard, yet the comparison so standing as he makes it, that is,
whether they were better utterly to Continue their Impious Edicts, and to deny
such Sinful Acts to their Faces, which is meant by Spitting at them, or else
Obey them, Spoiling God of his Right, and as it were pulling him out of Heaven,
I say, we must no way consent to yield any regard or Reverence, to their
Idolatrous Rage and Pride against God. This is all that Calvin in vehement
Words, as his manner is, urges; and this is far from Rebelling and Pursuing
Princes with Arms, as you would have his words to Sound. Christian Subject. P.
509.


Next he traduces Ibid.
Beza, telling us that in his Book De jure Magestratus, he does arm tke Subject
against the Prince, and in Effect overthrows the Authority of Christian Kings
and Magistrates. But where? Why, he would have us believe that Dr. Suthliff
alleges Beza his Book De jure Magistratus for this. What says Dr. Morton
here?. He assures us that he conferred with Dr. Suthliff, who Answered him,
that the Book De jure Magistratus, he never thought to be Beza his work. So
that Malice and Ignorance make up one Part of this Demonstration, and a piece
of Forgery the other. And a little before, the Jesuit accusing Beza and other
Protestants of such Doctrine, the Doctor Answers, But if you should vow
faithfully not to Eat, till you prove this, I could easily Prognosticate what
Death you should Die. Page 109.


Mr. Knox is the third he accuses in these words Cloak. Page 7.
Noble Men, (says Knox,) ought to refrom Religion if the King will not. If the
Prince will not yield to his Nobles and People, he armeth them with Power to
Depose him. Nay, says he farther, if Princes be Tyrants against God and his
Truth, their Subjects are freed from their Oaths of Obedience. He grounds the
charg upon the History of the Church, of which he will have Knox to be the
Author. But Archbishop Spotswood, (no great Friend to Presbyterians) assures
us, that was none of his Book, in these words; As to the History of the Church,
ascribed commonly to him, the same was not his Work, but his Name supposed to
gain it credit. And he proves it too, as by other Reasons, so this
particularly; spaking of one of our Martyrs, he remitteth the Reader for a
further Declaration of his Sufferings, to the Acts and Monuments of Martyrs,
set forth by Mr. Fox an Englishman, which came not to Light some ten or twelve
Years after Mr. Knox his Death. History of the Church of England Lib. 5. P. 267.
And this he does in a digression, wherein he shows what a worthy Person Mr.
Knox was, both in Life and Death, And the rather (he says) because some
Malicious, and wicked Spirits, have Studied by many Forged Lies, to deprave his
Fame; only out of hatred to true Religion, whereof he was a Zealous Promoter.
Page 264.


His fourth and last Author is Buchanan, whom he cites as another Apostle of
Scotland, but he advisedly tells us, not in what Volume we may find the words
(perhaps they are in Buchanan's Common Places, which another learnedly Cites, to
promote the same Catholic Design, for dividing Protestants in order to their
Ruin) And after he has abused the World with such Truth and Ingeniousness, as
became the Jesuit Parsons in three of his evidences; has he the confidence to
expect we should take his word in the fourth? Indeed I have found Buchanan
elsewhere charged for giving too much Power to the People, but if some mistake
not, what he does is upon a Supposition, that the Laws and Constitutions of the
Government allow it; and what the Law gives, none will question, but it may be
Lawfully challenged. But then what Power the People have by the Laws of this or
that Country is no Doctrine of Faith nor matter of Religion, but a Point of
Law; and more proper to be decided by Lawyers than Divines.


L. I suppose the Book of Buchanan's which my Author intended, is De jure Regni.


A. If that be it, there is no reason to charge the Presbyterians with it more
than others, for it was called in by Act of Parliament, as Dr. Morton P. 107.
ib.
Answers the Jesuit, Anno, 1584. And this was before Episcopacy was settled in
Scotland by King James. We have done with your Author and the Jesuit, the one
accusing the Presbyterians, the other the Protestants, in the same Words. Have
you met with any more elsewhere?


L. Diverse of the German Divines I find charged with the like Principles.


A. The German Divines might do, as ours and other too often do, measure other
Governments by that of their own Countries. But I leave others to Judge,
whether it be considerately done by Divines. Foreign or at Home, to determine
of the Power of Princes and People as if it where every where the same, when it
is not the same any where; and to make a Jus Divinum the measure of that
Universally, whose proper measure is the peculiar Laws of several Countries,
and the varying and very Different Constitutions of their respective
Governments. It seems no less a mistake, to look upon the Notions of Treason
and Rebellion in People, and of Tyranny in Princes as though they where fixed
and invariable: whereas that may be such in England which is not in France, and
that such in Germany or Poland, which is not so in England; and that so in one
part of the King of Spain's Dominions, which is not so in another. However
there needs no other Answer for the German Writers than that of Bishop Bilson,
whom your cloaked Author Cites Diverse times, as tho he favored him. Christian
Subjection, Page 513.
In Germany the Emperor himself has his Bounds appointed him, which he may
not pass by the Laws of the Empire; and the Princes, Dukes and Cities, that are
under him, have Power to Govern and use the Sword as Gods Ministers in their
Charges; and though for the Maintenance of the Emperiour, they be Subject to
such Orders as shall be Decreed, etc. Yet if he touch their Polices, infring
their Liberties, or violate their Specialities, which he by Oath and Order of
the Empire is bound to keep; they may Lawfully Resist him, and by Force Reduce
him to the Ancient and received form of Government, or else Repel him as a
Tyrant, and set another in his place by the Right and Freedom of their
Country. Therefore the German's doings or writings can help you little in this
Question, they speak according to the Laws and Rights of the Empire, themselves
being a very Free State, and bearing the Sword as Lawful Magestrates, to
defend their Liberties and prohibit Injury against all Oppressors, the Emperor
himself not excepted.

But not to digress further; Who else can you produce?


L. I will trouble you with no more at present.


A. I am apt to belive, that if the Persons you are so bitter against, were not
loath to expose our Religion as others do; they might allege out of the most
eminent Prelatists such Passages as look with as ill an Aspect upon the Civil
Government, as any other of the Reformed Divines you can produce, And if they
should do this, by way of recimination, as you provoke them to do it would you
think it reasonable from two or three Instances to conclude, that all the
Episcopal Divines are worse than Papists? And yet there is neither more Reason
nor more Honesty, in the one than in the other.


L. I should not think so ill of Presbyterian Principles, upon the report of
Papists only, but they are ill represented by some Protestants.


A. It may be so, but by none that I have seen, save such as take pleasure to
lick up the Papists Vommit, and Spue it out again upon the Reformed Religion,
after all has been clean wiped off by those that are Protestants indeed; and
that with as little regard of Truth or Modesty, as the Papists show when they
tell us, That the chief Protestans, Bishops and Churchmen, did all that lay in
their Power to exclude Mary their Lawful Queen from the Throne. Parsons
mitigation, Page 224
The Jesuit names Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Sands, Jewel, Hooper, Page 123.
etc. And, affirms that the Bishops and all the chief Protestant Ministers did
concur in the Duke of Northumberlands Rebellion. Sober Reckoning Page 253.
And that Bishops and Ministers had as deeply their hearts and hands and heads
in the Rebellion of Wyat and the Duke of Suffolk, and much more than in the
former Rebellion Ibid Page 254.
That it was the consent of these and the chiefest Protestant Bishops and
Divines, that Queen Mary might be deposed, and not only she, but her Sister
Queen Elizabeth a Protestant, which was put in practice to the utmost of the
Protestants power both with Wit and Weapons -- and this not only against the
Statutes of the Kingdom, but their own Oath to the Lady Mary in her Father's
Life. Idem Mod. ans. Cap. 3. in Mort. full Satisfact. Page 200.
The like, (says he,) the Protestant Forces and Parliaments did against the
Succession of Queen Elizabeth. Ibid. Page 4.
Many Nobles with the whole Clergy are Charged with public and Dogmatical
Positions and Practices of Rebellion against, not only God and their Queen, but
Oaths of Fidelity to Harry the 8th. Page 9.
He tells us also, that they do not now profess these Positions, because they
are not under Princes that press them in matters against their Will; but that
they would fall to them again if they were Pinched as others are. Mitigation.
Page 117.
Nay, they are bold to invoulve our Princes and State in the guilt of Rebellion
(as they will call them) in Scotland, France, the Neither Lands, etc. as having
their chief encouragement and supports from our Princes and Parliaments. Ibid.
P. 44.



L. All this has been fully vindicated long since.


A. And so has Cabvin, Beza, and others of the Reformed Churches, and that by
the same Hands. But there are a sort of Protestants of a Latter Edition, who
have little of Protestants but the Name, (and seem to have crowded what
Religion they have, into some few things wherein we agree with the Papists,
making little or nothing of most of the Differences betwixt us) and these not
admitting the Defense made for the latter, will be obliged to reject that made
for the other. Accordingly some of them have made it their business, to rake up
all the Dirt which the Papists could help them to, how clean so ever removed by
our Champions against the Romanists: and would overwhelm and bury the
Protestants Religion under it, pretending that they design only a Grave for the
Presbyterians.


L. But if the Principles of the Presbyterians be so innocent, and such as the
best of our former Bishops did approve; yet certainly some of their Practices
cannot be justified.


A. No, nor all the Practices of any sort of Men on Earth, how good soever
their Principles be, so long as they are but Men, and have Depraved Natures,
and are liable to Mistakes, and sensible of Interest and Danger, and exposed to
Temptation. You will count it highly unjust, and unreasonable, to charge a
whole Community consisting of some Millions, with the Odious Act of a sew in
Comparison, when they generally declare against it, and own no Principle that
may encourage it. And the Iniquity will be greater, if it be a rare Act, far
from a common Practice, especially, if they fall into it upon a Mistake, that
the Laws and Constitutions of the Government allow it. If this be the Case, are
not the Protestants most injuriously used? Would it not be counted intolerable
for any to brand the Church of England as a Company of Rebels and Traitors
against God; because, there are some in her Communion, who live in such open
Wickedness, as is counted Rebellion against the Most High? Especially, if they
were but few under such Guilt, and that very seldom; when, as our Church
declares against, and disclaimes all Principles that would countenance it?
Would it not be unsufferable, to censure all our Kings for Tyrants, because,
some of them have acted Tyrannically in one or two Instances, upon a Mistake
too, that the Laws did warrant them? Compare these Cases impartially, and you
will find, that upon the same ground you condemn these Protestants, others may
as justly condemn our Church, all, even the best of Kings, and the most
innocent Part of the World.


L. This seems specious, but may we not upon the same Plea acquit the Papists?


A. In no wise; The Case is vastly different in every Point.

All the Papists are engaged in continued Treasonable and Rebellious Practices
against Protestant Princes and States, by the Laws and Rules of their Religion.
Their Principles oblige them to it Universally under pain of Damnation. It will
be a Damnable sin not to be Rebels and Traitors, when they have Power and
Opportunity and hopes of Success. Those who to the utmost endeavor not to
exterminate them, fall under the damning Censure of the Church, nor are they to
desist from such Practices while there are any Heretics, Kings or Subjects
left alive. And those that perish in such attempts, how Treacherous and Bloody
soever, are assured of the Rewards and Privileges of Martyrs. None can have
reason to doubt of any of these, but those that are strangers to the Decrees of
their Popes and Councils, the Positions of their approved Writers, and the
Histories of former or latter times.


L. You say something that requires further consideration.


A. Pray consider further of it, and suffer not your self to be transported
with unreasonable Heats against true Protestants, so as to be exposed to the
Subtilties of Counterfeits; or to be Surprised with the sly insinuations of
others, which may ensnare you in Popery before you are aware.


L. You spoke before of some Protestants of a new Edition, pray, who do you
mean?


A. I mean such who profess themselves to be Protestants, but entertain
themselves, and instill into others, such Principles as are like to betray them
to Popery, when occasion serves. One of them we have discoursed of already.
Another is this, that they are no true Churches who have not Diocesan Bishops.
By this, the far greatest Part of Protestants are cut off from being True
Churches, while the Church of Rome is allowed this Honor and happiness. And so
it is and will be Inferred, that it is better for those of the Reformation to
turn Bapists then to continue in their Present State. And if it be better for
them, it will be as good for us of the Church of England: for the difference
cannot be great, where the ground of it is so small and of so little concern,
that most, both Papists and Protestants count it no Part of Religion. Upon this
account also there will be no reason left, why we should not turn Papists but
because we have Diocesans, and this can be no reason to those who know they may
have them in the Church of Rome. If all that Protestants do believe and
Practice, as Christians and Protestants, is not Sufficient to make them true
Churches without such a sort of Officers, it will be concluded that the mere
retaining of such Officers will scarce make us in England a True Church, upon
this account besides others.

For whatever is not of Christ's appointment, cannot make that to be a True
Church, which would not be so other wise, but whether Diocesans, of the Roman
mode, be of Christ's Institution, is a Question both in the Church of Rome and
England, and so it will be questionable at least, whether this in England be a
True Church, consequently no Soul can be unquestionablely safe but in the
Church of Rome. Not in the Reformed Churches, for they are not True Churches,
with the men of this Principle; not in the Church of England, for it will
scarce be probable that this is a True Church, since those Men leave no other
Probability for it, but what there is for the Divine Institution of such
Diocesans; and this is denied by many of the Romanists and by ten to one
amongst Protestants, that are learned and judicious. And who that loves his
Soul, will run the venture of it on so great odd's? So that maxim, how much so
ever cried up by some Bigots amongst us, razes all other Reformed Churches even
to the Foundation; betrays the Church of England, under pretense of securing
and advancing it, by leaving the whole weight of it to lean upon a Straw, but
is of real and great advantage to the Papists, serving to Ferret Unstable Souls
out of all other Churches, that they may run into that of Rome.

The Protestant Religion will scarce be thought worth the owning, if all the
Points of it together be of less weight and value than this one, and this such
a one wherein Religion is so little concerned.

Our People are also prepared for Popery, by those who would clear the Church
of Rome from Antichristianism, and Idolatry, and Heresy. Hereby the Grounds of
our Departure from Rome are removed, and a plain Way made for our Return, and
what is there left to deter those from Popery, who believe those Suggestions?
They will charge them with some Superstitions and Errors, and what Church is
there, which has not some Tincture of these? The Ancient Churches are
complained of on this Account, by some of their best Writers; and that the
Errors in the Roman Church may not seem more or worse; they Justify many, and
excuse others, and have devised Shifts to reconcile all in a manner to the
Doctrine or Practice of our own Church. The direct Tendency hereof, is to make
People indifferent whether they be Protestants or Papists, and to leave them in
such a Posture, as their Interest may determine them to either Religion, and so
disarm them of all that might enable them to resist any Temptation to Popery.

I may also take those into the Reckoning, who under the Name of Protestants,
write Volumes for the Service of Popery. One Doctor is notorious for this, viz.
he that writ a Satyr against our Reformation, and miscalled it a History (as he
has served diverse others of his Books) wherein following Sanders a Roman
Priest (noted above others, as one that had abandoned both Truth and Modesty)
he has made such a false and odious Representation of the Protestant
Reformation, and the Reformers, as has endangered many, and quite perverted
others; particularly, two near the Crown have declared (the one in Writing, the
other in Discourse to diverse Persons of Quality) that the Book mentioned
turned them off from the Protestant Religion to the Communion of the Roman
Church. Hereby, this Historian, such as he is (for he has nothing requisite
for such a one but his Style, and therein may be outdone by a Writer of
Legends or Satyrs, of which his Books are a Medly) has done more Mischief to
the Nation and Church, than all the Divines of his Temper and Principles are
like to do good. To say nothing that a late Popish Scribler has filled diverse
Sheets with Passages in Favor of Popery, extracted out of his Histories.


L. If this be so, I hope, the Rulers of our Church will set some public Mark
of their Displeasure upon such Books, to prevent further Mischief.


A. The Mischief done already is so great, that the Wisdom of the Nation is to
seek how it may be repaired. But if these who are most significant in the
Church, would testify their Resentment of it to the World, and withal
discountenance those, who make it their Business, to magnify little Differences
among true Protestants, and would blow up Bubbles into the bulk of Mountains,
thereby dividing us one from ancther, that we may be ruined together by the
Papists, who equally design the Destruction of us all. If they would abate
those Rigours, the ill Consequence of which is visible, and allay the Heats,
wherewith men of ill Natures, and as had Principles, such as neither become
good Protestants, nor true English Men, would inflame them. If they would
stigmatize such Maxims, as under Color of serving some little Interest, slyly
undermine our Religion, and trapan unwary people into Popery: if they would
really confute those who are ready to charge many of them, as having more
kindness for the Roman, than the Reformed Churches, and being more ready for
Accommendations, with the former than the latter; and as still obstructing what
is offered to secure us from the dreadful return of popish Darkness and
Tyranny: they would do Justice to themselves and others, and good Service to
their Country and the Protestant Interest.


FINIS.

