Brief History OF TRANSUBSTANTIATION.

SHOWING The Time when, and the Occasion how it first begun; the Growth,
Increase, and present state of it; the Grounds and Reasons, Absurdities and
Follies of it.

WRITTEN For satisfaction of those that are, and shall be called to Subscribe
the DECLARATION in the late ACT AGAINST Popish Recusants, For Quieting the
MINDS of HIS MAJESTY'S good Subjects.

By R. A. Pastor of the Church at Henfield in Sussex.

LONDON, Printed by J. Cotterel for the Author, and are to be sold by Francis
Kindon in Duck-lane, near the Crown-Tavern. 1674.

To the Honorable Sir John Pelham, Sir Nicholas Pelham, Sir Cecil Bishop, Sir
John Fagg, Sir John Covert, Sir John Stapley, Knights Baronets; Henry Goring
the Elder, Mr. Garroway Edward Blaker and Henry Goring the younger, Esquires;
with the rest of the Honorable Members of Parliament serving for the County of
Sussex.
Honorable Patriots,
TO avoid the Penalties of your late Act, many received the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, that never did before, and peradventure never will again: I judge
so, because I have heard of some murmuring at the Subscription therein
required. Whereupon I adventured to publish this short Account of
TRANSUBSTANTIATION, for their better satisfaction. We see the Nation divided
about Matters of Religion; and we know the danger of a Kingdom divided against
it self, except speedy remedy be applied. Toleration is a pretty Anodyne, that
may ease our Distempers for a time, but will never make a perfect Cure. And
Physicians observe, That violent Medicines never did good upon stubborn
Humors. For remedy of such Evils as now we are endangered with diverse eminent
persons have given their advices.

First, Some famous Princes, Peers, and Prelates of our own Nation.

Secondly, A famous Parliament, in a Message to their King, tell him, That the
only way to suppress Heresy and Schism, is to follow the example of the
Primitive Church, etc. There is (say they) a Root to be tilled; and if that be
done, we may hope to enjoy the sweet fruits of a firm and lasting Peace. But if
this be neglected (make what Laws you will) Heresy and Schism will increase,
and Divisions grow daily wider and wider.

Thirdly, The famous Council of Chalcedon called by Martianus the Emperor
against Eutyches, has taught us to remove one main hinderance of peace out of
the way.

If the great Affairs of the Kingdom will permit, You may do something for the
Church of England, that will not only stop the mouths of Evil Speakers, but
also allure all Conscientious Dissenters to return home again to their Mother,
whom they forsook, before they knew her. The great God, and disposer of all
things, send his blessing upon all Your Consultations, that they may be to His
Glory, the Honor of our Gracious Sovereign, and the Peace and Welfare of our
Country.

Your HONORS Humble Servant, Rich: Allen.
October 1673.
THE Declaration.
I A. B. do Declare, That I do believe that there is not any Transubstantiation
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or in the Elements of Bread and Wine at
or after the Consecration thereof, by any person whatsoever.

A Brief History OF TRANSUBSTANTIATION.
PREFACE.
THere are and have been many erroneous Opinions concerning the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; Three specially at this day trouble the Church, scil.
Transubstantiation; Consubstantiation; and bare Sign or Figure.

I. Bare Sign or Figure allows no more in this Holy Sacrament, but only
Bread and Wine; denying all other presence of Christ, but only in figure and
signification.

II. Consubstantiation holds, That the Bread and Wine, and the Body and Blood
of Christ, are jointly, and both together present: So that we receive in this
Holy Sacrament, not only Bread and Wine; but also in, with, or under the Bread
and Wine, we receive, eat and drink the very Body and Blood of Christ really
and substantially.

III. Transubstantiation is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and teaches,
That in this Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, after the words of
Consecration, and by virtue of the same, the Bread and Wine are turned into the
very Body and Blood of Christ; nothing remaining of those Elements, but only
outward accidents to serve the senses. The two last have been the occasion of
many Superstitions, the first of much profaness. All Three rejected by the
Church of England.

CHAP. I. The Original and first Occasion of Transubstantiation.
TRansubstantiation is a barbarous word, never heard of in the Church till
above 1000 years after Christ. The first that imagined a Carnal eating were the
Capernaites, who ( John 6.) mistook our Saviors words, for a Carnal eating his
Flesh with their teeth. This gross conceit vanished with the Authors; of whom
St. Augustine speaks nothing, but makes mention of others, who abused,
slighted, or despised this Holy Sacrament. Whereupon the old Writers and
Fathers of the Church (to preserve the dignity of this Ordinance, and to stir
up the more Piety and Reverence in the minds of men to so holy a Mystery) used
many Rhetorical expressions and flourishes of Exornation, as giving the names
of the things signified, to the signs signifying, etc. which in aftertimes
gave occasion to many mistakes, and came thus to pass.

Gallienus the Emperor, a luxurious Prince, given wholly to pleasure and
carnal delights, through his sloth and negligence, gave way to the Goths, and
other barbarous Nations, to invade and break into the Empire; who for many
years together made such havoc and spoil in France, Spain, Italy, and all
Christendom, that there followed a great decay of Learning, and Learned men. In
those dark times, Professors of Christian Religion, in reading the Fathers,
through want of skill to discern, mistook their meanings, and took things as
they read them, and commonly one thing for another; their Tropes and Figures,
for speeches natural and proper; a change of substance, for a change of power
and operation, which is all the Fathers intended. Thus the seeds of
Transubstantiation were probably sown, though the blade appeared not in many
Ages after.

About the year 870, in the Reign of Charles the Bald, a certain Knight called
Fredenardus, moved the question, Whether the Body of Christ was truly in the
Sacrament, or only in Figure? Whereto diverse answered diversely; and some more
gross than Capernaites, said there was nothing in the Sacrament, neither
substance nor accident, but only the body and blood of Christ; and whatsoever
appeared, was the outside of his body. The question was put to Bertram a
Presbyter well-beloved of the King; whose answer was, That Secundum creaturarum
substantiam, etc. According to their substance, the creatures of Bread and Wine
remained in the Sacrament after Consecration. The Popish Writers, to excuse
what they cannot deny, say, That Bertram at that time did not exactly know how
these accidents could subsist without their substance.

It was above 300 years after this, that Berengarius a Deacon, reading the
Fathers, and misliking some expressions, as savouring too much of the letter,
declined as much on the other hand to bare Figure (if Caranza abuse him not:)
for others affirm, That he was of a sounder judgment, holding a Conversion (suo
modo) as we also do. Whatever it was, Pope Leo IX. condemned his Opinion in a
Council at Vercelles, 1049. and soon after, scil. 1057, Pope Nicholas II. took
him in hand, and in the second Council of Lateran, made him Recant, and make
this Public Confession, That the very body and blood of Christ, was truly and
sensibly broken and bruised with the teeth of the faithful. And this Confession
the Pope received and allowed for Catholic. But no Papist at this day will
undertake the defense of it; and some of their own Doctors utterly dislike it,
because then aged People, who have no teeth, cannot eat effectually.

As yet we hear nothing of Transubstantiation; the word was coined afterward:
for Lombard, who lived a good while after this, says, L. 4. Sent. D. ii. If
any man enquire what manner of conversion is in the Sacrament, he could not
resolve him. Howsoever, it was never received as an Article of Faith, nor
decreed by that name, till the third Council of Lateran held under Innocent
III. 1215, where Tit. de Fide Cathol. it is declared, That the very body and
blood of Christ is truly contained in the Sacrament of the Altar, the Bread
being transubstantiate into the Body, and the Wine into the Blood of Christ.
This is the first News we hear of Transubstantiation.

We see now the Antiquity of Transubstantiation. It is one of the Tares that
were sowed whilst men slept, and grew up by degrees; but was scarce known,
never decreed as an Article of Faith; till above 1200 years after Christ; and
was never received generally to this day. For some of their own Writers (one a
Cardinal) say, That they receive it chiefly out of reverence to the Church,
because she has so decreed; but otherwise in their own judgment rather approve
that Opinion, which says, That the substance of Bread and Wine remain in the
Sacrament.

CHAP. II. The full growth and present state of Transubstantiation.
WE have seen now how Transubstantiation was first sowed, and how it grew up by
degrees; but came not to its full growth and height, till the Council of Trent,
called by Pope Paul III. and assembled in the City of Trent, December. 13. 1545.
In this Council, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation being called in question,
was with some earnestness debated between the Franciscan and Dominican Friars.
The Dominicans affirmed, That in the Lords Supper, the Bread and Wine are
turned into the very Body and Blood of Christ, matter into matter, and form
into form; and therefore it was called Transubstantiation. On the contrary, the
Franciscans contended, That it was called Transubstantiation, not because one
substance was made of the other, as Dominicans say; but because one substance
succeeded in the place of the other, the Bread vanishing, and the Body of
Christ coming in place of it. I purposely pass over the hot dispute they had
about the manner of Being of Christ in the Sacrament, and how it differed from
the manner of his Being in Heaven; wherein the Learned Friars were so
confounded, that they could neither agree themselves, nor satisfy others. The
Fathers of the Council being for most part Lawyers, understood not the
subtilties of the Divines; and it is a wonder how they should understand,
Locatum sine loco; Quantum sine quantitate, etc. In a place, possessing no
place: A Body, without quantity: Quantity, in condition of a Body or Substance:
Substance without Accidents: and Accidents, not insisting but subsisting of
themselves without a Subject. And such like monstrous fancies, enough to puzzle
all the Wits in the World, as it has done their own Doctors to this day, that
they neither understand it themselves, nor can explain it to others. Such hard
shifts men are often put to, that forsake the Truth, to maintain Error. The
Fathers conclude to make an expression so universal, as may be accommodated to
the meaning of both Parties. And so it is declared, Con. Trid. S. 13. Dec. de
Euchar. That after the words of Consecration, the whole substance of the Bread
is turned into the substance of the Body of Christ, etc. And that whole Christ,
Body and Soul, together with his Godhead, is contained in the Sacrament, and in
every part and particle of it. But this did not please all the Council neither.

CHAP. III. The Grounds and Reasons for Transubstantiation.
THE Grounds and Reasons for this Opinion, are the Power and Truth of Christ.
Who being God Almighty, can do whatsoever he will; and will do whatsoever he
has promised, because he is Truth it self. But Christ has promised to give us
his flesh to eat ( John 6.) and afterward instituting a Sacrament, did give
his Body to his Disciples, saying, Take, eat, this is my Body. Some think it
impossible, but we (say they) must believe it, for his other Miracles that he
did: as ( John 2.) he turned water into wine; and many other Miracles he did,
to witness his Almighty Power and Godhead; that they which believed him not for
his Word, might believe him for his Works sake.

CHAP. IV. The Grounds and Reasons Considered.
IT is very true, That Christ can do whatsoever he will, and will do whatsoever
he has promised. The question is, not of his Power, nor of his Truth, but of
his Will and Promise: when and where made he any such promise? He promised
indeed ( John 6.) to give his flesh for the life of the World; and so he did
upon the Cross once for all. He promised also to give us his flesh to eat; and
so he does to every faithful Receiver in the Sacrament. As he said to his
Disciples, Take, Eat, this is my Body. Not his Body Natural and Organical; our
Savior never promised to give us that to eat. That was the gross conceit of
carnal Capernaites: which our Savior reproves and corrects ( John 6.62, 63.)
That Body must ascend up into Heaven, there to continue; the flesh profits
nothing. Our Saviors words are spirit and life, and will quicken us, if
understood spiritually. Aug. Leave off then all carnal Thoughts. Quid paras
ventrem, etc? August. Why preparest thou belly or teeth? Here is no
Belly-chear, but food for the Soul: Believe, and thou have eaten.

2. Our Savior turned Water into Wine; that was a true Miracle, as all his
Miracles were. Water turned into Wine, for color, taste, and other qualities,
true Wine: but this trick of Transubstantiation is a mere juggle, that beguiles
all the senses, and would have us believe not only above, but against Reason;
yea, against Scriptures, Fathers, and Nature it self.

3. In one part of the Sacrament, there is a plain Trope or Figure ( Luke 22.)
This Cup is the New Testament in my blood; Cup put for Wine in the Cup. And why
there should be a Figure in one part of the Sacrament, and not in the other;
when they give us a reason, we shall give them an answer. But indeed we can
never expect any reason from them, who reject Scriptures, Fathers, practice of
Primitive Times, yea and the Institution of Christ himself; to set up their own
monstrous Fancies, as the Council of Constance does, ( Sess. 13.) where it is
said, That although Christ administered the Sacrament in both kinds, and
Primitive Christians received it in both kinds; yet (Hoc non obstante)
notwithstanding all this, they think fit to take away the Cup from the Laity,
to avoid some perils and scandals; no man knows what, nor themselves neither.

CHAP. V. Observations concerning the FATHERS.
BEcause our Adversaries make boast so much of Antiquity, and of all the
Fathers on their side, (as Campian does) and so with great swelling words of
Vanity deceive the hearts of the simple: To all their vain Brags, I oppose that
one Speech of the Noble King James, who said, That all the Jesuits in the
World shall never be able to produce the unanimous consent of the Fathers
against us, or for themselves, in any substantial point of Faith. And to
Duraeus his Nullam refugio antiquitatem, I oppose that of the Learned Whitaker:
Si vel unum potes proferre, etc. Produce but one testimony of pure Antiquity
for Transubstantiation, and we will yield the cause.

The same famous Prince also at a Conference with some Learned men, shows out
of Vincentius Lirinensis, and others, how the Fathers, in flourish of
Exornation, and in heat of Opposition, may overstrain. And Jesuits themselves
confess, That some of the Fathers in heat of opposition against one Heresy,
have given occasion to another. The shameful work they have made with the
Fathers, as their own Books bear witness, is sufficient to stop the mouths of
all that are not past shame. There is not one Father that is not of their own
spurious brood, in whom they can find any ground for Transubstantiation, but
only some words and phrases mistaken.

CHAP. VI. Absurdities that follow this opinion of Transubstantiation.
THE falsehood of Transubstantiation appears most clearly by the Absurdities
that follow it: As,

First, If this Opinion be true, then Christ eat his own Flesh, and gave to his
Disciples his own dead Body before he was dead.

Secondly, If this Opinion be true, then there were two Christ's; one giving,
another given; one sitting at Table, another in the hands or mouths of his
Disciples.

Thirdly, If this Opinion be true, then there are many Christ's: for according
to this Doctrine, the Body of Christ is in every part and particle of the
Sacrament; as the Bread then is divided, Christ is multiplied.

Fourthly, If this Opinion be true, then the Apostle did not speak true, to
call it Bread after Consecration (1 Cor. 10. and 11.)

Fifthly, If this Opinion be true, then the Body of Christ is in many places at
one time; in a place, possessing no place; whole Christ, in a crum of Bread or
Wafer: all contrary to the nature of a true Body, that possesses as much place
as is proportionable to its magnitude.

Sixthly, If this Opinion be true, then the Body of Christ may putrify, breed
Worms, be eaten of Mice, go into the Draught, etc. most unworthy to be spoken
of him, of whom it is said, Thou will not suffer thine Holy One to see
Corruption.

CHAP. VII. The true Doctrine held by the Church of ENGLAND.
THE same that is taught in the Twenty eighth Article.

First, To them which receive it worthily, the Bread which we break, is the
Communion of the Body of Christ, etc.

Secondly, It is given, taken and eaten in the Lords Supper, only after an
heavenly and spiritual manner.

Thirdly, The mean whereby the Body of Christ is received and eaten in the
Lords Supper, is Faith.

1. Against bare Sign and Figure, we teach, That the Body of Christ is given,
taken and eaten in the Lords Supper.

2. Against Transubstantiation, we teach, That the Body of Christ is given,
taken and eaten only after an heavenly and spiritual manner, by the mean of
Faith. There must be some great and wonderful change of the Elements, or else
the common Bread made of Corn, could never become an instrument of heavenly
grace and life, to feed, quicken and strengthen the Soul to life eternal.

And this change of the Elements cannot be in their substance.

First, Because that would overthrow the nature of a true Body, as has been
said.

Secondly, It overthrows the nature of a Sacrament.

But the change we acknowledge, is in their use, virtue, power, and operation;
so that whereas before Consecration, the Elements were only instruments to feed
and strengthen the Body; after Consecration, they are holy instruments to feed
and nourish the Soul to life eternal. For if the Woman that had the bloody
issue ( Matthew. 9.) drew Virtue out of Christ to heal her disease, only by
touching the hem of his garment or clothes in faith; Why should it seem
strange, that in receiving those holy Mysteries that Christ himself has
ordained, we may, and do receive Virtue from him, and are truly made partakers
of his precious body and blood by faith? Distance of place cannot hinder the
work of faith, ( Ephesians. 3.17.) Christ dwells in our hearts by faith.

When our Savior says, This is my Body, he intends not to show what the Bread
is, but what his Body is: Not that the Bread is turned into his Flesh, but that
his Body is Food for our Soul, as Bread is for our Body. It shows not any
conversion of one substance into another, but only the relation that is
between them. He which before called his Body Bread, now calls the Bread his
Body; that by this change of names, we might understand and believe the change
that is made by grace; and not so much heed the things we see, as mind the
things we see not: Theod. We confess then, that the Body and Blood of Christ is
given and received; we agree about the matter, all the question is about the
manner. They say it is corporally and carnally; we grant really, if by really
ye understand truly and indeed; but yet that it is spiritual, heavenly, and
divine. The Truth is present with the Sign; the Holy Spirit with the
Sacrament, feeding our Souls with the truth of Christ's Body and Blood: but the
invisible working of that divine Spirit herein is unsearchable; the natural man
cannot perceive it, because it is spiritual.

To conclude, Let us firmly believe what we cannot conceive; and rest assured
in this truth, That we receive in this Holy Sacrament the Body and Blood of
Christ by Faith, though we cannot conceive it by Sense and Reason.

FINIS.

