THE CAPTIVE Taken from the STRONG: OR, A true Relation of the gracious release
of Mistrisse Deborah Huish (by the Arm of the Almighty) from under the Power of
the Tempter, by whose fiery Conflicts she had been sorely vexed for about
fourteen years; as it was Faithfully written from her own mouth, BY WILLIAM
ALLEN, Late Adjutant-General in Ireland.

He brought me up also out of an horrible Pit, out of the miry Clay, and set my
feet upon a Rock, and established my goings. And he has put a new Song in my
mouth; even praise unto our God: Many shall see it, and fear, and shall trust
in the Lord. Psalm. 40.2, 3.

I will never forget thy Precepts, for with them thou have quickened me. Psalm.
119.93.

London, Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1658.

To the Christian READER.
READER,
THou have here a true Narrative of the various and wonderful dealings of the
Lord with this his poor Handmaid, now made rich in Faith, (through grace)
after fourteen years exercise, under great horror, and soul-dismaying
distress, as it was taken from her own mouth, at several times, by my self,
since the Lord by his grace enlarged her heart, causing her thus to speak to
his praise.

The matter herein contained needs not Epistles of commendation, at least from
one so weak and unworthy as my self, who to my grief and shame may say, have
not yet attained to the least part of this rich portion the Lord has blessed
her soul with. And indeed, the whole is an Epistle that may be seen and read by
all discerning Christians, to have been written on her heart, by the Spirit of
the living God; which I hope will more commend it to every gracious soul, then
any thing from man can do: though when I call to mind the deep distresses of
soul I have known her in, for some years passed; with the gracious deliverance
the Lord has now wrought for her, agreeable to that prayed for in Psalm. 126.4.
O Turn again our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the south; and fulfilling
that precious promise in the 5. and 6. verses of that Psalm. They that sow in
tears, shall reap in joy, etc. I may truly say, I am in my own thoughts (as to
the gracious surprising nature of this special mercy) even as one that dreams.

Reader, be not offended at the homely dress this comes forth in, either as to
often repetitions of the same things, with little variation, the want of
Oratory, eloquence, or what else the wisdom of this world calls ornament: this
being intended chiefly for the use of those that little mind such things; it
was judged, it is own natural simple Attire would best become it. Besides, this
gracious soul, since her rescue out of Satan's power, has been under very
frequent and renewed assaults from him, who has set upon her often with the
same temptation; and the Lord has taught her to use the same Weapons he gave
her at the first, with great success, to oppose him at those several times;
which were thought necessary to be set down accordingly (as appears more
particularly in the ensuing Narrative) That so the Devil's restless malice to
disturb and destroy; and the Lord's continued faithfulness to succor and
deliver, might the better be observed: But if it be substance thou seek (and
that will satisfy) I dare be bold to say, thou will here find it; yea rich
treasure (though in a poor earthen Vessel; (which will render the praise of
this precious mercy more properly due to God, unto whom alone it belongs.) She
was, when she declared these things, much in that frame of Spirit, mentioned in
1 Cor. 2.3. In weakness, in fear, and in much trembling. And her speech
(though plain and mean) thou will find in some measure, answering that in the
fourth verse of that second Chapter, viz. in the demonstration of the Spirit,
and of Power.

And of whom I may further say, she delights not to make a fair show in the
flesh, but rather to be found glorying only in the cross of Christ Jesus, by
which the world is crucified unto her, and she much crucified unto the world.

The ends of Publishing this Narrative (next to giving the glory of this mercy
to the Lord, to whom alone it is due) are, first, to warn sinners (especially
such as make a mock at sin, as in Prove. 14.9.) to take heed, how they make
light of that which the Lord can (and frequently does) make so weighty, when he
binds it on the conscience of the sinner (as in the ensuing Narrative more at
large appears; which I desire such may with fear and trembling read, and
consider well.)

If God did so deal with this green Tree, what then may be expected he will do
to the dry ones? that so, if possible, such might be stopped in their Carreer
in ways of sin and Ruin, and caused to return by this poor souls sad
experience, who having indeed known the terrors of the Lord, does declare
them, to that end that she may persuade men. But secondly, and more especially,
that poor, drooping, disconsolate, discouraged souls, who are, or may be ready
to faint under the weight of their Iniquities, and just displeasure of the Lord
discovered against them; who by reason thereof may be ready to say, as in
Lament. 3.18. That their strength and hope is perished from the Lord: and as in
Isai. 49.14. That the Lord has forsaken them) might hereby be succored,
supported, and encouraged, to look toward the Lord, and the strength and
length of those everlasting Arms, mentioned in Deuteronomy. 33.27. Which may be
underneath, when not discerned, as in this poor souls case; they were
encompassing and upholding (though not comforting) her, when she expected
nothing but the stretching them out to her eternal ruin. In her fourteen years
dangerous Voyage through such a tempestuous troubled Sea, when all that time
(as it were) neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars appeared, and her soul with continual
Billows going over it, was sorely afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not
comforted; yet he (whose way is in the waters, and his footsteps in the great
deeps, was then with her, as in Isai. 43.2. (when thou passest through the
waters, I will be with thee, etc. Checking the proud Waves; and as is said, Job
38.11.8. Hitherto shall thou come, but no further; and here shall thy proud
waves be staid:) and his thoughts toward her, even all this time, as in Jer.
29.11. Thoughts of peace, and not of evil, etc. and doubtless shall also in
due time appear to be the same, toward all his poor tossed troubled ones (who
for the present may walk in darkness, and see no light, as in Isai. 50.10.)
and yet (he that has promised to bring the blind by a way that they know not,
as in Isa. 42.16.) is leading them in the return, in that path mentioned, Jer.
31.9. They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead them,
etc. And surely such shall have cause in the end ( with this late redeemed
captive, and other precious ones) to admire the Riches of God's infinite grace;
and say as in Romans 11.33. O the depth of the Riches, both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out! And in the mean time may hereby be helped to put some check to
their own troubled thoughts, at least so far as not to make them (as is too
usual) the Rule and measure of those infinite transcendent thoughts and ways
of God toward them.

And truly the bringing forth of such a glorious work as this, out of such a
barren Womb of apprehended impossibilities (when even Faith, hopes, and hearts,
of the strongest failed concerning it) I cannot but think was given in at such
a season, to raise our Faith and hope in the Lord, by looking upon this signal
mercy, at a pledge and pattern of what God will yet do, not only for poor
disconsolate souls in like conditions; but also for the recovery and raising
his public works, so far gone back in these Nations, in this sad declining
day, as causes many of Zions Friends to speak sadly and doubtfully of them, as
they of Christ, Luke 24.20, 21, 22, 23. Who were sad in the sense of his being
taken from them (as in v. 17.) and to be mourning as Mary, in John 20.13. And
some of them are ready to faint with crying, Lord, how long? and, Help Lord, as
in Psalm. 12.1. While their Enemies insult, as in Lament. 2.16. Saying,
Certainly, this is the day that we looked for. And as in Psa. 35.20, 21. are
devising deceitful matters against them that are quiet in the Land; and yet are
subject to say, as in Jer. 50.7. They offend not, etc. Yea some of Zions
pretended lovers raised and lifted up (it is to be feared too highly) by her,
are dealing unkindly with her; and that under highest pretenses of real
affection to the name and cause of God, and interest of his people ( as in
Isai. 66.5. Saying, Let the Lord be glorified, etc. all so much involved in our
late public transactions, but now almost all given up into the hands of those
that hate, reproach, and scorn them; which is a sad cause of lamentation; and
O, that it may lie with due sense upon the hearts of all Zions mourners, to
spread before the Lord as a lamentation; and more especially the causes of it,
(some of which are mentioned (as I judge) Lament. 1.8, 9. Jerusalem has
grievously sinned, etc.) That so we may be led thereby to the cure (which I
fear we much want) as they of old, Jer. 8.6. They spoke not aright, no man
repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done! Ah! the Lord has yet
a work to do on Mount Zion, before the rod can will be removed, as in Isa.
10.12. Wherefore it shall come to pass, that when the Lord has performed his
whole work upon Mount Zion, and on Jerusalem, etc. And were that done,
judgment would soon return to Righteousness, and all the upright in heart
should follow it.

But alluding to the Acts 26.8. I would yet say, Why should it be thought a
thing incredible that God should raise the dead? considering what he has done
in this late captives case; and what is Prophesied and promised he will do more
publickely in the most needful season, Isai. 5.9. from the first to the
sixteenth, much our case (as thou may read at leisure) and yet his cure
reaches it, mentioned in v. 17. compare also Isa. 51.3. where he has promised
to comfort Zion with all her waste places, etc. and in v. 22, 23. Thus says
thy Lord, the Lord and thy God, that pleads the cause of his people; Behold,
I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup
of my fury, thou shall no more drink it again, but I will put it into the hand
of them that afflict thee, etc. And many other precious words of the like
import, which I shall not mention here, being well considered, does afford us
(in this valley of Achor) a door of hope.

But that I may not detain thee from this Feast of fat things, the best of
which is last (according to Christ's old Method) John 2.10. I shall haste to a
close, in the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 107.43. Whosoever is wise, and will
observe these things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the
Lord: Which that my soul with thine may be taught to do, and improve
accordingly; I beg thy earnest supplications for me at the throne of grace, who
am the most unworthy to make mention of the name of the Lord, (or any concerns
of his) yet desire to be found in this evil day, bearing my part with his poor
Mourners; having much cause, under the sense of my own, and sight of other
abominations abounding in this day, calling to that duty: Yet cannot but
rejoice in this great deliverance wrought for this poor soul; hoping and
longing for the remaining deliverances, purchased for (and promised to) whole
Zion: which the Lord hasten in his time: even so, AMEN.

W. ALLEN.
Sand in Devon the second day of the first Month, 1657.
To every true Mourner over his own, and Zion's sins and sorrows; especially to
such in the Churches of Christ in Ireland, to whom the soul-sinking sorrows of
Mistrisse Deborah Huish, the Subject of the ensuing treatise, was well known:
John Vernon, their Brother in Christ, and Companion in Heaviness, for Zions
sake, wishes grace for strength in weakness, to wait still in weeping, and
supplication until the times of refreshment shall come from the presence of the
Lord, Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen.
BEloved, you have herewith brought unto you an Olive Branch, showing forth the
floods abatement, and the rest and safety of the soul that is entered into the
Ark of God; the ransom of a poor Prisoner out of the Pit indeed, in which
there was no water: which will be, I know, the more welcome to some of you (I
hope only to the praise and glory of God on high) because you so long wept
before his Heavenly Throne, and made your humble supplication to him almost
unto fainting for her, who was bound of Satan so many years: yet that the
height and depth, length and breadth of the love of God in Christ Jesus our
Lord, might be the more admired of all, and magnified herein; And this Monument
of mercy may remain in the Churches, throughout all ages, toward the support
of such as sit in darkness, and see no light: I am willing, (though most
unworthy) to add my mite toward the completing this account of the grace of
God, extended to my poor (late distressed) Sister, Mistrisse Deborah Huish; who
is now made rich in Faith, through grace, and the wise Virgin-subject of this
ensuing Relation: to the truth of which, as delivered by her with much fear and
joy, with trembling received, and faithfully written from her lips, by my dear
Brother Allen, I can do no less then bear my testimony, that (to those who
judge us faithful) it may out of the mouth of two or three witnesses be
established.

Yet because many may be subject, with Thomas, called Dydimus, to question what
their eyes see not, and their fingers feel not; These shall advertise any who
do esteem soul-concernments of the greatest consequence, and desire to be
informed more perfectly in some part of the truth hereof, for the help of their
own souls, or (as natural members of the body of Christ) to administer some
assistance unto their sister, the subject of this ensuing treatise, toward her
continued walking uprightly and humbly with her God; That she is the third
Daughter of James Huish Esquire of Sidbury, in the County of Devon; To whom God
Almighty to save, has already granted an hopeful place in his house, to the
joy of the faithful Churches in Christ Jesus, who have more diligently then
some in our days, weighed the truth of their high and heavenly calling, in the
Balance of the sanctuary, and inquired into their sovereign love to Christ,
and suitable conversation to the word of God, before they gave the right hand of
Fellowship unto them: One of the three now is not, but having witnessed unto
death a good confession before many witnesses (and running best at last, even
in these worst days of declining, wherein Sunshine and worldly Professors are
so puzzled, and put to their shifts, how to get with credit again into their
wider place, out of the faithful Churches) is fallen asleep in Jesus, whom God
will bring with him at his coming, and her works shall follow her. In her stead
has God seasonably raised this her Sister to supply the breach made in the
visible body of Christ, and in the Spirit of many faithful members, who (having
sorely lamented their too little improvement of her, and some other dear
Friends, lately taken from the evil to come (of whom this world, yea the
Churches (or many amongst them) yet in too much Fellowship with the world, I
fear, were not worthy) will learn wisdom (I trust) to know their day, for
treasuring the Gold granted us, though through Earthen Vessels; and better
improve the small remnant of Gods Elect, amongst the great bodies of outward
Israel, who remain yet amongst them.

This blessed workmanship in Christ Jesus, was through his good providence (as
her Sister) from a Child instructed in the holy Scriptures, by their truly
virtuous Mother: which education the Lord Sanctified, to make her very serious
in her infancy, restraining her from common foolish and vain communication. She
was at about fourteen years old, first sensibly assaulted by the tempter, and
that furiously, as you will perceive by the Sequel: And from thenceforward you
have her own Relation, to which I shall refer the serious Reader: but must
remind many of the poor mourning Saints in Ireland, what they have often heard
from her; which may perhaps prove helpful to them, and other dejected souls,
according to my earnest wish; to whose use her rest and shelter (through rich
grace, after a fourteen years sad stormy Voyage, and bewildered wandering) is
now Dedicated. For I judge her deep casting down, and powerful raising up, was
not only for her sake, and private uses; but as a Pillar should be erected for
common caution against unbelief, and every sin which cost her so dear, and for
encouragement out of such dismal deeps, to look yet unto God's holy Temple, and
to flee for hope and refuge always, only to our one stronghold. And whosoever is
wise, and will observe these things: even they shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord. Psalm. 107.43. Let us remember then what a meeting in, of
almost all the complaints of the deserted, darkened, and disconsolate ones on
Scripture record, have refted on her poor soul, to the sore afflicting also of
some of yours, before the Throne of God, who did defer, but not deny, to answer
your poor Prayers on her behalf: but at last has heard, after you have heard
her bemoaning herself, as H^man the Ezrahite, Psalm 88.6. Thou have laid me in
the l^west Pit, in darkness, in the deep; thy wrath lies hard upon me; and
thou have afflicted me with all thy Waves: I am afflicted and ready to die from
my youth up, while I suffer thy terrors I am distracted, verse 15. with Job
7.3, 4. So am I made to possess months of Vanity; and wearysome nights are
appointed to me: when I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be
gone? I am full of tossings to and fro, unto the dawning of the day, mourning
without the Sun, etc. Chapter 30.28. with Hezekiah, reckoning till morning,
that as a Lion so would he break all my bones from day even till night will thou make an end of me. Isai. 38.13. And he has both spoken to me, and himself
has done it: I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul:
Yea, with David she might have said, I may tell all my bones Psalm. 22.17. and
ag^in, my heart is smitten and withered like grass, so that I forget to eat my
bread: by reason of the voice of my groaning, my bones cleave to my skin. And
Psalm. 102.4, 5. and again, When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my
roaring all the day long; for day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: my
moisture is turned into the drought of Summer. Psalm, 32.3, 4. and with the
Church, Lam. 3.18. My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord: nay, with
the desperate has she not said, in the hearing of many, There is no hope? Jer.
18.12. And with Cain, My punishment is greater then I can bear: Or, my Iniquity
is greater then that it may be forgiven. I have sinned unpardonably; you sin in
praying for me: I am undone and rejected; I know the very time when it was
sealed to me; I know it, I am sure I am damned for ever, etc. Oh! how have we
been terrified together in our assemblings on her behalf, who have seen her
sorrow, and disability to speak, unless sometimes in such like Language
against her soul, and our seeking her Salvation; who was as a very fearful
spectacle pining away (even like to an Anatomy) before us: and how many of us,
like the Friends of Job, came at first to mourn, and comfort her; but fainted,
left off, relinquished her, concluding hopelessely! how has a whole Church
flagged in their Faith herein, (who resolved to fast and pray for her until
deliverance) fainted and left off, yea dropped away as weary, or ashamed? how
have some holy women (skillful in mourning) assembled? what private endeavors
by some obtaining her to their houses, have been assayed? but all as water
spilt upon the ground, in their esteems: Yea, to the glory of the grace of God
alone herein, (who then loves to approve himself most favorable to his chosen,
when they are most friendless, helpless, destitu^e, and most stand in need of
succor from him,) let me add further this observa^ion to yours, that a
special Friend, whose affection led him further, and longer at a certainty then
mine, or any I observed to weep for her, and to reprove others for fainting,
and neglects of her before him, yet lately wrote from Ireland to me his
despairing also concerning her; at the very interim God our God, who comfort
those that are cast down, was surely succoring her, and encouraging his poor
mourning fainting followers, whose Spirits were willing, though the Flesh was
weak, as he will further do in their sight, unto public admiration, for those
who in this evil time shall go forth weeping bearing precious seed, according
to his promise, Psalm. 126.5, 6. and their Prayers in the fourth verse: Yea,
when there is but little Faith in the Earth; for alas, how have we, even we
that were nearest related also, left off our hope for this poor soul? Yea, how
have I, to my shame, that had the charge of her, failed most herein! I must say
indeed, to my abasement, the weights and fear of her untimely end; the cares of
keeping her from any Instrument to accomplish it; and the dread of diverse kinds
that so long encompassed me concerning her, with the trouble we had to get her
eat her bread, and to gaining her under hearing the word of God (which is more
necessary) with the discouraging influence of living under the daily droppings
of those many dismal predictions she uttered of her sudden and certain ruin
and destruction, after more then three years care of the kind aforesaid, and so
many attempts and faintings: Alas, Paimed now at no more in my own mind, then
to get her safe again delivered into her dear Parents hands, that my face might
not be covered with shame, according to my fear of her untimely end, at such
distance from them: which being accomplished by the good hand of God, (in our
safe Voyage through his special grace, who led us and our little ones through
his stormy deep, and after some hazzards landed us in safety; which I wish we
may not let slip) alas, she almost fell out of my memory, and was seldom in my
Prayer; the Lord grant me the mercy of her earnest supplications; for which
Jobs Friends were made humbly to apply to him through like frailty toward him
in his sorrow, as I have reason to impute to my self toward her herein.

Thus has the Lord our God stained the pride of all glory, as he shall yet
more publickely do unto his praise; and give grace to the humble, that they who
glory, might only glory in him, as the great end of his works of wonder, his
great Salvations, and the operations of the Almighty in the Earth; that the
faint, who rely on the Lord, may be revived; that youths, and every confident
one may faint, and be humbled before him. Wherefore Beloved, I beg the best
effects in every heart, of this unspeakable mercy, and to the glory of God in
the highest, which I trust is the only end, why my poor Brother and Companion
in mourning for our own sins, and shortness, and for yours also, which have
the greatest hand in hiding good things, yea the expected public Salvations
also from us, have agreed by the Advice of diverse, who are also in the dust for
Zion, in this dark declining day, to recommend this token of good from God our
Father and yours, unto you, toward the support of your sinking souls, in his
cloudy, gloomy hour, with our poor Epistles, full of affection to your
precious souls, affixed to this gracious earnest of releasing, drooping, dying
Captives; who shall draw nigh to, and alone depend on God: And these I trust
shall come to every hand, with some effect of our earnest Prayer, that the Lord
God (Almighty to save) would accompany it, and greatly bless this grain of
Mustard seed, to make it grow and multiply unto the Faith and refreshment of
many, the abasement of all, and the glorious exaltation of our King, who
sits at the right hand of the Father for us, and sends the Comforter to
succor his feeble ones, in earnest of his care of those who cast their care
upon him, who only has the healing Medicines, and will surely (right soon)
therewith visit such in every Nation; When all the proud, (how high soever) and
they who still do wickedly, shall be as stubble before him. Mal. 4.1, 2. 2 Samuel
22.28. Oh that this precious answer to your supplications (in the best season)
might be now improved, as a prop to uphold your hands, with the Rod of God
therein, in this doubtful day, that Amalek may not prevail: Oh! wrestle
fervently in the unspeakable privilege of Faith; and (with Christ in your
Arms) present your weepings, and spread your supplications before the Father
in other distressed cases still before you, by this encouragement; yea, let us
improve it to public as well as private benefit; for surely patterns of mercy
should be so made use of, 2 Cor. 1.10. And call for Faith in the path of them,
as the most natural improvement. 1 Timothy 1.16. Heb. 13.5. as well as to dread
the expectation of a contrary portion, in the contrary path. Psalm. 125.5. And
as the Declaration of Judgments, with the cause assigned, or the way into
them, warns all, and speaks encouragement to none; so the manifestation of
grace, and the path thereof, is an encouragement to all in the same path, and
Spirit; which was eminently seen of old, in God's special presence with Israel,
in driving back Jordan by his mighty Power for their present deliverance (and
their adversaries destruction) for which they erected Pillars of praise, to
encourage the future Faith and hope of faithful ones that should follow God
fully, as his Servant Joshua did: Yet could not Israel then have the least
ground to expect the driving back of Jordan again, or removing other
difficulties, to have encouraged their retreat, or furthered any humane design,
to which they were sometimes subject through unbelief: Neither in our days
have any persons ground to suppose (much less to conclude) that the Lords
eminent presence in the high places of the field, scil. Naasby and other parts
with his people, while they faithfully followed him, can now yield any
encouragement to expect the like presence of God, while they are turning back,
and declining from him.

Nevertheless, new appearances of the like glorious presence with the truly
humble followers of the Lord, (as the matter should require) might again be
safely expected from the Majesty on high; who by the former no doubt manifested
his right hand Power, for the strengthening of the Faith and hope of all
upright followers of him, according to Psalm. 33.8, 9, 10, 11. and Psalm. 36.6,
7, 8, 9. and Mic. 6.5.

And the very end of the Lords deferring to relieve Lazarus, whom he loved
until he was dead, and laid in the Grave, and so no visible hopes left unto his
Disciples touching his present resurrection, was to the intent they might
believe, Joh. 11.15. not that he raised him only; which every sensual beholder
would believe: but that in future distresses, in their greatest depths, they
might depend on him by that proof of his Power to save to the uttermost.

And no doubt Israel of old, of whom its said, They soon forgot his works, was
so ravished with the red Sea wonder, that they ever retained the Theory
thereof, and could all of them relate it to any that should ask them, either in
matter or manner concerning it: but their not retaining the Teaching sense
thereof for use, in point of thankfulness for past deliverances, and of Faith
in their future straits, in the way of following God; left them to those fears,
through which they fell short of obeying God, and entering Canaan. Now
therefore, thou poor sinking despairing soul, who sit in darkness, and
see no light; Learn thou assuredly, this pattern of mercy and long suffering
is to manifest to thee, that the Lord's thoughts are higher then thine; that so
thy soul may be encouraged, under the sentence of death, by reason of sin,
through believing, to have life and hope in him: If thou say, Is any sorrow
like my sorrow? Yea, is any sin like my sin? and truly considerest the sorrow
of this soul, and most desperate sin of a secret Devilish mind, in this case
related, with her confident expectation of Hell thereupon, on the one hand; and
the gracious pity and acceptance she found from Christ, being embraced by him
as in open Arms, so soon as truly persuaded humbly to come unto him, on the
other hand: I hope it will silence such suggestions distressing thee, and seal
to thy comfort the truth of that promise, that is so richly confirmed to her,
John 6.37. Now if any accepted through grace, should abate in their Faith,
because their present Feast seems not so full, nor their entertainment so
sensibly free, as that whereat this soul now sits so fully refreshed; I trust,
if (in their weakness) supporting grace be surely afforded, and they found
waiting in their Fathers house and affairs, that word shall suffice to balance
them from fainting and fretting at such grace to others, recorded, Luke 15.31,
32. And that her years of sorrow shall be by such considered, according to Ps.
90.15. Make us glad, according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us. And
oh! that this might warn all of every sin, and neglect, which being bound on
her soul, have been found so long and so heavy a load: but how shall I utter
the evil and bitter effects thereof, better then by asking the serious soul,
what debasing, defiling, and enslaving misery himself has experienced, as the
effect of but eating the forbidden fruit at first, and that by another? Yea,
with design to be made more Spiritual, neither have good men's good meanings
excused the least transgression or error: This treatise will tell you also what
those poor souls lose, who neglect, or are slighty in family-endeavours, in the
word and Prayer; in both which she found more benefit (through grace) then in
more able public Administrations, under which some can scarcely profit,
through their horrid neglect herein; and will have poor kindred, Children, and
Servants, one day complain of their loss, by living under the shadow of such,
few of whom will shine as Stars in the Firmament, according to the promise,
Dan. 12.3. if they persist in the neglect thereof, and forget that exhortation,
Ephesians. 6.4.

That I may not make an end of these poor hints, toward the improving this
mercy, without remembering the Mourners in Dublin, of another (elect one I
trust) whose secret sins, standing in the light of God's countenance, humbly
waited for his Salvation, so many solemn days among them, possessing Months
and years of sorrow, and they of tears for her poor soul, who alas is not now
found in the way of the true converts path, Psalm. 116.17, 18, 19. And will
surely, as Jacob, have her fears renewed, for building short of Bethel, when
new troubles shall incompasse her, and the Courts (short of the Lord's) prove
unable to comfort: Oh that this effectual experience of breaking the bands of
Satan for another (who was with less hope and expectation so often joined with
her in your intercessions) may renew your strength in supplication for her;
whose seeming weanednesse from the world, and the weights of such vain Company
as now beset her, sometimes administered hopes, that she would never be ashamed
to choose affliction with the people of God, nor be otherwise then as Hester in
the Court of the miss-informed and enraged against them. Oh! that by fervent
wrestlings she might be raised again from every false rest; and as being
plucked by the Arm of the Almighty, as a firebrand out of the fire, might be
saved from all vain pomp, infecting Company, and customs; the fury of the
highest of men, and from smoother temptations more near unto her, promising her
liberty in neglects; and so beguiling her of her choicest good, as the Tempter
beguiled Eve: yea, working I fear with the Stumbling Block of the falls of
some, (found in the ways of God) improved to the utmost in this evil day, to
prejudice souls with them; so that many indeed are now offended in Christ, and
I much long that a Soverain love to his holy ways, might preserve her from
that evil: According to Psalm. 119.11, 165. Yea, let the kindness of Gideon be
remembered, to oblige us herein; who unweariedly with unparalleled
uprightness, showed forth his labor of love to the Lord, and to us in the
Lord unto death, resting much in the persuasion, that his dearest relation (and
Children left behind him amongst us) would never more be beset with the
unexpected snares of that sort now encompassing; but be in the constant special
care of the most faithful of the Saints; delighting herself with David, in
those that excel in virtue.

Me thinks this mercy improved aright (without diversion) may be extended also,
to Administer reviving to the poor Prisoners for righteousness sake (who
(only in a way of righteousness) shall humbly wait for the Salvation of God)
notwithstanding the public reproach cast upon them, by men of corrupt minds:
For behold, the hand of the Lord, who led Joseph through Imprisonment,
slanders, and many difficulties, and thereby fitted him for further special
public relief and benefit; (though his Brethren meant not so, Genesis 50.20) is
not yet shortened, but here showed gloriously in the ransom of this sometimes
poor hopeless Prisoner, that distressed ones may have hope in him, Who causes
light to arise out of darkness; leading his Prisoners forth in his set time
and season; who will say shortly to his Captives, Show your selves, according
to Isai. 49.9. And surely this may help to succor also the whole Zion of God;
though she be ready to say, My God has forgotten me. Oh that therefore that
travel spoken of Isa. 66.6, 7, 8. etc. were now begun by all that have their
hearts heavy laden, with their own (and others) Iniquities; and that such
might never hold their peace, nor give the Lord rest: but in the strength of
Jacob, by weeping and supplication, wrestle with the Mighty one of Jacob, till
he return in pity unto Zion, to their own souls, and to all the distressed who
wait upon him; and to the stopping the mouth of all Iniquity in the Nations (so
lately rescued by his hand) even till the dry bones live, and the heart of
those that weep now, greatly rejoice, and flourish like an herb; and the hand
of the Lord be known toward his Servants, and his indignation toward his
Enemies; yea, to that effect in Isai. 66.12. For thus says the Lord, Behold, I
will extend peace to her as a River, etc. and Jer. 30.21. And their Nobles
shall be of themselves, etc. That the glory of the Lord may be redeemed in the
Land.

Let us still wait on the Arm of the Lord, who caused Ahasuerus to be restless
in the night, till he had read the records of the Chronicles of the good
service of Mordecai, to the changing his heart from his wicked decree, and
turning it against his treacherous Flatterers; and who have taught us to
remember his hand upon the haughty of old, and to plead it in future distress,
as in Isai. 51.9. Awake, awake, put on strength, Oh Arm of the Lord! awake, as
in the ancient days, etc. For hereby has he graciously given us a fresh proof
of his Power, to perform whatever may make to our relief and comfort in every
condition, whether we be encompassed with public, or private distresses:
wherefore I have somewhat enlarged upon this opportunity of Printing on this
occasion, which otherwise I love not, thus variously to improve this instance
(though some men may esteem them unnecessary diversions) for the begetting of
Faith in God by this Example of dread, and encouragement; which can only
enable to meet him acceptably in humiliation, and before the decree be gone
forth, as against Shil^e of old, and Judah, who perished with the signs of
God's presence in their hand, through their not observing aright, to Sanctify
his name, who had made them so strong and successeful against their
Adversaries. And seeing the Lord alone can heal our sickness, and our wound,
and the breach upon us, which is wide as the Sea; let every true Mourner humbly
approach before him, on the behalf of our selves, and whole Zion, the Prophets,
Rulers, Judges, Laws, Customs of these Nations; and on the behalf of the
afflicted, deserted, unbelieving, divided, and thereby liable to be destroyed
people; and to turn the heart of those that are enraged, and ready to do evil,
because it is in the Power of their hands to do it: for now all men almost see
our sickness, and our wound, how foolish many Physicians and our false refuges
have proved.

Let us therefore now cease not only from Babylon, Egypt, Ashur; Horses,
Armies, fenced Cities, etc. But also from those other fair shows in the flesh,
to which some fearful Friends would compel us to conform, which have too often
deceived us: Neither let us humor the lusts of men and multitudes, nor be
found in the indirect path of fretting proud wrath, envying and grudging one
against another; nor in rash engaging, submitting to traditions, temporizing,
etc. But in deep humiliation, and brokennesse of soul, let us be as Doves of
the Valley, every one mourning over his Iniquities, which is the most hopeful
path of refreshment from his presence, who has hereby showed us his right
hand; which will certainly relieve, and that right soon, those that truly sow
in tears; for according to his faithful word, Psalm. 126.5, 6. He that goes
forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless return again with
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him: When the Blossom of pride shall
wither, and the bands of mockers will be made strong: Let my soul and yours be
embarked with those that weep this day before the Lord, choosing affliction with
his people, rather then with those who rejoice now, and are not sensible of the
afflictions of Joseph; but make merry with the nakedness of Noah: and that the
Counsel given us for support, in Isai. 26.20, 21. may be accompanied with the
residue of the Spirit for our guidance and succor, as being given us to be a
word of gracious Counsel for such a day as this: And that though Satan be seen
yet further to fall, as lightening from Heaven; We may chiefly rejoice, in that
our names are written in the Book of Life. And now to be still freely admitted
with this precious soul, to that Feast that fades not for evermore; is the
humble and earnest desire (on the behalf of himself, and all Saints) of

The unworthiest of those who yet stand by Faith, through the upholding grace
of God, JOHN VERNON.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THou have here presented to thy view, and serious consideration; an eminent
pattern of Go^'s faithfulness, in fulfilling that good word, Matthew. 12.20. A
bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking Flax shall he not quench, till he
send forth Judgem^nt unto Victory. Which may help to confirm thee in that
great truth, that there is nothing too hard for him. Genesis 18.14. compared with
Job. 42.2. Who can, and will work when he pleases, and none shall let it,
Esai. 43.13. Neither the height of Satan's malice, nor the depth of sinners
misery, can hinder the free Communication of his mercy to such as look for
Salvation from him, (to which all are freely invited) Esai. 45.22.

And although I judge, two such testimonies as are annexed to this treatise,
suffic^ent to satisfy such as know them, of the truth of what they assert: Yet
I having been (by the providence of God) for some years past, an eye and
ear-witness in the Family, to the sad and deplorable condition of this poor
soul, now enriched from above, (who is the subject of the insuling Narrative) I
have thought meet to add my mite, and thereby signify my consent to the truth
of what is contained in the two foregoing Epistles, concerning the late
distressed state of that Daughter of Abraham, now loosed by the loving
kindness of the Lord. She has been indeed for a long season in the depth of
misery (as to her inward man) being bound in affliction, and Iron, by the
Tempter, who was suffered to assault, and buffet her poor soul even to despair
of all help or hope; and making her often to conclude, that her sins were
greater then could be forgiven: but that God, who is rich in mercy, has
appeared graciously (in his own time) to hear, and answer the Prayers of his
people in her behalf, in relieving her poor soul, and making her to see, and
acknowledge to his praise, that the former suggestions concerning him (and her
souls irrecoverable estate) was from the Father of lies; whose work it is, to
entice and tempt souls unto sin, and then wound them in the sense of it,
endeavoring by all means to persuade such, that they have out-sinn'd the mercy
of God.

But behold here the God of truth, whose grace is sufficient to support under,
and deliver effectually from such soul-sinking considerations, making Satan
appear to be (what indeed he is) a Lier. And seasonably succouring this
dejected despairing soul, who for a long time had the sentence of death in her
self, and was far from expecting that blessed issue that is fince brought forth
in her soul (by the mighty Power, and naked Arm of the Lord) who has hereby
helped her to see what little reason she had, or has, to trust in her self;
and the sure ground he has now given her, to stay on him as the living God,
who raises the dead; so that she is now made able (yea willing) to
acknowledge, His great gooddesse that has delivered her from so great a death,
2 Cor. 1.9, 10.
and does deliver; and is still helped to hope and trust that he will yet
deliver, and strengthen her Faith, to quench all the fl^y darts of the Devil.

Behold yet further the exceeding Riches of God's grace not a little
illustrated by setting free this Prisoner, sometimes even past hope in her own
(and some others) apprehensions: She that was for a long season sadly
concluding with the distressed Church, in Lament. 3.18. That her strength and
hope was perished from the Lord, Is now saying with Saul, in Acts 9.6. Lord,
what will thou have me to do? And with the Psalmist thankfully inquiring, What
shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? And in some
measure enabled to resolve with him, To take the Cup of Salvation, and to call
upon the name of the Lord, as Psalm. 116.12, 13, 14. And she, that was lately
(in her own esteem) not so good as a Dog; yea (to use her own words) worse then
any Devil, is now, (By the Father of mercies, and God of all consolations) made
meet to be partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in light: The sad
sentences she had often past upon her self (in the sense of her sins) being now
graciously reversed by her Heavenly Father, who has set her feet in a large
place: so that now, if sin, Satan, her own corruptions, or any other spiritual
Adversary, comes to lay any thing to her Clarge, she may be ready (the Lord
assisting) to produce her pardon; and able to say from blessed experience, as
in Romans 8.33, 34. It is God that justif^eth; who is he that condemns? that it
is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, who also makes intercession for us

And I hope this eminent instance of his grace abounding above the abounding of
sin, (added to other Examples of this kind recorded in his holy word) will help
to support and succor some poor souls under the like discouragement to hope in
his mercy, who waits to be gracious; and surely he has gracious ends in
affording this (and such like) deliverances, which greatly concerns all
persons to labor to understand, and improve aright.

First then, let sinners of all sorts (both in Zion and out of it) from the
ensuing narrative, take notice of the sad, ensnaring, and soul-destroying
nature of sin, and the wages of it, which this poor soul (as she feared) had
certainly found to be eternal death, had not the God of grace, (whose loving
kindness is better then life) caused her to hear the joyful sound of the voice
of the Son of God, that her soul might live, John 5.25.

Secondly, from the consideration of the mercy she has obtained, let poor
sinners be incited and encouraged, to come unto God through Christ for mercy,
who knows how to multiply pardon to the worst of sinners, as in Isai. 55.7.
with Nehe. 9 17. Especially let such as are inquiring the way to Zion, with
their faces thitherward, Though with trembling hands and hearts; and all that
are planted in the house of the Lord, be encouraged to wait upon God, who will
in no wise cast out those that come unto him. Let the first of these labor to
look to the Lord, that they may be enlightened: Psalm 34.5.
And let the other be confirmed, in the experience they have had of his great
goodness, that so God may have all the glory from both, as a Fruit of this
special favor afforded to this his handmaid, in so signal a return of many
Prayers; for which proportionable praises should wait for, (and be duly
rendered unto) our God in Zion, who is a present help in the needful time of
trouble. I shall not add, but to entreat thee to read, and consider well,
before thou censurest, (or seem to despise) the ensuing subject, as the day of
small things; but labor rather, to weigh the worth of this mercy in the
Balance of the Sanctuary;

That so thou may understand the end and use of it, and be helped to improve
it aright, to the praise of the Author of every good and perfect gift, and the
profit of thine own soul; that so thou may be able to say with the Prophet
of old, Micha 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons Iniquity, and
passes by the transgressions of the remnant of his heritage! that retains
not his anger for ever, because he delightin mercy: And from thence be
encouraged to wait upon him for the fulfilling that faithful word, Isai. 40.29,
30, 31. He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might, he
increases strength, etc. Compared with Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the Lord, and be
of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the LORD.

ROB. DOYLY.

To all, both small and great, that have either tasted of the rich grace of
God, or desire to be made partakers thereof, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Men, and Brethren,
THough we were very much strangers, both to the person and state of this
gracious handmaid of the Lord (the subject of this ensuing treatise, during
the time of her sore bondage, and captivity of Spirit; and so had no share with
those that in a solemn manner (expressly on her account) sympathized, sighed,
and groaned to God in her behalf: Yet having now through grace (we trust, we
may say) to the advantage of our souls, heard out of her own mouth, in the
midst of the Congregation to which we belong, (to wit, the Church of Christ at
Dalwood in Dorset) the wonderful deliverance which God has wrought f^r her
poor soul: We cannot, but in a special manner rejoice with her, and bless the
Most High for his unspeakable mercy.

That this work is of the Lord, and soul-work indeed; it speaks for it self to
all the wise in heart. That the Relation is very faithfully made, We do hereby
testify, having (as we said before) heard out of her own mouth the substance of
the whole; who then (in point of circumstance) would have been more particular
and large, had not time, and the earnest solicitation of a near Relation of
hers (whom God had used in some good measure, as an Instrument of her
enlargement) concurred to prevent her.

Two or three of our observations, while she related this unto us, we cannot
but mind the Reader of.

1. That having layen so long (as the Narrative mentions) under such ^error
of soul; And having now newly received her enlargement, she was so filled with
admiration at the exceeding Riches of the grace of God in her deliverance, as
that it many times stopped her Spirit, for a considerable season: and she could
in all appearance) have dwelt long between sentence and sentence, in a secret,
inward silent lifting up of her soul to God in thanksgiving.

2. We observed very much faithfulness, and tenderness of soul in her
faithfulness; in that she dwelt as long upon, and spoke as largely to, the
darkest passages of her blaspheming God, and maligning his people (though
doubtless the remembering of such things was with grief of soul to her) as in
speaking to the highest manifestations of the grace of God, in her present
enjoyments of her soul; expressing her self to the same effect with the
Apostle, Romans 5.20. Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound.

Tenderness, In that with very much circumspection she endeavored to keep
even to a tittle, both to the matter and Method of Gods dealing with her: And
if at any time she (or any else, who knew her in her afflicted estate, and
endeavored to help her memory) slipped, she would presently correct both herself
and them, and state the matter aright, and in its place, before she would let
it pass.

3. That her rejoicing was mixed with much holy fear and trembling; still
esteeming her self as a poor Worm before the Mighty God of Israel, though
exalted to many glorious Privileges through his rich grace.

We might speak further, what we observed of the crafty wiles of Satan, in the
manner of his working with her poor soul; first training her on from sin to
sin, and from degree to degree, still forestalling her with a persuasion that
she was already both in the sin, and in the degree which he would train her
into: And when by that slight he had got her further on, then persuading her,
that she had out-sinned all grace; so endeavoring to destroy all hope. And
indeed this is our common observation of the working of Satan, (to wit) That to
persons that are in a wretched state, and insensible thereof, he lesseneth sin,
and wideneth grace, that they may run the more greedily in their evil ways;
making out to them, as if the gate of grace, opening to life, were wide enough
for all persons to pass in at, with all their sins. But to those persons that
are brought to the sight of their sins, and their wretchedness thereby, he
wideneth sin, and narroweth grace; making out to them, as though their sins
(though not against the Holy Ghost) are greater then can be forgiven: in both
which, he is a grievous deceiver.

Also we might here more largely show the Reader, what subtle slights Satan
used with this Servant of the Lord, to hinder her obedience to the Commandments
of Christ, and particularly to that of Baptism; presenting it as a poor low
thing, etc. But as to that, we shall in this place only give thee notice, that
when she was in the highest revelations, and had the most sealing Testimonies
of the grace of God to her soul, She was then led forth most affectionately to
own the Lord Jesus in that despised Ordinance and appointment of his; as may be
seen more at large in the Narrative it self; suitable to that word given to
Paul, after his great revelations of grace, Act. 22.16. where it was said unto
him by the Spirit, And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be Baptized, and wash
away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord.

What we shall further say in this matter, shall be only to signify, that
upon the whole (she desiring to give up her self to the Lord, to walk in all
his Commandments blamelessely, and to have fellowship and communion with his
people, in the exercise of all the Gospel-Priviledges instituted by Christ
their King and Head, for his Body the Church; and particularly with this
Congregation, to watch (and be watched over by them) She was with universal
satisfaction accepted, and accordingly Baptized, and received. Many fierce
Assaults has the Enemy of her peace made against her, since the chain of her
bondage was broken: but against all, the Lord has made very gracious provision
through the word; bringing home (through the Power of his Spirit) many sull
promises to her soul, and establishing her through them.

To the God of Peace, who (through his own Rich and free love, after many years
horror of soul) is become her Peace; do we desire to commit all his chosen
Vessels to honor, for his calling in his season unto, and for his establishing
and growth of those that are called in the truth, as it is in Jesus: which
Jesus we desire to own as our King, our Crown, and hope of glory; and to whose
appearing with that glorious Kingdom, we desire to be daily better prepared:
That at his coming we may have the honor to be of that blessed number that
shall wait upon him with Hallelujahs, singing forth praise, glory and honor to
the Father and to the Lamb, for ever and ever, Amen.

Your Friends and Brethren in the hope of the Gospel, Hen. Parson. Jo. Owen.
Jam. Hill. 1658.

The Captive taken from the strong, or a true Relation of the gracious Release
of Mistress DEBORAH HUISH, (by the Arm of the Almighty) from under the power
of the Tempter, by whose fiery Conflicts she had been sorely vexed for about
fourteen years; as it was faithfully written from her own Mouth, etc.
ABout fourteen years ago I was cast into deep despair, by reason of
blasphemous thoughts cast into my mind, when I was applying my self to the
reading the word of the Lord; which thoughts were despising, slighting, and
contemning God, his word, works, and ways: with which being frequently
assaulted, I came to gather Conclusions, that God had past an irrecoverable
decree against me for my final condemnation; and though I had reluctance in my
heart against such thoughts, yet many times I did give my consent to them, and
approved of them; and from thence came to have great horror seize upon me, for
many days and nights after. Causing me to conclude these to be but the
forerunners of that great destruction from the Lord, which I judged was
prepared for me: and such thoughts as these at first were (continually almost)
born in with great weight upon my soul: about which time my Sister Anne Vernon
(then Huish) observing my dejected frame, desired to know the cause; I told her
then that God had rejected me for my blasphemous thoughts I had conceived
against him, worse then any Devil; but my Sister indeavored to persuade me,
these thoughts were not mine, but the Devil's: this gave me some respit for a
little time. bur I was suddenly assaulted again, and have continued under such
assaults eversince, more or less, till the time hereafter specified, when the
Lord of his free Mercy began to make way for my escape.

I do also remember that I had not only despising, slighting thoughts of God,
but also of his people, calling them in my thoughts (though not with my lips)
liars.

But when I did think I consented to such thoughts, then horror would seize
upon me, even to overwhelme me: and in this condition I remained till my going
into Ireland, which was about June 1654.

After my coming there, the Lord visited me with the Smallpox; and in that
time of sickness I thought I had some refreshment from the Lord, by consulting
his word; but was suddenly after assaulted with more and worse blasphemous
thoughts then ever before, and then did verily believe I was possessed with the
Devil, and did think I talked with him, and heard him say, that God loved to
torment and bring misery upon his Creatures; which thoughts were so pressing
upon me, that I was ready to wish the destruction of the Almighty; and did to
my thinking hate him; crying out (in the hearing of many) I am undone to
Eternity: and so remains till lately: And so dreadful were these (last
mentioned) thoughts to my soul, that from that time I concluded, I had
committed the sin against the holy Ghost, which before I did only think I had,
but now was confirmed in it, and began to think I had really trampled under
foot the blood of Jesus Christ, and had done despite to the Spirit of grace;
and thence concluded that nothing now remained, but a fearful looking for of
vengeance, that should devour the Adversary: and this put me into unexpressible
torments night and day, thinking the Devil would come and fetch me away, and I
believed I was certain of it: and when any went to pray for me, I thought that
hastened my destruction, and therefore I hated them for it, and had in my mind
many sad wishes as to those that prayed for me, counting Hell my portion, and
that I should by such means be sooner cut off, and that they sinned in praying:
I having sinned against the holy Ghost, thought they ought to hate me, but not
pray for me: I did also think I always heard a fearful sound in my ears,
especially when it was windy or rainy weather, and then thought I should be
cast into Hell presently: which made an unexpressable torment of mine to think
of it; and yet under all the means used to seek God for me, I found no benefit.

But at Dublin, when days were set apart, to seek God for me, I dreaded those
days, above all other, thinking verily that God was engaged in honor, to come
out against me in fierce indignation, as also against such as sought him on my
behalf: and I did many times think the Lord in a way of judgment would turn me
into some filthy hateful Monster or other, as a Memorial of his just
displeasure against me; and all the time that prayers were put up for me (which
was very frequent in Dublin, as also discourses very often with me) I could not
perceive that any ever took the least hold on my heart, but still I had that
Scripture often on my thoughts: Psalm. 65.5.
By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer them: which I understood
to be some answer in a way of judgment as to me: I had also that Scripture
much on my heart: Matthew. 12.31, 32.
He that sins against the holy Ghost, shall never be forgiven in this world,
nor in that which is to come.

And as to reading the Scriptures, my heart was much averse to it; oneiy
sometimes out of compassion to others I did read, and sometimes did mind them
what the casting off the Scriptures had cost me, who is now rejected for ever,
wishing them to take heed of the like: but it was very seldom that I did this,
and long ere I could bring my heart to it.

I do also remember when I lived at Clantarfe in Ireland, and used to go to
Dublin sometimes, to hear the word; I have often thought, when I went, I should
be destroyed ere I came back again; and when I did hear, I strove all I could
to forget what I heard, or read, having my expectations of Hell so heightened
by all such means, that I could not endure it; and would have given any thing I
might never have gone to have heard, or prayed more, it did so increase the
torments of my soul. And when I came into the place where I used to hear, I
st^ll expected to hear some sudden voice from Heaven, declaring my destruction;
and did think many times that the wind arose just as I came to that place to
hear, and did believe the Lord must needs appear in judgment against me for
coming, and sitting as one of his people among them, whom I in my heart hated:
and would long that the duties might be ended, that I might be free from those
fears that were upon me while there.

I do also remember that almost every thing did afright me; either a cloudy
day, the Sun or Moon Eclipsed, or the Suns rising red in a morning, or the wind
blowing high: All these I thought were signs of my destruction, that I did
believe the Lord would execute upon me for my hatred against him and his ways.
And indeed such an inveterate hate I had against him, that I judged, I loathed
and abhorred the doing good to any, saying in my self, that the Lord would damn
and destroy me; and why should I do any good? I also wished many times, I had
never been born, or had never had eyes to see, or ears to hear, or else had
been made the most contemptible Creature in the world, because when they die
there is an end of them; but when I die, my mis^ry then begins. I also wished,
I might ^^ever hear any one speak more from the Scriptures to me, for I
reckoned all that had spoken to me, either in sickness or in health, would be
witnesses against me, and so aggravate my sin and misery, because I had such
warnings, and had not harkened to them, but to the Devil; and especially Mr.
Patient, a Minister of the word in Dublin, coming to me in the time of my
sickness, and speaking of the great danger of an impenitent state if the Lord
should cut the third of life, that such persons would drop immediately into
Hell, the which he endeavored to demonstrate to me, that I thought he would be
the principal witness against me, of all that had spoke with me: so that I now
saw my self without hope, and the mercy of the Lord utterly taken from me, not
as it was from Saul, but far worse; I having sinned against far greater light,
and more warnings, and after such tastes and enlightnings to fall away, it was
impossible to renew me again unto repentance, but concluded I should suddenly
be destroyed, and that without remedy.

This being my case, I remember, after my sickness in Dublin aforementioned,
what fretful hateful thoughts I had of God, saying in my mind, I will do this or
that in despite of God, and I could not think otherwise; and such a hateful
bent of spirit I had against the Lord, that I was often ready to say in my heart,
I will curse God and die; and at last through the strength of temptation I was
so far prevailed upon, as I did in my thoughts curse God and all I could think
of that belonged to him, and then concluded my self damned indeed, and that I
was sure of it: and then said to my self, I am now sure I have committed the
sin against the holy Ghost, which is unpardonable, and should now to Eternity
be tormented with the Devil and his Angels: and this sorely afflicted and
overwhelmed me, in so much that I was once tempted to cast my self down out of
a window to kill my self, only the dread of Hell I thought deterred me from
it: I did also strive to put horror out of my mind all I could, by enjoying
outward comforts, but alas these were all imbittered to me, when I saw the end
of such comforts: I did also sometimes endeavor to divert these thoughts by
business I set my self about; but being sometimes hot at work, I should have
the heat of Hellfire thereby brought to my mind, and the terriblenesse of that
represented to me. But the greatest ease I had in these distracting terrors,
was by setting my self upon business, but found my self so continually
harrased with thoughts of Hell, that my heart grew hard, and stupid, so that
though I knew that was my portion, yet I was unsensible of it, unless at
sometimes, when horror would violently break in upon me, especially at such
times as I was forced to go to hear, when I still expected God to witness
against me by some sore judgment from Heaven, which (upon every dark and
stormy day especially) I expected, and did often times judge I saw flashes of
fire come upon my face, putting me in mind of that horrible pit of darkness I
should one day fall into: And many times when I went to bed, I have been afraid
to sleep, lest I should be cast into Hell ere I waked again: to prevent which,
I have often resolved not to sleep, only sometimes through a stupid senseless
frame I should lie down and sleep, not thinking of my danger: but when I waked,
I wondered I was not in Hell; yet could not be thankful for it, but still
thought I should be there shortly; and though I lived never so long, yet to be
there at last would swallow up all this time, as if it had not been; and all
the comforts I now enjoyed, would but aggravate my sorrow and misery then, when
I shall be deprived of all, and suffer for what I now enjoy: upon which
account, all my comforts were bitter to me; and when I tasted any thing, I
still thought what I should taste ere long in Hell, which made me hardly able to
eat my meat, for I should thus reason: Why should I eat and drink, when I am in
daily expectation of being cast into Hell? and then was that Scripture brought
to mind, Esa. 57.20, 21.
The wicked are like the troubled Sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt: there is no peace to the wicked: And many times when I have been
at work, sudden flashes of Hell have been as it were darted into my soul; so
that I have run out of the room where I was, and would have run out of the
Lords presence also, if I could: but alas, my foul had no refuge to fly to
from him, nor can I remember that I had a heart so much as to seek for mercy,
only in some great distresses sometimes I think I have used the words, LORD
HAVE MERCY UPON ME, but without any hope or expectation of obtaining what I
prayed for; but concluded God would not save me, unless he would deny himself,
and his word: and though an Angel from Heaven should have told me of mercy, I
could not have believed it, being so confident of the contrary; and therefore I
would tell those that endeavored to fasten counsel and comfort upon me, it was
but a casting Pearls before Swine, and holy things to Dogs, which God forbids.
And when several good women in Dublin did meet, to seek the Lord on my behalf;
I thought sometimes (especially once in Mistress Patients house) I smelled
Brimstone burning, and expected nothing but destruction; in the sense of which
I did tremble exceedingly, out of that deep horror that was on my soul: but
still I got no sensible good in any of these meetings: and when I have seen the
mist ascend sometimes, that minded me of that Scripture where it is said, Rev.
14.11.
The smoke of their torment ascends up for ever: And I have often, as I have
judged, seen Michaels meeting house in Dublin, where we met to hear, full of
smoke: all which I judged sealed and confirmed my destruction.

I do also remember when my dear Sister Allen died at Dublin in Ireland, I had
little or no sense of that with other like heavy strokes of the Lord about that
time, upon diverse other precious ones; but did believe they were taken away for
my sake, because they prayed for me, and that I was only left to fill up the
measure of my Iniquity, and therefore the Lord stopped many of their mouths by
death, that they might not pray any more for me, but that I might be left to
heap up wrath, and aggravate my misery.

I do likewise remember one morning particularly at Dublin, when (I being in
bed, and called to rise) I did believe verily I saw grievous flashes of
lightning fly in my face, which put me in strange honor: And also another
morning seeing the Sun rise in a misty frosty morning very red, I had that
Scripture come into my mind, Joel 2.31.
of the Suns being turned into blood, before the great and notable day of the
Lord; which I believed was then near, to my destruction.

Another time being at a Christian Friends (Mistress Roe's house in Dublin) in
the night season I heard a voice (as I judged) over my head; a great voice, to
which I hearkened, and was thereby put into great horror, thinking it to be
the Devil, come to fetch me away; and at last through anguish of soul was put
into great trembling and sweat; by reason of which, I spoke to Mistress Roe,
who told me it was the people that lay over my head, that talked: But I did not
believe her, but still thought it was the Devil; and toward morning I heard a
rattling of Chains (as I thought) which I judged to be the Devils hasting to
fetch me away, with great rejoicing that they had got me; then I asked Mistress
Ree what that noise was; who told me, it was only people opening Shop-windows:
but that satisfied not me, but I remained still in an inexpressible horror.

I likewise remember the cause of my going to lie at Mistress Roe's, was to get
out of the room I lay in at my Brothers, where I was sensible I had so sinned
by wicked thoughts against God, as aforesaid, from whose presence also, as well
as from that room, I would if I could have fled, it was so dreadful to me: But
alas! my fears were not at all abated, but increased by going thither; it being
the house where the Church met, and where was frequent speaking and praying. At
which I still thought the Lord would come out, and witness against me, making
me an example of his justice in the sight of all his people; whose often
speaking, to me, and praying for me, I did believe would aggravate my
condemnation greatly: And when any of them spoke of the promises to me, it was
a great terror to my soul, to see them cast such Pearls before Swine, to whom
they did not belong: by all which things, spoken to me, I was kept in a more
certain looking for a fearful fiery indignation from the Lord, to destroy me;
and my heart was the more enraged with an inveterate hatred (as I judged)
against God and his people, by all the means used about me.

And after all these things, coming to Waterford with my Brother Vernons
Family, and remaining there, I had not the like terror as before; but was
stupid, and more senseless, being (as I judged) given up to a seared
conscience and heart, yet many times sorely terrified with the like thoughts as
aforesaid: But was exceeding glad sometimes, that I was forgotten in Prayer as
I thought, and then did believe, it was revealed to them that prayed; so that
they, knowing what I was, prayed not for me: for I had a great dread on my
heart still, about being prayed for, judging it hastened my destruction, and
that I should by that means be made a fearful example of vengeance, to show to
others what I was; and thus it continued all the time I was at Waterford; no
words spoken to me, or to the Lord for me, doing me any good as I could
perceive; so that I still concluded God could not lie, nor repent, therefore I
must be damned; and that it was but in vain to attempt the contrary.

I also do remember when we came to Sea, to come for England, we were in a
storm: but I was in a senseless, stupid condition, little minding my danger
all the time.

And after my Brother and Sister Vernon landed at Milford, and the rest of our
Family with my self and Brother Allen were come to Sea again, to go for
Minhead, in a night and a day we had a very gracious passage given us, bringing
us safe into the Bay of Minhead: And when there coming from the Ship-side,
being all in the Boat, we had also an eminent deliverance; the Boat being in
great danger to be turned over by a Rope that was catched about the top of the
Boats Mast, just as we put off from the Ship, which, had it not been suddenly
loosed, had pulled the Boat over, and buried us in the Sea: I was yet under all
these mercies with a senseless frame of Spirit; only I had some few thoughts
of the infinite power of God in upholding all things, and believed I was
preserved for the sake of them I came with in the Ship: But coming into the
Town of Minhead, and finding a hand of visitation in that place, I concluded
that was for my sake, and that I was now come into the mouth of destruction;
yet I was something grieved to see the profaneness of the place and house
where we were, which was as to sin worse then Ireland, whence we came; and then
I thought of the terrible Judgments of God, against sin, and sinners, that
lived under such rich means of grace, as they here in England did. But leaving
Minhead, and coming toward my Fathers house in Devonshire, I did not now
doubt, (though I had spoken confidently before, that the Lord would never let
me see England, nor my Friends at home) but the Lord would bring us safe
thither; yet remember not any thankful sense I had of the mercy received: but
was thinking most part of the way as I came home, what a grief I should be to
my Friends and relations again; yet sometimes a little sense seemed to be on my
heart, of the mercies aforesaid, as I remember, and I did speak of them to some
in the Family after I came home: But soon after, I was in a dead stupid posture
as before, perceiving no good to me, either by speakings or prayer, though used
by some Friends then in the Family frequently; nor could I, nor durst I pray;
believing my Prayer was abominable: and therefore when my Sister Vernons hour
of Childbearing drew near, I could not seek God f r her, but was unsensible of
her danger approaching: and after her delivery I was then in greater terror
then before, thinking then that God would bring swift destruction upon me, as
upon a Woman in travel, and I should not escape.

Now as to the Lords manner of working on my heart of late: It here follows.
ON the tenth day of the eleventh Month 1657. hearing a Sermon upon Col. 3.3.
Col. 3.3
about persons in a natural estate, being dead, it was of an afrightning
consideration to me, to think that Death and Hell was their Portion, and that
Worms (as in the discourse was mentioned) should feed on such, Even that Worm
of conscience that should gnaw continually; withal considering (as was then
hinted) how loathsome a dead Creature is, fit only to be fed on by all other
devourers: which I saw also to be my state, and saw my loathsomeness in all my
Actions, as also that without Faith it is impossible to please God; which was
set home upon my heart, and also that I was a subject of his wrath, which did
abide upon me, and so should do to Eternity: Yet all this did not put me upon
the use of any means to get out of my condition, in which I still remained,
despairing of any way for my escape.

After this, on the four and twentieth day of the eleventh Month, I heard
again from another subject, Psalm. 50.23.
Psalm. 50.23. about Gods salvations being showed to those that order their
conversations aright: I had from this discourse many fears on my heart,
especially from that often repeated Scripture, Psalm. 119.155.
Salvation is far from the wicked, because they keep not thy Law: Which was
very terrible to me; and considering how abominable I was in God's sight, by
casting his Laws behind my back; that Scripture was much on my heart, Psalm.
50.16.
What have thou to do to take my Words into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be
Reformed? Which made me believe he would deal with me, as is mentioned in verse.
22. of that Psalm, even tear me in pieces, and none should deliver; And because
I had rejected him as I had done, I should suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy: And hearing that passage mentioned out of Hannah's Song, 1 Samuel
2.10.
The Enemies of the Lord shall be broken to pieces; out of Heaven will he
thunder upon them: And I being (as I judged) one of his Enemies, it did sorely
terrify me.

After this, on the six and twentieth day of the eleventh Month, in the night
season, my soul was much took up with thoughts about my sad estate; and I was
brought to conclude I was a Subject of the Lords displeasure, and should lie
under the weight of his wrath to Eternity: And this sorely terrified me, to
think what a sad thing it was to be cast out of Gods sight, and that for ever,
and tormented with the Devil and his Angels, and this for ever, without any
hopes of release, or dram of comfort. This I thought to be a pit indeed, in
which was no water, not the least refreshment; but unsupportable miseries, and
that to Eternity; and it seemed strange to me that I was out of Hell so long,
considering what I had been, and done against the Lord; and also considering
his infinite power, who could in a moment cast me there, who had so provoked
him as I had done.

I came then to suppose this with my self; were I now in Hell, and had but a
possibility of escape, what means would I use to escape that horrible Pit? I
also considered again, being once there, there was was no Redemption for ever:
and considering what great danger I was in daily, of being cast there, were the
third of my life cut, which might suddenly be, and so I drop into Hell, past
recovery.

I being not yet there, and believing no Redemption from thence, when there; I
came then to think, if yet there were any possibility of using means for my
escape, I would try: for if I lie still, I shall certainly perish; and if I
attempt the use of means, and miss obtaining what I seek for, I can but
perish: and many very great sinners have escaped through mercy; therefore I
would try (and the Lord encouraged me from those words of Esther, Esth. 4.16.
I will go in to the King; if I perish, I perish: As also the resolution of the
Lepers, 2 King. 2.4.
In the Siege of Samaria) to use the means, though without hope of success. I
being in such a deplorable condition, was pressed to up and be doing, seeing the
danger of lying still; at last I came to resolve to go hear at a Meeting in
Sydbury: but I could not pray for a blessing, believing my Prayer was
abominable to the Lord; and I had also (after I had resolved) much ado to go,
considering I was but an Hypocrite, and such a one should not stand before God;
also considering what my thoughts against God were, and had been: I went with
great fears on my heart, thinking (as formerly) the Lord would meet me in a way
of rebuke, witnessing against me: but then I thought also I could but perish;
and I had had such thoughts of the Lords witnessing against me formerly, which
I had been mistaken in, and so might be in these; and still urged this to my
heart, To abide in a way of unrighteousness is nothing but death: only in a
way of righteousness is life; so that I had great fears each way, of going or
staying: But considering my nights resolution, I feared if I went not I should
be found a Mocker of God; and so I went: but when I came there, my fears were
renewed again, as to the Lords witnessing against me: but I strove against
them, by calling to mind former mistakes of this kind, and endeavored to hear
attentively; and after a while the Lord abated my fears aforesaid, and
afterward almost clean removed them: The Subject spoken of at that time was
sloth; which having been so much my souls disease, I was very sorely reproved
by it, especially afterward, when I seriously Meditated upon it: but yet I
resolved to wait in the use of means, blessing God (as I was able) for what I
heard this day; but yet remained in a very helpless condition, having little
or no hope of deliverance. This night afterward, at prayers in the Family, I
had my heart affected with some expressions used in Prayer about the
dreadfulnesse of Christ's appearing to his Adversaries, for their rejecting him
in his tenders to them.

On the seven and twentieth day at night, I had many fears on my heart, in so
much that I was afraid to stay in any room; and would, if I could, have fled
from the presence of God, it was so terrible to me. And about twelve of the
Clock at night I came into my Sister Vernons Chamber; but horror so seized on
me in all places, as I was forced once this night to go and cry to the Lord for
mercy: but whilst I was in my Sisters Chamber, I heard one walking in another
room near, which made me afraid to go back again, believing it was the Devil;
but after understanding it to be one of the Maids that was up, I returned again
then into the Chamber somewhat freed from my fears, and went to bed; but having
got cold with being up, I found my self much distempered, both in my body and
head.

And kept my Bed the next day till night: Then I got up for refreshment for a
while, but remember not any remarkable passage farther this night; but had many
sad grieving thoughts for my rejecting Christ, which were often on my heart
this day; and also I had a little view of the excellency of Christ, and spoke
to some in the Family of it in these words, His Fruit is better then Life;
which I thought aggravated my Iniquity in rejecting him, besides whom there is
not another that can save; and that I should reject him, it sorely afflicted
me: But I had sometimes that day these words, He waits to be gracious; which
somewhat encouraged, and revived me to wait: And it grieved me exceedingly for
my rejecting him, his word and counsel, who shall be the desire of Nations; yea
that Tree of Life, whose Leaves are for the healing of Nations, with whom is
Riches and Honor; yea dureable Riches and Righteousness: All these
representations of Christ to me, heightened my sin, and grief for my rejecting
him: And even broke my heart in the sense of it most part of this day.

On the eight and twentieth day following, I heard again in the Family from the
28. Chapter of the Proverbs; the first Verse of which Chapter took hold on me,
as such a one as there is mentioned, fleeing from the Lord as from my pursuer,
which I have many a time done: but in that discourse it was shown, that despair
is the Highway to Hell; which much dwell'd with me in the night season: and
awakening in the night, and hearing the wind blow hard, it sorely terrifyed me;
being the voice (as I thought) of God my terrible Judge, considering him as a
consuming fire against all Impenitent Rejectors of him, of which number I was
one; and looking on him as a God of infinite power, able to cast me into Hell
in a moment: and I remaining a Subject of his wrath, in a state of unbelief, it
made me fear exceedingly: but withal considering, that still to remain in this
condition, nothing but destruction could be expected; as also that there was no
flying from his presence, before whom all places, persons, and things are open
and bare, and from whom nothing can be hid; Hell and destruction being open,
and known to him, how much more the hearts of the Sons of Men? I hence
concluded my condition to be exceeding sad; and then considering what a Rebel I
had been, setting at naught his counsels, and casting his Laws behind my back;
yea despising, hating, and contemning him, it made me afraid to go to him: But
seeing no way to go from him, and my self in this desperate condition, I must
needs be ruined by him, if I came not unto him. He at last led me to this
resolution of flying to him, begging mercy at his hands, for the sake of
Christ, as one who saw my self in the Highway to Hell; and knowing that his
right hand would easily find out all his Adversaries that had hated and opposed
him.

So that there would be no escaping, but by flying to Christ; there being NO
OTHER NAME UNDER HEAVEN GIVEN FOR SALVATION, UNTO POOR SINNERS, BUT THIS ONLY.
And so out of this great depth I was enabled to look toward his holy Temple,
crying to him for mercy, without which I saw I was undone for ever; so I
continued crying to him, and striving with my own soul, to hope that the Lord
would for Christ's sake show mercy to me, because he had showed mercy to very
vile sinners; though I knew none so vile as I, being the chief of sinners,
having long despised and rejected that mercy that then I sought; yet seeing
what a woeful condition I should for ever be in without it, I cried to him for
it; and then had some Meditations given in, of the way of God's showing mercy,
considering how he had found out a way for mercy and truth to meet together in
Christ, for the Salvation of poor sinners, yea the chief of sinners: and the
Lord brought at that time some passages to my remembrance, that I had heard
about the City of refuge, provided in the time of the Law; which was then
minded typed out Christ, as the City of refuge prepared of God for poor pursued
sinners to fly unto from that wrath that all would be else concluded under to
Eternity: And the Lord also was graciously pleased to enable me, to have
recourse to Christ, as the only refuge left for my poor soul; begging hard for
mercy upon his account, and the account of what he had done and suffered for
such poor sinners as I was; and I was helped also to consider the large extent
of his mercy to the vilest of sinners; and suddenly after, I was graciously
helped to hope in his mercy, and supported and encouraged from that good word
(then brought with power upon my soul) John 3.7.
He that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out; which did greatly support me
in good hopes of mercy from him; and after that, this other good word was
brought in with great power upon my heart, Heb. 7.25.
Wherefore he is able to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him,
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

This also added much to the ground of my hope in his mercy, that though I had
been such a Rebel, and great transgressor, as I had been; yet he having said he
would in no wise cast out any that came to him, and was able to save to the
uttermost; it much upheld and comforted my soul in looking toward him.

Another Scripture brought in at the same time to my heart, was, Esai. 43.12,
13.
I am God, and besides me there is no Savior; I will work, and none shall let
it; whence I was enabled to believe that he was able to do all things by the
word of his power, and to break through all oppositions that stand in his way;
that he was able to break down every strong hold, and subject every high
thought to his obedience. I then had Meditations of the heights, and depths;
lengths, and bredths, of that infinite mercy that was in Jesus Christ: and the
Lord by such Meditations on his holy word, did greatly encourage, strengthen,
and raise up my poor, weak, unworthy soul, very often (and powerfully)
repeating these Scriptures, last mentioned, over and over to my poor soul: and
now was my soul greatly refreshed in hopes of his mercy to me; but a little
after, the same night, Her first Assault after comfort received.
I was sorely assaulted again, to call in question all the hopes I had of mercy
from the Lord: in the sense of which, I was made to cry, yea roar out in bitter
distress to the Lord, striving not to let go my hold, but to call to mind what
he had before spoken: Namely, That those that come to him, he will in no wise
cast out; together with the rest of the Scriptures before mentioned, given in
at first for my encouragement: and the Lord again, in this sore conflict,
brought in all those Scriptures afresh upon my heart, and so relieved me
graciously at this time also.

Her second Assault.
But yet the tempter continued his assaults; tempting me yet to cast off my
confidence in the Lord, as also to blaspheme God: But the Lord upheld me, by
putting and keeping under his everlasting Arms; By which I was stayed upon
him, trusting in him, and was not left to the will of mine Enemy: but was
enabled still to hope in his mercy, and hang upon that word of his promise, He
that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out: and then the Lord was pleased
eminently to proclaim his name unto my soul: The Lord, the Lord God, pardoning
iniquity, transgression, and sin. And thus I was enabled (through his infinite
mercy, and by his Almighty Power) to stay my self upon him, by hoping still in
his mercy, for ever blessed be his name. And the same Scriptures were kept on
my heart all the first day of the week following, with great life and power,
succouring me against Satan's temptations, that this day also I was assaulted
with, sometimes to cast away my confidence as aforesaid, from thoughts of what
I had been, and done against Christ: but the Lord enabled me to withstand that
temptation also by his good word, in which he had caused me to trust: namely,
He that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out: As also that he would work,
and none should let: So that I went to God (through Christ) desiring he would
enable my soul to follow hard after him: begging in order thereto, that he
would uphold me, causing my soul to experience the truth of his word, that it
does and shall endure for ever: that I might be able from experience to witness
to it, as so enduring, by his never failing, nor forsaking me. But that I might
know him as a God that keeps Covenant and mercy for ever with his people: which
last words were this day made sweet to my Meditation.

Also this day hearing in the Family from Psalm 63.8. My soul follows hard
after thee, thy right hand upholds me; I was able to say, I had experienced
right hand upholdings: and my soul was now taught to beg earnestly for a heart
enabled to follow hard after him, that has so upheld, that I might follow him
resolutely, patiently, expectingly, and constantly, as was then minded in that
Sermon. I also begged I might be kept low in my own eyes, under the receipt of
mercy, looking on the Lord Jesus, as the Spring and Fountain of all in me, and
to me, owning the freeness of his grace to me.

Especially considering what a Rebel I had been against him, and how justly he
might have cast me off for ever, had it not pleased him to advance riches of
grace to me, a poor vile undone Creature, who desires his name alone may have
all the glory; and since he has showed this mercy to me, my souls great fears
are, lest I should sacrifice to my self: But I desire I may for ever be kept in
the sense of my own unworthiness of the least mercy from him, upon any other
account then the good pleasure of his own will, made known in and by Christ, to
poor sinners. Her third Assault.
Yet this night I was assaulted again with many blasphemous thoughts darted
into my soul, against God, by the tempter, causing fears and faintings
sometimes: Yet I strove against them, crying to the Lord for help, to resist
the Devil, desiring he would also work such a holy fear in my heart, as I might
never more dishonor him, who had so graciously helped me out of such depths, to
look toward him, and to hope in his mercy, who was pleased this night again
very graciously to support me with the same promises at first given in, and now
again afresh, as it were repeated, and confirmed further to my soul. And by
these he now also upheld me against departing from him; and after great
striving and struggling to keep my hold on the promises, I had also a precious
view of the love of God given into my soul, though the vilest of sinners, which
did greatly refresh me, enabling me (more fully) to believe in him: and this
Scripture 2 Cor. 5.21.
was much set upon my heart, That he has made him to be sin for us, who knew
no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him: As also that, 1
Cor. 1.30.
He is made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption: So that I was enabled now to see my self justified, and acquit in
the sight of God, through Christ, from all my iniquity, which was now hid, and
covered; and God in Christ well pleased with me, upon the account of his
righteousness only; so that I was (being thus refreshed) enabled to admire
his grace to such a poor worthless Creature as I was; and I had my soul then
much enlarged in desires after him, that I might be kept in time to come, from
dishonouring him by unbelief, or any other way, who had been so gracious, yea
rich in mercy to one so unworthy; yea even unto me, who had been such a bitter
Enemy unto him. Oh, this did much commend his love to my soul, causing me the
more to admire it, by reflecting upon what I had been, and what I had done
against him.

On the second day of the week I was also carried on for the most part, in a
holy Admiration of his kindness to me: Desiring, I might still be enabled to
depend on him, and his grace manifested through Christ Jesus to me; and might
be enabled still to press hard after him, from the manifestation of his love
through Christ to my soul: as also that I might be enabled to give glory to God
by believing; and that I might never more by an evil heart of unbelief, depart,
or fly from the Lord, or dishonor him by harkening to the voice of the
tempter; but might hear and know his voice, and follow him, and no more the
voice of strangers, but only him, who had been so abundantly gracious to such
an unworthy Creature, who never deserved the least dram of his grace or mercy,
but the greatest of his wrath and fury to be poured out upon me: And that such
a sense of my undone condition, and his right-hand-help extended to me in it,
might teach me for ever to ascribe grace and glory to his name, and that only:
it also was now my souls Request that I might be inbled to return thanks in
truth to him by my unfeigned obedience to all his commands, also by searching
after the more clear knowledge of his will, in any thing wherein I might yet be
dark, or ignorant; desiring that I might neither despise, neglect, or contemn
any of his Commands, though reckoned small or contemptible in the eye of the
world: but that, what ever his mind is, I should do; I might be enabled to
honor him therein, freely and sincerely, though never so weakly, and might
never willingly neglect any Command of his: but might with full purpose of
heart cleave to him, and his ways, no more sinfully to depart from them,
whatever I may be exposed to, and that the truth and integrity of my heart
might even appear to the glory of God, in my being sound a follower of those,
who through faith and patience inherit the promises.

The second day of the week at night, I had a more large view of the Lords
love, and more refreshings then I had before. And I was now enabled to see that
all sorts of good was laid up for me in Christ, both for soul and body, from
that Scripture, Col. 1.19.
For it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell: And this
fullness I saw was laid up in him for all believers: and I was made to see that
all that good contained in any of the promises, it was in him and by him given
out to believers, through the promises; and that it should be enjoyed by
believers in him, with unspeakable safety and certainty, he never failing any
that trust in him: for he has said, None that trust in him shallbe desolate,
nor should any be able to pluck them out of his hand, nor out of his Fathers
hand, who is greater then he. These with many other precious promises did then
flow in abundantly to my soul, carrying me out of my self by faith to him, so
that I was enabled to resign up my self, and commit the keeping of my soul, and
all that I have, and am, to him whom I had found thus faithful, (and also able)
to keep what was committed to him, and to present me before his Father, without
spot, and blameless, at that great day of his appearing: And I was now made
willing to be at his dispose, and to be governed by him; desiring that he only
might have Dominion in my soul; and I be enabled by him to follow him
whithersoever he goes, and into what condition soever he would carry me:
according to that Character given of his redeemed ones, Rev. 14.4.
These are they which follow the Lamb, whithersoever he goes: Which Scripture
was at that time born in, with great weight on my soul, making me earnestly
beg, That I might be enabled to deny my self, and take up his Cross, and
follow him; depending on him for whatever I might stand in need of, being
enabled (through grace) to believe, that all the promises are in him yea, and
Amen: Yea the good of every of them laid up in him, more fully then in them.
And afterward I was enabled to resign up my self to him, as before expressed;
and then did the promises plentifully flow into my soul.

As first, That I should Isa. 45.17.
be saved with an everlasting Salvation, and should not be ashamed world
without end; and that none should be able to pluck any believer out of Christ's
hand: So that I was enabled to say, Isa 45.24, 25.
In him have I righteousness, and strength: And in him shall all the Seed of
Israel be justified, and shall glory: And that promise also, Psalm 84.11.
He will be a Sun, and ashield; yea grace and glory will he give, and no good
thing will he withhold, etc. And I was enabled to believe, That I should be
kept by the mighty Power of God, through Faith unto Salvation. These, with many
more precious promises, with the comforts of them, in a far larger measure then
I can now relate, were given in to me. I had also particular promises for
guidance and leading given in to my soul: as that, John 7.17.
If any man will do my will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of
God, or not: And Psalm 32.8.
I will guide them with mine eye; and Hos. 6.3.
Then shall ye know, if you follow on to know the Lord: And that also Prove.
8.20.
I lead in the way of righteousness in the midst of the paths of Judgment.

And I had many promises also, as to provision, as Psalm 36.8.
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and shall
drink of the Rivers of thy pleasures: And also that Isai. 25.6.
In this Mountain will the Lord make a Feast of fat things; a Feast of Wine on
the lees well refined. And I was enabled now to believe, My life was hid with
Christ in God: and that because he lived, I should live also; and that he was
come, that we might have life, and might have it more abundantly; as also that
he ever lives to make intercession for us: and that he was come into the
world, that whosoever believes in him, should not abide in darkness: and that
he would be a Sun as well as a shield; yea he would give grace, and glory, and
no good thing will he withhold, etc. And in contemplation on these promises,
and the grace contained in them, and the durablenesse of them, (which I was
assured should not fail in one tittle to be made good) I was kept up the third
day of the week, in a holy Admiration of my soul, enjoying sweet refreshment
for the most part, from the consideration of the infinite goodness of God, set
off, and exceedingly heightened to my soul, by the consideration of that
abounding evil in me, to whom all this rich mercy had been showed: And in this
frame for the most part, both the fourth day of the week, and the night also,
and likewise on the fifth day of the week, it was much the same with me.

But on the fifth day at night again, the Enemy assaulted, Her fourth Assault
from Satan.
and conflicted very sore with me, To make me look on all the grace received,
as a poor and low thing: And I was also tempted to filthy and blasphemous
thoughts against God: This was before I went to lie down to take my rest; which
storm caused me to fly to my refuge, the Lord Jesus, for help in this needful
time: Saying unto him in my soul, Because thou have been my refuge, therefore
under the shadow of thy Wings will I put my trust. I then also pleaded the
Lord's good word, in which he had caused me to hope: Namely, That those that
came unto him, he would in no wise cast out; and that he had said, he would
never leave, nor forsake me, nor would turn away from me, or let my soul depart
from him: All which I pleaded with him; earnestly begging from him strength, to
resist the Enemies temptations, that I might not dishonor the Lord by
harkening or consenting to any of his temptations or suggestions. I also
pleaded with him his good word, of treading down Satan under foot shortly; and
his making good that word, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his
Saints: This being his word which he has said should endure for ever, in which
my soul has trusted: Yet still these Assaults were continued, Assaults
continued.
to cause me to cast off my hope: but the Lord succored and upheld me, and at
last through mercy vanquished my Enemies for me; also giving me such a
wrestling frame of Spirit, during the conflict, that I could not let him go,
till he had blessed me, by making good the word I pleaded with him, in many
respects to my poor soul.

For ever blessed be his Name, for such Riches of grace as he came in to my
soul with. In this conflict also, making me witness to the truth of his word,
that he is indeed a God that keeps covenant and mercy, and that for ever, with
such as fear him. And after I had been thus conflicting, I was enabled to read
in his word comfortably, without molestation any more this night; and had my
heart much refreshed, in beholding the Lord's faithfulness to me in my hour of
trial; which made my soul more firmly rest upon him, and trust in him, seeing
he had not suffered his faithfulness to fail, nor altered the thing gone out
of his mouth, nor removed, nor took away his loving kindness from me. And so I
lay down to rest, having been thus eminently refreshed, and supported by the
Lord: I had also my sleep made sweet to me; and when I awoke in the night
season, it was with this Scripture, Zeph. 3.17.
He will rest in his love, he will rejoice over thee with singing: As also this
Scripture, He will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: Then also had I a most
precious view of the eternal love of God to my soul, letting me see the reason,
why I was not (long since) consumed; which was, because he had made an
everlasting Covenant on my behalf, in Christ Jesus my Lord, in all things well
ordered and sure, and that he was ever mindful of his Covenant. Oh! this was
sweet, and this (even this) was the reason I was not cast off in my rebellions;
because he has loved me with an everlasting love, therefore with loving
kindness has he drawn me, and that for his own name sake he deferred his
anger: that he cut me not off, nor did he retain his anger for ever, because
mercy pleased him, and he delighted to be gracious. The coming in of these did
even satisfy my soul, as with Marrow, in the thoughts of his infinite,
Eternal, unchangeable love: Which I saw indeed was the reason of my not being
consumed, because he is God, and changes not: and in his protection, and
infinite love, and mercy, my soul did now rejoice, seeing its safety under the
shadow of his Wings, believing I should for ever be kept by him, and he would
uphold me with the right hand of his righteousness, and would never fail, nor
forsake me; but would rest in his love.

The sixth day I was kept up much in the sense of love, peace, and joy afforded
me the night before from God my gracious Father; my soul still trusting in his
word, with which he had refreshed and supported me: And still I was enabled to
believe, to my great comfort, That his word should endure for ever: from which
word, last mentioned, I have been enabled to plead with God, in my conflicts,
after this manner.

Lord, thou have promised, that they that come to thee, thou will in no wise
cast out; and if so, then can thou not turn away from doing thy people good;
but wilt according to thy good word, sprinkle them with clean water, and from
all their idols and Iniquities thou will cleanse them; yea thou will take away
the stony heart, and give them hearts of Flesh, with thy Laws written in them,
and thy fear put so into their inward parts, as they shall not depart from
thee: this Lord is thy word, in which thou have caused my soul to trust. Thus
have I been enabled to plead his new Covenant-mercy to my souls support, and
upholding in straits; blessed be his name.

This night I had a good nights rest, and was much refreshed, on the seventh
day in the morning, with thoughts much enlarged upon the great good laid up by
the Lord, for them that fear him: and had many promises presented afresh to my
soul, for future encouragement; so that I was enabled (through his grace) to
admire his infinite love in Jesus Christ, and to have my soul fully satisfied
in that only, and to testify my satisfaction therein, by desiring and
endeavoring for ever to be, to the praise of his rich grace made known to me,
by being dedicated wholly to his service; Whose workmanship I am, being created
in Christ Jesus to good works, to the end we should walk in them: Giving glory
and honor to Christ, Who alone is worthy to receive it from us, having
redeemed us out of all kindreds and tongues, etc. and having washed us in his
own Blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto God the Father; and we shall
Reign for evermore. I also considered it was for this end, that he gave himself
to redeem us, that we might be a peculiar people to himself, zealous of good
works: And to this end I desired, My soul might have Fellowship with him in his
death, sufferings, and resurrection, being made conformable to him in his
death, and raised up, and brought forth by the power of his Spirit, in the
Fellowship of his resurrection.

Fifth Assault from Satan.
But this seventh day at night I was again assaulted with blasphemous thoughts,
and tempted to slighty and low thoughts af all his grace and love made known to
me: And was seized with much fear (as I am usually in all these conflicts) lest
I should be overcome, and dishonor God by harkening, and consenting to the
suggestions of his and my Enemy: But the Lord this night also was not wanting
to me, but did uphold me in waiting upon him; inabling me to seek to him, and
rest upon him, his word in which he had caused my soul to trust. And in this
way he came in to me, manifesting himself exceeding gracious to my relief, and
helped me to vanquish those temptations; giving me strength against them, and
inabling me to speak to his praise, what he had done for my soul, to the end it
might be recorded: yet when I came this night to speak of these things, that so
they might be recorded, I was much afraid I should not be able, being much
straitened, and shut up: but the Lord opened my heart, and my mouth spoke
(through his assistance) to his praise.

The seventh day at night I went to bed late; and when I awaked in the morning,
the Lord made my Meditations of him to be sweet to me, causing me much still to
rejoice in the love of God my Savior. My first Meditation being of his
infinite love and wisdom, in finding out a way for recovering and reconciling
poor, lost, fallen man to himself; and such a way wherein mercy and truth might
meet together, righteousn^sse and peace might k^sse each other. And this
Scripture was much on my heart, 1 John 1.9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. And
that was sweet, to see it was not only mercy, but faithfulness, and justice,
to forgive sins unto poor penitent sinners for the sake of Christ, The Mediator
between God and man, in whom God saw himself and Justice fully satisfied; and
the poor believer might see himself fully acquitted, as if he had not sinned:
And all this I saw as the Fruit of Christ's death and resurrection, he having in
our stead fully discharged our debts, which we else could never have sati^fied;
by whom only we receive the Atonement. I had also a far more precious and
enlarged discovery of these things, then I am now able to mention, with many
choice Scriptures brought to my mind, as to this head: Namely, Psalm 68.18.
Thou have ascended on high: Thou have led captivity captive: Thou have
received gifts for men, yea for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might
dwell among them: and that by Christ all handwritings that were against us,
were taken out of the way, and nailed to his Cross, who has spoiled
principalities and Powers, triumphing over them openly: And that by him the
sting of death, and strength of the Law were taken away: According to his good
word: 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.
Oh Death, I will be thy death: O Grave, I will be thy destruction. The sting
of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the Law: But thanks be to God, who
gives us the Victory through our Lord jesus Christ. Oh! these Scriptures were
FOOD AND STRENGTH to my soul: At this time also that Scripture was given in,
Titus 3.4.
After the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared; not by
works of righteousness, which we have done: but according to his mercy he
saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, which
he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior: So that I saw our
Sanctification was the Fruit of his purchase for us, and Free-gift to us; it
being one great end in his laying down his life, that he might redeem and
purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. I had many
Meditations also, Ezekiel. 16.6, etc.
about the Lords passing by us, when we lay polluted in our blood, and cast out
to the loathing of our persons, in the day we were born, that then he should
say to us, Live; and that this should be the time of love, and spreading his
skirt over us: as also to consider, that the promise of Christ, Gen 3.15.
(And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and
her seed: It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel) was given
to fallen man, in that nick of time of the greatest misery, which he had
brought on himself and posterity.

I had then also many Meditations of God's power, by which he is able to keep
us through faith unto Salvation; with many promises given in to that purpose,
as, that Psalm 34.22.
none that trust in him shall be desolate: As also that was made sweet to my
soul: Isai. 33.16, 17.
namely, His place of defense shall be the munition of Rocks: bread shall be
given him, and his Waters shall be sure; and thine eyes shall see the King in
his Beauty, and behold the Land that is very far off. These were MEAT TO ME
INDEED at that time, Thus to consider the safety of believers as founded upon
the Rock of ages.

And also that Scripture, Isai. 26.12.
Lord thou will ordain peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our works
in us: and likewise that, Prove. 10.3.
the Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish: but he casts
away the substance of the wicked: And Prove. 10.29.
the way of the Lord is strength to the upright; but destruction shall be to
the workers of Iniquity: And that, John 14.^7.
Peace I leave with you; my peace Is give unto you, not as the world gives
give I unto you: Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid: And
John 14.13.
because I live, you shall live also: And Job 5.19.
he shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven, there shall no evil touch
thee: And Isai. 58.11.
their souls shall be as a watered Garden, that God has blessed: And Isai.
27.3.
I the Lord do keep it; I will water it every moment, lest any hurt it: I will
keep it night and day. With these promises was my soul refreshed greatly this
night; and from hence was I led to meditate on the great care, love, and tender
pity of the Lord, toward his poor people, in making so many precious promises
for support and succor for his poor Saints: which made me even (with
Astonishment) admire his grace herein: and then was that good word brought in
sweetly refreshing me, Isai. 41.17.
When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue
fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them; I the God of Israel will not
forsake them. I then called to mind how largely my soul had experienced the
truth of that word, that even when I was ready to fail and sink, and my soul
even scorcht up with the heat of the wrath of the Lord, without any
refreshment, yea without a heart to seek it; he made good this to me: For ever
blessed be his name, and the Riches of his grace, made known in Christ to my
soul.

And now did the Lord bring my soul to this Well of consolation, and made me
drink abundantly of the River of his pleasures streaming out in these promises:
and gave me Fruit indeed from the Tree of Life; feeding me from that word also
Isai. 55.3.
I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David:
Which I saw were sure indeed, as laid no in Christ for believers. Even in him
whom God has exalted as a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance unto
Israel, for remission of sins: who himself was tempted, that he might be able
to succor those that are tempted; Whom God has raised from the dead, that our
li^e and hope might be in him, who has called poor and weary souls to come to
him for rest, and has made me amongst others largely experience the truth of
that word, in causing my soul to find rest only in him, after a long and sore
travail, and wearysome journey. Yet again, this first day of the week I was
assaulted in hearing the word Preached, Her sixth Assault from Satan.
with many filthy suggestions cast in, to cause me to undervalue the grace of
God made known: And this was both forenoon, and afternoon: but yet I was
graciously helped to strive against them; and to cry out to the Lord for help
and assistance, to resist the wicked one; begging, The Lord would not suffer me
to dishonor his holy name, by consenting to the temptors suggestions: and then
I called to mind that word, wherein he had caused me to trust: Namely, Heb.
13.5.
That he would never leave me, nor forsake me: but would put his fear so in
my heart, as I should not depart from him; neither should the Gates of Hell
prevail against me: And thus by flying to him as my Sanctuary, I was enabled to
resist, and overcome my Enemies, who else had been too hard for me.

I had also this day, Her seventh Assault from Satan.
while I was hearing, some sad considerations about falling away, after grace
received; which made my soul to tremble in the thoughts of it, to think how
dishonorable that would be to the name of God: but I had some hopes in his
word, which supported and strenghthened me against these fears: Namely, That
the Lord would keep me by his Power through faith unto Salvation; and would
also according to his Covenant put his fear in my heart, that I should not (at
least utterly) depart from him: but yet had many fears, that if he should but
eclipse his love to my soul, that might also be to the dishonor of his name,
and an occasion of stumbling to others; which also made my soul full of fears
in the thoughts of it. But this somewhat flayed me, that he, who has begun a
good work, will finish it, and will be careful of his own glory, which in my
souls upholding is so much concerned.

She is helped to consider what she owed unto the Lord for all his mercy.
I was after these conversings with the Lord, and sweet Communion with him, led
to consider what all this calls for at my hand, and was caused to desire to
testify my love to Jesus Christ, in ways of obedience to all his Commands,
who had so plentifully manifested his love to my soul: and at last was led to
some Meditations about Baptism, looking upon it as a duty incumbent upon all
believers, whereby they did evidence their love to Christ, in obedience to his
Commands. But withal, I had some fears on my heart, about my being carried on
in that duty, which I see to be so contemned and despised: but did judge, these
were but the tempters suggestions; and therefore did earnestly desire of the
Lord, that he would enable me to evidence my sincerity to him, by following him
in his most despised paths; and that I might not dare to neglect any duty he
calls for at my hands: then also was I brought to mind that Scripture, Phil.
1.29.
To you it is given not only to believe, but also to suffer for his sake: And
that he only could give this gift, which was a great honor to be conferred
upon his poor Saints, to be counted worthy to suffer for his name; and I
begged, It might ever be so accounted by me: that Scripture also I had on my
mind, Matthew. 10.37.
He that loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me: As likewise
Mar. 10.29.
No man that has left house or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or
Wife, or Children, or Lands for my sake, and the Gospels, but he shall receive
an hundred fold now in this time; houses, and Brethren, and Sisters, and
Mothers, and Children, and Lands, with persecution, and in the world to come,
life Eternal.

Now by a hundred fold in this life, I understood to be in peace of conscience,
that would be more then all the comforts I could forsake for it; Besides in the
world to come life everlasting: And that Scripture also I had, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18.
For our Light afflictions, which are but for a moment, do work for us a far
more exceeding and Eternal weight of glory, whilst we look not at the things
which are seen, but at those things that are not seen: for the things that are
seen, are temporal; but those that are not seen, are Eternal: I also minded,
Moses his eying the recompense of reward, made him despise the pleasures of
Pharaoh's Court; and likewise what the Saints mentioned, Heb. 11.
had endured by eying the glory set before them, and looking to that City that
had foundations, whose builder and maker is God: And upon these and such like
considerations my soul was encouraged to follow Christ, resolving in his
strength, I would do so in every of his Commands, he should make known to me to
be my duty to walk in; although by so doing I were a reproach and scorn;
minding David's words, Psalm 71.7.
I am a wonder unto men: but thou art my strong refuge. And thence I reasoned,
if God were my refuge I did not care, though I were a wonder unto men, in
pursuit of my duty: and upon some further considerations, I saw Baptism more
clear to be my duty; I being commanded, Heb. 6.12.
To follow those who through Faith and patience inherit the promises: And this
path of Baptism I find Christ and all his Disciples walked in, and therefore in
this I judged I was to follow; being commanded to be a follower of them: I also
considered, Acts 2.41.
Then they that gladly received the word were Baptized, etc. I likewise
considered Christ's Commission, Matthew. 28.19.
Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. Teaching them to observe all things
that I Command you; Of which I find Baptism to be one: this still cleared it
up to my soul further as a duty; I also considered that the Laws of a King were
to be obeyed by all his Subjects; and this I judged one of the Laws of Christ,
and therefore to be obeyed by all his Subjects: I also weighed several other
Scriptures about the nature, use, and ends of Baptism, particularly Romans 6.4,
5.
which did manifest to me, that Baptism was a duty enjoined to all believers;
they thereby manifesting their conformity to Christ in his death, in order to
their being raised up by him again, and brought forth in the Fellowship of his
Resurrection unto newness of life; all which I found much encouraging and
engaging my heart to that duty.

This night also my sleep was made very sweet to me, through the Lord's
goodness: I waked often, and slept again, and still found sweet refreshings in
my soul, seeing my self very safe under the protection of Christ: I then
endeavored to sleep again, minding what had been told me, that I ought to have
compassion on my body; and my sleep was comfortable to me: Every time I awaked,
having these words given Zep. 3.17.
to me, He will rest in his love: And these, Mal. 3.6.
I am God, I change not, and I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: So that
I was sweetly composed, and enabled to rejoice, under the protection of Christ,
having those words also brought to my mind, Psalm 31.21.
The Lord has showed me his marvelous loving kindness in a strong City, and
has laid help upon one that is mighty: And that Scripture, Isai. 26.3.
Trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength;
in which my soul rejoiced greatly; as also in that word, Isai 40.11.
He shall gather the Lambs in his Arms, and carry them in his bosom, and
gently lead those that are with young: From which the Lord gave me faith in my
soul, that he was able to keep me, so as none should be able to pluck me out of
his hand; so that I was made to rejoice in that unspeakable safety that I had
under his Protection. Another precious promise to me was, Isai. 42.3, 4.
A bruised Reed shall he not break, nor smoking Flax shall he not quench, till
he bring forth judgment to victory: He shall not fail, nor be discouraged till
he have set judgment in the Earth, and the Isles shall wait for his Law: And
hence I considered, that he was my Counselor as well as my Protector; and what
a wonderful Counselor he is! which I considered at large from Isai. 9.6.
Unto us a Child is born, and unto us a Son is given; the Government shall be
upon his shoulders: and his name shall be called the wonderful Counselor, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of peace; and of his Government and Kingdom
there shall be no end: As likewise those words came to my mind, Acts 3.22.
A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your Brethren, like
unto me him shall you hear in all things that he shall speak: then was my heart
lifted up, blessing the Lord for that plentious redemption, which he had let me
see in Christ, according to that word, Psalm 103.
blessing him with whom there is such plentiful redemption, to redeem Israel
from all his iniquities, who Crowns us with loving kindness, etc. and who
has blessed us with all Spiritual blessings in Christ; having raised us, and
made us sit together in Heavenly places in Christ, that in the ages to come he
might show, what is the exceeding Riches of his grace, in his kindness toward
us in Christ, who has delivered us from the Kingdom of darkness, and has
translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son.

I had also some precious Meditations upon that great deliverance I had by
Jesus Christ, from the dominion of sin, Satan, and that greatest bondage of
all, to be in a natural condition; and that Christ had purchased perfect
liberty and freedom: so that I was now made free indeed, and made a partaker of
the inheritance of the Saints in light. Yet after all this, Her eighth Assault.
I was again sorely assaulted, and tempted, to have low undervaluing thoughts
of the grace of God, as if it were but a poor low thing; as also to blaspheme
against God: but the Lord did graciously make me to cry to him for his
assistance, to cause my soul to resist the Devil, and loath and abominate his
filthy suggestions, that so I might not dishonor him by harkening or
consenting thereto, seeing he had promised, He would never leave me, nor
forsake me: That he would now make good his word, in which he had caused me to
trust; and by these (and many other promises) he enabled me to plead with him,
who had said, He would save to the utmost, and would tread down Satan under
soot shortly; and that the Gates of Hell should not prevail against me: All
which I pleaded earnestly with him, that he would still cause me to experience
the truth of this his-word, in which he had made my soul to hope: and at length
(through his rich grace) I was enabled to say to his praise, That he was indeed
a God that did never leave nor forsake them that trusted in him; but did keep
Covenant and mercy for ever, in that he had vanquished the Devil, and caused me
to rely on himself, by giving me Faith in that precious promise, That he would
not break the bruised reed, till he had brought forth Judgment unto Victory:
So that in the sense of his never failing nor forsaking me, my soul was made
now greatly to rejoice.

Further Assaults from Satan.
The second day at evening, I had many fiery darts, and filthy suggestions of
Satan cast into me: Which were exceeding terrible unto me, and were born in
with such violence, as though the Devil strove with all his might to cause me
to cast off my hopes that I had in God; urging me to blaspheme God, and to
think meanly and lowly of the grace of God; Which caused in me great fears: but
the Lord of his grace did not so leave me, as to suffer me to cast off my
confidence: But great was my fears, lest I should be left to dishonor him by
unbelief, after I had professed such hope in him; and thereby also should wound
the peace of my own soul. I also considered, that if I should continue in this
condition, my life would be a burden to me, and I should have cause to repent
of the Profession I had made of my hope in God; thinking what a great dishonor
this would be to his Name and Gospel, and cause of stumbling to them who had
heard me profess my hope, causing them to dishonor him also.

But the Lord did help me (through his grace) to fly to him as my strong
refuge, with secret breathings in my soul, that he would not deliver me up to
the will of my Enemies: but he would now remember his good word, in which he
had caused me to hope, that those that came to him, he would in no wise cast
out, but save to the utmost, treading down Satan under the feet of such: And I
begged that he would open and enlarge my strait heart, that my mouth might
speak of his goodness, to the praise of his name. And the Lord did cause my
soul again to experience his faithfulness, that he is a God that keeps
Covenant and mercy for ever; and he did graciously cause the Devil to fly, and
gave great enlargement to my soul, considering how greatly it was straitened;
and made me able to speak to his praise; and did (by his good Spirit) bring
these things to my remembrance, which I was not able to think of before, and
was again enabled to believe (through his grace) that he is a God that will
keep truth for ever, and that no soul, that trusts in him, should be desolate:
So that my soul was now made to say, Psalm. 146.5.
Blessed is the man that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in
the Lord his God, which made the Heavens, the Earth, the Seas, and all that is
in them, and who keeps truth for ever with them that fear him. Blessed be his
name. I have been since pondering further the duty of Baptism aforesaid, and
had at some times much clearness in it as a duty: yet doubts and questions
have been cast into my mind about it; and thus I remained, debating it in my
own thoughts, and consulting Scriptures about it, until the twentieth day of
this eleventh Month at night; at which time I was set upon with terrible
suggestions about the lowness and meannesse of it, being much tempted to
despise and slight it; which, when I had considered, caused great fears and
fainting in me, lest I should in my heart consent to those suggestions, and
thereby hinder my obedience to the Lord, as aforesaid: And I was enabled to
lift up my soul to the Lord for help at this time, against these suggestions
and temptations, that I might resist them; and the Lord enabled me now to
consider, that no Command of Christ was to be accounted low, or small
Considering also I owed all service and obedience to the Lord, both as I was
his Creature, but more especially as I was redeemed by him so marvellously as I
have been, and with so great a price as the Blood of Jesus. I also thought,
what a sad condition Adam brought all his Posterity into, by disobedience at
first, in but eating an Apple, which was forbidden; as also what a poor
Creature man was; and how unfit, unworthy, and unbecoming it was for him, to be
disputing with his Creator; who might do with all of us, as the Potter with his
Clay, make or mar us at his pleasure; and what a proud presumptuous Creature
I was, to suffer such a thing to enter into my thoughts, that any of his
Commands should be disputed, or thought by me to be low, or contemptible, which
I looked on as an abominable evil in me; and desired the Lord to look with an
eye of Pardon and compassion upon me; and not to suffer me to hearken to the
Devil's suggestions, to dishonor him, but make me esteem highly of all his
Commands; desiring he would (according to his promise) put his fear into my
heart, that I might not depart from him; and that seeing he is able to save to
the utmost, and had promised so to do, as also to tread down Satan under foot,
and to work, and none should let: All which he having given me experience of
his making them good to my soul formerly, I now begged he would further
strengthen my Faith concerning them, as also in that good word of his, in
keeping me by his Almighty Power through Faith unto Salvation: And now did I
find the Lords gracious answer to my poor souls desire, in many of these
things: as first, in upholding and keeping me against the Tempters suggestion,
as I had desired, that I was not overcome by them; though when I awaked this
night, the Tempter met me again with his Assaults: but I was helped to strive
against them, crying to the Lord for help to stand, and strength to overcome;
and he did help and succor me against them, and encouraged me to believe his
word, and to call to mind the depths of distresses he had by his outstretched
Arm, and infinite love and pity raised my soul out of: and he minded me, how
he had supported me, when I was ready to sink under the weight of my
Iniquities, and wrath due to them; yet he then upheld me, and delivered me, and
had said he would not forsake me.

These considerations did support and enable me still to trust in him, that had
wrought so wonderfully, and appeared so eminently for my poor soul, as he had
done; and I was now enabled to believe that good word, Isai. 49.10.
They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat of the Sun smite
them: for he that has mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of
Waters shall he guide them: As also that, John 7.38.
He that believes on me, the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow
Rivers of living waters: These (with many more promises) were now given in,
fully answering to all my wants, and removing my fears: I was also enabled to
judge him faithful that had promised, and so to look upon his promises as so
many love tokens from him, in the way of his free grace to my soul, through
Christ my Redeemer: and seeing Baptism now (upon all the considerations
aforesaid) my duty, to which again was added afresh this Scripture, Romans 6.4, 5.
Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into death, etc. And my soul laid
under the Power of the truth in it, that as I did expect advantage by the Lord
Christ his death and Resurrection to my poor soul, so I ought by my visible
obedience to this his Command, to declare my putting him on, and my being
planted in the likeness of his death, being buried with him by Baptism into
death; and also my being raised with and by him, and the Power of his
Resurrection, unto newness of life; and my resolving (in his strength) to walk
accordingly: all which ends Baptism, (according to this Scripture) I judged
lively held forth; I was upon the whole enabled to come to resolve, (through
grace) to yield obedience thereunto, as unto a Command of Christ my Lord,
expecting his assistance and blessing therein: According to his word, John
14.21.
He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and
he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father; and I will love him, and will
manifest my self unto him: As also that word, Isai. 64.5.
Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works Righteousness, those that
remember thee in thy ways. In the Faith of which promises, and fear of the
name of the Lord, I intend (through his gracious assistance) to yield obedience
accordingly in that and all his Commandments; the love of Christ being of a
constraining nature to my soul, by which I have been caused to consider what he
has done for me, in perfecting the work of my Redemption, and also to think
how little I am called to do or suffer for him, who has done so much for my
sake, Isai. 53.5.
He being wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our Iniquities, the
chastisements of our peace being on him, by whose stripes we are healed:
Philip. 2.7.
Who being in the Form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet
made he himself of no Reputation, but humbled himself, and became obedient to
death, even to the death of the Cross for our sakes: These considerations are
of a Constraining nature to my soul, to obey him in all things.

I also considered what I should have undergone to Eternity, had it not been
for what he has done and suffered, to deliver me from wrath to come; I also
thought how little all the suffering of this world are to those I should have
under-gone, had not he Redeemed me from those Eternal miseries, which indeed
makes all the afflictions of this present life seem little and light to me,
when I seriously think of them: According to that, Romans 8.18.
For I reckon the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the glory that shall be revealed in us; and that, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18.
our light affliction that is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding, and Eternal weight of glory, while we look not at the things which
are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen
are temporal, but the things which are not seen are Eternal; and that, 2 Cor.
5.14.
the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if Christ died
for all, then were all dead, that they which live should not live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again: And that, 1 Cor.
6.20.
for you are bought with a price, therefore glorify God, both in your souls and
bodies, which are his; and ought to be offered up as a living sacrifice, Romans
12.1.
Holy and acceptable unto him, which is but our reasonable service, according
to the will of him who has of his own will begotten us unto a lively Faith in
Christ Jesus, unto whom be glory in the Churches (by Christ Jesus) thorowout
all Ages, World without end, AMEN.

FINIS.
An abstract of the principal parts of the foregoing Narrative, which the
Reader will find to be in substance as follows; though by reason of the
mixture and variety of the matter, it cannot be so distinctly composed, as
otherwise it might be.
I. A Particular Relation of her distressed estate and condition, for fourteen
years time, wherein she was exercised with various temptations, concluding
herself guilty of the unpardonable sin, and so a subject of the wrath of God;
Whch she daily expected to be poured down upon her, and was hopeless of any
deliverance, notwithstanding the frequent means used by many for her relief,
both by fervent Prayers for her, and Faithful endeavors by Christian advice
and counsel to her; from Page 1. to Page 19.

II. A Particular discovery of the Lords manner of working on her heart by his
word and Spirit, convincing her of her sinful state, and helping her to look
unto Christ alone for Salvation; notwithstanding many fears mixed with her
hopes: From Page 19. to Page 31.

III. A discovery of several Assaults from the Tempter, and gracious supplies
of strength from the Lord, by which she was helped to resist them, and to fly
unto him for refuge: From Page 31. to Page 40.

IV. Several precious promises, and seasonable words, brought in p^werfully to
her soul, for her support and succor under several Assaults: From Page 40. to
Page 56.

V. She is helped to consider what she shall render unto the Lord for all his
benefits and special deliverances he has wrought for her, and is helped to
resolve in his strength, to give up her self as a living and acceptable
sacrifice unto his service: From Page 56. to the end.

A TABLE, Containing several Texts of Scripture that were variously applied,
according to her state and condition; as the Reader may perceive, by comparing
them with the several places to which this Table directs.
I. Scriptures made use of to increase terror in her distressed estate.
HEb. 10.27, 29. Page 4 Psalm 65.5. Page 5 Matthew. 12.31. Page 6 Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
Page 8 Isai. 57.20, 21. Page 11 Matthew. 15.26. Page 12 Rev. 14.11. Page 13 Joel
2.31. Page 14
II. Scriptures made use of to convince her of her sinful and sad estate.
COl. 3.3. Page 19 Psalm 50.23. Page 20 Psalm 119.155. Page 21 Psalm 50.16. Page
Idem. 1 Samuel 2.10. Page Idem.
III. Scriptures made use of to encourage her to wait upon the Lord in the use
of means, to trust in him, and to follow him fully.
HEster 4, 16. Page 23 2 Kings 7.4. Page Idem. John 6.37. Page 30 Heb. 7.25.
Page Idem. Isai. 43.13. Page 31 Psalm 63.8. Page 34 2 Cor. 5.21. Page 35 1 Cor.
1.30. Page 36 Col. 1.19. Page 38 Rev. 14.4. Page 40
IV. Several choice promises, and precious words brought powerfully to her
soul, for her support and engaging to duty.
ISai. 45.17, 24, 25. Page 40 Psalm 84.11. Page Idem. John 7.17. Page 41 Psalm
32.8. Page Idem. Hosea 6.3. Page Idem. Prove. 8.20. Page Idem. Psalm 36.8. Page
Idem. Isai. 25.6. Page Idem. Zeph. 3.17. Page 45 Heb. 13.5. Page Idem. 1 John
1.9. Page 49. Psalm 68.18. Page 50 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. Page Idem. Titus 3.4,
5. Page 51 Ezekiel 16.6. Page Idem. Genesis 3.15. Page Idem. Psalm 34.22. Page 52
Isai. 33.16, 17. Page Idem. Isai. 26.12. Page Idem. Prove. 10.30. Page Idem.
Prove. 10.29. Page 53 John 14.27. Page Idem. John 14.19. Page Idem. Job 5.19.
Page Idem. Isai. 58.11. Page Idem. Isai. 27.3. Page Idem. Isai. 41.17. Page
Idem. Isai. 55.3. Page 54 Malach. 3.6. Page 60 Psalm 31.21. Psalm 61 Isai.
26.3. Page Idem. Isai. 40.11. Page Idem. Isai. 42.3, 4. Page Idem. Isai. 9.6.
Page 62 Acts 3.22. Page Idem. Psalm 103.3. Page Idem. Heb. 13.5. Page 55 Romans
12.1. Page 73 1 Cor. 6.20. Page Idem.
V. Scriptures convincing and confirming her in the duty of Baptism, and even
constraining her thereunto.
HEb. 6.12. Page 59 Acts 2.41. Page Idem. Matthew. 28.19. Page Idem. Romans 6.4, 5.
Page 60 John 14.21. Page 71 Isai. 64 5. Page Idem. Isai. 53.5. Page 72 Phil.
2.7, 8. Page Idem.
VI. Scriptures supporting her in the thoughts of sufferings.
PHil 1.29. Page 57 Matthew. 10.37. Page Idem. Mark 10.29. Page Idem. 2 Cor.
4.17, 18. Page 58 Heb. 11. Page Idem. Psalm 71.7. Page 59 Rom 8.18. Page 72
VII. Scriptures by which she was relieved against her fears, under several
Assaults: And had her hopes of fresh supplies from the Lord increased.
HEb. 13.5. Page 55 Romans 16.20. Page 65 John 6.37. Page 30 Heb. 7.25. Page
Idem. Psalm 146.5. Page 66 Isai. 49.10. Page 70 John 7.38. Page Idem.
The Reader is desired to take notice, that some of the Texts in this Table are
not mentioned in the Margent; only the words expressed in the Page, which
being but short, may soon be discerned.

ERRATA.
READER,
SEveral Faults having escaped the Press; I have pointed out the Chief, which
thou art desired to take notice of. viz.

In the first Epistle, Page 11. Line 9. read Isai. 59. In the Book, p. 2. l. 1.
for irrecoverable re. irrevocable. p. 4. l. 1. r. remained. p. 5. l. 3. r. made
it. and l. 4. re. mind. p. 7. l. 21. re. hatred. p. 22. Margent, re. 2 Kings
7.4. page 30. Margent, read John 6.37.


