ABSALOM'S REBELLION. As it is Recorded in the 2. SAM. Chap. 15, 16, 17, 18,
and 19. WITH SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THE SEVERAL Passages thereof. Too fit a
Pattern for the present Times, whereinto we are FALLEN.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1645.

ABSALOM'S REBELLION. As it is Recorded in the second of SAM. Chap. 15, 16, 17,
18, and 19.
IN the two precedent Chapters, 13, and 14. you shall find, that Absalom fully
discovered his many Vices of Revengefulnesse, Malice, Insolency, Dissimulation,
Pride, Impatience, Vnthankfullnesse, Justifying himself in his faults, even in
the Murder of his Brother Amon; and being thus seasoned, he turns Traitor;
For Treason never goes alone, it is always Vshered in with other notorious
vices.

And when he is resolved to enter into the Rebellion, he first amuses the
Common people with an opinion of his Gallantry. [Chap. 15. v. 1. He prepares
Horses and Chariots, and fifty men to run before him.] Such Shows he knew
would prevail much with the multitude.

Then he possesses them wirh an opinion of his industry, and wins upon their
affections, with his Affability. [v. 2. He rose up early, and stood beside the
way of the Gate, and it was so, that when any man that had a controversy came
to the King for judgment, then Absalom called unto him and communed with him.]

But yet this was not enough, unless he slandered the present Government, for
he says to him, [v. 3. See thy matter is good and right, but there is no man
deputed of the King to hear thee.] The Common sort love to be flattered, and
are naturally inclined to believe ill of their Rulers.

Then he is liberal in his Protestations, what wonders he would do for a
sudden Reformation if he were in Authority; and said moreover [v. 4. O that I
were made Judge in the Land, that every man which has any Suite or Cause might
come to me, and I would do them Justice.] He must raise an expectation of the
new, who goes about to alter the frame of the old Government.

And to win upon them whom he intended to abuse, he abounds in courteous
and civil behavior toward those who make their application to him. [v. 5.
When any came nigh to him, to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand and took
him and kissed him] And herein he dealt subtly to gain a general applause,
he did not speak some fair, and neglect others, [but v. 6. In this manner did
Absalom to all Israel that came to the King for judgment, and so Absalom
stole the hearts of the men of Israel.]

Yet all this while he is not come to the height of his wickedness, until he
make Religion the Stale for his impiety. [v. 7. Absalom said to the King, I
pray thee let me go and pay my Vow which I have vowed to the Lord in Hebron.]
And the King gave him leave, and he went.

But he having thus infatuated the hearts of the Men of Israel, inst^ad of
performing an Act of Devotion, as he pretended. [v. 10. Absalom sent spies (as
Committees) throughout all the Tribes of Israel, saying, as soon as ye shall
hear the sound of the Trumpet, then ye shall say Absalom reigns in Hebron.]
A chief City in Israel ye see, was the place where the Covenant was made,
and the vow to be performed, and thus the Scene of Rebellion being laid in the
sanctified City, it spread quickly throughout the rest of the Kingdom like
Wilde-fire.

Some (no doubt) went with Absalom, who were of the Plot, but [v. 11. others
went in their simplicity and knew not any thing.] Alas! its no hard matter to
mislead many ignorant souls by example.

But yet when they are gathered, they must be kept together, by the opinion
that wisemen are in the Plot. Therefore, [v. 12. Absalom sent for Ahitophell
the Gilonite, David's Counselor, from his City, even from Gilok, while he
offered Sacrifice.] There is never so much danger of seducing the Subjects, as
when the Kings Councillors, when his great Council turn head against him,
specially under the counterfeit mask of Religion.

Now, and not till now, Verse. 13.
is the Treason discovered to David, and David acquaints his Servants
therewith, who were with him at Jerusalem, and he said to them, [v. 14. Arise
and let us fly, for we shall not else escape; make speed to depart least he
overtake us suddenly, and bring evil upon us.] There is no dallying in time
of eminent danger. And, [v. 15. The Kings servants said to the King behold thy
servants are ready to do whatsoever my Lord the King shall appoint.

And, [v. 16. The King went forth and all his household after him, and, [v. 17.
They tarried in a place that was far off.] I do not find that then, or at any
time after, it was objected against David as a fault, that he then left the
City, or His great Council, who had first left him, and their Loyalty.

Yet this is observable, That although the Kings departure were sudden, it
was not in disorder, [v. 18. All his servants passed on besides him, and all
the Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the Gittites, even 600 men,
which were come from Gath, went before the King.] These were his Lifeguard,
and his servants, and his Guard in those days forsook not their Master the
King in his distress. And all this while, or after this, I do not find what
the Kings fault was, which might provoke Absalom and the people to this
Rebellion. David was a good King, and a wise, and a valiant man, a man after
Gods own heart, and yet he was not free from this misfortune.

Amongst others who attended the King, Ittai (who as is conceived was the Son
of the King of Gath) was one who went over to Jerusalem with David from Gath.
It was not objected against David, or Ittai, as a fault, that he was a
stranger, and yet did offer to assist the King against his Rebels; nor in truth
is it a fault now, unless in this, that strangers should thus condemn the
Natural borne Subjects.

But the King would have dissuaded Ittai from going with him, and said, [v. 19.
Wherefore go thou with us? return to thy place, and abide with the King,
for thou art a stranger, depart thou therefore to thy place.] Strangers may not
be compelled to serve in such a case; but they may be entertaind, if they be
willing.

Yet Ittai would not be dissuaded, but answered the King thus, [v. 21. As the
Lord lives, and as my Lord the King lives, in what place my Lord the King
shall be, whether in life or death, even there surely will thy servant be.]
True fidelity is then best tried, when the event is doubtful, and good Princes
shall do well to observe such followers and such Servants.

Verse. 24, 27, 28.
Amongst others, Zadook the High Priest, and Abiathar and the Levites, would
have gone with the King. They did well to offer their Services, for in such
times no Subject is exempted. But David sent them back of purpose to gain
intelligence by their means. Ahimaaz and Jonathan, their two Sons, being
trusty Persons fit for that employment. Good intelligence is an important piece
of Service in time of War especially, and it is a principal point of
wisdom to employ fit Instruments.

Hushai, Verse. 32, 33, 34.
also a Counselor to the King would have gone with him. Indeed I wonder how
any Counselor can absent himself at such a time; but by the Kings own
directions, as Hushai did: But he was sent back of purpose, that he being a sad
wise man and a faithful, might undermine the crafty Council of Ahithophel.
Both in times of War, and of Peace, such expedients must be used, and then
are not only lawful but necessary, and amongst other policies, divertion is
many times of great use.

As good Men upon such Accidents follow the King in his lowest Fortune, out of
Duty and Conscience, so do some wicked and false men, for by-respects.

Ziba, the Servant of Mephibosheth, Chap. 16. v. 1.
comes to meet the King, and brings a Present with him, the outside was fair,
to show his duty to the King, but the true Errand was, to insinuate with the
King, and by a false Lie to betray his Master. This kind of Court craft is
practiced too often; but a wise King, sooner or latter, will find those out who
use it, and severely punish it.

About this time also, Verse. 5.
the King met with another miscreant of another disposition. Shemei the Son
of Gera; he finding the King in these streights railed at him, and cursed him
to his face. After-ages have also found many Shimei's, who stick not to rail
at God's Anointed; but doubtless such will meet with their reward, as Shimei
did, in the end.

Abishai being then present, Verse. 9.
his fingers itched to take off the head of this foul-mouthed man; but David
made other use of this Affliction, and would not give way thereto at that time.
There are seasonable times for patience, as well as for Justice, and good
Princes will discern the seasons thereof.

We left Hushai a while since, Verse. 16.
when he left the King to follow Absalom. But you observe it was by the King's
special direction, and for his better Service. Else it had been a Crime
unpardonable in him, had he done it of his own head, and a good intent would
not have excused it.

Verse. 21, 22, 23.
This Plot of sending Hushai to Absalom prospered well, for Ahithophel gave
shrew Counsels indeed, for one was, That Absalom should go into his Fathers
Concubines, and that publicly, that so the breach between him and his Father
might be so wide, that it should be irreconcilable. A desperate Counsel it
was, that he and his Co-adjutors being put past hope of pardon, they should be
put past fear of retracting; And thus when the wicked Counsels of a
Counselor prosper, he is cried up for an Oracle, as Ahithophel was.

Chap. 17. v. 1.
The other was, that Absalom should send him with a present strength to surprise
the King and his few followers, before they were provided. Maturity in
resolutions, and celerity in execution of enterprises of War, are of
excellent use.

Verse. 7, 8.
Absalom put the first in practice presently, his own ungratiousnesse prompted
him to that; but about the other Hushai was consulted with, and he by his
wisdom did happily divert it. Verse. 14.
[But this was appointed by the Lord, that the Counsel of Ahithophel might be
defeated, that the Lord might bring evil upon Absalom] And when Ahithophel
found that his Counsel was not followed, Verse. 23.
impatient of the affront (as he esteemed it) and fearful of the Success, he
went home to his house, put his things in Order and hanged himself.] Such, and
such let the end be of all those Counselors or others, who conspire against
their Sovereign.

Verse. 5.
Hushai forthwith sent intelligence to the King of these Consultations and of
the result thereof, whereby the danger was for the present diverted, but it was
not held safe to rely thereon, for new Counsel might alter the case again. No
greater danger then to be over secure.

Verse. 17.
Whilst David and the People with him were pursued by Absalom in the
Wilderness, and the defection was very general, yet some there were who came
in to assist the King with their Persons, others with their Purses, and some
brought Provisions of all sorts to relieve the King's Army; amongst whom good
old Barzillai was one. Thus should all Loyal Subjects do, none must stand
Neutralls at such a time.

By this time was the Kings Army well increased, Chap. 18. v. 1, 2,
and now the King divides it into three Tertia's, under the Command of several
Colonells or chief Captains. That was the course then, and that is the course
still, where there are formed Armies, for Order must be kept in all great
Actions, both in times of Peace and War.

To encourage the Soldiery, Verse. 3, 4,
the King would have gone into the Battle in Person; But the People dissuaded
him, saying [ Thou art worth ten thousand of us] and the King hearkened unto
them. For the Person of the King ought not to be hazarded, but in Cases of
inevitable necessity.

At last the Battle was set, Verse. 9,
wherein God from Heaven fought for the King, for [ Absalom, the Arch-Traitor,
in passing through the Wood was hanged by the head in a Tree.] A fearful
Example, and fit for all Traitors to look back upon.

When this was related to Joab the Captain of the Kings Host, and he
understood, that Absalom was not yet dead, Verse. 10, 14, etc.
he was not satisfied till he had taken three darts, and struck him thorough
the heart. It is not safe to deal remissely with notorious and dangerous
offenders.

But when this stroke was given and the Rebels dispersed themselves, Joab
sounded a Retreat, Verse. 16,
and the Soldiers returned from pursuing of Israel. He had pity upon the
seduced multitude, when they had pity on themselves, and repented them of what
was amiss, and were willing to return to their obedience.

When the Battle was thus ended, Verse. 20,
Joab sent Messengers to the King with the Tidings. Observe this, that without
the Mission of the General, it was not lawful in the time of War to run
with News from the Camp, although it be true which is told.

Verse. 33.
As Soon as the King was informed of the Success, and withal of the death of
Absalom, he was passionately moved therewith. Herein he discovered more the
affection of an indulgent Father, thou the Judgment of a prudent King, the
time and place rightly considered.

Chap. 19. v. 1,
But when Joab (an old Commander) observed what impression this took with the
Soldiery, he told the King very home of this unseasonable Error. Some body
must deal plainly and truly with the King in such Cases of importance, so it
be done with discretion. He told plainly to the King, Verse. 6,
That it would hazard the loss of the hearts of his People, if they should
apprehend, that he loved his Enemies, and hated or neglected his Friends.

Verse 8,
He therefore advised the King to rise up (for he was dejected) and to speak
comfortably to the People, and the King followed Joabs Counsel, and he did so.
Good words, and a gentle Carriage cost little, and yet prevail much with the
Common People.

Verse. 9,
For upon this [ the People strove who should be first] in showing their duty to
the King.

Verse. 13,
The King also thought it no ill piece of Policy, to win over Amasa unto him by
promises of preferment. Such Policies must sometimes be used, but it is not
safe to trust overmuch to a reconciled Enemy.

Verse. 16, 17,
Amongst others Shimei, and Ziba, of whom ye heard even now, the Tide being
turned, came to congratulate with the King. But he (as a wise King should do
upon time-servers) did set a mark upon them, and Shimei had his just reward.

Verse. 24,
Mephibosheth also, as soon as he (being a lame man) could come to the Kings
Presence, attended him to express his joy for the Kings Victory, and in the
Kings absence, had neither washed his Feet, nor dressed his Beard, nor washed his
Clothes, till the King returned in Peace. They who cannot fight, must at such a
time Pray, in one way or another, every one as he is able, ought to express
his Duty and Affection.

And old Barzillai, who before in the Kings distress, Verse. 31,
did attend him, and help to releeve his Army, came down now to help to Conduct
the King over Jordane. None is so old or so weak, but (if he be willing) will
find some way or other to express his love and Loyalty.

The King graciously accepted Barzillai's fidelity, Verse. 33,
and moved that he should go along and live in Court with him, ( Barzillai was
for his quality, a Person might have befitted it,) but he was very aged, unfit
for a Court life, and he was also wise and understood his own imperfection,
and unfitness to turn Courtier at that Age, and therefore modestly and
thankfully he refused that gracious offer. It were to be wished, that none were
employed in places for which they are not fit, and that men were so modest and
so wise, as not to accept of such employments when they are offered.

Yet Barzillai took the opportunity to move the King, Verse. 37,
to confer that favor upon Chimham his Son, who was a young man, and fit to
serve in Court. And the King granted his suite, and [ he took Chimham with
him. Verse. 40.
] A gracious requital of the King, to a faithful and well-deserving Servant.

This is the true Story of this Rebellion, faithfully extracted out of the Holy
Writ, where it is Recorded; scarce to be paralleled until these unhappy Times,
whence it seems they have taken their President.

It needs no other Application.

FINIS.

