A SERMON PREACHED In St. Peter's Westminster on Sunday Jan. 6. 1660. at the
Consecration of the Right Reverend Fathers in God,

GILBERT Lord Bishop of Bristoll,

EDWARD Lord Bishop of Norwich,

NICHOLAS Lord Bishop of Hereford,

WILLIAM Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

BY RICHARD ALLESTRY D. D. Canon of Christ Church in Oxford, and one of his
Majesty's Chaplains.

LONDON, Printed for Jo. Mar(...) Allestry, and Tho. Dicas, at the Bell in
Saint (...) Churchyard 1660.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, GILBERT LORD Bishop of LONDON, and Deane
of His Majesty's Chapel Royal.
My Lord,
WHEN I consider with what reluctancies I appear thus in public; I have all
reason to suspect and fear, least this offering, which like an unwilling
Sacrifice was dragged to the Altar, and which has great defects too, will be
far from propitiating either for its self or for the votary. But I must crave
leave to add, that how averse soever I was to the publishing this rude
Discourse, I make the Dedication with all possible zeal, and ready
cheerfulness. For I exspect your Lordship to be a Patron not only to my
Sermon, but to my Subject. Such a separate eminence of virtue and of sweetness
mixed together may hope to ingratiate Your Function to a Generation of men that
will not yet know their own good, but resist mercy, and are not content to be
happy. And for my self, Your Lordships great goodness and obligingness has
encouraged me, not only to hope that You will pardon all the miscarriages of
what I now present, but also to presume to shelter it and my self under your
Lordships Name and Command, and to honor my self before the world by this
address, and by assuming the relation of.

My Lord, Your Lordships most humbly devoted and most faithful Servant, RICH.
ALLESTRY.

Imprimatur.
Geo. Stradling, Reverendi in Christo Patris Gilberti Episcopi Londinensis
Sacellanus domesticus.

Ex Aedibus Sabaudianis, Feb. 2. Anno Salutis 1660.
Acts 13. 2. -- The Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them.
AND as they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, --

Although that ministering to God by prayer and fasting, be the indicted and
appropriate acts to preface such Solemnities as this; and that not Sermons, but
Litanies, and intercessions, are the peculiar adherents of Embers, and of
Consecrations; and those vigorous strivings with Almighty God by Prayer are the
birth-pangs in which Fathers are born unto the Church: Yet since that now this
Sacred Office is it self opposed, and even the Mission of Preachers preached
against, and the Authority that sends despised as Antichristian, whilst
separation and pretense unto the Holy Ghost set up themselves against the
strict injunction of the Holy Ghost to separate; the Pulpit, that otherwhiles
has fought against it, must now atone its errors, by attending on the Altar,
and the bold ungrounded claims of Inspiration that false teachers have
usurped, be superseded by the voice of the Holy Ghost himself, who in this case
becomes the Preacher, and says, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them.

My Text is a Commission parole from Heaven; in it you have

First, the Person that sends it out; (...), The Holy Ghost said.

Secondly, the Persons to whom it is directed; implied in the verb (...)
separate, more particularly expressed in the foregoing words. Verse 1, 2.


Thirdly, the thing to which they were empowered by the Commission, or which
was required of them; set down in the remaining words of the Text, wherein you
have

1. The Act enjoined; (...), separate. 2. The Object; (...), Separate me
Barnabas and Saul. 3. The End for what; (...), for a work. 4. The Determination
of that work; (...), for the work whereunto I have called them.
Of these in their Order: and first,

The Holy Ghost said.

Of those (...) 1. (...) 2. (...) 3. (...) 4. (...) 5. (...)
five things, for want of which the second Jewish Temple sunk below the first,
and its glory seemed faint in the comparison, the Chiefest was the Holy Ghost;
who became silent, his Oracles ceast then, and he spoke no more by the The Arc
of the Covenant, with the Propitiatory and Cherubias; the Urim and Thummim; the
fire that c^m^ down from Heaven to consume the burnt-offerings; the glory of
God that appeared between the Cherubins; and the Holy Ghost that spoke by the
Prophets. See Gemar. c. 1. in Joma. See also Galat l. 4. citing the same out of
R. Elias, R. Solomor, R. David.
Prophets. A thing not only confessed by the Thalmudists, (who say our Rabbis
have delivered to us, that from the time of Haggai, Zechary and Malachy, (...)
The Holy Ghost was taken away from Israel) but so notorious in experience, that
when S. Paul meets Disciples at Ephesus, Acts 19. 1. and asks them if they have
received the Holy Ghost, whether at their Baptism the Spirit came down upon
them as He did then on others; they answer ver. 2. We have not so much as heard
whether there be any Holy Ghost, any extraordinary effusions of the Spirit,
whether he do come down in Gifts and Afflations, such as we know were usual in
the first Jewish Temple, but have not been for a long time, and we have not yet
heard they are restored, (for of this pouring out of the Holy Ghost they must
needs mean it, not of himself, of whom they could not doubt, nothing was more
known in the Jewish Church.)

But as our Savior did supply the other four with all advantage, and so
fulfilled the Prophecy, and made the Hag. 2. 10.
glory of that Temple greater: so for the fifth, the Spirit, he was restored in
kind with infinite improvement; that of Joel 2. 28
Joel fulfilled, I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, for they were all
baptized with the Holy Ghost; baptized in rivers of living waters, which did
flow out of the belly of themselves, for this he spoke of the Spirit, which all
that believed on him should receive, Joh. 7. 39. so that Joel did scarce feel
or foresee enough to prophesy of this abundance, but John 3. 34.
the inundations were almost like Christ's receivings, without measure. Nor
were his Inspirations as of old, dark and mysterious oracles, direction in
rapture, where ^^e Message it self was to have another revelation, and it must
(...) prophecy to understand as well as utter: But in the Gospel his effusions
run clear, and transparent as the water that expresses them, revealing even
all the unknown languages that were the conduits and conveighances; all plain
express direction, such as that of the Text.

Now amongst all the several uses of the Holy Ghost for which he was poured out
in this abundance, amongst all the designs he did engage himself in, and
advance, He does not seem to have a greater agency, nor to interess himself
more in any, then in qualifying for, and separating to Church-offices. This
seems to be his great work: and indeed how can he choose but be particularly
concerned in those offices which are his own (...), his gifts? Timothy's is
expressly called so, in each of his Epistles, 1 Timothy 4. 14. 2 Timothy 1. 6. and
when our Savior, Ephesians. 4. 8. is said to give the gifts of the Holy Ghost to
men, it is added how, ver. 11. He gave some Apostles, some Evangelists, some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, namely because those gifts enabled for those offices; and all the
reason in the world that he should have a special hand in giving, where
himself is to be received. Receive the Holy Ghost, that was from the beginning,
and is yet the installation to them: And if we take them from their divine
original, from that great Pastor and Bishop of our sonls, 1 Pet. 2. 25.
who was the maker of them too, Thus he was consecrated; The spirit of the Lord
is upon me, therefore he has anointed me to preach the Gospel, Luke 4. 18. And
when he comes to ordain succession, he says, as my Father sent me, so send I
you: and he breathed upon them, and said, Receive the Holy Ghost, Joh. 20. 21.
and after bids them tarry at Jerusalem till they should be endued with power
from above, Luke 24. 47. that is, endued with the Holy Spirit, Act. 1. The
present Barnabas and Saul were sent by his Commission in the Text; and v. 4.
Saint Paul tells the Elders of the Churches of Asia, the Holy Ghost made them
overseers, (...), Act. 20. 28. Timothy had his office (...), by immediate
designation of the Holy Ghost, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Ep. ad Corint. p. 3.
Clemens Romanus says, the Apostles out of those they had converted, did
ordain Bishops and Deacons, (...), having first tried them by the Holy Ghost,
and so taught by his revetation who should be the men. apud Eusebius. l. 3. c. 23.
And Clemens Alexandrinus says, John after his return to Asia, ordained
throughout all the regions about, (...), such as were signified and designed by
the Holy Ghost. So that Oecumenius pronounces in the general, (...), The
Bishops that were made, they made not inconsiderately on their own heads, but
such whom the Spirit did command. Chrysostom said as much before, and on ^
Tim. 4. 14.
Theophylact. Nor can we doubt that he maintains his interest in this affair
even at this day: But that our Veni Creator Spiritus, Come Holy Ghost eternal
God, does call him to preside in these so concerning solemnities; For Christ,
when he commissioned his Apostles, assuring them, Behold I am with you even to
the end of the world; which promise Matthew. 28. 20.
he performs only vicaria Spiritus praesentia, by the presence of the Holy
Ghost, who is his Vicar, as Tertullian expresses; nor can the Spirit be with
them till then, but by making them be till then; which being done by
Ordination, that Ecclesiastical procreation, (for so they derive themselves to
the worlds end;) upon the strength of that promise, we may assure our selves he
does assist as truly, though not so visibly, as when he said here, Separate.

The Holy Ghost's concernment being thus secured, I have this one thing only
to suggest; that they who set themselves against all separation to these
offices and Orders, in and for which the Holy Ghost has so appeared, (what
they be I dispute not now) they fight against the Holy Ghost, and thrust him
out of that in which he has most signally interess'd himself. And they that do
entitle the Spirit to this opposition, do not only make Gods Kingdom divided
against it self, or raise a faction in the Trinity, and stir up division
betwixt those Three One Persons; but they set the same Person against himself,
and make the Holy Spirit resist the Holy Ghost. You know the inference pressed
upon them that did this but interpretatively in the Devils Kingdom, and did
make Satan cast out Satan: and is it not here of force? And Matthew. 12. 26.
they who make the Spirit cast out the Holy Ghost, contrive as much as in them
lies Gods Kingdom shall not stand. I will not parallel the guilts. Those
Pharisees blasphemed the Holy Spirit in his Miracles, ascribing that to
Beelzebub which was the immediate work of the Holy Ghost: (and such indeed do
sin unpardonably, because they sin irrecoverably; for Miracles being the utmost
and most manifest express wherein the Holy Ghost exerts himself, they who can
harden their understandings against them have left themselves no means of
conviction, and cannot be forgiven, because they cannot be rectified or
reclaimed:) These others do blaspheme the Spirit in his immediate inspirations
and (...), ascribing to the spirit of Antichrist all those Offices and Orders,
which these gifts of the Holy Ghost were powered from Heaven immediately to
qualify for, and separate to; things in which he has as signally appeared as
in his Miracles: and as he made these means to convince the world, so he made
those the Officers of doing it, and set them to out-last the other. Now in the
same nearness that these two guilts come up one toward the other, just to the
same degree these sin the sin against the Holy Ghost. For the Holy Ghost said,
Separate.

So I pass to the second, to those whom this injunction is directed to. And
thence I do observe 2.
in general, that

Notwithstanding all the interest and office that the Holy Ghost assumes in
these same separations, yet there is something left besides for man to do.
Although he superintend, they have a work in it: He is the Uncti^^, 1 John 2.
20.
but it must be applied by laying on of hands. I have called them, says he in
the Text; and yet to them that ministered, the Holy Ghost said, Do ye separate.
I do not now examine what degree and order of men they were whom the Holy Ghost
here commissions for this Office. The Judgment of the Ancient Church in this
affair is enough known, by the condemnation of Epip. haer. 75.
Aerius, and by the Fate of Vide Athanas. Apol. 2. How this judgment did derive
it self down into the Reformation, may be seen from the account of the Fratres
Bohemi, who sought over the world for Episcopal Ordination, and were never
quiet (...) (...) consciences till they had obtained it. Vide Johan. Am.
Comenii Ratio Disciplinae Ordinis; Ecclesiastici in Unit. Eratrum ^^^morum.
Ischyras and Colluthus: and for the present instance, in which they are called
Doctors that are bid to do it, there has enough been said to prove (...) a
Title of a Bishop: to which I shall only add, that it was a variation of Name
that stuck by them until Bede's age, in which, what Bishop signified does come
under no question; for he does say, Bed. Eccl. hist. l. 2. cap. 2.
that Austin called together to the Conference, Episcopos sive Doctores, the
Bishops or the Doctor, of the Province. Besides that there was then in Antioch
a Bishop, (...), Suid, in voce (...).
In the time of Claudius Emperor of Rome, and of Euodius, whom the Apostle
Peter had ordained at Antioch, those that before were called Nazarenes and
Galil^ans, were called Christians: a thing which happened a little before this
separation in the Text, as you find chapter 11. 26. But who they were that used to
separate for every Execution of these holy Offices, will appear from the
instances that I shall make to prove the present observation, that, besides
that of the Holy Ghost, there was an outward Call: And whomsoever the Spirit
sent, he commanded that they should have Commission from Men. And all my former
Testimonies for the Holy Ghost, bear witness for this too. The Text is
positive; here was a Conge d'eslire for Barnabas and Saul. Timothy had his
office (...), by designation of the Spirit, 1 Timothy 4. 14. yet (...), with
laying on of hands, ibid. yea (...), by the laying on of my hands, 2 Timothy 1. 6.
And Timothy was placed at Ephesus, as Titus also left at Creet, to ordain Tit.
1. 5.
others in the same manner; St. Paul providing for the succession of the Rite
and Ceremony as well as of the Office. And in St. Clement's Testimony, (...);
the Spirit tried, but the Apostles constituted. And down as low as Trajan's
time, when St. John's date was almost out, his life and his Commission
expiring, and the Churches of Asia to be provided with succession, the Men were
(...), signified by the Holy Ghost: But the Chron. Alex. says, (...), that he
went clean throughout Asia and the adjacent Regions, constituting not only
Bishops, but others of inferior Clergy: and even in the lowest thus it was;
when the first Deacons were to be made, Men full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom
were to be looked out, Act. 6. 3. But yet that did not autorize them, the Holy
Ghost and wisdom did not make a Deacon: for besides that, the Apostles will
appoint them over their business, ibid. and they are brought to them, and they
do lay their hands upon them, verse 6. Thus it was in those times of full
effusion of the Holy Ghost: Men always had to do in giving that Commission: so
that whoever pleads an Order of the Spirit for his Office, (although such a
Commission of the Spirit, if he had it, would evidence it self, and if it were,
it would appear, for 'twas the manifestation of the Spirit that was given to
every man to 1 Cor. 12. 7.
profit withal; yet) if we yield him his pretensions, and let his own
incitations pass for inspirements, and his strong fancy for the Holy Ghost, if
the Holy Ghost did call him, who did separate him? whom the Holy Ghost calls,
he sends to his officers to empower; they both work; He says, do ye separate.

And here a Consideration offers it self unto those holy Fathers, whom the
Spirit makes his Associates in separating men to sacred offices; that when they
set apart even to the lowest stalls of the Church, they labor to perform it so
that the Holy Ghost may be engaged, and act along with them in the performance:
Separate such as they may presume the Spirit has called, and will own. He does
not call the ignorant, or appoint blind eyes for the body of Christ, or make
men Seers to lead into the pit. The Holy Spirit calls not the Unclean, or the
Intemperate; we know it was another sort of spirit that went into the swine:
Mar. 5. 13.
nor does he ever say, Separate me those who separate themselves, the
Schismatics: the Spirit calls not such as break the unity of the Spirit; nor
sets into the rank of higher members in Christ's body those who tear that body,
and themselves from it: the factious, those that will not be bound neither in
bonds of peace nor of obedience, but break all holy ties, that make commotions,
and rave and foam, sure it is the Legion Luke 8.
that sends them, and not the Holy Ghost. He whom the Spirit will call, must
not be under the reputation of a Vice, but should be of a good report, lest he
fall into reproach, and so into the snare of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3. 7. i. e. lest
he fall into reproach, and then his teaching do so too, and men learn to
slight or not heed the doctrines of such a one as is under scandal for his
life, and so the Devil get advantage over them, and do ensnare them. Theophyl,
in locum.
(...). For to be to any an occasion of falling, is to be the Devils snare. Now
Christ's Matthew. 4. 19.
Fishers of men, those whom the Holy Ghost appoints to spread nets for the
catching Souls to God, their lives must not lay snares for the Devil, and
entangle Souls in the toyls of perdition. Those also that come to you out of
Ambition or of greediness of gain, the Spirit calls not neither: He calls we
see (...), to a work; so that they who seek more then they can well attend the
labor of, or are qualified for the work of, they are not of his sending. But
of all men the Holy Ghost will least deal with the Simoniacal, that come not to
a work, but to a market, that contract with Patrons for the Spirits call, or,
worse then their master Simon, would hire the Holy Spirit himself to say,
Separate me them: The Successors of the Apostles have a Canonical return to
these, Your money Act. 8. 20.
perish with you. They whom the Holy Ghost does call must have his gifts and
temper; Saint Paul has set all down to Timothy and Titus; and those who
minister in this employment, if they will be what he has made them, joint
Commissioners with him, and his Co-workers, they must order it so that he may
work and act, which he does not but where he calls, nor does he call but those
whom he has qualified: And it is of those only whom he has called, that he
says, (...), Separate,

The third particular, the thing enjoined; And the Holy Ghost said, Separate.

The separateness of the Functions of the Clergy, the incommunicableness of
their Offices to persons not separated for them, is so express a doctrine both
of the letter of the Text, and of the Holy Ghost, that sure I need not to say
more, though several heads of Probation offer themselves: As first the
condition of the callings, which does divide from the Community, and sets them
up above it; And here I might tell you of 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb. 13. 7.
bearing rule, of Matt. 19. 28.
thrones, of Rev. 1. 20.
stars and Rev. 1. 20.
Angels, and other words of as high sense, and yet not go out of the Scripture
bounds, although the dignity did not die with the Scripture age, or expire
with the Apostles: The age as low as Photius words it thus, Phot. ep. 54.
(...) (...). That Apostolical and Divine Dignity, which the chief Priests are
acknowledged to be possessed of by right of Succession. Styles which I could
derive yet lower, and they are of a prouder sound then those the modest humble
ears of this our age are so offended with. But these heights it may be would
give Ombrages; although it is strange that men should envy them to those, who
are only exalted to them, that they may with the more advantage take them by
the hands to lift them up to Heaven. Those neernesses to things above do but
more qualify them to be (...), in Theoph. and to draw near to God on your
behalf, that those your Matthew. 18. 10.
Angels also may see the face of your father which is in heaven, and those
stars are therefore set in Apoc. 1. 20.
Christ's right hand, that they may shed a blessing influence on you from thence.

2. The (...) and the (...), The Work and labor of the work, (the one is the
Text's, and the other Saint 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Paul's word) require a whole man, and therefore a man separate: and if Saint
Paul, one of our separated persons here, who had the fullness of the Spirit, and
the fullness of Learning too, that was brought up in the Schools, and brought up
in Paradise, taught by the Doctors, and taught by the mouth of the Lord in the
third heaven, snatched from the feet of Gamaliel to the 2 Cor. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4.
presence of God, to have a beatifical Vision of the Gospel, if after all this
he cry out, who is sufficient 2 Cor. 2. 16.
for these things? sure they are not sufficient, who in those little intervals
which their trades and necessities afford them, fall into fits and frensies of
Religion, have a sharp Paroxysme of irregular convulsed Divinity, as if they
were its (...), possessed with their Theology till their weariness, and not
knowing what to say do exorcise them.

But not to speak only to the wild fancies of this Age, the Scripture says of
the men of these callings, they are taken from among Men, and Heb. 5. 1.
ordained for Men in things pertaining to God. And such discriminations are
evinced by all the expressions of a Church in Scripture. It Is called the body
of Christ: Now the parts of a body, as where they are so separate that they
divide from Col. 1. 24.
one another, they do not make a body, but are an Execution; so where they are
not separate in a diversity of organs, for several faculties and operations,
it may be a dead Element, as similar bodies are, but cannot be that body which
Saint Paul describes 1 Cor. 12. which is not one member, but many, verse. 14.
And if they were all one member, where were the body? verse. 19. and indeed all
that Chapter is inspired for this Argument. In Christ's Church it is as
impossible that every one can be (...) an Overseer, as that every part in the
body can be an Eye: and the whole frame of man may be nothing else but a
Tongue, as well as every Christian may be a Preacher: And if it might, where
indeed were the Hearing? as Saint Paul does ask. The Church is also called a
Ephesians. 2. 21.
building, and 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Gods house: Now it is true that every Christian is by Saint Peter called a
lively stone, and all of them built up a Spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, 1
Pet. 2. 5. and they all are a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar,
separate people, ver. 9. Yet all this is no more of privilege then is affirmed
in the very same words of the Jewish Nation, Exodus 19. 6. where yet God had his
separated Levites, Priests and Highpriests too. But sure it is manifest enough
that in this building, as in others, stones have their separate places and
distinct; every one cannot bear up the Corner, or be a pillar and
foundation-stone; much less can every one place it self in the Ephod, assume to
be of the Urim and the Thummim stones, and there break out in Oracles, and give
responses; and every rubbish stone set it self in the Mitre, and shine in the
head ornaments, as if it were of the precious stones of Sion. In fine, (to
speak now out of Metaphor,) not only the transactions of the Text, which is a
precedent for men to commission such and such, but also all Scripture rules
direct a Choice; and where there is Election, there is also dereliction, and
both evince a separation. And if all the Nations in the World have had their
distinct officers for Religion, and, as it were, to signalize the separateness
of their function, in many nations they did live apart from Men: The Priests
had their adyta as well as the Deities; dark solitary Groves were made choice
of, not so much for the God, as for his Officer's retirement; so that every
appearance of him also was a Vision, and the Priest was revealed as well as the
Oracle; and all this at the first to make a kind of sacred Pomp for the
solemnity of awfulnes, (though afterward it often proved but opportunity for
foul performances.) And if to this uniform practice of the World Gods
attestation be set, who ordered it in his own government; nor that as a
Levitical or Jewish administration, but it was practiced amongst his own from
the beginning, and when dominions were but greater families, there were still
distinct persons for the employments of Religion; that was the office and the
privilege of the Vid. Tharg. Hicrosolym. Genesis 49. 3. and Jonath. ibid. and
Solom. Jarch. Glossam ad Exodus 19. 22. and ad cap. 24. 5.
firstborn: Esau was called profane for selling that VideIsido. Pelusio. l. 2.
Epist. 47.
birthright of his: (And the word in the Text here, (...) separate, is the same
which God does word the sanctifying the firstborn for him with, Exodus 13. 2.)
'Twere easy to deduce all this out of all ancient Jewish Records. And when the
practice ever sinee has been the same in Christ's Religion: after all this,
sure nothing else but absolute defection of the Notions of Mankind, and
blotting out all the impressions of Universal Nature and Universal Religion, or
else an absolute Command from Heaven, could alter this Establishment; from
which command we are so far, that it is the Holy Ghost himself that said
expressly, (...) separate.

Now this (...), this Separateness in Function, does infer upon us a
separateness in Life and Conversation, and they who are thus set apart from the
world, must keep themselves unspotted from the World. To separate and
Consecrate are but two words for the same thing: Jac. 1. 27.
Separate three Cities is the Command in Deuteronomy. 19. 2. and they sanctified
three, josh. 20. 7. Our Offices assume them both, and all are holy Orders. Now
separate and pure are both so primitive, and so essential notions of holy, that
truly I cannot determine which of them is original, and which secondary: Our
Consecration does challenge both; and as we will be separate in our calling, so
we must be separate in our lives, not Romans 12. 2.
conforming our selves to the World, for I Joh. 15. 19.
have chosen you out of the World, says Christ. A torrent license of an Age
must not carry us along; an Universal Custom of the World must be no
precedent, and can be no excuse for us to do what is irregular. We are (...)
separate; and that the world does such things is no more a plea for us to do
so, then that because the World is Common ground, therefore the Church is so
too, fit to be put to all the uses of the field, or of worse places. Were it a
reasonable Argument; because I see that the whole Countrey's tilled, why should
not I break up the holy places, and plow the Temple? Why, so we are enclosed
for God, and separated for the uses of Religion, and to preserve our selves
pure for them. Our Savior says that the Community of Christians is a City upon
an Hill; and then sure the consecrated Persons are the Temples Matt. 5. 14.
of that City, the separate places of it; and then as they are most in sight
(the Church is ordinarily the most visible building) so truly he that sees one
of them, it should be as if he saw an open Church, where there is nothing else
but holy duty, as if his life were Liturgy, public Service and Worship of God.
Has your zeal never rose, at least your indignation, at the profane fury of
this age, which never made a stop in violation of things sacred; when to its
heap of other Sacriledges, it added most contemptuous defilements of God's
Houses; making the place that 1 Cor. 11. 10.
Angels met us in to worship, and God Exodus 15. 17.
dwelt in to Exodus 20. 24.
bless us there, the place appointed for the Divinest Mysteries of our
Redemption, for the Celebration of Christ's Agonies, for the Commemoration of
the blessed Sacrifice, the place for nothing but Christ's blood, then to become
the place of a most odious and insolent uncleanness? If I had worded this more
aggravatingly, it had been only to infer that then to see a consecrated
person to pollute himself with those black foulnesses that made Hell and made
Fiends, is sure a sadder and a more unhappy spectacle. If an Apostle become
wicked, he is in our Saviors Character a Devil; Have I not chosen Twelve, and
one of you is a Devil? Yea if the good Saint Peter do become a John 6. 7.
scandal, tempt to that which is not good; Get thee behind me, Satan. Christ
calls his nearest Mat. 16. 23.
Officers Stars; Emblems of a great separateness Apoc. 1. 20.
those, that teach them how far their Conversation should be removed from
Earth: for they are of another Orb, Heaven is the Region of Stars. But they
are Emblems of a greater purity; there is nothing in the World so clean as
light, it is not possible so much as to sully shine; it may irradiate dung-hils,
but they do not defile it; you may eclipse a star but cannot spot it; you may
put out the light, you cannot stain it. It Is a word for God's purity: only his
light is glory; and as his holiness is so separate that it is incommunicable,
so his Light is inaccessible; Yet sure they that are stars in Christ's right 1 Timothy 6. 16.
hand, they do come near, and mix their light Apoc. 1. 20.
with his; and they of all men must be pure and holy, whom the Spirit calls to
that place, as he does all whom he calls to that separation that he did
Barnabas and Saul, the Persons and the next Part; Separate me Barnabas and Saul.

I intend not to make particular reflections upon these persons, although the
Character of Barnabas be registered the 11. Chap. ver. 24. He was a good man,
full of Faith and of the Holy Ghost; and the good influence that that had upon
the people follows; and much people was added to the Church. And as for Saul;
though he began the Christian persecution, and was baptized in the first
Martyr-blood, and breathed out threatenings, so that nothing but thunder could
out-voice Act. 9. 1.
him, and at last was born as an (...), as an untimely birth, aborting through
those wounds which his own hands had made in the Church, 1 Cor. 15. 8.
and making himself a birth with ripping up her bowels; yet this Abortive
proved the strongest birth, and 'twas a Miscarriage into the chiefest Apostle.
As he began the after-sufferings of Christ in Stephen; so he fulfilled the
(...), and made up all that was behind, in 1 Col. 24.
himself, being in deaths more then those he inflicted. The sound of his
preaching was louder then that at his Conversion, out-voic'd the thunder; for
this went out into all lands, as if himself alone meant to execute the whole
Commission, preach the Gospel to every creature: Mar. 16. 15.
which he did almost, not only preaching to those places where Christ was not
named, Romans 15. 20.
without the other Apostles line; but even where the rest employed themselves,
he wrought 2 Cor. 10. 16.
as much as they, in Asia as Saint John, at Antioch as Peter; yea and at Rome
too, having as much to do in their foundation: If I had said more, I could
have brought the Popes own Seal for evidence; where not only both are, but
Saint Paul has the right hand: And truly Matthew. Paris.
if they had had the luck to think at first of founding all their pretensions
on Saint Paul, his care of all the Churches would have born 2 Cor. 11. 28.
them out, as well as feed my Lambs does now. John 21. 15.
But these considerations I pass; though they would give a Man that has done
mischief in the Church a pattern for the measures of his future Service to the
Church. The thing I shall concern my self in, is the solemn separation here of
those who were before separated to the work of the Gospel; Barnabas sent by the
Church of Jerusalem to Antioch, Act. 11. 22. and Paul not only separated from
his Mothers womb, Gal. 1. 15. but chosen by express Revelation, and by the
laying on of Ananias hands, to go preach the Gospel to the Gentiles and to
Kings, and qualified for it by receiving of the Holy Ghost, Act. 9. from 15. In
which work both of them had for some years exercised themselves. Yet here is a
new consecration, and they are taken up to a condition more separate, and
distinct from what they were before. And all those vast advantages in which
these persons did excel; the one of faith and fullness of the Holy Ghost, the
other, besides those, of express and immediate mission from Heaven; and the
most strange success their labors had been blessed with, all these, I say, did
not qualify them to assume these powers which the Holy Ghost commands another
Separation to enstall them in: and 'twas this Call that called Paul to be an
(...). Separate for the work, that is, for the Apostleship. Occumenius upon
this text.
Apostle, Romans 1. 1. (as from this time he is always called Paul, not sooner).
Nor do we find any least footsteps of their being Apostles before; though
Barnabas were sent to Antioch, yet he does not undertake what Peter and John
did at Samaria in the very same case; for they confirm and give the Holy Ghost,
Act. 8. 15, 17. but Barnabas does nothing but Exhort, Act. 11. 23. and he and
Paul together preached the Word abroad, but we find nothing else they
enterpriz'd: but from this time they exercise Jurisdiction, settle Churches,
and ordain them Elders in the Churches, Chapter 14. 22, 23. and (as it does appear)
singly derived these powers to others, to be exercised by them singly. To Titus
most expressly, Tit. 1. 5. the like also to Timothy, with all the other acts of
Jurisdiction, (of which their Epistles are the Records) particularly that of
Censures, which Paul himself had inflicted on offenders in the Churches he had
planted. Powers these, which by such steps and by degrees of separation an
Apostle himself receives, and does not execute till he ascend the highest, that
which they have a new solemnity ordained from Heaven to enstate them in, by a
new laying on of hands, and the Holy Ghost himself commanding, Separate.

The separateness of this highest order in the Church is a doctrine handed down
to us both by the writings of all ages and the practices; (two things, which as
they scarcely do concur in such a visible degree in any other things in our
Religion, so also when they do concur, they make and secure tradition beyond
all contradiction, give it sufficient infallibility: and truly he that does
refuse the evidence which such tradition gives to all the motives of believing
Christianity, if he be not a Socinian, he must be an Enthusiast, and can
receive his Religion only from Revelation.) Now the matter of fact of this
tradition is a subject for Volumes, not for a discourse, and it has filled so
many, that there is nothing left unsaid, or to be said against, as to the main:
And they that pick some little sayings seeming against this order out of those
Ancients which were themselves of it, and wrote much expressly for it, and
think by those means to confute it, do the same thing, with that Romanist, who
tore some little Brerely.
shreds, that look as if they favored some opinions of the Romanists, out of
the books of Protestants, most of which were directly writ against the Church
of Rome, and putting those together went about by them to convince the world
there never were any such things as Protestants, but they that did profess to
be so were all Papists.

But I will say no more then my Text has done, which evidences it not a
separation only of degree, but Order, by a new Ceremony, and commissionating
to new powers. If I would stay on words, it is expressed here by one that speaks
very great distances, (...), separate, which does in Scripture word the
distances that the Censures of the Church do make; Luke 6. 22. and still in the
Greek Liturgies, when absolution is given, it is said to be (...), to free them
from all curse and separation; as if to pass into the bounds of this uncalled,
were a (...)
such a thing as to leap over the Censures of the Church, over the Line of
Excommunication; and to break through this wall of separation, were to break
through Anathema's and Curses: Yea, it is used to express the distance betwixt
the Lord's two hands, his right hand and his left, at the day of Doom, Mat. 25.
32. betwixt which hands there is a (...), a most insuperable gulf.

But these I shall not urge. Indeed the Fathers of the Church have been in
these last days counted (...) separate in the severest sense, cast out as the
dung of the Earth; and the calling it self was under reprobation, as if it
separated only to the left hand of God: but so it was with their Predecessors
in the Text. Saint Paul says of himself and the rest of his Order, that they
were counted (...) and (...), as the filth of the world, and the offscouring
of all things, 1 Cor. 4. 13. and as if they were called only to ruin, and
consecrated for a sacrifice, he says, the Lord has set us forth as men
appointed to death, verse. 9. Indeed God has pleased to own you as his Churches
Angels, we are not troubled if some have counted you as the offscouring of the
Earth, while we know Angels do relate to Heaven: and let them consider how they
will reprobate those to the left hand of God, whom Christ calls stars in his
right hand, and he is at the right hand of his Father; and while you were
accounted so you did but follow them that went before in sufferings as well as
office; and to do so was part of the (...), the work that they were separated
to; which is the next part For the work.

I shall but run this over, and reflect upon it as I pass, according as it is
of present Concernment; and

First, Saint Paul's work was to preach the Gospel, and we find him doing it
from this time forward to his End. The high Priest of the Jews was called the
Angel of the Lord of Hoasts; of which name an Heathen does give this account,
that he was called so, because he was, (...), the Angel or the Messenger of
Gods commands: so Diodorus Siculus. And Malachy gives the same reason, Mal. 2.
7. he was the Substitute to him upon Mount Sinai, and gave the Law also, only
without the thunder. Our Governors succeed into the Name, they are the
Churches Angels; and when we hear the word from them, Apo^. 1. 20.
we have it as it were from heaven again, and we receive our Law too (...), by
the disposition of Angels. Indeed the Acts 7. 1.
Case now is not like Saint Paul's, the Gospel then was to be first revealed to
all the World, and by continual inculcating secured against the depravations
which all the malice of the Devil and the world sought to infuse, and the
unskilfulness of infant Christians did make them apt to entertain; But now we
are all confirmed Christians: Yet truly the time is now such as did give
occasion for Saint Paul's charge to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. a time wherein
they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap
to themselves teachers. He therefore that is in Timothie's place, must heap up
Reproofs and Exhortations; or he must heap good sound dispensers of them: Such
as will feed the Lambs with sincere milk, not chafed and heated with commotion
and busy restless faction; not embitter'd with the overflowings of a too-ful
gall; not sour'd with eager sharpnesses of a malicious or a dissatisfied mind;
not impoisoned with the soul tinctures of a scandalous life, nor the Corrosive
infusions of Schismatical and turbulent opinions. He that caters thus for his
flock, and provides such as by doctrine and by practice do instruct them to
live quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty; He, like the Angel
on Mount Sinai, gives the Law to a Nation together, preaches to his whole
Diocese at once, Continually.

The second work was praying for, and blessing them: This does begin, and close
every Epistle; 2.
that he asserts of himself constantly, and it is well known the (...) gifts of
those times inspired for this Work. Now thus our Angels also are Angels of
Incense, The High Priests Office in especial: Those that did daily minister
performed a service of Incense too, that did accompany the prayers of the
people, and sent them up in perfume; but the High Priests Incense was part of
the Lev. 16. 12, 13.
Expiation, and was the Cloud that covered the transgressions of the people
when he came with them all about him before the Mercy-seat. And they who shall
consider that the prayer of Moses (Now Moses and Aaron were among the (...),
Greg. Naz. Orat. 6. ad Greg. Nyssen.
Priests, Psalm. 99. 6. and He was the chief (...) Aben Ezr. ad Psalm. 99. (...),
Greg. Naz. ubi supra. (...), Philo de vita Mosis l. 1, and 3.
Priest) did withhold the arm of God when it was stretched forth in fury to
destroy, and did commit a violence upon the Lord, such as he could not grapple
with, but seems to deprecate, and would fain avoid, and says, Let me alone,
that I may destroy them, Exodus 32. 10. If thou will permit me, my fury shall
prevail upon them, faith the Arabic, but if thou pray it cannot; therefore let
go thy prayer, says the Chald. and let me alone. And they who shall confider
also that His prayer did maintain a breach against the Lord, when He had made
one, and was coming to enter in a storm of indignation, then this made head
against him, and repuls't him, Psalm. 106. 23. Had not Moses his chosen stood
before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath lest he should destroy them.
They that consider these effects, will certainly desire the Prayers and
Benedictions of those Gods chiefest Officers of blessing, those that are
consecrated to bless in the Name of the Lord; and will have them in love for
this works sake.

Their Third work is Government, which may 3.
be some do look upon as privilege and not as work; the expectation and
delight of their ambitions, and not the fear and burden of their shoulders.
But ambition may as rationally fly at Miracles as Government, and as hopefully
gape after diversity of Tongues, as at presiding in the Church; the powers of
each did come alike from Heaven, and were the mere gifts of the Holy Ghost,
(...), Miracles. gifts of healing, Governments, diversities of tongues.
1 Cor. 12. 28. It was so in the Law; when God went to divide part of Moses
burden of Government amongst the Lxx, he came down and took of the Spirit that
was upon him, and gave it to the Lxx, Number. 11. 25. A work this that may have
reason to supersede much of that which I first mentioned: For notwithstanding
all Saint Paul's assistances of Spirit, he does reckon that care that came upon
him daily from the Churches amongst his persecutions, and it sums up his
Catalogue of sufferings: 2 Cor. 11. Such various Necessities there are by which
Government is distracted, and knows not how to temper it self to them. For
sometimes it must condescend: Paul notwithstanding Apostolical decrees made in
full Council that abrogated Circumcision, (as the Holy Ghost had declared it
void before,) yet is fain to comport so far with the violent humors of a party
as to Circumcise Timothy, at the very same time when he delivered those decrees
to the Churches to keep, Act. 16. 3, 4: yet asterwards when Circumcision was
looked on as Engagement to the whole [that sense he puts upon it in the epistle
to the Galatians, chapter 5. ver. 3.]
Law, and to grant them that one thing, was but to teach them to ask more, and
to be able to deny them nothing; then he suffers not Titus to be circumcised,
nor gave place to them by submission, no not for an hour, Gal. 2. 3, 5. Thus
the Spirit of Government is sometimes a Spirit of meekness, does its work by
soft yieldings, and breaks the Adamant with Cushions which Anvils would not do:
The Ocean with daily billows and tides, helped on with storms of violence, and
hurried by tempests of roaring fury, assaults a rock for many ages; and yet
makes not the least impression on it, but is beat back, and made retire in
empty foam, in insignificant passion: when a few single drops that distill
gently down upon a rock though of Marble, or a small trickle of water that
only wets and glides over the stone, insinuate themselves into it, and soften
it so as to steal themselves a passage through it. And yet Government has a
rod too, which like Moses's can break the rock, and fetch a stream out of the
heart of quarre; and which must be used also: the Holy Spirit himself breathed
tempest when he came, blew in a mighty boisterous wind: nor does he always
whisper soft things, he came down first in a sound from heaven, and spoke
thunder; nor did it want lightning, the tongue was double flame. Of some we
know we must have a Compassion, but others must be saved with terror, Jude 22,
23. which drives me on to the last piece of their work,

The Censures of the Church, the burden of 4.
the Keys; which (passing by the private use of them in voluntary penitences,
and discipline upon the sick) as they signify public exclusion out of the
Church for scandalous Enormities, and readmission into it upon repentance,
have been sufficiently evinced to belong to the Governors of the Church. The
Exercise of these is so much their work that Saint Paul calls them the Weapons
of their spiritual Warfare, by which they do cast down imaginations and every
high thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and bring into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5: a blessed
victory even for the Conquered; and these the only Weapons to atchieve it
with. If those who sin scandalously, and will not hear the admonitions of the
Church, were cast out of the Church; if not Religion, Reputation would restrain
them somewhat: not to be thought fit company for Christians would surely make
them proud against their Vices. Shame, the designed Effect of these Censures,
has great pungencies, the fear of it does goad men into actions of the
greatest hazard, and the most unacceptable; such as have nothing lovely in
them, but are wholly distastful. There is a Sin whose face is bloody dismal; and
yet because it is countenanced by the Roysting Ruffian part of the world, men
will defy Reason and Conscience, Man's and God's Law, venture the ruin of all
that is beloved and dear to them in this world, and assault death, and charge
and take Hell by violence; rather then be ashamed before those valiant sinners,
Satan's Hectors: and, they must never come into such Company if they do not go
boldly on upon the sin, is of more force with them then all the indearments of
this world, then all their fear of God, and death, and that which follows. Now
if Religion could but get such Countenance by the Censures of the Church; and
every open sinner had this certain fear, I shall be turned out of all Christian
company, shall be avoided as unfit for Conversation; would it not have in some
degree the like effect? and if the motive be as much exactly, would not men be
chaste or sober or obedient for that very reason for which they will now be
killed and be damned? Without all question Saint Peter's Censure on the
intemperate, 1 Cor. 5. must needs be reformation to him: It Is such a sentence to
the drunkard, Not to company with him, whose vice is nothing but the sauce of
Company; and who does sin against his body and against his faculties and
against his Conscience, is sick, and is a Sott, and goes to Hell merely for
Societies sake. Now the infliction of these Censures is so much the work to
which Church Governors are called by the Holy Ghost, that they are equally
called by him to it and to Himself; both are alike bestowed upon them: Receive
the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye retain they are retained, John 20. 22. And in the
first derivations of this office, it was performed with severities, such as
this age I doubt will not believe; and when they had no temporal sword to be
auxiliary to these Spiritual weapons.

And now to make reflections on this is not for me to undertake, in such a
state of the Church as ours is; wherein the very faults of some do give them an
Indemnity, who having drawn themselves out of the Church, from under its
authority, are also got out of the power of its Censures: So children that do
run away from their Fathers house, they do escape the Rod; but they do not
consider that withal they run away from the inheritance: and many times in
those that do not do so, but stay within the family; long intermission of the
Rod, and indulged license makes them too big and heady to be brought under
discipline. And is it not so with us? Among many of those that stay within the
Church, (I know not whether I do well to say so, when of these I mean there is
little other Evidence of their doing so but this, that they will swear and
drink of the Churches side; Blessed Sons of a demolished Church, who think to
raise their Mother a temple by throwing stones at her:) by reason of the late
overthrow of government and discipline, and the consequent licenses, Vice has
been so nursed up; not only by an universal, barefaced, uncorrected practice;
but by principles of liberty, that can dispute down all Ecclesiastical
restraints, and have set up the Religion of License: that now sin is grown so
outrageous, as to be too strong for discipline; nay rather then it should be
set up, it is to be feared they would endeavor to renverse all in the Church,
and enterprise as much in their vices quarrel, as others have done for mistaken
Religion. And indeed to what purpose were the Censures, whose first and
medicinal effect is shame, amongst men, where it is in very many instances the
only shameful thing not to be vicious; where men stand candidates for the
reputation of glorious sinners, take to themselves sins they have not
committed, that are not theirs, and usurp Vice; sins and damnations hypocrites?
What work is here for discipline? But this state wants not precedents; the
censures of the Church were not only laid aside in the Vastations of the
Arrian heresy and persecution; when the weapons of the Churches warfare were
too weak to make defense against all their cruelties and impieties: and before
that in Diocletian's days against the Lapsi: But we find also that Saint Paul
is forced to break out only in a passionate wish, (...), I would they were
even cut off that trouble you (by excommunication he means) Gal. 5. 12. When he
saw the ill humors were too spreading, and too tough also; Sedition and Schism
wide and obstinate; so that neither his authority could reach, nor his methods
cure, but were more likely to exasperate them: then he does excommunicate them
only in desire. And again, 2 Cor. 10. 6. and having in a readiness to revenge
all disobedience when your obedience is fulfilled. It becomes therefore every
one that has good Will for Sion, to labor to fulfill his own obedience, that
so the Church may be empowered to use Christ's Methods for reforming of the
rest. And they that will not do so must know they shall not only answer for
their sins, but for refusing to be saved from them, that they resist all
medicine, as men resolved that nothing shall be done toward their Cure, as men
that rather choose to perish, and prefer destruction. And for the seasons and
degrees of putting this work into Execution, Wisdom must be implored from
that Spirit of Wisdom that calls unto this work: The last Part; Whereunto I
have called them.

The Nature of the calling of the Holy Ghost is a Subject that would bear a
full discourse. But waving those pretensions which Necessity, and inward
incitation do make to be the Calls of the Holy Ghost; I shall positively set
down that the call of God and of the Holy Ghost to any work or office, (for I
enquire not of his calling to a privilege or state of favor,) is his giving
abilities and gifts qualifying for that work or office: The call immediate when
the gifts were so; but mediate and ordinary, when the abilities are given in
his blessing on our ordinary labors. It Is so in every sort of things, Exodus
31. 2. See I have called Bezaleel, and I have filled him with the Spirit of God
in Wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of
Workmanship, to devise cunning works, and to work in all manner of Workmanship;
and behold I have given him Aholiab, and in the hearts of all that are wise
hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded thee:
and he repeates the same again, Chap. 35. 30. adding that he has put in his
heart that he may teach, both He and Aholiab; so that giving this skill to work
and teach is named Gods calling. So in another case, the Lord does say of
Cyrus, I have called him, Esaias 48. 15. which he explaines in the 49. I have
holden him by my right hand to subdue nations before him, to loose the loins of
Kings, I have girded him. So when Isaiah says, the Lord has called me from
the Womb, or rather says that of our Savior, Isa. 49. 1. he tells you how,
ver. 5. he formed me and prepared me from the Womb to be his servant, to bring
Jacob to him. And throughout the New Testament, as his Call to a privilege is
(...), his grace, in allowing such a state of favor; so his calls to a Work
are his (...), his gifts enabling for it.

The Gifts of these Apostles by which they were enabled for their Office, and
which made up their call, are set down: those of Barnabas in the forecited 11
Act. He was a good man, full of faith, and of the Holy Ghost; and Paul's call
was a little Extraordinary. If we look into times, we shall find reason to
believe those revelations in 2 Cor. 12. were given to Paul a little before this
Consecration of him in the Text. That Epistle was writ, says Baronius, in the
second year of Nero, and this separation was in the second of Claudius, as may
be gathered also in some measure from the famine mentioned in the 28. verse of
the 11. chap: betwixt these two were fourteen years: now says Saint Paul when
he wrote that, he had his revelation somewhat above ab annis quatuordecim,
says the Arab.
14. years before; a little therefore before this solemnity. Here was a call
indeed, called up to the third heaven to receive instructions for his office,
and for ought he did know, called out of his own body too, that he might be the
fitter for it; whether in the body or out of the body, I cannot tell, God
knows, verse 2. and that again, verse 3. They whom Gods Spirit qualifies for
Consecration to separate to these diviner offices may be styled Angels well,
when they are called from all regards or notices of any body that belongs to
them; their gifts and graces set them above the consideration of flesh: In the
entertainment of these qualifications the Soul is swallowed up so, that it
cannot take cognizance whether it have a body of its own, and is not sensible
of that deer partner of it self, it is so only sensible of this Employment.
It Is not for an Apostle (or for his Successor) to think of things below with
much complacency: When these have all their Uses, all their glories on, they
but make pomp to dress the body; which an Apostle does not design for, nor
knows whether he be concerned at all in. He becomes something without a body,
and above the Earth, who for a preparative must be taken up to Paradise, and
called from all commerce and all intelligence with his own body. Saint Paul was
called from heaven to preach the Gospel; but he was called to heaven to
qualify him for this higher separation, to an Apostle and Church-Governour.

And now you see your calling, Holy Fathers: and to pass by such obvious
unconcerning observations as at first sight follow, that those who are not
qualified are not called; I shall only take notice hence of the counter-part
of this call, the charge God takes upon him, when he calls to this charge; and
that is, he owns and will protect whom himself calls. 'Twas that he promised to
the Founder and God of your Order; I the Lord have called thee, and I will hold
thine hand, and I will keep thee, Isai. 42. 6. And when he said of Cyrus, I
have called him, he said also, he shall make his way prosperous, Isai. 48. 15.
And so he shall be the way what it will; for thus he said to Jacob, I have
called thee; when thou go through the water I am with thee, and through the
rivers they shall not overflow thee, Isai. 43. 1, 2. There was Experience of
all this in one of the chief Princes of your Order; when the Apostles were
scarce safe within their ship, they were so tossed with waves and fears, yet if
our Lord will call him, Peter is confident he shall be safe even in the sea;
Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the Water, says he; and the Lord
did Matthew. 14. 28.
but call him, and he went down and walked on the 29.
water safely: as if the swelling billows did only lift themselves to meet his
steps, and raise him up from sinking. And when his own doubts, which alone
could, were near drowning him, and he but called the Lord; immediately he
stretched 31.
out his hand and caught him: He answers his call, if we answer ours; if we
obey when he says come, then will he come and save when we call to him. And so
Peter received no hurt, but a rebuke; O thou of little faith, why did thou
doubt? could thou imagine I would not sustein ibid.
stein thee in the doing what I bid thee do? in answering my call. But why seek
we experience of so old a date? There is a more encouraging miracle in these
late calls themselves. Had God sustein'd the Order in its offices and dignities
amidst those waves that wracked the Church of late, it had been prodigy of
undeserved Compassion to our Nation: but whenas all was sunk, to bid the sea
give up what it had swallowed and consumed; this is more then to catch a
sinking Peter, or to save a falling Church. The work of Resurrection is
emphatically called the working of God's mighty power, and does Ephesians. 1. 19, 20.
out-sound that of his ordinary conservation. And truly 'twas almost as easy
to imagination how the scattered Atoms of men's dust should order themselves,
and reunite, and close into one flesh; as that the parcels of our Discipline
and Service that were lost in such a wild confusion, and the Offices buried in
the rubbish of the demolisht Churches, should rise again in so much order and
beauty. Stantia non poterant tecta probare Deum. This calling of the Spirit is
like that when the Spirit moved upon the face of the abyss, and called all
things out of their no seeds there; or like the call of the last Trump. Thus by
the miraculous mercies of these calls God has provided for our hopes, and
warranted our faith of his protections: yet he has also sent us more security,
has given us a Constantine, if his own be not a greater Name, and more
deserving of the Church; for which (it is well known to some) he did contrive
and order, when he could neither plot nor hope for his own Kingdom; and did
with passion labor a succession in your Order, when he did not know how to lay
designs for the succession of himself or any of his Fathers house to his own
Crown and dignity. Nor is the Secular arm all your security: God himself has
set yet more guards about his consecrated ones, he has severe things for the
violaters of them: Moses, the meekest man upon the Earth, that in Number. 12. 3.
his life was never angry, but once at the rebellious; 20. 10.
seems very passionate in calling Vengeance on those that stir against these
holy Offices. Smite through the loins of all that rise against them, and of
them that hate them, that Deuteronomy. 33. 11.
they rise not again: the loins (...) we know) are the nest of posterity; so
that, (...) through the loins, is, stab the succession, (...) at once all the
posterity of them that we ^ ^^ut off this Tribe, and hinder its successior. Nor
was this Legal Spirit; Gospel is as severe. Those in (...) Jude that despise
these Governors, tha^ (...) (...) Corah and his Accomplices did, (who g^^^ered
themselves against Moses and Aaron, and said, You take too much upon you, ye
sons of Levi, 16. 3.
since all the Congregation is holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among
them, wherefore then lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the
Lord? words these that we are well acquainted with, and which it seems St. Jude
looks on as sins under the Gospel:) these perish in the gainsaying of Core;
whom God would not Jud. 11.
prepare for punishment by death, but he and his accomplices went quick into
it; He would not let them stay to die, but the Lord made a new thing, to show
his detestation of this sin, and Number. 16. 30.
the Earth swallowed it in the Commission, and all that were allied and
appertained to them that ver. 32, 33.
had an hand in it. And truly they may well expect strange recompenses, who do
attempt so strange a Sacrilege, as to pull stars out of Christ's own right
hand: from whence, we have his word, that no man shall be able to pluck any;
John 10. 29.
but if they shine thence, on their Orbs below, and convert many to
Righteousness, their light shall blaze out into glory, and they shall ever
dwell at his right hand, To which right hand He that Heb. 13. 20.
brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd and Bishop of
the sheep, and set him there: He also bring you our Pastors, and us your flock
with you; and set us with his sheep on Matthew. 25. 33.
his right hand. To whom, with the same Jesus and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed
all blessing, honor, glory, and power, from henceforth for ever,

Amen.
FINIS.

