AN ABSTRACT of a Letter from a Bishop of this land sent to --.
A Copy for the rest.
THis Earthly Moon the Church, has her fulls and wainings, and sometimes her
Eclipses, whilst the shadow of this sinful mass hides her beauty from the
world. Whilst she wadeth in this planitary World it should be vain to expect
better. It is enough when she is fixed above, to be free from all change. She
is not yet in the full of her glory. Goodness repulsed gives height to sin;
therefore have we bin worse then our Predecessors, because we might have been
better; because there was never more light of knowledge. Turn over all
Records, and Pararell such helps, such care, such cost, such expectation, with
such fruit; yet this censure is not confined to our Sees; and I joy not in this
large society, would God we were evil alone; where shall a man mew up
himself, that he may not be a witness of what he would not. They are rare
hands, that are free either from aspersion of blood, or spots of filthiness,
close Atheism, secret Idolatry, unmercifull oppression, greedy covetousness,
fymonicall sacrilege, bloody treachery, hypocritical fashionablenesse, have
spread themselves; the Sun of peace looking upon our unclean heap, has bred
these Monsters, and has given light to this brood of darkness. If any insult
in my confession, tell him that J account these the greatest part of our evil,
who knows not that as the Earth is the dregs of the world, so Italy is the
dregs of the Earth. Rome of Italy? and who does not confess to find such as
our Paradise is grievous. Let them alone that will dye, and hate to be cured.
Oh that remedies were as easy, as complaints against us? that we could be as
soon cleared as convinced, that the taking of the Medicine were but so
difficult as the prescription; and yet nothing hinders us from our health but
our will: Neither Gospel, nor grace, nor glory, are shut up, only our hearts
are not open; yet the secure, and perverse, must break if they bow not, what
should be done then? Except we would feign smart, each man amend one, and we
all live. Let us each of us, pull out one brand of this fire, and the flame
will go out alone. Till then, alas what availes it to talk whilst every man
censures, and none of us amend, though our care begin at our selves it may not
end there. Oh ye Sons of Levi, gather to your Moses in the gate of the
Camp; Consecrate your hands to God, and sound forth your voice like a Trumpet.
Cry down sin in earnest, and, thunder out of that sacred chair of Moses,
and let your lives speak yet louder. Thus as one that delights more in
amendment than excuse, J have both censured and directed. So judge of my severe
taxation. It shall be happy for us, if we can at once excuse and diminish,
accuse and redress iniquity. Let but the endeavor be ours, the success to
God.

FINIS.

