A SERMON Preached before THE KING AT WHITE HALL On Sunday Nov. 17. 1667. BY
RICHARD ALLESTREE, D. D. Chaplain then in Attendance. Published by His
Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher, for James Allestree at the Rose and Crown in
Duck-lane, Anno Dam. 1667.

S. JAMES IV. 7. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you.
THESE words are easily resolved into two parts: the first, a Duty; and the
second, to encourage the performance, an assurance of an happy issue in the
doing it. The 1. the Duty in these words, Resist the Devil; the happy issue in
those other, he will flee from you.

For the more practical and useful handling of these parts, I shall endeavor
to do these three things.

1. View the Enemy we are to resist, the Devil; fee his Strengths, and what are
his chief Engines, his main instruments of battery, whereby he shakes, and does
endeavor to demolish the whole frame of Virtue in men's lives, shatters and
throws down all Religious, holy Resolutions, and subjects men to himself and
Sin.

2. See what we are to do in opposition to all this; and how and by what means
we must resist.

3. Prove to them that do resist, the happy issue which the Text here promises.

First of the first.

Though no man can be tempted, (so as to be foiled by the temptation) but he
that is drawn away by his own Lust, and enticed, James I. 14. and all the
blandishments of this world, all the wiles and artifices of the Prince and God
of it, the Devil, are not able to betray one into sin, till his own ^er. 15.
Lust conceive that sin, and bring it forth; Man must be taken first in his own
nets, and fall into that pit himself has dug, before he can become the
Devil's prey: yet Satan has so great an hand in this affair, that the Tempter
is his name and office, Matt. IV. 3. and the war which is now before us is so
purely his, that we are said to fight Ephesians. ^. 12.
, not against flesh and blood, (those nests and fortresses of our own Lusts)
but against Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of
this world, against spiritual wickednesses in high places; that is, against the
Enemy here in the Text, the Devil.

Now to bring about his ends upon us he has several means. The first that I
shall name is

Infidelity. With this he began in Paradise, and succeeded by it; for he had no
sooner told the woman that she should Genesis III. 6.
not surely die, and so made her doubt of, not believe, and consequently not
fear, that which God had threatened, but she took of the forbidden fruit, and
she did eat, and gave it to her husband too, and he did eat. Now if a Serpent
siding with her inclination could so quickly stagger and quite overthrow her
Faith; if she, because she sees and likes a pleasing Object, can, in mere
defiance of her own assured conviction, when the Revelation looked her in the
face, and God himself was scarce gone out of sight, straight give credit to a
Snake, that comes and confidently gives the lie to God her Maker, offers her no
proof at all of what he says, but only flatters her desires with promises and
expectations of she knows not what, Genesis III. 4, 5.
Ye shall not die, but ye shall be as Gods; if in spite of Knowledge she turn
Infidel so soon and easily: it is no great wonder if that Serpent do, at this
distance from Revelation, prevail on men, whose conversation being most with
Sense, (their satisfactions also consequently gratifying of their Sense) they
do not willingly assent to any thing but that which brings immediate evidence
and attestation of the Senses, which the objects of our Faith do not,
(especially if it give check to and restrain those satisfactions, as those do;)
on such men, I say, that do not care, nor use, in things that are against their
mind, to apply the Understanding close and strongly to reflect on those
considerations which should move assent, and work belief. Considerations which
I dare affirm, if with sincerity adverted to, (if there be no improbity within
to trash their efficacy, no fensual inclination cherished that must hinder
their admittance, as not being able to endure to lodge in the same breast with
those persuasions,) would make Disbelief appear not only most imprudent, but a
thing next to impossible. But in those that give themselves no leisure, have no
will thus to advert, it is not strange if, through Satan's arts, in things of
this remote kind they have only languid opinions, which sink quickly into
doubts, and by degrees into flat Infidelity.

S. Paul does fetch the rise of unbelief of Christianity from hence, II Cor.
IV. 3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; In whom the
God of this world has blinded their minds: that is, If the Christian Doctrine
do not appear to be the truth of God to any, it is to obstinate persons only,
whom the Devil has besotted so with the advantages and pleasures of this
world, that their affections to these will not let the other be admitted. For,

That Carnal prejudice can cast a mist before the mind, or that a bright and
glittering Temptation of this world may dazzle it so as that it cannot see that
which is most illustriously visible, we have this demonstration.

Those Works which Christ and his Apostles wrought, which made the whole World,
that was Heathen then, so many Millions of such distant Nations as could never
meet together to conspire an universal change in their Religions, made them yet
agree to lay aside their dear Gods and their dearer Vices, and do that to
embrace a Crucified Deity, a God put to a vile ignominious death, as one worse
then the worst of men, and a Religion that was as much hated, counted as
accursed as that God of it, He and his Doctrine crucified a like, and a
Religion too that had as great severities in its Commands as in its
Persecutions, that did it self enjoin as hard and cruel things to flesh and
blood as they that hated it inflicted, the duties and the punishments equally
seem executed on its followers, and a Religion, whose performances had no
retributions here but fatal ones, no otherwise rewarded but with fire and
faggot, and whose after-promises were most incredible: Those Works that could
produce all this had certainly omnipotent conviction in them; sure we are there
must be prodigy of Miracle either in the causes, or in the effect. And yet the
Scribes and Pharisees are not wrought on by them. Their carnal Prejudices would
not be removed, not by the Finger of God: the mean and despicable, and, as to
all their worldly expectations and affections, the unsatisfying condition of
our Savior, had so clouded all his works, and their own pride so blinded them,
that they could see no argument in Miracle.

Now it is the Devil, that God of the World, that has the power of its Glories,
and the managery of its temptations, who, by raising these affections, dazles
so and blinds the minds of men, that they should not believe. S. Paul affirms
it: and it is plain that Unbelief is no one's Interest but Satan's. For it is
not Man's. Not the Virtuous man's certainly: He Is concerned as much as
Happiness amounts to, to believe there is a God, whose Cares and Providence
watch over him, whose Ears and Arms are open to him, whose Bowels yearn for
him, whose Blood did purchase him, whose everlasting Blessednesses do await
him. It Is his Interest to trust that Virtue, which the World so scorns or
pitties, was yet worthy God should be incarnated to teach it, die to purify us
into it, and will raise us up again to cro^n it. Neither is this Unbelief Man's
real Interest, abstracting from these prejudices of Religion. For if it were
Man's real Interest, then it were every man's wisest course to pursue that
Interest. But if every man did so, and should persuade himself into Infidelity,
and that Religion and a Deity were but dreams or artifices, and so arrive so
far as to have no fear of God, nor sense of Honesty or Virtue, the whole
world must needs return into the first confusions of its Chaos: Villainy and
Rapine would have right. When those Mounds are thrown down, there is nothing
that can hinder but that every man may lawfully break in upon and invade every
thing. There is no fence to guard thy Coffers nor thy Bed, no nor thy very
Breast: rather indeed there can be nothing thine. This is, it is true,
Leviathan's state of Nature; and it is so indeed with the Leviathans of Sea and
Land, the wild Beasts of the Deep and of the Desert. But to prevent the
necessary and essential mischiefs of this state amongst us Men, He will have
Nature to have taught us to make Pacts and Oaths: but if there is no such thing
as Virtue or Religion, then there is no obligation to keep Pacts or Oaths. And
why should he observe them that can safely break them? Here it is indeed that
Doctrine ends; to this their Infidelity does tend. And therefore it is no
Interest of States or Princes. This the Atheist will confess; Gods and
Religions were invented for the mere necessities of Governors, who could not
be secure without those higher Obligations, and these after-fears. And are they
not kind. Subjects then who, by promoting Atheism, labor to break down that
fence which themselves account necessary? Or are they not good rational
Discoursers too, who labor to throw out a thing as false and vain, because
it is necessary? So necessary sure, that they who weaken these bonds of
Religion, quite dissolve those of Allegiance, all whose Sinews are made of
those Sacred Ties, which if you untwist, the other Cords are burst as easily as
threads of Cobweb. Nay these Doctrines lay Principles that justify Rebellion
and King-killing. For if there is no such thing as Virtue or Religion, then
those are no Crimes. And it is no wonder Treason has been loved, when
Blasphemy has been so. They that hear men droll on God Almighty, raille their
Maker, and buffoon with Him, will quickly learn to speak with little reverence
of their Superiors. There Is no Kingdom but the Devil's that can have support
from Infidelity; it is the Interest of that indeed. His work goes more securely
on, when there are no religious apprehensions to check it: allowed Vice cannot
be at ease if it but think those things are true. It is the infinite concern of
Wickedness, that the Laws of Virtue and Religion should be only Spiders webs,
Snares for innocent and lesser flies, while venomous Spiders can pass safely
through them, and the Wasps can burst them; are Entanglements only for the
weak, the Phlegmatic and Hypochondriack: and that there should be no God that
can bring them to an after-reckoning. They that flatter and betray, that hugg,
and then trip up, or that plot villainies and ruins under fair and godly
vizards; must needs be unwilling to believe that there is one who Jet. XVII. 1
tries the reins, and sea^^hes hearts, and that will render every one according
to his works. The Drunkard, who nor must nor can keep the remembrance of his
Cups, cannot endure to apprehend he must be called to an account of them. The
man whose Lust prevents the Grave, that putrefies alive, and drops by piecemeal
into rotten dust ere he return to earth, must needs be loath that there should
be a Resurrection, to collect the scattered, the foul atoms of his Sin and his
Disease, and show them at that dread Tribunal, before God, his Holy Angels, and
Mankind. Such as these are the only men that are concerned against Religion.
Here we see whose Interest such promote who promote Infidelity. And truly it is
so much the Devil's Interest, that by those very measures that he weakens
Faith, he strengthens every sort of Wickedness: by the steps and degrees of
Infidelity men ascend toward the heights of Sin: and when they have surmounted
all Religious apprehensions, then they are upon the Precipice of Vice. When the
Floud-gates are removed, the Torrent must break impetuously. For what is there
that can hinder? Nothing certainly, if present Interest be not able: But it is
plain that Thieves, and Murderers, and Rebels, in fine, every one whom we
call Sinners, do pursue that which they account their present Interest: that
therefore, if there were no other, would not be sufficient, since the Devil
does make use of that to work with under Infidelity. This indeed he batters,
makes his spreading ruins with: therefore S. Paul calls him Ephesians. II. 2.
(...), the spirit that works in filiis diffidentiae, says the Vulgar: in the
unbelievers, so it bears: in filiis insuasibilitatis, in the men ^oh. III. 36.
that will not be persuaded to believe. In these (...) they are his (...),
Possessed and agitated by him: it is he spirits what they do: their actions are
his incitations and motions: In sum, as to wickedness, they are mere
Demoniacks. This therefore is his chief and the first Engine.

2. The second Instrument by which he does demolish whatsoever hopes of Virtue
we are built up to is Want of Employment: and in order to this, he has so far
prevailed on the opinions of the world, that they believe some states of men
not only have no obligation to be busied, but to have no Calling is essential
to their condition; which is made more eminent upon this account that they have
no business. Wealth, how great soever, if with an employment or profession,
makes a man only a more gentile Mechanic: But Riches and nothing to do make
a Person of quality. As if God had made that state of men, far the most
generous part of the whole kind, and best appointed for the noblest uses of
the world, to serve no other ends but what the Grasshoppers and Locusts do, to
sing and dance among the Plants and Branches, and devour the fruits; and
Providence had furnished them with all advantages of plenty for no better
purposes. Such persons think not only to reverse God's Curse, and In the sweat
of others faces eat their bread, but reverse Nature too; for Job says, Job V.
7.
Man is born to labor, as the sparks fly upwards; in his making has a
principle to which Activity is as essential as it is to fire to mount; from
which nothing else but force can hinder it: As if man did do violence to his
making when he did do nothing; and it were his hardest work and pressure, not
to be employed; it were like making flame go downwards. I am sure, it is one of
the busiest ways of doing Satan's work. Our Savior in a Parable in the XII.
Chapter of S. Matt. from the 43. v. says, When the unclean spirit is gone out of a
man, he goes through dry places, seeking rest, and finds none: Ver. 44.
Then he says, I will return into my house from whence I came out; and when he
is come, he finds it empty, 45.
swept, and garnished. Then goes he, and takes with himself seven other
spirits more wicked then himself, and they enter in and dwell there. Where,
under the Similitude of a man cast out of his habitation, who, while he wanders
through none but desert places seeking for a dwelling, he is sure to meet with
none; but if he find an house that is empty, swept and garnished, he has found
out not a receptacle only, but an invitation, an house dressed on purpose to
call in and to detain inhabitants: He signifies, that when a Temptation of the
Devil is repelled, and himself, upon some working occasion, by a resolute act
of holy courage thrown out of the heart; as he finds no rest in this condition,
every place is desert to him, but the Heart of man is indeed Hell to him, for
he calls it Matt. VIII. 29.
torment to be cast out thence, yea he accounts himself bound up in his eternal
chains of Luke VIII. 31.
darkness, when he is restrained from working and engaging man to sin; so,
while he goes to and fro, seeking an opportunity to put in somewhere, if he
find that heart from which he was cast out, or any other heart, (...), (so the
word is,) idling, not employed or busied, (so it signifies,) such an heart is
empty, swept, and garnished for him, it is a dwelling that is dressed properly to
tempt the Devil, fitted to receive him and his forces too, prepared for him to
garrison, and make a strong hold of, whence he cannot be removed; for he takes
unto him seven other spirits more wicked then himself, and they enter in and
dwell there. No doubt they are the Patron-Guardian spirits of the seven deadly
sins, their Tutelary Devils. Some of those good qualities that are the
attendants of Idleness you may find decypher'd in the Scripture. S. Paul says,
when people I Ti^* V. 13.
learn to be idle, they grow tattlers, busybodies, speaking things which they
ought not. It Is strange that Idleness should make men and women busy-bodies,
yet it does most certainly in other folks affairs. Faction, then which nothing
in the world can be more restless, is nursed by it. Where are States so
censured, so new-modell'd, as at certain of our Refectories, places that are
made merely for men to spend their time in which they know not what to do
with? At those Tables our Superiors are dissected; Calumny and Treason are the
common, are indeed the more peculiar entertainments of the places. In fine,
where persons have no other employment for their time but talking, and either
have not so much Virtue as to find delight in talking good things, or not so
much skill as to speak innocent recreation, there they talk of others, censure,
and back-bite, and scoff. This is indeed the only picquant conversation; Gall
is sauce to all their entertainments: and that you may know these things
proceed from that old Serpent, they do nothing else but hiss and bite. It Is
the Romans ^I. 13.
poison of Asps that is under their lips which gives relish to their
discourses; it is the sting that makes them grateful, veni ne that they are
condited with.

More of the brood of this want of Employment you may find at Sodom; namely,
Pride and Luxury: for says Ezekiel, Ezekiel. XVI. 49.
This was the iniquity of Sodom; Pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of
Idleness, was in her and in her daughters. And indeed the idle person could not
possibly know how to pass his hours, if he had not Delicacies to sweeten some,
Wine to lay some asleep, and the solicitous deckings of Pride to take up
others: But the studious gorgings of the inside, and the elaborate trimmings of
the outside, help him well away with them.

Good God! that for so many hours my morning eyes should be lift up to nothing
but a Looking-glass! that that thin Shadow of my self should be my Idol, be my
God indeed, to which I pay all the devotions I perform! And when with so much
care and time I have arrayed and marshalled my self, that I should spend as
much more too in the complacencies of viewing this! with eager eyes and
appetite surveying every part, as if I had set out, exposed them to my self
alone, and only dressed a prospect for my own sight! and since Nature, to my
grief, has given me no eyes behind; that I should fetch reliefs from Art, and
get vicarious sight, and set my back parts too before my face, that so I may
enjoy the whole scene of my self! And why all this? for nothing but to serve
vain Ostentation, or negotiate for Lust, to dress a Temptation, and start
Concupiscence. And that the half of each day should be spent thus! the best
part of a reasonable creature's and a Christian's life be laid out upon
purposes so far from Christian or reasonable!

And truly Luxury will easily eat the remainder up, that sure companion of
Idleness. For when the Israelites were in the Wilderness, where they could not
eat but by Miracle, and the Rock must give them drink; yet, having no
employment, they made Feasls: Exodus XXXII. ^*
They sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Nor would eating to the
uses of their nature serve them, but they must have entertainments for their
wantonness. Had they been employed to get their bread, their labor would have
made their morsells sweet: but since God, as the Wiseman says, sent them from
Heaven bread prepared without their labor, they must have varieties to sweeten
it; they require him to Psalm. LXXVIII.
prepare a Table also in the wilderness, 19.
and furnish them with choice. 25.
And although they had the food of Angels, Wised. XVI. 20, 21.
able to content every man's delight, and agreeing to every taste, and serving
to the appetite of the eater, it tempered it self to every man's liking, and
what could they fansy more? the latitude of creatures, the whole Universe of
Luxury could do nothing else; in every single morsel they had sorts, Variety,
all choice; as if that Desert had been Paradise, that Wilderness the Garden of
the Lord: Yet so coy is Idleness, so apt to nauseate, that they abhor the
constancy of being pleased. And though they were not sated neither, Exodus XVI.
18.
he that gathered much had nothing over, only to his eating, God as well
providing for their Health and Virtue, as necessity, and dieting their
Temperance as he did their hunger: yet their very liking does grow loathsome to
them. When their bodies were thus excellently well provided for, having no
employment, nothing to take up their minds and entertain their Souls, they
require Psalm. LXXVII. v. 18.
(...) meat for their Souls, meat not to serve the uses of their bodies, but to
feed their fancies, their extravagant minds. Thus Idleness requires to be
dieted. And all this but to pamper and feed high men's inclinations, so to make
Temptations irresistible, and by consequence Vice necessary.

It were easy to recount more of those ways by which the Devil does make use
of men's want of Employment to debauch their lives, and ruin all the hopes of
Virtue in them. S. Jude finds more of its effects at Sodom: Ver. 7.
They gave themselves over to Fornication, and went after other flesh, and are
set forth for a^ example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Indeed these
are most certain consequents of not being employed: Quaeritur Aegysthus -- is
too known an instance: and II Sam. XI. 1, 2.
great, Holy David is another. But its dire influence is sufficiently visible
in that which it rained down upon those Cities. Since it did fulfill the guilt
of Sodom, and made Heaven furnish Hell for it, and God himself turn
Executioner of fire and brimstone to revenge it; this shall serve to prove it
is one of the Devil's Masterpieces.

3. Next succeed his Ephesians. VI. 16.
fiery darts, as S. Paul calls them, namely, Persecutions, or Calamities of any
kind: which he manageth either by inflicting pressures; and he was so confident
of the force of those, that he did tell God he would make Job I. 11.
Job curse him to his face with them: or if he find men in necessities and
pressures, then by tempting them to get from under them by methods which he
shall direct; and he had such assurance of the strength of this Temptation,
that by it he tried our Savior, to find out whether he were the IV. Matt* 3.
Son of God or no, believing none but he that was so would be able to resist it.

Indeed the trials are severe which this Temptation does present, to draw men
from their Duty, and to overcome their Constancy: whether it solicit by
inflicting punishment, (as on the Mother and her Children, II Maccab. VII.) or
by offering to withdraw it, if they will submit to their unlawful terms, (and
so they tried her youngest son there, ver. 24.) or at leastwise by some feigned
act, some ambiguous words or practices, will pretend compliance, (so they dealt
with Eleazar, Chap. VI. 21. whom they would have had to bring flesh of his own
provision, such as he might use without offense, and so only seem to eat
forbidden meat.) Each of which is as great a trial also, and to stand against
them reckoned up amongst as vigorous acts of Faith, as those that held out in
the greatest tortures persecuting malice could invent: Heb. XI. 37. They were
stoned, sawn asunder, were tempted.

Now to fetch an instance of the sad success of these, I shall not need to go
so far as to those Persecutions of Antiochus: nor those of the primitive times
of Christianity; when they had no other choices but these, to deliver up their
Bibles or their Lives; either to sacrifice to Idols, or at least procure a
Ticket which should certify that they had done it, or to be themselves an
Holocaust, and give those Idols a Burnt-offering with their martyr-flames.
Which made the Traditores, Lapsi, the Thurificati and the Libellatici to be so
numerous. Through God's blessed mercy there is no use of such instances, as
there is no fear of such a trial; it is not death to be a Christian now: For if
the Son of man or Satan's self should come to try us at those rates, 'twere a
great doubt whether the one or other would Luke XVIII. 8.
find Faith upon the earth; whether they would sacrifice a life to our
Religion, who are not content to sacrifice a little interest or pleasure to it;
whether they are likely to Heb. XII. 4.
resist unto blood fighting against sin, who will not resist to tears nor sober
resolutions. Alas! what Religion should we be of, if God should raise a
Diocletian, come to tempt us with the fiery trial? Martyrs as we are to nothing
but our Passions and our Lusts! Nor shall I produce more known and near
experiences, when, by reason of such storms of Persecution, men ma^e shipwreck,
if not of their Faith, yet of good Conscience. When by order or permissions of
Providence they were brought to such a straight, that either they must let go
their possessions or their honesty, acting against Principles, and conscience
of Duty; I shall not remember, how, when God did shake his angry hand thus over
them, they fled to the Devil's kindness, and made Hell their refuge, to save
them from their Father's rod: how they grew so Atheistical, as to believe a
Perjury or other crime greater security, that would preserve their selves and
their condition better then all God had promised; were such infidels, that they
did rather trust their being here to the commission of a sin, then to the
Providence and the Engagements of the Almighty. For indeed what need I instance
in these greater cases, where the trial was so sharp, as not to offer any
easier choice then this, either to part with Conscience or with all they had?
God knows, we find less Interests will do: The Devil by no more then this,
driving the Gadarens swine into the Sea, was able to drive Christ out of their
coasts. You have the story VIII. Matt. from the 28 ver. A legion of those evil
spirits did possess two men; and finding Christ would cast them out, and by
that Miracle so far show forth his power, that in probability the whole
Country would believe on him, they fall upon this project to prevent it; they
besought him, if he would cast them out, to suffer them to go into an herd of
swine there feeding; hoping by destroying them to incense the owners against
Christ: and, to try them, he permitted this. The possessed swine ran violently
down into the Lake, and perished. Now a man would think the virulency of these
Devils, which were so destructive when they were at liberty and not restrained,
would have endeared the mercy that had cast them out of the poor men, and came
to dispossess the Country of them; and that their astonishment at so great a
Miracle would possess them all with reverence and belief of him; and that they
would therefore seize and possess him also, and not let the mercy go: But, on
the contrary, the whole City and Country came out to meet Jesus, and, in
consideration of the loss of their swine, desire him to depart out of their
coasts. Lo here an equal enemy to Christ and all his Miracles, that was indeed
too hard for them. The Senate of Hell had no project to keep out Religion like
to this, to make Religion thwart an Interest. Rather no Christianity then lose
an Earthly satisfaction by it: Rather have the swine then Christ himself.

4. But if he chance to fail in this Assault, (as by our Savior he was beaten
off) he has yet a Reserve, in which he places his last, strongest confidence;
with which he ventured to charge Christ, when it is probable he knew He was the
Son of God. IV. Mar^ 8, 9.
He takes him up into an high mountain, and shows him all the Kingdoms of the
earth in the twinkling of an eye, and the glory of them, and says, All these
things will I give thee. He thought it was impossible for such a prospect not
to make impression on the appetite, raise some desire, or stir one Covetous or
Ambitious thought: which if it could but do, he made no scruple then to clog
the Gift with such conditions as that there, All these things will I give thee,
if thou will fall down and worship me. It Is said indeed, the Ephesians. V. 5.
Covetous man is an Idolater: and here we see the God he does do homage to,
and worship. The Devil does require, that those whom he gives wealth to, (now
it is he that gives it to the Covetous, to all indeed that get it with injustice
or with greediness;) he requires, I say, that these should pay all their
Religion to Himself: and the Ambitious, in however high a place he sets them,
must fall down to him. And truly these two dispositions can give worship to no
other God but such an one as is Revel. X. 11.
Abaddon, the Destroyer of Mankind. For all the great Commotions of the world,
all those Convulsions that tear Provinces and Empires, all Seditions and
Rebellions, with those armies of iniquities that attend them, and that wage
their designs, which are upheld by legions of villainies as well as men, all the
Disturbances of States and Church, are but attempts of Covetous and Ambitious
spirits, men that are unsatisfied with their condition, and desire a change,
and care not how they compass it: they can charge through seas of blood and
sin, over the face of men and Conscience, to get out of that condition, which
they therefore are not well content with, because something they like better
beckens their ambitious and their covetous desires. Would you see what one of
these will venture at? When Christ our Savior was to be betrayed, when a
Person of the Godhead was to be delivered up and crucified, the Devil had no
passion to employ on that design so fit as the desire of getting money; and
when that desire was once entertained, we see he enters John XIII. 2, 27.
really in person, and possesses such a soul; and when he is there, he designs
no farther but to warm and stir that passion: it is sufficient fruit of his
possession, he has done enough in such an heart wherein he dwells, if he but
keep alive that desire of money: for he knows that will make the man adventure
upon any guilt; for it made Judas undertake to betray Christ. And as for the
other passion which the Devil did design the glories of his prospect to give
fire to, though he could not stir it in our Savior, yet he knew it vanquished
him himself when he was Angel. What height is there which Ambition will not
fly at, since it made this Spirit aim at an equality with the Isa. XIV. 14.
Most High? Heaven it self was not sufficient to content him, while there was a
God above him in it. And since this affection peopled Hell with Devils, it is no
wonder if it people Earth with Miseries and Vices.

5. The remaining Trial with which Satan did assault our Savior, when he
tempted him with IV. Matt. 4.
Scripture and God's Promises, and sought to ruin him with his own
Privileges: with that also

6. His being a lying spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets; by which long
ago he did destroy an Ahab, in the I Kings XXII. 22. But since by sad
experience we know, he ruined the best King, purest Church, and most
flourishing State, by the same stratageme. But these, with those other which S.
Paul does call his Ephesians. VI. 11.
wiles, I must omit; sufficient has been said already to enforce the necessity
of resisting, which is the Duty, and the next considerable.

Resist the Devil: that is, do not you consent to his Temptations: for there is
no more required of us, but this only, not to be willing to be II Tim. II. 26.
taken, and led captive by him. For let him suggest, incite, assault and storm
us, no impression can be made upon us till we yield, and till we give consent
no hurt is done. It is not here as in our other wars: In those no resolution
can secure the victory, but notwithstanding all resistance possible, we may be
vanquished; yea, sometime men are overprest and die with conquering, and the
Victor only gains a Monument, is but buried in the heaps of his slain
Trophies. But in these wars with the Devil, whosoever is unwilling to be
vanquished, never can be: for he must first give consent to it, and will the
ruin: for men do not sin against their wills. Only here we must distinguish
betwixt Will, and then Velleity and Woulding. For let no man think when he
commits deliberate iniquity with averseness and reluctance of mind, allows not
what he does, but does the evil that he would not, what he hates that he does;
that this is not to be imputed to the Will, that in this case he is not
willing, but here the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak, and yields
through mere infirmity: For, on the contrary, the Devil finds the flesh so
strong in this case, that with it alone he does assault the mind, and breaks
through its reluctancies and aversations, bears down all its resolutions,
triumphs over all that does pretend to God or Virtue in him. Where it is thus,
let no man flatter or persuade himself he does what he would not, when it is
plain he does impetuously will the doing it. Let him not think that he allows
not, but hates that which he does; when it is certain, in that moment that he
does commit, not to allow that which he does resolve and pitch upon and choose,
to hate what with complacency he acts, or to do that unwillingly which he is
wrought on by his own concupiscence to do, and by his inward incitations, by
the mutiny of his own affections, which the Devil raises, and when it is the
mere height and prevalencie of his appetite that does make him do it, (as it
must be where there is reluctance before he do it, his desires and affections
there are evidently too strong for him,) or at last, to hate the doing that
which it is his too much love to that makes him do; are all impossibilities,
the some things as to will against the will, desire against appetite. But do
but keep thy self sincerely and in truth from being willing, and thou must be
safe: For God expects no more but that we should not voluntarily yield to our
undoing. He has furnished us with his own complete armor for no farther uses
of a war, but to encourage us to stand. Ephesians. VI. 11.
Take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against
the wiles of the Devil: 13.
and again, Put ye on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. There is no need to do more
then this, not to be willing and consent to fall; for no man can be beaten down
but he that will fall.

It were very easy for me to prescribe you how to fortify against those
Engines of the Devil's battery which I produced to you. But that I may not stay
upon particulars, directing those whom he prevails upon through want of
employment to find out honest occasions not to be idle; (and here it is the
most unhappy thing in the whole world, for any man to be necessitated to be
vicio as by his having nothing else to do, and because, while the world
accounts it a Pedantick thing to be brought up by rules and under discipline,
he cannot learn how to employ himself to his advantage) to pass by these, I
say, the universal strength against this enemy is Faith. I Pet. ^ 9.
Your adversary the Devil, like a roaring Lion, goes up and down seeking whom
he may devour; whom resist steadfast in the Faith. And that not only as it
frustrates all that he attempts by means of Infidelity, but it also Ephesians. VI. 16.
quenches all his fiery darts; whatsoever bright Temptation he presents to draw
us from our Duty, or whatever fiery trial he makes use of to affright and
martyr with. For the man whose Faith does give him Heb. XI. 1.
evidence and eyesight of those blessed Promises eye has not seen, and gives
(...) Heb. XI. 1
substance, present solid being to his after hopes, and, whose heart has
swallowed down those happy expectations which have never entered in the heart of
man to comprehend; what is there that can tempt or fright him from his station?
To make all that which Satan gave the prospect of prevail on such a Soul, the
Kingdoms of the earth must outvie God's Kingdom, and their Gauds outshine his
Glory, and the twinkling of an eye seem longer then Eternity: for nothing less
then these will serve his turn, all these are in his expectations. Or what can
fright the man whose heart is set above the sphere of terrors? who knows
calamity, how great soever, can inflict but a more sudden and more glorious
blessedness upon him; and the most despiteful cruel usage can but persecute him
into Heaven. It Is easy to demonstrate that a Faith and expectation of the
things on earth, built upon weaker grounds then any man may have for his belief
of things above, has charged much greater hazards, overcome more difficulties
then the Devil does assault us with. For sure none is so Scepticall, but he
will grant that we have firmer grounds to think there is another world in
Heaven, then Columbus (if he were the first Discoverer) had to think there was
another Earth; and that there are far richer hopes laid up there in that other
world, for those that do deny themselves the sinful profits and the jollities
of this, and force them from their inclinations, then those Seamen could
expect who first adventured with him thither. For they could not think to gain
much for themselves, but only to take seisin of the Land (if any such there
were) for others covetous cruelty; cold get little else but only richer
graves, and to lie buried in their yellow earth. Nor are we assaulted in our
voyage with such hazards, as they knew they must encounter with; the path of
Virtue and the way to Heaven is not so beset with difficulties as theirs was;
when they must cut it out themselves through an unknown new world of Ocean,
where they could see nothing else but swelling gaping Death, from an abyss of
which they were but weakly guarded, and removed few inches only: and as if the
dangerousest shipwrecks were on shore, they found a Land more savage and more
monstrous then that Sea. Yet all this they vanquished for such slender hopes,
and upon so uncertain a belief. A weak Faith therefore can do mighty works;
greater then any that we stand in need of to encounter with our enemy: It can
remove these mountains too; the golden ones that Covetousness and Ambition do
cast up; yea more, it can remove the Devil also, for if you resist him steadfast
in the faith, he flies, which is the happy Issue, and my last part.

Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you. And yet it cannot be denied but
that sometimes when the messenger of Satan comes to buffet, though S. Paul
resist him with the strength of Prayer, (which when Moses managed he was able
to prevail on God himself, and the Lord articled with him, that he might be
Deuteronomy. IX. 14.
let alone,) yet he could not beat off this assailant, II Cor. XII. 7, 8, 9.
When God, either for prevention, as 'twas there, v. 7. or for exercising or
illustrating of Graces, or some other of his blessed ends, gives a man up to
the assaults of Satan, he is often pleased to continue the temptation long; but
in that case he does never fail to send assistences and aids enough against it.
My grace is sufficient for thee, says he to S. Paul there. And when he will
have us tempted for his uses, (if we be not failing to our selves) he does
prevent our being overcome; so that there is no danger on those Trials from
their stay. But yet it must not be denied but that the Devil does prevail
sometimes by importunacy, and by continuance of Temptation; so that Resistance
is not always a Repulse, at least not such an one as to make him draw off and
fly. It is not strange to find him siding with a natural inclination, with the
bent of Constitution, still presenting Objects, laying Opportunities, throwing
in Examples, and all sorts of invitation, always pressing so, that when a man
has struggled long he does grow weary of the service, not enduring to be thus
upon his guard perpetually, watching a weak heart which strong inclinations,
busy Devils do lay siege to; and so growing slack and careless, he is
presently surprised: or else, despairing that he shall be always able to hold
out, lays hold upon a tempting opportunity, and yields; by the most
unreasonable and basest cowardice that can be, yields, for fear of yielding;
lest he should not hold out, he will not, but gives up; and puts himself into
that very mischief which he would avoid, merely for fear of coming into it. For
which fear there is no reason neither: for it is not here as in our other
Sieges, where, if it be close, continuance must reduce men to necessity of
yielding, strengths and ammunitions will decay, provisions fail, and, if the
Enemy cannot, their own hunger will break through their walls, make avenues for
conquest, time alone will take them; but in these Spiritual Sieges, one Repulse
inables for another, and the more we have resisted, the Temptation is not only
so much slatter, and more weak and baffled, but the inward man is stronger;
Victory does give new forces, and is sure to get in fresh and still sufficient
supplies. For Jam. IV. 6.
God gives more grace, says S. Ja^es: and, Matt. XXV. 29.
they shall have abundance, says our Savior. So that where the Devil after
several repulses still comes on with fresh assaults, we may be sure he does
discern there is some treacherous inclination that sides with him: and although
the man refuse himself the satisfaction of the sin, he sees he has a mind to
it, his refusalls are but saint, not hearty; though he seem afraid to come
within the quarters of the Vice, he keeps, it may be, correspondence with the
incentives to it, entertains the opportunities, plays with the objects, or at
best he does not fortify against him. Now this gives the Tempter hopes, and
invites his assaults, and does expose the person to be taken by him.

But where he sees he is resisted heartily, his offers are received with an
abhorrency, discerns men are in earnest, watch to avoid all opportunities and
occasions, and prepare, and fortify, and arm against him, there he will not
stay to be the triumph of their Virtue. We may know this by his Agents, those
that work under the Devil, whom he has instructed in the mysteries of waging
his Temptations. Where they are not like to speed; (and as to this they have
discerning spirits,) they avoid, and hate, and come not near, but study spite
and mischief only there. The intemperate men are most uneasy with a person
whom they are not able to engage in the debauch; the rudeness and brutality of
their excesses are not so offensive to the sober man, as his stayed Virtue is to
them; they do not more avoid the crude egestions, shameful spewings of their
overtaken fellows riot, then they do the shame and the reproach that such a
man's strict conversation casts on them, which does in earnest make them look
more foul and nasty to themselves. In fine, every sinner shuns the company of
those whom he believes Religious in earnest; it is an awe and check to them;
they are afraid, and out at it, as their Great Master also is, who when he is
resisted must be overcome: and as they that are beaten have their own fears
also for their enemies, which are sure to charge close, put to flight, chase
and pursue them; so it seems he also is afraid of a sincere and hearty
Christian, for he flies him: so he did from Christ, IV. Matt. ver. 11. and so
the Text assures, If you resist him, he will fly from you.

And now, although we all did once renounce the Devil and his works, were
listed Soldiers against him, took a Sacrament upon it, and our Souls, the
immortality of life or misery, depend upon our being true and faithful to our
selves and oaths, or otherwise; nor is there more required of us but resolution
and fidelity, only not to be consenting to our Enemies conquest of us, not to
will captivity and servitude. Yet as if, in mere defiance of our vows and
interests, we not only willed the ruin, but would fight for it, we may find,
in stead of this resisting of the Devil, most men do Acts VII. 51.
resist the Holy Ghost; quench not the Ephe^. VI. 16.
fiery darts of Satan, but the I These. V. 19.
Spirit and his flames, by which he would enkindle love of God and Virtue in
them. If he take advantage of some warm occasion to inflame their courage
against former fol^ies, heat them into resolutions of a change; as soon as that
occasion goes off, they put out those flames, and choke these heats until they
die. If he come in his soft whispers, speak close to the heart, suggest, and
call them to those joys of which himself is earnest; to all these they shut
their ears, can hear no whispers, are not sensible of any sounds of things at
such a distance, sounds to which they give no more regard, then to things of
the same extravagance with the Music of the Spheres. Nay, if he come with his
more active methods, as the Angels came to Lot, send mercy to allure and Genesis
^IX. 16.
take them by the hand, as they did, to invite and lead them out of Sodom; if
that will not, judgments then to thrust them out, as they did also, come with
fire and brimstone to affright them; they not only, like the men of Sodom, do
attempt a Ver. 4, 9.
violence and rape upon those very Angels, but they really debauch the mercies,
and profane the judgments, having blinded their own eyes, that they might see
no hand of God in either: using thus unkindly all his blessed methods of
reclaiming them, till they have Ephesians. ^. 30.
grieved him so that he forsake and leave them utterly. As if they had not
heard that when the Holy Spirit is thus forced away, the evil spirit takes his
place, I Sam. XVI. 14. As if they knew not that to those who close their eyes
and stop their ears against the Holy Spirit's motions, till they are grown dull
of hearing and blind to them, God does send a spirit of slumber, that they
should not see nor hear; and that for this dire reason, that they may not be
converted, nor be saved. Isa. VI. 9. Matt. XIII. 14, 15.
Five times he affirms it in the Scripture. Yea, once more, in words of a sad
Emphasis, II These. II. 12, 13. He sends them strong delusions Joh. XII. 40.
Act. XXVII. 26. Romans XI. 8*
that they may believe a ly, that they all may be damned who believe not the
truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness: and that, because they received
not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. Blessed God! Is it so
easy for such sinners to believe and be converted, that thy self should
interpose to hinder it, and hide the possibilities of mercy from their eyes,
that they may never see them, nor recover! What can then become of those for
whom God does contrive that they shall not escape? when instead of those bowels
that did make him Ezekiel. XXXIII. 11.
swear he would not have the sinner die, but would have him return and live, he
puts on so much indignation at such sinners, as to take an order they shall not
repent, and take an order that they shall be damned.

And yet all this is only to those men, who, being dull of hearing the
suggestions of the Spirit, and not willing to give entertainment to his holy
motions, grieve him so, that they repel and drive him quite away; and so by
consequence only make way for the Devil: Whereas there are others that
directly call him, force him to them, ravish and invade occasions to serve him.
Some there are that study how to disbelieve, and with great labor and
contrivance work out arguments and motives to persuade themselves to Atheism:
Others practice, discipline, and exercise themselves to be engaged in Vice.
Some dress so as to lay baits, snares, to entrap Temptation, that they may be
sure it may not pass them: Others feed high, to invite, and entertain the
Tempter, do all that is possible to make him come, and to assure him that he
must prevail, when they have made it most impossible for themselves to stand
and to resist.

Some there are indeed whom he does not overcome so easily, but is put to
compound with them, takes them upon Articles: for when he would engage them to
a sin to which he sees they have great inclinations, with some fears, he is
fain to persuade them to repent when they have done; to lay hold upon the
present opportunity, and not let the satisfaction escape them, but be forry
after, and amend. For where these resolutions of Repentance usher in
transgression, there we may be sure it is the Devil that suggests those
resolutions. But if he can get admittance once thus, by prevailing with a
person to receive him upon purposes of after-Penitence; he is sure to prosper
still in his attempts upon the same condition: for Repentance will wash out
another sin, if he commit it; and so on. And it is evident that by this very
train he does draw most men on through the whole course of sin and life: for
never do they, till they see themselves at the last stage, begin repenting.
When they are to grapple with Death's forces, then they are to set upon
resisting of the Devil: and when they are grown so weak that their whole soul
must be employed to muster all its spirits, all their strength, but to beat off
one little spot of phlegm, that does besiege the avenues of breath, the parts
of life, and sally at it, and assault it, once, again, and a third, many times,
and yet with all the fury of its might cannot break through, nor beat off that
little clot of spittle; when it is thus, yet then are they to Ephesians. VI. 12.
wrestle with, and conquer Principalities and Powers, all the Rulers of the
utter darkness II Cor. X. 4, 5.
, pull down the strong holds of sin within, cast down imaginations, and every
high thing that did exalt it self against the knowledge of God, and bring into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; and with those feeble hands
that they are scarcely able to lift up in a short wish, or prayer, they must
do all this, resist the Devil, and take Heaven by force.

Now sure to put it off to such a fatal season is a purpose of a desperate
concern. In God's Name let us set upon the doing it while there is something
left of Principle and vigor in us, ere we have so grieved God's Spirit, that
he do resolve to leave us utterly, and before the Devil have so broke us to his
yoke, that we become content and pleased to do his drudgery. We deceive our
selves if we think to do it with more ease when Constitution is grown weaker;
as if then Temptations would not be so strong: for the Habits will be then
confirmed, Vice grown Heroical, and we wholly in the Act. XXVI. 18.
power of Satan, dead and senseless under it, not so much as stirring to get
out. But if we strive before he have us in his clutches, we have an enemy that
can vanquish none but those who consent to, and comply and confederate with
him, those that will be overcome: so that if we resist, he must be conquered;
and Temptation must be conquered too, for He will fly, and then by consequence
must cease to trouble and molest us. This is the sure way to be rid of
Temptations, to put to flight the great Artificer and Prince of them, subdue
and overcome Him and our selves: To Rev. III. 21.
him that over comes thus Christ will grant to sit with him on his Throne, as
He also overcame, and sat down with his Father on his Throne. To which, etc.

FINIS.

