THE GOVERNMENT OF THE THOUGHTS: A Prefatory DISCOURSE TO THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
TONGUE, By the AUTHOR of the The Whole Duty of Man.

The Lord knows the Thoughts of the Wise, that they are vain, 1 Cor. 3.20.
LONDON: Printed by R. Smith for Richard Cumberland, at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M DC XC IV.

Imprimatur.

Edward Cook.
September 15. 1693.
THE PREFACE.
THE Government of the Thoughts was some Years since designed for the Press,
but not till this opportunity, thought fit to make its Appearance. The Tract
indeed in point of Justice, must own its Original Theme, to that Most Excellent
and Learned Author of The Whole Duty of Man; and had not the Grave and Darkness
deprived us of so great a Luminary, this Treatise would have appeared in
perfect Luster, with all those Embellishments which so Exquisite a Pen could
have rendered it.

The main Subject Matter of this Discourse, is to persuade Men to regulate
their inordinate Thoughts and Affections, that such an unruly Member, as St.
James affirms the Tongue to be, may not break out into that Conflagration, as
all their Reason cannot easily quench: For out of the Heart proceeds all Evil
Thoughts, the product of bad Actions, which are concomitant to contumelious
Speeches: And indeed I presume, we cannot place too strong a Guard on that
which appears so formidable an Enemy, and threatens us with so much Violence,
which if not speedily prevented, may in the end prove Destructive.

I cannot reasonably expect, that this Product of my Labors should find a
candid Acceptance of all Persons; or like the Manna, accomodate every Palate,
especially in this Censorious Age, wherein some approve of nothing but the
Minerva of their own Brain; I wish I could not say many, (like those foolish
Heathens) Adore their own Maladies, applauding themselves for Benevolent and
Prudent, by disgusting all that is good and wholesome, which is indeed a Symptom
of a disaffected Palate.

I am not ignorant, that a Speaker ventureth within the reach of Censure; and
that a Writer fixes himself to the Stake: Yet in hope that some may reap
benefit by my Labors, I resolve not to be discouraged, if any shall prove so
malign as to render Evil to my good Intentions, my Labor is with that
Omnipotency who appointed some cheap Sacrifices, that the Poor might serve him
as well as the Rich, and requiring principally willing Hearts, Exodus 35.6, 7,
etc. And he that possessed not Jewels, Gold, Silver, Silk, Purple, or of the
like Estimation, might produce Skins and Goats-hair, which were of
inconsiderable Value, but proved Acceptable. You who enjoy a greater share of
Heavenly Treasures, offer of your Fullness; for the Almighty accepts the poor
Widows Mites where no more is Expected.

And now let us hasten to enter into that sacred way of Charity, which
directs to Salvation, and persevere in that Truth which never Deceives, nor
is Deceived; so that at the last we may enter into the Kingdom of Glory. To
conclude, I shall only add what St. Paul said upon his departure, to the Elders
of Miletum, Acts 20.32. And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word
of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance
among all them which are Sanctified. Read Happily, and Practice Diligently, not
omitting St. Paul's Instructions to Timothy, in his Second Epistle, 2 Chap.
ver. 2. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you Understanding in all things.

THE Government of the Thoughts.
CHAP. I. Of the Chief Governor, the Soul.
THERE are diversity of Things, of whose Being we know, whose Quality we know
not: All confess we enjoy a Soul which Commands, and Restrains, in us. What
a one it is, none can tell. Hence are those many Disputes concerning its
Essence, Seat and Subject, with the subordinate Faculties of it. No Person has
thoroughly been acquainted with this secret Governor in Man. Some Philosophers
have defined it a Harmony: Some a Divine Virtue, a Particle of the Deity: Some
the most exile and slender Air: Some, a Blood: Some, Heat, or Fire: Some,
Number. So innate is Error, that we most Err concerning our own selves.

2. MORE judiciously do they define it, who attest it an Immortal Spirit, an
Incorporeal Substance, Created by Infusion, and Infused in its Creaation, made
to the Image of the Creator, capable of the light of Understanding, Wisdom,
Holiness, Blessedness, and Eternity: So that in its conjunction with the Body,
it Animateth, gives Life, Action, and Motion, (wherein it differs from an
Angel) and in its separation from the Body for a time (until it shall be
reunited at the Resurrection) it Subsisteth, as the Angels, and has its
proper Acts and Apprehensions, as they have: Now, as the Eye beholds the Eye in
a Glass; so the Soul discerns it self by a kind of Reflex.

3. THE Soul is a divine Ghost sent from Heaven, into these Tabernacles of
Clay, to give them Life and govern them; yet is it neither visible coming nor
departing: It is an Immortal Form of Mortality: The Body Decays, the Soul
does not, being neither subject to Time nor Age: The Motions thereof are
Eternal; it apprehends things Present, Absent, Past, and Future; it
Deliberateth, Forms, Directs, Discourses, Judges, Doubts, Concludes:
So excellent it is, that Cicero the Orator said, God has not given any thing
so Divine to Man; and that there are certain Lineaments thereof more beautiful
than of the Body.

4. THE Body is adorned by the Soul; without which, Beauty it self appears
Ghastly: And good Abraham said, Give me a possession of a Burying-place, that I
may Bury my Dead out of my sight, Genesis 23.4. The Soul cannot be Deformed by any
unevenness, discomposure, or disproportion of the Body which it Animateth: As a
beautiful Creature is the same in a poor Cottage, as in a magnificent Palace:
So is Virtue, which is the Beauty of the Soul. Could we but behold the Soul of
a Saint, there is no Embellishment on Earth so Glorious; no Created Beauty here
of so divine a Luster.

5. THE Soul, tho now enclosed in Obscurity (having only some diviner
Breathings in the Raptures and Heavenly Contemplations, which sometimes allarum
it up, like Moses, to the Mount, or like a Jacob's Ladder, ascends it into
God's Presence) has some knowledge of its Original by Faith and Joy
unspeakable in the apprehension thereof, 1 Pet. 1.8. which arresteth the
Desire, as appeared in St. Peter seeing Christ's Transfiguration, Matt. 17. and
St. Paul's wishing to be Dissolved, was a signal Evidence of our interest in
Heaven; therefore our Pusilanimity cannot deter us from it, Phil. 1.

6. HE knows whether he shall go who remembers whence he came: But what
shall be the transcendent Beauty of a Devout Soul in its Separation, when it
shall be restored to its native Heaven; when it shall be all Illumination, and
God shall be all in all? Christ's Raiment on the Mount became shining white as
Snow, so as no Fuller on Earth could white them, Mark 9.3. And Moses Face when
he talked with God, became so Glorious, that Israel could not behold it without
a Veil, 2 Cor. 3.13. What then shall our Glory be when we shall be like Christ?
1 John 3.2.

CHAP. II. Of the Faculties of the Soul.
THE Faculties of the Soul are the Understanding, Will, Memory, Affections, and
Senses Internal and External. My purpose being not to enter the List with
Philosophers, but to direct Christians, I shall not further consider these, but
what concerns the Practical part, and right governing the thoughts of the Heart
and Mind, to the Service of God and our Mortification, and the means of
qualifying our selves for it.

2. THE Heart, in Scripture often taken for the principal Seat of the rational
Soul, imparteth any Faculty hereof: The Mind is the inward act, the result and
product of its Reason, and Discourses the Thoughts. The Learned affirm, the
Mind is the fountain of Counsel, and Soul of Life: And again, we understand by
the Mind, and live by the Soul. The Mind of Man is sometimes a Sovereign, to
govern in Virtue and Sanctimony it self; and the Body sometimes a Tyrant, and
indulging to Vice, which like the Worm bred in the Wood destroys its own
Original: It is often misled by tumultuous Passions, Lusts, Vain-desires, and
other Perturbations of a discomposed Mind, which unthron'd Reason dangerously
gains an Usurpation.

3. A prudent Man, whose Knowledge is his Life, in the light, height, and use
thereof, differing him not only from the Brutes, but ignorant Men; does
principally enjoy himself in his Mind and inward Man. There is indeed in humane
Possessions, nothing great and excellent, but a magnanimous and good Mind;
contemning External Greatness, or supposed Excellencies, such as Power,
Strength, Riches, Beauty, Wit, etc. obvious to Sense in respect of that which
is within, apprehensible by the enlightened Understanding.

4. AND certainly the All-wise God, who Created the Affections, ordained them
to some excellent end and use in the Soul, as Handmaids to Devotion and
Religion: neithere would he in our Regeneration, kill, but correct them, by
moderating them, where they grow extreme; and retrenching them into their own
Channels, where they overflow their banks, like over-rank Water Sources,
becoming muddy and choked up with that which they fetch in from without; or
reducing them, where they are Exorbitant.

5. ALL Extremes are foolish and dangerous: A Stoical Apathie is incompatible
with a well-composed Mind, as a violent Passion with a Prudent: The dead Calm
corrupts Air and Water, and violent Blasts disturb them; the moderate more
safely purify; but the mean is best. Affections are, as it is said of
Caligula, There is no better Servant, nor worse Master; they are good
commanded, but mischievous reigning; like Fire, and Water, very necessary, and
very destructive.

6. WITHOUT Love there can be no acceptable Service; without Anger, no Zeal;
without Fear, no co-ercive power in the Soul; without Hope, no Comfort; which
brings us to a necessary Consideration of the Hearts Corruption; the vanity
and exorbitancy of the Thoughts; and the necessity of their Regulations by some
Rules of Practice.

CHAP. III. Of the Hearts Corruptions.
THE Corruptions of the Heart, are, as in the Primitive Age of the World, Genesis
6.5. Only evil continually. The Heart is the fountain of Sin; and the
Evangelist tells us, Mat. 15.19. from thence spring evil Thoughts, Murders,
Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, false Witnesses, Blasphemies, all the Sins of
Man. All Iniquity is here forged; as it is written, Isai. 32.6. His Heart will
work Iniquity; hence words of falsehood are conceived and uttered, Isai. 59.13.
Here the kingly Prophet declares is the root of War, Psalm. 55.21. And the Royal
Preacher acknowledges it the seat of Mischief, Prove. 6.18. Error, Frowardness,
and that Obdurateness, which excludes all capacity of hearing God's Word and
Judgments, which should lead us to Repentance whereby we may be healed, Psalm.
95.10. Prove. 11.20.

2. THE Heart is deceitful above all things; who can know it? Jer. 17.9. There
lodges Hypocrisy, Jer. 3.10. and many secret Sins; like that unseen
Multitude, which rangeth through the Paths of the Deeps, such are the dark
Councels of the Heart of Man, which Solomon informs us, Prove. 20.5. Nor is this
the Condition of some few, but the secret Corruption of all natural Men; nor
are the Regenerate absolutely freed from these Pollutions, being yet partly
flesh: We have St. Paul's word for it, Gal. 5.17. For the flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh: and these are contrary the one to
the other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.

3. THE danger hereof fully appears, that these are the Seeds of every Sin, and
fomenters thereof; yea, that which obstructeth Faith and Repentance; for as the
Physicians affirm, if there be a fault in the first Concoction, there will
follow the like in the rest; so it is here, the Hearts Sickness is derived to
the Tongue, and all the Actions of Man: It is a People, said the Lord, that do
err in their Hearts, and they have not known my ways, Psalm. 95.10. As the Eye
is deceived through a false Medium; So is the Mind through the cloud of false
Opinion: And the Wise Man tells us, Prove. 24.9. That the thought of Foolishness
is Sin, into which they must needs run, says the Psalmist, Who set not their
heart aright, and whose Spirit is not steadfast with God, Psalm. 78.8.

4. THE Almighty searches the Secrets of all Hearts, and will at the Great
Audit, make all the Thoughts thereof manifest: God requires the Heart, says
Solomon, Prove. 23.26. and David tells you, If a Man regard Iniquity in his
Heart, the Lord will not hear him, Psalm. 66.18. and Wisdom expresses, Prove.
16.5. That the Thoughts of the Wicked are an abomination to the Lord; and they
who have wicked Thoughts, run swiftly to iniquity; and Destruction is in their
Paths, Isai. 59.7. In the Corruption of the Heart, the very fibrae and
remainders of Sins reviving root, Satan's venom remains: The Hydra's
ever-growing Heads, which (when occasions and ability so fail, that the impious
cannot serve the Devil in External Actions) will show its venom in their will
to Sin.

5. IN the next place, it is a very difficult thing rightly to compose the
Thoughts, in respect of the Hearts unfathomed Deceitfulness, and the Mind's
unlimited Agility; in these depths of quick-shifting Thoughts, Sin easily
hides it self: External Sins in Words or Works, are (like the Plague of
Leprosy, Levit. 13.12, 13. broken all abroad and covering all the Skin) nearer
the Cure, and by so much the more easily amended, or overcome, by how much more
evident they are, not only to others, but also to our selves.

6. THE Sins of the Heart are harder to be cured, the more secret, and
invisibly they are Committed: The Thoughts are more securely Extravagant,
Negligent and Presuming by how much less they are obvious, to any Pretender, or
Censurer without: And where the Heart is smitten with some awful fear of God,
and resolution to Repent, makes Inquest after Sin; that which is in Word, or
Action, is more easily and frequently found: But the sin of the Mind, like
Jonathan and Ahimaaz at Bahurim, is let down into the depth of the Heart, whose
secret Enemies are like those Ligurian Mountainers, whom the Roman's Chased,
more hardly found, than Vanquished. Moreover, Man's innate Self-Love and
natural Complacency, makes him unapt, and loath to Condemn himself, in any thing
wherein he conjectures others cannot.

7. LASTLY, The restless machination of Satan is to suggest Self-delusions, as
he does Temptations to Sin, whereby his Baits may be swallowed. His policy is
to keep the Heart for his Retreat; and if any reproof happily chase away
Profaneness, Anger, Obscenity, or Calumny out of the Tongue, or Adultery,
Theft, Murder, or the like, from the outward Man; yet if he can but foment and
maintain any of these in the impure Heart, he will find opportunity and
diabolical Suggestions, to make an Eruption: Or if not, he knows where he has
Possession, be the Words and Actions never so well framed, that God has no
part there, which brings me to the next Consideration.

CHAP. IV. The necessity of Governing our Thoughts.
THERE is great necessity of Regulating our Thoughts and Heart, without which,
as the Prophet says, Isa. 29.13. It is in vain to draw near to God with our
Lips. And the art of governing the Affections and Thoughts, must be performed
by Wisdom and Ingtegrity. Wisdom is as a Mistress to tumultuous Servants, at
whose Presence the most Disorderly are suddenly Composed and Silenced. An
understanding Heart is the inward illumination of the Soul, which God beholds;
without which, all External appearances of Sanctity make formal Hypocrites no
better than Egyptian Temples, grave and decent outwardly, but within, very
ridiculous; setting up for Gods, Apes, Serpents, Cats and Crocodiles.

2. SOLOMON, to whom God granted a free choice of any thing he would request,
desired, an Understanding Heart, 1 Kings, 3.5.9.12. This was more estimable to
him than Riches or Life; and he, whom God was pleased to make the Wisest of
Men, of all the Holy Penmen, gave most Precepts concerning the Heart and Mind;
and we are commanded for our further directions, to search the Scriptures,
which as the Apostle tells us, are only able to make us wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. And St. James requires us to ask Wisdom of God, that gives to all
Men liberally, and Vpbraideth not, James 1.5. He that trusts in his own
Heart, is a Fool, Prove. 28.26. Again, the Wise Man like a true Prognostic,
tells you, That the Heart of the Sons of Men is full of Evil, and madness is in
their Heart while they live, Eccl. 9.3. Unhappy is he who goes on perversely
in the way of his own Heart, or walks contrary to the Apostle's Rule, 1 Cor.
3.19. persuing the Wisdom of this World, which is foolishness with God.

3. WE must so compose our Hearts, that they may be upright and sincere in the
sight of God. Without this, our best actions, as Prayer, Hearing, Repentance,
Alms, and whatever else we do, is worth nothing. O Jerusalem, says the Lord,
wash thy Heart from wickedness, that thou may be Saved: How long shall thy
vain thoughts lodge in thee? Jer. 4.14. It is but folly to labor the Cure in
the outward part, while the Contagion and Venom of Sin invades the inward; or
to wash the Eyes with floods of Tears, where the sin of Judah is written with a
Pen of Iron, and graven with the point of a Diamond, upon the Table of the
Heart, Jer. 17.1.

4. THE Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 84.5. Blessed are they in whose Heart are the
ways of God: And that he is good unto such as are of a clean Heart, Psalm. 73.1.
And the Prophet tells you, Jer. 29.13. They shall find him who seek him with
all their Heart. And they that know righteousness, have the Law of God in their
Heart, Isa. 51.7. And Psalm. 37.31. Their steps shall not slide; they delight to
do God's Will, Psalm. 40.8. And Psalm. 119.11. They hide up the Law of God in
their heart, that they might not sin against him: The knowledge of God is
pleasant unto their Soul, Prove. 2.10. and Prove. 3.2. They shall have length of
days and Peace; and when they go, it shall lead them; when they sleep, it shall
keep them; when they wake, it shall talk with them, Prove. 6.22. It is a Lamp
and Light to direct them in the ways of Life to preserve them from Sin.

5. NOW, however the ways of an Hypocrite may seem clean in his own Eyes, yet
seeing the God of Justice Weighs the Spirits, Prove. 16.2. it highly
concerns every Man to look to the ordering of this inward House, that it may
be a clean Temple, for God's Spirit to dwell in, without whose guidance, Man
runs to Destruction, both Body and Soul. If we govern our Thoughts aright, we
have our conversation in Heaven, we walk with God: And in our many dangerous
sicknesses of Mind, sundry Distempers, and Perturbations of fluctuant Thoughts,
the wearied Soul shall ever have recourse unto this Ark for Rest.

6. THERE are troublesome Errors of sick minds which see false Comforts instead
of true. There is Anxiety, Impatience and Grief which devoureth the Heart:
There is the fire of Anger to inflame, Envy and Malice to transport, vain Hopes
and Fears, whose vicissitudes do miserably afflict the disquiet Mind. There are
many Perturbations, which if not prudently managed, will master Reason, and
violently carry Men into the most dangerous Precipices, from whence they
cannot, when they would retrieve themselves: All which to a wise and good Man,
shall prove but Exercises to make his Victory over his own Passions more
Glorious.

7. NOR is he less Honorable who is victor over himself, than he that
conquereth others. The great Conquerors of Kingdoms have been overcome of their
own Affections; whereby they have foolishly eclipsed all the Glory of their
Victories. The Strong may vanquish others; but only the Good can overcome
themselves. I shall conclude with the Saying of a Pious Man, I had rather
overcome my own Mind, than all my Enemies; and I would I were secure of my
self: All the Powers of Hell, cannot overcome me, nor make me unhappy if my
own Affections betray me not.

CHAP. V. Rules of Practice.
FOR the right composure of Mind and Thoughts, it is very requisite to consider
those Rules of Practice which concern the same in general; and then that which
appertains to some particular Passions of the Mind. First, Have a care of thy
Soul as thy greatest Interest, and that which surpasses all things in the
World: Next have a care of thy Mind, which, if well composed, is prudently
Content in every Estate, without which Even Temper, nothing can prove good, or
comfortable. What is Strength? Sickness may anticipate, but Age must bow down
to the Grave. What is Beauty? Why those Flowers quickly fade, and many times
become the Snare and Destruction of foolish and unhappy Owners.

2. WHAT are Honors, where a qualification of Mind is wanting to manage them?
Those Phaetons precipitate themselves, and set the World on fire. What are
Riches without a Mind well qualified, but snares, and easy ways to Hell? All
things duly weighed to a prudent Mind, which can limit it self within the
desires of Necessaries, a little is enough; but to an ambitious Mind, nothing
can satisfy. Alexander had a monstrous Mind when he was grieved, that there
was but one World for him to Conquer. It Is the Mind that makes truly Rich or
Poor; That, contented in every Estate, abounds in its own Happiness; but
discontented, can be blessed in none.

3. THE way to gain Riches, is not so much by adding to an Estate, as by
depriving the Mind of that foolish desire of having Superfluity beyond use.
Temporal Riches are but a burden to him, who has truly placed his Affections
on Heaven, where neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt, and where Thieves do not
break through and steal, Matthew. 6.20. That which must once be lost, is nothing
worth; which Consideration possibly made Stilpo answer like a Philosopher, who
when Demetrius had taken Megera, and out of a noble Care to give him Protection
from Plundering, asked him if the Soldiers had taken ought from him, he
answered, No; for, said he, I saw no Man that would take any Knowledge, or
Learning from me.

4. THE Mind is Sacred, and out of the reach of violent hands; so that to make
thee happy, which is the scope of a prudent Desire, the way is not to labor so
much, and disquiet thy self in things External, but to compose thy Mind aright,
to value and make a good Use of what thou have; to get true Wisdom and
Understanding, and well-ordered Affections, quietly to endure want, or enjoy
plenty: In which there is not only an admirable skill and strength of Mind
requisite, but also an holy Habit. No Precepts can suddenly make a Man
practically wise, or good; which must make us resolve quickly to study this
Divine Philosophy: And indeed, Experience here discovers a mavelous Stupor,
and Incogitancy of most Men. In any bodily Dissection, we speedily consult the
Physician; but in our Soul's Distempers, we not only delay our seeking help,
but are too often impatient of offered Remedies. That which thou designest to
do well, speedily put in practice.

5. SOLOMON's advice is, Prove. 4.23. To keep thine Heart with all diligence;
for out of it are the issues of Life. Many think it enough to keep their
Tongues and their Hands. But it highly concerns all Christians to keep their
Hearts from Satan's Snares; there he begins all his Stratagems which
afterward break out into Words and Actions. It is true, that bare Suggestions
without any delight, or consent of our own, are no more our Sins, than any
Robbery or Murder committed without our Consent or Knowledge: But except we are
vigilant over our Thoughts, and carefully stand upon our guard, Satan's
deluding Influences will create a Delight, and excite in us a Consent, and
concession to them; Therefore the Counsel of the Wise Man is this, Prove. 7.25.
Let not thine Heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her paths.

6. CHECK the first beginnings of Sin in thy Thoughts use them roughly at the
door, and think of the Prophet Elisha's saying, 2 Kings 6.33. Is not the sound
of their Masters Feet behind them? We must there chiefly observe and extinguish
Sin, where it is born, and quench the Sparks, before they break out into
masterless Flames. We must crush the Cockatrice in the Egg, before it proves a
fiery flying Serpent. We neglect not the biting of a Serpent, but presently
seek remedy to keep the Venom from the Heart: With how much more care and
diligence should we look to the biting of the Old Dragon, Rev. 12.9. who is
able, if a little neglected, to kill Body and Soul? Of evil Seeds, spring evil
Plants. Murder from Revenge in the Heart; Adultery from Lust unextinguish'd
there; and God justly castigateh evil Intentions, though they do not always
break forth into Actions.

7. KEEP a good Conscience, and put on Sanctity. The Wicked meditate on Evil;
and the Prophet Esaias affirms, cahp. 59.7. That their Thoughts are Thoughts of
Iniquity; Wasting and Destruction are in their paths. As our Actions follow our
Thoughts, so do they leave Impressions in them, which prove occasions of their
further Operation; and Solomon tells you, Prove. 12.5. That the Thoughts of the
Righteous are right; but the Counsels of the Wicked are deceit. Love good
Thoughts, and thou shall be furnished with them; as Flowers spring out of Buds,
so good Desires flow from Celestial Thoughts. We often think of those we Love,
and are ambitious of their Acquaintance. Think often of God, for his Love will
cause thee to detest all thoughts of Evil, and will hinder the approaches of
that old malicious Serpent to thy Heart.

8. FIX thy Thoughts on something certain. The Heart is a spiritual Labyrinth,
in whose perplexed turnings we often lose our selves; and the best fruits of
idle and extravagant Fancies, are but as the Eyes, continually rolling up and
down, seeing nothing intentively, but a wandering Mind. It is a signal Token of
a composed Mind, if it can contain it self, and not launch out into those vain
Evagations and wandering Thoughts: From whence waking as out of some feverish
Dream, after much thinking, we can give our selves no true account, what the
Mind has busied it self about; but that in long thinking, we thought on nothing
to the Purpose.

9. THE Mind is Man's most active Faculty: In a Moment, with the flight of a
Thought, it mounts from Earth to Heaven, and back again from Age to Age; from
Present, to Future: Like Lightning, it shoots from East to West, vanishing in
the Appearance. It is not a little skill to arrest it so, as that we may say
with David, Psalm. 108.1. My heart is fixed; O God, my heart is fixed. Without
this we can neither Hear nor Pray, otherwise than profane Hypocrites,
provoking God's Anger, by drawing near him with their Lips, when their Hearts
are far from thinking on him.

10. SEEK Peace with God through Faith in Christ; for therein consists the true
Composure and happy Rest of the Mind. The Prophet tells you, Isa. 57.21.
There Is no Peace to the Wicked; neither is there any true Rest out of Christ
Jesus. Sin is the distemper and disquiet of the Soul. Until that Jonah be cast
overboard, we can never appease the Surges of a troubled Mind. This thou
may seek by hearty sorrow for thy Sins; this restringent Acrimony shall heal
the Fountains, that Death and Barrenness may no more fluctuate from the Mind
into thy Words and Actions. It Is a good symptom of Recovery when the Disease
changes Place: So when we are pleased with Repentance, who were wont to please
ourselves with Sin, it is a token that Sin declineth in us.

11. BY Committing thy works unto the Lord, thy thoughts shall be Established,
Prove. 16.3. and by filling thy Soul with such happy thoughts, as constant
Meditation, or God's Word will furnish thee: And Wisdom, as a Monitor advises
thee, Ecclus. 6.37. Let thy mind be upon the Ordinances of the Lord, and
meditate continually on his Commandments; he shall establish thine Heart and
give thee Wisdom at thine own desire. Overcome thine own Mind, and in every
thing as much as possibly thou can, subject it to right Reason, and let not
Affection or Passion master it.

12. SET thy Mind ever upon some good, to prevent the rising of evil Thoughts,
that the Tempter may never find thee at leisure to entertain him. The Mind is
naturally active and prone to thoughts: Even when thou lie Dormant it has
its Motions. Employ it then in some Business, it cannot be Idle. As the Earth
neglected, for want of Culture, brings forth noisome Weeds; so will the Mind
evil and vain extravagant Thoughts, if it be not duly Cultivated. Often the
light of Reason is Eclipsed by the mischievous interposition of vicious
Thoughts: Yet perplex not thy Mind with too much, or too weighty Affairs:
Proportion thy undertakings to thy Strength: The Mind requires some
intermissions and rest, which otherwise, like the Fields, with perpetual
Bearing, will grow Fruitless. The Unballanced Ship is easily Overset with every
gust of Wind: And too much Burden Sinketh her.

13. THERE is an Ark of God's secret Counsel, which our thoughts must not pry
into. There are also admirable Mysteries, from whence God calls out of the
fiery Bush, Exodus 3.2, 5. Come not nigh hither, put off thy Shoes from off thy
Feet, etc. Resign thy Thoughts to God's Immensity: It is enough to believe his
Truth, tho thou can not examine his incomprehensible Secrets. If thou will
play with these Flames, thou will burn thy Wings: God has revealed suficiently
enough to make thee Happy: Ambition of knowing more, destroyed Mankind.

14. COMMUNE with thine own Heart concerning that, which may advantageously
make thee Happy. Divine Soliloquies are Heavenly Raptures and the Soul's
prepossession of that Blessedness. Inure thy Heart to ponder on good and
heavenly things; and such will thy Thoughts, Words and Actions be. The Heart of
the Wise teaches his Mouth, says Solomon, Prove. 16.23. Custom grows habitual;
therefore also the Wise man says, Wisdom rests in the heart of him that has
Understanding, Prove. 14.33. If the Wicked, the worst of Fools, have any notion
thereof, it can no more rest with them, than Lightning in the Air.

15. TAKE the Prophet's advice, Jer. 17.10. To set God ever before thee, as a
Searcher of hearts: And that which thou would detest to speak before others,
abhor to think with thy self. Thoughts are the words of the Heart, which God
hears; who therefore says, Matt. 9.4. Wherefore think you Evil in your
hearts? And Solomon gives us this Charge, Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King, no
not in thy Thought. Thou must be pure in Heart, if ever thou meanest to see
God. Let not thy Heart dissent from thy Tongue; neither desire to appear more
Holy than thou art, if thou intendest to please him who is Omniscient.

16. PRAY, and beseech the Lord with the earnest Supplication of the Psalmist,
to Create a clean heart, and to renew a right Spirit within thee, Psalm. 51.10.
To incline thy heart unto his Testimonies, Psalm. 119.36. Then Pray with the
Prophet, Jer. 24.7. That God would give thee a heart to know him: To prepare
thy Heart that thou may truly fear him, Meditate on him, and Love him above
all: And That he who cast out the tumultuous Rabble from Jairus's House, would
also be pleased to cast out of thy Soul and Mind, all those thoughts which
offend him, or hinder the raising up thy Soul to the life of Grace here,
whereby it may be fit for the life of Glory hereafter.

CHAP. VI. Of the affections of Love and Delight.
FOR the right governing the Thoughts arising from some particular Affections,
or Passions, which usually discompose and render the Mind less apt for the
Service of God, and less comfortable to our selves, we must ever have in mind
the General Rule before laid down, that extreme and violent Passions of any
kind, are Distempers of the Soul, which at best befool a Man, if not, as
Hypocrates thinks, makes him Lunatic; they are like a Deluge, which rather
overflow and drown, than refresh the Mind; they are like an enraged Sea, full
of hazard; they disturb the Intellectuals, and distract the Will. Behold, how
all things in troubled Waters, seem wreathed, and disordered, which in the
still are clearly seen; so is it here: The calm Affections are more fit for
God's Service, and our own.

2. LOVE and Delight, are great Actors in this present Life; and every Man has
some share in them. Now our main skill is to fix 'em on right Objects, as God,
Psalm. 37. and upon heavenly Things, as St. Paul directs us, Col. 3.1. By this
means we cannot fall into any Excess, but shall be undoubtedly happy; that we
pervert not the Order, we must not delight in, or love any object but God; let
him be our first and chief Love and Delight, and we shall have Felicity in all
that is subordinate.

3. LET no inferior Love or Delight allure us away from him who is perfect
Love. Tho there is a time, place, and measure for Secular Delights, so far as
they are subordinate to God's Will, which may make us fit for his Service, and
administer occasion of Expressions of Thankfulness to him: But if on the
contrary, they prove hurtful to us, if God loves us, he will take that away
from us, which else would wean us from him. A necessary Rule for them to
consider, who too impatiently bear the loss of that they so much loved or
delighted in.

4. LET us neither love nor delight in any temporal things, otherwise than to
hold it with a loose Hand; and let us follow the Apostles advice, 1 Cor. 7.31.
To use this World as not abusing it; for the fashion of this World passes
away. And St. John commands us in his first Epistle, chap. 2.15. That we should
not love the World, nor the things that are in the World. We must be contented
to part with all, when God in his good pleasure sees convenient. It was Job's
Resolution, chap. 1.21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, and
blessed be the name of the Lord.

CHAP. VII. Of Joy.
CONCERNING Joy, Rejoicing and Mirth, the Rules are, That God would not have us
disconsolate, but to rejoice and be cheerful in him evermore, 1 Thessalonians. 5.16.
Melancholy, Dejectedness, worldly Sorrow, bitterness of Spirit, and secret
repining against God's Providence, are dangerous Symptoms of Incredulity: For
if, as the Apostle says, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have peace of
Conscience, and cheerful access to God through Christ; there will be joy in the
Holy Ghost: We shall rejoice in hope, and glory in our Tribulations, being
assured of a blessed issue thereof.

2. JOY and Rejoicing in God, in things Divine and Spiritual we are secure and
happy. The end of Temporal Rejoicing, is many times clouded in sudden and
unexpected Sorrow. Such was Belshazzar's Feast with a thousand of his Princes,
Dan. 5.1, 5, 6. The scene of Joy was changed into sudden Astonishment, at the
sight of that dreadful Hand which decypher'd his doom upon the Palace Wall.
Secular Joy* entertaineth deluded Men, as that old lying Prophet of Bethel did
the Man of God, first feeding, then afflicting with the sad Intimation of
ensuing Destruction, 1 Kings 13.11, 22. Acquaint thy self with true good, that
thou may rejoice securely. They most delight in Secular things, who are
ignorant of Eternal.

3. LET not thy Heart be too much transported with Secular Joy; they that
superabound in Mirth and Joy in Prosperity, are too much cast down and dejected
in Adversity: For both Extremes proceed from impotency of Mind. In every
Exultation look with a thankful Heart on the Lord that gave it, and with a
prudent Heart on that which may quickly change this Scene of Mirth into
Heaviness. Taste thy Joy as the Israelites did their Passover, with bitter
Herbs, and prepared to be gone, Exodus 12.8. Let the thoughts of Sorrow season
all thy Mirth, lest a sudden Surprizal astonish and vanquish thee: For foreseen
Dangers least prejudice the Wise.

4. KEEP Innocence and a good Conscience: These shall Comfort thee, as Lamech
said of his Son Noah, Genesis 5.29. The Wise Man tells you, Prove. 15.15. All the
days of the afflicted are Evil; but he that is of a Merry heart, that is, a
good Conscience, has a continual Feast. Wicked Mirth, Sardonick Laughter, and
foolish Jesting, as they demonstrate much Levity, so do they dangerous
Uncomposedness, Vanity and weakness of Mind. In such Laughter, the heart is
Sorrowful, says Solomon, Prove. 14.13. And the end of that mirth, is heaviness:
And Eccl. 2.1. Behold, this also is Vanity. Again, The heart of the wise is in
the House of Moorning: But the Heart of Fools is in the House of Mirth, Eccl.
7.4.

5. WE read that Christ Wept over Jerusalem, Luke 19.41. and over Lazarus, John
11.35. But we never read of his Laughter: It Is a rare Government of the Mind to
have Mirth seasoned with Wisdom, wherein a prudent Cheerfulness commends
Mirth, well regulated in an holy thankful use of that we enjoy, as the best of
things, merely Secular: To imitate the Austerity of Cato, or the Sullenness of
Crassus, who is reported to have Laughed but once in his Life; or to be an ever
Weeping Heraclite, or an ever Laughing Democritus, is to launch out into vain
and unsafe Extremes. Indeed, of the two, Tears are to be preferred before
excessive Laughter: For too much Mirth is a symptom of Folly, which fluctuates
from the Heart, and a true Signet of Forgetfulness, or ignorance of this
mutable Life.

6. AND indeed Voluptuousness is Satan's Hook which produces to Destruction; it
is the Mother of Sin, and the Nurse of the never dying Worm: And as Oil kills
Insects, but Vinegar restores them; so Joy and Pleasure destroy incautious
Sinners; but sharp Afflictions safely Cure them: So that they at last arrive to
that apprehensive sense of understanding, That it is good for them to be
Afflicted, Psalm. 119.71. Never rejoice at another Affliction, for it is Odious
to the Almighty, and seldom evadeth such Revenge as points out the Sin.

7. IT is a Maxim of Wisdom to weigh the Joy, which will prove an excellent
Gage for thy Heart: For the Prophet Jeremy tells you, Chap. 17.9. That, The
Heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it?
If thou rejoicest in Evil, thy Heart must be agreeable to it; but if thou
delightest in Goodness, then a secret Power and Spirit of Sanctity rules in
thee. Observe in Musical Instruments, how some Strings sound at the Moving of
others, and accord very Harmoniously: So it is with the Strings of thy Heart,
which internally Assenteth to any wicked external Action. The uncircumcised
Heart rejoiceth at that Obscenity that vexed Righteous Lot: The Holy are
cheerful and glad, like the wise Merchant, Matt. 13.44, 45, 56. Who when they
find the treasure of God's inestimable Mercy opened to them, go away rejoicing
with that happy Convert, Acts 8.39. While he that has no interest therein,
sits numbering the Minutes, and thinking every Divine Exercise long; goes
away either as Ahab, with Indignation, or with Sorrow, like the rich young Man
in the Gospel, Matt. 19.22.

8. DANGEROUS Perturbations of the Mind, are in the dominion of Sorrows; and
there is as much occasion of prudent Rules to be used, as of a Rudder in a
Storm. In every affliction, examine well thy Heart for the Cause: Wherefore is
the living Man Sorrowful? Man suffers for his Sin. Let us search and try our
ways, and turn again unto the Lord, Lam, 3.39, 40. It is a vain attempt, and a
high presumption to seek for any Relief from Affliction; but by this means all
other Lenitives are as Draughts of Cold Water in a hectic Fit; it is more
Inflaming, like David's Harp to a moody Saul, where the vexing Spirit returns
with greater Violence.

9. PLACE thy Sorrow upon Sin, which is the right Object: It is the vulgar
Error and danger of many, to be dejected for that loss which indeed cannot
prejudice their Bodies; but take a delight in Sin, which wounds the Soul, and
may make them for ever Unhappy. We many times grieve for that which should
occasion us to Rejoice. And St. Paul tells us, Romans 8.26. That all things work
together for good; and whom the Lord loves, he Chasteneth, Heb. 12.6. Next,
let us consider the comfortable effects of God's Chastisements; It yields the
peaceable fruit of Righteousness, unto them which are Exercised thereby, Heb.
12.11. We are impatient and roar out as Men under the hands of a skillful
Surgeon, when he exercises the Lancet or Cauterie to Cure us. It was
David's Complaint, who said, I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my
Heart, Psalm. 38.8. Yet in the issue confessed, It is good for me that I have
been Afflicted; and declares this Experience, Before I was afflicted, I went
astray, but now have I kept thy Word, Psalm. 119.67, 71.

10. GIVE not thy Heart over to excessive Sorrow; for there is a Worldly Sorrow
to Death; and a Sorrow to Repentance not to be Repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10.
Exorbitant Grief is like the immoderate Overflowing of Nilus, a presager of
dangerous Sterility. Stand ready prepared for sharp Encounters. Ships are built
to endure Storms and raging Seas. And prudent Minds are composed to endure and
make good use of Sorrows. Let every Distress awaken thy mind to fly to thy
Redeemer: And then Afflictions will appear like that Rain which fell on the
Ark; the more it poured down, the more that was lifted up, and saved from the
fury of the Waves: Or like Moses Rod, to open a way through the briny Floods,
to our promised Rest, Exodus 14.21, 22.

CHAP. VIII. Of Anger and Malice.
ANGER is an Appetite of punishing any Injuries Received, or Conceived: The
product is Malice, which is inveterate Anger: The Fruit of it is Revenge, or at
least a well-wisher to it; but being weak it becomes vain. The Accomplices are
Hatred and Envy; which shows an abhorrency to any thing which displeases our
querulous Palate; for we think every thing, though good, and never so well
performed, to be evil, because we may have an Antipathy to the party that
transacts them.

2. ANGER is an Amarulency, embittering the Soul: A turbulent Passion, an
usurped Power, deposing the Sovereignty of right Reason: It is a Spiritual
infernal Fire, the Souls Tyrant, the seed of Malice, and an Enemy to good
Council. Its Rage is a Precursor of Destruction, Ruin, and Desolation; a
Companion of Misery, and the Souls Precipice. This Affection is of so high a
concernment, that some have writ whole Tracts upon this Subject: But my design
in this Treatise is only to consider the Government of the Mind and Thought in
relation to the service of God: With some Rules of practice for the better
performance of it.

3. THERE is an impious and fooolish Anger; whereof Christ said, Mat. 5.22.
Whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the
judgment: And St. Paul advises us, Col. 3.8. with this friendly Exhortation,
But now put off all these, anger, wrath, malice, etc. And the Wise man
Philosophically informs you, that a stone is heavy, and the sand weighty; but a
fools wrath is heavier than both. And he gives you further notice, that wrath
is cruel, and anger outrageous, Prove. 27.3, 4. An Example of which, we have in
Genesis 4.5. When Cain committed that Fratricide upon Abel: Furthermore, Solomon
the chief Anatomizer of Anger, and Dissecter of that Passion, affirms, that an
angry man stirs up strife, and a foolish man abounds in transgressions:
Prove. 29.22. And Eliphaz the Temanite, when he reproved Job for Cursing the day
of his Birth, admonished him in this Phrase, that Wrath kills the foolish
man, and Envy slays the Silly one.

4. THERE is a good Anger, such as was in Moses, Exodus 16.20. Phinehas, Numb.
25.7. And Nehemiah, Nehem. 5.6. Without which there can be no Zeal: For Stoical
Apathie agrees not with true Religion: Observe what a Be is without is sting,
nothing but a Drone; even such is man which cannot, or will not be angry. Some
anger is necessary, which the holy Spirit mentions, Ephesians. 4.26. Be ye angry,
and sin not; let not the Sun go down upon your wrath. There is such use of this
Souls Fire, that the inward man cannot subsist without it. But the skill is how
to reduce it to practice: It must be as the Celestial Fire, wherewith the
Sacrifice was to be offered, which we may discern by these Three Distinctions:
First, It is Incensed only against Sin, and that which any way displeases God,
and Obstructeth his Service. Secondly, It Launcheth out only upon some
particular Causes and Occasions, but not Unadvisedly. Thirdly, It goes, like
that Burning Lamp between the pieces of Abraham's divided Sacrifice, Genesis
15.17. That is, between the Person, and the Offense, proportionably loving the
one, and hating the other: This being without Gall and Bitterness, but zealous
in opposition to evil: For it is sin not to be angry with Sin.

5. THIS Affection is an Excellent Subservant to the Mind, exciting the
Faculties; it is Fortitudes Incentive, and Zeals Natural heat; it is Modesties
Sentinel, and Temperances Guardian: And does by an Excellent Allay of Pleasure,
Contract the Dilated Heart and Mind, with some unpleasing but profitable
Austerities; which otherwise, would be exposed to dangerous and wicked
Temptations.

CHAP. IX. Rules of Practice, concerning Anger, and Malice.
IN every Apprehension of injury, look up to God, and say with David when
Shimei cursed him, Let him Curse for the Lord has bidden him, 2 Samuel 16.11.
Consider if thou have not offended thy Maker, and provoked him to Excite
Enemies against thee; if upon thy Inquest thou find out the Sin thou
stand guilty of; hasten and make thy Peace betimes with him. Think not thy
self Competent for greater Matters, and all others Inferior to thee: That
Pride is like Tinder in the Heart, where every Spark is apt to foment
Indignation, and kindle Anger's Fire. Be ever Composed rather to bear an
Injury, than to Retaliate it: Indeed it is grievous to suffer; but it is
dangerous to requite it: Seeing God says, Vengeance is mine, Deuteronomy. 32.35.

2. MAKE a right use of all injuries: Let them be as so many Exercises to thy
Wisdom, Meekness and Patience; And then thine Enemy shall study to be thy
Friend: So that thou may express that with Verity, which Demosthenes affirmed
but Ironically, at his sentence of Banishment: Thy Enemies are so Courteous,
that it is a very hard task to find anywhere so good Friends. Be angry with
Evil, and imitate the Example of Moses the meekest man, who was so provoked
with the Idolaters, that he exposed many of them to the Sword, Exodus 32.19.
Basil fitly compared this anger to a Dog which Barks at Strangers, chases away
Wolves, and other Instruments of Evil, but forgets not to fawn on his Master.

3. SUFFER not Anger to be of a long Duration, lest it Engender into Malice;
but take St. Paul's advise, Ephesians. 4.26. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath,
neither give place to the Devil. As he must do, who sleeps with his Anger,
which indeed is the Devils Anvil on which he Forgeth his Mischiefs. When we
compose our Bodies to rest, we commonly secure our Fire from doing any harm;
and why should we be so Negligent of that Precious Part, the Soul, as to sleep
with this fire of Hell in our Bosoms? We are ignorant, when we close our Eyes,
whether we shall ever open 'em in this World, or have any time to agree with
our Adversary, before we appear at the great Tribunal.

4. ACT nothing in furious Anger; but endeavor to allay it. A Prudent Man,
will not put to Sea in a Storm, but will wait in Expectation of fair Weather:
So in Anger we must expect Calm Affections before we can act any thing
prudently: We have a frequent Proverb, and not unfit here to be used, that, a
hasty man can never want Woe: And Solomon furnishes us with many, pertinent to
our Purpose, Eccles. 7.9. Be not hasty in thy Spirit to be angry: And Prove. 12.
16. A Fools wrath is presently known, and he that is slow to anger appeaseth
strife, Prove. 15.18. And St. James gives this candid advice, in his Epistle,
Chap. 1.19. That we should be slow to speak, slow to wrath.

5. THAT Advice was good which the Philosopher Prescribed to Caesar, When you
are angry, answer not, until you have first Repeated the Letters of the
Alphabet: By that time the Choler being a little digested, his Judgment might
be Recollected, whose sudden Excursion out of its Seat of Passion leaves a
Man an Incompetent Judge; for it is natural to frail Mortality to think them
evil, whom they have any Antipathy against. Architas Considered well, when he
said to his offending Servant, It Is well for you that I am angry: And Socrates,
who in like case said, I would beat thee, but that I am angry. Other Passions,
in Extremes, discompose the Mind, but anger Precipitateth it: To be a Master of
other Affections, demonstrateth him very Moderate; but to gain a Conquest over
Anger declares him to be Prudent.

6. IN no Passion do we more lose our Friends, our Advantages, our Judgment,
our Selves; nor give an Enemy more Advantage, than in Anger. He is a Fool that
can be angry at nothing; and he Wise who will not at every thing: It is as
great a Virtue to Conquer thy Self, as it is to encounter with the fiercest
Lion: He made a good choice who chose rather the Meekness of Moses, than the
strength of Sampson: He that has vanquished his Anger, has gained the Victory
over a dangerous Enemy. Allay and overcome thine Anger with Reason, that
chasing it with due Revenge, it may prove Justice 's Handmaid, not its
Mistress.

7. DID we Consider the dangerous Effects it brings, we would hasten and wean
our selves from it. I shall Endeavor to give you a Catalogue of some of the
accomplices of Anger, and then tell me whether it be not a Passion of a
Pernicious Consequence: To begin, it is a short madness, differing from it only
in point of time; it distorts the Countenance, precipitates the Mind, and so
disturbeth the Reason, that, for the time, it converts Man to a Beast: From
hence prceed, the Unguarded Mouths, Unbridled Tongues; Reproaches, Calumnies,
Contumelies, Conflicts, and Fruits of Fury spring from that Fountain: This
whets the Sword, and breaks the Sacred Bands of Nature and Religion, provoking
men at that height by their Assasinations to be Butchers of Men.

7. OBSERVE how a sudden Deluge, sweeps along the Verdant Fields, and destroys
the Husband-mans most flourishing Hopes; even so rusheth the most impious
deluge of Anger into the Mind, covering dangerously for the time, if not
drowning the fairest Plants of Virtue, Wisdom and Temperance, under that
bitterness of Mind, and breathing of Revenge, leaving neither Venerable Age,
Tender Youth, nor any thing Sacred or Unspar'd. It depriveth thee of Council,
renders thee Obnoxious to thy Friends, exposes thee to thine Enemies, and
makes thee altogether Fruitless; when Patience and Mildness would leave better
Impression and Root, then the best Precepts sowed in Storms: In short, it makes
thee assume the shape of an Unjust Judge, who Correctest thy Child, or Servants
Fault with a greater fault of thine own Intemperance.

8. DESIRE and Anger are the worst Counselors; they not only disturb the Soul,
but deform the whole Frame of the outward Man: Could the angry man but take a
Prospect of himself, and steadfastly behold, what change that Passion works in
his Countenance, its impossible he could be Enamoured with that Distemper: He
would find it as much altered from its Native Beauty, as the Face of the
Thundering Sky, differs from the lovely Serene, or the Enraging Boisterous Sea
does from a Pleasant Calm: Plato advised his Scholars, when they were Angry, to
look into a Glass: And if ever the Odious Spirit of Satan looked out of the
Windows of Man's Face, it is in his Exhorbitant Anger: What a Deformity does it
Operate in the Divine Soul, Obvious to the Eye of God? It brings along with it
the same disadvantage, as those Dogs of the Profane Donatists, whom they fed
with the Bread of the Holy Eucharist; for which they escaped not, without an
evident Sign of Gods Justice; for the Dogs were so Inflamed with Raging Madness
that they fastened upon their own Masters, as Strangers and Enemies, Tearing
them with Revenging Teeth: Even so it often comes to pass that impious Anger,
destroys the Angry.

9. HE that can by a Regular Reason, Bridle his Anger, reaps great Advantage:
First, In Point of Pacification, according to Solomon's Counsel, Prove. 15.1. A
soft Answer turns away Wrath. Secondly, In respect of Victory; for as the
Patient Man enclineth the Prudent as Witnesses to his Party; So that shall more
Foil the Outrageous and Violent with Meekness, than by Retaliation of Injuries
and Contumelies: In which Sense, what Solomon says, confirms it for a Truth, A
soft Tongue breaks the Bone, Prove. 25.15. Next, thy Council better recovereth
its Seat by thy forbearance, and thou losest nothing of thy Interest, by
delaying that which thou once must express, or act. To conclude, in the most
just Occasions of Anger, remember God's indulgence with thee: Be not like that
Evil Servant, who having found much Mercy would show none, lest thy Judgment be
equivolent, Matthew. 18.34.

10. MALICE is the Venom of the Old Dragon; Satan's bitter Influence on the
Wicked, and his lively Image in them. It is the Fire of Hell breaking out on
the Men of this World: It is the Mother of Revenge, and Symptom of an
Unregenerate Heart, the Affection of a Reprobate Mind, the Devils Leaven, which
must be purged out of those, who will Communicate with Christ our Passover.
Malice, is the Fuel of God's Anger, and an Obstruction to his Mercy, who cannot
justify the Malicious, for what he has said is just and true, Mat. 6.15. If ye
forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive you. And
seeing it is wholly disagreeable with the Love of God; therefore it is
impossible, as St. John says, To Love God, and hate thy Brother, 1 John 4.20.
Concerning which, I need prescribe no other Rule, than this; If Malice possess
thy Heart, then desert all Pretenses and immediately cast it out, if ever thou
hopest to enter into that Kingdom, where inhabits all Love, Peace and
Tranquillity, with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory.

CHAP. X. Of Envy.
ENVY is an inveterate Grief at others Welfare and Prosperity; and an Evil
Perturbation of the Mind, so odious, that to expose it to View, is a Motive
sufficient to make us loath and detest it: It is a Tare of the Wicked 's
sowing, and worthy of Divine Revenge and Punishment; it is an impediment to
Piety, a path to Hell, and a secluder from the Kingdom of Heaven: It is a
Pernicious Attendant to Posterity, A Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, Eccles.
4.4. A Fruit of Unregeneration, Romans 1.29. It is the Daughter of Self-Love and
Pride, the Result of Carnal Minds, 1 Cor. 3.3. A Work of the Flesh, Gal. 5.21.
It is an Obstruction of Edification, and Growth by the sincere Milk of Gods
Word, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2.

2. IT is a Blasphemous Censure of the Most High, whose Judgment it
dissalloweth, secretly Murmuring and Repining at his Providence, who Wisely
Disposes of all things in Heaven and Earth, Setting up and pulling down, and
distributing to every one, according to his good Pleasure, Dan. 4.25. To
display it farther, it is a Diabolical Wisdom, a Companion of Confusion and
every evil Work, James 3.14, 15, 16. It is the mischievous Canker, which
nippeth the choicest Buds of Virtue, attempting either to cloud them with
Incredulity, by reason the Envious cannot attain thereto, or laboring to blast
them with impious Calumnies.

3. I need not here cite the Example of Antigones, and Teutamus, Conspiring
against the truly Noble Eumenes; or of Philip's Sycophants against Aratus: Nor
of Domitians envying Agricola his worth: Nor Readiness envying David, Cain Abel,
Rachel her Sister, the Patriarchs Joseph: Seeing it is manifest that Christ
Jesus, in whom were all Perfections, was envyed. There 's nothing so little,
but stimulateth it: Nothing so Sacred or High, but this Hellish Fury will fly
at. Joseph's Party-colored Coat awakened it, and it was vigilant to strike at
the Savior of the World: The Natals hereof were in Lucifer, envying God's
Monarchy, and ambitious to share in his Sovereignty.

4. NATURAL Historians acquaint us of some Countries free from Serpents; but
who can inform me of any barren of Envy? I doubt it is the common Plague that
visits all places: Like those Croaking Plagues of Egypt, which did not spare
Pharoahs Bedchamber; it deludeth the Country with False Optics, thinking our
Neighbors Fields more Fruitful than our own: It Is a Monster; not of Gods
making, but born of depraved Affections, as Anger, Fear, Jealousy, Self-Love,
which creates Indignation, if another attain to a Happy and Prosperous
Condition: Envy thinks all the World too little for its own Orifice: All this
avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings
Gate; said ambitious Haman in his Envy, Esth. 5.13. And again, To whom would
the King delight to do Honor more than to my self, Chap. 6.6.

CHAP. XI. Arguments to be Considered, by way of Dissuasion against Envy.
THAT Envy hurts the Invidious most, is apparent, that there is not a greater
Torment invented by the worst of Tyrants: Nothing can be more unjust to others,
nor nothing more just to themselves. The Serpent's Poison infecteth not
himself; but Envy proves fatal to them that embrace it: For as the Moth eats
the Garment which breeds it; and as the Rust consumes the Iron, so Envy preys
upon the Mind that entertains it. It is more Miserable that can be expressed;
for it is not only afflicted with its own Misfortune, but it is disquieted at
others Exhiliration: Whatever is a Pleasure to others, is but a Torment to him.
Another Man's Store, is the Envious Man's Want; another Man's Health, is his
Sickness; and another Man's Praises, his reputed Dishonor.

2. OTHER Sins have some Remisness, Anger will waste it self in time: Hatred
may be extinguished in the end, but Envy never cease: Fierce Lions are Tamed
and become Tractable, but the Envious grow worse and worse. The more Christ did
good to the Jews, curing their Sick, healing their Infirm, and bestowing the
words of Eternal Life upon them, the more destructively did they Envy him. It
is the Canker that blasteth Friendship: The corruption of Life and plague of
Nature. It is the Devil's incentive to Rebellion, who when he could not in his
Malice hurt God, assailed Man: For it instigated Cain to Murder his Brother
Abel; and the Jews to Crucify the Savior of the World.

3. BESIDES, it has irrational Effects: It would stop up the Fountains, and
vail the Sunbeams: It regards neither bounds of natural Civility, or
Religion. Rachel Envied her Sister, Genesis 31. Jacob's Sons their Brother Joseph,
Genesis 37.11. The Jews, the very Preaching and Hearing the Gospel, Acts 13.45. It
is the rottenness of the Bones, Prove. 14.30. It slays the Silly, Job 5.2. And
lastly, it excludes from Heaven; for what should Envy lay claim to so blessed
a Habitation; where there is nothing but love and rejoicing in each other's
Happiness?

4. FURTHERMORE, it is a perverse Distemper of a diseased Mind, rendering the
Envious his viewing of the good of others, as it were with sore Eyes grieved
with seeing. It delights and triumphs in Men's Miseries: As Flies feed
themselves upon others Ulcers, so the Envious propose to themselves a pleasant
Entertainment by Discoursing upon others Misfortunes and Afflictions: And to
set a gloss upon their Hypocrisy, they will sometimes personate the
Compassionate and Merciful, and like subtle Alchymists, pretend to Extract
Pity, when indeed it is only to stretch their Malice to a larger Extent, by
which means it might not be acquainted with any Limitations.

5. SOMETIMES Proteus like, they will pretendedly act on the Theater of
Justice; then will they seem zealous of Laws, and due Punishment of
Delinquents, when indeed they do but pervert Judgment into Wormwood, and Kill
or Rob by Authority, whom they durst not Assassinate or Assault by the Sword,
or open Violence. Sometimes they will assume larget pretenses of Sanctity,
appearing like the Devil at Endor, in the Prophet Samuel's Mantle, performing
some things externally good, whereby they may atchieve some greater Evil. Even
so the false Apostles Preached Christ, of mere Envy to St. Paul, that they
might add more affliction to his Bonds, Phil. 1.15, 16.

6. IT is at best but a fruit of the Flesh, Gal. 5.21. Mere Folly, Tit. 3.3.
Devilish, Sensual, Earthly, St. James, 3.14, 15. A dangerous Signal of a
Reprobate Mind, given up to Destruction, Romans 1.28, 29. The most that Envy can
acquire toward its own Satisfaction, is to Mourn when others Rejoice, and
possibly to hurt Temporally, with its own external Destruction of Body and
Soul. To define it further, It is no better than the Spirit of Satan reigning
in the Envious.

7. THIS Mischief sometimes craftily steals on incautious good Men: As Joshua
was Envied, for Moses's sake, Number. 11.28, 29. And the Psalmist confesses, My
feet, says he, were almost gone, for I was Envious at the foolish, when I saw
the prosperity of the Wicked, Psalm. 73.2, 3. The Prophet Jeremiah and Habakkuk,
were a little infected with this Contagion, which the Scripture as a Monitor,
admonishes all Men to beware of that Snare, which entrapped such good Men.

8. THE acts thereof are inconsistent with right Reason, if we respect the
Supreme Giver of that which stimulateth Envy; for how irrational a presumption
is it in Man, to control the providence of God? If Jacob's Eyes wax dim with
Age, and would not permit his dear Joseph to alter the Imposition of his Hands,
or to transpose the Blessing at his pleasure, how much less will the all-seeing
God, permit the Envious Man to pervert his Hands? Next we must respect the
quality of the Envied; Is he Evil whom thou Enviest? Then thy Compassion is
summoned to pity him, because his Sin represents him more Wretched than all the
World can do. Is he Good? How guilty then must thou be in Envying his Felicity?

CHAP. XII. Remedies against Envy.
ENDEAVOR to put on Christ, and then thou art sure to chase away Envy. It is
the Apostle's Rule, Romans 13.13, 14. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in
Strife and Envying, but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision
for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof. Strive by a Holy imitation, to
follow the Example of thy Lord and Master, who was meek and lowly in Heart, and
envied no Man, Matt. 11.29. Christ loved all respectively: For Love envieth
not, 1 Cor. 13.4. If we love for the sake of him who first loved us, we shall
never be perplexed for any competent Blessings he in his good pleasure bestows,
but should rather wish them greater: We shall wash off that guilt of
undervaluing others, and abandon that presumption of over-rating our selves;
and this sort of Ambition which acts contrary to these Remedies, reigns only in
the Dominion of the Envious.

2. THE Meek Moses was so free from Pride and Ambition, that he reprehended
those that Envied for his sake; and wished that all God's People could
Prophecy; and besought the Lord, that he would put His Spirit upon them, Number.
11.29. Discipline thy self in God's School, for there is the best and safest
cure of Emulation. It was a Paradox to David, Psalm. 73.16. Until says he, I
went into the Sanctuary of God; then understood I their end. There thou may
learn not to value Transitory things too much; to consider well his Hand, which
sets up, and pulls down: To refer all thy Desires to the advancement of
his Glory; and humbly to acknowledge, and in a high manner express thy
thankfulness for those favors of Providence he has conferred on thee; having
the possession of these thoughts, thou may quite Banish Envy.

3. NEXT consider where thou placest thy Enmity. The Psalmist found in the
Sanctuary, that his Enemies were not to be Envyed: Surely, said he, thou did
set them in slippery places: Thou castedst them down to Destruction, Psalm.
73.18. Let not this Memento flip out of thy Mind, That God mixeth Bitter with
Sweetness to all in this Life. One has great Riches, but no Child to enjoy it;
nor perhaps a generous Heart to make use of those goods of Fortune God has
been pleased to bestow upon him; Another is in perfect Bodily Health, but his
Soul may be sick unto Death: Others contrive and hoard up Wealth, but with such
a seared Conscience, that the poorest Saint is incomparably more happy. Another
is advanced to Honors, perhaps only to make his Fall the greater. Another in
diverse respects may be very Prosperous in the Eye of the World; but may
resemble the Moon, who is most tenebrous toward Heaven, when she Illuminates
the Earth. So it is with Man very observable. that the greater Luster they
shine with in the Eye of the World, the more despicable they are in the sight
of Heaven; for God abhors all those Pomps and Vanities, and lays up such
severe Judgments for the Owners, that a Soul in the midst of Torments is as
proper an Object of Envy, as the glittering Shadows, who are hasting thither.

4. O let us not forget then that we are Brethren, Members of one Body, whereof
Christ Jesus is the Head; therefore let us with all Gentleness and Meekness
take St. Paul's advice, Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if a Man be over-taken in a Fault,
restore such a one in the Spirit of Meekness, considering thy self, lest thou
also be tempted. Let us support one another through Love, and mutually rejoice
at each others Happiness; and by these means we shall cast away the works of
Darkness, Strife and Envy.

CHAP. XIII. Of Impatience.
IMPATIENCE is a Distemper of the Mind, proceeding from several Causes, as
Indignation, Anger, Envy, Sorrow, apprehension of Injuries, Affliction, deluded
Hopes, and the like. As the diseased Body cannot endure Heat or Cold; so an
impatient, and discontented Mind, cannot comply with Prosperity, or Adversity.
Every present Estate seems uneasy, wanting a true relish to make it
palatable; it is not only a Guilt, but a Punishment of the Sin of Ingratitude
against God; Therefore the Almighty threatened to send them trembling Hearts,
Sorrow of Mind, and pendulous Thoughts, and Fears, Deuteronomy. 28.65, 66, 67. In the
Morning thou shall say, would God it were Evening: and at Even thou shall say,
would God it were Morning.

2. SICK of this wayward Distemper was he, who being at Rome, liked Tyber best,
but when at Tyber gave Rome the Preference; the sick Person shifteth Rooms and
Beds, as the wounded Heart flies from Brake to Brake, but can find no ease,
whilst the fatal Arrow, that Messenger of Death sticks fast in his side. So it
is observable Malcontents waver, between contempt of the present, and vain
hopes of the future. But Coelum, non animum mut at, he transmueth the Air, not
his Mind; that crosses the Ocean. Wherever thy Progress is, thy Mind bears
thee company, and according to its Malignancy, a proportionable Remedy must be
applied.

3. TRIVIAL matters does not perturb the the Healthy, but a small Accident
discomposeth the Sick. The sound and strong Man can rest any where, but to the
infirm, a Bed of Gold, or Wood, produces the same ease; and a rich Palace, or a
poor Cottage, affords him equality of rest. So it is observable, a fixed and
stable Mind will rest contented any where; he is become a Proficient, and can
say with St. Paul, I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
Content, Phil. 4.11. And a Mind so serene and calm, is Health to the Sick,
Enlargement to the Prisoner, and far excells a Kingdom to the Possessor;
whereas the impeteous Mind is troubled and discomposed with every trifle. I do
well, said pievish Jonah, to be angry even unto death, Jonah 4.9. And all this
Morosety was but for a poor Gourd, when at that juncture he ought to have been
more concerned at so many thousand Lives, which were near Destruction.

4. TO cure this, no Cataplasm Externally applied can afford any Operation; but
it must be a Catholicon Internally used, which must purge the Mind of these
Malignant Perturbations which disaffect it, and to strengthen it by a right
Informatio^ of the Understanding, and rectifying the distempered Affections,
until the Mind enjoy a Calm of Patience. And indeed Patience is a Magnanimous
Virtue, and attended with a Train of ^piritual Qualifications* First, It is
Afflictions Cordial, and Despair Antidote, the Daughter and Nurse of Hope, Romans
8.25. And the Saints Communion with Christ, Rev. 1.9. It is the way to the
Inheritance, Heb. 12.1. The Seal of Salv^tion, 2 Pet. 1.10. A Symptom of Fait^
and Hope in Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Patienc^ is an Equanimity in bearing
Adversity; an^ a Fruit of Charity: And the Apostle gi^^ you this Certificate,
That the Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Ga^ 5.22. And
Charity suffers long, 1 Cor. 13.4.

5. IMPATIENCE is a Perturbation of the Mind, a Self-corroding, Tormenting
bitterness of the Soul, proceeding from Impotency, or Levity of Mind: A secret
contest with, and repining at the Providence of God. It is the absurdity of
Rich Men, and the vexation of the Poor: The Mother of Despair, and sad fury of
the Internal habitation; every Room, and Recess thereof, it disturbeth with
hideous Cries, like Ziim and Ohim, doleful Beasts in the Desolations of
Babylon, Isai. 13.21.

6. IT is a folly and sober distraction, wherein the deseased Mind rejects
all wholesome Prescriptions; it Rebelleth against the Physician, and lacerateth
open its own Wounds; it is an Heart-corroding canker, the internal Man's Woolf,
which devoureth that which feeds it; the Worm which gnaweth the Soul, which
Prometheus-like, cherishes the Vulture which afflicts it, and delights in
that which grieves it: Nor is the best of Men free from this Distemper, for
David with his Soul made this inquest, Why art thou so sad, O my Soul, and why
art thou so disquieted within me, Psalm. 43.5.

7. OUR Blessed Savior, who was free from Sin, who bare all our Sorrows, in
the sense of his Father's wrath, acknowledged, that his Soul was heavy to the
death: And wrestling with that most unknown Passion, cried out upon the Cross,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He could no otherwise be sensible of
Hell Torments, (due to us) in his Humane Soul, than by losing the present sense
of the Deities Assistance, which wheresoever it is, makes Eternal Happiness: He
lost in that Agony a present sense, not an Indeficient Interest: For even then,
he called God, his God; which Demonstrated a vast distance between the
Impatience, of Desperate and Irrecoverable Sinners, and the Estate of those
Good Men who are under Tribulation for the Infirmity of their Souls: The just
Man may be compared to the Israelites, marching with the Egyptians through the
Red Sea, where there is a way opened to their Promised Rest, but the Waters
return with a full force and drown the Enemy.

8. AS to this Malady we must not plead ignorance, but be sensible that it
grows Gradually: First, In unadvised Anger mix^ with Sorrow; which are the
Seminaries of Impatience: Next, it goes forward, to a dislike of every Accident
and Estate; from thence to an internal Repining: So like a Gangren, it invadeth
the Souls Vitals, Hope, Content, and a Cheerful dependence upon God's
Providence, and then marches forward to violent Despair; so that it behooves a
Man highly to prevent this danger by checking its Primitive Motions; and
learning to make a Prudent use of every Affliction, and to Expel all those
discomposed Thoughts which nourish it; likewise to practice in the whole Course
of Life, that Christian Patience, and Moderation, which becomes those, who
depend on the Providence of God: Some Motives to it, I shall show in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. XIV. Motives to Patience and Contentedness.
FIRST, God Commands us, by his Holy Apostle in several places; as Romans
12.12. 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. 1 Timothy 6.8. Heb. 13.5. And David earnestly persuades us to
this duty, Psalm. 37. from the first, to the fourteenth Verse. Secondly,
Consider well the disadvantages of Impatience, and the Advantages of Patience;
Seneca was of that good Opinion, that no man could be happy who did not think
himself so: It imports not what thy Condition is, if thou think it evil? The
Patient Man is happy in every Estate; because God will hear him, Psalm. 40.1.
And the Wise Man gives this Result, Eccles. 7.8. The Patient in Spirit is
better than the Proud in Spirit. And the Apostle gives us this assurance, Romans
2.7. That the Lord will give him Eternal Life. And the Evangelist gives us this
Encouragement, by Patience a Man possesses his own Soul, Luke 21.19. All
Affliction to him is but a wholesome Bitter Potion, which he freely swalloweth,
as being prescribed to Operate his Cure, and to produce him the quiet Fruits of
Righteousness, Heb. 12.11. The Apostle likewise tells you, 1 Timothy 6.6. That
Godliness with Contentment is great gain.

2. PATIENCE allays a ponderous burden, and makes it easy; and therein
defeateth the adverse Party; the product of whose Injury is the Perplexity and
Impatience of the injured. When Job Exercised his Affliction with Patience,
Satan was foiled at his own Weapon. As Ballast, if it be well placed that it
cannot move, or shoot, the Sailing Ship Rides secure; but if otherwise, she is
Foundred: Even so it is with Patience in the Soul. It was a Blessed Victory
obtained at Job's first encounter, at which the Angels of Heaven could do no
less than give a Plaudite; for when Satan had fully charged him with all his
Machinations, and Job had received all those fierce Blows on his Shield of
Patience; he made this meek Reply, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away;
Blessed be the Name of the Lord: And the Holy Ghost thus testifies, In all
this Job sinned not, Job 1.21, 22. And Job was happy in being so great a
Victor; and happy are all they who imitate that invincible Patience in their
sufferings.

3. THOSE who are Impatient, must submit to that Term of being Evil; and the
Almighty will not lend an Ear to them: They are by every Condition made worse,
being Authors of their own misery; and make their own Burdens intolerable, by
striving under that, which no violence can cast off: They are Satan's Captives,
introducing their Fretful Impatience only to adorn his Triumphs; they prove
scorns to Men, who can no less than deride, if not loath that Morosity, and
peevish Waywardness, which causes the Impatient malecontent neither to enjoy
Friends nor himself. An Example we have of that Mirror of Impatience Diogenes
the Cynick, who being Asked by Alexand^r the Great, if he lacked any thing; to
which he Morosely Replied Yea, I do, Stand out of my Light. Now whether he
embraced this Churlish Humor, to profess himself a Votary to his own Passions,
or to lay Claim to an equal Capacity and Right of Contemning his Friends
Greatness, as much as he slighted his Poverty; that I cannot Expostulate: But
he chose rather to Inhabit in a Tub, than expect the delayed Beneficence of him
that promised to build him a House: And certainly by this his Impatience, he
reaped no Advantage.

4. CONSIDER that Momentary Afflictions are of no Duration: If all the World,
Men and Devils, Conspired to vex and molest thee, they could not long make thee
an Object of their Fury and Malice. The Apostle like a good Prognostic
foretells our Necessities, Heb. 10.37. Ye have need of Patience, that after ye
have done the will of God, ye might receive the promises: For yet a very little
while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Then Blessed are
all they, who with meekness and a patient Confidence expect him. Be therefore
Patient, Stablish your hearts: For the coming of the Lord draws nigh, James
5.8. Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning, Psalm.
30.5. However the longest day as its due must accept of a period: And the most
tedious misery of a good Christian shall have such a Counsumation as may render
him happy.

5. CONSIDER the extent of thy suffering: Perhaps thou art envied without
Cause: Thou owe thanks to God for that Conformity to his dear Son: Thou art
Oppressed, Plundered, Imprisoned, Exiled: But yet thou have not resisted unto
Blood* Thou art Listed, and Enrolled a Soldier under Christ's Banner; in whom
Believing and Patiently bearing Trial, thou can not miscarry; and do thou
Recoil at those Military Charges, which have not exposed thy Life to danger?
What if Heavens General drew thee out, and posted thee for one of the Forlorn
Hope of Martyrdom, and the Fiery Trial? Would thou desert the Service? Or
complain of Danger?

6. CONSIDER nothing is befallen you, but what is common to many: Paulus
Aemilius well observed in his sudden Victory over Perseus, that there is
nothing durable in this World: Do thou in the loss of some Secular Comfort,
Cry with the afflicted. Church, behold, and see, if there be any sorrow like
unto my sorrow, Lam. 1.12. If it be any comfort to have Partners in mighty Woe,
consider well that thousands of others suffer at a higher rate: As he said,
who, to Comfort an Embittered Friend, as they beheld a Populous City from the
House Top, considered how many heavy Hearts, and weeping Eyes, are now under
these Roofs? From hence may be Learned, that in thy afflictions, thou art not
singular.

7. CONSIDER that many good Christians excelling thee in Perfections, have had
a greater share of Afflictions than thou could undergo: And St. James makes
no scruple in his 5 Chap. v. 11. But that ye have heard of the patience of Job:
And therein the issue of Patience: God delivered him to Satan: Behold he is in
thine hand, Job 2.6. Yet all that the Devils Malice could Inflict upon him,
redounded the more to Illustrate his Happiness: For the Almighty had Pronounced
him Righteous, and knew his Strength was of that Extent, loud enough to
proclaim him a Champion. If Saul was unwilling to expose David to an unequal
Conflict, shall we think the Almighty would hazard us, if we were not certain
to gain the Conquest? He will not venture thee into the Lists, without his
Grace, which makes thee invincible: He views thy Trials with delight, and has a
Proportionable reward always ready.

8. THEREFORE be not deceived nor discouraged, they are not miserable, whose
Sufferings are ample: It Is honorable to receive Wounds in War; for Scars are
Honors Characters, written in the Face and Breast of the Valiant: Enquire into
thy own Heart, and then thou can not but express thy Thankfulness, for his
afflicting thee so lightly; for no Man is so miserable as wicked. Consider the
issue of Afflictions, and the end why God afflicts thee. The Physician
prescribes not bitte^ Pills, nor does the Surgeon exercise his Lance^ or
Cautery to kill, but to cure the Patient. So God does not delight in the death
or affliction of a Sinner, but he permits thee to wee^ now, to prevent
Eternal Weeping hereafter* It is not thy Misery that affects him, but the
Health; and he prescribes such bitter things as are proper to thy Malady; and
if lenitiv^ Physic, or a less quantity would effect the operation, he would
not have exhausted one dra^ or scruple more than he thought necessary.

9. PATIENTS undergo much under Physicians Skills, when their promising helps
ar^ uncertain; how much rather ought we pat^ently to submit our selves under
the Hand (...) God, who will not fail of his promise to us* But upon serious
Consideration, thou reportest that this Objection will arise, That tho^
invocatest him for help, and he hears not: T^ which I answer, That it is
God's infinit^ Mercy not sometimes to hearken to thy request, but to fulfill his
own Will and Pleasure in order to thy Salvation. Thus the Almighty, who is the
great Physician of Souls, deals indulgently with all his Patients.

10. SEEING then Calamity is often the Discipline of Virtue; Shall his Stomach
be averse to the Antidote, who greedily swallowed down the Poison? All
Impatience receives its Nativity from Satan, who Conspires by all his
treasonable diabolical Arts to poison the Soul of Man, and to plunge him into
the Pit of Despair, and by Rebellion to murmur at the taste of the Marahs of
Affliction; For it is very infallible, that Satan envies the Image of God in
Man, and is displeased when God bestows his Favors on frail Mortality. Strive
therefore in storms of Misery, to calm thy Mind, and be patient under every
Affliction; which that thou may the better do, observe these Rules laid down
in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XV. Rules for Contentment.
LOVE and Honor God above all things, and thou will not repine at any order of
his Providence. It was the saying of Old Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.18. When we express our love to God in a regular
Manner; we shall truly discern that all his Judgments are Just, and what he
inflicts on us. His fatherly Corrections, are the Products of his Love and
Wisdom for our Amendment, who therefore corrects every Son, out of an earnest
Desire, that none should perish; and he that indulgeth himself to his pleasure,
profit, or ease, and omitteth his duty toward God, must needs be impatient of
any loss which may befall him. Next to thy Maker, love thy Neighbor as thy
self; and a trifling Injury shall not molest thy quiet.

2. LET us take the Apostles advice, to be content with Necessaries, 1 Timothy
6.8. Having Food and Raiment, let us be therewith content. And what can the
richest Treasures of Princes afford them more than Tranquillity of Mind? It was
a prudent Speech of that Indian King Taxiles, to the invading Alexander, What
occasion have we, said he, to fight and wage War one with another, if thou
come not to take away our Water, and our Necessaries, by which we must
subsist? As for other Goods, if I abound more in Riches than you, I am ready to
acquit some of them to you; and if I have less, I will not think scorn to
receive from you the like favor. And I would to God that all Societies of Men
were so happily composed.

3. FREQUENTLY and thankfully recount what God has done, and still does for
thee. Foolish Men by their Impatience, create an oversight, and look through
false Optics upon their happy Estates; and reversing often something to
nothing, by which means showers of Blessings are turned into Curses, which
brings a severe Doom upon themselves. It Is the part of a Fool rather to mourn
for a Loss, than rejoice for any Profit, or Gain. Many reckon what they are not
possessed of, not what they enjoy beyond many thousands that are dignified
because, prudential and more thankful: They imagine their morose Humor must not
be contradicted, and their Sweets must not be mixed with Bitter; but I may say
to them, as Job said to his Wife, tempting him, Thou speak as one of the
foolish Women; what, shall we receive good at the Hands of God, and shall we
not receive Evil? Job 2.10.

4. IN all Discontents look up to him, who is the Author and Finisher of our
Faith, Christ Jesus: Consider that he suffered and underwent what thou could
not perform; yet not for himself, for he knew no Sin; but it was to work thine
and the World's Salvation: If through Faith in him, thou can have Peace with
God, thou shall not only bear, but rejoice in Tribulation, knowing as the
Apostle says, that it works Patience, Romans 5.3. If thou will preserve
Innocence and a good Conscience, thou will advantageously acquire peace and
contentment of Mind, which shall Compose thee in the midst of Tumults in things
External: But as a Seditious City, or a Discorded House cannot be Happy; so a
discorded Mind, cannot be at Unity in it self.

5. KEEP within the Jurisdiction of thy proper Business, Employment, or
Calling. Undertake not, neither propound to thy self any thing too great for
thy Management. Overgrasping thy Hand, Enervates it, and torments it with
fruitless Pain: And aiming too ambitiously, crucifies the Heart, when they fall
from the Precipice of their vain Proposals. Art thou endowed with Riches?
Actively offer them to that use for which they were sent; which is God's Glory.
Is thy Fortune slender? Contract thy Mind within its Limits, which is to
Necessity, not Opinion: We read of a Philosopher in his Journey, which drank
Water in his Hand, and cried out, With how few Vtensiles is Nature content! I
could wish many would follow his Example, that they might enjoy that Peace and
Tranquillity of Mind.

6. BUT many become their own Tormenters and Authors of their own Discontents,
proposing such strange Fabrics of their Babels, erecting airy Castles and
Towers to Heaven; adding House to House, and Land to Land, Province to
Province, and Kingdom to Kingdom; chasing for their main Concernments in the
dangerous attempts of doubtful Adventures, Grandeur, and affluence of Riches.
They go Remote to find that which with Prudence may be produced at Home, in our
own Bosoms, which is to be satisfied in that which God has allotted for us,
with a contented Mind.

7. IT was remarked of Pyrrhus that active Epirot, that Fortune made him happy
enough with Sufficiency, to live Peaceably at Home, if he could have contented
himself only with the Sovereignty over his own Subjects: But his insatiable
Avarice, (which neither the Sea, Mountains, Inhabitable Deserts, nor the
Confines which separate Asia from Europe could Limit) instigated him
perpetually to seek out new matter of Trouble to himself and others: Which his
faithful Friend Cineas, did once Prudently, tho without Effect, intim^^^ (...)
him, whereupon new Overtures of honorable and profitable Undertakings for the
Tarentines, occasioned by Cineas Quaeres. Pyrrhus had said, When we have
Overcome the Romans, there can neither- Grecian nor Barbarous City in all the
Country withstand us, but we shall Conquer all the rest of Italy with Ease. And
what shall we do then, (said Cineas?) Pyrrhus replying, tells him of
Conquering commodious Sicily. Again he demanded, That being Won, shall our Wars
end? Pyrrhus replied, The way was then open enough to attain great Conquests,
and who would not afterward go into Africa, and so to Carthage? But when we
have all in our Hands, (said Cineas) what shall we do in the end? We will then
(good Cineas, said he) be quiet and take our Ease, make Feasts every day, and
be as Merry one with another as we can possibly. Cineas having brought him to
that point, said to him, My Lord, What hinders us now to be Quiet and Merry
together, since we enjoy that presently without farther Travel and Trouble,
which we should now go seek for Abroad with such shedding of Blood, and so
manifest Dangers? And we know not whether we shall ever attain unto it, after
we have both suffered, and caused others to suffer infinite Sorrows and
Troubles.

8. LEARN to obtain a faithful dependence on Gods Providence. This ground of
Content the Holy Ghost proposes, Heb. 13.5. Let your Conversation be (...)
Covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have; for he has said, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. When Men too much depend on second
Causes, they are impatient at every Cross. They would impiously prescribe God
the time, as Jehoram would, 2 Kings, 6.33. and rebellious Israel, Exodus 32.1.
Or in the Means, as Naaman, 2 Kings, 5.11. But in assurance that God will never
fail us, we must patiently expect his help. In every Affliction remember that
God beholds thee, and his Providence will give the issue with the Trial.

9. ART thou in Want, which excites thy Discontent? Then call to mind what thou
broughtest into this World, and what thou shall carry out: Thou have not such
Possessions, Houses, Riches, Apparel as some have; yet no Man lives so poor as
he was Born. This was that which that Exemplar of Patience said in all his
Losses, Naked came I out of my Mothers Womb, and Naked shall I return thither,
Job 1.21. So St. Paul makes it a ground of his Exhortation to Contentedness,
We brought nothing into this World, and it is certain we shall carry nothing
out, 1 Timothy 6.7. Kings and Princes are cast out Naked in the day of their
Nativity, and are beheld as Weeping little Masters of the World. The Great
Saladine will inform you what they carry hence; who ordered, that at his
Funeral one should carry a Shirt or Winding Sheet, on the Point of an advanced
Lance, and go before the Hearse and proclaim thus, Saladine the Conqueror of the
East, carries hence with him only this of all that he has gotten.

10. FEED not the bitter humor of Discontents, for the growths thereof are sad
and dangerous. Give not over thy mind to heaviness, and afflict not thy self in
thine own Counsel, Ecclus. 30.21. The exhileration of the Heart is the Life of
a Man, and prolongeth his days. Some Minds are like the Sea, which instantly
turns sweet Showers into its own Bitterness; because they indulge to
Impatience, pleasing themselves with that which tormenteth them: But the
prudent in every Affliction, elevate their Souls to God, seeking Comfort in
him, and consider of the Life to come; where there shall be no more Curse, Rev.
22.3. no more Discontent, but every Heart shall be filled with Joy.

A Prayer for Patience and Contentment.
MOST Gracious God, I humbly acknowledge thy fatherly goodness, in measuring to
me those Corrections which my Sins daily provoking thy Justice, most justly
deserve; and thy stupendous. Mercy in sparing me, whom in thy severity thou
might not only have made the most Miserable of all Men living, but might
have cast me into that Lake, which burns with Fire and Brimstone. Lord, as thou
have in a bleeding Jesus afforded me this Mercy, so for his sake blot out the
Handwriting of all my Offenses: Lay no more upon me than thou will enable me
to bear; and never suffer me, frail Dust and Ashes for any Temptation, to fall
from thee, but give me a blessed issue out of every Trial.

2. AND O holy Father, correct me not in thine Anger, lest I perish in thy
fierce Wrath; neither chasten me in thy heavy Displeasure, lest I am utterly
Consumed. Let thy Corrections work in me a true sense and detestation of all my
Sins; a filial fear to offend thee, and a fixed resolution to love and serve
thee more carefully for the future: To this end, I humbly beseech thee give me
assurance of my Justification by Christ's Righteousness; my atonement with
thee, and such a peace of Conscience, as the world can never give nor take from
me; that I may adore thee above all, and render thee a sincere thankfulness for
all thy Mercies Temporal and Eternal; Entertaining always in my Heart that
assurance of my Savior, who suffered such great great, things for me, that he
will not suffer me to fall under any of Satan's Conflicts.

3. LORD Sanctify all my Afflictions to me by thy good Spirit: Cast out of my
Soul all those Sins and Corruptions which lie lurking to betray me to Ruin: Let
the sum and height of my Ambition be only to be thine; give me a prudent and
contented Heart in every estate and condition, a faithful dependence on thy
Good Providence, in assurance that thou who have promised, will never fail me,
nor forsake me; that in every Affliction, I may expect thy gracious
Deliverance. Give me Patience and meekness of Spirit, that I may in the midst
of all my troubles, find rest to my Soul: Let not my Heart be fixed on
Transitory things, but on things which are above, where Christ my Peace,
sits at thy right hand making Intercession for me.

4. CHASE from me all Impatience, bitterness of Spirit, Diffidence, and the
secret Murmurings of Flesh and Blood. Let thy Holy Spirit, the Comforter, dwell
in me to keep and counsel me in all affairs and interests Spiritual and
Temporal: Let his joyful Presence so sweeten all those Marahs of Affliction
which thy Providence shall appoint in my way to the Promised rest. O let me
ever rejoice in thee, and in every Estate live cheerfully before thee, until
thou in thy good pleasure bring me unto the fullness of eternal Joys in thy
blessed Presence, where thou will wipe away all Tears from my Eyes: Make me
glad with the light of thy Countenance, and unite me to that Triumphant Society
of Saints and Angels, which in perfect Harmony Sing their Halelujahs to thee
Eternally, through Jesus Christ, my only Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
CHAP. XVI. Of Hope.
HE is not living in the World that is void of Hope: The Child hopes to arrive
to Manhood, the Aged to linger out a Year longer: The Poor hopes for Wealth;
the Sick for Health: The Imprisoned for Liberty: And the Afflicted that Joy may
be the Scene of the Morning: Hope induces the Husbandman to Sow, and Manure
his Ground, the weary Traveller to endure his tedious Ways, and the Experienced
Swimmer to spread his tired Arms upon the Death-threatning Waves: Thus is the
whole Span of Man's Life Employed, in Suffering and Hoping.

2. BUT in Hopes, there is a vast difference: As for Example, the Human vain
Hope is of all others the most pernicious: Such a Hope is but the Denomination
of an uncertain Good; it is a treacherous Guide, leading to desperate
Precipices; the Ignis fatuus of the Mind and the Waking Man's Dream. It was the
Tempters Artifice first to assail Man's Innocence, with vain hope grounded on a
lying Promise; without this flash of Vanity, Satan had never gained so many
Vassals. Imprimis, He shows the forbidden Fruit; and in a wicked Elegancy
Preached this Doctrine, In the day ye Eat thereof ye shall be as Gods, Genesis 3.5.
Thus was unhappy man caught by this alluring Bait.

3. SO he Accosted the Second Adam, the Lord of Glory, when he represented to
him the Kingdoms and Glory of the World, Matthew. 4.8. Satan still makes it is
his Business to give us a Prospect of false Heavens, to precipitate us into a
true Hell; suggesting vain hopes that he might deprive us of the real: There is
none commits the least sin, but a Train of vain Hopes attends it: Several
instances we have, as in Cain's Murder, Amnons Lust, Judas's Treason, or
Achitophel's Despair: The Sinner many times hopes for some other product of his
Resolutions, than from the Sin he transacts.

4. THE worst have not lost their hopes of some good; but all their wishes are
in vain: For the hopes of the Wicked are often frustrated, but the Justice of
the most just Judge cannot. We must expect from Reason's Providence; and when
Time's Glass is fully run, there must be something future, all which carries
the face of Goodness; yet so flattering a Liberty is Self-hopes, that every
man, especially the Juvenile, who are least acquainted with Fascination, and
Constant Inconstancy of the World, relying much on hope, and depending little
on Memory, promise themselves great things: But when the Malignants Sing
Requiems to their Souls, sudden Destruction is the more terrible in its
assault, by Reason it poured upon them unsuspectedly; The Hypocrites hope shall
perish; their hope shall be Sorrow of Mind, Job 11.20.

5. AND truly such is Worldly Confidence in an Evil Conscience: However it may
appear to have purchased thee A Covenant with death, and an Agreement with
Hell, Isai. 28.15. yet it will deceive thee: However it fawns, and promises
long Life, and vigor in an Arm of Flesh, and the vain Councels of Men, raising
thy Hopes to high Flights; yet they are but Phantasms of deluded Men, and
create an Eruption in the midst of their full Career, delivering up their Mind
to dangerous Convulsions; and by the Ascent, is cast down from so high a
Pinnacle, as renders the Fall the more desperate: How often do despairing
Wretches wish they had never hoped, when the vanity of it is plainly
Demonstrated, like Pharoah's Chariot-Wheels, they fall off, where they are most
deeply engaged, between Floods of returning Miseries, Exodus 14.25.

6. NOW I come to show you, there is a hope of the Righteous, which never
fails; this is a prudent Expectation of future Happiness; fulfilling of his
Promises who is Yea, and Amen, both in this Life, and that which is to come.
This is a Virtue infused into our Hearts by Gods Holy Spirit, who cannot
deceive, as the Psalmist confirms it, Psalm. 31.24. Be of good Courage, and he
shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord. The Eye of the Lord
is upon them, Psalm. 33.18. And they trust in him* who will certainly perform
his Promise And thrice happy are they in whom the Lord takes pleasure, their
Expectation shall be Gladness.

7. SOLOMON says, They have hope in death, Prove. 14.33. And the Apostle tells
you, they are saved thereby, Romans 8.24. Hopes in any Creature may be
frustrated, but hope in God makes not ashamed; for he is good to all them that
trust in him, Lam. 3.24, 25. This hope is not Humane, or Conjectural, liable to
Fraudulency, but Theologically grounded on the infallible Word of God, in whom
is only our Confidence, Psalm. 119.81. Now the Object of this Hope, is what God
has promised; Remission of Sins, Grace, Glory, and all things necessary for
this present Life, and the future; and the instrumental Motive is justifying
Faith, from whence it springs; for the Apostle tells you, Heb. 11.1. Faith is
the Substance of things hoped for. The supreme end, God's Glory; the
subordinate, our own Salvation, and present Comfort, whereby we may effectually
offer up our Thankfulness to God to who begets us again to a lively hope in
Christ, 1 Pet. 1.3.

8. St. John tells you in his first Epistle, 3.3. That he which has this Hope
is purified; and the Psalmist animates you, saying, It is an Expulsion of
servile Fear, Psalm. 5.6.4.5. As also a dependence on God, and casting all our
Care upon him, a Fortitude in bearing Afflictions, and a Joy in Adversity. The
Subject of this Hope, are God's Saints; Faith and Hope accord in the Cause, and
God's Spirit gives both; and in the certainty, as we believe, so we hope. All
they differ in is this, That Faith begets Hope, whereby Faith has the
Preference. Secondly, Faith beholds the the verity of God's Promises, Hope on
the Goodness of them; as Faith can entertain nothing but infallible Truth for
its Object, so Hope can enjoy nothing but Goodness. Faith apprehends the
Truth, and Hope patiently expects the fulfilling of it. Now the Object of this
Hope has four Qualifications, Good, Future, Difficult, and Possible.

9. GOOD: Whatsoever is contrary to it, may be an object of Fear, which has no
coherence with this Hope. Now whereas there is a real Good, so there is an
appearing or seeming one, which being not sincere, creates a vain, or impious
Hope; as if a Man hopes for Ease, Pleasure, Riches and Honors: These are not
Verities, nor good of themselves, but in their use; and so their hopes may be
vain and of no duration. A Man hopes a Revenge on his Enemy, a Satisfaction of
his Lusts, or the like. This Hope is impious, and not durable; and must in the
end render a Man unhappy. But if we hope for the Glory of God, our Soul's
Health and Comfort, or what is really good in it self; this is true Hope, and
shall attain to that height of Perfection, tho to transitory Eyes it seems not
to be durable; as when we invocate for some Temporal Things, which Omnipotency
discerns not to be agreeable to our Necessities, or for him to grant; as when
Christ prayed that the Cup might pass from him; and when Moses hoped to go into
Canaan, Christ was heard, and Moses not defeated of his hope, because in both
God decreed that which was best; and that is ever consistent with true Hope,
which gives not the Deity Prescriptions, but confidently expects, either what
it hops, or something better.

10. FUTURE Romans 8.24, 25. Joy is of things Present, or so represented; as when
we rejoice in Hope, Romans 12.12. Hope makes that present, by a Prepossession of
that which is to come; for Hope acts contrary to that which is present.
Difficult: Such are all things Excellent; perhaps deluded Hope makes it an
easy step to Heaven and Salvation. But they that indeed go that Path, shall
find it narrow, and environed with a World of Difficulties. Lastly, Possible;
That which is impossible to Carnal Reason, may be hoped for, because it is
possible to God; therefore Abraham believed above Hope: And we expect the
Resurrection of the Dead; and some things which sinful Men think possible, are
impossible.

11. ALL things are possible to Omnipotence, which he will perform; and he will
perform what he has Promised. But some things he disannuls, and so are
impossible. Omnipotency will not lie, nor be unjust; for that imports
Impotency, and is a declining of his Attributes: To hope that those
Asseverations God has pronounced concerning Supine Sinners, shall not be
accomplished, is a Hope altogether vain and fruitless; for it is impossible for
the Divine Majesty to be untrue: To be resolute in Sinning, and yet to hope for
Pardon, is a frivolous Hope, because it is impossible for God to be unjust; a
severe Lesson for Presumptuous Sinners, who resolve to enjoy their Lusts and
Pleasures, glut themselves with Revenge, and yet hope when this Life's Scene is
ended, the few Petitions of their Epilogue shall purchase favor.

12. IF thou go on in this Career, thou will be guilty of a gross Absurdity;
for if thou resolvest to Sin, and invocatest the Almighty to be Merciful, thou
do in effect beseech God to unthrone himself of his Justice, and to be
indulgent to an Impenitent Sinner. This being impossible, it concerns thee, to
arise from sleep, and shake off all vain and deluding Hopes, that thou may
fix on the true and never failing, which is the Anchor of the Soul, a laying
hold on the Land of the Living; it is the ease of Sorrows, Grief's Asswager,
Affliction's Comforter, and Despair's Antidote. Again, it is Faith's
Perspective; the Nebo where we take a view of the Promised Rest, and the
Faithful Spy to discover the Holy Land, bringing us the Tastes from Escoll, the
Fruits of the Spirit, the Possession which they hold, who enjoy no more, and
yet are Rich in all Things.

CHAP. XVII. Rules to govern our Hope.
IN order to this Governance, endeavor to fortify thy Mind with Resolution
and Sobriety; which will guide to Purity of Life. For every one that has this
Hope, purges himself as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. A true Hope, with a Resolution
to persist in any known Sin, is incompatible. The Devout Man's Hope never
fails, of which Seneca could say, That Fortune has often deserted the
Innocent, but good Hope never. Hope to the End; for the Perfection of that
Virtue is Perseverance. We must wait for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption
of our Body, Romans 8.23. Though deferred Hope disturbs the Heart; Though it
tarry, wait, for it shall surely come, Hab. 2.3. What ever Trials we undergo,
let us put on Job's Resolution, Chap. 13.15. Though he stay me, yet will I
trust in him. We belong to him that Redeemed us; If we hold fast the
Confidence, and the rejoicing of the Hope firm unto the End, Heb. 3.6.

2. THOUGH through Humane Frailty thou sometimes art assaulted with Fear; yet
be confident, and pursue the Psalmists Rule, who expresses, What time I am
afraid, I will trust in thee, Psalm. 56.3. Fear and Hope may inhabit together,
especially where the fear of the Lord does not abrogate Faith's Confidence, but
Carnal Security. Treasure up the Promises of God; to that intent were they
written, and divulged, That we through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures
might have hope, Romans 15.4. Fix not thy rest on this World, or place thy
Confidence on any thing in it; it is but comparable to a broken Reed, a slack
Rope, on the raging Sea, or a false Friend in Adversity; and like the
Quicksands, on which infatuated Builders lay their Foundations: As Moses told
Israel, Ye are not come to your rest, Deuteronomy. 12.9.

3. ALL temporal Enjoyments are liable to Vicissitudes, and no Constancy to be
found among the Sons and Daughters of Men. Prosperity is like a Fair Morning,
quickly overcast with hideous Storms; like the Morning Dew, soon vanishing; or
like a pleasant Flower, or a Jonah's Gourd; such are all Humane Enjoyments. So
that there is no sure Hope, but in the Almighty, who is immutable, neither
deceives those that trust in him; therefore, beware of vain Hopes, especially
those which are Irrational, (lest thou tempt the Lord) for they are fraudulent
to Men. Such is their Reliance who contemn the ordinary means in Expectation of
Miracles, and act contrary to the express Word of the most High, in vain hope
of obtaining a Pardon.

4. PROPOSE not too great things to thy self; for we are frequently the evident
Authors of our own Misfortunes, when we promise Peace, Health, and Prosperity
to our selves. This soaring Ambition's Wings are sometimes deplumed, and we
fall into bitterness, when we come short of that which to our selves we so
vainly promised. So that it were much better never to climb too high, than put
our selves in so much danger as falling from so great a Precipice; but rather
let us invoke the Great Being, who is the Author of our Hope, and the Donor of
all Consolation, to infuse a sure Hope and a steadfast Confidence, by a Divine
Inspiration into our Souls.

A Prayer for Hope.
O Almighty God, my earnest Expectation and Hope, my Fortress, Helper and
Deliverer; though my numberless Sins have deserved thy Wrath, insomuch as thou
may justly cast me off into hopeless Despair, and final Destruction; yet look
upon me with thy Eye of Mercy, through the Wounds of a bleeding Jesus, in whom
thou have commanded me to believe, and have promised Remission of my Sins, and
Eternal Life. For his sake alone I humbly beseech thee, give me that assurance,
that in the end, I may obtain my hope, even the Salvation of my Soul. And
though thou do now fill my wounded Spirit with Bitterness, and remove from me
Peace and Comfort, so that I forget my Prosperity, and go mourning all the day
long:

2. YET, O Lord, though thou humblest my dejected Soul, with ponderosity of
Sorrows, and make my Eyes fountains of Tears, driving me to Solitude and
Silence, with them that mourn in Zion; Yet thou do extend thy Goodness to
them that wait for thee, and to the Soul which seeks thee. Thy Mercies are
renewed every Morning, and thy Compassions fail not, to frail Dust and Ashes.
Thou have opened unto me the rich treasure of thy transcendent Mercies, and
enabled me to trust in thee: Thou have according to thy stupendous Mercy
begotten me again to a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of thy dear Son from
the dead, of an Inheritance Incorruptible: For all these Blessings my Soul has
acknowledged thee, to be my Portion; therefore will I trust in thee.

3. O Lord, I know, that the Hopes of the Hills are vain, and so is all
Confidence in frail Mortality; and no hope can be happy, which is not fixed in
thee. But in defiance to all Satan's devices, thrice blessed must he be, whose
hope thou art. He shall be like a Tree planted by the Waters of Life, which
shall never wither, but prosper; for thou art Truth it self. And O thou God, of
all Consolation, now speak Peace to my afflicted Soul, and let me not be
disappointed of my Hope. Thou art pleased to wean me from the Allurements of an
unkind and diffident World, by suffering me to endure such Grief and Sorrow;
yet seeing thou art my Hope from my Youth, let me not be ashamed of my
Confidence; let thy Mercy be still my Hope, and thy Grace my Strength; amidst
all the Storms and Surges of Affliction, fasten my Soul's Anchor on the Land of
the Living, my Rock, who is entered within the Vail, to make requests for me.

4. INVRE me with Patience, until the time of Comfort, and refreshing shall
return from thy gracious Presence. Give me the Helmet of Salvation, and an
Assurance of what thou have graciously promised in thy Word, and laid up for me
in Heaven. Let the Experience of thy former Goodness in many Deliverances give
me a Door of Hope for the future, that I may more and more trust in thee. And,
O thou, who art the God of Hope, fill me with Joy and Peace in Believing, that
I may abound in Hope, through the Power of thy holy Spirit. Give me a strong
Consolation, and full assurance of thy Mercy, that continuing grounded, and
established in a steadfast Hope of my Resurrection to a Life of Glory, at the
appointed hour, my Flesh may rest in Hope, and my Soul be cheerfully rendered
into thy Gracious Hands, to rest with thee, through Jesus Christ, my ever
blessed Lord and Savior.

Amen.
CHAP. XVIII. Of Fear.
FEAR is a pensive and anxious Expectation, of some danger approaching, either
Imminent, or a Supposition of appearing so. We are timorous at any Malevolency,
which is real, or apparent; and many times at that which proves not so. Fear is
opposite to Fortitude, as one extreme of Participation; and as it allayeth too
much Presumption by its limitation, it becomes beneficial; but when it exceeds
its Extent, it grows Pernicious. Virtue is absent, when Fortitude is not
present: And he can never express his Duty toward God well, or demonstrate his
Justice to the World, who acts contrary; for Satan is vigilant in his
diabolical Operations upon the Timorous, offering to his View continual Objects
of imposterous and vain Fears; like Hunters Suels to chase the fearful Deer
from the safe ways: So Satan driving through Pusilanimity and Timidity, that he
makes them Evil for fear of Men, whom the fear of God cannot make Good.

2. TO omit many acceptations of the Word: I shall only handle some few; First,
there is a natural Fear, and that of two sorts, in respect of the Object:
First, Concerning the avoidance of Sin, for the love of him who knew no Sin. It
happened so with Adam in his state of Innocence, who having heard the
Threatening, feared to Sin, signalizing he would not be guilty of offending his
Creator, whom he loved above all: But however Adam in the Temptation lost this
Fear, and so Sinned, yet in the rectitude of his Mind, he reassumed it.
Secondly, In relation to the avoidance of Sorrow in apprehension of God's Anger
against Sin committed. In this Christ Feared, Matt. 26.38. Heb. 5.7. He that
knew no Sin.

3. THE nearest to this, is the filial fear of the Regenerate, who tho through
Infirmity they frequently Sin, and fear to displease God by any Offense; as
Solomon declares, Prove. 8.13. The fear of the Lord is to hate Evil. This is the
beginning of Wisdom, and it is principally demonstrated in four things: First,
That we place God ever before our Eyes, moving as always in his Presence.
Secondly, That we acknowledge him as the Omniscient Witness and supreme Judge of
all our Thoughts, Words and Actions. Thirdly, That we fear not the Creatures,
as we do the Creator. Fourthly, That we ever perform that which is just and
acceptable to him; tho no Mortal Eye can testify against us, or the World may
be offended; yet let us follow those Patterns of Goodness, as Joseph, Daniel,
and many other Servants of the Most High.

4. THERE is a fear of Infidelity in them that love the Sin, but fear the
Punishment. This is that servile Fear which the Wicked affect; which tho
perhaps it may restrain them from sinful external Acts, yet it is not
predominant over any constant Duty: For no sooner their dread is vanished, but
they turn with as great eagerness in pursuit of their sinful Game, as the Dog
to his Vomit, or the Sow to her wallowing in the Mire. This fear is not
consonant to God's Children, because a guilty Conscience ever attends it, as
incredulity and expectation of God's just Judgments on their Sins, without
hoping and trusting in Christ's Merits. A Christian Fortitude dissipates Fears,
which made the Psalmist animate himself, Psalm 49.5. Wherefore should I fear in
the days of Evil? And Psalm. 23.4. I will fear no Evil, for thou art with me.
Again, Psalm 27.1. The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear?
The Lord is the strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid?

5. THE Wicked fear where no fear is: They fear not God for love of him, but
for Self Ends and fear of Punishment; as the Grecians Worshipped their false
Gods; and the Commonalty the great Lords* Which is a Symptom of a base and
impious Mind, prohibited to them that are adopted Heirs of the Heavenly
Jerusalem, to whom the Wise Man speaks, Prove. 3.25, 26. Be not afraid of sudden
fear, neither of the Desolation of the Wicked when it comes; for the Lord
shall be thy Confidence, and shall keep thy Foot from being taken. And Isaiah,
encourages us in Chap. 4.1.10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee: Be not
dismayed, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, and I will help thee. And
in the 43 Chap. ver. 1. Fear not, for I have Redeemed thee.

6. ALL which Precepts are to be apprehended of servile fear, which is to
despond of God's Mercy, rendering Men Desperate, not provident to avoid Danger,
nor importunate to fly to God for help. The first is evident in Jehoram's
Message, Behold, said that Prophaner, beheld, this evil is of the Lord, what
should I wait for the Lord any longer? 2 Kings. 6.33. And in that precipitate
Counsel, Job 2.9. Curse God and die. The second Effect we read in Jacob, who
being in danger of his Life, instantly Prayed, and sent Presents to appease his
revengeful Brother. Not to be afraid of God's Judgments on Sin, is carnal
Security, and stupid Carelessness of Seared Consciences, 1 Timothy 4.2. Not to fear
imminent Dangers, demonstrates an improvident Mind. And not to fear God's
dreadful Presence, must needs be imputed to sinful Mortals as an ignorance of
the Deity, and a Man's own self.

7. BUT to be a timorous Antemon, who was possessed with so large a stock of
Fear, that he durst not stir abroad; but kept Two Servants at home to guard his
Head, with a Brass-Shield; is not only an impious but ridiculous Fear. To stand
in awe of Men, more than God, is the fear of Hypocrites: To fear without
Confidence in God, for the diversion of evil (as Belshazzar, when seeing the
Handwriting upon the Wall, his Knees trembled, and the joints of his Loins
were loosed; or as Saul at Endor) is such a Fear, as God Challenges no share in
it. This Fear is a perpetual torment to the wicked, and can by no means quiet
the voice of their Conscience: It is an Imperious Mischief, an Anticipiation of
Evil, not yet come, an Inducement to a Man's unhappiness, not only with present
evils, but with future, which, were Fear banished, they could not molest him;
Semblant to that Fear of Enevitable death, which forces men continually to
die, for fear of Dying once.

8. BUT to fear God with a filial Fear, proceeding of Love to him, as in
Christian verity, the fountain of Wisdom and true Happiness: And with such a
Fear, God is well pleased; he will deliver them, and fulfill their desire; he
will learn them the way of Righteousness: They shall enjoy all that is good,
and when they seem to lack, they shall be supplied most; it shall be Health,
and Strength to 'em, Prove. 3.8. They shall have Understanding, Blessings
Temporal and Eternal, and be Animated to perform Acts of Goodness, and deal
Uprightly with all Men: Examples of which we have in Obadiah, 1 Kings 18.3, 12,
13. and Joseph, Genesis 42.10.

9. THIS Fear brings more advantage to the Possessor, than great Riches to the
Wicked: It is the Souls Angel-Guardian, Innocencies Keeper; it is Securities
Antidote, the Minds Sentinel to awaken it, and give the Alarm against the
assaults of the Subtle Enemy. This armeth a Man, with a true and unfailing
Confidence: It Is indeed the sum of what God requires of us, Deuteronomy. 10.12. And
what the Preachers Doctrine, informs us of, even, the whole Duty of Man. Eccles.
12.14. Of this only is that saying true, The Mother of the Fearful, never weeps
much; because such are truly Blessed.

10. NOW by reason, we are but Men, even frail Mortals, not yet perfect in
Love, and so liable to many Fears, and subject to many Sins, Failings and
Hazards, and thereby exposed to many dangerous and servile Fears: Which by the
stupendous and tender Mercy of the Almighty, may convert it in the Issue to
our Happiness; but if we are so prone to Sin, even under so much Fear, what
would we be if we were secure from all? Therefore I have thought it necessary
to lay down some Rules for the Governing of our Thoughts in Fears; which I
shall show in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XIX. Rules for Governing our Thoughts in Fears.
FIRST, for God's Glory, and the Salvation of thine Immortal Soul, contemn any
danger: It was our Savior's Precept, Fear not them who are able to destroy the
Body only; for they cannot diminish thy happiness: They may indeed make an
Addition to thy Felicity, if thou bear well thy injuries. These Objects are
only dreadful to the ignorant; like that Cumane Ass in the Lions Skin, or the
Crocodile, fierce against the timorous, but fearful of the Courageous; so is
the Impatient, who cannot submit to take up the Cross, which like Moses Rod,
thrown down became a dreadful Serpent; but at God's Command, reassumed; an
harmless-Rod; to divide the Briny Floods, and open a way into the Promised
Rest: Many men heighten their own Fears, deluding Fancy, representing that
monstrous, which right Reason would discover Innocent; in a constant and
Prudent Resolution to meet with difficulties.

2. FEAR God, and be not dismayed, Josh. 1.9. Endeavor to fix thy Mind upon
such a Basis of Moderation, that thy Resolution neither rise to Temerity, nor
fall to Timidity; neither to be Obstinate, nor to be afraid of any thing: But
in a Medium, carry such an even temper, as that Prudence may claim that
privilege to fit at the Helm without the Interruption of either Extremes: Take
the Prophets Counsel, Isai. 8.13. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts, and let him be
your Fear, and your Dread, and he shall be your Sanctuary: But fear not their
Fear, who say a Confederacy. The present fear of God Creates us an Eternal
Security: Fear him and he will banish all other fears from thee. Behold the
Psalmist how he is fortified; Though I walk in the Valley of the Shadow of
Death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me, Psalm. 23.4. And Psalm. 118.6.
The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me. And in
Conclusion, the fear of the Lord immergeth all other fears.

3. IN every danger, impress on thy heart the Omnipotency of God, and endeavor
to have an Affiance in him: He that pursues this Rule, shall act safely: When a
Fiery-Furnace was threatened, Shadrach, Meshac, and Abednego answered the
Incensed King, Our God whom we serve is idle to deliver us, Dan. 3:17. And
David tells you, Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them
that fear him, and delivers them. And when our Enemies seem most formidable,
there are more for us than can be against us: As it appeared in the case of the
Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings 6.16. It animated the Royal Prophet to cry out, In the
Lord put I my trust; how say ye then to my Soul, flee, as a Bird to your
Mountain? Psalm. 11.1. All Confidence in Men, even their Councels, or an Arm of
Flesh, is unhappy, and must come to nothing; but God endures to all Eternity:
Which made the Psalmist declare; Therefore will we not fear, though the Earth
be removed: And though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea.

4. TAKE Solomon's Counsel, and hearken unto the Word of God, Pro. 1.33. Whose
hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil.
And Prove. 3.23, 34. Then shall thou walk in thy way safely; when thou lie
down thou shall not be afraid. Herein shall be made manifest Gods Power, Truth,
Providence, Mercy and Justice that thou may trust in him; according to the
Expression of the Psalmist, They that know thy Name, will put their trust in
thee, for thou, Lord, have not forsaken them that seek thee, Psalm. 9.10. Love
the Lord thy God with a sincere heart: And the more thou love him, the more
thou will rest assured of his Love and Protection: and the more perfect thy
love is, the more it casts out fear, 1 John 4.18.

5. TAKE Job's advice, Chap. 22.24. Depart from iniquity, and say of it, as the
Princes of the Philistines said of David, Let him not go down with us to the
Battle, lest in the Battle he be an Adversary to us, 1 Samuel 29.4. Fix thy self
to seek the Lord, as Jehosaphat did, when the Armies were upon their March
toward him, against whom he Achieved a Glorious Victory, 2 Chronicles. 2.3.
Entertain a good Conscience, it shall be a Wall of Brass unto thee: The safety
of that makes a man assume the Courage of a Lion: But if we perceive the smoke
of Infernal Brimstone ascend there, we must needs faint, like the men of Ai
when they beheld their City on Fire, Josh. 8.20. Guilt of Sin in the Conscience
creates Sordidness in Men; they may possibly express Transcendent Words who
possess a Timorous Conscience; but as one said of the fearful Dog, He must
needs fear, who has no peace in himself.

6. CONSIDER with David, Psalm. 37.37. The end of the Saints and Apostles
sufferings, which has ever been happy; and they are the more Partakers of
Christ's Glory, for bearing a share in his sufferings: Consider how long they
have suffered, and then thou can not fear any of those things which thou
shall suffer: Behold the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, that you may
betryed -- be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life,
Rev. 2.10. True it is, Flesh and Blood claims Allowance for its Infirmity; but
the more we can apply to our hearts the end of the Saints, and the quiet fruits
of Righteousness, to them that are exercised, the less we must needs be
sensible of the Malignity of any Creature.

7. ENDEAVOR for Peace with God; give him no rest till he speaks unto the
Voice within thee, thy Conscience: And firmly resolve not to let him go, until
he Bless thee, and assure thee of thy Remission in Christ Jesus. He has
nothing to fear or molest him, whose sins are forgiven. When the sting of Death
is taken out, who would not be Valiant? Which occasioned St. Paul to express
himself, 1 Cor. 15.57. But thanks be to God, which gives us the Victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ. And St. John says in his first Epistle, Chap.
5.4. And this is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith.

8. IN thy greatest Fears pray most fervently: Even so did our Savior, being
in an Agony, He prayed more earnestly: So did Jacob in fear of his Brother's
long studied Revenge, Genesis 32.9. Pray and beseech God that he would illuminate
and open thine Eyes to behold his saving Health. God many times sounds his
Allarm to awaken our drouzy Souls, and open our Mouths to earnest Prayer, which
in Prosperity are too prone to the Spirit of Slumber and Coldness: Fear has
many Tongues, and can open the Mouth of the Dumb: Even Jonahs Mariners in their
Fear will pray, and instigate others to the same Duty: That one Example of
Athis, Croesus's Son, shows what the violence of Fear can do; he who before
was dumb, on a sudden cried out, O Cyrus spare my Father, and by our
Misfortunes, learn, that thou also art but a Man.

A Prayer against Fear.
O Almighty Lord God, who art in thy Wrath and Indignation dreadful against
Sinners, I humbly acknowledge and confess, that there is not one of thy
Judgments, but what the Guilt of my Sins have long since deserved; even the
miseries of this Life, terrors of Death, and future Condemnation: But, O thou
great God of Consolation, assure me of a full and free Pardon, and a remission
of all my Sins, and Seal my Peace with thee, through the Blood of a Crucified
Jesus. Fill my Heart and Affections with that measure of thy Love, as may
exclude all servile fear: Give me the testimony of a good Conscince, to comfort
me against all vain fears of the Wicked. Lift up the light of thy Countenance
upon me, and give me that assurance that thou art, and will be my Defense and
Confidence.

2. AND, O thou who rulest in Heaven and Earth, from the Angel to the Worm, the
lowest of Creatures; and from the swayer of the Scepter, to the drawer of
Water: Thou art Omnipotent, and can do what thou please, and no other God
besides thee, can Deliver after this sort: Lord, let it be thy Divine will and
Pleasure to deliver me from those Afflictions which I fear and so much tremble
at; that I may live to Praise thee, and declare thy goodness toward me in the
Land of the Living.

3. AND I humbly beseech thee, O Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass
from me; yet nevertheless not my Will, but thy holy Will be done. Lord, suffer
me not for any trials in Afflictions or under any Temptations to fall from
thee: Consider my Frailty, remember whereof thou have Made and Fashioned me,
that l am but sinful Dust and Ashes, which soon fade and pass away.

4. GIVE me Patience to endure thy Fatherly hand of Correction, and a full
assurance that all things shall work together for my advantage: Give me a
fervent frame of Spirit, to Pray more Earnestly; and give me that Faith, to
which thou, who can not be guilty of the breach of it, have made the promise
of Audience and granting my Petitions. Give me an invincible Resolution, not to
let thee depart until thou do bless me with some happy Issue, through Jesus
Christ, my Lord and only Savior

Amen.
CHAP. XX. Of Cares.
CARE is the Child of Providence: Some say, the Soul's Apparator to Summon all
its Faculties to its Senate or Counsel. It is rather Counsel's President,
determining what to pursue and what to decline: It is the Weight which moves
all the Wheels; which taken off, or quite run down, all the Nerves of
Providence are loosed, and the Souls Faculties become inactive and resty, so as
we neither affect the Good, nor fear the Bad.

2. CARE is the Sentinel which gives the Allarm to awaken Wisdom to its
Offices, and the Steward of the internal Habitation: It is the Pilot which
sits at the Helm, to steer and direct the Course; lest Industry be wanting
to prudent Decrees and Resolutions, or sucess to Industry. So necessary is this
Vigilance of the Soul, that without it we can neither be profitable to our
selves or others, in things Divine or Humane: Tho Salvation shall neither be in
his Care, as the Apostle mentions, Who Wills, nor of him that Runs, but of
God, that shows Mercy, Romans 9.16. Yet if thou use not thy diligence to lay
hold on his Promises, thou shall find, that he which Created thee without thy
Care, will not Save thee without it; for he has made thee a voluntary Agent,
and has endowed thee with Reason, that thou might use his Ordinance, for
the benefit of thy own Salvation.

3. THO, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3.7. It is neither in him that Planteth,
nor in him that Waters, but in God who gives the Increase: Yet if the
Dispensation be committed to thee, Woe be to thee if thou Preach not the
Gospel: And Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently: Tho, as
the Psalmist mentions, Psalm 127.1. Except the Lord build the House, they
labor but in vain that build it: And, Except the Lord keep the City, the
Watchman Waketh but in vain; and the Builder shall work to Confusion: Yet if
thou art a careless Inhabitant of Laish; if thou art not vigilant, or in
necessity Build not, thou temptest the Lord thy God, Judges 18.7. It is in the
power of Omnipotency, who said at first, Genesis 1.11. Let the Earth bring forth
Grass, the Herb yielding seed, and the Fruit-Tree yielding Fruit after his
Kind. Which to this day are duly performed: But except thou Plant and Sow, thou
must not expect to Reap: Neither has the Almighty Wisdom fixed this care in
our Hearts for our selves only, but likewise for them to whom he has given
dependence on us. So that if any Man will not Work, according to the Apostle's
Order, Let him not eat, 2 These. 3.10. And, If any provide not for his own, and
especially for those of his own House, he has denied the Faith, and is worse
than an Infidel, Tim. 5.8.

4. IT is an exquisite care which the great Being has Implanted in the Hearts
of Mothers, for the Preservation of their Children, in which, They shall be
saved if they continue in the Faith and Charity, 1 Timothy 2.15. Neither is any
Employment, Calling, or Person among the Sons of Men exempt from Care. Kings,
as the honored Parents of Kingdoms, embrace Care of the largest size, like
those Egyptian Plagues, Exodus 8.3, etc. Not forbearing their Sacred Beds: They
must take care for the Weal of their Subjects. It was a mark of Shame and
Dishonor which the Holy Ghost fixed on Gallio, Acts 18.17. But Gallio cared
for none of these things.

5. CHRIST in his suffering for us, omitted not this Emblem in his Crown of
Thorns. Nor can the Brutes and Animals subsist without their Care: God has
given them a mavelous Instinct and natural Sagacity, to build and lay up for
themselves and their Young: So that the Sluggard may well be sent to School to
Solomon's Industrious Ant, laboring in Summer against the Winter, Prove. 6.6.
And the Careless Daughters, who think they were Born to live at Ease, may learn
of the provident Be, and other Creatures, Prudent in their Kind, Isa. 32.9,
etc.

6. CARE there must of necessity be used, and the best are not secluded from
it; but the malicious Enemy striveth to pervert it to Man's Destruction,
endeavoring to make some so Ebrious with desire of Ease, that they sleep
Negligently: And where he encounters with an active and industrious nature, he
labors to introduce some vain or impious Object of Cares, to extract a
distraction from that which should conduce to their Happiness. The misery that
attends Infatuated Mankind, is, when their Cares, like the River Jordan, empty
their sweet Streams into a dead Sea of unprofitable desires and vanities.

7. THERE is no sin which has not some unhappy Cares to surround and foment
it: And commonly more Acts of Supererogation, than Salvation requires. Impious
Cares are Revenge's, Brokers, Lust's Panders, Avarices Vassals, Errors Nurses,
Mothers sin, and Vice's Handmaids, in all which they but fight for a
destructive Helena, or a mischievous Gain. How happy might Adulterers,
Murderers and Robbers be, were so much Adventure, Vigilance, Charge and Care
bestowed on God's Service, as they employ in their Sins! Taking more care and
pains to go to Hell, than by the tender Mercy of God, would guide them to
Heaven.

CHAP. XXI. Rules Concerning Cares.
SEEK first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, Mat. 6.35. That all
things necessary may be Administered unto thee: Let thy main Care be for God's
Glory and thy own Salvation; to acquire that one necessary thing, which on^^
gained, shall never be taken away or lost, Luke 10.42. Martha's many
Encumbrances in this case, cannot avoid Subordination: This is Treasure in
Heaven, neither in Danger of Thieves, or Moths. That same Hysteron Proteron,
wherein Worldly desires appear like those unmannerly Imps in Elies discomposed
time, claiming to be served before God himself, must needs come to naught; and
it proves but lost labor to rise early, late take rest, and eat the bread of
Carefulness, Psalm. 127.2. That Manna which was kept all Night, except only for
the Sabbath, was Corrupted, Exodus 16.20, 24. All our labor to lay up, except
for Salvation (the eternal Sabbath) is but lost: Therefore Labor for the Meat
which endures to Eternal Life, John 6.27.

2. SET your affections on things above, Col. 3.2. And study a holy Contempt of
this World: It is Affection creates us Care; and where that is, there our Cares
and our Minds will be fixed. It Is the highest Prudence to lop off vain Cares,
that our better placed Care may be more Fruitful, and to thrust out worldly
thoughts: As Christ did the tumultuous Company at Jairus house, which otherwise
like those Guests at Bethlehem, would afford him no room: As when the
Superfluity of the Branches are pruned off, the Vine is recompensed in the
Fruit: So it is in the cutting off vain Cares; the more thou diminishest from
them, the more fruitfully shall thy Soul be augmented in Spiritual things: As
when Elijah was taken up to Heaven, his Mantle fell off, 2 King. 2.13. So do
the Cares of this World, when our Hearts are addicted to Heavenly things.

3. HOW properly may vain, childish things, like dead Leaves near the fruitful
Autumn, fall off our minds, when we subscribe our selves Men? And when that
which we have in possession is perfect, how easily do our Worldly Cares wither
and fall away; even like the Glowworms fraudulent Luster, which vanishes at
the approach of the Morning Light? In whatsoever State thou art, learn
therewith to be content: Discontent and avaritious Desires force the heart,
upon the sharp Tenters of Care: If a Man be content with little, he will not
care for much: Cares follow Riches, and augment with their Increases, Mat.
13.22.

4. TRUST in the Lord, and commit thy ways to him, and he will bring it to
pass, Psalm. 37.5. Cast thy care upon him, for He cares for thee, 1 Pet. 5.7.
and has Promised, He will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. And
the Prophet declares this comfortable Report, Jer. 17.7, 8. Blessed is the man
that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is; for he shall be as a
tree planted by the Waters; and shall not be careful in the year of drought.
Gods Providence is vigilant over his Servants, and it can neither err, nor be
defeated: He that gave us Life, will not fail to give us Meat and Clothing; he
that feeds the Fowls of the Air, and adorns the fading Flowers, with such
varieties of Beauty, will not forget to Feed and Cloth Man, whom he has
appointed to be Lord over them.

5. HE knows our Necessities before we ask, and that all our Care cannot add
one Cubit to our Stature: Riches and Honors, for which men take such
indefatigable care, come neither from the East, nor from the West, nor yet from
the South; but it is God which both gives and takes away. Some increase in
Wealth, Sleeping, or Waking; others with unwearied industry wax poor: Labor to
perform thy endeavor with Cheerfulness, and commit the Issue to God: By which
means thou will avoid all Diffidence and Distracting Care.

6. BE vigilant over thy Soul; otherwise Cares will choke up the holy Seed of
God's Word, whereby it will become unprofitable to thee: It will Eclipse the
light of Heavenly Knowledge, it will clog the Heart, and creep on like an
Ephialt, which having seized us, we groan under it, and can neither shake it
off, nor awake to an holy Expectation of the coming of Christ. Frequently
Recollect thy Mind of thy Mortality, Frailty of Life, and the Vanity of all
Transitory things: What are Riches and Magnificence in this World? They are
like Childrens Bubbles filled with Air, which vanishes in their breaking: Even
such are we, like Dreams, or a Scene, wherein our parts once Acted, we must
shrink into Natures Tyring-room, never to return.

7. IT is uncertain what hour may be our last; but it is certain one must come,
and how nigh it may be at hand, is beyond our knowledge; perhaps this night the
Sentence may come forth, and a Writ of Alienation on thy Store laid up for many
years; and this harsh Summons may reach thy Ears; Thou Fool, this night shall
thy Soul be required of thee; then whose shall all those things be? Luke 12.20.
When the Hives in their Plenitude warn the Masters of their Republic, that
they want a Deduction of their Colony, they Swarm and Fly: But if you cast a
little Dust among them, they presently settle. So the only Expedient to settle
our Swarm of Busy Cares, is the memento of our Original, That Dust thou art,
and to Dust thou shall return, Genesis 3.19. Lastly, to remember the Apostles
Rule, Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by Prayer and
Supplication, let your Requests be made known unto God: Those wants and cares
are happy which chase us to him: Therefore let us depend and hope in him, and
Invocate him by Prayer.

The Prayer.
O MOST Gracious and Merciful Lord God, who Feedest the young Ravens, Clothest
the Lillies of the Fields, and fillest all things with thy Goodness: Thou
Governest in Heaven, and in Earth, and give to every Creature Subsistence and
Preservation in its kind: O Lord I humbly acknowledge thy goodness toward me,
even from the Womb unto this present moment: Thou have preserved me, when I
neither knew what human necessities were, nor which way to relieve them: When I
reposed my self, thou preservedst me; when I did not foresee any evil
approaching, thou dissipatedst it; when I was kept ignorant of my Necessities,
thy infinite Mercies Prevented me with Blessings and Provisions; when I was
lost, thou recoveredst me: And when I was dead in trespasses and sins, thou
did quicken me by thy Grace; when I understood nothing of the Way of Life,
thou meekly did inform me, and did guide me in the way wherein I should
walk: But above all, before ever I was, thou gave thy Son Christ Jesus to be
the Inestimable price of my Redemption.

2. AND now, O Lord, I who am less than the least of all thy Mercies, what
shall I render thee? Nay, what can I, for all thy Transcendent Blessings? Thou
have not only once, like the good Samaritan, but many times, as a God of
Infinite Mercy, bound up the wounds of my Soul, and taken care of me: O let thy
Mercy still continue toward me, and create, O God, in me a clean and a
contrite heart, and renew a right Spirit within me, that it may express my
thankfulness aright to so great a Majesty as thou art: The Lions want, the
Mighty suffer hunger: Thou have sent a Fire among, them that live at ease and
carelessly, even unto the Proud and Rejoicing Cities; and what am I, O Lord,
that thou please to spare me, and do not still feed me with the Bread of
Anxiety and Affliction, and make me drink the Waters of Astonishment?

3. LORD, fix my Hopes on thy Providence, and give me Assurance thy Mercy shall
never fail me: I humbly cast all my Cares upon thee, who art a Protector of thy
Children: Prosper thou my Labors, whose Providence descends to the
Preservation of the poorest and meanest of all thy Creatures: Feed me with
Bread of my Stature, and let me never want that which thou know needful for
me: O thou, who did increase the Sareptan's Oil and Meal, so that it failed
not in all the Famine, Bless that portion which thy Providence has measured
out to me, and mine; let thy Blessing descend upon it, whether it be much or
little, so that finding a sufficiency therein, I may in a Thankful, Holy, and
Prudent Use thereof, Glorify thy Holy Name, and live Contentedly and
Cheerfully before thee.

4. GIVE me in every estate, both in prosperity and adversity, a faithful
dependence on thy Gracious Providence, which never fails them that trust in
thee: Thou best know, O Lord, my necessities before I ask; let no Cares of
this World distract me from thy Service, neither make my Confidence in thee,
incline to any distrust of thy Goodness, or fixing my heart on the love of this
present World: Thou have given thy Holy Son Jesus; assure me by his infallible
Spirit, that with him thou will also give me all things.

5. GIVE me a heart to rest in thee, and to put all my trust and confidence in
thy Mercy; instruct me, to seek thy Kingdom, and the Righteousness thereof,
before all things which this World can give or take away: So that thou who
providest for me, may in thy good pleasure administer to me all those
things, which thou see necessary for the relief of this Life's present
necessity; and let thy Blessing evermore attend it, until having passed
through this World of Cares, and Valley of Miseries, I may arrive to that
Blessed Life, thy Kingdom of Glory, through Jesus Christ, our Lord and only
Savior,

Amen.
CHAP. XXII. Of Jealousy.
AMONG those thoughts which discompose the Mind, the Jealous are not the least:
And the Wise Man acknowledges, Prove. 6.34. that Jealousy is the rage of a Man;
and it is frequently so exasperating to unplacable. Anger, That he will not
regard any Ransom, neither will he rest content, though thou give many Gifts,
Verse 35. I mention not here that Jealousy, as it is Attributed to God, and
sometimes imports Anger, as in Ezekiel. 8.3. and Chap. 16.42. or execution of
Justice, Deuteronomy. 29.20. nor Indignation at that which molesteth those the
Almighty loves, Ezekiel. 39.25. Zach. 1.14. or Pity to his People, Joel 2.18,
19. nor as in Man, signifying only Envy and Emulation, as Romans 10.19. and Chap.
11.11. or Fear of Danger to those whom we are most Indulgent, as 2 Cor. 11.2.
Neither do I mean that of Ambition, to exclude Corrivals of Sinister Ends, such
as St. Paul charged the false Apostles amongst the Galatians: Nor of Suspicion,
which is an opinion or dread of some evil, sprung from Symptoms of Levity, or
Airy notions, which sometimes set Friends at a great distance, and imbitter
Humane Societies: But of that which God gave a Law to Israel, Numb. 5.14.

2. THIS is a perturbation of Mind, compounded of Fear, Love, Indignation, and
Suspicion; a bitter Electuary of Ingredients, though good and proper in
themselves if applied to their distinct uses: This Jealousy is the Bane of
unhappy Love; the Gall of Wedlock; the sad Asmodeus, which makes the most
flourishing Families detestable, if not desolate: It is a Tenebrous Apparition
of disturbed Thoughts, restless in the inquest after that which they most
abhor, and dread to find: It is the Souls Absynthium, and overflowing
bitterness, the Scourge and Torture of Afflicted Minds, really tormenting
sometimes with Imaginary, but often with vain Evils: It is the Devils
Masterpiece, and Quintessence of his Envy, rendering the Honorable, and
(otherwise) Happy Estate of Matrimony, which the Almighty appointed to be the
greatest Worldly Comfort; he by his Diabolical Malice strives to make it the
most odious and unhappy: Therefore it may well be nominated in Numb. 5.30. The
Spirit of Jealousy. For a worse Fury could never have been contrived to
perplex frail Mortality.

3. NOW whereas the Drama in this unhappy Scene, is of two Persons at least,
the Rules of Advice in this case, must have a double Address; which is to the
Jealous of either Party: And first, Espouse not another sin by a foolish and
impious Connivance at the basest Action. He that inhibiteth Divorce in any
other cause, as 1 Cor. 7.12. permits it in the cause of Adultery, Mat. 19.9.
And the Law allows, when the Jealous man shall have set his Wife before the
Lord, and Justice shall be executed upon her, Then shall the Man be guiltless
from iniquity, and the Woman shall bear her iniquity, Numb. 5.31.

4. BE not rash, lest thou prove injurious to the Innocent; it is an innate
Corruption, to view others faults, rather than their Virtues, and to surmize
that to be Evil which may be transacted: And this Axiom may be fitly applied,
That they who are evil themselves, claim that privilege of being Jealous of
others: And he that looks through a yellow Glass, thinks all the World of the
same Color: Consider well, and then tell me, if it be not thy own guiltiness
which is the false medium, that casts that Complexion on others, which indeed
thou only retainest thy self.

5. GIVE not place to the Devil; his Malice is like those Envious Philistines,
who cast filth into the pure Fountains of Humane Propagation, to create a
jealousy between the Married Pair, that by this Venom he may put them at
variance, whom God commanded to a perfect Union. Sometimes he will aggravate
slight suspicions, which so increases the rage of each other, that Reason is
many times lost in the Battle: Or else, rather than lose his Game, he will
suggest some vain Chimera of that which never was, or perhaps never like to be
accomplished: Sometimes he will throw Temptations before 'em, such as private
Meetings, Whispering, or some such loose Behavior and Familiarity with others,
as may unhappily create suspicion in the Good and Prudent.

6. NEITHER shall he be destitute of the service of other Mischievous Tongues
to foment and feed this Malignant Humor: He that said Matrimony might be
happy, if the Wife were blind, and the Man deaf, either did, or might mean, if
the Wife had not wandering Eyes, she would never spy out Vanity, nor the Husband
open Ears, he could not hearken to Malicious Reports: Seriously consider the
vanity of this Evil, and then thou will prudently acknowledge, that all
self-vexation is folly; and to invert the Theme, all folly is self-vexation: If
with all thy Art and Care, thou could invent any Stratagem beyond tormenting
thy self, there were some Plea for thy vexation: But none can be Chaste against
their Will, was a Sentence among the Heathens; and Argus's hundred Eyes cannot
be so vigilant, but opportunity may prove too crafty for him.

7. IF thy Jealousy be fruitless, then thou have occasion to vex at the Levity
and Vanity of thy own Mind: If it be just, what is the monstrous Object of thy
Hatred and Malice? Assure thy self the Adulteress is unhappy enough; and there
is no Creature on Earth more despicable and odious, nor no Sin in this Life,
accompanied with so many varieties of Plagues and Judgments; so that indeed
they are great Objects of Pity, if all these wretched Ingredients can render
them to be so, as a wounded Conscience, the Devil's Earnest to the Impenitent,
and assurance of Hell and Damnation.

8. IN the next place, my address shall be to those in whom there is occasion
of Suspicion. And first, Let Man himself consider how odious Adultery is, and
out of all measure sinful; for he sins against his own Body, defiles the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, Cor. 6.18, 19. and pierces through his own Bowels
with a Dart of Rottenness, Prove. 7.23. And that which will render him in the
end mournful: But beyond all this, in case of Impenitency, which the stubborn
Presumer may justly suspect, it is that whereby he excludes himself from the
Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. And in the Adulteresses Crime, some
Aggravations are appertaining to it, as robbing her Husband of his Posterity;
obtruding a base and adulterous Issue, and so stealing away his Estate and
Inheritance, by giving it to a Stranger, and fixing on an indelible Character
of Dishonor and Bastardy upon her Child, who but for her impotent and
ungoverned Lust, might have proved noble and legitimate. An Injury which she
can never expiate, nor repair to the innocuous Son with Rivers of Tears, and
streams of her infected Blood. This multiplied Sin is sometimes concealed from
Men, but never from the All-seeing God, who is a severe Revenger of all
Iniquity.

9 OTHER Sins are grievous and pernicious; yet neither Lying, Stealing,
Idolatry, Murder, nor Witchcraft, can of it self dissolve the Sacred Bond of
Wedlock, as this only base act of Adultery does: Therefore our Savior admits
of no Divorce but upon that occasion. And it is remarkable, that when God would
display the loathsomness of Idolatry, which most displeased him, he styled it
Whoredom, and himself a jealous God; and certainly, though that be abolished of
the bitter Water, causing the Curse, and rotting of the Thigh with swelling,
which attended that antiquated Ceremony; yet the bitter Moral and Substance are
not quite extinguished, Numb. 5.18.

10. AVOID what you are sensible of has created your Suspicion; otherwise you
are guilty, if not of Adultery, yet of a just Cause of Jealousy. Lysander
punished one of his Soldiers for going out of his Quarters, resolving that he
would have none of his, look, or go out like a Plunderer. Dinah's idle visits,
Genesis 34.1, 2. proved her dishonor, effusion of guiltless Blood; her Father's
Trouble, and her Brother's Curse: The wisest of Men records it, as the mark
of an Harlot, Prove. 7.11, 12. Her feet abide not in the house; now she is
without, now in the streets, lying in wait at every corner.

11. IT was an Italian Severity in Sulpitius, and a Diposition to part with his
Wife, who divorced her for going out of doors bareheaded: The Law, said he,
confined thee to mine Eyes and Approbation, and not to please others. The
common Law noted any, going out unvailed, with the odious brand of Adultery. So
careful were they to avoid all occasions or suspicions of that Sin. However
foolishly strict they were, I am sure Jerome's Rules fore-noted is good;
Whatsoever, says he, may probably be feigned, be thou cautious it may not be
feigned: Thou owe this to thy Husband's Love, thine own Indemnity and Honor,
and the Right and Credit of thy Children.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal and Almighty God, Father of Lights, and of the Firstborn who are
written in Heaven, and of the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect. Thou art the
Searcher of all Hearts and Reins, to whose All-seeing Eye every Creature is
manifest, and every thought of the Heart naked and open: We humbly beseech thee
to take from us our stony Hearts, and to give us Hearts of flesh; to subdue in
us by thy omnipotent Spirit, the miserable remainders of the First Adam, that
native inclination to Sin, which continually carries us away Captive to the
Laws thereof, even to that Evil which we would not commit, but utterly detest,
and in bitterness of Soul repent of.

2. LORD create clean Hearts, and renew right Spirits within us; root out that
raging Spirit of Jealousy, that infernal Fire which lies scorching in our
bosoms; and enlighten our Understandings with a sound Knowledge of all the
Mysteries of Eternal Life and Salvation. Sanctify our Wills and Affections,
and according to thine own gracious promise, six thy Law in our inward Parts,
and write it deeply in our Hearts, that we may know thee, from the least to the
greatest. Heal up those Wounds which our Sins have made so wide, that none but
thine own Hands can close them, and forgive our Iniquity, and remember our Sins
no more.

3. O Lord, thou did by thy holy Word, so heal the fountains, that death and
barrenness was no more therein; heal, we humbly beseech thee, the wretched
Corruptions of our hearts; cleanse and sanctify all the thoughts thereof, by
the sweet and blessed influence of thy Holy Spirit, and so quide, govern, and
direct us in the way which thou will have us to walk in, as that we may in all
our Thoughts, Words and Actions, be acceptable to thee: Mortify and subdue,
all our evil Desires and Thoughts, and bring them all into Subjection to thy
Holy Will and Pleasure, that we may constantly resist all Temptations to Sin
and Wickedness.

4. KEEP us, and Counsel us, in all our Affairs Spiritual and Temporal, that we
may be filled with the holy Fruits of the Spirit of Sanctification, appearing
in new and hallowed Thoughts, Words, and Actions, to thy glory, and our farther
assurance before thee; so that in our Bodies and in our Spirits, we may be kept
blameless in this sinful and miserable World, unto the appearing of our Lord
Jesus Christ; To whom with thee, O Father of Mercy, and the Holy Spirit, the
Comforter of the Elect, be rendered all Honor and Glory, in Heaven and in Earth,
from this time forth, and to all Eternity.

Amen.
CHAP. XXIII. Of External Actions.
THE External Actions of Men are the product and fruit of their Thoughts; and
as we owe Sanctimony to God, and our own Consciences within, so do we good
Examples to our Neighbors in things External. And our blessed Savior in his
Sermon on the Mount, excites us with this Doctrine, Mat. 5.16. Let your Light so
shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and glorify your Father
which is in Heaven.

2. GOOD Actions proceed from a sound Credence, without which they cannot be
good, nor pleasing in the Sight of Heaven, For whatsoever is not of Faith is
Sin, Romans 14.23. For Faith apprehending Christ to our Justification, renders
our Works acceptable to him, if they extend to Fruits of Regeneration; and
uniting us to Christ, dedicateth us to a Capacity of his Sanctifying Spirit,
and enableth us in some measure to vanquish Sin, and perform that which is holy
in his sight. Now the Apostle mentions, St. James 2.18. Show me thy Faith
without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by thy Works. And St. Paul
says, Romans 3.28. A Man is justified by Faith only, without the Deeds of the law.

3. THOUGH our best Performances cannot justify us before the Almighty,
because imperfect, yet are they never separated from true Faith; and they are
the Pathway to the heavenly Jerusalem, though they cannot finish our happy
Arrival. Therefore to the Young-Man's Query, who desired to be justified by
Works; our Savior replies, Mat. 19.16. Keep the Commandments: Thus he was
convinced, who had not yet learned the Righteousness of Faith, which says,
Believe and thou shall be Saved; thereby implying, that yet he was wanting in
some things, who was excellent in others, and therefore must seek Salvation by
Faith, and the way to Heaven by Sanctity. This is a Condition, not an
Obligation of our Salvation; for as we can never acquire Salvation by it, so we
can never expect any without it, because our very best Endeavors and
Performances we owe to God's Honor and Glory.

4. IT is not sufficient to have a good Intention, either to speak, or to do
good; for Satan is well-pleased, that Men should draw near unto God with their
Lips, if their Hearts be far from him; or that they speak well, if they will
perform Evil. Words at best are but Feminine Virtues, but Works are M^sculine;
Of these the Spiritual Pharaoh gives charge to smother them. But we desire to
convert our Words into Actions, and not only to speak, but to Effect holy
Performances.

5. ACTIONS Humane, Natural, or Civil, are no otherwise here concerned, than as
they are in order to the Moral, and so regulated by the Law, and holy Word of
God, in the affirmative or negative Precepts, which is the only Rule of all our
Moral Actions toward God or Man. Neither Examples, Prescriptions, Universality
of Consent, nor Commands of Men, must be prevalent with us, against the express
Word of God: For these claim Privilege only in those things which God's Law
allows, and refereth to our Authority.

CHAP. XXIV. Rules in External Actions.
FIRST, Neither Propose, nor Act any thing Evil or Unjust, for any Worldly
profit, Honors, or Pleasures: For it is an apparent detriment to acquire the
World with the loss of thy Soul, Mat. 16.26. What can Secular Honors advantage
thee, when thou art condemned by the Almighty? Should all the World extol thee,
and thou be Canonized a Saint in the opinion of the multitude, or thy Actions
be highly applauded, equivalent to Herod's Speech, and be rendered Supernatural:
God's Angel may smite thee, and the Worms destroy thee. What are Pleasures? In
their Birth they look toward a Precipitate End; and the Vicissitude of this
Scene serves only to aggravate the misery: Like that ungrateful sound, which
reached the Ears of Dives in Hell, Son remember that thou in thy life time,
receivedst thy good things, Luke 16.25. Present remembrances of past pleasures,
embitter the Torment.

2. LET God's Law be thy Rule and Counselor, and weigh all thy Actions by his
Standard, before thou Execute any Purpose. David could not enterprise before he
had consulted God's Oracles: Nor the very Heathens, before they sent for the
double Effataes of their Priests. When the Word of God is our Rule, we abhor
setting up strange God's in our Hearts, like those who adore their own
Inventions, in Will Worship and voluntary Religion; wherein all, even the most
zealous and painful Actions, as Pilgrimages, superstitious Fasts, foolish
Penance and idolatrous Oblations, or costly Dedications, shall be rejected,
with a Who required this at your Hands? Isa. 1.12. And the Prophet tells you,
Micah 6.7, 8. The Lord will not be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten
thousand Rivers of Oil: And, He has showed O Man, what is good: And what does
the Lord require of thee but to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God?

3. IN Religious Acts, God left not Israel to their own disposing in minor
things, but commanded Moses, See thou make all things according to the Pattern
showed thee in the Mount, Heb. 8.5. Also when God's Word is our Rule, we will
neither lay Snares upon our own Consciences, placing Religion in those things
which God has left Indifferent, (as they who prohibited certain Meats or
Marriage, 1 Timothy 4.3.) Nor will we dispense with that Word in any one point
which any humane Authority pretends, or imposes to the Contrary.

4. IN all thy acts and designs, before thou execute them, duly and seriously
consider the Event, which is like a Ship's Rudder, tho it comes last, it
directs first and last. Endeavor to gain a foresight, and consider the
Sequel. O that they were Wise, says the Lord; That they understood this; That
they would consider their latter End, Deuteronomy. 32.29. By which means thou will in
all sinful Actions, with the Holy Apostle, be ever ready to conclude, That the
end of those things is Death, Romans 6.21.

5. IN all thy actions fix thy self in the presence of God, by following
David's Example, Psalm 16.8. Ever remember thou art in his Sight, and that
neither thy Thoughts nor Actions can be excluded from him; for neither Solitude
nor Darkness can vail thee from his All-seeing Eye, Psalm 139.11, 12. In all
thy Undertakings accustom thy self to the rule of Charity, for that is the
fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. and the Fruit of God's Spirit, Gal. 5.22.
And there can be no performances acceptable to God, if we omit this Duty and
Command of the Apostle, Let all things be done in Charity, 1 Cor. 16.14.

6. IN all Religious Duties, act not the Impostor, for the Hypocrite does but
personate, act and counterfeit the Saint; he seems good, but is doubly Impious,
as the Orator said of the Servilii, which were very like, but not the same; so
resembling, that they were not d^stinguished abroad amongst Strangers, but were
known at home by their own Acquaintance. But when the Hypocrite has deceived
all the World, he can never defraud his own Conscience. Therefore let this
advice be thy faithful Monitor, to be just and sincere in thy Deportment,
before God and Man: Let Christ's Rule be thy constant Pattern, Whatsoever ye
would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them: For this is the Law and
the Prophets, Matt. 7.12.

7. TRANSACT nothing which must cost thee a bitter Repentance. When the
Philosopher had a great price set him upon Folly, replied, I will not buy
Repentance so dear. Never act any thing against thy Conscience, for fear or
favor of Men; but rather esteem a good Conscience before all Treasure on this
side Heaven: In some things we Sin all, But happy is he that condemns not
himself in that thing which he allows, Romans 14.22. Lastly, In all thy
undertakings beseech and humbly implore the Almighty to Direct, Counsel and
Bless thee; and according to the Apostle's Direction, In every thing by Prayer
and Supplication, let your requests be made known unto God, Phil. 4.6. For he
is unworthy to receive a Blessing, who omits the duty of Asking.

A Prayer for Directions in all our Actions.
MOST Merciful Father, who have promised, that if the Wicked turns from his
Sins that he has committed, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall
live, and his Transgressions shall not be remembered. In humble acknowledgment
of our manifold sins, the equity of thy Judgments to give us over to our own
unhappy Ways, who have so long refused to be guided by thy holy Word, and our
own helpless Impotency, to stay our selves, turn unto thee, or fix our selves
in any good way to Serve and Please thee.

2. WE humbly beseech thee O Father, for the sake of thy dear Son, to pardon
all our Offenses, and to vouchsafe to lead us in thy Paths, and the way thou
appointest us to walk in: We have long gone astray like lost Sheep; and thou
best know, O, our God, how dangerous Satan's Snares are to us, how many the
Distractions of a deceitful vain World; how frail and infirm sinful Flesh and
Blood; and how many our Errors: But, O Lord, thy Wisdom cannot Err, which is
immutable; therefore renouncing our own Conduct, we render our selves into thy
Gracious Hands, humbly beseeching thee, who freely give Wisdom to all that
ask, and upbraidest no Man; hold thou up our goings in thy Paths, that our
Footsteps slide not; direct all our ways, that we neither incline to the right
nor to the left hand to offend thee; but give us the Shield of our Salvation,
and let thy Right hand uphold us.

3. O thou that hear the Prayers of them that call upon thee, hear us, for
our Souls wait on thee; direct and guide us; keep us and counsel us in all our
Actions, that we neither design nor perform any thing but that which is
pleasing to thee, and which thou will bless unto us; that we may walk
unblamably and prudently toward all Men, and in Sanctity before thee: And
grant that in all our actions we may Glorify thee, and adorn the Gospel of
Christ by our holy Conversations, give good Examples to our Neighbors, and
stop the Mouths of all malicious Adversaries; so that when these days of Sin
are ended, that we rest from our Labors, we may enter into that promised Rest
which remains for thy People, where shall be no more Sin, Error, nor Curse.
Hear us, O Lord, in these and all other things necessary for our Bodies or
Souls, for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
CHAP. XXV. Of a Wounded Spirit, what it is.
SOLOMON tells you, Prove. 18.14. The Spirit of a Man will sustain his
Infirmities, but a wounded Spirit who can bear? The word signifies a smitten,
contrite, or broken Spirit. It is a kind of Speech borrowed from corporal
Affliction, by Stripes, Contusions, Bruises, or Wounds, wherein by Incision and
Launcing the Sinews and Veins, the Body is debilitated and endangered to Death,
and Disabled so, that it is void of Supportation; it is liable to Inflammations
and Distempers, that every slight touch prejudices it: It depriveth a Man of
Rest, so that he is impatient of this present Posture, and more perplexed at a
Mutation. To express it further, it is the intense sorrow of the Soul, a weak
Confidence, and an infeebled life of the Spirit; so that God may well nominate
it, A wounded Spirit.

2. THIS Affliction is of that Magnitude, that it exceeds all other Temporal
Sorrows: And none can truly give their Verdict of it, but they who can join and
say with David, The sorrows of Death compassed me, and the pains of Hell gat
hold upon me, Psalm. 116.3. Other Sorrows may be Mitigated, by administering to
the Afflicted something equivalent to the loss sustained; as where one Treasure
is lost, another may be found; or by some compensation or repair, may be
Retaliated; as Job had a second Posterity and increase of Wealth: And Elkanah
declared such a Medium of Consolation to Afflicted Hannah, when he said to her,
Am I not better to thee than ten Sons, Sam. 1 1.8.

3. BUT these Comforts are no ways conducive to an afflicted Spirit; for
furnish him with Riches, the company of the dearest Friends, or that which
might afford Relief, Refreshment and Delight to others, yet to him it procures
no Ease, no more than if you put on a rich Purple Robe upon broken Bones: No,
no, the Grief is internal, and no external means can Cure it. In other Crosses,
time will assuage, by Prudence and persuasive Arguments, excellent lenitives of
Sorrow: In some cases to divert, Wine, merry Society, Music, or the like
means, may bear some part, which the Wise Man accords to, Give strong Drink to
him that is ready to perish, and Wine to those that be of heavy Heart* Let him
drink and forget his Poverty, and remember his Misery no more, Prove. 31.6, 7.

4. DAVID'S Harp did for the time refresh Saul, and Charm the Evil Spirit: But
this grief admits of no Efficacy in such Comforts. In other Pressures we may
receive Ease, or be conducted from the Evil, as St. Paul was from the Jews
Conspiracy, Acts 23.31. and David from Saul, 1 Samuel 19.12. But there is no
flying from a wounded Spirit: Where ever we go our Affliction attends us, even
our secret Tormentor in our own Bosoms In short, as it is in one sense a
Separation from God, so no Creature in Heaven or Earth can Cure it: There is no
Sanctuary for a troubled Soul, but only Gods favorable Presence: No other
Expedient can be used, till he return and Comfort it.

5. SO Horrid in the mean time is this Affliction, that the desperate Traitor
Judas took Death for his Sanctuary, as an Antidote against his guilty
Conscience ^ but with what ponderosity it sits upon the Hearts of God's
Servants, may appear by the Complaints of Job and others; Wherefore is light
given to him that is in Misery, and Life unto the bitter in Soul, which long
for Death, but it comes not, and, dig for it more than for hid Treasures;
which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the Grave, Job 3.2O,
21, 22. This was Job's Complaint. And the Prophet complained of his Birth, Jer.
20.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. And the Prophet Elijah being threatened by Jezebel at
Beer-sheba, poured out himself, It is enough now, O Lord, take away my Life,
for I am not better than my Fathers, 1 Kings, 19.4. And Jonah at the loss of
his Gourd, expressed himself, saying, It is better for me to die than live,
Jonah 4.8.

CHAP. XXVI. What the Conscience is, and the Tranquillity of it.
THE Conscience is the Cognition of the Heart, and is a divine internal Light,
which we cannot Extinguish; a Supreme Court of Judicature within us, and above
us; and a silent Register of our Thoughts and Words: It is a thousand
Witnesses, as the Apostle says, Accusing, or Excusing, Romans 2.15. Such is the
Impartiality of this Judge, that no Bribery can tempt him to Justify the
Wicked, nor Condemn the Just; but he is the first Revenger of Impiety, and an
excluder of the Guilty from Absolution.

2. IN true Tranquillity of Conscience, the Heart is cheerful in every Estate
and Condition, Romans 5.1, 3. and dreadeth no Judge nor Witness: It is a
continual Feast; the Soul's Paradise; the Mind's fair Haven; an unvaluable
Possession, which renders every owner Happy: It is an immovable Comfort, the
first Fruits of Heaven, and Riches which shall never be taken away. As no Wind
can move or shake the Sunbeams, so neither Life nor Death, Prosperity or
Adversity can Transfix this. While this is secure, tho Men receive many sharp
Encounters, as the Citizens of Ai did, Josh. 7. Yet are they confident to
resist; they can resolve with that pattern of Patience, Job 13.15. Tho he Kill
me, yet will I trust in him: But if that fail, and the Smoke ascends, their
Hearts are under a great Consternation, Josh. 8.20.

3. THE Almighty Wounds and Heals, Deuteronomy. 32.39. Job 5.18. But it is with
his Justice and Mercy. The Wise Man says, Prove. 6.32, 33. We wound our selve by
Sin: and God heals us by Afflictions, as Chirurgions do with the Lancet and
Cautery. Sins are the Thieves which rob us, and leave us wounded us by the way,
till the good Samaritan appears with his Wine and Oil, to cleanse, supple and
bind up our Wounds: He scourges the Conscience with a sense of his Anger, to
make us sensible of our Sins, and to bring us to an abhorrence of them. And
thus he sometimes Disciplines us with external Afflictions.

4. GOD sometimes wounds the Heart and terrifies the Conscience, by the Word
Preached; and then we are Pricked at the Heart, and with St. Peter's Auditors
cry out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Acts 2.37. Sometimes he smites the
Conscience with an inward sense and apprehension of his fierce Wrath, and
severe imminent Judgments; in which, as the Psalmist complains of, Psalm 55.4,
5. An Horrible fear overtaketh them (like the Earthquake at Horeb, preceding
the Still small voice of Mercy, 1 Kings 19.11, 12.) In sense of a Spiritual
Desertion, while he hides away his Face; Spiritual Wants, or permission to
some grievous Temptation, cold Fits of Despair and Buffetings by the Messengers
of Satan, in all which tho there be means of Comfort appointed, yet none can
prevail, till the Spirit of God the Comforter, return and Heal.

5. THE same Hand gives the Wound, and prescribes the Plaster; as it was
said, Hos. 5.13. The Assyrians and Jareb could not heal Judah and Ephraim of
their Wound; so no Mortal Creature can administer Comfort whereby to heal a
wounded Spirit, till he who corrects in Measure approaches and binds it up,
Jer. 30.11. etc. He, only he, says the Psalmist, Psalm 147.3. He heals the
broken in Heart, and binds up their Wounds: Even he who was Wounded for our
Sins, and bruised for our Iniquities, and by whose Stripes we are Healed, Isa.
53.5.

CHAP. XXVII. What things principally wound the Conscience.
THERE are some things which Principally afflict and wound the Conscience, and
comes up, as the Prophet mentions, 1 Samuel 13.17. like those Philistim Spoilers,
in three Companies, to destroy and drive Men into Despair: And the first
Apparition and Assault, is the apprehension of God's Wrath, for some Heinous
Sin committed: An Instance we have in Cain, having Murdered his Brother, cried
out, My Sin, or Punishment is greater than I can bear, Genesis 4.13. And Judas
having betrayed his Lord and Master, durst not approach to him to beg Mercy, by
reason he apprehended an implacable Anger in Christ.

2. IT is certain, according to the Apostles saying, That the Wrath of God
comes on the Children of Disobedience, Col. 3.6. And that his Wrath is
revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, Romans
1.18. And that the Impenitent by their hardness of Heart, treasure up to
themselves Wrath against the day of Wrath; That the^e shall be Indignation and
Wrath to them that obey not the Truth, Romans 2.5, 8. But when thou, who art of a
wounded Spirit, and broken Heart, have well considered, perhaps thou will find
that these things are of no Concernment to thee, but to those who live in Sin.

3. THE second Obstacle in wounding the Conscience, is sense of Spiritual
Wants, as Hope, Faith, assurance of Salvation, the Spirit of Sanctification and
Prayer. These being the Graces of the Almighty, and the Presence of his Holy
Spirit in the Regenerate, may yet for the time be an hidden Treasure, an
Immortal Seed under the frozen Clods, without any appearance of Life. And the
truly Devout may weep and complain, like the Penitent Magdalen in the Garden,
for the loss of Christ, when at the same season he is discoursing with them;
but they are ignorant of his Presence, John 20.14.

4. THE third Obstacle, is fear of some strong Temptations and Trials, at which
the afflicted and affrighted Conscience is Amazed, as the Disciples were when
Jesus slept in the Storm, and the Ship was Overmastered with Waves, and ready
to Travel to the bottom of the Sea, upon Death's Errand, Matt. 8.24, 25. Or
like St. Peter on the Water, when he beheld the rough Billows come Plowing
before him, cries out, Save Master, we Perish, Matt. 14.30. When it evidently
appears, they cannot Perish who are with Christ; nor they cannot be Safe who
are without him.

CHAP. XXVIII. Divine Considerations of the Afflicted.
AS God is Just, so he is Merciful; he is no enexorable Radamanth, but he is
easy to be entreated: Concerning whom we have a Word more sure, than any
Testimony of Man; for the Almighty, in Exodus 34.6. being his own Herald, thus
proclaims himself, The Lord merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant
in Goodness and Truth, keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving Iniquity, and
Transgression, and Sin. Now if that which others report of the Kings of Israel,
1 Kings 20.31. That they were merciful Kings, Could persuade them to seek
Mercy, and to enjoy their Lives and Liberties; how much more should that, which
God, who cannot lie, has declared himself, Tit. 1.2. move the afflicted Soul
humbly to Petition him for Mercy; who is more ready to grant it, than we are,
or can be to entreat it; for ask it we never could, except his preventing Grace
and holy Spirit invisibly moved us.

2. GOD delights not in the Death of Sinners, but in their Conversion, Ezekiel.
18. And as it is a true Prognostic of a Guests being welcome by the good
Aspects and Deportment of the Family; So it is an evident signal that a
Penitent Sinner is welcome to Heaven, by the Angels loud Exultations. If God in
his good Pleasure would have destroyed thee; how often and justly might he have
taken thee away in thy Sins? But now that his Eye has spared thee, his
Goodness is to lead thee to Repentance, which never comes too late, if
seriously performed. He terrifieth with present Sense of his Anger against Sin,
that Men may be excited to Repentance, and by forsaking their Sin, be more
assured of the Mercy of God, and their own Salvation. As stormy Winds by
shaking the Trees, do fix and root them deeper, and seasonable Weather purifies
the Air and Water by their Agitation; so does the Almighty mundifie the Minds
and Hearts of his Servants, by Menaces, Judgments, and Afflictions, 1 Cor.
7.11. Psalm. 119.

3. IT is God's Mercy to afflict thee now, that thou may Repent and be Saved.
It is the most unhappy Condition of a Sinner, when God concealeth his Anger to
the last, and then denounces the Impenitent as incorrigible, Isai. 1.5. So
that if no Remorsness of Conscience appears, thy Case is desperate. But this
Soul's Conflict, concludes another Co-ercive Power in thee, resisting Sin,
whereby thou may be capable of a state of Regeneration; for tho the Spirit of
God at the present in its Motions are but weak in thee, yet it is invincible.

4. St. Paul tells you, Romans 3.23, 24. All have sinned, and come short of the
Glory of God; being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that
is in Jesus Christ. Which plainly demonstrates, that it is not a Man's own
Righteousness that can contribute to his Salvation; and David, in Psalm. 32.1,
2. says, Blessed is the Man whose Sins are covered, and to whom the Lord
imputes no Sin. Not who has no Sin; for on those Terms none could be blessed.
It is not in the quantity of the Debt, as in St. Luke 7.42, 43. where fifty and
five hundred are equa1ly forgiven: And where an Infinite Majesty is offended in
the least, never any of God's Servants were Saved, for being less guilty than
thou art. Thou fear God's Wrath, because thy Sins are great, and appear so
to thy Conscience. They which are Saints had some, and he that breaks one
Commandment is guilty of the breach of all, and liable to the Curse of the Law,
James 2.10, 11. A diminutive wound to the Heart will as surely Kill, as the
deepest and widest Orifice. A small Shelf of Sands will as surely bulge the
Ship, as the greatest Rocks. A little Postern-gate, or breach in a City Wall
unguarded, will let in the Enemy: So the smallest Sins, if not covered by
Faith, and cured by Repentance, will destroy the Soul.

5. WHEN we consider Noah's Drunkenness, David's Murder and Adultery, Solomon's
Idolatry, Manasses's Murder, Witchcraft, and Idolatry; St. Paul's Persecution,
and St. Peter's denial of Christ; it is apparent, that these committed sinful
Acts of a deeper die than thou can charge thy Conscience withal; and that if
God's Justice should be executed according to the rigor of his Law, No flesh
living could be justified, Psalm. 143.2. Romans 3.20. Therefore is Christ the End
of the Law, to every one that believes, Romans 10.4. An Instance of which we
have in the Patriarch Abraham, the Prophet David, the Apostles St. Peter and
St. Paul, and all those that are Saved; when we rely on him and his Merits, by
God's own Covenant of Grace, and the Rigor and Curse of the Law is suspended.
God therefore gave us his Son, with this Proviso, That whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting Life, John 3.16. And the Apostle
intimates, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God. And Romans
8.1. There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. And if God
Justifies, who shall Condemn?

6. NO Sin is of that extent, or Equivalent to the Mercy of God, and the Merits
of Christ. All Actions of the Creature are finite; but the Mercy of the
Creator, and the Merits of a Savior are infinite. A drop of Water holds some
Proportion with the Sea, being both finite; but finites with infinites holds
none: Fear not then, nor let Pusilanimity overruled the^ if thou can Repent
and Believe, for there is Balm in Gilead, there is a Physician there; Therefore
let not Despair seize upon thee.

CHAP. XXIX. Considerations of Humility.
HUMILITY is Religion's Basis; and God gives Grace to the Humble, but
resists the Proud. When the subtle Tempter cannot prevail in his Persuasions
to evil, he insinuates himself into the Minds of them who have performed some
Pious Acts of Christianity, by his mischievous Suggestions, elevating them to a
secret Admiration of the same, whereby they may be deprived of that Grace which
enabled them to that Performance. The Poor Publican in his Humility not daring
to lift up an Eye toward that heavenly Majesty, he had so grievously offended,
having nothing to say, but only, God be merciful to me a Sinner, went home
justified rather than the Proud Pharisee, who boasted of much Sanctity.

2. HUMILITY is the securest Virtue; but Pride the Worm at the Root of
Religion, eats up the Vitality of it. Now by reason it is difficult for Dust
and Ashes to enjoy any extraordinary Temporal Blessings, without being puffed up
in Mind, above his Opinion of others in a lower Sphere; God justly permits many
of his Servants to depend on their own Strength, (like a tender Nurse, who
withdraws her Hand a little from her Charge, to make it sensible of its own
Weakness, and to check it from a dangerous Presumption) so that by falling
under some great Temptation, they may be disciplined in Humility safely to
distrust their own Strength, and fix their Dependence on God. For St. Peter was
in a better posture Weeping, than when he presumed to lay down his Life for his
Master; then he fell by abjuring his Lord; but now he rose again by his bitter,
but sincere Repentance. Now if the serious Considerations of thy Sins do truly
humble thee, thou have acquired a speedy way to thy Repentance.

3. THE Almighty often in his great Council orders the greatest Enormities of
some of his People to stand upon Record; that we may draw from thence this
Conclusion, That if we can Repent sincerely of Sins, of as deep a Die as they
are, we also shall find Mercy; but by the way, with this deep Consideration,
that we never entertain any of them in our Thoughts, to be guilty of
Presumption, but as Motives to Repentance, whereby we may lay hold with Faith
on him, who freely forgiveth the Penitent, not the obstinate Presumptuous
Sinner; and nothing more offends the Divine Providence, than a despairing of
his Mercy, (which is a secret questioning the Veracity of his Promises) and
Impenitency, which is the undoubted Issue of Incredulity. Indeed there is no
greater Injustice to God's Mercy, than by Despair to persevere in Sin, seeing
his Truth is engaged for our Pardon, if we believe and Repent, for he has not
declared in vain, Isai. 1.18. Though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be
white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool.

CHAP. XXX. Divine Considerations of our Repentance, forgiving Enemies, and the
Love of God.
CONSIDER why Christ came into the World: The beloved Disciple informs you,
John 3.16. Because he so loved it. God sent him to save Sinners; not only them
who had broken some of his Commandments: But as St. Paul says, He came into
the World to save Sinners, of whom I am chief, 1 Timothy 1.15. He came to call,
(as himself professes) Not the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance, Mat.
9.13. Mark 2.17. He called the heavy laden not fallaciously, but indeed to ease
and disburthen them of their Sins, Mat. 11.28. He saved the Publicans and
notorious Sinners, and to manifest the same in contempt of Pharisaical
Calumnies, conversed with them.

2. CONSIDER, that God who commanded us to forgive, not only seventy times, but
oftener, would not enjoin us that which himself could not, or would not perform.
He is essentially, and so infinitely gracious, that his Mercy is more than
thousands of Oceans, which can never be exhausted. Man has but a slender
Stock, a finite Mercy at the best, and such as may be diminished and vanquished
by Injuries. He that enjoineth Man to forgive without Exception, could not in
his Justice command and require Man to forgive more than himself in his
abundant Mercy could or was willing to assent to. Add to this a Consideration
of his tender Love; He has planted a Paternal Love and Care, not only in
Parents for their Children, but (lest we should suppose it rather habitual than
natural, taught by Precept or Example, rather implanted by the Almighty in
their Natures) in the very brute Beasts of the Field, and Birds of the Air, for
the Preservation of their Young; All this Love in the Creature is but
momentany, but in God it is Essential, Infinite, and Unchangeable.

3. NOW consider, did God give Man (suppose David) so much Love and Mercy, as
that upon the Mediation of the Tekoite, he could presently be reconciled to a
Rebellious Absalom; has he given thee Bowels of Compassion, and an ardent Zeal
for thy Childrens Good and Safety, to mourn for their Transgressions, and to be
ready upon the least appearance, or signs of amendment, to enter into a
Reconciliation with them, and can thou conceive that God will not be much
more ready to Pardon thee, if thou can heartily Repent and Implore
Forgiveness, through the Merits of a Crucified JESUS, the Son of his Love, and
in whom he has proclaimed from Heaven, He is well pleased, Matt. 3.17.

4. THE Custom among the Molossians was, whom Plutarch mentions, that the
Petitioner should take up the King's Son in his Arms, and so kneeling before
the Altar, nothing was denied for the Protection and Safety of the Suppliant.
So Themistocles found favor with King Admetus. So likewise will our Heavenly
King give Audience to our Petitions, if we present him in the Arms of Faith,
his Beloved Son Christ Jesus with the Merits of his Death and Passion. A
wounded Spirit, a broken and a contrite Heart, is an acceptable Sacrifice to
God, and that which he will not despise, Psalm 51.19. Thou can not reasonably
think thy Case detestable, for that which God approves and loves in thee, and
has so mercifully Cherished in those he dearly loved. The Royal Psalmist, the
Man after his own Heart, felt this which thou art afraid of, My Heart, says
he, is Wounded within me, Psalm 109.22.

5. CONSIDER seriously, that a calm Conscience is not always the best, nor a
Tempestuous the worst: There is a Lethargy and Stupidity of an evil Conscience
in a Carnal Security: This Calm is such a Storm, wherein the Soul, (like the
Men of Laish) is quiet and secure, until some Spiritual Danites awake it, and
the Sinner goes on like Agag, thinking surely that the Bitterness of Death is
past: As some Heart-sick Patient, in whom Nature's strength is so far decayed,
that he is insensible of the undiscovered approaches of Death now imminent;
even such is the calm Conscience of a secure Sinner.

6. NOW, if that Angel Guardian, the Conscience, which God and Nature has
placed within the Breast of a Righteous Person, be sometimes at Variance and
upon the seasonable point of Admonition for some Sin Unrepented; we may infer
it to be like the Ship in which Jonah fled, followed with Storms, until he was
cast forth, whereby his Happiness might be the greater: But the danger is
desperate with those, when the Mind is Drowsy and will not be awakened from
its Guilt and Impenitency; but are given up to the Spirit of Slumber; those I
say, if at any time their Conscience within 'em whispers and severely Checks
'em, then are they ready to cry out as Ahab to Elijah, Have thou found me, O
mine Enemy? If we are not sensible of our Wounds, the sign is Mortal; therefore
let us not our selves remove from that wholesome Discipline, or fly that
Surgeon, whose Lancet threatens none but the imposthumated Parts; but rather
choose wisely that main skill of knowing, whether our Consciences thus lulled up
in treacherous sleep, or disturbed by that Voice within us; which of these two,
I say prognosticates the most Danger.

CHAP. XXXI. The Examination of the Conscience, concerning our Repentance, etc.
TO this a serious Examination is requisite; wherein I shall lay down these
Particulars: First, some Reasons why we must seriously examine our Consciences.
Secondly, The main Lets incident thereto. Thirdly, Certain Rules by which we
may thoroughly Examine. Fourthly, Interrogatories to be proposed to the
afflicted Conscience. Fifthly, Some Conclusions necessary to be drawn from the
Whole.

2. FIRST, We ought to Examine our selves; for certainly God has not so often
Commanded it in vain, Lam. 3.40. Psalm. 4.4. 1 Cor. 11.28. 2 Cor. 13.5.
Secondly, Without this we cannot know our Sins, and so not Repent, nor have any
solid Comfort in Impenitency. We are extreme apt to mistake our selves; which
if we do, we can have no sound Comfort in the Testimony of a good Conscience,
which presupposes Faith and Illumination. Thirdly, Without this, we cannot
possibly know which way we are going, the Broad way to Destruction, or the
Narrow to Salvation, which were very necessary to comfort us, if we go right,
or to recall and rectify us, if wrong. Fourthly, Without this, we can never
make a right use of God's Chastisements, nor obtain any comfortable way out of
'em: Neither can we distinguish his Operations of Mercy in us, when he Humbles
us here, that we may be Exalted hereafter.

3. NOW, the common Obstructions to this Duty, are first an Evil Conscience,
which being wounded by a deep Guilt, cannot endure any Searching. Secondly,
Native Hypocrisy, misrepresenting us to our selves, by denominating us highly
Pious, and looking upon it as an important Injury not to be counted so.
Thirdly, distracting Cares of this Life, and Carnal Security, which say with
those Jews, Hag. 1.2. The time is not come: These make Men refer their
Repentance to the last Hour, even to the hazard of their Immortal Souls.

4. NOW, the Rules to be observed, are these: First, Earnestly endeavor to
find out and abandon all thy known Sins. Secondly, Rest not in outward
appearances, but entertain the illumination of God's Word into the secret and
dark recesses of thy Heart: For, the Woman in the Gospel, first lighted, and
then swept the Room, Luke 15.8. Thirdly, Judge thy self as impartially as thou
would do an Enemy. Skillful Painters place their Work at some distance from
'em, that they may be able to judge and amend their Errors. So must thou fix
thy actions upon some other Person; like David, who could no^ behold his Sin in
himself, till Nathan showed it him in another, 2 Samuel 12. I need not instance
in Judah, Genesis 28. Or in Ahab, 1 Kings, 20.4.

5. BEGIN Early, and be constant in this Duty. If thy Thoughts, after some
slender pursuit, return as those Men of Jericho, with a Non est Inventus, Josh.
2.22. Know that thou have more need of greater diligence to repeat often thy
Examination. Examine thy self by the whole Law of God: And enquire what thou
have done in opposition to Sin. Few wicked Men, but are content to observe some
of God's Laws, if thou will grant them Naaman's Plea only, The Lord pardon thy
Servant in this thing. And sometimes Herod, Ahab and Pharaoh, will have certain
fits of seeming Devotion and Repentance. The Brazen Serpent will not Sting: And
Men's Corruptions are most apparent when opportunity gives them Birth.

6. NOW, The Interrogatories to be propounded to thy Conscience, are these:
First, does Sin reign in thee, so that thou yieldest a willing obedience to it?
Or does it bear sway and tyrannize over thee? For between these there is an
immense difference. True it is, all Men sin, but Sin reigns only in the
Unregenerate; Let not sin reign in your mortal Body, Romans 6.12. And St. Paul
further tells ye, that the Regenerate sin, Romans 7.15.19. That which I do, I
allow not; for what I would, that do I not, but wh^t I hate, that do I: For the
Good that I do, I would not: But the Evil which I would not, that I do. From
this Inference, ask thy Conscience whether thou would have committed this
Evil which now wounds it? If not, it is no more thou, but Sin that dwells in
thee.

7. DO thou detest all Sin, because it is contrary to God's Holy Will? And
rather more for the love of God, than for fear of his Judgments? Do thou not
only grieve for every Sin which thou have committed, but also for the ^ravity
and Corruption of thy Will, and the infirmities of Flesh and Blood, disabling
thee to the purer service of God? If thou art in this State, thou art not
disesteemed in the Eye of the Almighty: Neither will God ever Condemn thee, for
that, which he has given thee a competency of Grace to abhor and condemn in
thy self: For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged, 1 Cor.
11.31. The Unregenerate Person Idolizes Sin, but is afraid of the Punishment;
but the Regenerate abhors it, therefore God will not judge him for it, but will
rather say what he said to the Woman taken in Adultery, Neither do I Condemn
thee, go and Sin no more, John 8.11.

8. WOULD thou embrace Sanctity, and is it thy Heart's desire to serve God in
sincerity? So that thou can say with the Church, Isa. 26.8. The desire of
our Soul is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee. If thou do hunger
and thirst after Righteousness, be assured thou shall be satisfied, Matt. 5.
Do thou in the inward Man consent to the Law of God? It Is Infallibly certain,
if thou do pursue after Holiness, without which, none can see God, thou art
esteemed of the Almighty. For our best Perfection at present is this, not that
we are thoroughly Pious, but that we chase after it.

9. HAVE thou with the Kingly Prophet, Psalm 119.6. a respect to all God's
Commandments, so that thou do not in thy Heart dispense with any of them, for
Pleasures, Profits, or any secular Advantage, but would earnestly enjoy that
Privilege of keeping them all? If so, let not slip the Anchor of thy Hope, but
receive Comfort: For hour Satan's Delusions may allure thee, and thy own
Corruptions may betray thee, yet thy minor serving of thy Creator without
Exemption or dispensation to any Sin, concludes thee in a State of
Regeneration, the Denomination following the better Part, as appears in St.
Paul's Expression of himself in the same case, Romans 7.25. With the Mind I my
self serve the Law of God; but with the Flesh, the Law of Sin. That is,
groaning under the Tyranny, but not dispensing with its Reign.

10. DO thou resolve to oblige thy self to avoid Sin? Then God will accept
thee, 2 Cor. 8.12. David said, I will keep thy Statutes, and I have sworn, and
I will perform it, that I will keep thy Righteous Judgments, Psalm. 119, 8.106.
It is evident he made a breach of his Performance, tho his Intentions were
quite contrary, 2 Samuel 12.9. Do thou conscientiously and diligently use the
means to take cognizance of thy Sins; as by applying the word of God home to
thy Conscience? for by the Law comes the knowledge of Sin. Romans 7.7. Do thou
carefully shun all occasions and incentives moving thee and enticing thee to
Sin and Wickedness? It is a vanity in him to detest Drunkenness, who will not
restrain his boon Companions: It is impossible for him to hate Adultery, who
fixes his Eye upon the Lascivious, and is entangled in the snare of the
Adulterer: Such are apt then to forget what was mentioned in our Savior's
Sermon on the Mount, Matt. 5.28. Whosoever looks on a Woman to Lust after
her, has committed Adultery with her already in his Heart. And Solomon's
Advice is very proper, Come not near the Door of her House, Prove. 5.8. For
Opportunity and Occasion is Lust's Pander.

11. ASK thy Conscience whether it can presume to sin wittingly and willingly?
And whether it can be sedate in any known and unrepented Sin? If it be
disturbed, dissipate thy Fear; for this very disturbance of Conscience, which
so much appalls thee, is a principal Mark of a good Conscience. It is true, as
the Woman sang of Saul and David, 1 Samuel 18.7. Saul has slain his Thousands,
and David his ten Thousands: So, Despair has cast away some, but Presumption,
Multitudes. Has not thy Conscience at some time, in a particular Measure, been
refreshed by a Divine assurance of thy Interest in a Savior, a resolution to
forsake all thy Sins, Peace with God, and Salvation by the Merits of Christ? We
commit a gross Mistake, if we always judge of our State by present Sense: For
there are certain hours of Tentation, wherein the light of Grace is obscurely
Eclipsed to our Sense, and the stupid or afflicted Conscience feels no
present Illumination of God's Spirit, which yet in due time shall return, and
compensate our Trials, with greater advantage of Assurance.

12. NOW the Conclusions necessary to be considered are these: First, The
Almighty's Judgments are ever just, yea, when Flesh and Blood says with
Nichodemus, How can these things be? John 3.9. When the too Curious Inquests
after them are to be Stayed with a, Nay but, O Man, Who art thou that Reply
against God, Romans 9.20. And so also his Mercies are as the unsounded Deeps,
beyond all apprehension of carnal Reason; often Medicable by Wounding and
Afflicting the Guilty Conscience; Comforting by terrifying, introducing to
Glory and Immortality through Corruption; killing Sin in the Flesh by Death,
the Fruit of Sin, and guiding to Heaven, (as I may say) by the Gates of Hell,
and fear of Damnation.

13. THE most Notorious Sins committed in Ignorance and Incredulity, after
Repentance, are no Arguments to Despair: For the Apostle tells you, 1 Cor. 6.9,
10, 11. Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor
Abusers ^f themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards,
nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall Inherit the Kingdom of God; and such were
some of you: But ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are Justified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. And the same Apostle,
was a Blasphemer, and a Persecuter, and Injurious; but obtained Mercy,
forasmuch as he did it ignorantly, and in unbelief, 1 Timothy 1.13. In his
Conversion these Sins fell off, as the Viper of Melita from his hand, without
any danger to his Life, Acts 28.5. So God pronounces of the Convert by the
Mouth of his Prophet, Ezekiel. 18.22. All his Transgressions that he has
committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him.

14. SINS of the Regenerate, though violent Perturbations of Mind, or
Tentations ensna^ing them, are not to be reckoned among Symptoms of
Reprobation, or Apostasy: Such was Peter's denial, and David's Adultery, and
Murder: Therefore the Apostle's, Counsel is very charitable, Gal. 6.1. If any
Man be overtaken in any fault, ye that are Spiritual restore such a one with
the Spirit of Meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. And
Christ has taught us, without distinction of great and little Sins, to say
daily, forgive us our trespasses: This Life is a Spiritual Combat, a Truceless
War against the Powers of Darkness, wherein the Strongest may be, and often are
carried away Captive, and yet be healed and recovered, Ephesians. 6.12. Their
Captivity concludes not their not being true Israelites, who would fain return.

15. EVERY Sin against Knowledge does not presently infer a Reprobate Mind: The
most Exquisite and Dexterous are sometimes taken in Satan's snares; St. Peter,
though forewarned, denied Christ through sudden apprehension of fear: Not out
of Malice, but infirmity: We, nay the best of Men, are but partly Flesh and
partly Spirit, so that we can neither perform the good we are inclined to, nor
avoid the evil which we behold and detest. St. Paul, and all that are
Regenerate, does allow the Law of God, yet sometimes feel another lawless Law,
carrying them away Captive to Sin, Romans 7.23.

16. THOUGH every Sin against Conscience is very dangerous, and every
perseverance therein, the very Suburbs of Hell; yet every such Enormity
excludes not Repentance and Remission: Because sin not only allureth, but
sometimes exercises the rage of a Tyrant, and Captivates us against our Wills.
There may also be a Lethargy or Epilepsie of the Soul: There is such
mischievous subtilty in Satan, that his Snares, though visible, are not always
avoided; whose Messengers, though felt with grief of Soul, are not always
overcome; yet he that gave Waters to the Horeb Rock, Exodus 17. 6, 7. can smite
our harder Hearts, and make the Waters of Life flow Plentifully, to Repentance,
never to be repented of.

17. THOUGH every Relapse into Sin is very dangerous, yet if a man be not
entangled and vanquished, those breaches may be repaired by Repentance, 2 Pet.
2.20. And Solomon tells you, The Just man falls seven times a day, Prove.
24.16. Satan does not always present New Scenes, but sometimes dresses up his
Old Artifices, therewith to beguile: Though our Infirmities are numerous, God's
Power is made manifest, by sustaining us, that though we fall, we shall not
fall away. Though Satan's power, subtilty, and restless malice, are very
potent, yet he and his Messengers are limited by their Chain, and can receive
no Commission, if it be but to enter into a Herd of Swine, but from the
Almighty, Mat. 8.31. And the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 10.13. That God will not
suffer us to be tempted, above what we are able: So that we may resolve, that
neither Life, nor Death, nor any Creature shall be able to saparate us from the
love of God in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.39.

CHAP. XXXII. Rules of Practice.
FIRST, use thy utmost endeavor to possess the Testimony of a good Conscience,
which thou can by no means attain, but by being vigilant over thy Soul, and
with a fixed Constancy resisting Temptations. Every Sin, yea, even the least,
wounds the Soul afresh: Be not secure of minor Sins, but let a good
Conscience be most precious unto thee; part not from it for any Pleasures,
Honors, or Riches of this World; but rather part from Life it self. Enjoy a
tender Conscience: A seared one, like Callous Flesh, is insensible of that
which touches it; to this, Custom creates a proneness to sin, and takes away
the sense of it, 1 Timothy 4.3. Tit. 15.

2. APPROVE thy self in every Action to God, fixing thy self ever in his
presence, who beholds a far off all thou think or actest, 1 Pet. 3.12. And
value not whoever is disgusted, if God approves thee Walk not according to the
Wisdom of the Flesh, but by the Rule of Gods Grace, which shall at last be thy
rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1.12. Resign not thy self to Sins Dominion; which is
impossible, except thou wholly deliverst up thy self, by consenting to thine
own Captivity; as the Ear-bored Servants, who professed love to their Masters;
and so would not be Manumissed and freed from them, Exodus 21.5, 6. Detest Sin
and it shall not prejudice thee: No sin is so pernicious as that which is most
facetious; but espicially beware of presumptuous sins, lest they get the
Dominion over thee, Psalm. 19.13. Numb. 15.30, 31. Deuteronomy. 17.12.

3. CONTEMPLATE on God's Justice and Mercy together; let them be inseparable in
thy Thoughts. For if thou inspectest into his Justice only, thou art liable to
Despair upon the sight of thy sins: And if thou viewest his Mercy only, thou will with facility presume, when thou beholdest that transcendent Immensity,
which is ever ready upon unfeigned Repentance to pardon Sinners: The Sailers of
Old, upon the Yards of their Ships, conjectured the Ignis lambens for a good or
a bad fatality; if they beheld but one flame, they denominated it an unlucky
Helena; but if two, they accepted it for Castor and Pollux, Good Prognostics
of fair and prosperous Weather: Even so it is in Mercy and Justice, the
Consideration of them singly, may prove pernicious, but both linked together
may complete thy Happiness.

4. LABOR for true Faith in Christ, who is the Propitiation for our sins, 1
John 2.2. Whose Blood cleanses us from all sin; 1 John 1.7. And holding Faith
and a good Conscience, That we may avoid being Shipwrack'd, 1 Timothy 1.19. 1 Timothy
3.9. There was no cure for a wounded Israelite against the venom of Fiery
Serpents, but to look up to the Brazen Serpent, which Prefigured Christ
apprehensible by Faith; the only Medicament for Sin-wounded-Consciences: Permit
but this very sense and apprehension of God's Wrath which now appaleth thee, to
induce thee the more arduously to detest all Sin; and thou shall thereby be
ascertained, that God has wounded thee, only to heal thee.

5. REMEMBER that what the Law averrs, it declares only to them who are under
the Law, not under Grace, Romans 3.19. They are under the Law who plead Not
guilty, and insist upon their Justification by works of the Law: We are under
Grace, who perceiving our Sin and Misery by the Law, fly wholly to him for
Mercy, who freely justifies the Sinner, Romans 3.24. The Imprecations and
Menaces of the Law are not to break the bruised Reed, nor quench the Smoking
Flax, but to depress the heart that is elevated with an opinion of self merit,
who safely go on to undo themselves after a presumptuous manner.

6. LET thy Repentance be speedy, that Sin take no root in thy heart. Neither
let thy Wound putrify before thou apply the Remedy: But ascend with all
diligence to the Throne of Grace to implore Mercy, before Wrath is gone out
against thee: Rely on this Second Table, Repentance, who have lost the first,
of Innocence: Condemn thy self, and Christ will Justify thee: He only expects
thy voice, to give thee audience: When thou come with thy Accusation and
confessest thou have sinned, then Christ he readily receives the Humble
Penitent, and Proclaims thy Sins are forgiven thee. Observe how quickly the
Pardon followed David's Confession; no sooner had he acknowledged, I have
sinned against the Lord, but Omnipotency declares by the Prophet, The Lord also
has put away thy Sin, 2 Samuel 12.13. St. Peter quickly Repented, and as quickly
found Mercy: Esau stayed too long, and so found no place for Repentance,
though, He sought it carefully with Tears: Heb. 12.17. If the Granado fired, be
suddenly retorted, it proves prejudicial to the Assailant: Such are the product
of Satan's Fireworks, if thou cast out his Temptations, and heartily repent
thee, where any of his Darts pierce thee.

7. GIVE not thy self up to pensive Dedolency, mundane Sorrow, and fruitless
Solitariness; that will but animate the bitterness of Spirit: Think not too
much of thy Afflictions, but dulcifie them with remembrance of God's Mercy
toward thee: Assume not to thy self a Worldly Sorrow that is unto death, 1
Cor. 7.10. But comfort up thy self in God, as David did, Psalm. 43.5. Why art
thou so sad, O my Soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? Trust in God,
for I shall yet praise him. And Solomon tells ye, A merry heart does good, like
a Medicine, but a broken Spirit dries the Bones, Prove. 17.22. And again, a
merry heart makes a Cheerful Countenance, but by the Sorrow of the heart the
Spirit is broken, Prove. 15.13.

8. BE very attentive to God's Word: For he is the God of all Consolation, and
the Word is his Mind and Revealed Will for the benefit of our Salvation: It is
a full Magazine, and there is no Affliction incident to frail Mortality, but
may there meet with a proper Antidote: There thou shall find Rules to guide
thee, and preserve thee from sin: There thou shall have a prospect of the
Divine Mercy of God in Christ Jesus to wash away the guilt of all thy
Transgressions: But then appear not only to be a hearer, but a doer of the
Word, and Treasure up those Gracious Promises in thy heart; so shall thou in
due season feel the Operation of the Holy Spirit distilling the former, and the
Latter-Rain upon the seed, whereby it may take root and be fruitful.

9. LASTLY, Add Zealous and Frequent Prayer, as God's Servants have practiced
in all their distresses, Psalm. 6.9. And be ascertained that he will not leave
thee Comfortless, but will at length appear with great assurance of thy
Salvation, and will infinitely recompense thy Patience in suffering and
perseverance in invocating for pardon. Satan is never more baffled and
infatuated in his own Stratagems, than when he gains a License to wound the
hearts of those who are precious in the sight of the Almighty: For, as Romanus
the Martyr told the Tormentor, Look how many Wounds thou give, so many Mouths
thou set open, to cry to God for help; and indeed these Jewels cannot
arrive to their Glorious Luster, without being Ground hard by Affliction.

The Prayer.
O MOST Gracious and Merciful Lord God, rebuke me not in thine Anger, neither
chasten me in thy hot Displeasure: My Soul is sore vexed, but Lord, how long
will thou punish me? Have Mercy upon me, for I am weak: Lord heal my Soul and
deliver it, for I have sinned against thee; O save me for thy never failing
Mercies sake: I am weary of my continual Groaning, mine Eyes are consumed with
my grief of Tears: But Lord, hear thou my Supplication, and receive my Prayer.

2. O Lord, I am sorely afflicted, but quicken me in thy Righteousness
according to thy word: In thy loving kindness, and multitude of thy tender
Mercies, blot out my transgressions; wash, O wash me, and purge me thoroughly
from my sins, and cleanse me from all my iniquities, the magnitude and number
being of that Extent, that my guilt flies in my Face, and I am afraid of thy
Blessed Presence. I acknowledge my self unworthy to look up to Heaven, to
appear before thee with a Petition of Mercy, who have so incessantly provoked
thy Justice: The filthy Leprosy of my sins, stink and are corrupt, that they
stop my own mouth; but my heart readily answers, that I am of all men, most
unworthy of this thy Condescension, in inclining thy Gracious Ear unto so
wretched a Creature as I am.

3. THESE Terrors of Conscience wherewith thou have now afflicted my Soul, are
thy just Judgments: The fears of Hell, and eternal Condemnation, wherewith thou
have wounded me, are incomparably less than my sins have deserved: But, Lord,
remember them not, who can not forget the sufferings of thy blessed Son Jesus
for them all. Lord, I am not able to answer thee one word of a thousand, nor
can thy Justice require that of me, for which my Savior and Redeemer has
satisfied: Therefore I renounce my self, that I may be found in a bleeding
Jesus, not having on my own Righteousness, according to the Condemning Letter
of the Law, but that I may be Clothed in his Righteousness, who has long since
Cancelled the Handwriting of Ordinances that were against me, and has paid
the debt for me.

4. O Lord, for His sake I humbly implore thee, to convert this Judgment I now
labor under, into Mercy: Let it operate in my Soul a true detestation of all
Sin; a steadfast purpose to forsake all my evil ways; a comfortable experience
of thy Mercy, pronouncing Pardon to my afflicted Conscience, by the infallible
Evidence of thy Holy Spirit, and assurance of Peace with thee: O make me to
hear of Joy and Gladness, that the Bones which thou have broken may rejoice.
Cast me not away from thy presence, neither take thy Holy Spirit, the
Comforter, from me; but restore me to the joy of thy Salvation, and uphold and
establish me with thy free Spirit.

5. O thou who despisest not a broken and contrite heart, pour the Oil of thy
Mercy, and heal my wounded Spirit: Then will I teach Transgressors thy way,
that they may fear thee, and melt at the sight of thy Judgments; then shall
Sinners be Converted unto thee, who art the Fountain of all Mercy and
Consolation: Lord hear me, and incline thine Ear, in this day of my Calamity:
Lord Consider, and perform thine own promise made through thy beloved Son Jesus
Christ the Righteous, to whom with thee, O Heavenly Father, and the Holy
Spirit, be all Honor and Glory, in Heaven and Earth, from this time forth and
for ever more,

Amen.
CHAP. XXXIII. The Sense of Spiritual Wants.
THE next thing which wounds and afflicts the Conscience, is Sense of defects,
and Spiritual Wants: As want of Faith, Hope and Assurance of Salvation; Want of
Sanctification, Purity of Heart, the Spirit of Prayer, and Hearing, and want of
ability to perform other Holy Duties. In these the Spirit is stupefied, and
overcast even in the best of Christians for a time: The Religious Person
sometimes is sensible of a dullness, and want of Fervency in Prayer, and of a
comfortable assurance, that God hears or regards it, because he does not
presenty answer, or not grant our Petitions. Sometimes they feel a Deviation of
the Mind, and discomposure of thoughts, in attention, and unbelief in hearing
and reading the Word: Sometimes want of Patience, want of Love to God, and
Charity to Men: In short, such a general debility, or distemper of the Internal
Man, that he readily concludes with St. Paul, That in his Flesh dwells no
good thing, Romans 7.18. These are great Maladies of the Soul, and Wounds of the
Spirit; but it infers a good Prognostic of a bad Cause: Where these are and
the Sinner is insensible, they are desperate Symptoms.

2. IN this Case let us consider, that the very same measure of Grace, which to
the present sense of a Regenerate Man, seems incompetent, may yet be a
sufficient measure to save him: And when he Invocates the Divine Assistance, he
is most strong, though in his own sense he is weak and deficient: For in St.
Paul's distress the Lord thus answered his Petition, My Grace is sufficient for
thee, 2 Cor. 12.8. It says not it shall be, but it is sufficient, meaning the
present measure of Grace he had in his Possession, when he looked upon himself
as a weak Vessel.

3. THE most Pious, their measure of Assurance is such, as they are not only
enjoined to give diligence to make their Calling and Election sure, that so an
entrance may be administered to them abundantly into the Everlasting Kingdom,
but they are in duty bound also to Work out their own Salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.12. All Incredulity infers not a Reprobate sense: There
is Incredulity in the very Elect before, and a perplexing Remnant after their
Calling; yea, even in their best Estate here; else why did the Holy Apostles
pray, Lord increase our Faith, Luke 17.5. And why did our Savior upbraid them
with unbelief, Mark 16.14.

4. AND Saving Faith differs in degrees: So that there is a stronger and a
weaker Faith, yet both true, and justifying: So do all other Graces, one has a
greater and more Excellent measure of the Spirit of Prayer than another: One
has a more discerning and attentive Spirit of Hearing than another, and yet in
either instance, the minor may be true and sufficient: For to every Man is
given according to the measure of Christ, Ephesians. 4.7. One has ten Talents, and
another but two: Nay, even in one and the same Person's Faith, there is
sometimes a grander, and sometimes a diminutive measure of Confidence and
Assurance: And so we must judge of other Gifts; sometimes there is more
fervency in Prayer, and other times less. The Sun does not display his Radiant
Beams on us always alike, neither does the light of Gods Grace illuminate us
after one manner.

5. A true saving Faith may be very impotent, and the Believer may be
insensible for some space, but yet the Gates of Hell shall never prevail
against it, as may appear in St. Peter's Example. There are doubtings and
failings in the best on Earth, by Reason we are but here partly Spiritual: We
are not yet arrived to perfection: Faith here must receive continual increases,
and be subject to Trials: And the like does ensue to all other Virtues and
Graces: That true Faith, never shall finally fall away, or utterly fail, though
it be subject to Intension and Remission; because Christ interceeded for us, as
he said to St. Peter, behold, Satan has desired that he may sift you as wheat,
but I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not, Luke 22.31, 32. Because
his Grace by which we are called, and stand, is immutable in the Counsel and
Decree of Heaven, and are Sealed up by the Holy Spirit of Promise, 2 Cor. 1.22.
And the like we are to judge of of all the Fruits of Sanctification, which
being the Donations and Graces of God, are such as he repents not of, neither
finally withdraws, Romans 11.29.

6. THOU have indeed a true sense of thy Spiritual wants, and mournest at thy
Corruptions of Heart, which on every occasion produce sinful Acts against thy
Maker; if this be a heavy burden unto thee, receive this Comfort, that thy sin
is excluded its proper place, and become a Stranger unto thee: For nothing in
its own proper station is so ponderous. The danger is want of Sense, and taking
pleasure in Unrighteousness: If a wounded Person is insensible, he is either
dead, or in some dangerous Exstacy: No part has sense but the Living; though
it were for the present more comfortable to be whole, yet sense of smart in thy
wounds infers Life; and indeed in Gods Medicaments, who makes all things
operate for the best to them that love him, it is a better State, (in respect of
the quiet Fruits of Righteousness, accruing to them that are thereby Exercised,
and the Ulcerous Corruptions of our Souls, often necessitating our wounding
that we may be healed) than the secure prosperity of Sinners; for it is good
and beneficial at the last for the just that they have been afflicted, Psalm.
119.67.

7. WHEN thou hear, or read the Scriptures, art thou sensible of the want
of Faith, Assurance, Sanctification, and the Spirit and Fervency of Prayer? If
so, be comforted: For as the Solar Eclipse, and Descension of Light toward us,
can be discerned by no Luster, but its own; so neither can the want of Grace be
possibly discerned by any thing but Grace. Have thou a hearty desire to have
these wants of Grace supplied? Then that very holy Ambition is Grace it self;
without which thou could not desire it: Our blessed Lord in his Sermon on the
Mount, Math. 5.6. pronounces, Blessed are they who do hunger and thirst after
Righteousness; for they shall be filled: God will never desert that Soul which
desires him, and his saving health: None can hunger but the Living; and none
hungers for Grace, but he that subsisteth by it: But then thy desire of that
Seed must be ardent, not languid, such as cannot rest unsatisfied with any
thing else in the World.

8. THERE may be an Enervate, and Oblique appetite of Salvation in Balaam, for
fear of Damnation; but he more loved the Wages of Unrighteousness: The happiest
thirsts for the Waters of Life, and afflicts the Soul till it be obtained;
and enjoys no rest, or peace without it: So that indeed this very State which
so much afflicts thee is the most secure and happy; and thou shall once know,
that which one said in the happy Event of his unhappy Shipwreck, We had
perished, if we had not thus perished. And when thou have received the Spirit
of God in such a measure as thereby to discern the things that are freely given
thee of God; then thou shall find, That Blessed is the Man whom the Lord
chasteneth and teaches in his Law, that he may give him rest from his days of
adversity, Psalm. 94.12, 13.

9. MAKE that inquest with thy Soul, whether ever thou were possessed of that,
which thou art now sensible thou want? If so, be assured it shall revive
again, and finally overcome; For whatsoever is born of God overcomes the
World; and this is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith, 1
John 5.4. And this sense and sorrow is a signal of the recovery of the health
of thy most precious part, thy Soul; as the seven times Neezing of the
Shunamite's Child presaged his reviving, 2 Kings 4.35. If thou never yet
enjoyd'st the Grace which thou now beginnest to be sensible of, it now
evidently is apparent thou shall acquire it; for this internal perplexity, is
but as the motion of the Waters of Bethesda, a certain Prognostic of a healing
Power descending on thee.

10. NEXT ask thy self, according to that saying of the Prophet, Jer. 2.17.
Have thou not procured this unto thy self? Even this which thou now complainest
of? Have thou not neglected the appointed means? If want of Faith perplex thee;
have thou not negligently heard the Gospel? Have thou laid it up in a
Solicitous Heart? Have thou valued it, and begged it fervently and frequently
of God, above all things in the World? Thou art querulous for want of the
Spirit of Prayer; Have thou not neglected this Duty formerly; and do thou now
duly prepare thy self for that holy Office? Do thou use that vigilance which
Christ enjoined, of Watch and Pray; by recalling thy profane and wandering
Thoughts from their Extravagancies, and all attention of Spirit, fixing them on
the Holy Jesus? Thou art sensible thy Heart, Tongue, nor Actions are not
Sanctimonious: Appeal to thy own Conscience, and then tell me, if thou have not
heretofore used all Arts, and solicited all things to appear in the throng, to
drown the loud checks of that voice within thee, and have looked upon it as thy
utter Enemy? Now if thou would cease the Effect, remove the Occasion; duly
observe God's holy Ordinances, and he will infallibly perform his Promises.

11. ENQUIRE whether thou do not persevere in some habitual sin? It is a
great folly to cry out of the Heat, and still cast oil on the Fire: If it be an
Achan's Wedge hidden, search for the Cursed thing, Josh. 7.25, 26. and the
Plague in thine own heart, 1 Kings 8.38. And by removing the Impediment and
Obstruction, thou shall be Comforted: If it be a sleeping Jonah, cast him
overboard: And as Eliphaz said to Job, If thou return to the Almighty, thou
shall be built up, thou shall put iniquity far from thy Tabernacles: The
Almighty shall be thy defense; then shall thou have delight in the Almighty,
and shall lift up thy face unto God: Thou shall make thy Prayer unto him, and
he shall hear thee, Job 22.23. etc.

12. TO reduce what has been said into practice, follow these Rules; Give an
audit to God's Word preparedly, that is, renew thy Repentance, and Invocate the
Father of Lights to Illuminate thee, that thou may be a Reverend and an
Attentive Auditor: Faith comes by Hearing; so does Sanctification, God's Spirit
operating upon his own Ordinance to make it Active: The occasion why so many
hear, so often; and so few so seldom practice and receive true Comfort by it,
is for want of a due preparation; resembling them that sow among Thorns: Let
Faith and all Christian Graces be valuable to thee for his sake who is the
Author of all our Happiness. How few set a right Estimate on Heavenly things
till it be too late? Mundane Vanities, are Rated high, and often purchased at a
dear Rate; but where are those that rise Early, rest Late, Eat the Bread of
Carefulness, venture Sea, and Land to obtain the holy City, even the New
Jerusalem? Be eager in the pursuit of these things thou standst in need of, and
the Almighty will not withold them from thee.

13. OUR Savior affirms to us, John 7.38, 39. He that believes in me, out of
his Belly shall flow Rivers of Living Waters: That is, fluency of Graces
proceeding from the Holy Ghost. If thou will labor, and endeavor to attain
unto this Faith, chase away all Obstructions that do oppose thee: For a
Resolution to persevere in any known Sin, and True Faith* are inconsistent. An
obdurate Heart is like the great stone on the mouth of the Well at Padan-Aram,
which kept Men back from the Waters of Refreshment: These Impediments, I say,
must first be removed; for sin in the Affections, is like a venomous Toad in
the Mouth of the Fountain, obstructing the Waters of Life.

14. CONSIDER the Operation of the Almighty in thee, and compare thy
misfortunes with others: If thou art not heard by the Great Being, perhaps thy
Supplication is not consonant to his Will: For his design is to save thee, and
infallibly to bless thee; and if he performs that by a means suitable to
Omnipotency, will thou be impatient, with Naaman, if thou art not healed
according to thy way which thou proposest? Is not it enough that he will effect
that which is properest and best for thee and can thou pretend to outvie his
Wisdom? Perhaps he thinks it requisite to try thy perseverance and patience,
whereof I confess, I know no severe object, than an opinion of his not hearing
our Prayers. It was no small trial, when David cried out, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Why art thou so far from helping me, and from the Words
of my Roaring? Psalm. 22.1. But the Acclamation on the Cross, carried a louder
sound, Mat. 27.46. Moses was denied entrance into Canaan, but was received into
Heaven: The Cup did not pass away from Christ, but God's Will was performed in
the operation of Man's Redemption; and so, he was heard, Heb. 5.7.

15. DOES thy Faith endure many sharp encounters of the Tempter? Then observe
the Almighty by this means does more confirm it. Is not every Temptation as the
shaking of Trees, which loosing the ground, Engrafts them the deeper? Thou art
sensible of thy great defects in Sanctity, and of many dubious conflicts
between the Flesh and the Spirit, provoking thy Soul to cry with Rebecca, when
perplexed with her wrestling Twins, Why am I thus? Genesis 25.22. Despond not, but
consider the work of him, with whom we have to do: Thus he chaseth thee often
to fly to him, and to Consult his Oracles: Thus he exercises thee to humility,
without which the most Excellent Graces could not save thee. He that Prayed for
St. Peter's falling, could have prevented him from falling into that Sin: But
in so doing he kept him from presumption, and fitted him to confirm his
Brethren.

16. IN all Humility beg Holiness of God, who has expressly said, ask and ye
shall have: And to consider that God is perfect Holiness, is a vehement Motive
conducing to it; and certainly he cannot choose but love his own Image in us,
and freely give us that which he loves: It pleased the Author of our Being,
that Solomon, before Riches, Revenge, and Life it self, should petition him for
Wisdom; upon which, he did not only grant his request, but additionally gave
him Riches and Honor: And undoubtedly it does so much please God, that any of
his Servants does in the sense of their wants, before all things give Grace the
Preferrence; and they that in the sincerity of their heart Petition to him for
Sanctity of Life, he will not deny them, but will insert to their grant, more
than we are able to ask or think of.

The Prayer.
O Almighty God, Infinite in Mercy, and perfect Verity, who delightest not in
the destruction of Wretched Creatures, nor despisest the Groans of a Troubled
Spirit; Lord, I am poor and afflicted, and do in bitterness of Soul acknowledge
my vileness and vacancy of Grace, the Corruption of my sinful nature, the
misery which I have procured my self by my wilful disobedience to thy Holy
Laws, and my Impotency to any thing that is good: Lord, I am as that wretched
Traveller, wounded and cast down; only sensible of my Wounds, but utterly
unable to move, or help my self: The Priest and Levite pass by and afford me no
relief; neither is it in the power of the Creature to assist me: Nay, even thy
just and holy Law, which wholsomely instructs, Do this and live, is so far from
aiding me, or administering Comfort, that my sins make it appear to me a killing
Letter; or at best resembling the Prophets Staff, sent before by the Ministry
of thy Servant, not able to give Life, but a Prospect of my Sins, and rendering
me guilty, before thy dreadful Tribunal, and at the Bar of my terrified
Conscience.

2. BUT, O Lord, let the good Samaritan, the Prophet himself, Christ Jesus, thy
dear Son, and my alone Savior, inspire me with his Holy Spirit; for he only
can bind up my wounded Soul and heal it: Thou have wounded me by an heavy
apprehension of thy Justice; O now heal me by the assurance of thy Mercy:
Strengthen my Faith in Christ, who freely justifies Sinners: And as thou have
in thine Eternal Love, given him to Death for my Redemption, so give me an
infallible assurance that he is my Savior and Deliverer: That according to
thine own Gracious Promise in him, I may live with thee.

3. AND O thou, who art the Savior of all the World, who sentest the Holy
Ghost the Comforter of all thy Servants, to thy Afflicted Disciples to
strengthen them, send him to my Enervated and Wretched Soul: It is neither of
him that Wills, nor of him that Runs, but of thine own Infinite Goodness,
showing Mercy: Thy Omnipotence is effectual in the Operation of thy good Will
and Pleasure. O, be Graciously pleased to Sanctify my Corrupted will and
affections: And as thou have freely given me a will and a hearts desire to
serve and please thee, that I might be saved; so perfect thine own work in me,
and establish what thou have begun: Give me, O Lord, true Holiness, and repair
thine own Image in me, that thou may own me for thine; and then manifest
thine own work in me, and unto me.

4. LET not the good Spirit which has possession of me, remain any longer in
obscurity; but blessed Lord, manifest thy self unto my Soul: And let the
Illumination of thy Spirit break out in full assurance of Faith, that I may no
more doubt of thy Mercies: Grant me an entire Victory over Sin and Despair, by
the apparent presence of the Comforter: My afflicted Soul, O Lord, knows no
Sanctuary to fly unto, but thy infinite mercy: Unto thee, alone it Gaspeth as
a thirsty Land; O shower down such a plentiful Dew of thy Grace, which may
refresh my wearied Spirit, and fill me with the Fruits of Righteousness, which
may evidently appear in my Life and Conversation, to thy Glory, and the
assurance of my Election, Vocation, Sanctification, Perseverance and Salvation
in thy beloved Son, and my alone Savior, to whom with thee and the Holy
Spirit, Three Persons, one Immortal, Incomprehensible, Omnipotent, only Wise
God, be rendered all Honor and Glory, in Heaven and Earth, now and to all
Eternity.

Amen.
CHAP. XXXIV. Fear of Temptations.
NEXT We are to Consider the Conscience afflicted with Fear of Temptations, and
a defection through them, enclining it to a despair of Grace sufficient to
resist them; by this means the Soul is immerst with heaviness, through manifold
Temptations, 1 Pet. 1.6. In which case it is necessary to consider, That first,
A Temptation is a Trial, or taking an Experiment of something or other: The
Devil who cannot compel, tries men whether he can allure them to Sin; and this
is apprehensively Temptation.

2. THERE is a Temptation of Trial, which you see, Acts 20.19. 1 Cor. 10.13.
Rev. 3.20. and St. James says, My Brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into
diverse Temptations: And Blessed is the man that endures Temptation. For when
he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised
to them that Love him. St. James 1.2, 12. God is said to tempt no man, (that
is, to Evil: Evidently implying, as there is no Sin in him, so neither is there
any occasioned by him) yet tried Abraham (to manifest him openly to others and
himself: For no man knows himself, which is untried) which denominates
tempting, or proving: As you will find in Exodus 15.25. and Chapter 16.4. Deuteronomy.
8.16. and Chap. 13.3. Psalm. 26.2. 1 Pet. 1.7. And there is a Temptation of
seducement, which is a Solicitation to defection and falling from God, by
sinning, and committing evil, 1 Timothy 6.9. 1 These. 3.5. So that God tempts,
that he may Discipline us, but the Devil that he may destroy us.

3. SOME Temptations spring from the Corruption and Sin Inherent in the Flesh,
St. James 1.14. Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own Lusts;
such as are mentioned, Gal. 5.19, 20. Some are suggested by the Tempter, who
being a Spirit has power to insinuate and convey his impious notions into our
minds: Suggestion between Spirits, are as Contiguity and touching of Bodies;
for whereas he cannot discover the unuttered secrets of the heart, (it being
the Almighties peculiar Prerogative) but he observes men's natural inclinations
and habits, by their Words and Actions, and so prepares Baits accordingly; thus
he fishes in these depths, till he perceives his Suggestions are swallowed, and
the Sinner taken: And by this means he presents such Thoughts, as he
conjectureth will take, by that which is obvious to the Senses of men: As he
fitted an opportunity of Treason to impious Judas, by the malice of the high
Priests: Of Lust to Amnon; of venturing on the cursed thing to Achan; of the
Revenge to Cain; of Idolatry to Ahaz, by the Altar of Damascus, 2 Kin. 16.10.
etc.

4. OF Temptations, there are four degrees, by which it arises to full
Maturity: First, Suggestion. Secondly, Delight therein. Thirdly, Consenting.
Fourthly, Acting the same: As St. James tells ye, Chap. 1.14, 15. Man is
tempted when he is drawn away of his own Lusts, and enticed; then when Lust
has conceived, it brings forth Sin, and Sin when it is finished, brings
forth death. The first of these (a bare Suggestion) is not our Sin, if there be
no delight, or consenting to it: For Christ was tempted, Mat. 4.1. Luke 4.2. in
all points as we are, yet without sin, Heb. 4.15. The Sin is Satan's, when ever
he Suggesteth evil: The Second (as the Third and Fourth) is Sin in its degree;
for every delight in evil, declares a Man's inclination to be such: A declining
from Good, and a proneness to consent and act evil.

5. A trial of Temptation to the Just, is but as Fire to Gold; it purifieth,
and creates a valuation in God's Esteem; as the Psalmist tells ye, Psalm
116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints; and the
Apostle informs ye, 1 Pet. 1.7. That the trial of your Faith being much more
precious than of Gold which perishes, though it be tried with Fire, might be
found unto praise, etc. And that mirror of Patience is Comforted, Job 23.10.
When he has tried me I shall come forth as Gold. Temptation therefore burns
out the dross, and is as a Winnowing Wind; For Satan by a Temptation winnowed
St. Peter: Now Consider with thy self, can the Refiner of Gold take that Care,
that he will not lose it in the Furnace? Can the Husbandman, so opportune the
Wind, that he will not lose the Corn, but cleanse it from the Chaff? And can
thou think that the Almighty will suffer thee to be lost, by permitting thee to
Temptations? No, assure thy self he cannot err: He measures all, Is Faithful,
and will not suffer thee to be tempted above what thou art able, 1 Cor. 10.13.
He knows how to deliver his out of Temptations, 2 Pet. 2.9. Therefore God
commands us not to fear any of these things, which they should suffer, whom
Satan should cast into Prison, Rev. 2.10.

6. THERE can be no Conquest gained without an Enemy, nor no Crown without a
Conflict: No Faith without Troubles, nor no Combat without some Adversary:
When the Almighty puts thee to Trials, he steadfastly beholds how thou
entertainest the Enemy, and as thou stand the Shock, he supplieth thee with
fresh aids, as necessity requires, and in the mean time prepares the Crown:
Many by a long and secure peace grow Impotent; and for want of Experience
unable to resist an enemy when he invadeth, perhaps their own Pride (born out
of self-ignorance) overcomes them; or fullness may debauch them; whereas
Exercise makes them Vigorous, and Temptations humble: Lest I should be Exalted
above measure, says Saint Paul, There was given to me a Thorn in the Flesh,
the Messengers of Satan to buffet me, 2 Cor. 12.7. And indeed Conscience of a
Sin, and fear of punishment, makes the Regenerate more Religious; and is much
the firmer Faith, which Repentance storeth up, That ye Sorrowed after a Godly
sort, what Carefulness it wrought in you, 2 Cor. 7.11.

7. THE Spiritual Pharaoh most eagerly pursues those who are departing out of
his Kingdom: He passes by his own, as Captives: And chaseth those in whom he
perceives Christ lives: When he must be cast out, then he teareth most
furiously, Luke 9.42. So that his rage against thee is no Argument of Despair,
but rather of great Affiance, that Satan himself, finds thou art none of his
Disciple; were he secure of thee, he would let thee go unmolested to
destruction, and never disquiet thee, lest any agitation should bring thee to
Repentance, and him to loss: This Lesson our Savior taught, When a strong Man
armed keeps his Palace, his Goods are in peace, Luke 11.21.

8. CONSIDER well that the best have been, and the best that live are tempted:
The Jebusites were left in Jerusalem, for an Exercise of Virtue, 2 Samuel 5.6.
The Apostle wrapped up into the third Heaven, was buffetted by Satan's Messengers,
2 Cor. 12. 12. EVERY day dedicate thy first and last 2, 7. Once for all, Christ
in whom was no sin, was tempted, Heb. 4.15. That thou are tempted, is no
inference of Despair: It seems a Paradox, how Heaven and Earth are here so
annexed; we being partly Spirit, and partly Flesh; that we cannot appear as we
would, Gal. 5.17. We find an irksome Law in our selves, opposing us: Our
Reparation is something, and Supernatural, but so short of that which shall be,
that our selves (like the Israelites in Ezra's time) sound a discordious
Concord of sharps and flats, joy and sorrow, Ezra 3.13. We must expect
perfection in Heaven, for our present freedom from sin, is rather a desire to
be free, than our being so.

9. NEXT let us consider that God's Grace (who at his pleasure chaineth up the
Tempter) is sufficient for thee, Rev. 20.1. 2 Cor. 12.9. He restrains him so
much, that he cannot be a lying Spirit in the Mouths of Ahab's Prophets, until
he have leave (to tempt him out to his destruction) from him who justly
permits to strong Delusions, that they should perish in believing Lies, who
receive not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved: Omnipotence knows
best how far he will suffer thee to be tempted, and accordingly measures out a
sufficiency of Grace to all the Regenerate: Why he suffered David so
dangerously to fall, or St. Peter, and St. Paul is dubious, except to humble
them, and leave us motives to Repentance; and as for his Judgments be assured
they are ever just.

10. WHEN thou art under any Temptation examine thy self whether thou
delightest in it? If thou take no pleasure in it, nor consentest to it, but
rather startlest at it, as a thing which thy Soul detests, and abhorrs, it
shall not prejudice thee: Now consider whether the Temptation which commonly
assaulteth thee is such as probably arises from the Corruption of thine own
heart, which is usually inferred by the Thoughts Parley from one thing to
another, by direct or natural mediums: But if it be a Temptation of Satan's
cast into thy Soul, it is vulgarly abrupt, and such as thou did not think of,
Incongruous, Sudden, Unnatural, and such as thou tremblest at, as Blasphemous,
Sanguine, or Desperate: Though in some Temptations he takes the opportunity of
deluding our sight and hearing, joining himself with our natural inclination to
sin: And these are his Messengers the Apostle mentions, 1 Cor. 12.21, 22. Gal.
5.20. Who are like Traitors Corrupted by some Foreign State, against their
native Country: Now if a Temptation arise of Corrupted nature, the Remedy must
be the depression of carnal Reason and Affections: For if it be Satan's
Instigations, the very discovery will infer a Detestation whereby thou may
gain the Conquest; for if we yield not to his allurements, he is utterly
vanquished.

11. WHEN any motion excites thee, either Internally, by Suggestion, or
Externally by persuasions of Men, observe the Apostles Rule, 1 Job. 4.1.
Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of God: because
many false Prophets are gone out into the World; and by this thou art proved,
whether thou love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart: And St. Paul tells ye
there must be also Heresies among you, 1 Cor. 11.19. Therefore Examine whether
they bring any Propositions against Faith, the substance of the Gospel,
Sanctimony commanded in God's Law, Peace, Order, Charity, and Unity: To this
end, that if we discern any thing in Men's persuasions or any internal
Suggestions, contrary to our great Lawgiver, we may conclude them Carnal,
Earthly, Sensual and Devilish, and so use our utmost endeavor to resist them,
which may be performed by the practice of these Rules following.

Thoughts to the Almighty in Sincere and Fervent Prayer, to preserve thee from
Temptations, and to guide all thy Thoughts, Words and Actions, so that waking
thou may walk sincerely in his presence, and sleeping rest assuredly in his
Protection: Prepare and fortify thy self against these encounters of
Temptations with the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.12. Thou must expect Trials,
for thy Adversaries are Formidable, such as Flesh and Blood, Principalities and
Spiritual Wickednesses: It is a Conflict the more terrible, by being Abstruse,
and with an invisible, puissant, indefatigable, and restless Antagonist, with
whom thou can not Truce safely: Therefore contrive beforehand, like the Wise
Master Builder, to fix the Basis upon a Rock; against which no Winds, Storms,
or Floods can prevail, Mat. 7.24, 25.

13. THE Mariner does not design his Ship only for a Calm, but also against
furious Storms and rough Seas: Prepare thy self with the Anchor of the Soul,
Heb. 6.19. Hope to lay hold on Christ, who therefore suffered, and was tempted,
that he might deliver thee from, and in Temptations: Next, Fraught thy self
with Patience, and all things necessary for Trials, which thou must in reason
expect, before thou can arrive at thy desired Haven: It were great
Incogitancy to think that Satan, who could not abstain from tempting the Lord
Jesus, in whom was found no sin, will ever give thee a Cessation from
Temptations, in whom he conceives some hopes of prevailing; for he will
endeavor to perplex thee, though he cannot attain to vanquish thee.

14. BE vigilant, lest ye enter into Temptation: Because your Adversary the
Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet.
5.8. And be not less vigilant for your own Salvation. Some have not observed
whether a mischievous Temptation has hurried them, but has been surprised and
led into some desperate sins, which upon true Optics have abhorred and
trembled at: Thou must expect many assaults, for Satan leaves them sometimes,
to return with seven worse Spirits, Luke 11.26. That security may destroy thee,
when no other means are prevalent. Be not Precipitated into any sudden
undertaking, but consult first the Oracles of God, and there receive direction:
Let them be as the Cloudy Pillar to Israel, and where that directs, Steer thy
Course accordingly.

15. FOLLOW the Apostle's advice, St. James 4.7. Resist the Devil, and he will
fly from you: If thou Surrendrest, or give him the least advantage, he is
Tyrannical: Next observe St. Paul's Exhortation to his Son Timothy, to fly
youthful lusts, 2 Timothy 2.22. For they are like Serpents, and there is no safe
debate with them, except by fasting and Prayer: Therefore the exquisitest way
is flight: Stop thy Ears to the Enchanting Sirens; and with the Patientest of
Men, make a Covenant with thine Eyes, not to behold that which shall prejudice
thee, Job 31.1. Take heed of all Incentives, and Inauspicious motives; beware
of Tamar's ways, and Dalilah's Embraces; Solomon's Curtisans Invitations, and
presented Opportunities, Suspected Company, Lascivious Entertainments,
Betraying Gifts, and whatsoever may lead thee to the paths of Death.

16. AS the subtle Enemy fixes his Gins, according as he finds the assaulted
inclinable to be ensnared; so be thou careful most to fortify thy self where
thou find him placing his main Batteries: And most carefully watch over thy
self, where he most frequently assaileth thee: In this use Perseverance, which
will prove an Antidote against that Malice which else would destroy thee. To
reckon up all the Artifices of this Tempter would be Voluminous; I shall only
instance some few: And first he represents himself in the shape of a Serpent,
with his destructive Commentaries on the forbidden fruit. Secondly, He appears
like a holy Prophet, with lying Visions to Bewitch the foolish and impotent:
Next he comes like a Court like Sophister with ample promises of Wealth, Honor
and Pleasure; another time he Acts the Pander, and produces a Bathsheba,
bathing her self. And lastly, He hellishly studies the secret Conspirator, and
assists Judas in the betraying of his Lord and Master; and for revenge of so
horrid a Fact, makes him become his own Executioner; therefore search into his
Gifts, and whatever they are fear the Enemy: As Saul said of David, 1 Samuel
23.22. See his place where his haunt is, for he deals very subtily: He never
pretends the least shadow of Goodness, but there is some mischief in the end of
it; he is studious of Men, and where a Gentle disposition is evident, he tempts
to Luxury; an Ambitious, to some lofty and impious designs; and the Angry to
Revenge: In this so important Affair, thou can not be too Politic; therefore
where thou art most weak, let thy Fortifications and Guards be strongest.

17. FLY Idleness, that lazy Matron of all Evil, and Basis of Mischief. Ever
employ thy self about acts of Virtue, and then there will be no space or room
for the Tempter. What advantage did he reap upon the Royal Prophet, by staining
so glorious a Life, which was produced by his few hours Vacancy? Dally not with
Temptations; for happy shall he be who parleys not with them, but is Careful
and Vigilant, and is ready to say as Elisha said of Jehoram's Messenger, 2
Kings, 6.32. When he comes, shut the Door, and hold him fast there: Is not the
sound of his Master's Feet behind him? The same Remedy we must use to Satan's
Messengers, who are sent to Destroy us: We must crush the Cocatrice Eggs, lest
breaking out into a fiery Serpent, we cannot Conquer it, but say too late, as
the Turk mentioned of Scanderberg, This Enemy should have been Subdued in his
Minority; for a Attemptation is Nourished that Hour it is not Mastered.

18. INVOKE the Almighty constantly and fervently; use his own Words, Lead us
not into Temptation. In many Instances, these are a Divine Revenge on some
precedent unrepented Sin; against which the Sanctimonious frequently make their
Supplications: And if, as often as Satan assaileth, we could address our selves
to earnest and zealous Prayers, we should worst him at his own Weapon, and
receive frequenter Allarms to awaken us to a stronger Guard; even the shadow of
the Almighty. The first Enemy that assailed Israel in his way to Canaan, was
vanquished by Prayer. When Moses held up his Hands, Israel prevailed, Exodus 17.
The same repulse we must use to our grandest Enemy.

The Prayer.
O LOD God Almighty, the Examiner of all Hearts, and the Tryer of the Reins,
who know before we ask, what our Necessities are, and by thy Holy Spirit
helpest our Infirmities; Lord, I acknowledge my Ignorance in not Praying unto
thee as I ought; but thou alone can make request for me, according to thy
blessed Will, with unutterable Groans, which thou only understandest: Help, I
beseech thee, my Infirmities, regulate my Devotion, and restrain the busy
Malice of the Tempter: Direct and accept my Prayers as Incense in thy sight,
and let them enter thy Presence, through Jesus Christ, my only Redeemer and
Advocate.

2. THOU, who art Truth it self have promised, that all things shall work
together for good, to them that love thee, and keep thy Commandments: Lord, I
put all my trust and confidence in thee, and do steadfastly believe that it is
good for me that I have been afflicted; for I am assured that after the trial
of my Faith, and exercise of my Patience, I shall receive of thee, (the only
giver of all good things) the quiet Fruits of Righteousness: But, O Lord, how
shall frail dust and ashes appear before thee, which is full of Infirmities,
Fears, Doubtings and Failings; for mine Iniquities have taken such hold upon me
that l am not able to look up: Nay, they are more in number than the hairs on
my head, and my heart has failed me: Neither have I to deal, O Lord, with
Flesh and Blood only; but with Invisible Powers of Darkness, which with
restless encounters assault my Soul to destroy it.

3. BUT, O Lord God, of my Salvation, be not thou far from me: Show thy Power,
and deliver me from the Messengers of Satan, which are too mighty for me: O
rescue me, and bridle their Insolent Malice; bind the Strong man, and deliver
thy Vessel from his Usurping Tyranny, that I may in every faculty of my Soul,
serve and please thee. Pardon all my sins for thy Blessed Son's sake, who died
for me: Heal my wounded Soul, which has to the anguish of my heart, so often
sinned against thee: Hide not thy face from me in time of my trouble, forget
not my bitter affliction, which makes me go mourning all the day long, while
the insulting Enemy heavily oppresses me: Thou art my King, O God, and can
Command deliverances: Lord, I am poor, needy and destitute of help and strength
to resist the Fiery Darts of Satan.

4. PUT thy whole Armor upon me, I beseech thee, that I may be able to stand.
Arise for my aid, O thou preserver of all Men; redeem me from the devouring
Lions Mouth, and for thy Infinite Mercies sake think upon me; make have to help
me, and make no long tarrying, O my God: O suffer me not for any trials to fall
from thee: Lay no more upon me, than thou will be pleased to give me Strength,
Pat^ince and Perseverance to bear Cheerfully: Confirm me unto the end, that I
may be blameless in the day of the Lord Jesus: Give me a blessed Effect and
Issue out of every trial; that the more thou permittest me to suffer, the more
Experience I may acquire of thy Mercy, and the greater assurance that thou will
never fail me, nor forsake me: That I may through him, who has by suffering
vanquished death, hell, and him who has the power of death, overcome all these
Spiritual wickednesses, which war against my Soul.

5. LORD, I have trusted only in thy Mercy; thou have ordained Strength in the
Mouths of Babes and Infants: O strengthen me unto the end, that my heart may
rejoice in thy Salvation: Lord, spare me, that I may recover my strength: Put
thou a new song into my mouth, that I may praise thee for my deliverance, and
declare unto afflicted Sinners, what thou have done for my Soul: Lord hear me,
and have mercy upon me. Thou who art ever readier to give, than poor Mortals
are to ask, deny not the Humble and Earnest Requests of me the vilest and worst
of Sinners: This I beg, O Lord, through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus
Christ my only Savior and Redeemer,

Amen.
The Close.
HAVING run through the several Parts I intended, I shall now Calculate the
whole, and give a Specimen of Reducing it into Practice. Be very careful to
stifle every Sin in its primitive motion, and give no place to the Wiles of
Satan, but crush, betimes the Cockatrice Egg, lest it break out into a Serpent:
Permit not vain Imaginations to possess thy Mind, which are impossible for thee
to attain, or unprofitable if they are attained; but rather contemn, and behold
them as empty shadows, and lighter than Vanity.

2. BUT labor daily more and more to inspect into thy self, that thou may
attain to that cognizance. If thou should upon the Enquiry be asked what is
the vilest Creature in the whole Earths Circumference, thy nearest and most
intimate Friend, thy Conscience may report, thy own self, by reason of thy
Sins: And if on the contrary thou were asked the Question, What is the truest
Catholicon for it? Thy Heart may readily reply, The Blood of Christ, which
speaks better things than the Blood of Abel. Affect not vain Glory, nor
Popularity, lest it prove more pernicious than Contempt, and avoid entertaining
a male-contented mind, for that may produce thee more misery than thou art
sensible of; but think it the greatest Mercy of the Almighty, that in the
multitudes of those Blessings thou enjoyest, thou have some Crosses. God
showers upon thee many Blessings, lest through want thou should despond; and
he mixes with them some Crosses, lest by too much Prosperity thou should
forget thy Maker.

3. WHEN the Subtle Tempter, by his Instigations offers any Motion of
Discontent, referring to thy present Station; remember St. Paul's saying, which
must be allowed a Maxim, 1 Timothy 6.7, 8, 9. We brought nothing into this World,
and it is certain we can carry nothing out; and having Food and Raiment, let us
be therewith content; but they that will be Rich, fall into temptation and a
snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown men in Destruction
and Perdition. Invocate the Almighty, and with wise Agur let this be thy
Petition; O Lord, Give me neither Poverty, nor Riches; feed me with Food
convenient for me, lest I be full and deny thee, and say who is the Lord; or
lest I be poor and Steal, and take the Name of my God in vain, Prove. 30.8, 9.

4. BE not opinionated that any sin is diminutive, for Heavens Vengeance is due
to the least, and without Gods Infinite Goodness and Mercy, is enough to cast
thee into unquenchable fire, from whence there is no Redemption: Remember that
Christ died for thee, and when thou have committed any sin, mourn for it, and
earnestly deprecate the Almighty for Pardon and Forgiveness: Often Contemplate
on the Frailties of thy Transitory Life, and of Deaths Infallibility: Wish
rather a good, than a long Life, and let thy Verdict agree with the Royal
Prophet's; That one day in God's House is better than a thousand elsewhere, so
that one week Religiously employed is more estimable, than a Life annually
consumed in Debauchery.

6. CALCULATE once a day thy thoughts, and for what good ones thou have
entertained, return thy Lands to him from whom comes every good and perfect
gift: And for what vain and idle ones has possessed thy Memory, humbly implore
his Remission, to whom alone belong Mercies and Forgiveness: St Matthew as a
good Monitor, gives thee this Memento, that for every idle word that men shall
speak, they shall give an account thereof at the day of Judgment, Mat. 12.36.
Therefore shun all frivolous and prolix Discourse, which will but infest thy
Ears, and prove insignificant, and petulant answers, which many times prove
very pernicious: The words were thine when locked up in silence, but once
uttered they are out of thy Possession; and what folly and madness is it, when
that sharp weapon thy Tongue shall attest against thee?

6. AVOID Hypocrisy, and let thy Heart and Tongue agree in a direct Harmony;
for where Truth and Justice is the Basis, no evil Politics can undermine the
Foundation: Abhor all Falsity and Dissimulation in another, and Contemn it in
thy self, else the Almighty will detest thee, and for ever banish thee his
presence; of which the Prophet David gives us that assurance, He that tells
Lies shall not tarry in his sight, Psalm. 101.7. Set a Guard upon the Door of
thy Lips, that no Obscene words proceed from thence, as thou would preserve
thy Food from being Poisoned; but let thy Discourse favor of Virtue and Piety,
that the Hearers may be Improved and well Instructed: And when Religion is the
Theme, use that Reverence which so Important a Subject requires.

7. STUDY to be a good Proficient in Three things, which are very necessary:
First, to understand with Discretion, to speak with Prudence, and to perform
with Alacrity; be not too Credulous to all Informations, neither report totally
what you have lent an ear too: For if thou do, those which were thy Friends
will become thy Enemies, and thou will expose thy self to perpetual Vexation:
This is well observed by the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 19.8, 9. Whether it be to
Friend or Foe, talk not of other Men's Lives, and if thou can without offense
reveal them not, for he heard and observed thee, and when time comes he will
hate thee.

8. LET not Malice provoke thee to divulge that which the Bonds of Friendship
obliges thee to Conceal; but to prevent so great an Eruption, make choice of
such a Familiar Friend, who is inspired with Evangelical Graces, from whom thou
can never receive any prejudice; for though there may arise some particular
dissension, yet the operation of those Graces will infallibly conduce to a
Reconciliation. Next, act nothing which may be offensive to Sobriety, or
uneasy to thy self, neither be guilty of any thing which may induce thy Friend
to become thine Enemy; but when thou have, through Supineness or Ignorance,
committed even the least sin, with all the speed thou can hasten to the
Throne of Grace; and there thou will upon thy true Repentance, find Mercy in
the time of need.

9. BE not too liberal in declaring all thou know, but rather dissuade thy
self, than thy Friend to keep thy own Council: Scoff not at other's
Infirmities, but consider and pity thy own, by endeavoring to Rectify and
Reform that in thy self which afterward thou may be capable of performing
to others: Prefer not the little Ebullitions of Frothy Obscene Wit before Solid
Reason and Judgment: But if thou art disposed to use that freedom in Mirth,
confine it within the bounds of Legality, and level it at nothing that is
Sacred or Religious; lest we provoke God to anger, and pull down a Judgment for
our Profaneness.

10. BE no Contriver of Evil, though it lies in thy power to Act it, for the
Almighty will not permit the least sin, without bitter Repantance, to escape
unpunished: Omit not any good Duty, neither enter upon any, before thou have
humbly besought God for a Blessing upon thy endeavors in the performance; and
whatever thy task and undertaking is, let the Operation be effected, with all
Diligence of Alacrity; committing the Event unto him, whose Omnipotence does
Benedict with his Grace, whatsoever Action is intended for his Glory: Be not
puffed up by any good performance, for the Judgment of God is far differing from
the judgments of Men: Avoid that in thy self, which does most displease thee in
others; and remember that as thou inspects into others, so art thou inspected
by Omnisciency, Angels and by Men.

11. EXERCISE thy self as often as thou can in Religious Duties; and abridge
thy self of Worldly Pleasures by entertaining them seldom; That if Death should
suddenly Summon thee, thou may not be Surprised, but stand ready prepared:
Render to every Man the Honor due unto his Function; but Esteem and Venerate
him more for his Goodness, than Greatness: And from whom thou have received a
Gratuity, according to thy ability express thy Thankfulness. Be apprehensive of
the dreadful Events of Notorious Evil Men, and detest their Wicked Actions: But
observe the Life of the Sanctimonious, that thou may effectually imitate
their Blessed Example, to thy Joy and Comfort: Obey thy Superiors, attend the
Prudent, accompany the Just, and love the Religious.

12. IT is evident that Corrupted Nature is prone to Hypocrisy, therefore it
behooves us to take heed that we exercise our Religion not merely as Customary,
but to those higher ends for which it was designed, as the Glory of God and the
Salvation of our Immortal Souls: Be not Rash in thy proceedings, nor Confident
and Pertinacious in thy own Opinion; but seek advice of him that is Prudent,
and receive Instruction of him whose Judgment exceeds thy own. Petition not for
a long Life, but a happy one; for length of days often times prolongs the Evil,
and augments the Guilt: Therefore it would deserve Applause if that little time
we had allotted us, were employed to the best advantage.

13. LASTLY, In thy Supplications wait with Patience, and be not dissatisfied
if thy Requests are not speedily granted; but search the Scriptures and there
thou will find, holy Job and others, that far out-stripped thee in Sanctity of
Life, did not murmr or repine and charge God foolishly, but on the contrary
did resign themselves up to his good Will and Pleasure: An Instance we have in
that Pattern of Patience, Job 14.14. All the days of my appointed time will I
wait, till my Change comes. He that fixes his Trust in the most High, shall not
miscarry; he is neither puffed up in Prosperity, nor cast down in Adversity, but
continually fears him, who is his Salvation, and his Refuge.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now ready for the Press, the Art of Patience, and Balm of Gilead
under all Afflictions, an Appendix to the Art of Contentment, Written by the
Author of the Whole Duty of Man. The Second Impression with Additional Prayers
suitable to the several Occasions.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. 1 OF the Chief Governor, the Soul. Page 1 CHAP. 2 Of the Faculties of
the Soul. Page 4 CHAP. 3 Of the Hearts Corruptions. Page 6 CHAP. 4 The
Necessity of Governing our Thoughts. Page 10 CHAP. 5 Rules of Practice. Page 14
CHAP. 6 Of the Affections of Love and Delight. Page 22 CHAP. 7 Of Joy. Page 24
CHAP. 8 Of Anger and Malice. Page 30 CHAP. 9 Rules of Practice Concerning Anger
and Malice. Page 33 CHAP. 10 Of Envy. Page 39 CHAP. 11 Arguments to be
Considered by way of Disswasion against Envy. Page 42 CHAP. 12 Remedies against
Envy. Page 45 CHAP. 13 Of Impatience. Page 48 CHAP. 14 Motives to Patience and
Contentedness. Page 53 CHAP. 15 Rules for Contentment. Page 59 The Prayer. Page
65
CHAP. 16 Of Hope. Page 68 CHAP. 17 Rules to Govern our Hope. Page 75 The
Prayer Page 77
CHAP. 18 Of Fear. Page 79 CHAP. 19 Rules for Governing our Thoughts in Fears.
Page 95 The Prayer. Page 100
CHAP. 20 Of Cares. Page 102 CHAP. 21 Rules Concerning Cares. Page 105 The
Prayer. Page 110
CHAP. 22 Of Jealousy. Page 112 The Prayer. Page 109
CHAP. 23 Of External Actions. Page 111 CHAP. 24 Rules in External Actions.
Page 113 The Prayer. Page 117
CHAP. 25 Of a Wounded Spirit what it is. Page 118 CHAP. 26 What the Conscience
is, and the Tranquillity of it. Page 121 CHAP. 27 What things Principally wound
the Conscience. Page 124 CHAP. 28 Divine Considerations of the Afflicted. Page
127 CHAP. 29 Considerations of Humility. Page 131 CHAP. 30 Divine
Considerations of our Repentance, forgiving Enemies, and the Love of God. Page
133 CHAP. 31 The Examination of the Conscience concerning our Repentance. Page
137 CHAP. 32 Rules of Practice. Page 146 The Prayer. Page 150
CHAP. 33 Sense of Spiritual Wants. Page 152 The Prayer. Page 160
CHAP. 34 Fear of Temptations. Page 162 The Prayer. Page 171
The Close. Page 174
Books Printed for, and Sold by Richard Cumberland, at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
I. Reformed Devotions, in Meditations, Hymns and Petitions for every Day in
the Week, and every Holy Day in the Year. Divided into Two Parts. The Third
Edition, Reviewed.

II. Analecta: Or, A Collection of some of the Choicest Notions, and what
seemed most Remarkable in more than Forty Authors, Philosophical, Chemical,
Medical, Astronomical, Historical, etc. Whereunto is added an Appendix,
containing short, but very profitable and delightful Rules in many parts of the
Mathematics. By T. B. Gent.

III. A Complete Discourse of the Nature, Use, and Right Managing of that
Wonderful Instrument, the Baroscope, or Quicksilver Weather-Glass. In Four
Parts. By John Smith, C. M.


