THE Divine Authority AND USEFULNESS OF THE Holy Scripture ASSERTED IN A SERMON
On the 2 Timothy 3. 15.

By R. ALLESTREE D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

OXFORD At the THEATER. 1673.

2. Tim. 3. 15. And that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures,
which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, throughx faith which is in
Christ Jesus.
THE words are part of St. Paul's reasoning, by which he presses Timothy to
hold fast the truth he had received, and not let evil men, seducers, work him
out of what he had bin taught: urging to this end both the authority of the
Teacher, himself, who had secured the truth of his doctrine by infallible
evidence; and beyond that, as if that were a more effectual enforcement,
pressing him with his own education in the Scriptures; how he had bin nursed up
in that faith, sucked the Religion with his milk, that it was grown the very
habit of his mind, that which would strengthen him into a perfect man in
Christ, and make him wise unto salvation if he did continue in the faith and
practice of it; which he proves in the remaining verses of the Chapter.

In the words read there are three things observable.

1. Here is a state supposed, Salvation; and put too as of such concernment,
that attaining it is looked upon as wisdom; wise unto salvation.

Now since true wisdom must express it self both in the end that it proposes,
and the means it chooses for that end to be pursued with and attained by, and
take care both these have all conditions that can justify the undertaking, and
secure the prudence of it, and this wisdom to salvation therefore must suppose
both these; in order to them both we have here

2. That which with all divine advantage does propose this end, and alsox does
prescribe most perfect means for the attaining it; and that is Holy Scripture
through faith which is in Christ Jesus. Thou have known the holy Scriptures
which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in
Christ Jesus. Holy Scripture probably of the Old Testament; for there was
hardly any other Timothy could know from a child, scarce any other being
written then. The faith of that then through the faith which is in Christ
Jesus, that is, together with the faith of all things necessary to be known
concerning Christ, is meant. Now since St. John, after the view of all that the
other three Evangelists had wrote concerning Christ, adding his story also
says, that Christ John 20. 30, 31.
did and spoke more then what is written, yet affirms most positively that
those things were written that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of God, and believing might have life through his name; and so enough is
written for that faith which is in Jesus that is necessary to eternal life:
therefore the Holy Scripture of the Old Testament, together with the faith of
what is written in the New, is that which St. Paul affirms is able to make us
wise unto salvation.

3. Here is the advantage Timothy had above others as to Faith in these, and
consequently the far greater obligation to continue in it. He had known them
from a child. And that from a child thou have known the holy Scripture, etc.

The first thing that does offer it self to our consideration is the state
supposed, Salvation. But because my Text supposes it, I shall do so too, nor
shall think it needful to prove here, that there is such a state, nor
consequently that all those are stupid, who propose not to themselves this
everlasting safety for their main end, and by strict care in the duties of
Religion and Gods service aim at it: for if that state be granted, nay if it
be but possible, it must be granted that there can be no security but in doing
so, nor consequently any wisdom without being wise thus unto salvation.

But then if this were granted, that the wisest thing man could propose to
himself, were by strict care in all the duties of Religion to design Gods honor
and his own salvation; still, as to the other part of prudence which consists
in the choice of means, we are to seek for that Religion we are to pursue this
end by and attain it; since there are so many and so opposite Religions in the
word, that it is not easier to reconcile them, then to make peace betwixt
enemies and contradictions. And it always was so; for excepting that mankind
agreed still in the notion of the necessity of Religion, that all had
apprehensions of invisible powers above us, and differed not much in the rules
of Justice and Morality, in other things there was no nearness. Almost from the
beginning there was more variety of Gods then Nations, I had almost said then
Worshippers. Beasts were their Sacrifices and their Deities, and therefore the
votaries were certainly no better. Vices also were their worships; things which
their Cities and their Camps would not endure, found Sanctuary in their
Temples; and the actions which were whipped in the Judgment-hall, were their
piety in the holy places. And tho some wise men among them found good reason to
decry this, yet they knew not what to take up in the stead. I need not add the
present differences of the world, even that called Christian too, great part of
which as heretofore they sealed their faith with their own blood, now seal it
in the blood of all that differ from them; and by their persecutions hope to
merit Heaven more, then those did hope to gain it by their Martyrdoms. But
these I need not add to make up this into a demonstration, that it is
impossible for lapsed men, so far as they are left to themselves, and have no
other guide to follow but their reason, to find out what they are to believe of
God, and how to serve him, and save themselves. The Hill. l. 1. de Trinit. p.
53, 54. Clemens Al. Strom. 6. p. 675. (...)
Fathers and (...). Vid. Justin. Mart. ad Diognetu^ p. 499. Athanas. ad
Serapionem ^om. 1. p. 191. 194. edit. Par. 1672.
Philosophers too* conclude that we can learn from none but God, what we must
understandx of God; who must be known only as he himself is pleased to revele
himself. His worship also, how he will be served, and what observances he does
require, or will admit, since it depends on his own good pleasure, therefore
without his directions it is in vain to hope to please him with our Religious
service whatever it be, and by consequence impossible without his guidance and
assistance to acquire the end of all our Service and Religion, the salvation of
our souls. So that how wise soever he be who does propose this blessed end to
himself, if yet withal he be not some way from the Lord instructed by what
means he must pursue that end, and do not make choice of, and use those means,
it is impossible he can be wise unto salvation. Now for this St. Paul assures
us most expressly, here we may be furnished: For he says, The Holy Scriptures
are able to make us wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ
Jesus. And he does assert this on the very ground we mentioned, for they are
(...) inspired by God; they come from him. All which must be made out in the
next place.

That those Holy Scriptures which St. Paul first mentions, those of the Old
Testament were so, and did contain sufficient revelation both of God, and of
the way of worship of the Jews, that Nation did so perfectly believe, that
neither Sufferings nor Miracles could persuade the contrary; neither the Roman
persecuters that destroyed their worship, nor the Son of God that changed it,
could yet take them off from Moses and his Scriptures. Now that this Moses led
that Nation out of Egypt with an high hand, and made himself their Prince and
Lawgiver, multitudes of Justin. ex Trogo. l. 36. Diod. Sicul. l. 1. Strabo l.
16. Plinius 30. Tacitus Hist. 5. Joseph. contra Apionem mentions many others.
foreign Histories of the first times, and the best account assure us: whose
relations we cannot question as derived from themselves, because they hated
Jews beyond all possibility of such compliance. But the Exodus 7, 8, 9, 10.
Chapters.
Scriptures also tell us, how in Egypt by strange wonders, (such as their
Magicians could not imitate nor bear, who tho they had permission to do some,
it was that so they might appear to be outdon the more miraculously, themselves
confessing Gods hand in those prodigies) Moses wrought on the Egyptians to give
leave the people should depart: and how when yet notwithstanding that leave
given they were pursued, he made way for them through the Exodus 14. 21.
Sea by Miracles, which was a rampart and defense to them, a ruin to their
enemies: How they were Exodus 16. 15. Deuteronomy. 8. 24.
fed for forty years with Manna raining down from Heaven in the wilderness: and
that they might depend on Providence for their daily provision, when he forbad
them to take care or gather for the morrow, whatsoever their greediness or want
of faith provided, strait bred Exodus 16. 20.
worms and stank, except that on the Sabbath eve, to keep off such cares from
the day of their Religion, they gathered double which Exodus 16. 24.
corrupted not: How when they mutined for flesh, would have variety, Paradise
in the desert, such great plenty of Number. 11. 19, 20. 31, 32.
Quails flew to them as fed the whole Nation till their very lust was
surfetted; and they had no more will then hunger to them: How Moses Rod did
strike a living stream, a River that sufficed that people and their cattle out
of a Number. 20. 8. 11.
Rock: How in the midst of lightning and thunder God himself promulgated his
Law Exodus 20.
to the whole Nation audibly at once: How his glorious presence showed it self
in all necessities upon the Ark, in which the Tables of the Law were laid up:
How the waters of the river Josh. 3. 16.
Jordan fled from that Ark both ways, flowed upwards to give passage to the
people into Canaan: How the walls of Josh. 6. 20.
Jericho without any other battery, any other force but that the Ark was there,
fell down before it.

But to name no more, If these be true; that power by which these were wrought,
was great enough to give that Law, require obedience to it, and reward it, and
to punish all transgression according to the tenor of these Scriptures: that
is* it was God; and he that wrote those Scriptures must have had communication
with, and bin inspired from, God to write them. But,

2. Whether they were true or no according as they are recorded in those
Scriptures, that whole people from the greatest almost to the least must know;
because they are recorded as all don, not only in the presence of them all, but
as the objects and the entertainments of their senses, every one; so that if
they were forged, not one of the whole Nation could be ignorant of it. And then,

3. If they knew them forged all; that Number. 2. 32. Number. 11. 21.
600000 men, besides their wives and families, should endure this Moses, having
brought them forth only into a wilderness, there to lay such a heavy Law, and
so severe a yoke upon them, with such penalties annexed to every least
transgression, and adjure them to observe it on the account of all those
prodigies that had bin wrought among them, and upbraid them with
stiffneckedness, rebellion, and appeal to their own senses for the truth of all
this, and record all to posterity in this Scripture, cause all to be read
before them; and that they should bear all this from him they knew so impudent
a deceiver, and conveigh that Scripture and the faith of it to their posterity,
ground their so strict, so chargeable Religion on that book, which they were
certain had no word of truth in it: this sure transcends belief and possibility.

It Is certain therefore, since the Jews of that age did perform the services
required, and in performing them according as that book directs, did teach
their children the great works that God had don in their sight, therefore they
believed those Miracles and Scriptures. And since it was impossible that they
should be deceived; if they believed them, they were true: and their posterity
received from them the faith of this, and so derived it on, that neither Gods
dread judgments, nor man's cruelty can yet shake it. Now had they not bin don,
and on that account conveyed; when ever they were broacht, and that book
first appeared, the men of that age must needs know their Fathers never had
performed such services, had such a book read to them constantly, nor told them
of such Miracles that had bin wrought: and therefore 'twas impossible that they
could have believed it had bin so from Moses, if it had bin true that it had
first begun to be taught in their own time, or in theirs with whom they lived.
And this discourse must be of force concerning every age, if we ascend until we
come to that of Moses wherein all was effected. Yet besides this, they had also
that perpetual Miracle in the High Priest's Pectoral, the Oracle of Vrim and
Thummim, that did keep alive their faith and strengthen it: and they had
Prophets constantly foretelling, as from God, things that were sometimes
suddenly to come to pass, and sometimes not till many ages after, the event of
which depended often on the will of those that would not of some hundred years
be born; others on Gods own immediate will and hand: and therefore none but God
could look into, foretell, and bring to pass all those events. Now such were
Ieremies predictions of the taking of Jerusalem, and the captivity of the
people, and the express number of Jer. 25. 11. 12
years it would continue; Esays naming Isa 44. 26. 21. 28. and 45. 1.
Cyrus, who was to release it, near two hundred years e're he was born; All
Daniels prophecies, particularly that most eminent one of the Dan. 9. 24. etc.
Messiah this Christ Jesus, of whose Scriptures we are next to speak.

That that Jesus, whom Cornelius Tacitus the heathen historian in the fifteenth
book of his Annals, calls Christiani dogmatis autorem, the Tac. An. l. 15.
Author of the Christian Doctrine, did work Miracles, and prophesy, both Vid.
Raim. Martin. pug. fid. p. 2. c. 8.
Jews and learned Celsus apud Orig. l. 2. Julian. Cyril. contra ipsum 6.
Origin. contra Cel. l. 2. c. 69.
Heathens do confess. But these Books tell us, when he first began to preach,
he publicly cast out a Devil in the Synagogue on the Sabbath day; and at even,
when the whole City was assembled, he healed all their sick, and cast out many
Devils, which confessed before all, that he was the Son of Mat. 8. Mar. 1. Luc. 4.
God. Then he cast out a Legion of such mischievous malign Spirits, as having
got license, drove two thousand Swine headlong into the Sea and choakt them,
which was known to the whole Country of the Mat. 8. Mar. 5. Luc. 8.
Gadarens* Before the Pharisees and Doctors, that came out of all the Cities
both of Galilee, and Iewry, and Jerusalem, and so great a crowd as forced them
to unroof the house to come to him, he freed one from his Mat. 9. Mar. 2. Luc.
5.
palsy and his sins. A multitude was witness of the death of Mar. 5. Luc. 8.
Iairus's daughter, and bewailing her laughed him to scorn that undertook to
raise her, yet he called her into life. And on a feast day in the Temple,
before all the people, he recovered one that had lain lame John 5.
eight and thirty years: and when a widows son was carried to his funeral, and
all the City followed him, he only touched the bier, and bid him Luc. 7.
live. With two fishes and five loaves he fed Mat. 14. Mar. 6. Luc. 9. Joh. 6.
5000 men besides women and children, and with what they left they filled
twelve baskets, when one basket carried all before they ate; so that they were
convinced, he was that Prophet that was to come into the world: and with seven
loaves he filled Mat. 15. Mar. 8.
4000 afterward and seven baskets. He commanded a dumb spirit out of him that
had bin Mat. 17. Mar. 9. Luc. 9.
Lunatic, vexed with a Devil from his infancy, before the people and the
Scribes, whom his Disciples could not cast out. And when John 11.
Lazarus had bin dead four days, and buried till he stank, yet at his call,
although bound hand and foot with grave clothes, he came forth, all the multitude
beholding. From so many more I chose out these, because they are reported don
before the people, and the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Doctors. I might name
his Mat. 24. Mar. 13. Luc. 21.
Prophecies of the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the propagation and
continuance of his Religion; even of the woman's box of Mat. 26. Mar. 14. John
12.
Spikenard, which event has made notorious to the world. But his death was so
even at the present: when if the rending of the Mat. 27. Mar. 15. Luc. 23.
John. 19.
veil of the temple was apparent Miracle to all Jerusalem, the suns prodigious
Eclips, when it was impossible by nature he should be eclipsed (it being then
full moon,) was so to the whole Hemisphere. It serves the use I am to make of
this, that it is here recorded, but withal Heathen d Phlegon apud Orig: contra
Cells. l 2. p. 80. Eusebius. ad Olym. 202 ann. 4 Philop. and Georg. Syncel. Thallus
apud African. vid. Seal. animad. ad Eusebius. Chron. p. 186. ad ann. 2044. Etiam
vide Just. Mart. p. 76. and p. 84. and Tertull. Apol. c. 21. and de isto terrae
mot^ agere Tacitum and Plin. l. 2. c. 84. scribit Oros.
Historians and Chronologers bear witness to it: for when they relate that in
the 4th year of the 202 Olympiad, the year that is assigned to Christ's death,
there was such a great Eclipse as never had bin, day at noon turned into night,
the stars appearing, and earthquakes as far as Bythynia, since it is apparent by
the motions of the Heavens and the calculations of Astronomy, there could be
none such then according to the course of nature, it must be this the Gospel
speaks of. But beyond all this, it is registered here, that according as he had
foretold, he raised himself from death the Mat. 281 Mar. 16. Luc. 29. John. 24.
3d day; yea and many bodies of the Saints that had bin buried, long it may be
some of them, he raised with him. That notwithstanding all the art and
treachery of the Chief Priests to conceal it, yet that very day he appeared
Mar. 16. 9.
First to Mary Magddalen, Luc. 24. 5.
2dly the Women, 3dly V. 33.
Peter, 4thly to them that went to V. 13.
Emans, last of all on that day to the Eleven V. 36. 37. 41.
except Thomas, being seen and handled by and eating with them; 6thly eight
days after to the same eleven with John 20. 24.
Thomas; 7thly at the sea of John 21.
Galilee appearing in a miracle of fishes; 8thly to all his Disciples and Mat.
28. 16. Mar. 15. 6.
500 Brethren more in Galilee, then to James, 1 Cor. 15. 7.
then to all his Apostles, promising them the Luc. 24. 49. Act. 1. 4. 5.
Holy Ghost; and lastly all of them beholding he Act. 1 9. Luc. 24. 51.
ascended into Heaven, and ten days after as he promised sent the Act. 2. 6.
7. 8.
Holy Ghost upon them in the shape of fiery tongues, so as that they spoke all
Languages immediately, to the amazement of the Jews of every Nation under Heaven
to which they were scattered, that the Miracle might spread as far.

Now if all this be true, he that did these must have communication with a
power above all that we account the powers of Nature; such an one most
certainly as can perform whatsoever he in this book promises, inflict what e're
he threatens; such as is divine. And since he wrought all these, on purpose to
evince he came commissioned from that divine power, brought these Miracles as
seals of that commission, that we might believe him, therefore whatsoever he
delivers must be embraced by us, as we hope for those blessed rewards that he
proposes, and on pain of those eternal torments if we do not; of both which it
is not possible to doubt if these accounts be true.

2dly Since the most and greatest of these must be don but once; he could not
be incarnated, and born, and live, and preach, and dye, and rise again, and go
to Heaven every day, of every age, in every place, to convince every man by his
own senses; to all those that did not see the matter of fact, therefore faith
of all these must be made by witnesses. And

3dly If we can be sure the witnesses that do assert a fact understand it
exactly, if the things be palpable, and they must certainly know whether they
were really don or no; and if we can be sure too, that they are sincere, will
not affirm that which they do not know, and do not lie, their testimony of it
must be most infallible: because it is impossible such witnesses can be
deceived, or will deceive.

4thly The witnesses in this case, the Apostles and the 70 Disciples (for I Will
name no more) must needs know most perfectly: For they not only saw the
Miracles, but were Luc. 1. 14.
instruments and parties in some of them; sent to cure diseases, cast out
Devils, and knew whether all this were in earnest. And most certainly they saw
(as all the Jews did too) Christ crucified, his heart peirc't with a spear, and
his body buried; and whether they did see him risen, handle him, and eat with
him they knew. And if they might mistake in his Ascension, yet the fiery
tongues, if such did light on them, they must needs see; and whether they
themselves, who spoke no Languages, could then speak Tongues, it cannot be but
they must know. In these there is no possibility they could err, unless they
did it wilfully: but then it is as impossible that they could do it wilfully,
if they were sincere and honest, such as would not lie.

Now that they were such, I might urge their simplicity and openness, without
disguise, not covering their own errors; men who seemed to live as well as
preach against all artifice, and to have no design on any thing but the
amendment and salvation of mankind. For he that can suppose it possible that
they were otherwise, men of art and finess, that they contrived the story, must
needs know; First, that such would not seal their falsehood with their blood;
design no recompense to all their travels but contemt, and hatred,
persecutions, prisons, whippings, wounds and death, to be the scum and the
offscouring the world; lay out their lives against their conscience to preach
that Jesus, who did only call them out to be a 1 Cor. 4. 9.
spectacle to all the world, just such as Malefactors when exposed to fight
with, and to be devoured of wild beasts. Their sufferings are too known to stay
upon: St Paul's own catalogue of his for five whole verses 2 Cor. 11. is such,
that to sustain them only for this end, to put a cheat on mankind; count a so
laborious, vexed, torn, miserable life and an infamous death gain, so the fable
might be believed: to think they could do this, is sure as great a madness as
to do it. But yet I will suppose that possible; that those who wove the fable
pleased themselves so infinitely with the expectations of imposing on mankind,
as that those hopes could make misery and death it self look lovely to them. But

Then 2dly that all and every of them should be of that mind, that amongst so
many that bare witness of Christ's Miracles and resurrection not a man should
discover the cheat; that when their persecutors did with arts of torment as it
were examine them upon the rack, they should work not one single confession out
of them; that no ones courage should be broke, nor have a qualm so far as to
acknowledge how it was, disclose the plot, lay open the confederacy, the whole
mystery and the contrivance of it: When of twelve Disciples one was so false to
betray his Masters person at a vile rate, yet that all of them, and many more,
in a feigned story of his Miracles should be so true to one another, that no
engine of man's cruelty ever could screw out the secret, not one should betray
the forgery and be a Judas where he ought to be: no not that Judas, whose
concern it was, whose treason to his Master had bin justified had he bin an
impostor: yet that he should stir no least suspicion of it, but should burst,
choakt with his grief because he had betrayed innocent blood: This, if he knew
it had all bin imposture, must be most stupendous.

But yet we will give them this too, that vainglorious hopes of drawing in the
world to follow them, might make all of them obstinate in secresy against all
attemts of cruelty; or if some weak brethren did perchance discover, we may not
have heard of it. But

For them 3dly to begin their preaching at Jerusalem is yet more strange. To
hope to draw men into a persuasion, and to bottom that persuasion upon
Miracles, and a resurrection don amongst them there, where if discovery were
made it must be made, and where it could not but be made if there were fraud.
For to relate and write those works with every circumstance of persons, place,
and time, where they not only could examine every circumstance, but where they
rather then their lives would find them false, if nothing else would, this must
needs discover it. They preach them to the face of the whole multitude and of
the Pharisees, and tell them they were don before their eyes, sometimes 500 and
sometimes 5000 being by and the chief Priests and Pharisees and Doctors: so that
'twas most impossible they should not know if they were true or false, as sure
as there was never a Jew in all the Land, but knew whether there were a
darkness over all the land when Christ was crucified. Now if these were forged
to hope to draw Jews out of their Religion with apparent forgeries, which they
knew such, speaks these Apostles men so far from art to manage a design of
changing the Religion of the world, that they were mad beyond recovery and
president.

But let us give them that too. Yet it is certain 4thly that the Jews, if any
such were wrought on by them, must be much more stupid to believe them upon the
account of such things don in all the country, in their Cities, and the Temple,
before all the Nation, when they could not choose but know they were not don,
if they were not don, but were feigned all. For what ever might be motive to
Christ's followers and his Apostles, with the certain danger of their lives to
forge the cheat, what possible temtation could there be so great to incline
Jews, the most stiffnecked people, the most stubborn in Religion in the world,
to embrace a faith which nothing but the Cross and shame and misery attended,
and which they must know false too? Had they so great lust to dye, as for that
to bid farewell to their Moses, their Religion and their Law? It is impossible
had they not known the truth of those things, that in waters of affliction, in
Jerusalem, ipsis persecutionum fontibus, in that fountain, that springhead of
persecutions, as the Fathers call it, they would ever have bin baptized into
Christ.

Yet suddenly in one day at one sermon of St Peter we read near 3000 were
baptized. Act. 2. at another strait 5000 Act. 4. and such beginnings, such sums
are required to make good what the Governor of Palestine (...). S^idas in vo^e
(...).
Tiberianus tells the Emperor, that he was not sufficient to put to death all
those that confessed themselves Christians. All which must needs have either bin
convinced those things were true, or else as well against their conscience as
against the powers, thus embraced that faith and death together.

Neither was this a first surprise of Christianity, as it had seized men's minds
at unawares; for it went on conquering till the world came into it, receiving
the Religion with the loss of all that was dear to them in this world. For in
one age from Christ's death, what with the Apostles sermons, miracles, and a
Whence Eusebius. says. l. 2. Ecc. hist. c. 14. they at Rome not thinking it enough
to have heard the gospel once (...), not being contented with the preaching of
the heavenly doctrine while it was but an unwritten doctrine, earnestly entreat
St Mark, that he would leave in writing with them a monument of that doctrine
which had bin delivered to them by preaching. Nor did they give over till they
had prevailed; which when St Peter knew by revelation of the H. G. (...) being
extremly pleased with that desire and their earnestness in it, He approved, it
and appointed it to be read in their assembly.
writings also to confirm and keep men in the truth, and to conveigh it better
to posterity, and their disciples after them, who went forth Eusebius. l. 3. c. 37.
delivering those writings, preaching on, and doing wonders also, very many
Nations are recorded by Historians as converted almost wholly. And the truth of
it is evident, since nothing but almost whole Nations, nor yet they but as
buoyed up by the wonders and the graces of Gods spirit, ever could be able to
endure, or be sufficient to employ the Swords, the Flames, the Lions, and the
other numberless tortures which the Jews and Nero and Domitian, and above all
Trajan in that first age raged with, till they made their Cities, villages and
provinces so desolate, that the Proconsul Pliny, being frighted with the
multitude of murdered Christians, did advise with him about relaxing his
edicts, as he himself l. 10. epist. 97.
assures us.

It was the same the next age, when the power of Miracles Just. Mart. dial* cum
Tryph. Iudaeo p. 247. 302 311. Iren. l. 2. c. 56. 57.
yet lived, and those which Christ himself wrought were scarce all dead, (some
Excerpt. ex Quadrat. Apolog. ad Hadrian. apud Eus. l. 4. c. 3.
lived till near that time, who rose up with him at his resurrection;) when
these Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 98.
books, (writ by the will of God to be the pillar and foundation of men's faith
in after ages, as says Iren. l. 3. c, 1. ^
Irenaeus in that age,) were also read in the assemblies weekly; when not only
those that did assemble were by Just. Mar. Apol. 2. Eccl. Smyrnens. apud Eusebius.
l. 4. c. 15. Ecclesiarum Viennen. and Lug. dun. comment. de passione Martyr.
suorum apud Eusebius. l. 5. c. 1. and Niceph. l. 3. and 4.
Hadrian martyred, but they put men to their oaths, to find out whether they
were Christians, that they might massacre them.

And in the 3d, it was the like, when Miracles they say were not Orig cont.
Cel. l. 2. p. 62. and p. 80. Tertul. Apol c. 23.
yet ceast, yet sure the greatest was the constancy of Christians in adhering
to this book and patience in suffering for it. For they report the Niceph. l.
5. c. 29.
sands on the sea shore almost as easy to be numbered as the Martyrs of that age;
what by V. Eusebius. l. 6. and 7. ^ere integros. de Sev. Spartian. and Tertul. de
Decio S. Cypr.
Valerian, Decius, Maximinus and Severus, but especially by Eusebius. l. 8. c. 2.
c. 6. Niceph. l. 7. c. 6. Eusebius. l. 8. c. 11. etc. 9. Sulp. Sev. l. 2. Oros. l.
7. c. 25. Ignatii Patr. Antioch. literas. apud Scalig. de emend. temp. l. 5. p.
496. Spond. ad annum 302 n. 4.
Dioclesian, who put so many men to death for not delivering up their Bibles to
be burnt, and refusing to Sacrifice to his Gods, as if he meant to have
depopulated the whole earth. And this is as notorious as that men do now
profess that they are Christians, and that these are holy Scriptures. Therefore
I shall need to go no further.

Now among so many myriads who on the account of all these Miracles (whatever
they were) suffered themselves to be converted to the faith of Christ, and then
as if they cared for nothing but Religion and their Bibles, for them bore the
loss of goods, and life it self, and engaged their posterity to do so also;
that not one of these should know whether indeed any such miracles were
wrought, if any were restored to life or no: (for if they knew, then they were
true:) and that among so numberless a crow'd of teachers, who by assuming to
speak languages, raise the dead, work signs, drew in those Myriads to Religion
and the stake, and went before them, gave them an example both in faith and
death; that not one of all those should believe either the Miracles or himself
that did them: for if any one that did them did believe them, since he knew who
did them, they must needs be certain: but not one of them to know it, sure is
such a thing as neither could be don nor be imagined.

He therefore that requires strict evidence in things of faith which cannot
bear it, he that calls for Mathematical demonstration, nor will believe on
easier terms, yet is so credulous and so unwary, that he can believe so many
things which by the nature and the disposition of mankind I have demonstrated
not possible, which yet must be true, unless these scriptures be from God: it is
plain he does not seek for certainty, but for a pretense of not believing;
would fain have his Infidelity and Atheism look more excusable, and is not fit
to be disputed with but to be exploded.

But if these scriptures be from God, then whatsoever they affirm (with modesty
I may conclude) is true. And therefore when St Luke Acts. 1. 1. declares his
former treatise contained all that Jesus began both to do and teach until the
day in which he was taken up: since Christ before he did ascend taught every
thing that was required to be believed and don in order to salvation, and more
too; therefore if his Gospel did contain all that he taught, and did, since it
did not contain all absolutely, it must needs mean it contained all that was
necessary, or it must mean nothing. And since the same St Luke in the beginning
of that Gospel does affirm he wrote it, Luc. 1. 4.
that Theophilus might know the certainty of those things wherein he had bin
instructed; It Is plain he avers that the certain knowledge of all those things
wherein the having bin instructed made Theophilus a Christian, might be had out
of that Gospel: and when St Paul says here, that the Holy Scriptures are able
to make us wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus, and St
John in his 20 chap. v. 31. that tho he had not wrote all the things that Jesus
did, yet those that he had wrote were written, that we might believe that Jesus
was the Christ the son of God, and that believing we might have life through
his name; It Is evident the Scriptures say that what was written was sufficient
to work that belief which was sufficient to life and salvation, as far as the
credend^ do concur to it. And when St Paul in that verse that succeeds my text,
in most express particular words sets down the usefullness of Scripture in each
several duty of a man of God, or preacher of the Gospel, both for Doctrine of
faith, for reproof or correction of manners, and instruction unto
righteousness, and tells you Gods express end in inspiring it, and consequently
its ability when so inspired was, that the man of God might be made perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto every good work that belongs to his whole office; it is
most certain that what is sufficient for that office to instruct, reprove,
correct and teach in, must needs be sufficient to believe and practice in for
all men: i. e. what my text affirms, they are able to make us wise unto
salvation.

I might call in Tradition universal to bear witness to this truth for holy
Scriptures, if having once demonstrated that they are Gods word, when that does
affirm it, and bears witness to it, there were need of any other. And this I
dare boldly say, that if the Scripture did say as expressly, that the Pope had a
supremacy or soveragnity over the whole Church, or that he or the Roman Church
were infallible; their definition, or the living voice of their present Church,
a most sure rule of Faith, as it does say Scripture is able to make us wise
unto salvation, those Articles would suffer no dispute, it would be blasphemy
or sacriledg to limit or explain them by distinctions, when those sayings of
the perfectness of Scriptures are forced to bear many. Then we should have no
complaints of the obscurity of those books; if those articles were either in
the Greek or Hebrew, they would never say the Bible were not fit to be a Rule
of Faith, because the Language were unknown to the unlearned, and they could
not be infallibly secure of the Translation; were they there they would account
them sure enough, who think them plain enough already there, and that we must
believe them because, Thou art Peter, Feed my sheep, and Tell the Church, are
there.

And for him that shall affirm, all necessaries that must make us wise unto
falvation are not in the Scripture, it is impossible to give a rational account
how it should come to pass that some are there, the rest are not.

It must be either on design, or else by chance. Now 1. That God should design,
when very many things that were not necessary were to be written, that the main
and fundamental ones should be omitted: and when of the necessaries most he did
design for Scripture, then He should not suffer the Apostles to write the
remainder of them: and yet what he would not suffer them to write, designed
that the Trent Fathers (who I hope have perfected the Catalogue) should write
all: of these since it is not possible to give a reason, it is not therefore
rational to affirm it was upon design. But

2. If he shall say it only happened so by chance, he does affront both
Scriptures, and Gods Holy Spirit, who, as they affirm, inspired them for this
very end, to bring men to the faith and to salvation. But there is no place for
chance in those things that are don in order to an end, by the design, impulse
and motion of the infinite wisdom of Gods holy Spirit. He certainly does most
unworthily reproach his Maker, who can think it possible, that what he did
design expressly and on that account alone to attain such an end by (namely
that men should believe and be saved) and inspire it for that purpose, should
yet fail, not be sufficient for that purpose. And sure if it be sufficient it
contains all necessaries, otherwise it were deficient in the main; yea so
clearly also, as that they, for whose salvation they are intended, may with use
of such methods, as are obvious and agreed upon by all men, understand them:
for otherwise they could not be sufficient: if men could not be instructed by
them in things necessary both to faith and life, they could not make them wise
unto salvation.

I must confess the Scripture labors under a great prejudice against this
doctrine, from the different senses and interpretations that are made of it,
even in the most fundamental points, by them that grant it is the word of God;
when yet all use the same means to find out the meaning, and no doubt they seek
sincerely after it. But yet I think it evident this happens not from the
obscurity of Scripture, since it is not only in the most express texts; but
also if you should suppose the doctrins were as plain set down there as words
can express them, yet there are such principles assumed into the faith of
different sects, as must oblige them to interpret diversely the same plain
words. I am not so vain as to imagine that no places are obscure in Scripture,
and I know that learned men have arts by obscure places to confound the
plainest, just as the Philosopher did motion. Neither am I so perverse and
singular not to think that universal practice and profession of the Church does
much assure and confirm explications of Scriptures, whether obscure or plain.
But this I say, that the diversities of explication come, as I now said, from
the diversity of principles or rather prejudices, and that this only is the
cause of it I thus demonstrate.

First in the Socinian, who interprets all those Scriptures, which the Catholic
world has still applied to the Divinity and satisfaction of Christ, that I
name no more points, otherwise then the Church did always; and I affirm he does
it, not because he thinks the words do favor his interpretation, but because
his principle requires it; namely this, To admit nothing into his faith but
what agrees with that which he counts reason, which in a Socinians faith is
judge of all points in the last resort. And I mean reason upon natural
principles, and thus I prove it. Socinus speaking of Christ's satisfaction,
says the word is not in Scripture, Ego quidem etiamsi non semel sed saepe id in
sacris monimentis scriptum extaret, non ideirco tamen ita rem prorsus se hub^re
crederem. Socin. de Jesus Chr. Servatore part 3 c. 6 operum tom. 2. p. 204.
yet if it were there very often I would not believe it, because it does not
consist with right reason, that is with the arguments that he had brought
against it drawn from human principles. And therefore he there adds; those
things which it is apparent cannot be, (i. e. that appear such to him who judges
by the principles of natural reason, which yet cannot judge of supernatural and
infinite beings,) tho the Holy Scripture does expressly say they are, yet must
not be admitted; and idcirco sacra verba in alium sensum quam ipsa sonant per
inusitatos etiam tropos quandoque explicantur: and for this reason we make use
of even unusual tropes, strained figures to explain the words of Holy writ to
other senses then the words themselves import. And so he therefore serves that
great variety of words by which the Scripture does express Christ's suffering
for our sins, in our stead, as our sacrifice; against the universal notions of
those words, not only which the Church of Christ, but which the Jew's and which
the heathen world had of them. And when his reason told him that Christ could
not be God one with his Father, that he was so far from having any being from
eternity, as that he was not at all, till he had a being from the Blessed
Virgin; Therefore when the Scripture says directly John 10. 30.
I and the Father are one, he must strain it to this meaning, are of one mind,
we agree in one: although St John avert that, by Joh. 5. 7. The Father the Word,
and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. 8. the Spirit, and the Water and
the Blood, and these three agree in one.
distinguishing those two expressly. Yea worse, when to prove that Christ had a
being e're the world was made, we urge from the first Chap. to the Heb. 1. 10.
11. 12.
Hebr. what St Paul produces from the Psalm. 102. 25. 26. 27.
Psalms, and does apply to him most particularly. Thou Lord in the beginning
have laid the foundation of the earth, and the Heavens are the works of thine
hands; they shall perish, but thou remainest, and they all shall wax old as
does a garment; and as a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be
changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. They explain it
thus: that God by Christ will at last destroy these Heavens, and this Earth,
and change them, according to that saying in the Psalms; which although the
Apostle produce at length, as it stood there, both concerning the Creation and
destruction of the world, yet he intended only to apply this last to Christ.
And tho he say as well of the same Lord, Thou Lord in the beginning did lay
the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thine hands, as,
thou shall change them; yet he meant no more but that this change God would
effect by Christ. It is not possible that the text can give any the least
countenance to this interpretation. The different explication of this Scripture
does not come from the obscurity of any words in it; for in the Psalm they and
we understand the same words in the same sense exactly: therefore that we
differ here, is not from any thing in the words quoted, but is wholly from the
Principle. And we may not wonder, for the plain sense will not suit with their
Hypothesis.

There are no other that are instanced in as differing from us in points of
faith but the Romanists. I know not whether they account those differences to
be in things necessary to salvation. The reasonableness of this supposition
might be demonstrated if there were any need of it.
If that be true that they allow (for what cause they know best,) some that are
reconciled to their Church to communicate with ours, that is, join in our
worship, and by doing so own the profession of our faith in distinction to that
of others, or at least espouse the scandal of the owning it; Then one would
think they must account that there is nothing in our worship don that is
unlawful, nor omitted that is necessary, nor any thing Heretical professed, at
least that there is no scandal in the owning that profession. For if there were,
they did allow them only to profess and act gross sin, which certainly they
would not do. So that poor Protestants when they are pleased to give leave may
be no Heretics, and therefore there is nothing of it self in that profession
faulty. But yet on the other side since we see they call us Heretics, and when
they have no power over us, damn us to Hell fires, and when they have had
power, damned us to the fire and faggot also; sure they think the differences to
be in things necessary. But yet the account is easy, how not the obscurity of
Scripture, but a Principle or prejudice does cause this. For We are bound in
conscience to grant they believe their own Principles. Now it is a Principle
with them, that their Church cannot err, and therefore that their present faith
and consequent depending practice was their faith and practice always. That it
may appear so, they must seek for countenance from Scripture: and if any thing
there seem to thwart their faith or practice, they must smooth and disguise it,
that it may look friendly. And it is most certain if the Scripture should be
never so express against them, whilst they think it is not possible that they
can err, they cannot think it possible Scripture can mean what it pretends to
speak. Twere easy to make instances. As first for invocation of the Saints
departed, which with them is a point of faith, L. 1. de Sanct. Beatit. c. 17.
Bellar. and Cochleus produce that of the Psalms, I will lift up mine eyes unto
the hills from whence comes my help. Psalm. 121. 1. and although the text directs
that looking up expressly to the Lord that made heaven and earth. v. 2. and tho
it be a Principle with them, that on those everlasting hills there were no
Saints in David's time that could be invocated, they were all in limbo then they
say; yet as I said, they would have countenance from Scripture, and for want of
better they are therefore forced to interpret those words, I will lift up mine
eyes unto the Hills, thus, I will invocate the Saints. Now will any say it is the
obscurity of this Scripture that does hinder Protestants from seeing the bright
evidence of this argument, and not rather that it is the weak foundation of
this practice that does make the Romanists seek to build it on those mountains?
So among those several texts which in the 2d Nicen general Council are produced
for adoration of the images of Christ and of the Saints, and are expounded to
evince it, none is plainer then that which I produced now from Bellarmin. I
shall give one or two examples from the Psalms: Psalm. 27. 8.
Thy face Lord will I seek: Psalm. 4. 6.
and, Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us: and again, Psalm.
45. 12.
the rich among the people shall entreat thy face: therefore David thought the
picture of Christ was to be adored. It is their own Council tom. 18. p. 295.
conclusion from these texts, And they have no better for it. Yet they saw the
doctrine in these so apparently, as that with great opposition to great
Councils, and more blood shed I think then yet ever any doctrine has bin
settled with, it was imposed. Yea more, the first experiment of the Popes power
over Sovereign Princes was on the account of this same doctrine: when for
opposing Image Worship Gregory the 2d excommunicated the Greek Emperor. Pope
Sigen. de regno Ital. ad annum 712. l. 3. p. 94.
Constantine for the same cause indeed had 14 years before don so to
Philippicus, but he did not go much further, whereas Gregory absolved the
Emperors subjects in the Roman Duchy from their Allegiance; commanded them not
to pay him any tribute, nor in any wise obey him; whereupon they Sigen. de
regno. Ital. ad annum. 726. l. 3. p. 103.
killed their Governors, and Leonis impeperium respuerunt, ac solenni
sacramento se Pontificis vitam statumque in perpetuum defensuros, atque ejus in
omnibus rebus autoritati obtemperaturos jurarunt. Ita Roma Romanusque ducatus a
Graecis ad Romanum Pontificem pervenit. Sigon. de Regno Ital. ad annum 727. l
3. p. 105.
swore obedience to the Pope. And this was the beginning of St Peter's
patrimony, and it was thus gotten by this doctrine, which they saw so clearly
in these Scriptures; when they cannot see the contrary in those plain words,
Thou shall not make to thy self any whether Graven image or idol it matters
not, since it follows, nor the likeness of any thing which is in heaven above,
etc. nor in those where God takes care expressly that himself be not worshiped
by an image Deuteronomy. 4. 15. and then judge if it is obscurity or plainness that
makes them see or not see doctrines in the Scripture: rather if it be not
merely the necessity of prejudice. So again we differ in the meaning of the
14th chap. of the 1. Cor. where we think St Paul asserts and argues, yea and
chides against all service in an unknown tongue in the public assemblies,
saying all must be don there so as it may be 1 Cor. 1. 5. 12. 19. 20.
understood, and to edification. But that which is performed there in an
unknown tongue does not V. 6. 14. 16. 17.
edify says he there: yet to justify this practice they must make it have a
different meaning, which no Fathers countenance, but which Basil. Mag. in reg.
brevior. interrog. 278. Tom. 2. p. 641. Theodor. and Cecumen. in locum etc. and
the commentary under St Ambrose's name makes these who in the Church of Corinth
would use an unknown tongue in their sacred offices, (against whom St Paul
directs his speech, and takes occasion for that which he says in this chap.)
converted Hebrew's; who would it should seem perform the service or at least
some parts of it in the Christian Assemblies, as they had bin don of old in the
Synagogues, in the Hebrew tongue, which the Corinthians understood not, against
which St. Paul disputes.
several expound as we do, yea and diverse of their own do so too, and
particularly their Pope John 8th in his 247th Epistle writing expressly on that
Subject. Conc. tom. 24. p. 287.
Once more, so their half communion, that it may be reconciled with that
express command Mat. 26. 27.
Drink ye all of it: and this do, obliges them to find another meaning: drink
ye all must be directed to them only as Apostles; and do this must signify
consecrate the Elements, although St Paul apply it most directly to the drinking,
1 Cor. 11. 25.
and the drinking to his lay Corinthians. Nor dare they say in truth it means
the other, for St Paul when he does say do this, did not intend to make his Lay
Corinthians male and female all Yet the Counc. of Trent Sess. 22. c. 9. can. 2.
pronounces Anathema to all those that shall say these words do this, quoting
them also in the margin out of this place 1 Cor, 11 did not constitute priests,
and ordain that they should offer the body and blood of Christ. Edit Col.
Agrip. anno 1261.
priests, and give them power to consecrate. The words are plain, there is
nothing in the text obscure that makes us differ; but the practice had by
little and little grown upon them, till it became Universal, and so grew into
their faith: and then since they believe they cannot err, they must expound
Christ's words so as they may not contradict their practice; because that would
overthrow their Principle.

But the Church that builds upon no Principle but Gods word, can have no
temtation to pervert or strain it, since what ever does appear to be the
meaning of it, that their Principle must needs engage them to believe. And
therefore if it say This is my body, we believe it; if it says too after
consecration it is 1 Cor. 11. 27.
bread, we believe that also: and because it therefore says it is both, we so
believe it one that it may be the other: which since both say it is impossible
that it can be substantially, neither has God in express words told us which
it is substantially; therefore seeing when he calls it body, he is instituting
his Sacrament, there is all reason in the world he should mean Sacramentally;
since it is the most proper meaning: and by consequence it is bread
substantially, as all ways of judging in the world assure us. Here Is no stress
on Scripture, as there is no Principle to serve; when as the other makes us
differ, not in Scripture only, even where it is plainest; but tradition too. For
the most express and evident sayings of the primitive Fathers are on every head
of difference, as much the matter of contention as the texts of Scripture are;
as it were easy to demonstrate if that were my business. So that it is mere
deceit to lay our quarrels to defects in Gods word, and particularly to its
obscurity, which a man would think were evident enough from this that Children
knew it. The last thing I am to speak to.

And that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

I cannot pass this, that it is St Chrysostomes observation, that Timothy was
nursed up in the Scriptures from his childhood. Yea and since his Father was an
Heathen, he must have bin taught them by his Grandmother Lois, and his Mother
Eunice, whose faith St Paul speaks of 2 Timothy 1. 5. Children therefore then, and
Women, and they sure are Laics, read the Bible. Yea and since they knew it,
they must read it in a language which they understood: and we know where that
is unlawful now. If we consider the first prohibition that appeared in that
Church with Synodical authority against such men's having any Bibles in their own
tongue, we shall find it was immediately upon the preaching of the Waldenses,
one of whose doctrines it was, Vsser. de Chris. Eccle. success. c. 6.. 17.
that the Scripture was the rule to judge of faith by: so that whatsoever was
not consonant to that must be refused. This they preached in France and over
Europe in the latter end of the c. 8.. 1.
12 Century: and that Council which forbad their having of the Bible, we find
lately put forth by the friar Spicileg. tom. 2. p. 624.
D. Achery as held at Toulouse in the beginning of the 13th Century. It seems
they apprehended then their doctrines hardly would abide that touchstone: And
they therefore had no surer, more compendious way for its security then to
prevent such trial, taking care men should not know what was or what was not in
Scripture. And it is not possible for me to give account why in their
catechizing they leave out all that part of the commandments, Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven image, etc. but this only, that they dare not let
the laity compare their doctrine and their practice with that Scripture. But
tho it is possible they might conceive some danger if the whole Scripture
should be exposed, yet in those portions which the Church it self chose out for
her own offices, the little lessons, and Epistles, and Gospels, those sure one
would think were safe: no, not their Psalter, Breviary, nor their Hours of the
Blessed Virgin must they have translated in their own tongue; as that cap. 4.
Council did determine. And truly when the Roman Missal was turned lately into
French, and had bin allowed to be so by the general Assembly of the Clergy in
the year Ordonnance de Messieurs les Vicaire, Genereux de Monseigneur
l'Emiminentissime Cardinal de Retz Archevesque de Paris, which is in the 137th
page of the Extrait du Frecez verbal de l'Assemblee general du Clerge de
France, tenue a Paris en l'annee 1660.
1650. and when it was don it had the usual approbation of the Doctors and some
Bishops, and then was printed at Paris with the license of the Vicars general
of their Archbishop. Yet another general assembly of the Clergy the year 1660,
whereat there were p. 128 of that extrait.
36 Bishops, upon pain of Ibid. p. 128. and p. 139.
excommunication forbid any one to read it, and condemn not only that present
traduction, but the thing in general as p. 130.
poisonous, in an Encyclical Epistle to all the Prelates of the Kingdom: and in
p. 141. le: enfans de nostre mere ont pris les arms contre neus, ils la vent
attaquer jusques dans le Sanctuaire, des Mysteres de son Espoux pour les
prostituer.
another they say of him that did translate it, and the vicars general that did
defend him in it, that by doing so they did take arms against the Church,
attaquing their own Mother (namely by that version) at the Altar, in that
sanctuary, that closet of her spouses mysteries to prostitute them: and in p.
132.
another Epistle they beseech his Holiness Pope Alexander 7th to damn it not in
France alone but the whole Church; which he then did by his p. 147 and the same
bull is printed in the Index of prohibited books set out by the command of
Alex. 7. at Rome 1664. p. 382.
Bull, for ever inter dicting that or any other version of that book, Missa le
praefatum Gallico idiomate conscriptum vel in posterum alias quomodolibet
conscribendum and evillgendum perpetuo damnamus, reprobamus, and interdicimus,
ejusque impressionem, lectionem and retentionem universis and singulis
utriusque sexus Christi fidelibus, eujuscunque gradus, ordinis, conditionis
existant, sub poena excommunicationis latae sententiae ipso jure incurrendae
perpetuo prohibemus: mandantes quod statim quicunque illud habuerint, vel in
futurum quodcunque habebunt realiter and cum effectu exhibeant and tradant
locorum Ordinariis vel inquisitoribus, qui nulla interposita more, exemplaria
igne comburant, and comburi faciant.
forbidding all to read or keep it on severest pains; commanding any one that
had it to deliver it immediately to the Inquisitor or Ordinary that it might be
burnt forthwith. Now thus (whatever it be otherwise) the mass is certainly a
sacrifice when it is made a burnt offering to appease his holiness's
indignation: when that very Memorial of Christ's passion again suffers, and
their sacred offices are martyred. To see the difference of times; 'twas
heretofore a Pagan Dioclesian, a strange prodigy of cruelty, who by his edict
did command all Christians to deliver up their Bibles or their bodies to be
burnt: 'Twas here his Holiness, Christ's Vicar, who by his Bull orders all to
give up theirs, that is all of it that they will allow them, and their prayers
also, that they may be forthwith burnt, or themselves to be excommunicated,
that is their souls to be devoted to eternal flames. And whereas then those
only that did give theirs up were excommunicate, all Christians shunned them as
they would the plague; and multitudes, whole regions rather gave themselves up
to the fire to preserve their Bibles: now those only that have none, or that
deliver up theirs, are the true obedient sons of that Church, and the thorough
Catholics. I know men plead great danger in that book: it is represented as the
source of monstrous doctrines and rebellions. I will not say these men are bold
that take upon them to be wiser then Allmighty God, and to see dangers he
foresaw not, and to prevent them by such methods as thwart his appointments;
but I will say that those who talk thus certainly despise their hearers; as if
we knew not Heresies were hatched by those that understood the Bible
untranslated: and as if we never heard there were rebellions among them that
were forbid to read the Bible. For if there were a Covenant among them that had
it in their own tongue, so there was an Holy League amongst those men that were
denied it. While those that had the guidance of the subjects conscience were
themselves subject to a foreign power, as all Priests of that communion are,
How many Kings and Emperors have there bin that did keep the Scriptures from
their people, but yet could not keep their people from sedition, nor themselves
from ruin by it? In fine when God himself for his own people caused his
Scripture to be written in their own tongue, to be weekly read in public to,
and day and night in private by the people; and when the Apostles by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost indicted Scripture for the world, they did it in
the language that was then most vulgar to the world: what God and the Holy
Spirit thus appointed as the fittest means for the Salvation of the world, to
define not expedient, as the Holy Fathers of Trent did, looks like blasphemy
against God and the Holy Spirit. But blasphemies of this kind are not to be
wondered at from that kind of men, that call the Scripture a dumb Pigh. 3. de
hier. Ecc.
judge, Eccius.
a black Gospel, incken Divinity, Pigh. de hier. l. 1. c. 2. fol. 8.
written not that they should be the rule of our faith and Religion, but that
they should be regulated by, submitted to our faith; Idem Pigh.
that the authority of the Church has given canonical authority to Scriptures,
and those the chief, which otherwise they had not neither from themselves nor
from their authors; And that if the Scriptures were not sustained by the
authority of the Church they would be of no more value then Aesops Vid. Chemn.
examen de S. Can. p. 47.
fables. Peers. de tradit. par. 1. assert. 3.
And lastly, that the people are permitted to read the bible was the invention
of the Devil.

But to leave the controversy and speak to the advantages which may be had from
early institution in the Scripture; it is so evident that I need not observe how
it is for want of principles impressed and wrought into the mind in Childhood,
that our youth is so licencious. And it is not possible it can be otherwise,
when they have nothing to oppose to constitution, when it is growing, and to all
the temtations both of objects and example; no strict sense of duty planted in
them, no such notions as would make resistance to the risings of their
inclination, and seducements of ill company: and they therefore follow and
indulge to all of them. And in Gods name why do parents give their Children up
to God in their first infancy, deliver him so early a possession of them? as if
they would have Religion to take seizure on them strait, as if by their
baptizing them so soon, they meant to consecrate their whole lives to Gods
service, make them his as soon as they were theirs, as if they had bin given
them merely for Gods uses? And they therefore enter them into a vow of Religion
almost as soon as they have them: why all this? if accordingly they do not
season and prepare them as they shall grow capable. Why when they are but newly
born their children, do they take care they shall be regenerate and born again
Gods children? if they do not furnish them with necessaries, educate them into
all the qualities and hopes that appertain to the condition of Gods children,
as well as they do to that of their own. That parent which not only, like some
delicate ones refuses her own breasts to her own infant, but provides no other
to sustain it; that does only wash her babe from i'ts first blood and
uncleanness to expose it the more handsome prey to wolves and tigers in the
desert, is more savage then those tigers: Lam. 4. 3.
even the sea monsters draw out the breasts, they give suck to their young
ones, says lamenting Jeremy, but he adds the daughter of my people is cruel
like the Ostrich in the wilderness, Job. 39. 14.
which leaves her eggs in the earth, and forgets that the foot may crush
them, or that the wild beast may break them, she is hardened against her young
ones: such are they who when their children are so born again to God, yet as
they shall wax capable provide not that which St Peter calls the sincere milk
of the word that they may grow thereby: 1 Pet. 2. 2.
but from their being washed so in the laver of regeneration, take no more care,
but expose them forthwith to such lusts and conversations, as are much more
wild and savage then those beasts in the comparison; to which they cannot
choose but be a prey. They strive indeed, they say, to educate them into men
betimes, that is, make them conversible and bold: and since for that they must
engage them into frequent company, where they see and hear men's follies, that I
say no worse; by that means they come to have their understandings stored with
nothing but the Modes, and sins of conversation; filled with froth and puddle;
men betimes only thus, as they have forwarded their inclinations to, and got an
early understanding and experience of, those vices, which one would think men
only could be equal for. But by this means the mind, that only part that makes
us be men, is not only not improved, but dwarft. They do not only still
continue children in their understanding, as to any thing that is real and
solid; but the hopes of reason are destroyed in them, and its growth killed, by
turniug all its nurishment to feed the beast part; and the Christian is quite
starved. There needs no other cause be given for the most part, why so many men
have no Religion, own being Libertines, and profess vice; for want of education
they have nothing in them that does check this, for they had no principles of a
Religion instil'd into them. And if at any time it comes to pass that they
think it is their interest to take upon them the profession of some Religion,
they therefore, since they have no Principles nor rules to judge by, are most apt
to choose to profess that Religion, which is like to be most gentle to the
courses they have steered, and are engaged in. Now that men hope to find such
an one, (whether by its constitution I shall not enquire but,) by i'ts practice
is but too appaernt. Accordingly when they go over to it, they carry with them,
and preserve in it the vices of their no Religion; and by consequence they went
not over seriously for Religion: and are therefore so much worse now then when
they owned no Religion, that they do their wickednesses with certainty of easy
absolution, and so hopes of salvation; and by this are likely to be made
twofold more children of Hell then before: and let them triumph in such
conquests. There Is nothing in the world that contributes so much to this as men's
being not acquainted early with, instructed in, those divine rules and
obligations to piety and virtue, which this book the Bible does afford. If men
had bin seasoned first with the knowledge and the sense of duty, with the
comforts that are in it, with the apprehensions of great blessings that attend
it; and the mischiefs that are consequent, indeed essential to impiety and vice
here; and their minds were furnished with examples of both, which this book
abounds with; and their hearts too raised with expectations of far greater
blessedness in a life hereafter, and with the belief that both that blessedness
and life shall have no end: and were made sensible also of strange dreadful
torments that await the breach of duty, which shall also last for ever: If
these impressions I say, did prevent all other, and take up the mind, and had
in them the stamp and character of God, and so there were a reverence and awe
of him wrought in them, and they looked upon him as concerned in all this; how
it was his word that said; and these sentiments were grown into the very habit
of their mind; as it would not be easy to corrupt or soften such, so 'twould be
much more difficult to shake them, since their faith is founded on the rock of
ages. Besides the Holy Scriptures carry in them such an obligation of adhering
to them, and to them alone, since they are sufficient to make us wise unto
salvation, and are Gods word, that men would not be apt to exchange them for
Legends, pious forgeries, for things that can make good no certain title from
the Lord: for let them show an equal derivation of it, bring it down through
all the ages ae we have don the Scriptures title to him. Otherwise it justly
may provoke Gods exclamation in the Prophet Jer. 2. 13.
Jeremy: Be astonished O ye Heavens, and be horribly afraid, be ye very
desolate; says the Lord, for my people have committed two evils, they have
forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken
cisterns that can hold no water: cisterns therefore that may leave them in a
state to want a drop of water, when their tongue shall be horribly tormented:
whereas he that drinks that living water which Christ gives, his Joh. 4. 14.
compard with c. 6. 34.
word, shall never thirst, but it shall be a well of water in him springing up
to everlasting life.

FINIS.

