A SERMON PREACHED AT HAMPTON COURT On the 29th of May 1662.

BEING The Anniversary of His Sacred Majesty's most happy Return.

BY RICHARD ALLESTRY, D. D. and Chaplain to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by I. Flesher for John Martin, James Allestry, and Thomas
Dicas, at the Bell in S. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXII.

TO The Right Honorable EDWARD Earl of Clarendon, Lord high Chancellor of
England, and Chancellor of the University of Oxford.
My Lord,
TO vouch your Lordships commands for the publishing this Discourse, I might
reasonably think, would be to libel your judgment; and the prefixing your Name
to it, and this mean address, would look rather like revenge then homage or
obedience: if I did not know that low performances are due to the transcendency
of such a subject as I then discoursed upon, and such a Patron as I now
dedicate to: So I lie prostrate under my great Arguments, here insufficiency is
Art and Rhetoric. And the truth is, my Lord, it was not this which made me so
sollicitous to avoid your injunctions, but apprehensions of the unusefulness of
the Discourse it self.

When God's most signal methods of all sorts do not seem to have wrought much
conviction; when neither our own dismal guilts, nor miseries, nor most express
miracles of deliverance have made us sensible, but after the equally stupendous
30th of January and 29th of May, and the black time that intervened, we are
still the same perverse untractable people; when luxury is the retribution made
for plenty, license for liberty, and Atheism for Religion, whilst miracles of
mercy are acknowledged only by prodigies of ungrateful disobedience: and on the
other side, when factious humors swell against all Laws, as they would either
overflow those mounds, or make them yield and give way to them; when
Declarations and Decrees, which were infallible when they came only from a
party of a part of a Parliament, are neither of force nor esteem when they have
all solemnity and obligation that just and full authority can give; alas, what
hopes of doing any thing can a weak Harangue entertain? But, my Lord, since you
are pleased to command, I give up both it and my understanding to your
Lordship, and the weaker the Discourse is, so much the more pregnant testimony
is it of the obsequiousness of

My Lord, Your Lordships most devoted and most humble servant RICHARD ALLESTRY.

HOSEA 3. 5. Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek the Lord
their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness.
HE had said in the words before, that the children of Israel shall abide many
days without a King and without a Prince, without a sacrifice and without an
image or altar, and without an Ephod and without Teraphim. Now when they shall
have been for many years in such a state of helpless desolation, shall have no
King under whose shadow they, their laws and rights might hope for shelter; no
Prince to guard them from the sad calamities of wild confusion or usurping
violence; shall have no exercises of religion to allay and soften those
calamities, and give them comfort in the bearing of them; no Altar to lay hold
on for security against them, or to stretch out their hands toward, for
deprecation of them; no nor a God to put an end to this sad state; nor any
means of direction what to do under it, no Ephod to ask counsel at; nor yet
the pageantry, the fallacy of these, no Teraphim for Ephods, nor Image for a
God; the same destruction having seized these and their worshippers, the people
and their Idols going into Captivity together, and the only true God having
forsaken them: Now when the Prophet had denounced this state of Woe, which was
to dwell with them so long as that their very expectations of deliverance
should be dying, having continued threescore years and ten, a longer and more
wearisome age of patience then life, he then proceeds to sweeten all by telling
them of a return, and what things they shall do in it; and they are three.

First, Seek the Lord their God, apply themselves to his Worship and Obedience,
and cleave to him; for so the word is rendered (...) Lev. 19. 31. and Jeremy
repeating this c. 30. 9. words it, shall serve the Lord their God, and David
their King:

Which is the second thing they were to do. As the Ecclesiastical state was to
be settled, so the secular too upon its just foundations: Religion and Loaylty
both running in their ancient current.

Thirdly, They shall fear the Lord and his goodness: not only tremble before
him, who is the Lord, that did exert his power in their destruction; but shall
much more revere his goodness, that did flow out in such plentiful miraculous
expresses of deliverance,

Now these being not only prophecy what in that juncture they would do, nor
only duties what they were to do, but also counsels and directions
immediately from God what they were best to do, the only prudent and safe
course according to the policies of heaven; the direct view of these
particulars in reference to that state of theirs is not an unconcerning
prospect at this season, which is the Anniversary of an equal return; and
therefore I shall lay them so before you, and the reflection on them in our
practice shall make the application.

1. They shall seek the Lord their God is my first part, and the Lord's prime
direction for the repairing of a broken Nation. Neither indeed can any other
course be taken; for till we have found him, while he does hide his face,
nothing but darkness dwells upon the land; or if any light do break out, it is
but the kindlings of his anger: so he expresses, Deuteronomy. 31. 17. This people will
forsake me and break my Covenant; then my anger shall be kindled against them,
and I will forsake them, and hide my face from them, and they shall be
devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them, so that they will say
in that day, Are not these evils come upon us because our God is not amongst
us? This absence is only another word for desolation: Be thou instructed, o
Jerusalem, says God by Jeremy, c. 6. 8. lest my sold depart from thee, and I
make thee desolate, a land not inhabited: As if without him there were nothing
else but solitude in Cities and in Courts, and all were desert where he does
not dwell. Yea there is something beyond desolation, Hos. 9. 11, 12. As for
Ephraim, their glory shall flee away like a bird from the birth and from the
womb, and from the conception: though they bring up their children, yet will I
bereave them that there shall not be a man, (...) yea woe also to them when I
depart from them. And it must needs be so; for let our state be never so
calamitous, if God be not departed, there is comfort in it, and a deliverer at
hand: If we are in the place of dragons, Psalm. 44. 19.
his presence will make heaven there; and although we be covered with the
shadow of death, if the light of his Countenance break in, we are in glory; and
the brightness of that will soon damp and shine out the fiery trial. But if the
Lord depart, then there is no redemption possible: God has forsaken him,
persecute him and take him, for there is none to deliver him, Psa. 71. 11. But
if there were deliverance some other way, yet the want of God's presence is an
evil, such as nothing in the whole world can make good: the presence of an
angel in his stead does not. When the Lord said to Israel, I will not go up in
the midst of thee, but I will send an Angel with thee, and drive out the
Amorite, the Hittite, etc. yet when the people heard these evil tidings, they
mourned, and no man did put on his Ornaments, Exodus 33. 4. Nay more, I shall
not speak a contradiction if I shall say, that the most intimate presence of
the Godhead does not supply God's absence; and such a small withdrawing of
himself as may consist with being united hypostatically, was too much for him
to bear who was Immanuel, when he complained God was not with him: I mean our
Savior on the Cross. He, Luke 22. 44.
who although he did beseech against his cup with fervencies that did breath
out in heats of bloody sweat, with agonies of prayer; yet when he fell down
under it, did cheerfully submit to it, Ver. 42.
saying, Not my will, but thy will be done; yet when God hides himself, he does
expostulate with him, Mat. 27. 46.
crying out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? His God could no more
forsake him, then himself could be not himself: and yet the apprehension of
that which could not be was even insufferable to him, to whom nothing could be
insufferable. He seems to feel a very contradiction while he but seems to feel
the want of the Lord's presence.

Such is the sad importance of God's not being with us; and this same instance
tells us what drives him away. 'Twas sin that he withdrew from then: Christ did
but take on him our guilt, and upon that the Lord forsook him: God could no
more endure to behold wickedness in him, then the Sun could to see God suffer;
Mat. 27. 45.
Iniquity eclipsed them both, and sin did separate betwixt him and himself, and
made that person who was God cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? And it will do the same betwixt God and a people. Isa. 59. 1, 2. Behold,
the Lord's hand is not shortened that it cannot save, nor his ear heavy that it
cannot hear; but your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and
your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. His face is
clothed with light, we know; but when Wickedness over-spreads a people, those
deeds of darkness put out the light of his countenance. His hand although it be
not shortened, yet it contracts and shuts it self, not only to grasp and
withhold his mercies from them, but to smite: Iniquity builds such a wall of
separation as does shut out omnipresence, and makes him who is every where, not
be with such a people; not be in hearing of their needs; for when their sins do
cry, no prayers can be hearkened to; he will not hear you, says the Prophet.
And that gives us the very (...) of the Lord's departure from a people, and the
manner of it.

He is taking away his peace and mercies from a Nation when he will hear no
prayers for it; and He declares that he will hear no prayers when he withdraws
once from his house of prayer, and makes his offices to cease. The place
appointed for these offices, the Sanctuary, he calls, we know, the tabernacle
of (...)
meeting, that is, where he would Exodus 29. 42, 43.
meet his votaries, and hear and bless them; calls it his Psalm. 42. 4.
house, his Psalm. 74. 7.
dewlling place, his court, his Psalm. 31. 20.
presence, and his Jer. 17. 12. and 14. 21.
throne: and if so, when he is not to be found in these, when he no longer
dwells nor meets in them, we may be sure that he has left the land. Psalm. 74.
The Psalmist, when he does complain men had done evil in the Ver. 3.
Sanctuary, the adversaries roared in the midst of the Congregations, and set
up their banners there for trophies; they broke down all the carved work
thereof with axes and hammers, and had defiled the dwelling places of God's
name Ver. 7.
even to the ground, and burnt up all the houses of God in the land; he does
suppose that God was then departed when they had left him no abiding place: and
therefore he cries out, O God, Ver. 1.
wherefore art thou absent from us so long? Remember Sion where thou have
dwelt. Analogies I build this method of departure; we shall find exactly in
Ezekiel's Vision of that case to which my Text referres: it begins chap. 9. 3.
And the glory of the God of Isreal (i.e. the shining cloud, the token of his
presence in the Sanctuary,) went up from the Cherub whereupon he was, to the
threshold of the House, as going out; and then ver. 8. he does refuse to be
entreated for the land: after that chapter 10. 18. The glory went from off the
threshold to the midst of the City; and chap. 11. 23. it went from thence to
the mountain without the City, and so away: And then nothing but desolation
dwelt upon the land, until the counsel of my Text was followed, and they did
seek the Lord their God: for then the glory did return into the Sanctuary just
as it went away, as you may find it chapter 43.

And having seen when and how God forsakes a people, and for what, that does
direct us how to seek him, and it is thus; When men forsake those paths in
which they did not only err and go astray, but did walk contrary to God, so
that they did forsake each other; and do return, walk in his ways, the ways
of his Commandments, and return also to his Church, and seek him in his house,
fall low before his footstool, beg of him to meet in his tabernacle, renew
his Worship, and all invitations of him to return into his dewlling place. For
sure as it is in vain to seek him but in his own ways, nor can we hope to meet
him but in his Tabernacle of meeting; so also Scripture calls both these to
seek the Lord, and promises to both the finding him. To the first, Deuteronomy. 4. 29,
30. If from thy tribulation thou shall seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find
him, if thou seek him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, if thou turn
to the Lord thy God, and shall be obedient unto his voice. And to the second,
Ier. 29. 12. speaking of this sad state to which my Text relates, Then shall ye
call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me; and I will hearken unto you,
and I will be found of you, says the Lord, and I will turn away your
captivity. I could produce you instances of Asa making all his people swear to
seek the Lord: but because my Text speaks of David, he shall be the great
explication, as he was the practice of this duty in both senses. In the former,
119. Psalm. I have sought thy Commandments above gold or precious stone; more
then that which does make and does adorn my Crown, then that which furnishes
all the necessities and all the pomps of Royalty. And for the other, Psalm. 63.
1, 2. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for
thee, my flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty land where no water is: To
see thy power and thy glory, as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. His very
words do seem to labor too, and he does seek expressions to tell us how he
seeks. The hot fits of a thirsty palate that call so often and so impetuously are
in his soul; it has a pious fever, which cannot be allayed but by pouring out
of his soul to God in the Temple, by breathing out its heats in his devotion
offices. Nay more, he longs, has that I know not whether appetite, or passion,
which is not to be understood, but only suffered; to which all the
unreasonable violences which passion can be heated into, all the defaillances
nature can be oppressed into, are natural; it is the bodies Ecstasy. Now this he
had toward the worship of the Sanctuary; his very flesh found rapture in those
exercises, and when he was in a barren and dry land, was driven from the
plenties of a Court, and from the glories of a throne into a desert solitude,
he found no other wants but of God's house; did mind, pant, and long after
nothing else, did neither thirst for his necessities, nor long for his own
Crown, but for the Tabernacle only. And besides the Religion of this, he had
reason of State too to be thus affected; this was the best means to engage his
Subjects to him and secure his Throne. He knew, if by establishing God's
worship and by going with the multitude, Psalm. 42. 4.
as he did use, to the exercises of it; if by royal example and encouragements
of virtue, and by discountenancing and chastising impiety, by doing as he did
profess to do Ps. 101. (that directory for a Court) he could people his land
with holy living, and his Temple with holy-Worship; he knew he should then have
good Subjects, loyal to him and at peace with themselves. If they will seek
their God, then they will seek their King. The Lord saw this dependence, and
therefore counseled this course should be taken. The Master of our Politics
discerned it too, Arist. Pol. l. 7.
and therefore does advise that the first and chiefest public cares should be
about things of Religion, that and the same profession of it being (...), the
cement of Communities, and the very foundation of all legislative, and indeed
all power in the Magistrate: and in the people (...), it is a most efficacious
philtre, a charm, a Gordian knot of kindness. And as a Jew observed of their
own Nation, Joseph. l. con. Appio.
(...), To have one and the same opinions of God, and not to differ in their
rites from one another, breeds the best harmony in men's affections. When on the
other side no obligations, though the most signal and divine, will hold them in
obedience and peace, if their ambitions or interests look another way: and if
at any time present advantage, or an expectation, or some passion do incline
them to seek David their King; yet the appearance of a change of Interest, that
expectation defeated, or a cross animosity will burst those bonds, unless
Religion and Communion in Worship help to twist them. David had had experience
of this.

Abner knew of God's oath to David that after Saul he should be King over all
Israel; but he was otherwise concerned, and therefore he made Ishbosheth King,
maintained a long and a sore war even against what he knew God was engaged to
bring about, and made himself strong for the house of Saul, 2 Samuel 2, 3. chapter
But when a quarrel happened betwixt Ishbosheth and him, then, So do God to
Abner and more also, except as the Lord has sworn to David, even so I do to
him, to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah. And he sent
Messengers to him saying, Whose is the land? make but thy league with me. c. 3.
9, 10, 11, 12. Do but look forward, and you find when Abner was cut off, and
Ishbosheth was slain, and Israel had no leader, then they came to David,
saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh, and the Lord said to thee, Thou
shall feed my people Israel, c. 5. 1, 2. They knew all that before, yet would
not let him do it, till they had no other leader. Nay, when they had done
that, by Absalom's insinuations (who in a way of treacherous pity did instill
dislikes against the government, and did remonstrate in good wishes, as some
men do in prayers, c. 15. 3, 4) they were all drawn into rebellion against this
David, and made him fly out of the land, and became Subjects to that Absalom.
When he was dead indeed they speak of bringing back the King, c. 19. 10. and
when his own Judah had done it, quarreled ver. 43. because that their advice
was not first had: and though Judah had nothing but their service, for, Have we
eaten at all of the Kings cost, or has he given us any gift? say they, ver.
42. yet Israel is angry, because he came not back upon their score, for they
forsooth have ten parts in him, v. 43. and yet the next day every man of Israel
went after him that said, We have no part in David, Sheba a man of Belial, chapter
20. 1. Thus no allegiance, no tie however sacred and divine will hold them who
follow not upon God's score. Nay at the last, because that Rehoboam would not
ease their taxes, 1 Kings 12. 16.
all Israel cry out, What portion have we in David? see to thine own house,
David. And to make this secession perpetual (which all the former did not
prove) Jeroboam did use no other policy, but to change the Worship and the
Priests: He knew he should divide their hearts and Nations for ever, when he
had altered once the Service and the Officers; and if he could but keep them
from seeking God at Jerusalem, he was secure they would not seek David their
King. And so it proved. Now the Lord to prevent divisions had provided so far
Uniformity in his worship, that he required a single Unity; and that it might
be but in one manner, he let it be but in one place.

And truly, when men once depart from Uniformity, what measures can they set
themselves of changing? what shall confine or put shores to them? what
principle can they proceed upon which shall engage them to stay any where? and
why may not divisions be as infinite as men's phansies? And though, when those
are but in circumstantial things, those who are strong, and know them to be
such, are no otherwise concerned to contend for them then on Authorities
behalf, (to which every change is a Convulsion fit,) and on the account of
decency, and of compliance with the universal Church: yet when others do
dogmatize, and put conscience in the not doing them, and stand at such a
distance from them as to choose Schism, Disobedience, and Sedition rather, and
therefore must needs look upon damnation in them; these differences make as
great a gulf and chasme as that which does divide Luke 16. 26.
Dives from Abraham's bosom. It is one God, one Faith, one Worship makes
hearts one. Hands lifted up together in the Temple they will join and clasp:
and so Religion does fulfill its name a religando, binds Prince and Subjects
all together; and they who thus do seek the Lord their God, will also seek
David their King, God's next direction, and my second part.

2. And here three things offer themselves, a King, their King, and David their
King.

I am not here to read a Lecture of State policy upon a vie of Governments; why
seek a King, not any other sort of Government; and why their King, one that
already was so by the right of Succession, not whom addresses or election
should make so. And though I think 'twere easy to demonstrate only Monarchy
had ever a divine or natural original, and that elective Monarchy is most
unsafe and burdensome, full of dangerous and uneasy consequences, and this so
much to sight, that choice for the most part bounds it self, proves but a
ceremony of Succession: yet this I need not do, for I am dealing with the
Jews, who had God's judgment in the case, and his appointment too; and to me
that is argument enough. And when God has declared, Prove. 28. 2.
for the transgressions of a land many are the Princes thereof; many at once,
as in a Commonwealth, or many several families successively, for so God reckons
also one or many; it is still, we see, David their King, while it is in David's
line, and so the King does truly never die, while his race lives. If either of
these many be God's punishment, for the sins of a land, I will not say that
they who love the many Princes love the transgressions which God plagues so;
but I will say, they who do choose that which God calls his plague, that quarrel
for his vengeance, and with great strife and hazard take his indignation by
force, I can but pity them in their own options and enjoyments: but, O my soul,
enter not thou into their counsels.

As for seeking their King, I shall content my self with that which Calvin
says upon the words; Nam alitervere and ex animo Deum quaerere non potuit,
quin se etiam subjiceret legitimo imperio cui subjectus erat: For they could
not otherwise truly and with all their heart seek God, except they did subject
themselves to his Government to whom they did of right belong as Subjects. And
I shall add that they who do forsake their King, will soon forsake their God.
The R. Simeon the son of Jochai said, (...) and R. Simeon the son of Menasiah
said, (...)
Rabbines say it more severely of Israel, that they at once rejected three
things, the Kingdom of the house of David, and the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Sanctuary. And truly, if we do consult that State from the beginning, we shall
find that when they were without their King, they always were without their
God.

Moses was the first King in Ieshurun, Deuteronomy. 33. 5.
and he was only gone into the Mount for forty days, Exo. 32. 1, 5.
and they set up a golden Calf; they make themselves a God if they want him
whom the Lord makes so, as he does the Magistrate: if they have not a Prince,
that (...), living Image of God, then they must have an Idol. When Moses his
next successor was dead, we read that the man Micah had an house of Gods, and
consecrated one of his sons to be his Priest: and truly he might make his
Priest who made his Deities. And the account of this is given, In those days
there was no King in Israel, Iud. 17. 5, 6. The very same is said chapter 18. 1. to
preface the Idolatry of the Tribe of Dan. There was no heir of restraint, as it
is worded ver. 7. It seems, to curb impiety is the Princes Inheritance, which
till it be suppressed, he has not what he is heir to. But Vice will know no
boundaries if there be no King, whose sword is the only mound and fence
against it: for if we read on there, 19, 20, 21 chapter we shall find those dismal
tragedies of Lust and War, the one of which did sin to death the Levites
wife; the other, besides 40000. slain of them who had a righteous cause, and
whom God did bid fight, destroyed also a Tribe in Israel: these all sprang from
the same occasion, for so the story closes it, In those days there was no King
in Israel, chapter 21. 25.

Just upon this, when God in their necessities did raise them Judges, that is,
Kings, read all their story, you will find to almost every several Judge there
did succeed a several Idolatry: God still complaining, Judge. 3. 7. and ver. 12.
the children of Israel did evil again after the death of such an one, till he
raised them another. Chapter 4. 1. Chapter 6. 1. Chapter 10. 6. Chapter 13. 1.
Those 450. years being divided all betwixt their Princes and their Idols.
After them Jeroboam, he that made the great secession of that people from their
Prince, has got no other character from God but this, the 1 Kings 16. 26. Chapter
21. 22. and 22. 52, etc.
Man that did make Israel to sin, at once against God and against their King.
Yea upon this account they are reckoned by God to sin after both their Idolatry
and State were ended, when their calves and their Kingdom were destroyed.
Ezekiel. 4. 4, 5. the Lord does bid the Prophet lie on his left side 390. days,
to bear the iniquity of Israel according to the number of the years of their
iniquity. But this was more then the years of their State, which were only
255. 390 years indeed there were betwixt the falling off of the ten Tribes, and
the destruction of Jerusalem by the King of Babel; but those ten Tribes were
gone, their Kingdom perfectly destroyed above 130. years before: but their
iniquity was not, it seems, that does outlive their State, so long as that
God's Temple, that King's house did stand from which they did divide. As if
Seditious and Schismatics sin longer then they are, even while they are whom
they do sin against in separating from.

It Is true, there was an Ahaz and Manasseh in the house of David, but Hezekiah
and Josiah did succeed. Mischief did not appear entailed on Monarchy, as it is
upon rebellion and having no King. It does appear their Kings were guards also
to God and his Religion, the great defendors of his Faith and Worship. God and
the Prince for the most part stood and fell together: Therefore S. Paul did
afterward advise to pray for Kings, 1 Timothy 2. 2.
that we might live in godliness and honesty; and still they were the same who
sought the Lord their God, and David the King.

But why David their King? for could his Kingdom disappear and be to seek, of
whom the Lord had said, I have sworn once by my Holiness, Ver. 35.
I will not fail David? Psalm. 89. And his Throne therefore was as sure as God
is holy. But yet the Lord had said to the people of Israel, 1 Samuel 12. 25.
If ye do wickedly, ye shall be destroyed both you and your King. There are
other sins besides Rebellion and Treason that murder Kings and Governments.
Those that support their Ills by their dependencies, and use great shadows for
a shelter to rapacity, oppression, or licenses, or any crying wickedness; these
prove Traitors to Majesty and themselves, strike at the root of that under
which they took covert, fell that and crush themselves. National vices have all
Treason in them, and every combination in such sins is a Conspiracy. If
universal practice palliate them, we do not see their stain, it may be, think
them slight; but their complexion is purple: Common blood is not deep enough to
color them, they die themselves in that that is sacred. Nay these do seem to
spread contagion to God, as if they would not let the Lord be holy, nor suffer
that to be which he swore by his holiness should be: for the Psalmist cries
out, Where are thy old loving kindnesses which thou swarest unto David? Psalm.
89. 49.
But sure some of God's oaths will stand; if not those of his kindness, those
will by which he swears the ruin of such sinners, Isa. 5. 16.
and God that is holy will be sanctified in judgment upon them. Yea, upon more
then the offenders, for the guilty themselves are not a sacrifice equal to such
piacular offenses. Innocent Majesty must bleed for them too; If you do
wickedly, you shall be destroyed both you and your King. Thus when God would
remove Judah out of his sight, good Josiah must fall; and the same makes them
be to seek David their King.

But how David their King, when 'twas Zorobabel? for with Theophylact and
others I conclude he must be meant in the first literal importance of the words.

It was the custom of most Nations from some great eminent Prince to name all
the Succession, so at once to suggest his Excellencies to his followers, and to
make his glory live. Now without doubt David was Hero enough for this, and his
valor alone sufficient to ground the like practice upon. And though we do not
find that done, yet we do find his piety and his uprightness made the standard
by which that of his Successors is meted. Of one it is said he walked in the
ways of David his father; 2 Chro. 34. 2.
of another, he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, 2 King. 14.
3.
but not like unto David his father. And because David went aside, and was
upright with an Exception, once therefore it is said, 2 Chro. 17. 3.
The Lord was with Iehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his
father David. But besides this, his very name is given to two, Zorobabel, and
the Messiah; both which were to be the restorers of their people: the one from
Sin and Hell, to reestablish the Kingdom of heaven it self; the other to
deliver his people from Babel, and to repair a broken Nation and demolished
Temple. And for this work God bids them seek David their King.

The ways from Babel to Jerusalem, from the Confusion of a people to a City
that is at unity in it self, Psalm. 122. 3, 5.
the City of God where he appears in perfect beauty, and where the throne of
the house of David is, must be the first ways of David: in those he walked to
Sion, and did invest his people in God's promises, the whole land of Canaan. In
those Zorobabel brought them back to that land and Sion. And in these our
Messiah leads us to Mount Sion that is above, to the celestial Jerusalem; does
build an universal Church and heaven it self. And all that have the like to do
must walk in those first ways, fulfill that part of David, and must copy
Christ. Such the repairers of great breaches must be: these are the ways to
settle Thrones, the only ways in which we may find the goodness of the Lord;
which to fear is the third direction, and my last part.

They shall fear the Lord and his goodness. 3. That Israel who came but now out
of the furnace should fear the Lord whose wrath did kindle it, whose justice
they had found such a consuming fire as to make the Temple it self a Sacrifice,
and the whole Nation a burnt-offering, is reasonable to expect: but when his
goodness had repaired all this, to require them to fear that, does seem hard.
That that goodness, which when it is once apprehended does commit a rape upon
our faculties, and being tasted melts the heart, and causes dissolution of soul
through swoons of complacency, that this should be received with dread and
trembling, is most strange. Indeed the Psalmist says, Psalm. 130. 4.
There is mercy with God that he may be feared; for were there not, we should
grow desperate: but how to fear those mercies is not easy. It Is true, when God
made his goodness pass before Moses, showed him the glory of it, as he says,
in those most comfortable attributes, the sight of which is beatifick Vision,
Exodus 34. 6, etc. The Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious, long-suffering,
and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin; if that which follows there be part of it,
forgiving sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation;
if this be one ray of the glory of goodness, if it dart out such beams, alas,
it is as devouring as the lake of fire, his very goodness stabs whole
successions at once, and the guilty may tremble at it for themselves and their
posterity. But if those words do mean as we translate those very words, (...)
Ier. 46. 28. I will not leave thee altogether unpunished, yet will not utterly
cut off, not make a full end of the guilty, when I visit iniquities upon the
children, but will leave them a remnant still; then there is nothing dreadful
in it, but those very visitations have kindness in them, and his rod comforts,
and this issue of his goodness also is not terrible but lovely. To fear God's
goodness therefore is to revere it, to entertain it with a pious astonishment,
acknowledging themselves unworthy of the crumbs of it, especially not daring to
provoke it by surfeting, or by presuming on it, or by abusing it to serve ill
ends, or any other then God sent it for, those of piety and obedience: not to
comply with which, is to defeat God's kindness, and the designs of it. If when
they sought the Lord, he was found of them, and came to his dewlling place
only to be forced thence again by their abominations; if when his goodness had
restored all to them, they had David their King but to conspire against, an
Altar only to pollute, and a Temple to separate from, as Manasses the Priest,
Sanballat's son in law, with his accomplices did do; this were both to affront
and to renounce that goodness, which above all things they must dread the
doing: for if this be offended too, ruin is irreversible; there is no other
attribute in God a sinner can fly to with any hope. His Holiness cannot behold
iniquity, his Justice speaks nothing but condemnation to guilt, his Power
without kindness is but omnipotent destruction; but if we have his Goodness on
our side, we have an Advocate in his own bosom that will bear up against the
rest, for his mercy is over all his attributes as well as works: but if this
also be exasperated, and kindness grow severe, there is no refuge in the Lord,
no shadow of him to take Sanctuary under; for there is nothing to allay the
anger of his Compassion and Bounty. This sure is the extremest terror we are
to dread, his kindness more then his severity and wrath; we have an antidote, a
buckler against these, but none against the other if it be provoked; and if the
heats of love take fire and rise into indignation, it is unquenchable flame and
everlasting burning. Therefore when God has done all things that he can do or
they can wish, then most of all they must fear the Lord and his goodness.

My Text and I have spoke all this while to the Jews: nor do I know whether I
need to address any other way, all this did so directly point at us. The
glories of this day need not the foil of those calamities from which this day
redeemed, to set them off: Or you may read them in my Prophet here, and our own
guilts will make too sad a Comment on his Text, who were more barbarous
Assyrians to our selves. We also were without a Prince and without Sacrifice,
had neither King, nor Church, nor Offices, because we our selves had destroyed
them, and that we might not have them had engaged or covenanted against them;
tied to our miseries so, that without perjury we could neither be without them,
nor yet have them. As we had broke through all our sacred oaths to invade and
usurp calamity and guilt, so neither could we repent without breach of Vows. If
this were not enough to make us be without a God too, then to drive him away we
had defiled his dwelling places to the ground, and by his ancient gists of
remove he was certainly gone. There was indeed exceeding much Religion among
us, yet, God knows, almost none at all, while Christianity was crumbled into so
many, so minute professions, that 'twas divided into little nothings, and even
lost in a crowd of it self; while each man was a Church, every single professor
was a whole multitude of Sects. And in this tumult, this riot of faiths, if the
son of Man should have come, could he have found any faith in the land? Virtue
was out of countenance and practice, while prosperous and happy Villainy usurped
its name, while Loyalty, and conscience of oaths, and duty were most
unpardonable crimes, to which nothing but ruin was an equal punishment; and
all those guilts that make the last times perilous, Blasphemy, disobedience,
truce-breakings and Treasons, Schisms and Rebellions, with all their dismal
consequences and appendages, (for these are not single, personal crimes, these
have a politic capacity) all these did not only walk in the dress of piety,
and under holy Masks, but were themselves the very form of Godliness, by which
'twas constituted and distinguished, the Signature of a party of Saints, the
Constellation of their graces: And on the other side, the detestation of such
hypocrisy made others Libertines and Atheists; while seeing men such holy
counterfeits, so violent in acting, and equally engaged for every false
Religion, made them conclude there was none true, or in earnest. And all this
was because we were without our King; for 'twas the only Interest of all those
usurpations that were to contrive and preserve it thus. And when we had rolled
thus through every form of Government, addressed to each, moved every stone, and
raised each stone to the top of the Mount, but every one still tumbled down
again, and ours like Sisyphus's labor was like to have no end, only restless
and various Calamity; Necessity then counseled us, and we applied to God's
directions in the Text, I know not whether in his method, but it is plain we
did seek David our King. And my heart is toward the Governors of Israel,
Judge. 5. 9.
that offered themselves willingly among the people: bless ye the Lord: yea,
Thou, o Lord, bless them. May all the blessings which this was the birthday
of, all that my Text encloses, all the goodness of the Lord, be the sure
portion of them and their Families; may they see the King in his beauty, and
peace upon Israel, and may their Names be blessed in their posterities for
evermore. We sought him with the violent impatiences of necessitous and furious
desires, and our eyes, that had even failed with looking for him, did even fail
with looking on him, as impotent and as unsatisfied in our fruitions as
expectations; and he was entertained with as many tears as prayed for; as one
whom not our Interests alone, but our guilts had endeared to us, and our tears:
he was as necessary to us as repentance, as without whom it was impossible for
us to repent and return from those impieties to him, of usurping his rights, of
exiling, of murdering him by wants, because we could not do it by the Axe or
Sword; without him 'twas impossible for us to give over the committing these;
and the tears that did welcome him were one of our best lavers to wash off that
blood that we had pulled upon our selves. One endeared also to us by God's most
miraculous preservations of him for us: We cannot look upon his life but as the
issue of prodigious bounty, snatched by immediate Providence out of the gaping
jaws of tyrannous, usurping, murtherous malice, merely to keep him for our
needs, and for this day: One whom God had trained up and managed for us, just
as he did prepare David their King, 2 Samuel 5. 4.
at thirty years of age to take possession of that Crown which God had given
him by Samuel about twelve years before; Inter 7 and 9
and in those years to prepare him for Canaan by a Wilderness, Sauli qui
regnavit an.
to harden him with discipline, 20. Vid. Sim Chron.
that so the luxuries and the effeminacies of a Court might not emasculate and
melt him; by constant Watches, cares and business, to make him equal for,
habituated to, careful of, and affected with the business of a Kingdom; Psalm.
120. 5.
and by constraining him to dwell in Mesech, with Aliens to his Religion, to
teach him to be constant to his own, and to love Sion. And has he not prepared
our David so for us? and we hope has prepared for him too the first days of
David, having no Sheba in the Field, nor Achitophel in the Council, nor an
Abiathar in the Temple, not in that Temple which himself has raised, God
having made him instrument of that which he would not let David do, building
his house, and furnishing it with all its Offices, and making it fit for God to
meet us in, when we do seek him also, which was the other perquisite of our
Condition.

There never was so much pretense of seeking God as in those late days of his
absence from us; and it should seem indeed we knew not where to find him, we
took such several ways to seek him. But if God did look down from heaven then
as he did Psalm. 14. to see if any did understand and seek after God, should he
not then have found it here as there? Psalm. 14.
They are altogether gone out of the way; Romans 3.
their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues have they deceived, the
poison of asps is under their lips, their mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood: destruction and unhappiness is
in their ways, and the way of peace have they not known; there is no fear of
God before their eyes: They eat up my people as it were bread; and, which is
worse in these then them, they even then call upon God, as if they craved a
blessing from the Lord upon that meal that did devour his people; and when they
did seek God, they meant to find a prey. Yet where were any others that did
seek him? or that do cleave to him now? The Schismatic does not seek God, who
shuns the place where he appears, and meets, and dwells; nor does he cleave to
God who tears himself off from the Lord's body. Romans 16. 17.
Mark such as cause divisions, says S. Paul, and avoid them: and if all
Christians must avoid them, then I am sure God is not with them. The other
Schismatics that divide from the World by cutting off the World from them; do
they seek God that are diverted by so many Saints and Angels? that terminate
divinest Worship in a creature? or do they cleave to God, when their devotion
embraces stocks and stones? or did they seek God for the purpose of my Text,
who did not seek David their King, but did apply themselves to several foreign
Princes, and to others which they hoped would set up their Golden calf?
Incendiaries, that make fires and raise commotions, these are far from God; 1
Kings 19. 11, 12.
for the Lord was not in the fire, or in the Earthquake, but in the still
small voice, in the soft whispers of peace and love. The Atheist, he that says
in his heart there is no God, will not seek God, you may be sure: nor does he
care to seek David his King, who is equally well under all Governments that
will allow his licenses, and who has no Religion to tie him to any. If he at
all disliked the former, it was upon reasons of burden, or of pride, or
Libertinisme: so much Religion though counterfeit was a reproach to him, and
the face of such strictness was uneasy to him. These are so far from seeking
God, that God says these did drive him out of Israel, Ezekiel. 9. 9. And then
when that has so long been the Wit, that it is now the Complexion of the Age,
and they who thought fit to show their not being hypocrites by license, and (to
give it an easy word) by drollery in sacred things, have now made nothing to
be sacred to them; how shall the Lord dwell among such? they are enough to
exorcise God out of a Nation. The Hypocrite also, for all his Fasts and
Prayers, never did seek God, for he is but a whited Sepulcher, Mat. 23. 27.
our Savior says. Now who would seek the living God among the dead? the Lord
of life sure is not to be found in graves. Golgotha was a place to crucify him
in, not worship him: he takes not in the air of funeral Vaults for incense;
'twas a Demoniack that used to be among the Tombs. The subtle, false and
faithless men that walk in mazes, never shall meet God; these are the windings
and the tracts of the old Serpent, and they lead only to his habitation. They
that do climb as if they meant to find God on his own Throne, that follow
Christ up to a pinnacle of the Temple, or to the top of that exceeding high
Mount, whence they can overlook the glories of the World, and pick and choose,
these do not go to seek Christ there: It is the Devil that does carry up
thither, Mat. 4.
upon his own designs. Nor is it possible to seek the Lord in the ways that
lead to the strange Woman's house, Prove. 7. 27.
for her house is the way to hell, Solomon says, (and he did know;) nay more,
her steps take hold on hell, Prove. 5. 5.
seize on those everlasting burnings which her foul heats kindle and begin. In
a word, they that seek their own, Phil. 2. 21.
that turn all merely to their advantage, they cannot seek God too, he will not
be joint God with Mammon. And then where are the men that sought him? that did
retrive him to us? or with whom does he dwell? If he be not among us, we do in
vain flatter our selves in our prosperity and peace, gawd it in all our bright
appearances. Have we not seen the Sun rise with the glory of a day about him,
and mounting in his strength chase away all the little receptacles and recesses
of the night, not leave a cloud to shelter the least relics of her darkness,
or any spot to checquer or to fleck the countenance of day? when strait a small
handful of vapor raised by that Sun it self did creep upon his face, and by
little and little getting strength bedasht his shine, and poured out as full
streams of storm as he had done of light; till it even put out the day, and
shed a night upon the Earth in spite of him. So may prosperity it self, if the
Lord and his blessing be not in it, raise that which will soon overcast and
benight the most glorious condition of a Nation. That wine which now makes your
hearts glad, may prove like that which did commit the Centaures and the
Lapithae, first kindle Lusts, then Wars, and at last only fill a Cup of
trembling and astonishment; and that oil that does make you cheerful
countenances, may make your paths slippery, and nourish flames that will devour
and ruin all.

But God, Isay 65. 1.
who is found of them that seek him not, Luke 15* 4, 5.
nay who himself sought the lost sheep and carried him, when with his straying
he was wearied into impossibility of a return, has also sought, and found, and
brought together us and our great Shepherd: for this is the Lord's doing, and
it is mavelous in our eyes; these ways of his also are so past finding out,
that we may well conclude they are the mere footsteps of his incomprehensible
goodness, and we have only now to fear that goodness.

But give me leave to say, those that despise his goodness do not fear it; and
they whom it does not lead to repentance, do despise it, S. Paul says, Romans 2.
4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and
long-sufferance, not knowing that the goodness of the Lord leads thee to
repentance?

And now, o Lord, what sort of men among us has thy goodness wrought upon, and
made repent? Those whom it was directed to convince, and came on purpose to, to
prove by their own only argument they had of providential Miracles, they were
not in the right, but that destruction and misery were in their ways; yet
these choose rather to deny their own conclusions, and resist God's goodness,
then to be convinced and repent: for we have seen them as bold Martyrs to their
Sin as ever any to Religion, signalize their resolved impenitence with cheerful
suffering, as if the fire they were condemned to were that triumphal Chariot in
which the Prophet mounted up to heaven. 2 King. 2. 11.
Others that did not go so far in condemnation nor guilt as they, and
therefore think they have no reason to repent of that, do they repent of what
they did contribute to it? Of those that lifted up their hands to swear and
fight, how many are there that have made them fall, and smite their own thigh,
Jer. 31. 19.
saying, What have I done? Do not all rather justify as far as they
themselves proceeded? and if all that were well, why do not we repent of our
Allegiance and Loyalty? if all that were well, what has thy goodness done, o
Lord, that has reverst it all? And for the rest, those that do not partake the
plenties of thy goodness, murmr and repine at it; are discontent at having
what they prayed for, what they would have died for: those that have been
partakers of it, have turned it into wantonness, have made it furnish them for
base unworthy practices. Such as have not the generosity of vice, have not a
noble, manly wickedness, are poltron sins; have made it raise a cry on the
faithfullest party, the best Cause, and the purest Church in the World. While
we have debauched God's own best Attribute, made his Goodness procure for our
most wicked or self ends: and the face of things is so vicious in every order
and degree and sex, that -- But the Confession is only fit for Litanies, and
we have need to make the burden of ours be, Lord, give us some afflictions
again, send out thy Indignation, for we do fear thy goodness, it has almost
undone us: and truly, where it does not better, it is the most fearful of God's
Attributes or plagues, Romans 2. 5.
for it does harden there. S. Paul says so in the forecited place; and Origin
does prove this very thing did harden Pharaoh's heart, indulgence was his
induration. Now induration is the being put in Hell upon the Earth: there is
the same impenitence in both, and Judgment is pronounced already on the
hardened, and the life they lead is but the interval betwixt the Sentence and
the Execution, and all their Sunshine of Prosperity is but kindled brimstone,
only without the stench. And then to make the treasures of God's bounty be
treasures of wrath to us, to make his kindness, his long-suffering, that is, 2
Pet. 3. 15.
S. Peter says, salvation, condemn us, his very goodness be hell to us! But
sure so great a goodness as this we have tasted cannot have such deadly issues;
and it was great indeed, so perfectly miraculous in such strange and continued
successes, resisting our contrivances and our sins too, overcoming all
opposition of our vices and our own policies, that do not comport with it, and
in despite of all still doing us good; it was fatality of goodness. Now sure
that which is so victorious will not be worsted by us. But oh! have we not
reason so much more to fear the goodness? The greater and more undeserved it
is, the more suspicious it is: as if it were the last blaze of the candle of
the Lord when its light gasps, its flash of shine before it do go out, the
dying struggles and extreme efforts of goodness, to see if at the last any
thing can be wrought by it. And if we did consider how some men menage the
present goodness, make use of this time of it, and rake, and catch, we would
believe they did fear the departure of it: but yet it is in our power to fix it
here. If we repent, God's gifts then are without repentance, but one of us must
change: bring Piety and Virtue into countenance and fashion, and God will dwell
among us. Nay S. Paul says, Romans 11. 22.
Goodness to thee if thou continue in his goodness. If we our selves do not
forsake it and renounce it, not fear it so as to fly from it, but with the
fears of sinking men, that catch, and grasp, lay fast dead hold upon it; Jer.
32. 40.
if, as God promises, he so put his fear in our hearts, that we never depart
from it, fear that has love in it, and is as unitive as that, then it shall
never depart from us; but we shall see the goodness of the Lord in the land of
the living, and shall be taken thence to the eternal fullness of it. This day
shall be the birthday of immortal life, the entering on a Kingdom that cannot
be moved. A Crown thus beautified is a Crown of glory here, and shall add
weight and splendor to the Crown hereafter: A Church thus furnished is a
Church triumphant in this World, and such a Government is the Kingdom of
heaven upon Earth; and then we shall all reign with him who is the King of
Kings, and who washed us in his blood to make us Kings and Priests to God and
his Father, Apoc. 1. 5, 6.
to whom be glory and dominion for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 9. line 8. after build place the semicolon; after departure in the line
following blot it out.

Page 16. line 18. for far Uniformity read for Uniformity.

Page 23. line 9. for David the King, read David their King.


