EIGHTEEN SERMONS, Whereof Fifteen Preached before the KING. The rest Upon
Public Occasions.

BY RICHARD ALLESTRY D. D. AND CHAPLAIN To His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft, for James Allestry at the Rose and Crown in
S. Paul's Churchyard. M DC L X I X.

A TABLE OF THE SERMONS.
A SERMON on 1. S. Pet. 4. 1. HE that suffered in the Flesh has ceased from
sin. Page 1 A SERMON on Psalm LXXIII. 1. Truly God is good to Israel, even to
such as are of a clean heart. p. 19 A SERMON on Leviticus XVI. 31. Ye shall
Afflict your Souls by a Statute for ever. p. 37 A SERMON on S. John XV. 14. Ye
are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. p. 55 A SERMON on Ezechiel
XXXIII. 11. Why will ye Dye? p. 73 A SERMON on Psalm LXXIII. 25. Whom have I in
Heaven but Thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire besides Thee. p. 89
A SERMON on S. Mark I. 3. Prepare ye the way of the Lord. Page 105 A SERMON on
1 S. John V. 4. This is the Victory which overcomes the World, even our Faith.
p. 125 A SERMON on Galatians II. 20. I am Crucified with Christ. p. 145 A
SERMON on S. Luke IX. 55. Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of. p. 163 A
SERMON on S. Luke XVI. 30, 31. Nay Father Abraham, but if one went unto them
from the dead they will repent. And he said unto him, if they hear not Moses
and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.
p. 181 A SERMON on S. Luke XI. part of the 24. Verse. Behold this Child is set
for the Fall and Rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be
spoken against. p. 199 A SERMON on S. James IV. 7. Resist the Devil and he will
flee from you. p. 219 A SERMON on Philippians III. 18. For many walk of whom I
have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the Enemies
of the Cross of Christ. p. 241 A SERMON on S. Mark X. 15. Verily I say unto
you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little Child he shall
not enter therein. p. 259 A SERMON on Acts XIII. 2. The Holy Ghost said,
separate me Barnabas and Saul for the Work whereunto I have called them. p. 269
A SERMON on Hosea III. 5. Afterward shall the Children of Israel return, and
seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his
Goodness. p. 295 A SERMON on S. Matthew V. 44. But I say unto you, love your
Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them that despightfully use you and persecute you. p. 315
SERMON I. WHITE HALL. January 27. 1660.
1 PET. IV. 1. He that has suffered in the Flesh, has ceased from Sin.
SO great a flatterer is Man of himself, that from all kind of Events, how
various soever, Blessedness; and rather than want Argument, contradictions
shall conspire to make him happy: If he prosper, then God allows his doings;
and the success of actions is his mark and Seal, that they are acceptable and
dear to him: And if this Argument be good, The Tribe of Benjamin while it
conquered (as they did Conquer those that fought Judges, 20. 18, 21, 23, 25.
Gods Battles; and that by his immediate commission:) yet all that while, those
Sodomites and foul Adulterers, the men of Gibeah were Saints; But when calamity
does take away this Argument, then on the other side the Gibbet; though the
punishment of Villainy, is only execution of that Decree, whereby God has
predestined them, To be conformed to the Image of his Son. As if they Romans 8.
died most like Christ, who died with the most Guilt about them, and they will
needs be Martyrs when they suffer for Egypt was blessed with all her Plagues,
and the consuming fire that ran upon the ground, was the light of Gods
countenance upon them. Yet both these Arguments have been made use of lately,
by each several party of us, in the variety of Gods dispensations to us: now
this each could not do of right. Some parties of us made false and unjust pleas
to them both. Now to decide which did so, not a priori, from the cause; though
that alone does guild prosperity, and that alone too makes the Martyr, not the
sufferings. But men will never be agreed of that, while whatsoever right. But I
shall do it from a plain notorious effect: nor do I know what else can be more
seasonable than while some men seem to stand candidates for sufferings, and
choose Sedition and Schism, rather than lose the reputation of not being
afflicted with their party; and while others plead the merits of affliction,
and Trumpet out their having suffered, as a pretense for the ambition and the
covetousness, the luxuries and intemperance, and all the other vices of
prosperity, which their late sufferings have before hand expiated; while He
that has suffered in the Flesh, has ceased from Sin.

The words make a single Proposition, and therefore cannot well be taken
asunder, nor indeed need they; the Terms being very well understood. The
Subject every one is willing to assume to himself; no one I believe that hears
me, but will say he has suffered in the Flesh. Therefore we have no more to
do, but to see whether the other Term agree as universally, which certainly it
must, if our Proposition here hold good, He that has suffered in the Flesh,
has ceased from Sin.

Therefore in order to this, I shall offer at Three things.

First; Discourse of the truth of the Proposition in General, and see if we can
discern how necessary, and how effectual this Instrument of Reformation is,
whether it be such as may build a confidence of asserting; That He who has
suffered, has ceased from Sin.

Secondly; Because discoursing in General, is not so practical and useful, I
shall endeavor to discover in particular, By what Artifice of method the Flesh
engages men sin, and how it works them up to the height of it, and then see
how sufferings blast that method, and make the Arts of the flesh either
unpracticable, or too weak.

Thirdly, I will attempt to veiw our own concerns in all Word as to break his
Commandments, and contrive that his truth shall no more stand than his will
does; but notwithstanding Scriptures bold affirmation here, yet they that have
suffered have not ceast from Sin.: and if so, then to propose the danger and
infer Christ's Application that at least we begin to cease, and sin no more
least a worse thing come unto us.

I. He that has suffered in the flesh has ceast from Sin: None but He, and He
certainly:

When it appeared that Eden had too much of Garden for innocence to dwell in,
and although man were made upright, yet amidst such delights he could not be so
a whole day, but of the many inventions he found out the first was to destroy
himself immediately, and under the shadow of the Tree of life he wrought out
death, and made the Walks of Paradise lead him toward Hell: God saw himself
concerned to take another course: He sets a guard of fire about Eden, about the
place of pleasure, as well as in the place of torments; and there was as much
need of flame to keep man out of Paradise, as flame to fright him from Hell. He
makes the Earth not spring with Garden any more, but bring forth thorns and
briars, that might scratch and tear man in the pursuit of things below, which,
if the Soul should cleave and cling unto the Earth, might gore and stab it in
the embrace; Nothing but sufferings will do us good: The Earth was most accursed
to man when it was all Paradise, nothing but the malediction could make it safe
and bless it to us; our happiness must be inflicted executed on us, and we must
be goaded into blessedness: and therefore God has put afflictions into every
dispensation since the first. Deuteronomy. 7. 10.
Among the Jews sin did receive immediate punishment by the tenor of the
Covenant, and though the retributions of our Covenant be set at distance, as
far remote as Hell, yet Christ has dressed his very promises in sackcloth and in
ashes, tears and trouble: when he would recompense heroic virtue, he says it
shall receive an hundred fold with persecution, Mar. 10. 30. and he does grant
us sufferings; to you it is given in the behalf of Christ to suffer: Phil. 1.
29. so that the sting of the Serpent is now the tempter; his biteings and his
venom moving us to obedience, as much as his lying tongue did our first
rebellion, and when he does fulfill Gods threat and wound the heel, he only
drives us faster away from him, and makes us haste to him that flies to meet us
with healing under his wings. This method God has always used, and the
experience righteous Abel to the blood of this season: of all the Prophets that
went before us, and the Apostles that came after them, as if those were men
inspired for ruin, and what ever Judgment they denounc't it was their own
burden; and as if these were men chosen out for, and delegated to persecution,
men 1 Cor. 4. 9.
appointed unto death as St. Paul expounds their office, none escaped: and the
next succeeding times of Primitive Christianity were but Centuries of
Martyrdom, so many years of Fire and Faggot, and worse tortures. This method
has not past by any Grandeur, but of those great ones that have afflictions
have vy'd with their Majesty, the Calendar has had as much share of them as
the Chronicle, the Martyrology as the Annals, and their blood, not their Purple
put them in the Rubric. Gods Furnace made Crowns splendid, gave them a Majesty
of shine and an Imperial glory, and so all our Crowns indeed must be prepared
in the Furnace; he that told us we must be Baptized with fire saw there was
something in us that the Christians water will not cleanse; Baptism may wash
sullays but not dross away, That must be washed in flame, and nothing else but
fire will for when God was to bring many Sons to glory, he sanctified the very
Captain of our salvation through sufferings. Heb. 2. 10. Who though he were a
Son, and that the Son of God, yet learned he obedience by the things that he
suffered, Heb. 5. 8. This therefore is the only and most effectual way of
teaching it, when God speaks in Judgment: and indeed he counts all other of his
voices but as silence in comparison of this; and though he gave his Law in
Thunder, and sent his Prophets daily to denounce wrath to transgression, yet he
reckons of all this as if he had said nothing till he speak Plagues and
commands afflictions; Psalm. 50. 21. after a Catalogue of sins he tells the man,
these things have thou done and I kept silence; though my Law did warn thee,
and my Messengers called to thee, yet I hardly expect that thou should hear
those whispers, with all those voices I did scarce break silence, but now I
will reprove thee, and thou shall Micha 6. 9.
hear the rod or hear thy own groans under it: For that we may be sure to hear
this voice, God does by it open the ear, Job 33. 14, 15, 16. God speaks once,
yea twice, yet man perceives it not, in a dream and in a vision, then he opens
the ears of men by Chastisements, as it follows in four verses full of them 19,
20, 21, 22. and seals his instruction that he may withdraw Man from his
purpose, i. e. that he may make him cease from sin. It seems the place of
Dragons is Gods chiefest School of Repentance; and we may have a clearer sight
of him in the dimness of anguish, than Vision it self does give. When men did
not perceive that, says Job, yet this opened the Ear, and so God seals the
Instruction: And truly when the Soul dissolves in Tears, and when, as David
words it, Psalm. 22. 14.
The heart in the midst of the body is even like melting wax, then only it is
susceptible of Impression, then is the time for sealing the Instruction. Nor
does Chastisement open the Ear only, but the understanding also; I will give
her trouble Hos. 11. 14. 15.
(...), I will take her into the Wilderness (...) says he, and speak unto her
Heart; There is convincing Experience of all this. Pharaoh that was an Atheist
in Prosperity, does beg for prayers in Adversity; before he suffers, Pharaoh
says, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice? I know not the Lord,
neither will I let Israel go. Exodus 5. 2. but yet Thunder preaches obedience
into him, and Pharaoh sent and called for Moses and Aaron and said, I have
sinned, the Lord is righteous, and I and my People are wicked, entreat the Lord
that there be no more mighty Thundrings (no more Voices of God, the Hebrew
words it) and I will let you go. Exodus, 9. 27. And in the Book of Judges sinning
and suffering, divided betwixt Idolatry and Calamity. When Gods hand was not on
them they ran after other Gods, as if to be freed from Oppression had been to
be set free from Gods Worship and Service; but when he did return to slay them,
then they sought him, and they returned to enquire early after God, and they
remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God was their Redeemer. Psalm.
78. 34, 35. So that from such induction the Prophet might pronounce, that when
Gods Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness, Esaias 26. 9. and S. Peter in the Text, they that have suffered in
the flesh, have ceased from sin. Which calls me to my second Task;

2. To show first, by what arts the flesh engages men into courses of sin, and
by what methods it does work them up to the heights of it. That I may Secondly
declare how sufferings blast those methods, and make all the arts of flesh
either unpracticable or too weak.

1. That the carnal appetite should reach after, and give up thirsting and
panting after water brooks: But when Reason and Law in the members to fight
with and prevail against the Law in the mind, those original dictates born in
it, and Christian Principles infused into it, this is the Fleshes aim and sin.
Now this it does by exciting to ill actions, as being sauc'd with pleasures and
contents, and by indisposing to good actions, as being troublesome or not at
all delightful to the sense, and as for all other delights it has no
apprehension of, but indisposeth for them perfectly. So that this it does, it
engages too much in Pleasures here, and

1. It prevails with us to indulge our selves the fall use of lawful pleasures,
and for this the Flesh will urge, it is the end of their Creation, to do
otherwise were to evacuate Gods purpose in the making; Did he give us good
things not to enjoy them?

Thus every sort of sin insinuates it self at first: Youth will not deny it
self converses with temptations, although he have reason to fear they will
commit a rape upon his warmer passions, Anchoret and recluse in the throngs of
Cities and of Courts. Another that would not by any means be luxurious or
intemperate, yet goes as near them as he can, and contrives to enjoy all those
delights that do indeed but sauce Intemperance, and make Excess palatable: And
truly why should he restrain himself from meats and drinks, and be a Jew again?
All these believe they live righteously, soberly, and Godly enough. This
resolution works in every recreation, pleasure, honor, and advantage of this
World, men are content

Secondly, does often take in somewhat of the immoderate and unlawful, which
cannot be avoided, both because it is hard to set the exact bounds and limits
of what is lawful: The (...), the Line that meers out Virtue from its neighbor
vice: And then to him that plays upon the brink of sin, it

Thirdly, this happening therefore sometimes proves a Snare and bait still to
go on, both as it takes away the horror and the a versation of the sins which
at the first seem uncouth, till a man be experienced in them; and also as it
smooths the way, for such beginnings do nurse up an Habit and prepare a
Custom, and make vice very easy, which at first it is not, while the Appetite
is modest and not able to digest full Doses, till use enlarge and stretch it.

And now the Mind, which by these means tastes diverse Pleasures, and the
Degrees of them, and finds a gust in

Fourthly, Something like a necessity of doing so: Thus Continence would be
some men's Disease, and the Intemperate

And now the Flesh is Callous, and if you doubt how it could so harden it self,
as not to be pervious to any stings of Conscience, but Proof against all
Pricks, though Experiment may persuade you; yet I will show you the Method.

As all Appetite you know is blind, so the Guides also extempore, looks but
upon that which is before it, scarce on that: We have sufficient experience of
this, for when one vice will not look forwards a year or two to the penury and
rottenness some courses do pull down: And when another vice, as if it had
learnt to fulfill our Saviors command, and take no care for the morrow, will
bear their Iniquities, yet choose those sins that bring their Plagues along
with them; for we see men with most excessive difficulty practice a vice only
that they may have the vice, swallow sickness, drink Convulsions and dead
Paralyses, foaming Epilepfies, only that all this may be easy to them: And
this is but one instance of the many that might be made; just as the King of
Pontus, that ate Poison that so he might be used to it: Strange! that a man
should torture himself with all those deadly symptoms that Poison racks the
body with, only that he might eat Poison; yet just such is the Sinners

Well: But though Flesh be so short sighted and inconsiderate, the mind might
trash it by suggesting other sorts of punishments that do await transgression.
Why truly if before Death come I will be sorry for my sins, and God is
merciful. Conscience being thus quieted, and both Raines and Spur given to the
Flesh, it takes its full carier, and leaves behind all thoughts of Repentance,
and indeed, of God, or Heaven; the hope and joys of which, are the only
possible

The Mind that is immerst in body, and has been long accustomed to taste no
pleasure but the carnal ones, its fancy filled with those Ideas, it does imbibe
such a tincture of sensuality, receives such an infusion of Flesh, and is so
impregnated with the fumes of Carnality, which clog the Spirit, that its
complexion and temper is quite altered, it is diluted and deprest, and so grown
stupid and unactive to all higher Hecatombe, and let Pythagor as be an Epicure
on the dimensions of a Triangle, the other has no palate for these pleasures;
and indeed how could the unclean lascivious Mat. 22. 30.
Where they neither Marry, nor are given in Marriage? Or how the Riotous, that
Eats to eat, eats to hunger and provoke, not satisfy; how will he content
shall neither hunger nor thirst, or the Incendiaries that love to set all on
Rev. 7. 16.
fire, what should they do there where there are no flames but such as kindle
Seraphins; so that flesh and blood, not only shall not, but cannot enjoy the
Kingdom of God: And why then should they long after, or think of it? Nay, I
would this unhappy Age, and an unlucky axiom of Aristotle's did not convince
that they do think there are no such things; Sensual pleasures, are corruptive
of Principles, says he; and indeed where Damnation is the conclusion, it is a
much quieter and more easy thing for Men of Wit and Understanding Psalmists
Chair, the Chair of Scorners; and it is one of the Psalm. 1. 1.
Luxuries of their life to scoff at them who are so foolish as to be Religious,
and to deny their flesh its present appetites and pleasures on such thin
after-hopes; here their Wit also is an Epicure, and Feasts and Triumphs,
distates, the Chair of Pestilences, as the LXX translate, and very truly, for
such men shed a Sphere of Contagion about them, and their Discourses are
effluvia of the Plague, and the breath of Pestilence: But how to get Flesh down
out of this Chair, that is the difficulty; yet that my Text will tell us, for
all this progress of the Flesh is trasht and checked by Sufferings, for, He that
has suffered has ceast from Sin. Which how, I will briefly show you.

The Fleshes first art was by immersing it self in the full Indeed it does that
for us which every man in every state David never checked Adonijah, did not at
any time displease him, saying, Why have thou done so? he easily takes
confidence to say I will be King, and step into the Throne. 1 Kings 1. 5. 6.
But he that mortifies sometimes, that does uninterrupted Health, or of a
certain Cure in all Diseases, sure I had rather never need a Potion than drink
Antidote and Health it self. And even so the lawful good things of this life
are at the best but Remedies and Reliefs, never good but upon supposition:
Therefore while Affliction taught us to want, it has destroyed this art

As for the Second, Then the lulling asleep all sense or thoughts of any Life
hereafter, neither minding the fear of one, or hopes of the other; Affliction
surely met with this too: For Sufferings bring both the hereafters to
remembrance, the Sad one while every Punishment was an Essay and taste of that
which is prepared for those that live after the Flesh, and the more
insupportable our Firey Trial was, the more it cautioned us to beware of that
Fire which is never quenched. And for the other Life, surely when Darkness and
dimness of Anguish, and darkness as of the shadow of Death, we could not
choose but turn away our Eyes and lift them up to Heaven. When abiding City,
and eternal Mansions. For the Soul that is restless, when it sees nothing here
below to stay upon, but all is hurried from her, roams about for some hold to
rest on, and being able in that case to find nothing but God, there she does
grasp and cling; Job, Affliction did discover better than Revelation, and in
the dimnesse of Anguish we might see more than by Vision; and truly of two
Visions which our Savior gave to his most intimate Apostles Peter, James, and
John, the one of Glory on Mount Tabor, the other of Sufferings in Gethsemane;
showing in the one Heaven and Himself transfigured, a glimpse of Hell
transfigured, and a sad Scene of all its Agonies, he thought this a more
concerning sight, for when they fell asleep at both, at his Transfiguration,
Luke 9. 32. Peter, and they that were with him, were heavy with sleep; yet he
does not rouse them up to behold his Glory, when they did awake, indeed they
saw a glimpse of it, but straight a Cloud did overshadow it. verse 34. But at
his Passion he bids them Watch with him, Mat. 28. 38. and when he finds them
asleep, he says, What, could ye not watch with me one hour? v. 40. and bids
them watch v. 41. and comes again a third time and upbraids their drowsiness,
v. 45. So much more necessary was it to behold his Agonies, than to see his
Felicities: Glory does not discover or invite to Heaven, so much as Sufferings
drive to it; and we are more concerned to take a view of that Garden in
Gethsemane, than that of Paradise, and the going down from the Mount of Olives
does more advantage us in climbing the Eternal hills, than all Mount Tabors
height. Nor do Afflictions only drive us toward heaven, but they beget an hope
of it. Knowing that Tribulation works Patience, Patience Experience, and
Experience Hope. Romans 5. 3. 4. And I will give them the Valley of Achor for a
door of Hope, Hos. 2. 14. As if Despair oppressed them into Hope, and that low
troublous Valley opened into the highest Firmament. Now he that rides at Anchor
of this Hope though his Anchor lie Hyperbole mount him to Heaven: He that has
entertained these Expectations in earnest, how will he slight temptations here
below? What will he not sacrifice to Christ's Command? See, Abraham that did but
hope for Canaan, and that far off too, to be possessed by the Posterity of his
Son Isaac, yet when God commands him to flay Isaac before he had any
posterity, and so to dash all his own Promises, and quite cut off the very
motive to Abraham's Obedience, Romans 4. 18.
Does both against hope: And had we but the shadow of his hope, as he had but
the shadow of our promises, how would we sacrifice a sin at his Command, and
think a Fleshly lust a good exchange for the hope of Heaven, which Tribulation
works? and he that had suffered in the Flesh would certainly cease from sin.

And now my last work is to view our own Concern in this, and surely that must
be all Exultation and Triumph, and this not so much that our sufferings are
ceast, as that our sins are so; not that our Enemies are sunk, but that our
flesh is vanquished, that sub hoc signo ninces is thus also come to pass, with
the Standard of the Cross, that Cross on which our selves were Crucified, we
have overcome; and with this Christian banner we have put to flight the Armies
of our Heathen Vices. For thus it must be, if my Text be true; and sure it is
not possible it should be otherwise: For look upon the Muster-roll of these our
Foes which S. Paul does produce, Gal. 5. 19. 20, 21. and see which of them
could escape; it runs thus, Adultery, Fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions,
Heresies, Envyings, Murder, Drunkenness, Revellings.

To begin with the great Commanders, those that lead the Van and bring up the
Rear, Uncleanness, and Revellings; They that consider how they not only
suffered for, but by these Vices, which did misplace men's watches and
attendances; sins that were not only like Achans in our Army, and ruined it by
bringing the accursed thing into it, but were like Hannibal's Numidians in the
Roman Army, that did at once bear such Vices: These are the guilts of Wealth
and Splendour,

Then for Seditions; They who consider when they broke the Scepter, they left
us nothing but the Rod of God instead of it; a Rod that turned straight into a
Serpent, that changed our Seas into Blood, or rather made new Seas of our own
blood; that brought Locusts over the Earth, and Frogs into Temple also, to
croak there; that struck Lights here worse than Egyptian Darkness, and
destroyed all the first born of the Nation, all the Nobles of the Land, these
will easily believe that we have felt this Rod too much to seize upon it
hastily again; the Scepter is restored, and this Rod like to that in Israel,
laid up, I hope, within the Ark together with the Tables of the Law, never to
be disjoined from Gods Commands, nor taken thence against them.

Next for Heresies; Truly we have left us none to revive, Divisions and
Schisms, they who reflect on the sad issues of them, how well meaning soever
all their Causes were, will certainly avoid them: To see how while we quarelled
for the Fringes of Religion, we tore the seameless Coat of Christ to pieces;
yea, and the body too: How when we first dislikt a Liturgy, the daily Sacrifice
of Prayer was made to cease, and then the House of Prayer was demolisht; next,
Christ's, our Lords Prayer was rejected, that Liturgy of his own framing, thrown
away Supper was so too; and that Great Mystery of our Religion, the Sacrament
of our Redemption, was buried in the Ruins of his Altar. To see how thus out
of heats of Religion we destroyed all Religion, because that some adjacent
Circumstances did not please us, and fetched a Coal from the Altar to set fire
to and burn down the Temple, because the building of some out-court was, we
thought, irregular; is Jewish accusation of him, Destroy this Temple also, and
in three days he will build it up again; and has built it up we hope, as he
did that of his own Body, never to fall again by us: Surely we will not kill
this Temple his burnt Offering. When God has set our sins in order thus before
our eyes, showed them us in their sad effects, there is no fear that we should
fall in love with them.

But where it is not thus, where Gods last and most working Method has been
able to produce no good, I must, to keep my word,

Apply the Danger: In that case what remains but the Curse of the ground, Heb.
6. 8. which, if after all the Husband-mans methods of Care and Art, it bring
forth only thorns briars, it is rejected by him, he will bestow no more labor
on it, but can hardly forbear cursing such an ill piece of ground, and its end
is to be burnt: So we after Gods Husbandry of Afflictions, when the Psalm. 129.
3.
Plowers plowed upon our backs and made long furrows, and the Iron teeth of
Oppressors as it were harrowed us; if we bring forth only the fruits of the
Flesh, we are rejected, reprobated, God will bestow no more arts on us, we are
not far from his curse, and there remains only a fearful looking for of
Judgment and ficry Indignation. If any did continue refractory to the Lions,
where when the City was so visited with the Pestilence that scarce any were
free, that the Dead without a figure buried their dead, falling down one upon
another, each being at once a Carcass and a grave; the Soldiers of the
Citadel would daily issue forth and deflour Virgins now giving up the ghost,
defile Matrons even already dead, be drawn to Virtue by the cords of Love; and
now God save us from our Enemies that we might serve him without fear, that we
would do it in holiness and Righteousness before him: And if he would restore
his opportunities of Worship, how we would use them. Thus we did labor to
tempt God, and draw him in to have compassion; and this was Ephraims
Imagination just, I heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, says the Jer. 31. 18.
Prophet as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, turn thou me and I shall be
turned; turn my Captivity, and I will turn my life: But this was as a Bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke, that did not like the straitness and pressure of it,
and would promise any thing to get it off, thought it more easy to reform than
bear Affliction: But is this hopeful think you? The Soldiers of Lions that
would ravish Death, and break into the Grave for Lust, it may be would have
been modest, and retired from the fair Palaces that are prepared to tempt and
entertain that vice: Cold and insensible of all those heats that Health and
Beauty kindle; but remember it was the taking off Gods Hand that hardened
Pharaohs heart, and a release from punishment was his Reprobation.

And as for those that were humbled under the Rod, and when God had retrencht
from their enjoyments, did put restraints upon themselves, gave over sinning; I
have a word of Caution for them, that they examine well and take a care it be a
ceasing from fin like that in the Text, a dying to it, that they no longer live
the rest of their time in the flesh to the lusts of men: For if this Old Man be
only cold and stiff, not mortified by the calm and sunshine of peace, likely
to be warmed into a recovery, if thou owe all thy Innocence issues of his
goodness in which his bounty has so great an Luc. 15.
Prodigal was received into his Fathers house and arms, had a Ring put on him,
and the fatted Calf killed for him, if he should strait have invited the
companions of his former riot to that fatted Calf, and joined his Harlot to
Ring, he had deserved then to be disinheritated both from his Fathers house and
pity, who would have had no farther entertainment, nor no bowels for him. To
prevent such a fate, let us make no relapses, but quite cease from sin; which
if we do not do, a little Logic will draw an unhappy inference from this Text;
if he that has suffered has ceast from sin, then he that has not ceast from
sinning has not suffered, and then what is all this that we have felt and so
layn under? what is it if it be not suffering? If this be but preparative, then
what is the full potion, the Cup of Kings Throne and Christ's: For
notwithstanding men's pretensions, these Thrones are not at all inconsistent:
For that there must be no King but Christ, that there cannot be a Kingdom here
of this world, because there is a Kingdom that is not of this world is such
another Argument, as that there cannot be an Earth because there is an Heaven.
Indeed if we fulfill my Text, then we shall reconcile these Kingdoms, and bring
down Heaven into us; for that is a state where there is neither sin, nor
suffering, where there shall be no tears because no guilt to merit them, and no
calamity to make them: Now Reformation does work this here in some degree, and
afterward Who washed us from our sins in his own Blood, and by his sufferings
has made us Kings and Priests to God and his Father, to whom be Glory and
Dominion for ever and ever,

Amen.
SERMON II. WHITE HALL. October 20. 1661.
PSALM LXXIII. 1. Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a Clean
Heart.
'Twas a false Confidence the Jews did nourish, That they should dwell securely
in their Jer. 7. 4.
trust on lying words, the Prophet says, when they did trust upon The Temple
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; As if the Temple were a Sanctuary for
those that did profane it, and the horns of the Altar would secure them, when
'twas the blood upon the Altar called for Vengeance. Nor was that after-plea of
theirs more valid, We are the chosen Israel of God, John 8. 39.
We have Abraham to our Father; As if v. 44.
of their Father the Devil, they could claim any but their present Fathers
interest, or have the blessings of forsaken Abraham. Now if it be no otherwise
with us, but Psalm. 76. 1. 2.
our Judah God is known, his Name great in our Israel, with us in Salem, that
is, in peace, he has his Tabernacle now, and his dwelling in Sion: And so much
knowledge, such pretenses to the Name of God, and to his Worship, are not with
other Nations, nor have they such advantages to know his Law: If as each party
of us does assume these Privileges to it self, so each do also rest in them,
although their Lives answer not these advantages. If while they judge
themselves Christ's chosen Flock, boast Covenants and Alliances with God,
although they violate all Number. 23. 21.
he will not see Iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel. Lastly, if we
that wear the distinctive Character of Israel, that of a Ransomed, Purchased
People (for sure our Rescues rise unto the number and the rate of those which
brought the Sons of Jacob from the House of Bondage) if we, as they, presume
and surfeit upon goodness, and think these gifts of God too are without
Repentance, believe our being his Redeemed, his Church; conceit Enemies, and of
our vices too, and neither let our soes nor our selves ruin us, with such my
Text and my intentions prepare to meet, least we should fill the Parallel; and
as we equal Israel in our Deliverances, and imitate their practices, we do
transcribe the fatal pattern too in the most full resemblance, and repletion of
an entire excision; for although God be truly loving to his Church, yet the
ungodly does his soul abhor; however in a signal manner he be good to Israel,
yet this his kindness does confine it self to such as are of a clean heart.

The words need not much explication; By Israel is meant the Church of God, and
by his goodness to it, all his external mercies also and protections, as the
Psalm evinces; and by such as are of a clean heart, those that to the
profession of Religion and Holiness of outward conversation, do add internal
purity and sincerity; for some translate it, such as are of a clean heart,
some, such as are true-hearted and sincere: And it signifies both.

The words thus explicated give me these Subjects of Discourse. First, a
general Proposition, Truly God is good to Israel, to his Church. Secondly, an
assignation of Conditions under which that general Proposition holds, Romans 9. 6.
All are not Israel that are of Israel, it holds only in such as are of a
clean heart. And in this we have, first, a quality appropriate to the Church,
Cleanness. Secondly, with its subject, the Heart; and there I shall enquire why
that alone is mentioned; whether the cleanness of the Heart suffice, and having
answered that, shall proceed, Thirdly, to consider them together, in both the
given senses as they mean, a sincere heart, and a pure undefiled heart: In each
of which Considerations, because the latter part of my Text is a limitation of
the former, showing where that general Proposition is of force, where it is
not; I shall as I proceed, view all the several

1. Truly God is good to Israel, his Church. And sure this Proposition is
evident to us by its own light, to whom God proved his goodness to
astonishment, by exercising it to Miracle; while he at once wrought prodigies
of kindness and conviction; to which we have only this proof to add, That God
has been so plentiful in Bounties, that we Israel, Ezekiel. 16. 17. 19.
Thou have taken thy fair Jewels of my Gold and my Silver which I had given
thee, and made to thy self Images: My meat also which I gave thee, my fine
flower, mine Oil, and Honey wherewith I fed thee, and have even set it before
them for a sweet savor. And if men now do offer things, in which God has the
same propriety, to baser Idols, to their vices; if they do sauce his meat,
which he has given them, to sacrifice to Luxury, take his silver and gold to
serve in the Idolatry of Covetousness, and use his Jewels to dress Images also
for sowlest adorations. If Atheism grow against Miracle and Goodness too, and
men do most deny God now when he has given greatest evidences of his kind
Providence; I know -- Factum quod se dum negal hoc videt beatum,
because they see they fare best now, though they deny him goodness to confute
his being. If they do look upon the wondrous restitution of Gods Service as but
a shifting of the Scene of Worship, only another and more gaudy draught and
Landscape of Religion shot on the Stage; and do accordingly esteem it as a
variety and entertainment for their senses only; for nothing higher is
engaged, I doubt me, in those offices: If they assist in them not out of
Principle, but mere indifference to all, and therefore these at present; It is
not halting betwixt God and Baal this, it is the bowing of the knee to both,
which they can do to each alike, Sermon, is but a prize within the Temple, the
Preacher but Rhetor dicturus ad aram, that comes to do his Exercise before the
Altar, in which men are concerned no farther than to hear and judge, not to be
sentenc't by: If God endure all this, and do continue still his Church, his
Worship, and his other Mercies, then I may well conclude that Truly God is
good to Israel.

But I will not be this fastidious Remembrancer: These limitation, my next
part, must suggest them; which tells us who they are God is good to: Even to
such as are of a clean Heart.

1. Clean. Clean, Pure, and Holy, are so essential attributes of the Israel or
Church of God, that though I must not say the Church does take in none but
such: For there are Mat. 13. 28, 29, 30.
tares unwholesome poppy too, and darnel with the Wheat, yet I must say that
(...), the Church is but a Congregation of such as are called to be Saints, 1
Cor. 1. 2.

In the first Israel almost the whole Discipline of their Religion purity in
type, and all the Ceremonies of their Worship were but figures, rather
Doctrines of Cleanness, when they came first to enter Covenant with God at
Horeb, and to receive their Law, they were to Exodus 19. 10.
sanctify themselves and wash their clothes. What purity do those
Commandments require, which they must not hear with any thing that was unclean
about them? which they must wash all to receive? and indeed nothing with them
was enterprized without it; they were to cleanse themselves from the impurities
of Isaiah, 1. 16. 17. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings,
cease to do evil, learn to do well.

And in our Israel by our Covenant there is as much of this required, for we
were all initiated into our profession by Tit. 3. 5.
regenerated in a Lavet, and Joh. 3. 3. 5.
born again of Water, becoming so Tertullians Sanctitatis designati, set aside
for Holiness, consecrated to cleanness, and made the votaries of purity: How
clean a thing then must a Christian be who must be washed into the Name? nor is
he thus washed only in the Font, there was a more inestimable fountain opened
for sin and for uncleanness. Apoc. 11. 5. Jesus Christ has washed us in his own
blood; And Heb. 9. 14. The Blood of Christ did purge our Consciences from dead
works to serve the living God: How great is our necessity of being clean, when
to provide a Cor. 6. 11. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified by the Spirit
of our God, and we must Mat. 3. 11.
be Baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire. A Laver of flame also, to wash
away our Scurfe as well as sullages, and beyond all these, some of us have been
purged too with the fiery trial, and molten in the furnace of Affliction, to
separate our dross and purify us from alloy, that we may be clean and refined
too; may become Christians of the highest Carrect.

Such, among others, are the obligations, such the instruments of cleanness in
a Christian: Let us inquire next into the importance of the quality, and the
degree that is exacted.

And here I need not say that it stands in direct opposition to the licenti^ous
practices of vice; this Scripture calls corruption and pollution. 2 Pet. 2. 19,
20. and the sinner is there styled the servant of corruption; sure a worthy
relation this, a Servant is we know, meaner than whom he serves, at least David
does also call such open Sepulchers; things all whose horror does not lie in
this that they enclose rottenness and putrefaction, but open Sepulchers are
gaping frightfull noysomness; and they do also shed a killing stench; a man
that is engaged in conversations with impure sinners, is in a like condition
with him who has no air to draw into him, but that of Funeral Vaults, and does
suck in only the breath of Pestilence.

But it is a small thing to say the cleanness of a Christian does abhor such
licentious impurities, for it is such that though it may consist with those
little stains that come by slips and failings of infirmity (these are the spots
of Children) and unclean; for partial obedience does imply also partial
disobedience, and to the worst and foulest mixture; therefore no purity. Herod
feared John the Baptist, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and
observed him, and when he heard him he did many things, and heard him gladly,
Mar. 6. 20. Could you but pardon him one crime, he were a most Religious
person, but that indulged makes him the wicked Herod: The matter of Vriah threw
dirt, perpetual sticking dirt, into the Character of David, that man after Gods
heart. There are few persons but some sin or other finds a particular
engagement on, and does insinuate especially above all others into them; the
vice of Constitution, the Crime of my Bosom, it is my own flesh and blood, I
cannot tear that from me: Or else another sin does get into my Coffers, the
profits of it bribe me to make much on^t, and it brings such a reward with it I
cannot be unkind to it; Or else the custom of a vice has made it my
acquaintance and my friend, and then it is so joynted into me that there is no
divulsion of it; now when a vice has got any of these relations to me, rather
then use a violence upon my self, I must find out some salve how to quiet
Conscience, and yet keep the vice. And truly if it be but one thing that a man
transgresses in, he is apt to be gentle to himself, and finds plump grounds to
be so. The best man has his fault, and this is his, only in this the Good
Lord pardon him, in other things he will be strict, but this is his particular
infirmity, to which his very making did dispose him, having been poisoned by
its Principles without his fault or conspiration.

It Is true, indeed, men have some one or other sinful inclination, which is a
weight and violence upon them, and which they did derive from Adam, whose sin
like an infection taken in by diverse men, breaks out in several Diseases,
according to variety of Constitutions: But truly Adam gave them no ill
Customs, and they have no original habits, educate their inclinations into
vices; and for those inclinations that are derived into them, the water of
their Baptism was therefore poured upon them to cool those inbred heats, and
quench those flashings out of Nature, wash away those soul innate tendencies in
that Laver of Regeneration; which therefore they who spare and are tender
Devil, World, and Flesh; now whichsoere of these gets most into thee, will thou
think fit to spare thy Enemy because he is thy bosom one? the Risque is
greatest when thy Foe is Rebel and Traitor too, is got in thy own Quarters,
shuffled with thy own Forces, entered thy Holds and thy Defenses, and mixes in
thy Counsels, does counterfeit David will tell me when I am, Psalm. 18. 23. I
was incorrupt before him, and es^hewed my own wickedness. God has not given us
Authority to pick and choose our duties; observe him where James's Aphorism
holds, that Jam. 2. 10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point only, he is
guilty of all; he that allows himself to break one Precept, does keep none, but
shall be reckoned guilty of those things which he does not commit. For
whosoever keeps the whole Law, and yet thus offends in one point, is guilty
of all.

And then I need not prove such have no title to the goodness of the Text, but
may conclude if God be good to Israel, it is to such as are of a Clean Heart;
And so I fall upon the subject, Heart.

And here I must first caution not to think the Heart is set The time will come
that whosoever kills you will think he does God service. Joh. 16. 2. (...),
that he does offer an Oblation or Worship, shall think his Murder Sacrifice;
that that would propitiate for other faults; his Crime should seem Religion and
atonement to him. (We have seen guilts put on such colors too:) and yet by
these same actions which their hearts pursued with Holy aims, out of a Zeal to
God, as S. Paul says, Romans 10. 2. they sacrificed themselves and their Nation
to Gods Vengeance. Once more S. Paul does find reason to call himself the chief
of Sinners. 1 Timothy 1. 15. for the commissions of that time of which he says
that he served God with a pure Conscience. v. 3. did what he was persuaded in
his heart he ought to do, pursued sincere intentions; and after says, he had
lived in all good conscience before God until that day, Acts 23. 1. So that
here was enough of the clean heart, a good and a pure conscience, and could his
fiery persecutions by virtue of that flame within be Christian'd Holy Zeal?
Could his Pure Conscience make his Bloody hands undefiled? Oh no! 'twas
blasphemy, and persecution, and injury, for all 'twas Conscience; for all his
heart was clean from such intentions: I was before a Blasphemer, and a
Persecuter, and Injurious. v. 13. We may not think to shroud foul actions under
handsome Meanings and an Innocent mind; a Conscientious man may yet be chief of
sinners; S. Paul was so, he says, and a clean Heart will not suffice alone:
Therefore Heart is put here accumulatively as that whose cleanness must be
added to the purity of Conversation to complete it; and it implies what
elsewhere he does set down more expressly Psalm. 24. 4.
Clean Hands, and a Pure Heart, all which a clean Heart may be set to signify,
because under Gods Holy Spirit it is the principal and only safe agent

When a Disease has once insinuated it self into the Vitals, spread through
the Marrow, and seized the gatrisons of Life, profane may alter into Factious,
or contrary, the profuse Proud man turn Covetous) but till the ground of these
be purged away the man's not cured, but only the Disease is changed, and he is
as unsound as ever: Gods severe Judgments that did lie so long so close upon
us, like strong repercussives, may have stricken back the breakings out of
former sins or inclinations: But then no care being taken of the Heart, the
first heat sent them out again, and Mercy made a restoration of Vices too. But
if the Heart once truly God is good to Israel, even to those that are of such
a clean Heart; And so I fall upon them both together, first in the former sense
proposed.

That Clean heart signifies sincere true-hearted men, I have not only the
assurance of Translations, and among them the Syriack, but the Text it self
does evince it, because such only are indeed of Israel; for so our Savior
says, Behold an Israelite indeed in whom is no guile. Joh. 1. 47. One like the
Father of them (...). Genesis 25. 27. a man unfeigned, that did seem nothing he
was not, all Heart. And such each Israelite, each man that does expect an
interest in that goodness which the Lord has for Israel, must be, sincere and
without guile.

1. In his Conversation with Men:
I am not here to say, Sincerity is much, most generous, when it looks like a
disingenuous fear to be afraid of my own mind, when my Heart dares not look
into my Face, or speak prudence, or as we call it policy, and that not only
because it has most Col. 3. 9.
lying to one another, oblige us and all those that require faithfulness and
his Command that Romans 12. 9.
Love should be without Dissimulation; that while we speak gently, we should
not be hard hearted, give melting language soft as the aires of Flattery, but
yet have crusted inwards, that cannot yearn nor stretch into compassion, Jacobs
voice but Esau's rough red hands: Besides Gods reasons do enforce this, Ephesians.
4. 25.
Putting away lying, speak every one truth to his Neighbor, for we are members
one of another: So that Dissimulation is as great a Treachery as for the Eyes
to seek stomachs only festival Smells, which may encourage fainting For we are
members one of another; all fellow members of Christ's Body the Church; this
Israel to which the Text says God is truly good, not in presence or color
only, he has not the hypocrisies of kindness: Now such a true good God he
will not be to them who are but counterfeit and mock-parts of this Israel, for
clean, true, and sincere heart toward their brethren.

2. And much more, Secondly, is he such only to them that are sincere in their
Religion to him. Christ has nothing but Mat. is made up of them; when he would
word Gods Vengeance to finners, he says, he shall give them their portion with
Mat. 24. 51.
Hypocrites and Luc. 12. 46.
Unbelievers. Things strangely coupled sure, that they whose Life does seem all
Faith, all Godliness, should be only fit Company in Tophet for the
unbelievers, rank't and condemned with them; that all their strong belief
cannot remove them from an Infidel, Sure they are far enough from the goodness
of the Lord, when the portion of Hypocrites is Rhetoric for Hell, is its
Torments expressed with art.

They whose heart is not clean to God in their Pieties, but let their
strictnesses take in some temporal aim besides, as Reputation with their
party, or getting Praise, or Wealth; they serve Mammon or Fame with Gods
Religion, and make the very Worship of the Lord be the Idolatry of Covetousness
or of Honor. If Jehu in his Executions on Ahab and his Family intend the
cutting off the Regal Live as well as Baals worship, and with their Blood to
purple his own Royalty, though God did bid him shed that blood, yet does it
stain his Soul with crimson guilt; and God will punish him for his obedience, I
will visit the blood of Jezreel upon the House of Jehu, Hos. 1. 4. But he that
lets a vicious aim mix with his virtue, and does good to an ill end, addresses
God's Religion to the Devil, and makes Christ minister to Belial; he does sin
multipliedly, both in his vicious intention, and in 1 Samuel 15. 9. 21. 23.
Saul will sacrifice with Sheep and Oxen he was bid destroy, his very worship
loses him the Throne of Israel: Nor can I serve God with such pieties, God
never does require an action which he sees I cannot compass without Job. 13. 7.
Shall I speak wickedly for God, says Job? and then shall I do so? Such
Religious intentions, the justice of those ends, will never qualify me for
Gods goodness, when it but makes Damnation just to me, for so S. Paul affirms,
Romans 3. 5, 6, 7, 8. In fine if there be any wickedness in the heart, it gives
so foul a tincture to whatever pious actions we perform, that they become sin
to us. It Is true, Psalm. 141. 2.
Prayer is as the Incense, David says, and the lifting up of our hands is like
the Evening Sacrifice; but if the heart of him that Prays have any heats of
Malice in it, truly that man does light his Incense with Jam. 3. 6.
strange fire, kindles his sacrifice with the flames of Hell, for so S. James
does call those heats. He that gives God any of his performances, and has a
naughty Heart, like Nadab and Abihu, he presents his offering in an unhallowed
Censer, and all his holy worship will get nothing else from Heaven for him but
a consuming fire as theirs did. He that will offer any thing to God, must take
a care it be not tainted with such mixtures, which spoil all the Religion,
making it not sincere, and also spoil the Heart clean, and undefiled. The last
remaining sense,

A Clean and undefiled Heart.
Of those things which our Savior says defile the man, some are merely sins
of the Heart, such as may be consummated within the Soul; and for the
perpetration of which a spirit is sufficient to it self; such are Pride,
especially spiritual pride, the sin of those that think none holy as
themselves, and cast the black doom of Reprobation upon all that do not
uncontentednesse with our estates, inward repinings at the dispositions of
Providence concerning us, black malice, bitter envyings. Now in these as the
mind does need no outward members to consummate them, requires no accessory
organs to work them out; so neither does it require any outward

The other sort of things that are said to come from the Heart, and to Defile,
are those which S. Paul calls works of the Flesh, such as if they be committed
must be committed outwardly, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, Revenge, Wrath
and Contentions, Seditions, Factions, Schisms, all Uncleanness, etc. In
these indeed the Heart can be but partial Actor, the utmost it can do, is to
desire and to intend them, and to contrive and manage the designs of compassing
them, which yet Providence or the Innocence of others sin be perfected there is
no death in it. And truly I confess that, as it happens many times, on a
sudden surprise of soul, when a bright gilded temptation strikes the heart, and
dazles the mind, we see that the Will rushes on it instantly, consents and
wishes heartily; yet within a while the Spirit does recover velleity, as if it
had been nothing but a woulding; and now the man would not by any means consent
to the commission: In this case though there be a guilt to be repented of, and
cleansed with many tears, yet this is Innocence in the comparison; but if the
Will purpose, contrive, and do its utmost, it is the same to the man as if he
had committed. Twere easy to demonstrate this, that whatsoever evil thing a
man intends and does fixedly resolve, he is guilty of, though he Paul, I know,
and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is no meat unclean of it self,
but to him that esteems any thing unclean, to him it is unclean, Romans 14. 14.
and he that doubts is damned if he eat. v. 23. These could have no truth in
them, unless the heart by choosing and pursuing to the utmost any thing that
it does judge unlawful, incurred the guilt of that unlawfulness, even to
Damnation; and all that merely by it self without the Action, which in that
case had nothing sinful in it A weight that is upheld by a man's hand, and
otherwise would rush down to the earth, does surely gravitate as much, it is as
heavy though it do not fall quite down, as if it did, and, were it let alone,
it would: A settled tendency, a resolved Abyss, its center, and will not rest
but in that Pit that has nor rest nor bottom; the Heart in this case is as
liable as it can be, because here it has done its worst, and such a will shall
be imputed to it self.

And now I need not tell those who are still designing sin, or mischief in the
heart, although it never dares come out of those recesses, how far they are
removed from the goodness of God to Israel. Tertuall. de Anima. cap. 58.
A Father finds a way to prove such souls have larger doses of Gods Vengeance,
who when he had

Go now and reckon that thy outward gross transgressions are the only
dangerous and guilty ones and slight thy sins of Heart; but know that while thy
flesh is sleeping in the quiet Grave at rest and ease, thy Spirit then is in
Torments for

But why do I stand pressing aggravations against uncleanness of Heart in an
Age, when God knows Vice has not so much modesty or fear to keep within those
close and dark pure Fraud, or pure Impiety; the one of these does make a
strange expression very proper, pure Corruption, for so it is, sincere and
without mixture, nothing but it self, no spots of Clean to chequer it, but all
stain: The other is pure white indeed, but it is that of whited Sepulchers; a
Life as clean as Light, a bright pure Conversation, but it shines with that
light only which Satan does put on 2 Cor. 11. 14.
when he transformes himself into an Angel of light, and it is but a glory
about a fiend. But yet this shines however, whereas others do stand Candidates
of Vice, and would be glorious in wickedness; and that is such a splendour as
if Satan should dress himself with the shine of his own flaming Brimstone, and
make himself a glory with the streamings of his Lake of Fire. And yet thus is
the world, we do not only see men serve some one peculiar vicious inclination,
and cherish their own wickedness, but they make every vice their own, as if
the Root of bitterness branch't out in each sort of Impiety in them, such
fertile soyls of sin they are, here insincerity were to be wished; and where
there is not cleanness that Mask, that there were the Religion of Hypocrisy.
We may remember God was good to Israel of old by obligation and performance;
the one a^ great as he could enter, the other great to miracle and
astonishment; when after Faction, of others into Profaneness; when the
strictest Sect of them, the Pharisees, became most holy out wardly, to have the
better means Jos. Antiq. l. 13. c. 23. edit. Basil. 1544.
(...), to mischief those that were not of their party, and got a great opinion
of Sanctity, (...), so as to be believed in whatsoever they did speak against
the King or chief Priests; and that so far as to be able openly to practice
(...). Jos. Anti. l. 17. c. 3.
They are Josephus words of them; and when another Sect, the Zelots, the most
pernicious of all, says Bertram, did commit Murders, Sacrilege,
Prophanations, and all kind of Villainies, (...), (...). l. 4. c. 12.
with good Intentions, says the same Josephus; and when those who did not
separate into Sects, but were the Church of Israel, became lukewarm, supine,
and negligent in their Profession, yea, and licentious and Profane, fit only
to be joined with Publicans, in Christ's Scandalous as well as vicious, as if
they loved the guilt as much as the delights of sin, and cared not to be wicked
to themselves, but must debauch, as if they did enjoy the ruin of other
persons, sinning just as the Devil does, who does not taste the sin, but feasts
upon the Sinners Condemnation: Then did God execute a Vengeance whose
prediction was fit to be mistaken for that of the Day of Judgment, and whose
event almost fulfilled the terrors of that day.

I need not draw resemblances, show how Gods goodness Israel does equal that
to them; applying to our selves their Raptures; how Psalm. 126. 1.
when the Lord turned the Captivity of our Sion, we also were like them that
dream, surprised with Mercy. Indeed as in a Dream; Ideas are not always well
connected, there is no chain or thread of fancies, and the thoughts are not
joynted regular and even; but there are breaches and disorder in them still,
the Images of sleep being like Nebuchadnezzar's, made of such things as do not
well unite. So there is something I confess, like this in our condition, for
with our gold and silver, our precious things Iron and Clay, not only meaner
mixtures, but such things as will not close, or be soder'd, but do incline to
part asunder, and would moulder and tend toward dissolution; and just as in a
Dream, the composure of things is not so undisturbed, but that there is some
confusedness; dream of mercy, it is not a Phantasme or an Apparition of Gods
kindness, but the Lord will be truly good to us.

Yet if we do proceed as Israel, and equal it in provocations: --

But I will make no parallels, public clamors do that too loud; these do
display the factions of iniquity among us, and muster up the several parties of
our vices too; and each man is as perfect in the guilts of all sides that he is
not of, as Pharisees and Zelots; others can show you our profane licentious
Professors, Lay and Clergy both; and indeed we need not go far to seek any or
all of these, nor do we want our Sadduces. Now if all this be true, then as
those were the signs of the Son of Man's coming to them in Judgment, so we may
fear they are his Harbingers to us. If they be, I am sure the only way to make
his coming good to us, is to prepare for it by cleansing from all filthiness
and insincerity; then though he come clothed with a Glory of flaming Vengeance,
pure in heart shall see God, so as that that sight shall be the Beatick Vision:
Yea, they shall see the Goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living, they
shall see Jerusalem in prosperity all their life long, and Peace here upon
Israel, and in his light they shall see light hereafter in the Jerusalem that
is above. To the state of which glorious Light He bring us all, who is the
brightness of his Fathers Glory: To whom be Glory, and Dominion for ever and
ever.

Amen.
SERMON III. WHITE HALL. Second Wednesday in Lent.
LEVIT. 16. 31. Ye shall Afflict your Souls by a Statute for ever.
THe words are one Single Precept concerning one part of the Celebration

1. What the Importance of the thing commanded is? what is required in this
Injunction Te shall Afflict your Souls?

2. What Usefulness and Efficacy this Duty had upon that time in which it was
prescribed? what the Afflicting of the Soul contributed to the work of that
Day? that it should be made so indispensable an ingredient of its performances,
tied by a Statute for ever?

3. Whether that for ever do reach us? which is the Application, and brings all
home to us.

First, What the Import of the thing commanded, the Afflicting of the Soul is?

The Arab. and Targum of Jerusalem Translate it Maimonid.
Fasting; yea, and a Learned Rabbine says, that wheresoever these two words
are put together, that is meant. And indeed they are often joined in Scripture
to express it, Psalm. 35. 13. I afflicted my Soul with Fasting. And the Prophet
Isaiah Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? A day for a man to Afflict his
Soul? Isa. 58. 5. Somewhat a strange expression it is; for Fasting does afflict
the Body properly, and yet we find the like too in the other Extreme: We read
of pampering the Soul, Psa^. 78. 18. They required (...) meat for their Souls;
not to supply the Hunger of their Body, that they had before; but to indulge
the Lusts of their mind; they did not want food, but variety; Festival diet,
and a Table furnished they would have; and this luxuriancy and wantonness of
Meat the meat for the Soul: Such as God says in other places the Soul lusts
after. Indeed forced meats, and things that please merely by being rare and
dear, or by being extravagant, these do not feed the Appetite but opinion, and
the mind; it is the Soul only that hungers after these: Thus when I look after
Wine in the glass, and make my Eye a Critique of its accidents, and by the
mode and fashion of it teach it to please or displease my judgment, I do not
here thirst after the cool moisture of it, but the sparkling flame, and do not
drink the wine, but the flavor and color, and this is all but notion. Now
certainly these are not proper meat for the Body, says the Scripture, and it
is the Stomach and not the Imagination that is hungry; nor is it Fancy or the
Soul that thirsts, but it is the Palate, so that these are unnatural and
monstrous satisfactions and appetites.

And yet to bring men's selves to this, is one of the great masteries of Wit and
Art, to force themselves to find a relish in these things, and then contrive
them is a piece of skill which the advantages of parts and fortune are
desirable

It were in vain to ask what else such men can be good for? that being their
Profession, they are out at most other things:

Lord God! that thou should shed a Rational Angelick Soul into us, a thing
next to the Being of thy Self, and We make it employ it self to animate only
the organs of Intemperance, and Gluttony, and their appendant lusts: Only
inspire us how to be but more Sagacious, indeed but more luxurious Bruits, when
thou have set us here to train and discipline our selves for a condition of
such glorious Joys as are fit to entertain Souls of Reason

Adam fell his great Fall by Eating, but ever since men fall further by riotous
intemperate Eating. He fell from Paradise, and they from Reason; the Man sinks
into Beast, and the Soul falls into very Flesh, and has no other faculties or
appetites but fleshly ones.

Such people of all others are not to be raised up by Religion; their fullness
gives no place to that, but does exclude it. God did complain of this of old,
32. Deuteronomy. 15. Je surun waxed fat and kicked; that we may see they want no
brutish quality, who do allow themselves the appetite of Bruits; they that
pamper themselves like to fed Horses, will also neigh like them and kick even
him that fed them; thou art waxen fat, thou art covered with fatness; then he
forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation. When
they came once where they did Deuteronomy. 32. 13.
suck honey out of the Rock, and Oil out of the flinty Rock, they could not mind
the Rock of their Salvation.

Indeed this sensuality as it consumes Estates, eats Time, and all the
faculties of the Mind, so it devours all Religion

For ever since Adam did eat of the forbidden Fruit, the carnal mind we know is
neither subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, as S. Paul says,
Romans 8. 7. because Gods Commands are restraints upon those things which Flesh
desires Exodus 32. 6. The People sat down to Eat and Drink and rose up to Play:
Tertull.
Lusum non denotasset nisi impudicum; he means, to play the wantons. But Jeremy
is plainer, chapter 5. 7. 8. How shall I pardon thee for this? thy Children have
forsaken me, when I had fed them to the full, they then committed Adultery, and
assembled themselves by troops in Harlots houses: Nor stays it there, but does
increase as well as feed to an Excess; we may discern that by the Wisemans
Prayer 23. of Ecclesiast. 6. O Lord, Father and God of my Life, let not the
greediness of the Belly, nor the lust of the Flesh, take hold of me, and give
not over me thy Servant to an impudent mind. Gyant-like he had called it in the
verse before; and sure the Wiseman in the Proverbs apprehended it as such, and
dreaded it accordingly, as if Bellies full gorged were those Mountains which
the Giants cast up to storm Heaven on: He looked upon this Vice as that which
would bid defiance to God, and out him, and therefore thinks it necessary to
beseech the Lord not to afford him so much as would furnish Plenty, Prove. 30.
8. Give me not Riches, feed me with food convenient for me; (...) with an
Allowance, with no more than is sufficient for me, least I be full and deny
thee, and say who is the Lord. It seems such persons know no other God besides
their Belly; nor is it any wonder if a Soul made Flesh cannot well apprehend a
Deity that is a Spirit, or believe it, but thinks all notions of such beings to
be contradiction,

Whether this time that has been almost always set aside for strict
Severities, and to work out Repentance (and if it be not so intended now, I
know not what pretense did call us hither) (for though there be some relaxation
of the severer Diet of this time, sure there is no indulgence of that Penitence
which the strictness of this time designed) and let to afflict our Souls, i. e.
our Appetites, and to revenge our superfluities upon our selves, and to teach
our desires to be denied: Or whether we do teach the Diet of this season to be
but a variety of Luxury, and if the Law did not command it, and so make it
Pressure by hands that would unsheath it, if God do not interpose to

Tertullian is very pleasant with those who did dislike that in their
Penitencies, they were by the Church prescribed to put off Mirth and put on
Sackcloth, and take Ashes for Come, says he, reach that Bodkin there to braid
my Hair, and help me now to practice all those Arts that are in Mode to attire
it; give me the washes of that Glass, the blushes of that Paper, the foyles
which that Box has to beautify and dress my Cheeks; come and set out and
dress my Table too, let me have Fowl with costly forced and not a natural Fat;
or let me have cramb'd Fish, and cramme my Dishes also; get me cheerful Wines
too: and if any one ask why I do thus indulge my self? why I will tell him, I
have sinned against my God, and am in danger of Perdition, and therefore I am
in great trouble; I macerate (do you not see the signs of it?) and excruciate
my

Alas to humble ones self thus in fullness, and to afflict the Soul in cheerful
plenties, is such a thing as none but he that sinks under the surfeit of those
Plenties understands. I Am sure the Lord, when he required his People to repent,
required them then to discipline, and use severities upon themselves; they were
to fast or dye: God took the execution, for whatsoever Soul it be that shall
not be Afflicted that same day shall be cut off from among his People, 23.
Levit. 29. Even

And I do verily persuade my self, that one great cause, why men that have
sometimes thoughts to reform their lives, and do resolve against their Courses,
yet repent of their Repentance, their resolutions untwist, and become frail as
threads of Cobweb, the first assault of a temptation does break through them,
is, they do not use mortifications to work their aversations high and strong
against their sins, and fix their resolutions. The universal sense of the whole
Primitive Church does give me confidence in this persuasion, into; and those
had S. Paul for their precedent. But now

Do not complain of the Infirmity of the Flesh for this,

But Secondly, You shall Afflict your Souls, cannot be meant only that ye
shall Afflict your Bodies; the Spirit also must be troubled, and we must rent
the Heart as well as Garments; that is indeed a Sacrifice fit for a
Propitiation day, for it is such a one as God will not despise, Psalm. 51. 17.
and

God may call safting the Afflicting of the Soul, because it is the most
appropriate and natural means to work it; but when he calls it so he does
intend it should produce it. Austerities humilificandi hominis disciplina, as
Tertull* says, Humiliation discipline; but yet they have not always that
effect. The Pharisee that fasted twice a week did not mortify at all, but his
Humiliation made him lofty, his emptiness filled him with wind, and puffed him
up, and the Publican was more justified than he. And late experiences have
taught us, that Fasting does not always humble, when it did gape for
Sovereignty, and did afflict them into Power only, when there attended it a
sacra fames, an hunger after Holy things, and such as all the relicts of old
Sacrilege the throat of these fasting men was an open Sepulcher indeed; open
to bury, and that could no more be satisfied than the Grave.

But it is not only these demure impieties, and those that are devont in
wickedness, and act it in Religion and the Fear of God, I have to speak
against:

But in the general, If Fasting do not humble, and those severities that wear
the Flesh break not the heart too and make it contrite, then they are lost upon
us, and do not profit us. All these strictnesses of bodily and outward
exercise, Paul calls it, are acts of discipline prescribed to make the Sorrows
of Repentance more severe and operative, and so to be the Correctives of the
distempers of the Soul, to quell the risings of the Appetite and Passions, and
bring the sensual part of us under obedience to Reason and Religion; to make
all calm and even in us, and put us in the frame of Men and Christians, of
Rational and Pious Creatures. And if they do not work this in us, if the Soul
do not meet in the performances, they are not acceptable in themselves at all:
These are only the mint anise and cummin of our Pieties; Origin says, the
condimenta actuum the sauces of Religion, not the main standing parts of it,
which he therefore that offers solitary gives God a Sacrifice of Sallads, and
thinks that will be a Sin-Offering. They do mistake themselves who cherish any
hope from having spent a day, or Lent of abstinence; if the Excesses of their
vices be not made over, and evacuated by it; if they continue still full gorged
with their iniquity; or who think all is well, they have atton'd by having
bowed down the head like a bulrush; if the Soul were not also humbled in them;
for as S. Paul I may give all my goods to feed the poor, yet have no Charity,
and I may give my body to be burnt, yet in those Martyr-fires there may be no
heats of Love to God, and then all these profit me nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 3. So I
may chasten my self too, and yet not receive correction or be disciplined, and

That Church indeed which has found out the easy expiation of Indulgences,
that has the treasure of Christ's merits and all the supererogations of the
Saints at her dispose, and by Commission can issue them at pleasure out, and
apply those merits to men's uses not by Sacraments, but by a Bull or Brief, and
not require Gospel conditions of Faith and Repentance in the persons that
receive them, but visiting a Church in Rome, ascending the steps in such a
Chapel in the Lateran on such a day, shall give a plenary remission from sin
and punishment; the saying of such a Prayer over daily shall do it for
fourscore thousand years (could they but make a lease for men to live and sin
out the indulgence too, that would get them good store of chapmen) that Church
I say: may give encouragement to hope that God may be compounded with at easy
rates; that for a Surfeit I may give a Meal and God will pardon it, and let me
have Wine too into the bargain (for they allow afflicting of our Souls in Wine)
that some weeks change of Diet may go for a change Pater noster's quite blow
out those flames which burn no where but in their Doctrines: Yet when without
any commission from Christ they make Attrition able to secure men from Hell,
and an Indu^gence able to release them out of Purgatory; when they make new
conditions of Pardon, that is new Gospel, new ways of application of Christ's
Merits, and though our Savior God when Contrition, Humiliation, and Amendment,
which they commute so cheaply with his Vicar: We justly stand astonished at such
usurpation on Christ's Blood and Merits, that does assign them at these rates.

I make no question but these easy expiations get them many Converts. Rome
from its first foundation grew from being an Asylum to the dissolute, but they
that go away upon Proselytes to Rome and Hell. Nor are our trusts much more
secure, if we rely upon our op^s operatum too, our little outward
strictnesses, unless the soul be engaged, meals, and give my self my sins, that
is so far from expiation that it aggravates, I am an argument against my self
that my crimes are incorrigible, when I will have them though I cut off the
instruments and foments of them, and though I meddle not with the temptations,
yet I seize the sins.

What Aug. Enchir. c. 70.
S. Austin does say of Alms, In melius vita mutanda, and per eleemosynas de
peccatis praeteritis propitiandus est Deus; non ad hoc emendus quodammodo ut
semper liceat impune peccare: This is applicable to these performances also,
our lives must Blood of God shall not be ours at such unworthy prices. The
Prophet Micah seeking for a present to appease Jewish rites though God
prescribed them, as insufficient; and in them all things of the like external
kind. Mic. 6. 6, 7. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self
before the most high God? shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with
Calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with
ten thousand Rivers of Oil? shall I give my firstborn for my Transgression,
the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? If I do offer up whole Hecatombs
to God, will that atone for having offered up too plentifully to my Genius? Or
if I do remove my Riots from my table to the Altar, and change my few
extravagant Dishes into whole Herds it cost more to Redeem Souls, which not
Rivers of Oil can cleanse, but streams must flow out of the Heart of expiation
of sins was wrought: Even so to make that expiation mine, besides relyance on
it, I must transcribe the Gethsemane into my breast. If his Soul be sorrowful
even unto Death, my Soul must be Afflicted too; Humiliations must prostrate me
upon my face to deprecate that Fire and Brimstone, burning Tempest that is the
portion of the Sinners cup says David: O my Father let this Cup pass from me!
The lustful fevers of my blood must excern themselves in cold sweat of fear
and grief, in agonies of Penitence; and my excessive draughts not only make me
I thirst, but give me Vinegar and Gall to drink; sorrow as bitter as my riotous
egestions have been; my Oaths that have struck through the Name of God, must
pierce my Soul with grief as pungent as his Thorns and Nails. In a word, I
must so Afflict my Soul as to crucify the body of sin, and nail it to his
Cross. And this is that which in its own proportion was required of the Jews
this Day here in the Text, to the work of which Day how the Afflicting of the
Soul in both the given senses does contribute, was my Second and the next
Enquiry.

Secondly, What this Day was the Verse before the Text informs us, it was their
Day of Expiation or Atonement. Now that the Jews esteem Fasting and
Humiliation expiatory Sacrifices, appears from a Form of Prayer which even yet
they use on such a day where he that fasted says, O Lord the Governor of all
the World, I have now finished my Fast before thee, thou know that when we
had a Temple standing, the man that sinned was bound to expiate it by a
Sacrifice, the Blood of which was poured out, and the Altar consumed the Fat to
make amends for his Offense; but now by reason of our many wickednesses, we
have neither a Temple, Altar, or Priest to make Atonement for us; I beseech
thee therefore O Lord my God the God of my Fathers, to accept of that little
portion of my own Flesh and Blood which this days Fasting has torn from me,
in lieu of a Sin-offering, and be thou reconciled unto me for thy mercies sake.
Thus when he cannot give a Lamb for his Transgression, he gives some of
himself, he offers Hunger for Shewbread, and Thirst for a Drink offering, he
consecrates a Meal instead of a Beast, and sheds a sower fasting sigh for
Incense; and this he hopes God will accept as Sacrifice. And truly Judgment
was given on a Nation or Person, and Execution going out against them, yet this
rever'st the Sentence; Ahab is a great proof of this, 1 King. 21. 27. And it
came to pass when Ahab heard those words, that he rent his Clothes, and put
Sackcloth upon his flesh, and Fasted, and lay in Sackcloth and went softly: And
the Word of the Lord came unto Elijah the Tishbite saying, See thou how Ahab
humbles himself before me? Because he humbles himself before me I will not
bring the evil in his days. One Fasting-day secured a Life; the weaknesses it
brought upon the body, upheld it against all Gods threats; Vengeance pronounced
and coming out against him falls to ground if Ahab humble Afflict his Soul.
Gods stretched out Arm will not strike Sackcloth, nor wound through Fasting
Garments: One fit of it removes his Judgments a whole Age; and had it been
sincere and persevering, how had it wiped them out to everlastingnesse?

Nineve is another instance of the practice and success of this even among the
Heathens.

Nor should it seem to have less Efficacy among Christians: The Primitive
Fathers call these severities Tertul. de pudiciti. c. 13. and de poenit. c. 10.
Cyp. Ep. 9. Fdit. Priorij. 1666. ep. etia. 26. and lib. de lapsis. Aug. enchir.
c. 71.
Satisfaction for sin, and Hieron in Joel 1. and in ep. ad Eustoch. de ob. Paul.
Compensations, the Tertul. de Poenit. c. 6. Orig. Hom. 15. in Levit.
Price with which they are bought off, the things that Ambros. de Poenit. l. 2.
c. 5.
cover them, and Orig. Hom. 6. in. Exodus
blot them out, and which Cyp. Ser. de Lapsis. Chrysostom. Hom. 41. ad pop. Antioch.
Propitiate and appease God for them; not in their sense who force up these
Expressions to a strange height of meaning; and yet have quite beat down the
Practice as to the public wholesome use of them out of the Church. But though
these sayings assign not the Power and just Efficacy of that discipline in it
self, yet they do the acceptance and effect of it by virtue of Christ's
Satisfaction: A Fainting Body cannot bear indeed the weight of our iniquities,
nor will lowest prostrations in the Command, and therefore God, though not by a
condignity of performance, yet as Conditions Covenant of Grace has set us,
which when they are fulfilled then God is satisfied, thy sins are expiated, and
thou art pardoned: And so in this lower sense these are thy Satisfactions with
which God is well pleased.

And thus these self Afflictions of the Sinner supply Gods They leave no place
nor business for it, and by these short severities upon himself he does make
void, he does expunge the Sentence of eternal Torments, says Tertullian: As
thou becomest severe against thy self, so will the Lord abate of his
severities, and he will spare, and he will pity thee in that he sees thou will
not spare thy self. How can he choose but be appeased toward thee when he
shall see thee executing his Sentence even upon thy own self? and punishing his
Enemies although they be thy Members? so that by this means thou do censure
thy self into Gods

Our Church says the same thing; That in the Primitive Church there was a
Godly Discipline; that at the beginning of Lent such persons as were notorious
sinners, were put to open Penance, and punished in this world, that their
Souls might be saved in the Day of the Lord; and she does wish (if her wishes
be of any force and value when her Orders and Constitutions are not:) that
Discipline could be restored. But this I shall not press; if all those whom
the Primitive Church Paul sentenced were so used, if every Schismatic that
lies tearing himself and others off from the Lords Body were rejected, and if
the Fornicator that joins himself to his unclean Accomplice were disjoined from
Christ, and not suffered to make his members be the members of an Harlot; if
every scandalous debauching offender that lies corrupting Christ's Body,
spreading contagion, thrusting the gangreen forward, were cut off, and these
and all the rest delivered up to Satan, alas what part would Christ have left
of his own Body? Sed illos defendit numerus junctaeque umbone phalanges, and
that I fear too in more senses than the Poet means. Therefore I shall not urge
the Churches Wish, but only see whether the Statute in the Text says any thing
to this, and whether the for ever do reach us: Which is my third and last
Enquiry.

Thirdly, Diverse of the Jews Rites are said to be, and be prescribed for ever
although those very Rites and the whole economy of their Covenant were to be
changed and cease; among other reasons, as the Fathers say, because they
foresignifie and point at things in the new Covenant, which were to last till
Covenants and Rites shall be no more, and

Now truly that their Expiation Performances, those which I am upon, did so,
the whole Epistle to the Hebrews is employed to prove; the Margent of your
Bibles in this

Now does this Expiation as theirs did, require afflicting of the Soul in its
attendance, or was that but a Ceremony of their Rite? and though a Jew must
mourn and Fast to see his sin killing a Beast, and when he does behold his
wickedness eating up a Goat for a Sin offering, he must deny himself

Indeed if we consider most men's practices, it would appear most probable that
if we were to expiate our sins as the Jews Jesus, those satisfactions would
more afflict our Souls, and more restrain our vices than that which was made
for us by the Death of Christ, and how can this be rectified, unless by some
severities upon our selves, we give our selves a piercing sense of what our sin
deserves, and grateful apprehensions of what our Surety suffered for us? When
in sad private earnest I have thought fit to Afflict my Soul with some austere
mortifications, and when my fainting Spirits are scarce able to sustain my Body
that sinks under the load of it self, then I may have some quorsum perditio
haec? why must the Blood of God be paid for sin, when I cannot afford a little
self-denial for it? Why such great Agonies of the Holy Jesus, when I cannot
find in my heart to bear a little strictness for it?

But I could easily deduce (were I not to suppose it done before) that sure as
if the Church had thought a Statute By Dr. Gunnings Paschal or Lent Fast.
had annexed these two for ever, they have been joined from the beginings of our
Christianity; it was the Fast that did attend our Saviors sufferings that in
part caused the Contest about Easter, which Polycarpe S. John's Disciple
managed; and then there was a Fast so soon: and he that Irenaeus, Scholar to
that Polycarpe, says some observed it many days, some forty days also, if we
can take the Ancient Ruffinus's authority but for a Comma. And if the Ancient
Fathers do expound aright, Christ himself thought that men were interested so
much in his Death, that they would Fast by reason of it; When the Bridegroom is
taken from them, then shall they Fast in those days: Upon which words they say
the Season was determined to this Duty by the Gospel.

But they may say so, who knew how to persuade men to fast, we cannot make them
temperate. Blessed Savior! what kind of Christians did thou hope for thy
Disciples, of whom thou were so confident they would so concern themselves in
thy Passion as to Fast because of it? when in our times Christians will not be
kept from their Excesses by it? not in those days of Fasting which thy
Primitive followers did Celebrate with abstinences, that did almost mortify
indeed and slay the Body of Flesh as well as Meal, nor an intemperance, will
eat and Riot too, and make a Lent of Bacchanals: Thus we prepare load for thy
Day of Passion, sin on to add weight to thy Cross, and yet we our selves will
not be humbled under them. It is in vain to tell men thou expectest they should
mortify, that it will spirit their Repentance, for they will have no kind of
Penitence for sin, but such as will let them return to sin again, suffer no
discipline with which their vices too cannot consist, for they can scarce live
if they make not themselves cheerful with them, even in this time

Indeed when I consider how this Season is hedged in from Vice by all Gods
Indignation, threatened at first, suffered at last* pronounced in Commination,
executed in Passion: Ash Wednesday gave us all Gods Curses against Sinners, all
which Good Friday shows inflicted on our Savior. Thus we began, Cursed are the
Unmerciful, the Fornicators, and Adulterers, the Covetous persons, Worshippers
of Images, Slanderers, Drunkards and Extortioners; and we shall see the Son of
God made this Curse for them; yea we our selves said Amen to all, as testifying
that that Curse is due to all. When I consider this I say, I cannot choose but
be astonished to behold how men can break through all Gods Curses and their own
to get Oaths begged God to damn them, and he has not done it yet, they would
now do it in their Prayers too; make their Devotions as well as Imprecations
consign them to the wrath of God. He that does love cursing thus in the Passive
sense, surely as David says, it shall come unto him, it shall be unto him as
the Garment that covers him, it shall enter into his bowels like Water, and
like Oil into his Bones, Psalm. 109. 17, 18, Lents and abstinencies that the sin
prescribes shall be observed exactly, only to qualify them for more sin and
condemnation, may be, at the best but to recover them from what it has
inflicted; when yet alas! they are too soft and tender, the Lord knows, to
endure any severities to work out their his fastings starve that worm that
otherwise would gnaw the weepings quench the everlasting burnings, yea there is
cheerful Pleasure in the midst of these severities, when God breaks in in
Comforts into them: The Glory of the Lord appears in that Cloud too that is
upon the penitent sad heart; when he is drencht in tears the Holy Ghost the
Comforter does move upon those waters, and breaths Life and Salvation into
them; and he who is the Unction pours Oil into those wounds of the Spirit; and
we are never nearer Heaven than when we are thus prostrate in the lowest dust,
and when our Belly cleaves unto the ground in humble penitence, then we are at
the very Throne of Grace: And Afflicting of the Soul which is but for a moment,
does work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. To which,
etc.

SERMON IV. WHITE HALL. October 12. 1662.
JOHN XV. 14. Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I Command you.
THe words are a conditional Assertion of Christ's concerning his Apostles, and
in them all Christians: And they do easily divide themselves into two parts.
The First is a positive part, wherein there is a state of great and Blessed
advantage, which they are declared to be in present possession of: In these
words, Ye are my friends.

In which there are two things that make up that advantage, 1. a Relation, 2.
the Person related to. Friends, and My friends. The

Second is a Conditional part, wherein there are the terms, upon which that
possession is made over, and which preserve the Right and Title to them: in
these words, If ye do whatsoever I command you: in which there are two things
required as Conditions.

I. Obedience, If ye do what I command you. II. That Obedience Universal; If ye
do whatsoever I command you.
The first thing that offers it self to our consideration, is the Relation,
Friends.

It is a known commonplace truth, that a Friend is the most useful thing that
is in whatsoever state we are: It is the Soul of life, and of content. If I be
in prosperity: We know abundance not enjoyed, is but like Jewels in the
Cabinet, useless while they are there: It is indeed nothing opinion of
Prosperity. But it is not possible to enjoy abundance otherwise than by
communicating it: a man possesses plenty only in his Friends, and has
fruition of it merely by bestowing it. If I be in adversity; to have a person
whom I may entrust a trouble to, whose bosom is as open and as faithful to me,
as it is to his own thoughts, to which I may commit a swelling secret; this is
in a good measure to unlade, and to pour out my sorrow from me; thus I divide
my grievances which would be insupportable, if I did not disburthen friendship
lodges; take God's opinion in the case, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. If thy Brother the Son of
thy Mother, or thy Son, or thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy bosom, or thy
Friend that is as thine own Soul. This is the highest step in the Gradation.
And there is all the reason in the world; for though Parent and Child, are as
near one to other as any thing can be to part of it self; Husband and Wife are
but two different names of the same one, yet these may become bitter and
unkind: A Parent may grow cross, or a Child refractory, a Mother may be like
the Ostrich in bowels with her burden; and an ungracious Son is constant pangs
and travail to his Mother, his whole life gives her after-throws which are most
deadly: Dislikes also may rest within the Marriage Bed, and lay their heads
upon two wedded Pillows; but none of these unkindnesses can untie the Relation;
that ends not where the bitterness begins, he is a Parent still though
froward, and a Child though stubborn; but a true Friend can be nothing but
kind; it does include a deerness in its essence, Husband without loving, but
cannot be a lover, that is a Friend, without loving.

And sure to have no one friend in this Life, no one that is concerned in any
of my interests or me my self, none that Plague that keeps Friends at a
distance from me while I live, out of the sphere of my infection, and after
gives me Death, has yet less of Malignity than this; that leaves me the
Compassions, the Prayers, all the solitary comforts, all indeed but the outward
entertainments of my Friends; that, though it shut the Door against all
company, yet, puts a Lord have Mercy on the Door: But this I now described has
none of that, has no good wishes, nothing else but hate, is worse than a
perpetual Pestilence.

Yet neither is this state so comfortless, in respect of this life, as not to
have a Friend in the concernments of the Life to come; none that has so much
kindness for my Soul as every man has for his Enemies Beast, which if he see
fallen in a Ditch he will at least give notice that it may be helped out thence:
No one, that when a sin, like to that Falling sickness in the Gospel (and it is
such indeed without a Parable) is casting me into the Water, quenching my
parts, my Reason, and the Immortal spark within me; or throwing me into the
Fire, raising Lascivious heats within, which after will break out into Hell
fires; none yet that will stretch out his hand to catch me, or to pull me out:
None that does care to see me perish-to Eternity, or that values my Soul, which
yet did cost the Blood of God, at a word speaking: This is to be like Dives in
the Flames, to whom they would not lend the help of the Luke 16. 24. 25.
tip of a finger, or give the kindness of a drop of Water: I am as it were on
the other side the Gulf already. Here is the use of Friendship, the only noble
one, that is worthy of that blessed quality: When I have assistant Conscience to
me, who, when that within me sleeps, or is benumbed, will watch over my
actions; will testify them to my Face, will be as faithful to me as the
Conscience should be, hold a Glass to my Soul, show me the stains and the
proud tumors, the foul Ulcers that are there, and then will fret, and rub, or
prick, lance, and corrode, to cure those tumors, and do off those spots, such
an one is a familiar Angel Guardian, is truly of that blessed Heavenly rank,
and only less than the Friend in the Text, the Person related to, and my next
part.

My Friends. There are three things from which men use to take the measures of
a Friend.

First, From the good things he bestows on them: He that thinks to keep
friendship alive only with air, that gives good words, but parts with nothing,
that entertains only pageant of a Friend: They that own having but one Soul,
and seem to clasp as if they would have but one Body too, cannot keep such
distinct and separate proprieties in other little things, as not to have
communication one from the other. And,

Secondly, The friendship of these benefits is rated by the measures of our
need of them. When Midas was ready to dye for hunger, his God was kinder to him
in a little bread, than in making all that he touched turn into Gold: Great
things engage but little where there is but little use of them:

Thirdly, Are endeered by the Affection they are given with. Good turns done
with design, what need soever I have of them, are hire, and not friendship; it
is the kindness only that obliges, the gift without the love does but upbraid
and scorn my want.

Now to measure the Friend here in the Text, by these, were an impossible
undertaking, whose Friendship did exceed all bounds and measures. I shall do no
more toward it but read the words before my Text, which were the occasion of
Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
Friends, and then it follows, Ye are my Friends. The token therefore of his
Friendship, the gift he gave them was his life, rather that was the least he
gave: He gave his glory first, that so he might be qualified to give his life,
for (...) Phil. 2. 7. He lessened himself from the condition of being Lord of
all, into that of a Servant, (...), Heb. 2. 9. being diminished, made lower,
meaner than his Creatures for the suffering of Death. Now with the price of
such Divine essential glory to buy only a life, rather only a possibility of
Death, that after he might give that Romance of friendship ever fancied or did
aim at: We may have heard of two Companions that would dye for one another,
that never quarrelled in their lives, but for this, who should suffer first to
save the other, and strave only for Execution: But for a Person of the Trinity
to leave his Heaven to come down to us; to dwell with agonies that he might be
at one with us; and be tied to the Cross, that he might be united to us; this
is a friendship fit for Ecstasies of apprehension. Of all the things that I
shall not blame him that engages his Affection there: But Heaven cannot give a
greater gift than this; for what can God give greater than himself? Yea I may
say God could not give so much, for he must be Man too, to give his life, and
this, says he, he gave for his Friends, even in our stead, who must have
perished else eternally, which intimates the second thing, the need we had of
this.

A need great as the gift, necessity invincible, that could break into Heaven,
rifle the Trinity to serve it self, throw Death into those Regions of
Immortality, and which would not be satisfied but with the Blood of God.

And now is not the kindness and the condescension of Friendship in his
expressions too, when he says, greater love than this has no man? which was
the third endearment.

There never were such wounds of Love as those that tore this Heart; never such
meltings of Affection as dissolved this Lover into sweats of Blood. There was
no motive to all this, but his mere love: For all this he designed to us before
we were, and therefore sure before we were deserving: And O our God! thou that
from all Eternity did lay Contrivances were not, and deserved nothing; and
who since we were, have deserved nothing but Damnation.

And as there was no other motive to all this design but love, so neither was
there any thing but love in the fulfilling. Look on your Savior in the Garden,
and upon Mount Calvary, Affection as Torment, and hanging down his head upon
the Cross with languishments of kindness more than weakness. His Arms stretched
out and racked, as if on purpose to the posture of receiving you to his
embraces, and his side opened not only to shed Blood for you, but to make you a
passage to his very Heart. Look on him offering up his Tears, his Prayers, and
his Soul for Sin, and in the midst of all, projecting happiness to you, as it
were praying, O my Father, here I charge my self with all the guilt of those my
Friends, I thy only Son God, one with thee, am content to suffer Torments that
they to all his Friends, even to those that do what he Commands;

Ye are my Friends if ye do what I command you.
I shall not urge, that Great-men upon Earth will not take any to their
Friendship but upon these terms; nor will I plead the reasonableness of this
in Christ, there being no cause why he should be a Friend to any that will
daily disoblige him and dishonor him: Nor will I press the whole Economy of
Scripture, which says, all the advantages Christ ever gave or meant us, and
all the acts of Friendship that he Tit. 2. v. 11, 12. He gave himself also to
Ransom us from our own evil doings, and to redeem us into his obedience, Tit.
2. v. 14. Without which no dependence on him will avail. Mat. 7. 21. He will
own no acquaintance with, nor services from them who have friendship with sin;
though they have cast out Devils in his Name, if they retain their vices;
though they do miracles, if they do wickedly, he will bid them depart, profess
he never knew them, v. 22. 23. He will not relation to his Name, nor have the
friendship of a Title, 2 Timothy 2. 19. All his Rewards also that he will give are
promised to none other, but them that do what he commands, Apoc. 22. 14. that
is, do Evangellically, heartily and faithfully endeavor it, and do this with
all diligence expressed by words, that import all strife imaginable, as Running,
Wrestling, Fighting, Warring. And persevere also by patient continuance in well
doing, Romans 2. 7. and he has nothing else but vengeance for all others. 2
These. 1. 8. and we have neither Christ, nor Gospel, nor Religion, but

But I shall wave all this, and bound my self within the present words, Greater
love has no man than this, that a man lay down his Life for his Friends. Ye
are my Friends if ye do what I command you. When Christ is boasting of his
love, making comparisons, and vying friendships with mankind, nay more,
contriving heights and depths of Mercy, such as Man has no comprehension, nor
fathom for; when he was preparing to do an act of compassion almost equal to
his Divinity, when he had resolutions of so much kindness as to give will not
do what he commands, but in the midst of such agonies of compassion, he thought
of nothing but infinite indignation and eternal vengeance to the disobedient. I
have but now given my Body and my Blood even to the Traitor Luc. 22. 19, 20, 21.
Judas to one who is a Joh. 6. 70.
Devil: I am going to give my life even for my Romans 5. 10.
Enemies, for the Joh. 3. 16, 17. and 6. 51. and 2 Cor. 5. 19.
World: But I will give no love to any, have no friendship with any but the
virtuous: no, though they be my own Disciples, ye are my Friends, ye my
companions and Apostles are my Friends, only on this condition, if ye do what
I command you.

And then is it not matter of Astonishment, to see men fancy they have a right
in all Christ's Actions and Sufferings, presume upon his favor and their own
happy condition, Christ's commands, appointed them to do no commands, and
Christianity were but a liberty from virtue. To pass by those that do nothing
but Evil, that which the Devil does suggest, or their flesh dictate, and to
consider the Demurer sort of Christians, that pretend a respect to Christ, and
to Religion, and see what they will do.

Why sometimes you may find them troubled at their vices and themselves; and
those troubles breath out in Sighs, warm wishes that they could do that which
Christ prescribes; to will is sometimes strongly present with them, but to
perform they know not how. Alas Christ does not tell you that you are his
Friends if you wish well to him, and his Commands, but he requires that you
shall do them. These are but vapors of a troubled Soul, which howsoever they
may chance rise warm, catch a strong sudden heat, breath up in flashing
thoughts. They are but meteors, little shooting flames that only do catch fire
and fall and dye; show fair, but they warm nothing: And so these thoughts do
never heat the heart into Devotions and holy resolutions, aversations; For you
may find such men, when wearied with the pursuit of their sins, hating their
customs, and the engagements to the practice of them; complaining thus, I know
it is ill, and it is against my heart, that I obey the motions of my passions or
Lusts: The incitations of my Appetite, the usance of the World, the obligations
of civility or mistaken honor do indeed prevail upon me, but it is with great
reluctance of mind that I yield to them, but I cannot avoid it. There are not
few that satisfy themselves with this condition. Now sure Christ does not say
Ye cannot be my Friends except you sin against me and against your Knowledge,
and your Conscience too. It Is strange that men should think the Heathen
instance of a Witch that cried. -- Video meliora, proboque, Deteriora sequor --


I know, and do approve of better things, but cannot choose but follow these
that are the worser; strange, that this Fury that had the Devil for Familiar,
should make Christ a friend; that this should be the state of Gospel Saints,
and of Gods favorites. It Is possible some therefore go yet further to good
purposes toward Obedience, and have holy Intentions, do his Commands be
necessary: for to purpose and intend to do them, is not certainly to do them.
Yet where are any that do aim at doing any more? and there is none of these but
does presume upon his interest in Christ, and satisfies himself and is secure.

Yet is it hard to find a ground of this their confidence, unless it rise from
the unhappy use they make of Gods preserving Mercies, and his kindness to them
in the concernments of this life. They see without their cares, and upon very
little homages, themselves some Prayers when their pleasures or occasions
permit, God has a care of them, and their desires flow into them, all does
succeed well with them. Now they take confidence hence to conclude, these are
the tokens of Gods friendship, and all his mercies will come in at the like
easy rates; that such a short* petition as committed them to the refreshments
of the night, and after which they wak't into renewed strengths and pleasures,
such another shall lay them long night, that afterward will break in happy
Resurrection: For why? God will not sure fail his own mercies, but be as
friendly to their Souls as he is to their Bodies.

And thus God's Preservations here, in mere defiance of arts of his long
suffering, his strivings of Compassion, merely to give us opportunities of
being reconciled to him, and to invite us to be so, while we make them
occasions of carelessness and security, they are so far from being pledges of
his Friendship, that they have all the aggravations of affronted goodness,
become temptations and degrees of Ruin. 'Twere fine indeed if Christ's eternal
preparations for his Friends, would come in to us, without care or doing any
thing, as an accession to our pleasures; if when we had lived many years as in
a Garden, our flowered with delight; we might expire into Paradise, and in soft
airs of Music breath into Hallelujah's. But alas! the smooth easy way leads
down the Hill, and the must strive and pant that will get up into the Mansions
and the Bosom of his Savior, and whosoever will be his Friend, must do what
he commands.

But is there nothing less indeed will qualify? The Scripture says, that
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness, and he was
called the Friend of God, James 2. 23. and then, is Christ more inaccessible,
and harder to be made a Friend?

Why, truly God and Christ both are so much Friends to all true Believers,
that the Life of Christ was given for them, for, God so loved the World that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. Nor are there any qualities more
signally peculiar to friendship, more engaging than confidence and trust,
dependence and relying, embosoming my self in him: Now these are but the
exercise of Faith; and it is most certain if we heartily endeavor to do what
he commands, there is employment then for all this work of Faith, Gods favor,
justification, and eternal Life: he does not once offer Remission of sins, but
to those that amend their lives; nay, does express as if he could not give it
otherwise, peradventure they will repent that I may forgive them, Jer. 36. 3.)
The promises therefore being conditionali, Faith must be answerable to the
Promises that it does an assurance that you shall be partaker of what is
promised, that is to say, partaker of the favor and the life of Christ, if ye
do his commands. But then if I perform not this condition, to not do; and to
assure my self Christ will transgress his everlasting Covenant for my Vices
sake, merely to give me leave to enjoy my sins; will do that which God may not
do, forgive one that will not repent: If I believe thus against promise, and
against Decree, am confident whether Christ will or no, and will rely upon him
in despite of him, if such to lay violent hands on his favor, and to invade
his friendship, and without metaphor, take Heaven by force.

But sure I am, that this is not the Faith made Abraham be called the friend of
God in that place of S. James, but a Faith that was perfected by doing, v. 22.
of that Chapter, a Faith that made him offer up his only Son upon the Altar,
v. 21. It Is true, he did in hope believe against all hope, Romans 4. 18. So that
his faith was stronger than a contradiction, all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed in the seed of Isaac; though Isaac had no seed, nor could have, if he
should be slain: And he resolved at Gods command himself to slay that Isaac, so
to make him have no seed. His Faith indeed did not dispute the great
impossibility; but his obedience caused it. He did not question, how can God
perform with me when I have offered Progeny should rise out of the Ashes on the
Altar; nor will those Flames that devour all my Seed at once, make my seed
numerous, lasting, and glorious as the Stars in Heaven, which he Genesis 15. 5.
promised me: But much less did he question, why should I obey in this? He that
does his commands, can but expect what he has promised; but if I should do
this Command and slay my Son, I make his Promise void, and destroy my own
expectations: And if I disobey I can but suffer what he bids me do; my own
obedience will execute all that his Indignation would Abraham had Genesis 22. 4.
three days time and journey to the Altar, that Nature might have leisure the
mean while to reason with the Precept thus, and his Affection might struggle
with his Duty; yet he goes on, resolves to tear out his own Bowels, and cut off
his hopes, only Son, and Sacrifice Gods Promises to his Commands.

And then, he that will trust to Abraham's example of believing, yet will not
follow him at all in doing, will obey no Commands; that is so far from offering
up an only Son, he will not slay an only evil Custom, nor part with one out
of the herd of all his vicious habits; will not give up the satisfaction to any
of his carnal, worldly, or ambitious appetites; not Sacrifice a passion or a
lust to all the Obligations that God and Christ can urge him with, he has, nor
faith, nor friendship, no, nor forehead. It Is true indeed, he that has
Abraham's faith may well assure himself he is Christ's Friend; but it is only on
this account, because he that believes as Abraham believed, he will not stick
to do whatever Christ commands; which is that universality of obedience, that
is the next condition that entitles to Christ's friendship, and my last part.

Ye are my Friends if ye do whatsoever I Command you.
There is no quality so necessary to a Friend, or so appropriate sincerity.
They that have but one Soul, they can have no reserves from one another: But
disobedience to one Precept, is inconsistent with sincerity, that has respect
unto all the Commandments; and he that will not do whatever Christ prescribes,
has reserves of affection for some darling sin, and is false to his Savior.
He is an Enemy indeed, so that there is no friendship on either side. S. Paul
says so of any of one kind; the minding of the flesh, says he, whether it be
providing for the Belly, or any other of the organs of Carnality, is desperate,
incurable Rebellion Romans 8. 7.
: Now such a Rebel, is, we know, the worst of James does say as much of any of
those vicious affections that are set on the world: Whosoever will be a Friend
of the World, is an Enemy of God, James 4. 4. And he calls them Adulteresses
and Adulterers, who think to join great strict Religion to some little by love
of an Honor, or a profit of this world? Such men are like a Wife, that not
contented with the partner of her Bed, takes in another now and then, she must
not count her self her Husbands Friend, though she give him the greatest share
in bosom Enemy: And so any one vice allowed is a paramour sin, is whoredom
against Christ, and our pretended friendship to him in all other obediences, is
but the kindness and the caresses of an Adulteress, the mere hypocrisy and
treachery of love. If it be necessary friendship, that thou do his commands,
it is necessary that thou do them all, that thou divorce thy self from thy
beloved sin, as well as any other: Because his Friendship does no more require
other obedience than it does that, but is as inconsistent with thy own peculiar
vice as with the rest. Indeed it is impossible that it should bear with any,
they being all his murderers. If thou can find one sin that had no hand in
putting Christ to Death, one vice that did not come into the garden, nor upon
Mount Calvary, that did not help to assassin thy Savior, even take thy fill
that: But if each had a stab at him, if no one of thy vices could have been
forgiven, had not thy Jesus dyed for it, can thou expect he should have
kindness for his Agony, or friendship for the man that entertains his
Crucifiers in his heart? If worldly cares which he calls Mat. 13. 22.
Thorns, fill thy head with Contrivances of Wealth and Greatness, of filling
Coffers, and of platting Coronets for thee, as the thorns did make him a Mat.
27. 29.
Crown too, would thou have him receive thee and these in his bosom, to gore
his Heart as they did pierce his Head? If thou delight in that intemperance,
which Cup, which Vomited Gall into it, can he delight in thee? That Mat. 26.
38. 39.
Cup which made him fall upon his face to deprecate, will he partake in as the
pledge of mutual love? He that sunk under, could not bear this load of thine,
when it was in his Cross upon his shoulders, will he bear it and thee in his
arms, when thou fallest under it? When thou will cast a shameful spewing on
his glory too, if he own such a Friend? Thou that art so familiar with his
Name, as thou were more his Friend than any in the world, whose Oaths and
imprecations, Moses says, Levit. 24. 16. (...)
strike through that Name, which they so often call upon, thou may as well
fellowship with Belial: For him to dwell in any heart that cherishes a vice,
were to descend to Hell again. But as far as those Regions of Darkness are from
his Habitation of Glory, and the Black Spirits of that place from being any of
his Guard of holy Myriads; so far is he from dwelling with, or being friend to
him, that is a friend to any wickedness, to him that will not do whatever he
commands.

And now if these conditions seem hard, if any do not care to be his Friend
upon these terms, they may betake themselves to others. Let such make
themselves friends Mammon of unrighteousness: A Friend indeed that has not so
much of the insincerities as many great ones have: For this will furnish them
with all that heart or lust can wish for, all that necessity or wantonness
proposes to it self to dress out pomp or vice: But yet when with enjoyment the
affections grow, and become so unquiet, work them so, as not to let their
thoughts or actions rest, make them quicken themselves, and like the motions of
all things that go downwards tending to the Earth, increase by the continuance,
grow stronger, and more violent toward the end, nothing but the guilt of all:
When their great Wealth shall shrink into a single sheet, no more of it be
left, but a thin shroud, and all their vast Inheritances but six foot of earth,
be gone, yet the iniquity of all will stick close to them; and this false
Friend, that does it Self forsake them, will neither go Psalm. 49. 17.
along, nor will let its pomp follow them, raises a cry on them as high as Gods
Tribunal; the cry of all the Blood, all the oppressed rights that bribery till
then Poor that greatness, covetousness, or extortion had groun'd and crush't;
the yellings of those Souls that were starved for want of the Bread of life,
which yet they paid for, and the price of it made those heaps which will that
day appear against their Friends and Masters, and prove their Adversaries to
eternal Death.

Let others joy in Friends that Wine does get them; such as have no
qualification to endear them, but this, that they will not refuse to sin and to
be sick with their Companions: friendship as of liquor, and probably they do
unload themselves of both at once, part with their dearness and their drink
together and alike. I know not whether it be heats of mutual kindness that
inflame these draughts, and the desires of them, so as if they did drink
thirst; but sure I am, that these hot draughts begin the Lake of fire.

Let others please themselves in an affection that Carnality cements. These are
warm friendships I confess, but Solomon will tell us whence they have their
heat. Her house, says he, does open into Prove. 7. 27.
Hell, and Brimstone kindles those libidinous strait bands, fetters in those
affections indeed; for the same Wiseman says, The Closets of that sinner are
the Chambers of Death: That Prove. 2. 19.
none that go unto her return again, or take hold of the paths of life;
irreversible dead hold, she is not only as insatiate, but as inexorable as the
Grave, and the Eternal Chains of Fate are in those her embraces. But God keep
us from making such strict Covenants with Death; from being at friendship with
Hell; or in a word, that I say all at once, with any that are good Companions
only in sinning. Such men having no virtue in themselves, must needs hate it
in others, as being a reproach to them, and therefore they are still besieging
it, using all arts and stratagems to undermine it: and having nothing else to
recommend managery of vice, no way to Merit but by serving iniquity, they not
only comply with our own evil Inclinations, that so they may be grateful, and
insinuate into us, but they provoke too and inflame those tendencies that they
may be more useful to us, having no other means to work their ends. And then
such friends by the same reason, must be false and treacherous, and all that we
declaime at, and abhor in Enemies, when that shall be the way to serve their
ends; because they have no virtue to engage them to be otherwise: And to be
such, is Pests of all Societies, they speak and live infection, and friendship
with them is to couple with the Plague. These do complete and perfect what the
Devil but began in Eden: Nurse up Original sin, chafe inclination into appetite
and habit, suggest and raise desires, and then feed them into Constitution and
Nature: In a word, are a brood of those Serpents, one of which was enough to
destroy Paradise and Innocence. It Is true, a man would think these were our
Friends indeed, that venture to Gehenna for us: familiar devils, work under
Satan to bring us to Torments, and differ nothing from him, but that they draw
us into them, and he inflicts them. And when sinful contents come home in
Ruin, and pleasures die into Damnation; then men will understand these
treacherous loves, and find such Friends are but projectours for the Devil;
then they will hate them as they do their own Damnation, discerning these are
but the kindnesses of Hell. Nay it is possible, I may slander that place in
speaking so ill of it. Dives will let us see there are affections of a kinder
and Luke 16. from the twenty seventh verse; you find he did make truce with
Torments, that he might contrive and beg only a message of Repentance for his
Brethren; he did not mind at all his own dire Agonies, he minded so the
reformation of his Friends. Good God! pieties of the Damned, together with the
practices of those who have given their names in to Religion, when I see Fiends
in Hell do study how to make Men virtuous, and Christians upon Earth with all
their art debauch them into vice and ruin; I cannot choose but pray, Grant me
such Friends as are in Hell. Rather grant us all the Friendship in the Text.
But then, we must have none with any vice. Friendship with that, engages into
enmity with God and Christ I showed you. And to pass over all those after
retributions of Vengeance Christ has studied Adversary, must be our Judge: For
were there none of this, and should we look no further than this life; yet sure
we of this Nation know, what it is to have God our Enemy; who for so many years
lay under such inflictions, as had much of the character of his last
executions; they had the Blasphemies and the Confusion, the dire Guilts, and
the black Calamities, and almost the Despair and Irrecoverableness of those in
Hell. And though He be at Peace with us at present, at least there is a Truce;
yet I beseech equal those that twenty years ago engaged him into Arms against
us, and made him dash us so in pieces: Whether those Actions of the Clergy be
reformed, that made the People to abhor their Function and their Service, the
Offerings and Ministers of the Lord, and made God himself spew them out. 'Twere
endless to go on to the prophanness, to the loose impieties and the bold
Atheismes of the Laity, especially of the better sort; in short, what one
degree, or state or Sex is better? Sure I am, if we are not better, we

It Is true, when we lay gasping under his severe revenges, we then pretended to
be humbled, begged to be reconciled and be at peace with him, and vowed to his
conditions, promising obedience, and aliened our selves from our old sins, his
Foes. But then, when Christ came to confirm this amity, came dressed with all his
courtships brought all the invitations Prince and our Religion, our Church and
State, Righteousness and Peace, and the Beauty of Holiness, every thing that
might make us be an Happy and a Pious Nation, thus he did tempt and labor to
engage Worldlyness, Ambitions and Lusts, to be our opportunities of vice and
provocation of him. And being thus affronted and refused, his Enemy preferred,
not this God, but Barrabbas, any 1 Cor. 10. 22.
Are we stronger than God? It should behove us not to fall out with him till we
are. See how he does prepare himself for the encounter, Wisd. 5. Taking his
Jealousy for Armor, putting on Justice, severe and v. 17. 19. 20.
vindicative Justice, as a Breastplate; and, his Wrath sharpening as a Sword;
and, arming all the Creatures for Auxiliaries. Alas! when Omnipotence does
express it self as scarcely strong enough for Execution, but Almightyness will
be armed Weapons, call in Aids for fury, who shall stand it? Will our Friends,
think you, keep it off us, and secure us? did we consider how uneasy God
accounts himself, till he begin the Storm, while he keeps off his Plagues from
overrunning such a Land, we would expect them every moment, and they must come.
Isai. 1. 20.
Ah, says he, I will ease me of mine Adversaries, and avenge me of mine
Enemies; and then in what condition are we if God can have no ease but in our
rnine, if he does hunger and thirst after it, go to his Vengeance as to a
Feast? And if you read the 25. Isaiah, you will find there a rich Bill of Fare,
which his Revenge upon his Enemies does make; view the sixth verse. He that
enjoyes his morsels, that lays out his Contrivances, and studies on his Dishes
so as if he meant to cramm his Soul, let him know what delight soever he finds,
when he has spoiled the Elements of their inhabitants, to furnish his own
Belly, and not content with Natures Delicacies neither, has given them forced
Fatnesses, changing the very flesh into a marrow, suppling the Bones almost
into that Oil that they were made to keep; all this delight the Lord by his
expressions does seem to take in his dread executions a sinful People.

And if the vicious Friendships of the World have so much more attractive than
Christ's love and favor, and the happy consequences of it, as to counterpoise
all the danger of such enmity, you may join hands with them: But if His be the
Blood, so he does in Petitions too. For says S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
We are Ambassadors for Christ, as if God did beseech you by us, we pray you
in Christ's stead, Be you reconciled, and then be Generous toward your GOD and
Savior; and having brought him as it were upon his knees, reduced him to
entreaties, be friends, and condescend to him and your own Happiness. If He be
for you, take no care then, who can be against you. His Friendship when a man's
ways please the Lord he will make even his Enemies to be at peace with him.
Prove. 16. 7. He will reconcile all but Vices. And afterward see what a blessed
throng of Friends, we shall be all initiated into, Heb. 12. 23. To an
innumerable company of Angels, to the general Assembly, and Church of the
Firstborn that are written in Heaven, to God the Judge of all, and to the
Spirits of Just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant, etc. And of this blessed Corona, we our selves shall be a noble and a
glorious part, inflamed all with that mutual love, that kindles Seraphims, and
that streams out into an heavenly glory, filling that Region of immortal love
and blessedness; and being Friends, that is, made one with Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, that Trinity of Love, we shall enjoy, what we do now desire to
ascribe to them, All Honor, Glory, Power, Majesty, and Dominion, for evermore.

Amen.
SERMON V. WHITE HALL. Third Wednesday in LEN.
EZECH. XXXIII. 11. Why will ye Dye?
THe Words are part of a Debate which God had with the sinful House of Israel,
three things offer themselves to be considered.

First, The Sinners Fate and choice: He will Dye; That Is his End, yea, it is his
Resolution, he will dye.

Secondly; Gods inquiry for the Ground of this, he seems astonished at the
Resolution, and therefore reasons with them about this their so mad choice, and
questions Why will ye dye? Which words are also,

Thirdly, The debate of his Affections, the reasoning of his Bowels, and a most
passionate Expostulation with them on account of that their Resolution, Why
will ye dye? Which as it is adrest by God directly to the House of Israel, so
it would fit a Nation perverse, as that; which Mutinies giddyness and srenzy,
unsteddy in all things but resolutions of Ruin, that would tear open their
old Wounds, to let out Life, and they will dye. And though the Lord be pleased
to work new prodigies of mercy for us, and to say unto us in despite of all our
Enemies both Foreign and Domestic, Live: The use we make of all is only to
debauch the Miracles, and make Gods Mercies help to fill the measure of our
Judgment; live as if we would try all the ways to Ruin; and since thus
deliver us from dangers, we would call for them some other way. But to
prescribe to these is above the attempt of my endeavors: May the blessed
Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Holiness and Peace, and
Order, breath on their Counsels whom this is committed to. I shall bend my
Discourse to the Conviction of Sinners in particular, and treat upon the words
as if they had been spoke to us under the Gospel.

The first thing which my Text and God supposes, is the Sinners Fate and
Choice: He will dye. Even the second Death, for it is appointed for all men
once to dye, and then comes the Judgment which shall sentence him to another
death that is immortal, in which he and his misery must live for ever; that is,
he must dye Everlastingly: Such is first his fate.

That Sin and Death are of so near, so complicated a relation, as that though
they were Twins, the birth and Issue of one Womb and moment, yet they are also
one another Offspring, and beget each other, while James 1. 15.
Sin brings forth Death, as S. James says, and is the Parent of Perdition,
and 2 Thessalonians. 11. 3.
Man of Sin is the Son of Perdition, as S. Paul says, and Iniquity is but
destruction's birth, only it self derived. And that this Death and Perdition
is Eternal in the most sad sense of the word there are a thousand Texts that
say. This is the Message of God in the mouth and Blood of his Son, who uses
all the artifice of Words affirmative, and negative, to tell us so, as if on
purpose to preclude all doubt and subtersuge, calls it Mat. 25. 41. 46.
Eternal fire, and Mark. 9. 43, 44.
Eternal punishment, Rev. 14. 10, 11.
where their worm dies not, their fire is not quenched, Torment for ever and
ever, and the like. Your

But then this being granted that such is the sinners fate to Choice, and that
he does resolve for Death, is to suppose them worse than Infidels, more than
irrational and brutish; Beasts cannot so desire against the possibilities of
appetite, break all the forces and instincts of Nature, as to will destruction,
and choose misery. Yet that the sinner does so is the ground of Gods
Expostulation here, Why will you dye? David inquires as if it were a prodigy to
find, Psa. 34. 12.
What man is he that lusts to Live? And sure the vicious man does not, for
Wisdom that is Virtue, says, He that sins against me wounds his own
Soul, and all they that hate me love death, Prove. 8. 36. And it is most evident,
that they who eagerly, and out of vehement affection pursue and seize those
things to which they know destruction is annexed inseparably, they love and
choose destruction, though not for it self, yet for the sake of that to which
it clings. He that is certain such a Potion, howsoever sweetened and made
palatable, is compounded with the juice of deadly Nightshade, if
notwithstanding he will have the Poisonous draught, it is apparent he resolves
to dye.

And that I may evince this is a settled obstinate incorrigible

And First, When such persons have entered the Profession of Christianity in
Baptism, and by early engagements tied themselves to the observation of its
duties, if principles of probity in Nature, fomented by others, instil'd with
Education, then troublesome modesties of Nature and of Virtuous breeding; thus
they look out ill Company to infect themselves: And surely they that seek the
Plague and run into infection, we have cause to fear they have a Resolution to
dye. But,

Secondly, If notwithstanding this in the first practices of Vice, their former
Principles stir, and ferment within, and fret the Conscience, set that on
working; why then if the sin sting gently, do but prick the heart, and make an
outlet for a little gush of Sorrow, then in spite of Scripture, they do teach
themselves to think that grief Repentance, and by the help of that conceit this
sorrow cools, and does allay the swelling of the mind, washes away the guilt
and thought of the commission, they have been sad, and they believe, repented;
as if those stings opened the fountain for transgression, cure by hurting thus,
proves indeed the Tempter to go on. For if this be all, why should a man
renounce all the Contents and satisfactions of his Inclinations, and mortify
and break his nature to avoid a thing which is so easily repented for? No, if
it be no worse they can receive this Serpent in their bosom, dare meet his
sting, and run upon these wounds, and they do so till the frequent pungencies,
and cicatrices have made the Conscience callous

But if their first essays of sin were made unfortunate by Notoreitie, or some
unhappy circumstance, and so the wound were deep, and the Conscience
troublesome and restless, because this is very uneasy, these inward groans
make discord in their cheerful aires, make their life harsh, they therefore
find it necessary to confront the shame with Courage of iniquity, go boldly on
that so they may outlook it, sear their own Conscience that its wounds may not
bleed. And as those Fiends of Men who Sacrificed their Children in the fire to
Moloch, Tophet about themselves, and with the noise of Ryots overcome all
other, because they will not hearken to those groans that call for the
Physician of Souls, and then sure these resolve to dye.

Nay if this will not keep them quiet, you may see them Condemn themselves in
that which they allow. And though a man would think there should be little
satisfaction in those pleasures which Condemnation thrusts it self Hero of
Iniquity, can charge the wounds and take the Vice.

Yea Thirdly, though the Lord himself appear, and take part in the Quarrel,
join with our Principles and Conscience against the fin, and with importunate
calls alarm us, give us no rest, ordain a Function of men by whom he does
beseech us, dresses their Messages with Promises of that which God is blessed
in, and arms them too with Terrors such as Devils Holy Spirit too, that Power
of the Highest, sends him in Tongues of Fire, that he also may Preach this to
our very Hearts, and fright us with more flame: And yet the sinner breaks these
strengths, and vanquishes the Arts and strivings of Divine Compassion. If these
Ambassadors speak Charms, it is but what God tells our Prophet in this Chapter
v. 32. And lo thou art unto them as a very lovely Song of one that has a
pleasant voice, and can play well on an Instrument. And it does dye like that,
as it there follows, They hear thy words but they do them not. And if they
flash in Hell against their vices, in torrents of threatening Scripture, they
concern themselves no more than they would in the story of a new Eruption of
Mount AEtna or Vesuvius. Yea they do quench the Spirit and his fires, do not
like the deaf Adder, stop their ears against his whisperings, and the charms of
Heaven (that were a weaker and less valiant guilt) but are Religious in hearing
them, curious that they may be spoke with all advantages to make it harder not
to yield and live, that so they may express more resolution to perish, and
with more courage and solemnity

Nay more, when God has found an Art to draw themselves into a League and
Combination against their vices, bound them in Sacraments to Virtue; made them
enter a Covenant of Piety, and seal it in the Blood of God, and by that
foederall Rite with hands lift up, and seizing on Christ's Body, and with holy
Vows oblige themselves to the performances, or to the Threats of Gospel, which
they see executed in that Sacrament before their eyes, see there death is the
wages of iniquity, they show themselves its damned consequences, while they
behold it tear Christ's Body, spill his Blood, and Crucify the Son of God; yet
neither will this frightful spectacle, nor their own ties hold them from sin
and ruin, they break these bonds asunder to get at them.

The Wisd. 1. 16.
Wiseman says that wicked men seek death and make a Covenant with it, and so
it seems: But sure they are strange wilful men, that seek it at Gods Table in
the Bread of Life, that will wade through an Ocean of mercy to get at
Perdition, and find it in the Blood of Christ, will drink Damnation in the Cup
of Blessing; men that poison Salvation to themselves: They that contract thus
for Destruction, and tie it to them at the Altar, with such sacred Rites and
Articles, are sure resolved and love to dye.

Fourthly, God had provided other Guards to secure men from sin and Death, the
Censures of the Church; of which this Time was the great Season, and the
discipline of abstinence we now use is a piteous relic, all that the world
will bear it seems: But as the Lord appointed them they were so close a sense,
that our Savior calls them Matt. 16. 19.
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, as if they locked us in the Path of Piety and
Life; and we must pick or break all that the Key of Heavin can make fast, burst
Locks as well as Vows before we can get out, have liberty to sin. God having
bounded in the Christians race as that among the Grecians was, which had a
River on one side, and Swords points all along the other, Cyprian and S.
Hierome call the Censures.) But yet a Mound too weak alas! to stand the
Resolution and assaults of Vices now adays; which do not only make great
breaches in the Fence, but have quite thrown it down, and slighted it; and the
Church dares not set it up again, should she attempt it they would scoff it
down. Men will endure no bar in the way to Perdition; they will have liberty of
Ruin; will not be guarded Censures they will suffer no Reproof, nor
Admonition, not suffer one word betwixt them and death eternal.

But Fifthly, Though we will not let Almighty God restrain us with his Censures,
yet he will do it with his Rod, and set the sharp stakes of Affliction in our
walk, to keep us in; thus he makes sins sometimes inflict themselves, and then
we straight resolve to break off from them; and while we suffer shame, and feel
destruction in the vice we shrink and uncling: And now the sinner would not
dye, especially if his Precipitance have thrown him to the consines of the
grave; on the brink of the Abyss, he takes a prospect of the new life if God
will grant him any: But alas! have we never seen when God has done this for
him, stretched out his Arm of Power, haled him from the brow of the Pit, and
set

And now this Will is grown too strong for the Almighty's powerful methods, and
frustrates the whole Counsel of God for his Salvation, neglects his Calls and
Importunacies whereby he warns him to consult his safety, to make use of Grace
in time, not to harden his heart against his own mercies, and perish in
despite of mercy. And when he can reject Gods Graces and his Judgments thus,
defy his Conscience

Sixthly, His own present Interests; All which the sinner can break through and
despise, to get at Death. It is so usual to see any of the gross wasting Vices
when it is once espoused, murder the Reputation, and all those great concerns
that do depend upon a man's Esteem, eat out his Wealth and Understanding, make
him pursue pernicious ways and Counsels, besot him, and enslave him, fill his

The man who for another inadvertency, possibly such as their own rules of
Honor will not judge affront, yea sometimes without any shadow of a
provocation, merely one another to account, and to their last account indeed at
Gods dread Judgment feat; whither when he has sacrificed two Families, it may
be all their hopes and comforts Go ye Cursed into everlasting Fire: It Is plain
against all Interests of this World and the World to come, this man will dye.
And yet this is one of the laudable and generous Customs of the Age. Neither
does this man stand alone, the desperate Rebel would come into the Induction,
that without any hopes sets all on fire,

But I have said enough to prove the Resoluteness of a Sinners Will, which is
so great indeed that it is this especially which does enhance the guilt of sin
into the merit of an endless punishment, this persevering obstinacy does
deserve Hell and make it just.

For whatsoever inequality there is betwixt the short lived pleasures of a sin,
which dye while they are tasted, and put out themselves, and those eternal
never dying retributions the life of Man, and several of those petty felonies
that forfeit it) yet the Law does not murder when it Executes. (I might have
instanc't in the Number. 15. 32. 35.
gathering sticks upon the Sabbath day in Israel.) For since the preservation
of public safety and propriety is valuable with the lives of many men, and to
secure that and affright the Violation, it was necessary to affix such
punishments to such offenses; they that know the penalty, and wilfully, merely
to feed their other vices, run upon it, justly suffer it: So that Man Paradise,
so to set Fiends and Flames to guard Hell from him, and to entail those
Torments on Man's sin, which he had prepared for the Devil, and sealed the Deed
in the Blood of his Son. If notwithstanding men renounce the blessedness, and
against all their Interests and Obligations, in spite of all the arts and
Powers of Heaven, they will have the Torments; and, (what they never would
attempt for Paradise) gratify those that are obstinate for ruin, and against
his This Will does, as it were, even the Scales betwixt the Sin and the
Damnation, equal the pleasure to the punishment, and fill the distance from a
moment to Eternity.

But though this Will do clear Gods, Justice, yet it does not satisfy his
Reason, he seems astonished at the choice; God himself cannot find a Ground for
such a Resolution; and therefore does enquire, Why will ye dye? Which is God's
question, and my second part.

Is it the present pleasure sin does tempt your sensuality when the Woman saw
the Tree was good for food, and pleasant to the eye, and a Tree to be desired
to make one wise, she took thereof and she did eat, although she knew that God
had said, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye, Genesis 3.
But there was generous pleasure Te shall be as Gods. Genesis 3. 5. And sure it is
no great wonder if the proper pleasures of the mind engage it, therefore when
God would give a Precept liable to a Temptation of being broke, he laid it in
the sphere of those things that delight the Soul, of Knowledge; but far be it
that those of sensuality should ever have prevailed; Man may yield to the
pleasure of being like God, but for pleasure to make himself a Beast is
contradiction to Nature. For pleasure is but satisfaction of our appetites, and
the more natural the inclination

Now then that Soul being man's peculiar nature, the highest part of him, It
follows its delights, Spiritual reasonable Joys must needs be the most natural
and most proper for it, most conformed to it, and therefore the most taking
with it. This may be cleared most irrefragably.

A Beast has several ingredients of Nature in his making, he is an heavy body,
and a Vegetable, and he has also sense which is his highest nature. Now though
the only inclination of heavy bodies be to fall down to the Earth, and this be
also natural to a Beast, we do not find that it is his greatest pleasure, sure
he had rather feed than tumble in the Pasture; his chief delight lies in the
satisfaction of his chiefest faculties wherein he does excel, his Senses; and
as Beasts differ and transcend in these, so do their pleasures also differ
Aristotle says, does live a threefold Life: At first he is but a Plant-man, a
growing span of living Creature, and he is born only into Animality, a Life of
Sense, and at last Educated into reasonable. Now the delights of his first
Stages, whilst only Vegetation and Sense live, although proportioned to those
states, yet have no savor to the mind; he grows through Nuts and Rattles to
the use of Reason, and the pleasures of it also; these must keep even with the
growing faculties and become higher, rational, and manly: Which if they do not,
but the man still dwell upon the satisfactions of sense, he does confound

Come therefore, show me now the sins which the delights of Reason do betray
you to, and I Will admit the plea: But if you live your own reverse that you may
dye; renounce all your own pleasures first, that so you may renounce the joys
of God and Heaven; and fall from Nature that you may toll man on to death,
which till the man be dead, and the brute only live within him cannot be his
pleasures; and it is plain they are not pleasures to a Sober man that lives the
life of Reason, not to say of Grace: Nor are they such to any man till he have
trained and exercised himself into an habit of enduring them, and by a
discipline of Torment made himself experienced for Vice and for Damnation. Nor
is there ever any pleasure in some vices, what is there in the will destruction
so as that they call to God to pour it on them, and tear it down from Heaven,
so that Pain and Disease seem to sauce those delights, and Death to be the
tempter to the pleasure;

But I will grant, that the Spirit and Flesh of Man by their so strait alliance
and perpetual converse, may grow to have the same likes and dislikes, have but
one appetite, and this alas! be that of flesh, to whose only satisfactions the
man uses himself, by long Custom of which, the Soul does so imbibe the
Inclinations of the Body, that nothing of another kind

Once more; Do not men choose a present Agony to keep off an after evil, they
tear their bowels with a Vomit to prevent and all they can effect is only
this, that they are longer virtue, and the death prescribed against Eternal.

Now why do you choose thus only in Sin and Hell? It Is clear the very pleasure
you change Heaven for, cannot invite you from this Life, and then you that will
suffer any thing rather than you will dye, Why against all resistance will you
dye for ever?

Is it Secondly, because you know not what it is to dye the second Death? at
least your notions of it are so slight and

Indeed the Sinner would have reason if it meant no more than has been taught
of late by one that has gained many Proselytes among the Virtuosi of Religion;
After the Resurrection the Reprobates shall be, says he, in the state that
Adam and his Posterity were in after his Sin (i. e.) the state we are now in,
Live as we do, Marry and give in Marriage, and cease to be when they have got
some heirs to succeed them in Tophet. Poor unhappy Souls these! that never had
any sin to merit being there, nor any Sentence to condemn them thither but this
man's: Who must put them there succssively one after other, to find employment
for Everlasting-fire. A Doctrine such as had an Angel Preached from Heaven by S.
Paul's award he must have been Anathema; when the Devil made Religions, and
Theology came from the bottomless Pit, he never found out such an Engine to
conveigh men into it as this pleasant notion of the punishment of sin therein;
Leviathan were made to take his pastime in that Lake also, by such
interpretations, which surely were contrived to make out the Assertion of that
Tho. de Alb.
Romish Priest, who says, that those in Hell love to be there; nay more, that
'twas impossible for God to do a kinder thing for them than to put them there.
Doctrines to be abhorred as Hell it self; and yet upon these grounds he builds
their Church by demonstration, so strong as that the Gates of Hell cannot
prevail against it; and in truth they have no reason to assault it on these
terms. But to pass by such dolages and frenzies, you will slight impressions
of the second Death, if you but take that prospect of it which the close of
this time gives; look forward through this season, which is designed for you to
prepare the way of the Lord to his passion in; and you shall see the

If you behold him coming to Jerusalem with Hosannas and Palms about him, as
if Death were his Triumph, his Passion so desirable, that he rode to meet it,
which he never did at any other time; and then complaining he was Luc. 12. 50.
straightened until it were accomplished; as he had throws of Longing after it,
and Mat. 26. 30
singing when he went out to it, you would believe the sinner never chose his
death, sweetened by his most pleasant sin, with a more cheerful eagerness: But
then open the Garden and you see his apprehensions of it Mat. 26. 39.
throw him on his Face to pray against it. See how he sweats and begs, his very
Prayer is a Passion, the zeal of it is agony! and can thou choose that he so
dreads and deprecates? and when he durst not meet the apprehensions, will thou
stand the storm? see what a sting death has, when it makes outlets for such
clots and globes of blood, and stings the Soul so too, that it pours out it
self in Sweat. And then he sinks again under the deprecation of it, and prays
that that Cup may pass from him. Blessed Savior! when thou had just now
made thy Death thy Legacy, thy Sacrament, do thou entreat to escape this this
Cup pass from thee, what will the Cup of Blessing profit us? thou had but
now bequeathed a Cup to us which was the New Testament in thy Blood, and now
will thou not shed that Blood? But do thou refuse thy Cup? Oh 'twas a Cup of
deadly Wine, red with Gods Indignation, poisoned with Sin! And can the sinner
thirst for the Abyss of this, the Lake that has no bottom? and when he goes
again, and prays the same words the third time, be yet not only so supine as
not ask to escape it, seldom and very slight in any prayer or wish against it,
but also so resolved to have it, as to gape that he may swill it down to
everlastingness? Follow him from Heb. 1. 3.
upholdeth all things by the word of his power. It Is said the time will come
when the sinner will cry out to the Luc. 23. 30.
Hills to fall on him, any weight but that of iniquity, the burden of that is
intolerable, it is easier for him to bear a mountain than a vice, and yet
Christ says Mat. 7. 3.
he has a beam in his Eye, and can he shrink at any weight whose part, that is
most sensible, tender to an expression, can bear that which shoulders must fall
under, only Pillars can sustain? Oh yes; that which did sink Mountains rather
and the Rocks to cover; but in vain, they will not cover, for thy very Groans
will rent them: Christ's were so sad that his did, they tore the Rocks, and that
which is much more inflexible, Monuments: Death started at them, and the bonds
of the Grave loosened, and the Dust was frighted into Resurrection; and more,
the Hypostatick Union seemed rent by them, the God to have forsaken his own
person. And can the sinner hope to stand this shock? will the courage of his
Iniquity make his heart harder than those Rocks, more insensible than the
Grave, and better able to endure than he that was a God? and will you dye into
this state eternally? which it was necessary for him to have the assistance of
Divinity in his person, that he might be able to endure one

The sum is this, a person so desiring death and yet so dreading it, and
sinking under the essays of it, and this person the Son of God, and that dread
merely because there was sin in the Death, (for if this were not in the cause,
no Martyr but had born death with more courage but that Son of God) all this as
it does leave no Reason for the sinners choice of death Eternal, so neither
does it leave a possibility of bearing it: And if so, give me leave in God's
Name to Expostulate, Why will ye dye?

After this killing prospect, while the damp of it is on you, let my Bowels
debate with you, which yearn more over you than they did over my Beloved Son in
whom I was well pleased; when I have sent my only Son, God, one with my own
Self, to be made Man, that he might suffer what was necessary to be suffered to
preserve you from eternal sufferings; when I have laid on Prove. 8. 30.
him that was brought up with me from everlasting, and that was daily my
Delight, all your Iniquities and my own Indignation, that so you might be freed
from felicities of my bosom to embrace Agonies, and died for prefer Misery is
Wretchless beyond aggravation. Oh why will you rather dye? Those very things
that tempt your Wills were they abstracted from the death they do inveigle you
into, were they sincere and innocent, if they were set against that Life, that
blessed life, immortal Life, would vanish quite in the comparison Oh will ye
without and against all Temptation, Will ye dye?

O thou my Soul! take other Resolutions, thou feast the things that men with so
much care and sin provide to make their lives delightful here, although
success answer their care, are vain and helpless things, and life it self as
vain, and I must dye, and drop from them; and therefore be thou sure to take a
care their treacherous comforts do not make

The Artificial pleasures of the Palate whether in meats or drinks, forced
tast's, that do at once satisfy and provoke Supper of the Lamb, to drink new
Wine with Christ in my Father's Kingdom; The fatted Calf is dressing for my
Entertainment, and shall I choose to be a while a Glutton with the Swine,
rather than the eternal Guest of my Father's Table and Bosom? and refuse these
for a few sick Excesses which would end in qualms, and gall, and vomits, if
there were no guilt to rejolt too, and which will kindle a perpetual Fever?
The Honors and the Glories of this Life will loose their must say to
Corruption, thou art my Father, and to the Worm thou art my Mother and my
Sister: And if there were pride or ambition in them, their Worm will never dye,
that Pride will make me fall as low as Lucifer, that Glory will go out into
utter darkness, and that Ambition change my Honor into everlasting Shame,
Envy, and Torment: But sure I am that there are Glorious Robes, and Thrones,
and Scepters in God's promises; and let thy gayety, my Soul! be in the Robe of
Immortality, the Throne of thy Ambition that of Glory.

When I shall lie tortured or languishing in my last Bed, Palaces and
Possessions will no more relieve me, than the Landscape of them in the Hangings
can do it. And if there were Covetousness, Bribery, Sacrilege, or Injustice in
them, I shall be carried out of these, and have no other Habitation assigned
me, but with the Devil and his Angels, shall inherit and possess nothing but
the Almighty's Indignation for ever.

But in my Father's House are many Mansions, Places prepared for me, and an
Inheritance as wide as Heaven, as Endless and Incorruptible as Eternity, and
God Himself: And sure if I may choose, there I will live where there is neither
Will nor possibility to dye; where there is Life, fullness of Joy, Pleasures for
Evermore. To which, etc.

SERMON VI. WHITE HALL.
PSALM LXXIII. 25. v. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon
Earth that I desire besides thee:
MY Text is the result of the Pious man's

First, the different tenure, or condition of Estates in the two different
Countries we relate to, this here is a Land only of desires, the other is a
place of enjoyments, Have in Heaven, Desire on Earth. Yea

Secondly, Though our estate here in this Earth be present, and that other seem
removed far off, yet the possessions of that are present and in hand, but the
most native satisfactions of the Earth are still at distance, only the object
of our aims and expectations I have, now I have in Heaven, on the Earth I but
desire.

Thirdly, Here is the matter of both these desires and enjoyments to the Pious
man; No Person or no thing (for so it bears also) but God: There is nothing
upon Earth that I desire besides thee. And as to Heaven the negation is expressed
emphatically by a Question, Whom have I in Heaven but thee?

Yet least this Question should look like an Expostulation, and he that asks it
seem unsatisfied with his portion, we will therefore,

Lastly, see the Importance of it to the Christian, since our Savior is gone
up into Heaven, see whom the Christian has there: And if the Psalmist could
find none but God, and David (if he were the Author) could not see the Son of
David there, yet since Christ is set at the Right hand of God, the Christians
present Interest in Heaven is such, that looking with contempt on all that
worldly men applaud themselves in the enjoyment of, rejecting all but thee O
Christ, he justly triumphs in resolving of this question to himself, and being
satisfied in having thee, he does renounce even the desiring any thing but
thee.

Of these in their order beginning here on Earth, where our tenure even of
earthly things is but desire, this World does give no satisfactions in hand,
but still they are only the objects of our Expectations and wishes.

When God has given Man an erect Countenance, Eyes that do naturally look
toward him, and the very frame of him is such, that Heaven is his constant
object; it were no wonder if his looks and thoughts were always there, since
both the duty and necessity of that does seem impressed upon him in his making,
and to desire things above, is, as it were, the Law in his members.

But when he swims in delicacies here upon the Earth, is immerst in the
plenties of all kinds, that these should give him nothing but desires of
themselves, that the delights should not be present to him, but he should still
pursue and need that which he is encompast with, that while with open mouth and
in a most intemperate current he swills down the pleasures, yet his open mouth
should gape only with thirst, and he be sensible of nothing but the want of
these, is strange John would enumerate all that is in the World the particular
that he gives in is thus, 1 John 2. 16. All that is in the world, the lust of
the Flesh, the lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life. He does not say, the
objects of these Lusts

To begin with that of the Eyes, Covetousness, or the love of Money: It Is
evident that where an object is not useful to the faculty, it cannot satisfy,
for satisfaction is fulfilling of our needs and uses, but money is not useful
to the sight, nor indeed does it prove useful to, or serve any of the Covetous
man's occasions or faculties; rather the contrary in every kind, he does bereave
himself of good because he has it:

Nor is it fear of future want that makes him eager to

And since as there is no natural cause, so there is also no natural measure
for this Appetite of his; for Natures measure is our real uses of the object.
But this man heaps up useful things that he does never mean to use: Since
therefore it has neither bound nor cause in Nature, it is monstrous, and must
needs be an unlimited lust, incapable of satisfaction: And all this man's
Wealth does purchase nothing for him but desires, and is not the content but
the Lust of his Eye.

And the same reasoning will conclude the next, the Pride of life, which is the
Lust of a Sense as wholly unconcerned in all the Pomps and garnishes of Pride,
as the Eye is in Wealth: it is a Lust of the Ear, all is but the man's passion
to hear himself, his trappings, or condition commended. The Learned man that is
proud, does think of no return for all his toils and watches, all the present
racks and tortures of his mind, and all the after-ones that he does Babel of
all Languages, and Sciences too in his own head but for a word, only to hear
an Euge, and this with such solicitude breathed only at his Ear. If my pride
lies in gayeties, all Natures Wardrobe must be rifled, the beauties of the
Universe defloured, the Art and Sweat too of all Nations employed to attire my
person, or to dress my Room, rather indeed to dress the tongues and furnish out
the talk of other persons, who must entertain mine ears with the discourse of
my own splendors? which is all the use I can make of it; the Eastern Rocks must
send me Diamonds, merely to dart a line of light into another Echo of their
shine, which is reflected and beat back to me in commendations. With so much
expense anxiety and sin, I do provide only for other men's discourses, or, it
may be, envyes. Now these are none of my enjoyments, and therefore I have
nothing of them but the Lust and the desire.

As for those of the flesh, the third remaining kind, they seem indeed to be
exempted from this reasoning; the sensual person Solomon's phrase makes his Soul
enjoy good: Yet the same Solomon salves that appearance too, in saying when
provisions increase, they are increased that eat them, Eccles. 5. 11.
and what good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them
with their eyes? My broad and my cramb'd tables do not more enlarge or serve my
appetite, give me no satisfaction but only that of seeing many Dishes full, and
many men consuming them, as if Luxury also were a lust of the Eye. It has been
said indeed, that the Eye is the Gluttons most unsatisfied and greedy part, and
it must needs Intemperance lusts by the same rules and laws: It does not only
claim its seat in the Eye, which makes it self a Judge of Liquors for the
palate, and does not choose them by the uses of their moisture, but by their
body, by their air, and by the mode, and other Rules of the authentic standard
Drinkers; as if men thirsted in the fashion only: But this Eye also, as the
Ryotous man's did, gapes for company, Solomon's question, What good is there in
this? or what enjoyment? Oh Prodigy that it should Lust thus! As for the other
kind of Ryots, where with arts of Epicurism men contrive to feast and entertain
their private Appetites, and put a Patrimony into sauce for their own palates,
men sordidly Luxurious. It Is evident that these are studied to provoke, men
choose such VVines as they may ^^gest drink, and with elaborate condiments make
forced hunger as well as dishes, so that the Ryotous design only to Lust, and
the whole mystery of Luxury is to create desires.

Lastly, for that one that has ingrost the name of Lust, it gives in a full
Evidence against it self. For the Adulterer, much more irrational than the most
greedy Miser; is insatiate in desiring what he has, and his Lust will not use
his remedy, least so it should allay and quench the Lust: And whilst with so
much fever of desire, he courts nothing else but the change, and values that
alone equal with all the discontents of this life, all the miseries of that to
come, and will go to the Devil merely for variety, as it is plain: Adultery
proper to it self but the desire, is a mere loosnesse of the Fancy, which
ranges in wild lusts, and which has no enjoyment that is peculiar to it but the
lusting only; so it is also plain that this Lust must be endless, for that
principle of Change which gives it all its incitation must never let it rest;
for then it is not variety. S. John said therefore most expressively, All that
is in the World is Lust; men only can desire here, pursuing their desires just
as they do their shadows, no eagerness or have can bring them nearer, still
they only pursue, yea like him that would hugg and force God; the object of
the pious man's desire, and my next part.

Nothing besides thee, or with thee: so it signifies also, There is nothing
upon Earth that I desire with thee.
Had he said, Nothing without thee, the emptiness of every thing below which
the Lord and his Blessing is not in, had made this his determination just and
necessary: But sure when God has put other needs in my making, and has David's
frame, might well say he desired nothing upon Earth besides, with God; for he
had weaned his very Flesh and all the craving appetites of sense from their own
objects, and had fixed them upon God in all their strength and vigor. My Soul,
says he, thirsts for thee, (elsewhere, my Soul gaspeth unto thee, even as a
thirsty Land,) and my flesh also longs after thee, Psalm. 63. 1. How! My Soul
thirsts for thee? Psalm. 36. 9.
with thee indeed is the Well of Life: But Thirst is an Appetite, gasping a
consequent defailance and impatience of the Body; to both which the Soul is a
mere stranger, as it is also to the ways by which the Body does desire; for
Thirsts and Gaspes. And the Soul does put on the violent impetuous agitations
of the Bodies Appetites; My Soul thirsts for thee, and my Flesh also longs
after thee. What Longing is, whether an Appetite or Passion of the Flesh or
Mind, whose signatures are more express indeed upon the Flesh than those of
any other, yet whose impulses are so quick and so surprising, as they were
Spirit; I shall not now enquire: but sure if the Flesh long it should be for
some carnal object, for that is proportioned to it; Flesh and the Creature use
to close indeed, and they imbibe each other as if they knew to fill and
satisfy each other; yea some there are that have brought down their Souls to
the propensions of Flesh, have given to their very Spirits an infusion of
carnality, for they mind only fleshly things. But by the rates David's
practice it should seem the pious man does the just contrary; sublimes his
Flesh into a Soul, drains all the carnal Appetites out of it, weans it from all
its own desires, and teaches it those of the Spirit only, makes it long for
God. Now he whose flesh is defaecated thus, and as it were inured to the
condition which it shall put on, when it awakes from its corruption, as if it
were already in that place, whose happiness and desires have no use of Body,
and were in that state where their Bodies neither hunger or thirst, for these
he has translated from his flesh; it is his Soul only thirsts, and that for
God: As if he were indeed like Angels now, how can this man desire any thing
on Earth besides thee Lord, who is and does already what they are and do in
Heaven, where we have nothing but thee?

But notwithstanding this exalted temper, though we should arrive at this
Seraphick constitution of desires, and though God has now made himself to us
the proper object of these appetites, for since God struck the Rock for us 1
Cor. 10. 4.
which Rock was Christ; since the Joh. 6. 32. 34.
true Bread came down from Heaven, if our Flesh long for God there is a
satisfaction ready, he has made v. 55.
his Flesh be meat indeed; if our Soul thirsts for God, he can furnish drink
for a Soul, the Blood of God.

But yet while this Soul so journs in this earthly tabernacle, the man will
still want other supplies, and may be not desire them; or can he choose indeed?
For they that tell us stories panem Dominum, that (...) Supersubstantial daily
Bread, the Lord; these men I say, would find it hard to make out how bare
Species could nourish and sustain a bodily life. Yea Christ himself when he was
upon the Earth did hunger, and although it Joh. 6. 34.
was his meat to do his Father's Will, yet when he was an hungered Mat. 4. 11.
Angels came and ministered unto him, and then may not our earthly needs desire
something besides him?

That while we are upon the Earth all those necessities are in our constitution
is certain; but that we need not desire for them, or any thing besides Him, is
as certain: Because to them that desire him all these things shall be added,
they are annexed by Promise, Matt. 6. 33. it is for such to be solicitous who
would have something they must have alone; something that cannot come along
with God. But if I be assured that all my needs shall be supplied in him, I
need desire nothing besides him; now this Promise he must perform; for he that
when he put Man in a state of Immortality in Paradise, allow him necessaries
for his being and his Service, otherwise Chrysostom; These are not objects for
our careful wishes, but our trusts and confidences, we may assure our selves of
these if we have him, these are his Appendages, and then why should I put them
with him into my Devotions? when my Soul lies gasping toward God in Prayer, my
desires seizing on his Blessednesses, to take them off from him, and to make my
desires turn aside to little earthly things and fix God only, but my Prayer
too; and when these things are sure, seems to betray a mind too Earthly and too
apprehensive of these needs: Surely I were most strangely necessitous, or
strangely greedy, if both God and that which shall be added to him were not
enough for me: More wretched, or else more unsatisfied than Hell, if the
Almighty were not sufficient for me; if he be my provision, than I need desire
nothing besides him.

But yet Necessities will crave; Hunger does croak aloud, Thirst makes the
insensate Earth to gasp; as if with open He feeds but Psalm. 147. 9.
those young Ravens that do call upon him, and Psalm. 104. 21.
the young Lions roar to him and seek their meat at God: Psalm. 145. 15.
The Eyes of all things wait on him for that; yea, this our Psalmist in this
very Psalm desires other things; and Christ himself has put into his little
Summary these needs and these desires, Give us this day our daily bread; and my
Text does but regulate not exclude these desires, if we shall read it in the
old Translation, there is none upon Earth that I desire in comparison of thee
(...) There Is none or nothing that I desire or delight in equally with thee,
like thee, so we translate the same word, v. 5. I shall not doubt to beg what
my needs crave: But if God, and any the most signal earthly advantage stand in
competion, and I cannot have one with the other, his Providence, or his
Commands have made them inconsistent, that I will not desire with him, then he
shall be my Choice alone: Rather Obedience and my God than any satisfaction how
desirable soever!

This is the Touchstone of a Pious man's desires; it is not unusual for
inclinations to things below, more to possess our contest betwixt God and our
Inclinations, upon debate betwixt desire nothing in comparison with him, but
our desires are enjoyments, seize and take possession of him, and we have him:
So my Text implies here, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? importing that we have
him: Which brings me to the other parts that yet remain to be discourst of.

Three things are here to be considered:

1. That Heaven is the place of Possessions in opposition to this Land of
Desires. 2. That God is the possession there. 3. That the Pious man has this
possession in present.

The first of these is so much common place, I shall not stay upon it; those
only qualities that make this World to be a Land of Desires, have no place
there, to wit, the instability and emptiness of all things in it, he that lays
hold on them does but grasp Mercury, which the more he clasps the more he
forces it to slip away, and he retains only the soil and the defilement of
it, like Lightning which but passes by, it be nunc stans, an indivisible
Infinity of permanent duration, a perfect and entire possession, all at once,
of an interminable life that never can be all possessed; then nothing can pass
by us, or cease from us, but we shall always every moment have, what we shall
have in every any moment: Our enjoyment also being like him that we enjoy, all
in the whole and all in every part; being not only endless in the mass, but
every moment of it is immortal: And then there can be nothing but enjoyment; no
place for desire there, where there is nothing absent, where all past and all
futurity is always

Genesis 15. 1. I am thy shield and thy exceeding great reward. Yea, this he has
present possession of, which my third Proposition and my Text asserts, in
saying, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? importing thee I have.

The things we call most our possessions here both personal and real, are our
portions and inheritances: Now David claims God under both these dues, Psalm.
119. 57. 16. 6.
Thou art my portion O Lord and the lot of mine Inheritance; as other men
maintain themselves by these, so I live upon thee: And that we may not think
that God is such but in Reversion, those are present possessions which men reap
the uses of in present to themselves.

Now what is there of God the Pious man has not the present uses off? 1 Pet.
3. 12.
His Eyes are over him, and his Ears are open to his Prayers, watch to attend
each motion of his heart, and Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
underneath him are the everlasting Arms to carry and sustain him, his Hagg. 2.
23.
right hand wears him as his Jer. 22. 24.
signet, and his Psalm. 17. 8. 36 7.
wings are spread for him to nestle in that warm security, and hide him in the
shadow of; his bowels Isai. 63. 15.
sound and turn within him with compassion over him, and Psalm. 139. 2.
himself is about his Bed and about all his paths; not so much to spy out his
ways, as to preserve him in them all, and Iso. 30. 18.
he waits that he may be gracious. In a word, all the Securitys that Gods
Preserving Mercies signify, the watches of his Providence, the Blessings that
fulfill his Attributes of goodness, all are exerted upon his occasions, are
made the present objects and the satisfactions of his nearest Psalm. 34. 8.
taste and see how gracious God is.

And then give me O Lord! seizin of this the Pious man's Estate, I shall not
envy other men's possessions; though one lay House to House, and Land to Land
till he become the For thee I have in Heaven.

But yet, though chance nor violence cannot put me out, yet sin will Isa. 59. 2.
separate betwixt me and my God, cast me out of his presence and enjoyments, as
sure as it did Ada^ out of Paradise. And then alas! if I had none but him in
Heaven, he is now become my Adversary, holds possession against me, as he did
that of Paradise with flames; so he does Rain s^ares, fire and brimstone
thence, and this is all the Sinner's portion, Psalm. 11. All that I am like to
get, unless I have a person that will arbitrate the cause, or mediate, there is
no hopes of a recovery for me if I have none in Heaven but thee.

Now here my last Consideration will come in.

If while my Soul lies grovling under fearful Apprehensions of its Forfeiture,
casting about for help and finding none upon the Earth, if it look upwards and
enquire Whom have I in Heaven? have I none there but my offended Adversary God?
it may resolve it self with comfort he has other interests there. For,

First, I have an Intercessor there, Romans 8. 34. a Master of Requests, one that
will not only hand in my Petitions, get access for my Prayers and my tears to
God, but will make them effectual: For says S. Paul, Seeing we have a great
High Priest that is passed into the Heavens, let us come boldly to the Throne of
Grace, that we may obtain Mercy and find Grace in time of need, Heb. 4. 14. 16.
For though my supplications have not strength nor ardour that can mount them
into Heaven, and are too impure, however washed in my repenting Tears, to draw
nigh to the Lord, yet being put into the High Priests Censor with the Altar
coals to give them holy flame, and wrapped up in his Cloud and Smoke of Incense
that will cover all the failings of my Prayers, they may get access sit at the
right hand of God: The intercessions that are made for me are made upon the
Throne,

But should my Prayers fail, and should God Psalm. 55. 1.
hide himself from my Petitions, withdraw himself and hide his face from them,
although they be even before his face. Yet

Secondly, I have an Advocate there too, 1 John 2. 1, 2. If any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins; one that not only pleads for me, but brings the
satisfaction of my Forfeiture in his hands, makes the just value plead; appears

It Is Jesus Christ the righteous Advocate, that does propitiate and atone for,
what he pleads for; purchase what he begs. It Is true, that poor Worm, says he,
has provokt thee often Lord! but thou did Zech. 13. 7.
smite the Man that is thy fellow for it; Behold my Hands, and look into my
Sides, see there thy Recompense; will thou refuse that Satisfaction thy self
did contrive, and thy beloved Son did make? why did a Person of the blessed
Trinity descend from Heaven and Divinity to be made Sin and be a Curse; but to
Redeem him

Thirdly, I have there a Judge, and this is he, who sits at the right hand of
God to Judge the quick and dead; I might have said a Savior, for he was
exalted to a Acts 5. 31.
Savior to give Remission of Sins: But my Judge is as kind a word. For however
there be some will cry for Rocks and Hills to hide them from his Face, yet this
they are afraid of is the Face Lamb, Apoc. 6. 16.

And it is strange that they who can look upon Hell, and charge Fiends in a
sin, should tremble at a Lamb, and fly him so: But to the Faithful and sincere
endeavoring Advocate is his propitiation, so his Judge is his Sacrifice; is
that Lamb that does take away the sins of the World, is his sin-offering, his
expiation only removed off from the Altar to the Judgment Seat; indeed the
Mercy-Seat, the Throne of his Atonement and his Absolution: Where his Judge
notwithstanding that his Forfeit shall Decree Possession to him, Mat. 25. 34.
Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you.

Lastly, we have our first fruits, for so 1 Cor. 15. 23.
S. Paul does call our Savior; and then in whatsoever sense that which is whom
have I in Heaven but thee? I have my self in pledge and earnest there.

And then they that rather than have these Interests, these Heavenly
possessions in present, will have only desires here on Earth, are certainly of
a perverse and Reprobate choice. Sure it would make Consideration sick to think
of the comparison betwixt the after-expectations of a Pious man, and those
things which our worldly persons call present Enjoyments; Hallelujahs for a
Song, cast away solid Joys, and an Eternal weight of Blessedness for froth,
for the shadow of smoke. Perchance this may be said for them, the nearness of
the object does impose upon them, they choose something in present preparations
which they have nor reason nor Experience Not taste nor see how gracious the
Lord is.

It Is said, that the desires of Earthly sensual things do make the greatest
part of the Torments of Hell: Now though this Doctrine be false and pernicious,
yet it is plain that Torment must attend strong passions, and most infinite
desires which are radicated in the Sinner's heart, and which he carries hence
and cannot there deposite, and to which yet satisfactions are impossible,
against his knowledge to be mad, to have what he knows all the world cannot
make it possible gnashing of their teeth, and their Desires are their Uultures.
Thus Tantalus's ryotous hunger that does gnaw his bowels, is his Worm that
never dies; and his intemperate thirst his everlasting burnings; and his Water
that he cannot reach or taste of, is his Lake of fire without Metaphor; So that
desire alone without its satisfaction, is so much of Hell, and yet this is the
worldly sensual man's estate exactly here on Earth; for he desires and lusts;
and his condition is not easier at all, for how is Tantalus more wretched than
a Midas, or than any covetous wretch, who in the midst of affluence and heaps,
hungers as much as Midas did for meat and for Gold too, and can touch neither
for his uses? so that the Worlds delights are very like the miserys of Hell,
and men with so much eager and impatient pursuit do but anticipate their
torments, and invade Damnation here.

And if the case be so, sure there is no great self-denial in our Psalmist
here, when he resolves to desire nothing upon Earth in comparison of his God:
It Is no such glorious conquest of my Appetite to make it not pursue a present
Hell, and an eternal one annexed to it before a Savior: Yet the world does so.

Some there are that desire Money rather; and although when Judas did so, this
desire could not bear it self, but cast all back again; and though it did
disgorge, it burst him too; the Sin it self supplied the Law, and his guilt was
his Execution. Yet this will not terrify, men will do the like, betray a
Master, and a Savior, and a God; only not for so little money peradventure.
Others, when the Lord paid his own death in his stream. To others the
deservings of the partner of an unclean moment, are much greater than all that
the Jesus knew to merit at their hands or purchase for them. And it is no
wonder they are so ungrateful to their Savior, when they are so barbarous to
themselves, as to choose not to have present Divine Possessions rather than not
suffer the vengeance of their own Appetites; choose merely to desire here,
though that be to do what they do in Hell, rather than have in Heaven. O thou
my Soul! if thou will needs desire, propose at least some satisfaction to thy
Appetite, do not covet only needs thirst for a fever, and desire merely to
inflame desire and Torments: But seek there where all thy wants will find an
infinite happy supply, even in thy Savior; covet the Romans 2. 4. Ephesians. 1. 7.
riches of his Grace and Goodness, thirst for the Zech. 13. 1.
fountain opened for transgression, for the waters of the well of Life, desire
him that is Hagg. 2. 7.
the desire of all Nations; yet why should we desire even him? when we have him
in Heaven; and we have nothing upon Earth left to desire, but that God who has
exalted him unto his Kingdom in Heaven, would in his due time exalt us also to
the same place, whither our Savior Christ is gone before. To whom, etc.

SERMON VII. WHITE HALL. Third Wednesday in LENT. 1663/4.
MARK I. 3. Prepare ye the way of the Lord.
I Shall not break this single short Command asunder into Parts, but shall
instead of three Advents of our Savior in this Life, before that last to
Judgment: For each of which as it must concern us, there must be preparation
made by us. In pressing which I do not mean to urge you to do that which none
but God can do, Jer. 10. 23.
It is not in man to direct his own ways, much less the Lords; Prove. 16. 1.
The very preparations of the Heart are from Him. subjoyn, that the Comporting
with those graces, the using

Now of those Advents, the

First was, when he came Commissioned by God to reveal his Will, to propose the
Gospel to our belief, the coming of Christ as a Prophet, which particularly is
intended in the Text. The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as it is
written, prepare v. 1, 2, 3.
ye the way of the Lord. The

Second was, that coming which the Prophet Isay did foresee, and in the
astonishment of Vision asked, Isay 63. 1, 2.
Who is this that comes from Edom? with died garments from Bozrah, traveling
in the greatness of his Strength? Why is he red in his Apparel, and his
garments like him that treads in the Winefat? And it was the prospect of him
when he came to tread the Wine press of the Wrath of God, to Sacrifice himself
for us upon the Cross, his coming as a Priest. The

Third is, when he comes to visit for Iniquity, coming coercively as a King
with his Iron Rod, to execute his threats on that will not have him reign over
them: This coming also was considered in my Text; for in the parallel place of
S. Matthew. it is said, Mat. 3. 2, 3.
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, for this is he of whom it was
spoken by the Prophet Esaias saying, the Voice of one crying in the Wilderness,
prepare ye the way of the Lord.

For each of these in order, I shall show you what prepares his way, beginning
with the first, His coming as a Prophet, appearing in the World to reveal his
Father's Will, the Gospel.

Now the Preparative for this Appearance is discovered easily; we find both in
this Chapter, and the parallel places, that John came to make way for it by the
Baptism and Preaching of Repentance; and it was Prophesied of him, that he
should go before him in the Spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of
the Fathers with the Children, and the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just,
(to the minding of just things) so to make ready a people prepared for the
Lord, Luke 1. 17. And this is a preparative so necessary, that the Nation of
the Jews affirm, it is merely for the want of this that he does yet deferr his
coming: And though the appointed time for it be past, Talm. Hieros. Jaanith f.
64. 1.
If Israel Repent but one day presently the Messiah comes. And it is thus far
true, that though it hindered not his coming, yet it hindered his receiving;
although it did

Where there is not the preparation of Repentance, where there are not
inclinations and desires for Virtue; if Christ come with the glad tidings of
the Gospel, He is sure to be rejected, his Religion disbeliev'd.

If the Word of the Son of God might be taken in his own case, this would be
soon evinc't, for when Joh. 1. 11.
He came unto his own, they were so far from preparing his way, that they
received him not, but did reject and would not entertain him as Joh. 8, 43, 44,
45. Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot bear my Word: Ye
are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do; and
because I tell you the truth ye believe ^ne not. As if he should have said, the
reason why you do not regard me or my Doctrine, but reject us both; is not
because my Doctrine has not means to convince your understandings, but itis
not agreeable to your inclinations: The Works that I have done to make my
person 3 John 19. 20.
ye hate the light because your deeds are evil. Neither do you love to hear
that which you have no mind to practice; and you will not be persuaded to
believe that is your necessary duty, which you are not willing to perform; but
will rather choose to think Matt. 12. 24.
B^^lzebub the Prince of Devils; although it be apparent that those Lusts which
you will do, and which my Works and Doctrine come to drive out of the World,
they are Lusts of the Devil; and I, because I tell you the truth, truth I
confess somewhat severe, and not so agreeable, therefore you will not believe
me.

And is it not strange when nothing can be acceptable to the Understanding but
as it has appearance of Truth, and Miracles can give, should be therefore not
believed because

And therefore he says to them, Matthew. 21. 32. Ye repented not that ye might
believe them. As if they assented not with their Understandings but their
Appetites: And we our selves have seen too much unhappy evidence of men, whom
Libertinisme has made Antimonians, whom a desire of being loose from duty has
made Solifidians, of them whom sensuality has made Atheists; men that become
Proselytes to: their Lusts, the converts of their base affections.

And we cannot expect it should be otherwise. For certainly that men who are
averse to the dutys of Christianity, and cannot bend their minds to the
observance of that which Christ commands, should not care to believe they are
his Precepts or their duty is but very natural, they were unwise should they do
otherwise, it being far more reasonable to deny the duty and obligation, than
granting both, to trample on that obligation which they do acknowledge, and to
renounce that Duty which they do confess. Is it not far more prudent to
believe that there is not a God that does regard our foolish actions here
below, (which are not more

Covetous and Adulterous Felix when he began to think that Acts 24. 25.
S. Paul's Sermon of a Judgment to come might be true, straight he began to
shake, and then immediately to turn the Sermon off, bid S. Paul depart till
another time. Nor can there any other reason be assigned for this; for in the
Systeme of Christ's Religion there is not any thing but is so suited to the very
Constitution of a rational being, that the Soul would instantly embrace and
suck in, if the prepossessions of vices, which the mind will not resolve to
part with and repent of, and the Faith of every Sect of whole Mankind, it broke
Animal that were insensible, or as cold fire.

In this all the most distant Factions conspired in despite of Principles. The
Stoic, who by fettering all Events, all Consultations and Designs in the lines
of inexorable Destiny does seem to make all Virtue worthless, all endeavors
toward it useless, yet requires it with a strict necessity as his Fate
prescribes with; his reasons are as ineluctable as her Laws. Nay he does seem
to break his Adamantine Chain, to make way for this Chain of Virtues, though
his Jupiter were bound by that, yet for the sake of these he leaves (...), our
appetites, and actions in our power, (...), sports of Chance and matter; who
taught that their own souls were but the concretion of some Atoms casually met
together without any direction and to no end; yet the great Master of it in his
Ethics would not suffer any of this blind Contingency to have to do in Humane
actions, of Reason on our Soul, cleared from the blurs and defects Naturales
Tabulae Natures Decalogue, wrote by the Finger of the Lord: So that to quarrel
with Christ for requiring it, is the same thing as to be angry with our Savior
because the nature of the Fire is such as does require that it should burn. Nay
many of them were so sensible of the unhappy state of their Corruption, sound
so great pressures in themselves from the weights of their vicious
inclinations, discerned so perfect an antipathy betwixt their being and their
actions, that when with all the arts of Reason and the practice of their
Philosophy Sorcery and Magic for a Cure, received Catharticks, and a
discipline of purity from Hell, the Region of uncleanness; the Devil making
them believe he would assist in casting out himself: Such were the stresse, the
restlessness, the groans, the cry of Nature to be rid of its impurity. These
poor Souls were mistaken in their Method; but if the Devil by those worships of
his which they were used to, had not stopped the avenues, sure one would judge
they had prepared the way for Christianity; there being no obstruction to it,
nothing that can hinder its Philosophy was ignorant, and the Law weak, as
having neither Promises nor Terrors equal to the force of our Corruptions, that
the Gospel might effect, as having both to the utmost possibility of Divine
Contrivance: Now this requires us to believe those Supernaturals mostly
Christ's Promise sake, John 7. 17.
If any man will do my Will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of
God, he will soon know that Doctrine is from God that does prescribe such
Godlike lives; nor only for the Churches judgment, which did make Synesius a
Christian Bishop before he did believe the Resurrection, upon that confidence
they had of crown that Piety? Indeed he that accounts his Vices but Romans 8. 3.
by making him a Sacrifice for sin so to to condemn sin in the flesh; is not
prepared to think that there is an Eternal weight of Indignation due and ready
for it. He that has but mean thoughts of Virtue, counts it only pedantry, or
as it were the Flatus of the Mind, making the Soul Hypocondriack, it is
impossible that he should think God was Incarnated and dyed to teach it by his
Doctrine and Example, the Man in Hell would have one sent to his Brethren from
the Dead, to testify unto them of that place of Torments, Luc. 16. 28. as if
those Truths did want witnessing. But this is not because enough has not been
done for their conviction in the truth of Christ's Religion; for there is
hardly any thing besides in the whole world that men believe, but they believe
if there be another World what then? There was enough done therefore; Joh. 11.
47. you may find them struggling with his demonstrations to keep off the
Evidence, What do we? for this man does many Miracles. Yea, they do conspire
against the Miracles themselves, and would put Lazarus also death, because he
was raised from the dead; they could not let the Evidence and the Conviction
live, but they must murder that too. Nay more, as if the pertinacy of their
prejudices could do mightier Works than Christ, and could control, he could do
no mighty Works at Nazareth because of it, Mar. 6. 6. At least as says
Theophylact, (...), he could not do them where men were not capable they should
be done. So that Christ did pronounce from Reason and Experience, Luc. 16. 31.
If they believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rose from the dead. Such an amazing argument might probably
astonish, but would not convince, unless it met with honest inclinations; for
after the surprise of it were Conviction would vanish like the Ghost. And if we
should examine the Experience of our selves and others, we should find that
just according to the rate of virtuous inclinations and dispositions of heart
to part with sin, so are men prepared for the belief of Christ; so are their
oars and regards of his Religion: He that is honestly inclined opens his Soul
to Christianity, for James, James 2. 10.
that he that offends in one point thus, is guilty of all. And they upon whose
constitutions there are weights and Plummets, that incline them to some vicious
courses, and by loose Education have those pronenesses of temper pampered; and
by having their inclinations followed and indulged taught them to crave, then
to get head and to command; and then by conversation with others that mind
nothing but satisfaction of those bents of the Bruit part, that allow
themselves all the desires of constitution, are come to swill improbity of
Heart, to utter aversations of the strictnesses of Atheists. And though as once
at Corinth, now again the World by Wisdom knows no God; there being Skill and
Manage in this Mystery of Infidelity, and it requires Study, Wit, and Parts;
yet they proceed just by the Method of King Psalm. 14. 1.
David's Fool, first, he says in his heart there is no God, before he say it
in his thoughts and opinions: He wishes it, and so comes to believe it, the
Atheism is rooted in the Seat of the Affections, and it branches thence into
the Mind, at least into the Mouth, and finding Hell the greatest check to their
Delights, which they cannot determine with themselves to leave and to repent
of; therefore because they will not quench it with their tears, Arguments: And
merely for this reason, that they will not live like Men, they resolve
therefore to believe that they shall dye like Beasts. But alas! they must live
for ever with the Devil and his Angels, if that Christ, whom they reject, does
not lay hold on them, and rescue them from thence as he is in his passage to
his Cross, the next Way we must prepare for him; and my next part.

The Solemn days approaching will discover to you this Way, namely, the
Passage from the Garden in Gethsemane to Golgotha; There you will see he does
begin his Journey in Prayers and strong Cries, that so he might sooner escape
from under that sad pressure. And then do but consider and look on Paul does
show of him, how all that time that he was creeping under that dire burden in
that dolorous way, he was merely pressing on with all the have he could to
overtake us in our course, and rescue us from Ruin. For that Journey was a
Race, and we prize. (...), I have been laid hold on, says he, Phil. 3. 12.
laid hold on in the Agonistick sense, as in a Race, he so expresses it: And
that he was laid hold on by these sufferings, the Epistle to the Hebrews does
evince; (...) says Chrysostom, in that Way he pursued me till he caught me;
his Agony was but his strife to overtake me, his Sweat the issue of his Race:
When he came down from Godhead in his Incarnation, he pursued us then into our
nature he laid hold of our Flesh, and followed us from Heaven to the Psalm. 139.
15.
lowest parts of the Earth. But when he went thus to his Cross here, he
pursued us then into our guilts, he laid hold of sins, and took them up and
bore them on the Tree, then he descended into Hell to follow us. This as it was
formally done once for all, so in its virtue, influence, and blessed effects,
it is still in doing, as to thee, and me, and all of us; and the approaching
Season is to represent it so. Now sure we need no motives to prepare the way
for him who runs that he may obtain our Salvation, who though he labored under
such a dismal burden, yet still presses on to catch us, so to rescue us from
sin and Hell: If he think fit, and can

Now the same Preparation is required here, that made way for his other coming,
that is, Repentance, in one word, a disposition and sincere desire of heart to
part with every evil and corrupt affection, to quit every sin. Sin lying in the
way made it so dreadful, God laid upon him the iniquity of us all, and that
weight threw him prostrate on the Earth, Luc 23. 28.
Weep not for me, weep for your selves. And sure it was for want of such Tears
to dilute and temper his sad Potion that his Cup was so amazing to him: It was
for this the Luc. 22. 43, 44.
Angel that came from Gods presence to comfort him, left him still in Agonies,
could not do it, because the Luc. 15. 10. And God himself in Hoseah seeing
Ephraim would not reform cries out, (...). Consolatio abscondita est ab occulis
meis: Hos. 13. 14.
Comfort is hidden from mine Eyes; so LXX also. Now they that refuse to do
themselves this Honor that the Angel could not do, to comfort their God in his
Agony, how will he Isa. 1. 24.
ease himself on them? Prove. 1. 26.
How will he laugh at their Calamity? be comforted in their Destruction at his
coming as a King in Executions? the next Way that we must prepare, and my last
Part.

A Progress this, I confess, that is not usual to our King, nor is according
to the Method of his Government: God called it his Isa. 28. 21.
strange Work under the Law, and much more is it so under the Gospel, when he
Governs by the Heb. 11. 1.
Faith being the evidence of things not seen, shows us Rewards and Punishments
not present, but at distance, out of sight, in the World to come, to keep us in
our Duty. And then why should the Ax be now Laid to the Root of the Tree? when
as there is to be an universal Conflagration, where every Tree that bears not
good Fruit shall be cast in? And upon this we see events do not discriminate
deservings, things happen to the good and bad alike; we may have seen the
Wicked in great Power, spreading himself like a green Bay Tree; like a
triumphal Garland, as he were the Ax is at the Root of the Tree, we know not
whether it designs it for the Temple or the Kitchen, to make a Fire, or to make
a God. The Day that comes shall declare all, when the delay both of Rewards
and Punishments shall be compensated with interest: And it does scarce seem
equal to inflict them twice. But yet O Lord! in days when Scoffers appear, 2
P^t. 3. 3, 4.
that walk after their own lusts, and say, where is the promise of his coming?
For except that the Fathers fell asleep, some men are dead and others risen in
their place, all things else continue as they Jews they look as if they had
fulfilled all that the Prophecy was mistaken to foretell,

Now to prepare for such Approaches of the Lord our King, there is one only
means, that is, resolving Fealty and Allegiance to him, and that not formal
only, or but idle Homage, but renouncing all Confederacy with his Enemies,
Sin, and the Devil, and serving him with all the heart and all the strength.
For he is that King in the 19. of S. Luke, who did not only cause his
contumacious Enemies, such as would not have him to reign over them to be slain
v. 27. making his way over their Necks whose Hearts he could not set up his
Throne in; nor did only cause those Servants who were so far from preparing
his Way, that upon confidence he delayed his coming they smote their fellow
Servants, and did eat and drink with the drunken; were unjust to others, and
indulged themselves in all licentious living, cause them to be cut asunder, and
to have their portion in the Region of weeping, where these intemperate should
have only tears to drink, and for their ryots only gnashing of teeth, Teeth
ready to revenge their Matthew. 24. 48. But he is that King too that Executed
Sloth as well as Treason, in Matthew. 25. 30. who having given one a Talent,
trusted him with abilities of doing service in the station he had put him,
which for his not endeavoring to do, though he corrupted not his faculties,
because he buried them and did not use them, but indulged to idleness,
condemned him therefore to utter darkness, to the proper Mansion of the
slothful, all whose time can be nothing but night, since his whole Life is but
as Matthew has said all, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; as it
is written, prepare ye the way of the Lord.

And here to stop, and to reflect at once upon our selves and this which has
been said: And first, on this last way by which he comes as a King in
Executions.

Here I cannot but take notice, that we have some that do design and act among
us as if they were this King's Harbingers, his Pioneers rather, to prepare the
way for his invasion on us; or were his forlorn hope sent out to give the onset
of Him in the reserve to second them: Truly their Threats and their Attempts
are big and Insolent, and most men's expectations are not very comfortable.

To say with some, this Confidence of theirs is built on

And truly when I think on the temper of their fury, how it is hardened in the
fire of Execution, charges Death not

Now really there can be nothing else of that but an opinion of the great
defection of Virtue in their Enemies: Open Profaneness, public License, living
without fear of God or Man, makes them look upon them as men designed for
excision. Achior is said to give this counsel to the Captain of the Host of
Babel, when he went against Judaea.

My Lord and Governor, If there be any Error in this a Judith 5. 20, 21.
People, and they sin against their God, let us consider that this shall be
their Ruin, and let us go up and we shall overcome them: But if there be no
iniquity in the Nation, let now my Lord pass by, least the Lord defend them,
and their God be for them, and we become a Reproach before all the World. And
sure that they who when they were a formidable Body, furnished with Principles
as bad as now they can be, and with Weapons too; and flesht with Victories and
mischief, should at once depart from these advantages, quietly lay them down
and all their Interests; and now when they are scattered and delivered to
commit Abominations, they are grown confident God is them Courage, there are
enough will count our slaughter an Oblation to the Lord. O! give me leave to
contradict the Counsel of my Text, prepare Not this way of the Lord, do not
thus make ready for his coming by provoking him to hasten it in Fury; rather
Block up all Passages and stop his March; you have wherewith at hand; The dutys
you are now practicing, those of this Season, Humiliation and Amendment, are
Barricadoes strong enough against him, he cannot break through them. He had
sent out his Executions against Israel, and Ahab did but Fast and put on
Sackcloth and they straight retired, were beat off for a whole Life, 1 King.
21. 29.
See thou how Ahab humbles himself? because he humbles himself I will not
bring the evil in his days. The habit of Repentance, if Piety and Virtue get
but Countenance, it will divert him in his March; and it must needs, for it
prepares his other way, that to the place of Expiations: to the Throne of
Grace, his Cross; the Second thing.

And should we not prepare his Way to that by our Repentance, we were false to
our own actions that pretend to do it, unjust to the time that calls for it,
but most unkind to Christ and to our Souls.

When in that fatal race, and under all that load he did stretch and press on
so to lay hold upon us, to seize our sins and Sacrifice them in himself, that
then we should retain them, should not let him have them, but cling to them
still; that when he was upon the Cross with naked Breast and open Arms, as it
were ready to receive all wounds sin could inflict, and every wickedness of
ours had a stab at his Heart, that we should still reserve the envenomed
Poniard, keep the malice of the wickedness to Crucisie Him to our selves
afresh, and kill our selves also for ever! That we should suffer him to

Indeed they that come to the Celebration of his Passion thus disposed, plant
troubles in his way to his Cross, and make it more grievous; yea they obstruct
his passage thither even when they wait upon him to it: Those that come with
indevotion to attend that sad Procession, such as they usually the Mountains be
brought low, if we prepare the way for him. The Gaudy people, they that spend
the severe hours of this sad Season, and of preparation for that Passion in the
Arts and labors of Attire, that mortify and punish themselves only in cares
and in Contrivances to make and dress up Beautys, and the study of these
enters with, thrusts out the grand concerns of their own Souls, and the
employments of this time, even which they are about: These doubtless are
attired in Funeral conformity to wait upon him to his Cross, on which he had
Wine mingled with Myrrh to cheer the Heart and cloud the Understanding, and so
lessen sense of Suffering, in scorn and mischief gave him Vinegar and Gall,
which though it counterfeit the other taste, serves only to prolong life for
more future Torment. The Swearer stabs him all along his Journey; and the Men
of Black Designs and Malice, they pour Venime in those wounds.

But why stand I thus to enumerate particulars? All such Tragedy of Jesus, to
behold the dead march to Golgotha, indifferent and unconcerned in that (as in
the rest) whether

And here I hope I shall have no reflections to make as to preparing for this
coming. Christ certainly did find his Way prepared so to this Nation, that we
believe he was more early entertained in it, than almost any where in the whole
Gentile World: And ever since his cares for it were so particular, that they,
who would fulfill the Revelation in this Church, seem to err with some reason,
when as his regards prepare the Lord's Way, since he is among us. Righteous art
thou O Lord! and wonderful in thy Mercies! yet if I might plead with Thee
concerning them, I would enquire what have thou done here all this while after
thy so long abode among us? what are we the better? The last attempt of God to
reclaim Man, when he had showed the world all other means were fruitless, was
by Thee His Son! by whom he did conveigh us be more just, sober, or chaste; in
any way more virtuous than those Heathens whose Religion came from Hell? We
find Thee saying, Luc. 10. 18.
I beheld Satan as Lightning fall from Heaven, his Power vanishing like that
which does but flash and perish, never can be recollected. But alas! that
falling flash has kindled foul heats that will break out into Fire and
Brimstone. Idolatry it is true, is profligated hence; the Devil is not
worshipped as he was with a Religion Form of Godliness, makes them such perfect
Pageants of Religion, that they often fall in love with Vizour, and please
themselves as if their dress were Nature, while yet under that form there are
the greatest falsnesses, and black treacherous designs, the most unjust and
Bloody practices that even make the Form of Godliness superciliousnesse, with
such difference to Christ, that you would say the Pharisees were now all of
Christ's side. And i^ this all the Lord came hither for? to be a Sanctuary for
the profane, a Cloak for Hypocrites? Give me leave to relate a Story I have
read Voyages of M^^dex Pinto chap. 19.
of four or five Vessels of Portugals who were Shipwrackt to the drowning of
almost five hundred men, only fifty three escaped, and they were left naked
and hurt upon an Island Desolate, as the Israelites Wilderness, which needed
the same Miracle to sustain them, and found the like: For God as it rained Fish
upon them; and so did that which kept them alive, till at last they espied a
large Boat of Chinese making to the shore to take in Water in that Island, and
the people coming all to Land for their refreshment; which they seeing,
resolved to make themselves the Masters of their Boat and Goods, and go away in
it: A man would have thought their own sad state in that Land of Desolation
should have taught them Compassion; at least Gods Mercies to them should have
taught them Justice to others. But when men have received great signal
instances of Gods Protecting mercies, they think then that they are his
Favorites, and then they may do any They therefore get into a Wood near the
Shore and Boat, and it was ordered among them, that whom the Captain should
pronounce Jesus three times, then they should run out of the Wood and seize the
Vessel.

Lord! would not such a word be a Spell and Charm against unmerciful, inhumane,
and unjust Designs? would it not exorcize all impious Contrivances? It is no
new thing to preface mischief with an holy Name, and bring in Jesus in the
Prologue to Iniquity; to talk of God and act the Devil. They seized it, and
driving from the Land, left the true Owners of the Vessel to possess their
misery; Being secure, they searched and found no person in it but a Child of
thirteen years of age, and they fell to what Victuals, they met, and having
eatex, with hands lifted up they praised God solemnly, and then proceeded to
cut out and shore the Silks and Riches of the Vessel: The Boy seeing all this,
and drowned in Tears would not be comforted by them, who promised him all
friendly usage; but he desired rather to go Dye with his Father than live with
such wicked people: Being reprehended for that speech, Would you know, said he,
why I said it? Because I saw you when you had filled your Bellies praise your
God with hands lift up, and yet for all that, like Hypocrites, never care for
making resti^ntion of what you have stolen, but be you sure that after Death
you shall feel the rigorous Chastisement of the Lord Almighty. The Captain
admiring I understand not what you mean, declare it first, and you shall know
my mind: And being told by them of the blessed Author and the purity of our
Religion, what God did to Redeem us from our sins, and what holy Laws he has
left us: With Eyes and Hands lift up, he weeping, said; Blessed be thy Power O
Lord! that permits such people to live on the Earth that speak so well of Thee,
and yet so ill observe thy Law as these blinded Miscreants do, who think that
Robbing and Preaching are things that can be acceptable to thee: And so
returned to his Tears and obstinacy.

To see the strictness of the Christians obligations, and the looseness of
their Lives, to see their Practices dash against their Professions! It Is such a
thing as makes them be the Scorn of honest Heathen Children. And is this all
that men are required to prepare the way of the Lord for? Is this all he can do
after so many Centuries of the abode of him and his Religion among us? While
there is no more of his influence appears, I must suspect he is not here, the
Lord is not among us, but is gone. And certainly if it be possible to drive him
Drolls are they. That men should sin against him by transgressing of his Laws
is no wonder, for there is invitation to it in the Blood: That some did count
him an Impostor is not strange, they had not met it may be, with means of
Conviction, or were prepossest with prejudice; but while men own his Person and
Religion, to have a God only to make them sport, as it has no temptation, so
it has no measures of its guilt: Atheism is an honest refuge from this Vice;
it being much more sober and rational to Jews and Soldiers did, they put a
Scepter in his hand only to take it out and smite him with his Scepter, they
bowed the knee and cried Hail King, and so humbly spit in his Face, and they
put a Crown, but 'twas of Thorns, on his Head; thus they Worshipped him in scorn
and Crucified him with his Dignities. And so we serve Religion: When we would
have a Scene of Mirth, that must be put in a ridiculous disguise to laugh at,
the Son of God must enter Travesty, and our Discourse is nothing but the Gospel
in Burlesque. prepare not this path for him to go away in. The Heathens thought
it much more possible to Chain their Deity, than to be safe if he were gone,
Any the strangest contradiction is more Peter's Chain, that will hold your God
sure: 2 Pet. 1. 5.
Add to Faith (that is the first Link that unites us to him,) Virtue, and to
Virtue Temperance, and the other Graces named there. If he were going; yet
Malach. 3. 7.
Return unto me, and I will return unto you says the Lord: I^ you do but
prepare to meet him in the Dutys of this Season, you are sure to find him at
his Cross: and if we do but lay hold on him there, and by the mortifications
of a true Repentance partake in his Death; He that is the Way and the Life will
through that dust and ashes from

To which, etc.

SERMON VIII. WHITE HALL. October 9. 1664.
1 JOHN V. 4. This is the Victory which overcomes the World, even our Faith.
THese Words, though they explicitly make

First, That the State of Christianity is a state of Warfare; He that is born
of God must fight we see, for he must overcome; Which is the

Second; In this War he must not satisfy himself with being on his Guard,
defensive, looking to secure himself, but he must Assault and Conquer, nothing
else will serve his turn but Victory.

Thirdly, The Enemy which he must have no Peace with, is the World.

Fourthly, Faith is sufficient forces to assist him in his Conquest.

Fifthly, Faith where it is rightly made use of is a certain Victory.

But I shall not handle these in Thesi thus, but for the more practical
treating of them shall make and answer three Enquiries.

First, What the way is that the World does wage War in? where its Strength
lies? and how it manages that force

Secondly, what the strengths of Faith are? how it charges, breaks the forces
of the World, and does enable the Believer to overcome?

Thirdly, how far the Believer must pursue his Conquest? what must be the
measures of his Victory? that he may know how to vanquish it so as that the
World may not rebel again; not do like Joash smite three times, then leave,
but Smite until he make an end of danger: Having answered

Now for the better handling of the first of these, I must show you how the
Will of Man may be attaqued and taken.

To which purpose I observe, that whatsoever liberty there is in humane choice,
yet every appetite seems in some sense determined in its tendencies to fix on
that which appears simply best for it, for that instant which it chooses in; I
do not say that whenever Reason peremptorily concludes a thing is best that
the Will is determined instantly to that; for by a too unhappy evidence we
know, that if the lower Soul Will another way, she can suspend and stop her
prosecutions, and too often finds cause to go along with that against the
dictates of the Mind: But this I say, that in her last Executive Determinations
she always tends to that which has the fairest and most vigorous appearances
of being best for her at that present time. If it seem strange how, since the
Understanding can account the certain expectations of an happy everlastingnesse
much better for the present, than a momentany worldly satisfaction; (for we
have our Rules and our proportions by which we rate and choose Reversions
rather than Possessions, and those of the Will can let those go and take these
it can be said always to choose the better for the present? Will must needs
choose the Will it is true; yet by their importunacies still Will rushes into
the embraces of, and the other being vanished and Will fix, why then in this
unquietness of hers she sets the thoughts: on work and will not let them fix
till they find out some salvo that can satisfy Carnality and Conscience too,
that will let the Man have the sin and not deprive him of Gods favor: And if
either application of Gods Decrees and Promises without Condition absolutely to
himself, and the assurances of Faith and trust will do it, (as we may know it
will in some) or if hopes of mercy, resolutions of repenting afterward and
leaving off the sin, (as this does do with most) then it is evident in choosing
to obey his inclinations, with such salvo the man chooses that which does
appear best for Ideas not distinct, nor bright or brisk, therefore they move
the Will but very coldly: Whereas the other pleasure being Will does seem
always to fix on that which appears simply best for it, for that instant which
it chooses in; the man still takes what he likes better at that present, and
he likes better that which looks better for that present: And things are made
to look better by these arts which I have showed

This being now the temper and the disposition of the Will, and such the method
of her actings, this is the thing the world makes use of, here is its strength,
namely, in making

It was observed by the Philosopher most truly, that a Child is born only an
Animal, is to be Educated, and brought up into a Man: His reason is the birth
of time and institution, for a while nothing but sense does live in him. Now
all that while he is incapable of being affected with any other things, but
such as strike the senses, things of this present world; and by that means
only such possess his mind and inclinations too, the uses and advantages of
every thing about him are those he is first sensible of, and those alone: and
so the world does make the first impressions on our Souls, it does prevent all
other in our inclinations, has our first love and enjoyes our first embraces,
from which it must be with great assistant souls to us, denying us every thing
that was not very requisite or very moderate, that we might learn to want them,
and be taught not to desire them. The contrary alas! is practiced every way, as
soon as ere the mind is capable of being trained into the World's snares we
betray it into them, we teach it how to understand and be affected with the
bait, and those pomps which we but just ante palatum eorum quam os instituimus,
we teach their Palates sooner than their Tongues, and they can cry for what
they cannot name; and yet among their first half words they can name Day^ties;
and what will he not lust for when he is grown up, that is taught to desire
provocatives ere he can propensions into temper: And as Understanding grows
Aristotle's observation backwards, educating them into Creatures of mere sense,
teaching them to be rational understanding Bruits. Yet the world thinks sic
fiunt homines, this is called making them Men betimes: And when they are thus
made, when the age of satisfying all their inclinations is come, and when
temptations are understood, and multiply by Conversation, and the World has
objects for them all at hand; objects, that what every way they turn their Eyes
are still before them and thrust venture for? Whereas Mankind is swallowed up
in the pursuit

Add to this, that when these pretenses of condition have got footing in the
heart, besides those passionate desires which they stir for themselves, they
work out most unquiet Emulations, Envyes, Discontents at others. In whatsoever
any other does exceed me, his Abundance is my want, straight I am in necessity,
not from my own needs, but from his possessions, and I suffer his enjoyments; I
labor, fret, and sink under the burden of his Honors, and his greatness is
inflicted on me. Nor can I ever be at rest till I am got from Matt. 4. 8. 9.
in the twinkling of an Eye did once show all the Kingdoms of the World, and
all the beauty of them, and who promised to bestow them all for but one single
act of Worship, and whose gift the Glorys of it are for the most part, and
purchased by those very means. My business is to pull it down from this great
height, and show you how to triumph over these Conquests; which my Text Faith,
for this is the Victory that over comes the World even our Faith: Which how it
does, is my second next Enquiry.

It seems a prejudice to this Assertion of my Text, that the great pretenders
to Faith, the men that lay the whole stresse of their Everlasting Being on
believing only, have been branded to be very Worldly; and the Factions of
Godliness were the mysteries and arts of Thriveing; as if their Faith laid
hold indeed upon the Promises of that Life; and if it over came the World, it
was for them to seize and be possessours of. But this is not the Victory my
Text seeures, a Conquest for the Faith only of Ma^o^et to make: And while
Christian Votaries do only mind such Conquests, and are candidates of
Turcisme, do they not call it in, and make way for their Sword and their
Religion? But the Faith that lays hold on Christ's Promises cannot confist
with any such affections. For since Christ's Promises are made only to those
that overcome all such desires, and that do it to the end, and none other can
be safe; It is impossible for him Faith and Worldliness, they cannot suffer
one the other; it follows: He that has this Faith in sincerity must needs
overcome the World. And to show you in a word how it is done, you need not but
to consider, that Faith is as S. Paul says, the substance of things hoped for,
and the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. Which as the Syriach
translates, does say, we see them through a glass but darkly, yet we see them
by it, 1 Cor. 13. 12. it being (...). It represents the things of which we have
no demonstration from sense or humane reasoning, as convincingly to the mind as
if is present to it. Now by this alone it is of force to break Isai. 30. 33.
Tophet is prepared, the pile thereof is Fire and much Wood, and the Breath of
the Lord like a stream of Brimstone kindling it, and do this till his Lungs
crack, not one heart is moved, nor brings a drop of tear to quench the flame,
because these fires are not present as the other, neither Jam. 2. 19.
Devils do believe and tremble at, with greater dread wherever they appear: Now
a strong lively Faith must paint them out and show them in each fin the World
ensnares into. Neither would any of those rotten planks, which, application of
Decrees or Promises made absolutely to himself without any condition,
confidence in Gods Mercies, hopes of Pardon; none of these would be security to
one that were convinced in earnest. He that did believe and as it were discern
that height which his ambition goads him to by such false and guilty steps upon
such hopes of mercy, Almighty and Almerciful, able enough, and kind enough to
stretch out his right hand and catch him in the fall, or trusting to that
Promise, Psalm. 91.
He will give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they shall
bear thee up, least at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone: Or leaning
upon any such Decree as makes the term of life Job 7.
immovable and fatal; neither to be hastened or retarded; none of these will
make him mad enough to break his neck, neither would the same presumptions

To see my self trampled upon by pride and malice, or worse yet, begging of him
whom my blood it may be helped Lazarus the portion of his Dogs, Dogs that are
taught to snarle and bite, and make more sores, not lick them; this is a state
more killing than my want, able almost to tempt a man to any courses. But then
if with the Eye of Faith I do but look beyond the gulf, and there behold the
Rich man in his flames begging for water, and although it be the Region of
eternal weeping, yet not able to procure one drop of his own tears to cool his
Tongue. O then I see it is better to be Lazarus although there were no Abraham's
bosom! But if my Faith look Son of God leaving all the essential felicities of
that Bosom to come live a life of Virtue here on Earth, and to teach us to do
so; choosing to do this also in a state of the extremest poverty, consecrating
want and nakedness, contempt and scorn, making them thus the ensigns of a
divine Royalty.

And to encourage us not to sink under any of the Worlds assaults, he has
proposed Rewards of Virtue, such as God is blessed in; did my Faith give me but
a constant view of and it is acknowledged, that when our belief shall be all
vision, and our expectation possession, when our understanding sight, gives
presence we have seen, and it gives interest too, 1 John 5. 1.
He that believes is born of God, says the Apostle, and therefore has a
right: Now to be born of one is to receive from him a principle of life: He
then that has received from God a Principle of life such as he can born of
God, and consequently heir of Gods possessions, which his Faith gives him a
prospect of, how will he look down on the tempting glories of this World, on
all that makes it grateful and desirable, as upon abject things, and slight
and undervalue whatsoever worldly men, poor Souls! do fear or hope, or long
for, and pursue? The Mathematics say that the whole Globe of Earth to one that
looks upon it from the Firmament is but as a point, and sure it is demonstrable
a little World of Ants about a Molehill, which Philosophers Condition and
degree of which Victory is the next and last thing we are to enquire into.

If you ask the Stoic who is this great Conqueror that overcomes the World,
he will answer somewhat to this purpose. It is not any of those great
successful Robbers that with Armies forage Nations; it is not he that peoples
the whole Sea, filling it with his Navyes; nor he that sets his Confines on the
remotest parts of the Inhabited World, that can call all his own that the Sun
views, so that it shines not out of his Dominions: But the Man that has
conquered his own Inclinations to the things below; he that has raised his
mind above the Crosses or Contents of this receive and welcome all that
happens, as if he would not Stoick's Wiseman is victorious. Christ's Believer
goes a little farther: That man has the World Subject to him; but the
Christian does not stay Subject, but a Traitor, one whose Service is
Conspiracy, that does attend on us only to watch and to betray us, to know our
weak part, and to storm us there. Therefore as the Lord commanded Israel
concerning Amalek, that did by them as the World does with us in our journey to
Canaan, comes upon advantages and smites the feeble, Deuteronomy. 25. 17, 18, 19.
Therefore said the Lord, remember what Amalek did to thee by the way, how he
met thee by the way and smote the hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble
behind thee, when thou wast faint and weary, therefore thou shall blot out the
remembrance of Amalek from under Heaven, etc. So must we also with the World,
put all to death, not spare the best and goodliest as Saul did; yea more, put
all to the pomps and cruelties of Death as Gideon used the men of Succoth,
Judge. 8. 16.
tear their flesh with thorns and briars; or as David used the Ammonites, 2 Samuel 12. 31.
put them under Sawes and Iron Harrows; so the Christian must serve the World:
What ever instruments of tyranny that used upon his Savior on the Cross,
those he most exercise on it again, those Thorns, those Nails, Spear he must
employ like Gideon's Briars, and like David's iron Harrows, it must be
Crucified, and then he is a glorious Conqueror, Gal. 6. 14. God forbid that I
should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the World is
Crucified to me and I unto the World. He that does march under the Banner of
the Cross that Conquering Ensign, as he thereby declares himself upon such
terms of enmity with the World that he does look upon himself as one despised
by it, counted as an accursed thing, for so was that that was Crucified, as it
is written, Gal. 3. 13.
Cursed is every one that hangs on the Tree: So also he does look upon his
Standard as the instrument of Execution to the World, on which it must be
Crucified unto him, and so it is: He is so taken off from finding any stirring
delights in the glories of it, that he accounts it a dead thing, that has
Devil Serpent that was doomed into it, and is always in it, and then most when
it is most Paradise. Now he that has thus used the World, he that has nailed
it to the Cross of Christ has overcome the World.

Should we now cast an eye at once upon our selves and that which has been
thus deduc't tracing all back again; then First, it would appear so evident
that I were vain, if I should stay to prove that those which have such desires
to any of the profits, heights or pomps, or any dear thing else whatever of
this World, as that they are impatient if they miscarry in them, and full of
strange complacencies if they do answer their desires, these have not overcome
the World to any such degree. For had I overcome and Crucified it, sure I
should not be so affectionate as to desire, court, and pursue what I had
Executed; I should as soon I Crucified to it, had I but one Thorn of my
Savior's Crown struck through my head, but one Nail in my Foot of those that
nailed him to his Tree; were my Soul fastened to a Cross, how were it possible
I should run gadding after the gay follies of the World, hasty in my desires of
it: Nor could I be impatient if the World do not answer my desires and
expectations, disquieted and discomposed, if I be disappointed, when any thing
in it is not subservient to my I were Crucified to it, certainly these heats
would not warm the dead; these are none of the troubles of an Executed person
when he is rackt upon that instrument of Death, he is not grieved because the
Nails were not of Silver, contents thrust out all the just sadness of my
Sentence and I be Crucified to it. But much less is it Crucified to them that
will do actions of injustice for the sake of any of the pomps or profits of the
World; there are that grind, and screw, and rack all that they have to deal
with; others that deceive and rob in Vizours, plunder in the disguises of fair
words and of false arts; Some that dress their Pomps in none of their own
trappings, such as they never mean to have a right to, because the Lords
portion to serve the dead World with? If it were overcome and Crucified, they
would not feed it with hallowed things (and the Poor's portion is such,) nor
rob the Altar to give it excesses, take Consecrated things to make a cursed
Carcass gay and proud, strip Christ's Body, starve their Savior (so Matt. 25.
45.
He does interpret to deny a portion to the naked and hungry) to make pomps and
Ryots for an Executed World. In any of these cases he is far from being
overcome: And if so, the

Second Proposition will apply it self to such, and must conclude they have no
Faith; for if they had that were a victory; and however goodly they pretend,
they are but Infidels: But it may be they will boldly own the Consequence, for
now adays it is not gentile to believe any thing of Christ's Religion. And
sure it is for the Reputation of the Gadarenes would not suffer Christ in their
Coasts, and for their Swines sake drove him out, when that of Judas would not
let him be upon the Earth, but for thirty Silver pieces did betray him up to
Death; Heaven neither, but it scoffs him thence, and his Faith from the Earth:
And because they like this World so well, they will not suffer there should be
any other. It is not my part to Combat these; I undertook only to show a way
to overcome the World, if they will not use it let them enjoy their Bondage.
And yet without all doubt these candidates of Infidelity and Atheism have
faith enough to do the work in good degree; for certainly there is none of them
but does believe but he shall dye, and it is easy for his Faith to look thin
vapor which our life is styled by, to the end of that small span, and there
see a Bed, though gay now and soft as the sleep and sins it entertains, then
with the Curtains close, the gayety all clowded in a darkness, such as does
begin the desolatenesse of the Grave; if you draw the Curtain to his Faith it
sees a languishing sad Corpse which nothing in the world can help or ease,
foreshrowded in his own dead hue, himself preluding to his winding sheet, in
which within a little while he shall be cast from the society and sight of men,
and shall have nothing else of all his Wealth and superfluities such as
satisfying curiosity, and emulation, and estimation of the World, to be the
talk of people, and the like; these will appear most evidently to be insipid
things, mere conceits of delights; things of which there can be no real
enjoyment or advantage any time. And if it then appear evidently that in
themselves they are so, then they are so always; and a constant Contemplation
of that time will make them always seem so. So that a Faith that cannot see
into another World, that will but look through this, must needs take off our
hearts from the entanglements of those advantages, when it appears how small a
thing can

And really when we consider how unquiet and disturbed a thing man is, except
he raise himself above the power of all these, how till the mind escape out of
the whirle and circuit of the Worlds allurements, it cannot but be in perpetual
agitations; at every ebb or flow of things without, there is a tide within of
swelling or sinking affections; every change abroad does make a change of
thoughts

How the Beasts are free, serene and quiet Creatures in comparison, for they
not understanding many objects, consequently have few inclinations, and their
satisfactions very obvious; whereas the Comprehensive mind of Man that looks
into a world of things, and out of them creats a world of temptations, finds
out varieties of Pleasures or of Profits, and then starts as many eager
affections in himself to pursue them; his copious understanding does but
procure would I not be greedy after the great things of this, when Moralists
did so account it certainly, when they called this living according to our
Nature, as if all the other were a Violence upon us; and upon the same ground
they accounted it not hard to overcome the Alurements of this World, it was
only not to invade and use a force upon themselves and vanquish their own
natures: And sure we that are Christians, and are so no this Faith here in the
Text, we must not count it hard; we who have the Revelations and Example of the
blessed Jesus, all that he has done to make it easy, now says he. (...)
Courage, for I have overcome the World: They are but broken forces we are to
resist, we have the Strengths of Heaven on our side, and therefore sure we may
adventure to encounter them; and if we do begin to faint, we have an Almighty
Captain of Salvation, and if we have but Faith to lay hold on him, and be not
false to our own selves, but keep our Shield of Faith, nor Helmet of Salvation,
no Sword of the Spirit the Word of God, and yet mastered it in great degrees,
shall we that are harnessed turn our selves back in the day of Battle? and
confute this Scripture; and make good that they do overcome the World most
easily who never heard that Jesus was the Son of God? It Is not only base for
us to faint most this is the Victory that overcomes the World even our Faith;
the Victory that overcomes both Worlds indeed; it tramples upon this, and lays
hold upon that to come, out-doing what S Paul sings of it in his (...), Heb.
11. His Heroes through Faith subdued earthly Kingdoms, but by Faith we
overthrow the Kingdom of the Prince and God of this World, and the Kingdom too
of the Almighty suffers violence from it, and our Faith takes that by force,
forces even a right to it: By they stopped the mouth of Lions in the Wilderness;
by it we stop that roaring Lyon's mouth that compasses the Earth seeking whom
he may devour; by it they quenched the violence of Fire, we the Everlasting
burnings; by that Women received their dead raised to life again; by it we
shall rise to Immortality of Life and blessedness, receive all that we do
believe, more than we can comprehend, receive the end of our Faith the
salvation of our Souls: Which God of his Mercy state us all in for the sake of
Jesus Christ the Author and the Finisher of our Faith, and the Captain of our
Salvation:

To whom with the Father, etc.

SERMON IX. WHITE HALL, Sixth Wednesday in LENT. 1664/5.
GAL. 11. 20. I am Crucified with Christ.
THE Ancient Observation of this Time would justify my choice, make the Text
Exomologeses they ate only the Bread of Sorrow, and tears were their Drink day
and night, so as that in the Agonies of their Repentance they did Crucify
without a Metaphor, and m^rtifie the Body of Flesh as well as Sin. But it seems
to have happened in our Sins as in our great Diseases, men are grown more
skillful, and have found out much more grateful ways of Cure, there is no need
of going through a discipline of Torments, a whole course of Medicinal Cruelty,
but they can heal, at the Cross of Christ, and we can bear commemorations of
his Passion; they make the closing Ceremony of this Season, which was set aside
on purpose by the preparations of Humiliation to fit us for the performances to
put off our Old Man, the whole B^dy of Sin, that we may hang it on his Cross
as we go by. That is the only use of this time, and the only application of
that Day. Which I crave leave to show you how to make at once: And without this
that Ceremony howsoever solemn, will be me^rly pageantry, not Worship; the
observation but dramatick; and we shall have no part in the Atonement, only in
the Scene of that days Tragedy, rather than Sacrifice: He only Celebrates
that Passion, only he partakes that Offering, who Paul, I am Crucified with
Christ.

In which words we shall first endeavor to discover what this person is, I.

Secondly, what the Nature is of that Condition and estate which S. Paul does
affirm here of that person; and that

First, in it self, Crucified; I am Crucified.

Secondly, in its adjunct; with Christ, Which because it cannot signify
conjunction in time, he is not now upon the Cross, that I might say, now I am
Crucified with him, nor when He was, was I, that I might say then, I am
Crucifi^d with Christ; but we shall find it has other importances. First it
implies a likeness to Christ's Passion, I am Crucified as he was, so it means
through the whole Romans 6. and the being crucified with Christ is what S. Paul
elsewhere expresses by the being made conformable to his death.

Secondly, it imports more, even Communication and partaking with him in his
Passion, being planted together in the likeness of his death, Romans 6. 5. and I
am Crucified with Christ, does mean I have a fellowship of his Sufferings, as
he Phil. 3. 10.

Thirdly, it means also a conjunction of causal relation, that there is a
Virtue and Efficacy in the Cross of Christ to work the Sinner into Crucifying
of his sin, so the particle must needs import, Ephesians. 2. 6. (...) he has set
us together with him in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Where we are neither
in conformity, nor fellowship, but only in our head and in our cause; so I am
Crucified with Christ does mean his Passion has an influence to Crucify and
cause in me the death of Sin.

Of these in order; and

First, what this person is? I say not who? we know it was S. Paul, but what?
And the reason of the Enquiry is because we find indeed elsewhere crucifying
the Flesh with the Gal. 5. 24. Coll. 3. 5.
Affections and Lusts required, and we are also bid to mortify our members
that are on the Earth; such as Fornication and Uncleanness, Covetousness, and
the like. But these are not I, how am I mortified in these? Is it because it
may be they are grown so dear to me, that I am Crucified in their destruction?
and long practice and acquaintance has riveted them into my very heart? Now
the Wen we know though an excrescent tumor, but an accessory bag of noxious
humors, yet if it lay hold on any noble part, take in some Nerve or Artery,
then he must cut the thread of Life that cuts it off: So he must rent my heart
indeed that tears Old Man no Soul? is he all Flesh? and has Iniquity debased
the whole of him, so that his very Spirit is become Body of Sin, so as that
Wickedness should be our very Being, be all one with us, and I, and my
corruptions prove denominations of one importance, signify the very same? so
it is indeed: Besides the carnal part that is sold under sin, and consequently
does deserve the Cross, that punishment of Slaves, the part also that is in
lusts against the flesh, that must be made away. Be ye transformed by the
renewing of your mind, Romans 12. 2. And if there be any sublimer and more
defaecated part in that, it must submit to the same Fate, Be ye renewed in the
spirit of your mind Ephesians. 4. 23. Corruption has invaded that: (...) the
diviner ruling part, is grown a slave to the Beast part of him, it has
debaucht its notions whereby it should discriminate good from evil, so that now
it can discern no natural difference between them, but does measure Fortresses
of Vice that maintain and secure a man in sin must imaginations cast down, and
every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and 2 Cor.
10. 5.
every thought brought into Captivity to the obedience of Christ: That Spirit
of the mind must be destroyed, and we transformed into persons of new notions
and reasonings. But above all the remaining part of man, his own Will must be
mortified, which besides its natural (...) and (...), by perverse inclinings to
solicitations of flesh is most corrupted, and most dangerous, in that which
way soever it inclines, it draws the whole Man after it: If any thing in us be
crucified crucifying his own Will that above all other the ingredients made his
Death a Sacrifice, and the price of our Redemption. God that had given him his
Blood and Life, might call for it again when and how he saw good, and being
due, it was not properly a price that could be given him for sin; but his free
voluntary choice, his being willing Not my will, but thine be done: This his
own Will was Luke 22. 42.
his own offering; and such is ours, if we be Crucified with Christ, made
conformable to his death; if we present our selves a Sacrifice acceptable to
the Lord; for our will is not given up to him, till it do perfectly comport
with his; but that it cannot do, till we renounce our own desires, till we have
brought our selves to an indifference in outward things, to such a resignation
as she is storied to have had, who being Vehementissime desidero ut non facias
voluntatem meam Domine, this above all I desire that thou will not do my will,
I would have thee not do what I desire and would have. So that (...), the whole
of us, the Spirit, Soul and Flesh, go to make up this person; and the body of
Sin is the Old man entire. I, whole I am nothing but a mass of guilts, my
Senses are the bands of wickedness, that procure for my evil inclinations, my
members are the weapons of unrighteousness, my Body is a body of Sin and Death,
and the affections of my Soul are and however I be partly Son of Man, and
partly Son Crucified.

Which calls me to the next Enquiry, to the nature of the duty here intended, I
am Crucified.

What is designed by it S. Paul does perfectly declare Romans 6. 6. Our old man
is crucified with Christ that the body of Sin might be destroyed, that we
should no longer serve sin: So that it means a through Repentance, and
abandoning of former evil Courses: A Duty which there are few men but in some
instants of their life think absolutely necessary,

Indeed I must confess, the Scripture does sometimes word the performance of
this duty in expressions that are not so sower, but of an easier importance; as
first, put off the Old Man, as if all were but Garment; put it off I say, not
as Ephesians. 4. 22.
Theophyl. even as easy as putting off thy Clothes, and thy Repentance is but
as thy Shift, thy change of life like changing thy Apparel.

But alas! for all the easienesse which this expression hints, where the sins
also lie in the Attire, as besides emulation, pride, vainglory, great
uncharitableness and inhumanity, put them off without a Metaphor, yet it is so
hard that it cannot be done; sometimes these stones to be made bread; but
that is Miracle too stubborn for their Virtue. And then how will they proceed to
the next expression of this duty? Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take
away the foreskin of your hearts, Jer. 4. 4. These are harder and more bloody
words, they differ in the pain and anguish that they put us to, as much as to
uncloath and flea Ctesi^s of one, having his Skin pulled off he was Crucified:
And the scourges in some measure did inflict this on our Savior, when they put
off his Clothes they stripped his Skin also, left him no covering but some rags
of that which whipping had torn from his flesh. Yet this expression sounds
harsher, when it bids us circumcise the foreskin of our hearts, and tear it
from thence, flea that: When long conversation with the pleasures of a sin has
not only life were in that blood of the grape, when men can part as easily
with their own bowels, as the Luxuries that feed them; if you take away their
dishes, then you take their souls which dwell in them; when the sins of the Bed
are as needful and refreshing as the sleeps of it; when to bid a man not look,
not satisfy his lustful eye, is every jot as cruel as that other, If thine eye
offend thee pluck it out: For if he must no more find pleasure in his sight, he
has no use of it; yea if this be indeed a kindness not to leave him Eyes to
be to him the same as Appetite to Tantalus, that which he must not satsifie,
and is his hell: It Is easy if the lust be got no further than the Eye to pull
them out together; but if through that it shoot into the Blood and Spirits, mix
heats with those, if it enwrap the heart, twist with its strings, and warm the
Soul with its desires; so that it Spirit all the motions, all the thoughts and
wishes of the heart; when it is thus, to make the heart to to be Circumcised
with the Circumcision of Christ, and he that has not the sign of this, the
Seal of the New Covenant, as cut off; our long habituated hardened Sinners must
not think that there is any thing of true Repentance in their easy,
perfunctory, slight performances; there is something like Death in the Duty,
which yet is required of us farther under variety of more severe expressions;
for we are bid thirdly to slay the Body of Sin, Romans 6. 6. to mortify our
members, Col. 3. 5. and to crucyfie, Gal. 6. 14. which how it may be done, the
next consideration of S. Paul's condition in the Text, and my next part declare.
I am Crucified with Christ, as he was, by being made conformable to his Death.

And truly should we trace him through all the stages of his Passion, we should
hardly find one passage but is made to be transcribed by us in dealing with our
sins.

First he began it with Agony; when his Soul was exceeding heavy, for it
labored with such weight of indignation as did Mat. 26. 37.
make the Son of God to sink under the mere apprehension: And he was sorrowful
unto Death, so as that his whole body v. 38.
did weep blood. The Sinners passion, his Repentance is the Child of God too is
born weeping. And for loads, the Church when she does call us to show forth
this Death of Christ, as if she did prescribe that very Agony, requires that we
should find that Garden at the Altar, makes us say we are heartily sorry for
our misdoings, the remembrance of them is grievous unto us, the burden of them
is intolerable. So that the Sinner's Soul must be exceeding heavy too.

Secondly, There he is betrayed by his own domestic, sold for the poorest
price imaginable, as a Slave for thirty pieces of silver. I shall not mind you
what unworthy things the love of Money does engage men to; to sell a Christ, a
Savior, and a God! and rather than stand out, at such a base rate, as we scorn
to buy a sin at; every single act's engagement to Damnation, costs more than
the Ransom of the world is sold for; and the Blood of God is purchased cheaper
than any one opportunity of vice does stand us in! But I only mind you here,
that he shall have a better hire that Judas to his own iniquities; do but
betray thy Regent sins, deliver them up and thou shall have everlasting Heaven.

Thirdly, we find him next carried before the High Priest. And the strictest
times of Christianity would serve their sins Physician our shames, all our most
putrid guilts as well as Ulcers, and make him our Confessor in our most secret
sins; neither will I be inquisitive why the Physicians of our souls are balk'd;
but will pass this part of the Conformity, and follow Christ to Pontins
Pilate. And for this part we our selves are Fitted, the whole furniture of a
Judicial Court, all that makes up both Bench and Bar is born within us. God
has given us a Conscience whereby we are a Law to our selves, Romans 2. We have
(...) which Jews did want; such evidence as is sufficient to condemn us; the
same Conscience that is privy to our doings, and stands by our thoughts, and
sees through our intentions, is a thousand witnesses: And that there may be a
Prosecutor, our own thoughts accuse us says S. Paul; and if we will give them
way will aggravate each Circumstance of guilt and danger, bark, and howl and
cry as loud against us, as the Jews did against Christ, for Sin is of so
murdering a guilt it will be sure to slay it self; and that he may not want
his deserved Ruin the Sinner makes his own Indictement, yea, Sentence too, for
our own heart condemns us, says S. John: And when ever it does so, Oh that we
would follow it through all the gradations that brought Christ to Death! and
use our wickedness as he was used, strip it from its Clothes, bare it from its
fair pretexts it uses to be dressed in! Lay our anger naked from all those
excuses which our provocations, that either wrath or humor will be sure to
think intolerable, do make for it! strip our pride and vanity from those
paints and dresses which the Custom of the Age, that does require and warrant
strange things, dawbs Luxuries and Intemperances so, and the other greater and
more thirsty dropsy that of Wealth, and of unjust unworthy gains, which there
are richer Luxuries in too! And there are none of these but have their pleas,
their colors which they set themselves out in, to please the Appetite and to
deceive the Mind, all which we must strip off; and then when we have laid them
naked, spit upon them, vomit all our spleen and contumelious despite at that
which has made us so ugly in Gods sight; scourge it with Austerities, and
buffet it as they did Christ, and S. Paul himself, 1 Cor. 19. 27. And when the
Body of Sin is thus tamed and weakened, it will be easy then to lead it out
and crucify it. A Crucifiction this that does make our Good Friday be a day of
Expiation and Atonement to us: be conformed unto the death of Christ.

If I might have leave to go before you and to let you into the Example, draw
the Curtain from before the Passion, I would call my Sins out, drag them to
behold that prospect, hale them into the Garden, show them how he was used
there. You my Extravagancies of my youth, my mad follies intemperate Draughts,
my full bowls and the ryotous Evenings I have past, look yonder what a sad
night do these make Christ pass! look what a Cup he holds, which makes him
fall lower to deprecate, than ever my Excesses made me lie! You my lazy
Luxuries, Fullness of Bread, and Idleness, whereby I have controlled Thorns
grow on his head, and how he Sweats all over! You my supine Devotions which do
scarce afford my God a knee, and less an heart, not when I deprecating an
eternity of all those Torments which killed Christ! look yonder how he prays,
behold him on his Face petitioning, see there how he sweats and begs! You my
little Malices and my vexatious Angers, that are hot and quick as Fire it self,
and that do fly as high too, that are up at Heaven strait for the least wrong
on Earth! look how he bears his, how his patience seems wounded only in a
wound that fell upon his persecutors! and when one that came to apprehend him
wrongfully Mat. 26. 51.
was hurt, as if the Sword of his defense had injured him, he threatened and for
ever cursed the black deeds of that angry v. 52.
Weapon, and made restitution of what he had not taken, made his adversary
whole whom he had not hurt! See how with his cruel Judges he is as a Sheep,
that not before his shearers Luke 22. 51.
only, but before his Butcher too is dumb! You my Scorns, and my high Stomach
that will take no satisfaction but Blood and Soul for the faults of
inadvertency, for such as not the wrong, but humor makes offenses! look how
they use him, they buffet, and revile and spit upon him. Ye my dreadful Oaths
and bitter imprecations which I use to lace my speeches with, or belch out
against any one that does offend me in the least, making the Wounds and Blood
of God, and other such sad words, either my foolish modes of speaking, or the
spittings of my peevishness. There you may see what it is I play with so, you
may behold the Life of Christ pouring out at those wounds which I speak so idly
of, and what I mingle with my sportive talk is Agony, such as they that beheld
afar off struck their breasts at, and to see them only was a passion. Ye my
Atheismes and my Irreligion -- Judas and the rest did to the Man Christ Jesus,
you attempt on God, you invade Heaven, Sentence, Crucify Divinity it self.

And now having showed my Sins this Copy of themselves, what they are in their
own demerits, when my bowels do begin to turn within me at that miserable usage
which Christ underwent, it will be a time to execute an act of Indignation at
my self, who have resetted in my bosom all these Traitors to my Savior; made
those things the joy O my Jesu! sure I am, I am not able to support the weight
of that thou did sink under. Thou did come to bear our sins in thy own Body
on the Tree, therefore in thy Body they were nailed to the Cross, and then
certainly I will not force and tear them thence: No, there I leave them, and
will never reassume virtue and efficacy which is in the Cross of Christ to the
crucifying of sin, which is the second sense in which the Christian does
profess with S. Paul, I am Crucified with Christ.

There are some Learned Men, that when they would assign reasons sufficient to
move Cod to lay the punishment of our iniquities upon his Son, and execute that
Indignation that was due to us on the most innocent, most Holy Jesus, give this
only, that this was the highest and most signal way imaginable to discover
Gods most infinite displeasure against Sin, and by consequence to terrify men
from the practice of make us fear, and from henceforth commit no such evil, it
was surely this, to see Sin sporting in the Agonies of Christ, Iniquity
triumphing in the Blood of God: To see those dire instances the temporal Death
of Christ (which God by virtue of his absolute Dominion may inflict on the most
innocent, taking away that which himself had given, especially since Christ who
had that right over his own life, which none else had, did of his own accord
submit to it; and he laid down his life, who had a power to do so.) That Death
I say, might justly be ordained by God for an Example of his Wrath and Hatred
Joh. 10. 1^.
against Sin, and then might be accepted in the stead of their death, who were
warned by that example; and affrighted from committing sin. And truly there is
color for it, for all satisfaction seems either of a loss sustained, which is
acquired by compensation, or the satisfaction of our anger, which is commonly
appeased by the sufferings of the injurious party; or else the satisfaction of
our fears and doubts, that we may be secure not to sustain the like again,
which is most

Now of all these the first, the satisfaction of compensation, as it cannot
properly be made to God who could sustain no real diminution by Man's sin: For
though thy wickedness says Job, may hurt a man as thou art, yet if thou
sinnest Job 35. 8, 9.
what do thou against God? or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what
do thou to him? but only as the breaking of his law does in S. Paul's
expression dishonor him amongst men, Romans 2. 23.
anger, the Judge being to be like his Law, that has no passions or
affections. And truly since the things that do satisfy our angers and revenges
are no real goods, the satisfactions good: And although we are styled Children
of Wrath, as provision that is made by punishment against future offenses.

This is that which the Magistrate and Law requires, nec enim irascitur, sed
cavet; for by Punishment they cannot call back the offenses that are past, undo
or make them not have been: but they can make men not to dare to do them
again, nor others by their example.

This is the end why they annex Penalties to their Laws, expressly said so Deuteronomy.
19. 20. Which end therefore when they attain by Punishment, the Law and
Magistrate is satisfied. For it is not so much the Death of the Offender that
is satisfaction of the Law, as the Example of Terror that it etc. Accordingly
to propose an Example of Terror to us, God laid all the severe inflictions of
the Passion-day upon his own Son. Now it is evident that the example of a Man
suffering for the breach of Laws does certainly hedge in those Laws, keep
them more safe from violence; therefore we see those Laws are best observed
which the Magistrate's Sword does most guard; and Experience would quickly
Murderers and Duellists shall get impunity more easily than he that steals an
Horse or Sheep. When on the other side, that Nation from whom we most receive
the fashions of our vices also, whom the honor of that sin is most peculiar
to; though they seemed to value it above Estate, and Life, and Family, and
Soul, yet we know could be beaten from it by some sharp examples. And then when
our Lawgiver, as he spoke his Laws at first with how he that spared not his own
dear Son, will certainly the Blood of God: How he made empty himself of his
Divinity and of his Soul, and all to raise a sum only to purchase one example
of that Indignation that attends a Sinner; it will be easy then to recollect
how insupportable that Wrath will be to the impenitent in the Day of his fierce
Anger; when he shall have no kindness left for them, but the Omnipotence of
Mercy will become Almighty Fury: Who shall be able to avoid or to endure the
issues of it? shall I think to escape them when he spared not his Son? or shall
I venture upon bearing that to all Eternity which that Son was not able to
support Paul expresses, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, a Sacrifice for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that is he showed what
did await iniquity, that men by so great an example of his Wrath, might be
frighted from the practice. Et si quis morte Christi admonitus paniteat, iste
per mortem Christi peccato mort^^s esse dicitur, says Origin on Romans 6. 1. He
who seeing that example of Christ Crucified for sin is warned by it into
Repentance, he is crucified with Christ. God dealing with us as Men do with a
young Prince, that must be disciplined by the correction of

And now though I propose not this as if I thought this Reason were sufficient
of it self, which seems to give no good account how any could be ransomed e're
Christ suffered: (which yet certainly they were, the virtue of his Death
extending to all former Ages, as is proved most evidently Heb. 9. 25. a place
which Crellius himself does give no satisfaction to) if the satisfaction of his
Death consisted only in its being an Example, it could no more satisfy for
the sins of former it could or did affright them, yet repented. Yet to them
enjoy the indignation and the wrath of God, as if those Agonies like the other
difficulties of their sins did more provoke to them, or like the Paschal bitter
herbs that typified them, were as sauce to the Jews, when it showed the Sinner
his deservings only by the dying of his Beast, and had no other fence nor
satisfaction than the blood of Bulls and Goats: It is not very visible that it
has wrought upon consideration so as to make us more fear and beware; nay, we
may question whether the example of my Bullock dying for my sin would not
restrain and terrify me more than that of Jesus Crucified for it: If I were to
expiate anger and my oaths, with the blood of my own Flocks, if that Luxury
which plunders every Element and brings a little Universe at once upon my Table
to treat it self withal, were but to kill one Heifer for the Temple, and I to
expiate each surfeit by one such Religious Ry^t: Were I to quench the fevers
of an Intemperance with a drink offering, it is possible I should not be so
prone to sacrifice to my Genius, if I must sacrifice to God for doing so, and I
should be more tender of my Beasts than I Savior. Now how comes this to pass?
It is impossible that we should be so apprehensive of our own demerits, should
we see them represented in the sufferings of a Beast, as when they are showed
to us in those of the Son of God. What is it then? should we account our selves
to suffer our Beast? His Death were our own loss and punishment: And had we no
communion in this Death of Christ? was not that our own? or account we our
concern and share in that less valuable than in that of our Beast? Far be this
from us, we are no further Christians than we can affirm with S. Paul (who
challenges a fellowship in all Christ's sufferings, and boasts it, saying) I
am Crucified with Christ. Which brings me to the last sense of the words; I
have a share and am a partner in that Cross, and all the satisfactions that
were wrought upon it.

This is that (...) Phil. 3. 10. a partaking in Christ's Passion, having his
Sufferings communicated to us, made our own, as if we had been crucified with
him: as much as he that offered a peace offering was said to be (...) 1 Cor.
10. 18. to communicate with the Altar, and partake the Sacrifice which he
really did. We read indeed there in the sixteenth ve^se, that in the Sacrament
there is (...) the sheding of Christ's Blood is there communicated, reckoned to
us, but it is communicated in a Cup of Blessing.

And is this to be a partner in his Crucifixion, to partake Sacrament of
Crucifixion? not to receive the wounds and torments, but the benefits, the
pledge of the satisfactions of the Cross, the seal of the Remissions that he
purchased on it? Blessed Jesu! we should have born thy pangs, and all the dire
things thou did suffer ought to have been ours eternally, that Agony which an
Angels comfort could not calm, that dreadful Terror which expressed it self in
the cold Sweat of clotted Blood: that greater Terror which came so near
Despair as to make thee cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? all
should have been our portion to everlastingnesse, and spent their fury on bear
no more of this than the remembrance? all our Mount Olivet and Golgotha be
only the Lords Table and his Entertainment? do thou, communicate thy Agonies
in Eucharistick wine? and is this to be Crucified with Christ? so he does
account it seems. He that by virtue of the Cross of Christ has crucified his
body of Sin, Christ's satisfactions are accounted to him, he is esteemed to have
a fellowship in all the sufferings, to have had an hand in all that was done
for man on the Cross, they are all guilt of all our doings on the Tree, so he
will have us bear the name, and merit, and reward of his; for as S. Paul does
express, Romans 6. 5. We are planted together in the likeness of his death, by
being made conformable to that in crucifying of our sins, we are Paul says,
Phil. 3. 9. found in him, we have his righteousness. That poor Soul that does
throw himself down in the strict humiliations of Repentance at the footstool of
the Cross, and there beholds his Savior dying for him, and that is himself by
Penitence incorporated into him, graffed into his Death, and planted in his
very Passion, as Origin and Thomas interpret, He may take confidence to say,
Behold Lord, if the satisfactions of thy eternal Justice be acceptable to thee,
if the blood of God that is offered up without spot be a well pleasing
Sacrifice, look down at once on thy Messiah and on my poor Soul! turn not thy
face from me, for whatever my guilts are, I have an equal Sacrifice, those are
my satisfactions, and that blood my offering, the Passion and propitiation of
the Cross are mine. I am crucified with Christ.

We have gone through all the Parts, all the Considerations of this expression,
and have no more now to take notice of but this, that all of them must go
together, that they never are fulfilled asunder, but he only whom the efficacy
of the if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, old things are done away,
2 Cor. 5. 17. Whosoever is not such he has no interest in the Jesus of that
day. He may perchance in some one of those easy Saviors which these times
afford, wherein Opinions called holy, or a sanctified Faction give such
interests, and to be in a party is to be in Christ; or else he may depend upon
that Christ, that may be had with mere Dependence, is ours if we persuade our
selves he is so. Now sure, he that is persuaded he is Christ's, is either truly
so persuaded or else falsely; if but falsely, that will not advantage him, for
God will never save a man for believing a lie; but that he should truly be
persuaded so without this duty is impossible, for he that is Christ's has
crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts: therefore by good Logic he
that has not crucified them is not Christ's, and evidently whosoever is not
crucified at all, he is not crucified with Christ.

And sure I need not put you in remembrance, that the man in whom sin reigns,
and whensoere his Lusts and Passions bid him go he goes, or come he comes, or
do this he does it, that the body of sin is not crucified in him; that which
were nailed and settel'd on the Cross and slain there could

Or if sins dominion be not so absolute but God has got some footing, so as
that his Law has power in the man's mind so as to make him make resistances
against his sin, and he dislikes it but alas commits it still, yet what he does
allows not, but returns to do it at the next temptation, afterward would fa^^
be good yet does not find how to perform, something governs in his members,
leading that Law in his mind into captivity to the law of sin, this man
although he has the body of death, yet it is not crucified and slain; for it
does live and they are not crucified, as that he is alive that walks and eats.
Those works they are the fruits of the flesh, the offspring of its lusts, and
were that crucified, and we by likeness to Christ's death planted into the
Cross, we could no more produce them, than that dead Tree the Cross could
bear fruit, or then

Secondly, Yea more, they perform not the outward actions of life who have but
the image of death on them; and a man asleep works not, yet is alive, his fancy
and his inwards work; and if sin be only kept from breaking out, and men
commit not gross deeds of the flesh, but yet indulge to these things in
imagination and the heart, cherish them in fancy, and design, and wish, only
restrain the practice, or indulge to spiritual wickednesses; you may as well
say that a stirs but in the heart, it is not dead.

Thirdly, Once more, we part from all acquaintance with the dead, the Corpse of
one that had the same Soul with us; howsoever we may have some throws of grief
to leave it, yet we put it from us, we admit it to no more embraces; but if
'twere the loathsome Carcass of a Villain Traitor that was Executed, we turn
from the sight as from a siend; it is a detestable conversations in the
Chambers of Death; he would shun bury these his dead out of his sight. Thus he
must needs be disposed that has crucified his Old man.

And they that are thus dead with Christ shall also live with him, yea those
that are thus crucified with him, he has already raised up together, and has
made them sit together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus. There already in
their cause, and in their right and pledge, and there hereafter in effect and
full

SERMON X. CHRIST-CHURCH IN OXFORD. November. 5. 1665.
LUKE IX. 55. Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of.
THE state of that great controversy which Jews and the Samaritans as it then
stood, seems briefly thus: Those that were planted in the Regions of Samaria by
Salmaneser, however great Idolaters at first; having admitted in a while, the
God of Israel among their Gods, and after having an High Priest of Aaron's
Line, a Temple too built on that place where Joh. 4. 20. Genesis 12. 6. 7. and 33.
18. compared with Dout. 11. 29, 30. and Judge. 9. 6, 7.
Abraham and the Fathers of the Hebrews, friends of God, did choose to offer
Sacrifice; and on that very place where God himself enjoined the Law and all
the Blessings of it to be published Deuteronomy. 11. 29.
Gerizim; which therefore seems to have pretenses to vye with Mount Ps. 137. 3.
Zion for there also the Lord commanded the Blessing. An Altar too, says
Benjamin in his Itinerary made of the same stones that God commanded to be
taken out of Josh. 4.
Jordan and set up for a memorial of his Peoples passage through it: And
besides all this having the Law of Moses too; when they had all these
pretensions to the God of Israel, they clave to him alone, and wholly threw off
their Idolatry. So (...). Fpiphan. de Samarit. and Scaliger says Audeam dicere
eos adeo ab omni Idolol^tria abhorrere, ^t in hac part Judaeos ipsos superare.
vide. Anth. de Emen. Tem. l. 7. p. 662.
Epiphanius does affirm expressly. And their country being as Josephus says,
the receptacle of all discontented fugitive Jews, a great part of it too
planted Alexander, they espoused the Worship of the Jews, and came to differ
very little either in the Doctrine or the practice of Religion Joseph An. l.
11. c. 8.
(...), having all things as it were the very same, the only distance seems to
be betwixt their Temples, Jos. l. 2. contra Ap. p. 1063. Edit. G. L.
(...), just as the Woman states it to our Savior, 4. Joh. Our Fathers
Worshipped in this Mountain, but ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where
men ought to Worship: So that if we audit the account of the Samaritane guilt,
they separated from the place of Worship which God had appointed, and set up
another; in a Schismatics.

Whether this be such a guilt as should make those terms equivalent Joh. 8. 48.
He is a Samaritane and has a Devil, I shall not say; but it is such as makes
our Savior say somewhat exclusively, Joh. 4. 22.
Salvation is of the Jews. All the Blessings and Salvations of the Law did
indeed hover on Mount Gerizim, were given thence, that was the place of them;
but they were cut away when Schism came: The Church is not a place of blessing
when it is built against the Church; The Altar has no Horns to lay hold on for
refuge, but to push against the Altar; and Gerizim is Ebal when it stands in
competition with Mount Zion. Well; this only thing does breed the greatest
distances imaginable in the Nations, nothing more divides than Separation and
Schism; and then these Samaritanes as all Separatists do, grew such
Opiniastres and so violent in their way, as to deny humanity to those that
would not join with them; they would not grant the Civilities of Passage to one
that intended for Jerusalem to Worship: They refuse it to our Savior, here
because his Face was thitherward, v. 53. A Sons of Zebedee are offended,
zealous for their Master, as being most particularly concerned in him, 2 King.
1. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Eli jah was revenged by him with Fire from Heaven, which consumed twice fifty
Soldiers and their Captain, though they came to do the King's Command: And
shall these hated Schismatics be rude to Thee? and reject the Messiah, and yet
go unpunished? Lord, shall we command fire to come down from Heaven to consume
them, even as Elias did? Which our Savior answers with this sharp rebuke, Ye
know not what manner of Spirit ye are of.

Not to divide but to explain my Text, and so instead of parts present you with
some Subjects of Discourse.

By Spirit here is meant that disposition and complexure of Christian Piety and
Virtues, that course and Method of Religion which the Spirit does prescribe to
Christ's Disciples, and does guide them in; or in a word, the temper of the
Gospel is so called: And this in opposition to the Law, the difference of these
being expressed by a diverse manner of Spirit; the one is called Romans 8. 15.
Spirit of Bondage, the other Spirit of Adoption; so here Ye know not of what
Spirit ye are, ye Elija's was in calling for Fire, if my Spirit dwell in you,
For I came not to destroy ^^ens lives on any such account. In this sense it
affords these propositions.

First, To destroy Men's lives, or other temporal rights on this account merely,
because they are Apostates, Schismatics, or otherwise reject the true
Religion, or Christ himself, is inconsistent with the temper of the Gospel.
This is that which Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of.

Secondly, Because the Spirit of Elias, which the Gospel Christian Spirit here
is set in opposition to, opposed the Magistrate, destroyed those that came
commissioned from the Prince, and Christ designedly does say ye must not do now
what Elias did, therefore, to attempt upon or against the Magistrate, on the
account of Christ, or of Religion, is inconsistent with the Spirit of the
Gospel.

First, of the first that to destroy men's lives, etc.

But here I must observe, that since these fiery Disciples that did give
occasion for our Saviors rebuke, here were no Magistrates, nor did Christ
himself that gave the rebuke assume, but Luc. 12. 14. Joh. 18. 36.
renounce openly all such Authority; therefore judge in Articles of Faith, to
define what is true Religion, what not; for then the Pagan Princes who had
never heard of Christ, and yet are as much Magistrates as any, would have right
to judge what Doctrines Christ delivered down to be believed.

But certainly when Christ Commissioned his Faith to run through all the World
not only independently from all the powers of it but in perfect opposition to
them, they can have no right to judge in that, which whatsoever they shall
Judge we are a like bound to receive (the Faith of Christ) without any the
least difference to their judgment. But though they have no right to judge of
this, they have Authority to determine what Faith shall have the privileges of
their State and what shall not; which shall be publicly professed, and which
they will inhibit with Penalties: For sure the Privileges of the State and
power of Penalties are the proper rights of the Supreme Power, and therefore
none but that can judge and determine of them. In a word, since it is most
evident that the tranquillity of a State does depend upon nothing more than the
profession and priviledging of Religion; it follows that those Powers to whose
Judgment and Decrees the care and Tranquillity of the State is committed, must
have the power to judge and to determine what Faith shall be publicly professed
and priviledg'd by

Nor must Religion secure those practices which it cannot sanctify, but does
envenome. For by putting an everlasting concern into men's opinions and actions
their undertakings Priest kills a Sacrifice? that go to act their Villainies
with Devotion, and go to their own Execution as to Martyrdom?

'Twere easy for me to deduce the practice of this Power from the best
Magistrates in the best times, if that were my business; who had only this
temptation to say thus much, that I might not seem to clash with the
Magistrates Power of coercion in Religious causes when I did affirm, to destroy
men's Lives or other temporal Rights on this account merely because they are
Apostates, Schismatics, or otherwise reject the true Religion, or Christ
himself, is inconsistent with the temper of the Gospel.

If you would discover what the temper of the Gospel is, you may see it in its
Prophecy and Picture in the Prophet Isay, Isai. 11. 6, 7. etc. and 65. 25.
The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the
Kid, the sucking Child shall play on the hole of the Asp, and the weaned Child
shall put his hand on the Cockatrice den, and the Serpent shall eat the dust.
Whatever Paradise restored, the prospect of the Garden of the Lord. Rather
whereas there these Creatures only met, here they lie down and dwell together:
And the Aspe and Serpent that could poison Paradise it self, have now no
venomous tooth to bite, no not the heel, nor spightful tongue to hiss.

But to speak out of figure, the Gospel in it self requires not the Life of any
for transgression against its self, it calls all into it, and waits their
coming; those that sin against it, it breaches of the Covenant of this
Religion, therefore it does wait till life and possibilities of Repentance are
run out: and then its Punishments indeed come home with interest, but not till
then. The Law it is true was of another temper, it required the life of an
Apostate to Idolatry, whether twe^e a single person, or a City, 13. Deuteronomy. To
the Jew that was a Gal. 4. 1. 3.
Child, as S. Paul says, and so not to be kept in awe by threats of future
abdication, things beyond the Amorite and Hivite derived into him, a tincture
of Idolatry in his Constitution, that was as ready to run back superstitions as
the Land of Egypt, as eager for their Deities as their Onyons, and had the
same appetite to the Calf and to the fleshpots, to make the one a God the other
a Meal; to such a People Death, that was the only probable restraint, was put
into the Law by God who was himself Supreme Magistrate in that Theocraty,
against whom 'twas exact Rebellion and Treason to take another God, and
therefore was by him punished with Death. But the Spirit whom Christ sends
breaths no such threats, for he can come on no Designs but such as Christ can
join in, but says Christ, I came not to destroy men's lives.

Secondly, The temper of the Gospel is discovered in its Precepts. I shall name
but one, Mat. 5. 43, 44. Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love
thy Neighbor and hate thine Enemy: But I say unto you love your Enemies, etc.
Where if Enemy did not mean the man whom private quarrel had made such, and
Him it could not mean, it being said to them that they must love that Enemy,
Exodus 23. 4, 5. But, as the Jews neighbor was every one of his Religion, and
he lived near him that lived in the same Covenant with him, enemy being opposed
to that, must signify one not of his Religion; an Alien, an Idolater, with any
of which they were indeed to have no exercise of love or friendship, no
commerce; and to some Enemies, the Canaanites, no mercy, but they were to hate
them to destruction, Deuteronomy. 7. If so, then our Saviors addition here, But I say
unto you love your Enemies, does say that we must love even these; the
Christian has no Canaanites, but the most profligated adversaries of his
Religion he must love, and pray for them although they persecute him: (Which
makes appear it does at least include love the Neighbor, and Christ has
proved, Luc. 10. that the Samaritane, he whom our two Disciples would consume,
that Schismatic and rejecter of Christ is yet a Neighbor, therefore him also
we must love and pray for. Now it is a strange way of affection to destroy them,
to love them thus to the death, to get admission to their hearts with a Swords
point, to pray for them by calling for Fire down from Heaven to consume them.
S. Greg. Nazian* calls the founder of that Faction that began this practice in
the Church, (...),

Secondly, To attempt upon, or against the Prince on the account of Christ, or
of Religion, is most inconsistent with the Spirit of the Gospel. For it was the
Spirit of Elias who destroyed those whom the Magistrate did send, that Christ
ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of.

The other warm Apostle meets a greater check in the like case, S. Peter's zeal
that they say made him chief of the Apostles, as it made him promptest to
confess the Lord, so it did heat him to be readiest to defend him; as fiery to
use his Sword as his Tongue for his Master: But his Master will not let a Sword
be drawn in his own cause, Mat. 26. 52.
put up again thy Sword into his place: The God of our Religion will not be
defended from Treason, and from Murder by the wounding Christ himself; but goes
beyond its proper bounds to threaten things that are not Gospel punishments,
even excision in this life, to them that do attempt it, Ibid.
They that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword. Here the Gospel becomes
Law, and turns zealot for the Magistrate though persecuting Christ himself. Our
Savior does not think it sharp enough to tell S. Peter that he did not know
what Spirit he was of, for when this Disciple would have kept these sufferings
from his Master only by his counsel, he replies to him, Mat. 16. 23.
get thee behind me Satan: He was then of that manner of Spirit; therefore now
that he does so much worse, when he attempts to keep them from him with a
Sword, and drawn against the Power, as if Christ did not know how to word what
Spirit such attempts did favor of, he does not check and rebuke now, but
threaten and denounce. And it is obvious to observe, that this same Peter who
would needs be fighting for his Master, in few hours with most cursed
imprecations Mat. 26. 74.
forswears him: And so irregular illegal violences Ambition, Revenge, or
Interest; and that warm shine Angels of Light, is but a flash of Hell, a glory
about a fiend. Therefore afterward none was more forward than S. Peter was to
press submission to the Magistrate, though most unjustly persecuting for
Religion; talks of no Fire but the fiery trial then, in Epist. 1. Cap. 4. v. 12.
and v. 14.
If ye suffer for the Name of Christ the Spirit of glory and of God rests
upon you, he knows what manner of Spirit such are of: When they are in the
place of Dragons, then the Holy Ghost and God is with them; when the darkness
of the shadow of death is on their Souls, even then the Spirit of glory rests
on them. Accordingly the after-Fathers urge the same not only toward Heathen
Emperors, but relapst Heretics and Apostates: As Vid. S. Aug. in Psalm. 124.
Julian, and Vid. Athan. Apol. ad Constant. and Ho. Epist. ad Constant. in
Athan. Ep. ad sol. vitam agentes. Tom 1. p. 838. Edit. Paris. 1627.
Constantius, vid. Greg. Naz. Orat. 20am. Tom. 1. p. 350. Edit. Par. 1630.
Valens, vid. Ambr. provariis Actionibus Concion. 1. p. 97. Tom. 5. Edit.
Paris. 1632.
Valentinian; and upon the same account l. 2. Ep. 14. p. 206. Tom. 5.
S. Ambrose says, Spiritus Sanctus id locutus est in vobis, Rogamus, Auguste,
non Pugnamus: The Holy Spirit spoke these words in you, we beg O Valentinian,
we oppose not. And p. 270. Tom. 1.
S. Greg. Nazianzen says, to do so was the Christian Law most excellently
ordained by the Spirit of God, who knew best to temper his Law with the mixture
of what is profitable to us, and honest in it self. They manner of Spirit that
of Christianity was: It does assume no power to inflict it self: It Is not
commissioned to plant it self with violence, or destroy those that refuse or
oppose it. It wages War indeed with vices, not with men: And in the Camp of our
Religion as once in Israel, 1 Samuel 13. 22
there is no Sword found but with Saul and Jonathan his Son, only the Princes
Sword. Our Spirit is the Dove, no Bird of prey that, nor indeed of gall or
passion: If Christian Religion be to be writ in Blood, it is in that of its own
confessors only; if men's false Opinions make no parties nor mischiess in the
State, we are not to make them Martyrs to their false smutted Corn that must
not root out Poppy; we may let that which is a little blasted grow, if we must
let the Mat. 13. 29.
Tares and Darnel grow. The Soldiers would not crucify Christ's Coat, nor
make a rent there where they could find no Joh. 19. 14.
seame: But now men strive so for the Coat, that they do rent his Flesh to
catch it, and to gain an enclosure of name of Christians tear all other members
from the Body of Christ; care not to sacrifice a Nation to a supposed Error;
will attempt to purge away what they call dross in a Furnace of consuming
flame: The Christian Spirit's fiery tongues must kindle no such heats, but his
effusions called Rivers, Effusions that were mistaken for new wine indeed, but
never looked like Blood. Nor are they that retain to this Spirit, those that
have him called down on them in their Consecration, empowered for such uses.
When Christ sent his Disciples to convert the World, Luc. 10. 3.
Behold says he, I send you forth as Lambs among Wolves: And sure that does
not sound like giving a Commission to tear and worry those that would not come
into the Flock: The Sheep were not by that empowered to devour the Wolves. Our
Lords directions to his Apostles when a City Mat. 10. 14. Luc. 10. 11.
shake off the dust of your feet; let nothing of theirs cleave to you, have no
more to do with them; cast off the very dust that settled on your Sandals as you
past their Streets. And surely then we must be far from animating to give ruin
to, and seize the Sword, the Scepter, and the Thrones of Kings, if they refuse
to receive Christ or his Kingdom, or his Reformation, or his Vicar. If I must
not have the dust of any such upon my feet, I must not have their Land in my
possession, their Crowns on my head, their Wealth in my Coffers, their Blood
upon my Christian Dioclesians, and stand at

And now it may seem strange that they who most of all pretend the Spirit of
Christ, are yet of the most distant temper in the world from that of Gospel;
always endeavoring to do that which our Savior here checks his Disciples for
proposing, and did threaten Peter for attempting. baptized them with the Holy
Ghost and fire, only that they might kindle the unction of the Spirit did but
add oil to those flames; as if the cloven Tongues of fire in which the Spirit
did descend, were made to be the Emblems of Division, and to call for fire;
these men's life, their garb, their very piety is faction; they pray, rebel,
and murder, and all by the Spirit. It Is true indeed they plead now what we seem
to say, that they should not be persecuted for not being satisfied in their
Conscience; so they mince their breaking of the Laws for which they suffer. But
do these know themselves what manner of Spirit they are of? or are we bound not
to remember King, their Conscience, and the Law? And we do thus far know what
Spirit they are of, that if they have not yet repented of all that, then it is
plain if they can get an opportunity they will do it all again, nay they must
by their Spirit think themselves obliged to do it.

But these are not all: those that above all the World pretend to the
Infallible assistance of the Spirit, our Church is bold in her offices of this
day to say, So the Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and the Whole Clergy of
France in their general Assembly, in the censure of a Jesuit's Book styled
Admonitio ad Regem, published at Paris 13. December. 1625, say of them that for
Religiou's sake rebel against their Princes, fidem in factionem convertunt.
Alfonso de vargas relatio de Stratagem. Jesuitarum c. 55.
do turn Religion into Rebellion; she said it more severely heretofore, and the
attempts of this day warrant the saying, when not like our Disciples that would
call for fire from Heaven on the Village that rejected Christ, these will raise
up fire from Hell to consume their own Prince and his Progeny, the whole line
of Royalty, the Church and Nation also in their representative; and all this
only for refusing him that calls himself Christ's Vicar. There are, I must
confess, among them that renounce the practice, and say 'twas the devise only
of some few desperate Jerusalem and Babel or the Image of both Churches, p. 499.
male contents, wicked Catholics, and designed by the Devil: And Garnett to
have had no other guilt, but that he did not discover it having received it in
Confession. And this gives me occasion to propose a story to your patience and
conjectures.

Not long before the time of this attempt, a Priest of the Society of Jesus in
a Book he published, does propose this case of Conscience, Whether a Priest may
make use of what he has learnt in Confession to ave^t great impendent
mischiefs to the Government? as for Example, v. g. confitetur maleficus se
posuisse pulverem, vel quid aliud sub tali limine and nisi tollatur domum
comburenda^, Principem inte riturum, quotquot urbem ingredientur,
egredienturque in magnam perniciem, aut periculum venturos.
One confesses that himself or some other had laid Gun powder, and other things
under such an House, and if they be not taken thence the House will be burnt,
the Prince must perish, all that pass throughout the City will be either
certainly destroyed or in great peril; and resolves it thus, It Is Probabilior
and tutior, and magis consentanea Religioni, ac reverentiae huic Sacramento to
debitae, etc.
the most probable and safe opinion, and the more suitable to Religion, and to
that reverence which is due to the Sacrament of Confession, that it is not
lawful to make use of this his knowledge to that end. That his Holiness Clement
the 8. had just before by a Bull sent to the Superiors of the Regulars
commanded most studiously to beware they make not use of any thing which they
come to know by Confession to the benefit of the secular Government. He adds,
that in cases of Confession the Priest must not reveal though death be
threatened to him, but may say he knows it not, nor ever heard it, Because
indeed he does not know, nor ever heard it as a man, or as a part of the
commonwealth, or subject of the Government.
quia rever a non scit nec andivit ut homo, seu pars reipub. Tea he may swear
all this if he but mentally reserve, so as to tell you. It Is Del Rio in 6th.
Book Mag. dis. 1. Cap. Sec. 2. It seems it is safer to break all the obligations
to Allegiance and to truth, his duty and his oaths, the Princes and Gods bonds,
than the Seal of Confession.

But I did not mention this to let you see the kindness these men have to
Princes and their Government: I shall avoid producing any the opinions of Tea
and particular provincial Councels, though Bellarmine names many for my turn.
Conc. Romans 1. and 2um. (which was justified also they say in Com. Tribur.
Quint. Ost^ens. Claramont Romans 7. and 10.) (...) Rom 3. (...) Rhem^^s.
Claramont. And he names more Popes.
particular persons howsoever horrid in my arguments this day; but I only ask
whether it be not very probable this instance was the thing to be attempted on
this day? Whether the resolution was

Well they are even with us yet, and lay as horrid Projects to the charge of
Protestants. Among our other Controversies Image of both Churches, Babel and
Jerusalem, drawn by a Catholic Pen, and then you may be sure all Babell's
divisions and confusions make the draught of ours, and are said to be the issue
of the Protestant Doctrines: Whereas such things though countenanc't by some
particular Authors of their Church, were never owned by any public Act, or
Doctrine of a general Council to which they provoke us. I must needs confess
our Calendar can show a thirtieth of January, as well fifth of November. There
are indeed that say, the Romanists hatched that days guilt, and See Dr. Dr
Moulin's answer to Philanax Anglicus p. 59.
challenge any man to call them to account for saying so. But whether so or
not; which Churches Doctrines such things are more suited to, I will now put to
trial, that we may know what Spirit each is of: And I will try it by the
public Acts and most established Doctrines of the Churches, and here undertake
to show the Church of England most expressly does declare against all practices
against the Prince for the cause of Religion. But the Romish in those acts
wherein she has most reason to expect infallibility of Spirit, also in the
public Acts of the Church representative, in General Counsels does abett the
doing them, not only for Religion, but for the cause of Holy Church.

First, If the Church of Rome have reason to expect infallible assistance of
the Spirit in any case, it is as much in Accordingly the Schoolmen do account
it de fide that the Pope cannot err in this.
Canonizing of a Saint as in any other, it being as unhappy to

But it is known their Church has Canonized one of this Nation, S. Thomas the
Martyr.
Becket, who though he was indeed illegally and barbarously Murdered, yet it is
not the Suffering, but the Cause that makes the Martyr, now he did not fall a
Sacrifice for his Religion, but was slain because he did disturb the State by
See Daniel's Hist. of Engl. in the life of Hen. 2. Anno 1170. p. 94. Edit.
London. Ann. 1634.
suspending all the Bishops that upheld the Kings just cause against him, so
that neither King nor State could live in peace for him; for Idem. Anno 1164.
p. 85.
opposing also those Laws which Privileges by the Gallican Church, and they
not branded for so doing: In a word, he was slain for those actions which his
Idem. p. 86.
own Bishops condemned him for, as a perjured man and a Traitor: And for
persisting in them to the death he was Nor are the Jesuits less favorable to
Fa. Garnett who was Executed for this treasonable Powder Plot. For Mr. de St.
Amor in his Journal Part. 2. c. 11. says, that among other Prints of the
Pourtraitures of such as were canonises Canonized as having shed their blood
for the christian Religion, one was thus. Pater Henricus Garnetus Anglus
Londini pro fide Catholica suspensus and sectus. 3 Maii 1606. Adding that those
Prints are made avec permission des Superieurs.
Sainted.

Now whatever the estate of this man be in the next Lucifer did fall; does seem
to show what Spirit they are of that Canonize such Saints: For the Church to
pray to Christ that Christ's Jesu per Thomas vulnera quae nos ligan^ relax^
scelera. Jesu (...) per Thoma merita nostra nobis ^itte debit^ Pertisor. seu
^^^viar. all us^^ Eccles. S^ram.
by the wounds of this Saint he would remit their sins, does express what rate
their Church does set upon the merits of resisting Princes, and disturbing
States in the behalf of Holy Church: When such actions make men fit to be joint
purchasers with Christ in the Redemption of the World. But when the French See
Daniel's Hist. Anno 1172. p. 99.
Histories say 'twas disputed long after in Paris whether he were Damned or
Saved, that the Church in her public Offices should pray Fac was Christ^
s^^^der^ que Thomas a ^^^^^it, H^nc p^^^camur Assequa^^^r at Thoma conserti^^.
Missul. ad us. Eccles. Sur.
to go thither where he is gone to have his Society; though it express their
most infallible assurance of the condition of those men, who for their sakes
resist the Secular Powers, yet O my Soul! enter not thou into their counsels in
this world, neither say a Confederacy to whom they say a Confederacy: Much
less pray to be in their Society, who by resisting Rom 13. 2.
S. Paul says, do receive unto themselves Damnation.

Secondly, It is notorious that in their first General Counsel at Lions, Anno
1245. the Emperor Frederick the second, by the Habetor ^^^te^^ia. Council. Tom.
28. p. 424. Edit. Reg. Par. An. 1644.
Sentence of the Pope and the Cum fratribus ^ostris and sacre co^c^^^ deliber
(...) habit^ dil^^^^il. p. 431. Constanter igi^^ and ^^^rrime in ple^s and jo^^
plenissi^^^ Concili^ Imperat^^ Pred. quasi (...) Ecclesi^ (...) and Re^^^^^ a ^
^^ude part^s ^^habit. a^tibus. p. 457. Dominus Papa Se^te^t^^m
Excommu^icati^^ls (...) pl^^^ Concili^ (...) audicutium st^p^re and horrere
terribili fulgu^^^^. it. p. 462. Domin^s Papa and Pr^^^ti affid^^^^s Concil^
(...) ^^co^sis in dictum Imperat^r^^ -- terribilit^^ -- (...). p. 463.
Pr^lati^^^^ cand^las s^^s acce^sas incli^^^^^ and extinxer^^^ excommuit^^^^^
Imperat^^^m dep^^^^tes. Mutt. Par.
whole Council after long deliberation and producing several Arguments which
they say are not slight, but effectual to prove the suspicion of Nonne igit^r
^^t (...) levis sed effi^^^^ su^^ argu^^^^^ de s^spici^^^ N^r^sis contra eum
Co^^^^m. 28 p. 431.
Heresy, is O^^^ (...) and dignit^^^ -- sente^^i^^d^ privamus; (...) qui ei
jura^^^^ fid^^^^tis te^^^t^r a^^ricti a (...) perpet^^ absolventes: A^^^^^itatt
Apost^lic^ inhibond^, etc. Ibid. p. 431.
deprived of his Empire all his Subjects are absolved from their oath of
Allegiance, and by Apostolical Authority forbidden to obey him: Therefore that
such things may be done in the cases of Religion has the Authority of a
General Council, 'twas that Council that Decreed Po^^^. Ration^r. ^^mper^m. l.
9. c. 1. part prima p. 457. Edit. Par. Ann^. 1652.
Red Hats to Cardinals: Hats red it seems not only with the Royal Purple, but
with the Blood of Kings and of Royalty it self.

Thirdly, I should have urged the well known Canon of the General Council of
Celebrated in the year of our Lord 1215. in which 412 Bishops etc.
Lateran, (the greatest their Church ever boasted of) which says, Can. 3. Con.
Tom. 28. p. 161.
That if the temporal Lord shall neglect to purge his Territories from such as
the Church there declares Heretics, he shall be Excommunicated by the
Metropolitan, and if he do not mend within a year complained of to the Pope, Ut
ex tunc ipse vasallos ab ejus fidelitate denunciat absolutos, and terram etc.
Ib.
that so he may declare his Subjects absolved from their Allegiance, and expose
his Lands to be seized by Catholics; who shall exterminate the Heretics,
saving the right of the chief Lord: Modo super boc ipse nullum pr^stet
obstaculum, nec aliquod impedimentum opponat, e'dem nihilominus lege servata
circa eos qui non habent Dominos temporales. Ca^. eodem.
Provided he give no impediment to this. But the same law shall be observed to
those that have no chief Lords; that is, who are themselves Supreme.

This I should urge, but that some say that penal Statutes, which are leges
odiosae, tantum disponunt, quantum loquuntur: Therefore this Canon since it
does not name Kings, it does not they say concern them, although it is plain it
do sufficiently enough. But that there may be therefore no evasion,

Fourthly, In the General Council of Constance, that part of it I mean that is
approved by their whole after Martin V. was made. Pope.
Church. The Sacro approbante Council. Constant. per Apostolica scripta
committimus and mandamus. Conc. Tom. 29. p. 613.
Pope and Council join together in commanding all Archbishops, Bishops, and
Inquisitors to pronounce all such Excommunicate as are declared Heretics in
such and such Articles p. 617. 626.
Transubstantiation, p. 626.
half-Communion, and the p. 626.
Pope's Supremacy are among them) or that favor or defend them, or that
Communicate with them in public or in p. 628.
private, whether in sacred offices or otherwise; ^tiamsi T^ough they be
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Kings, or Queens, or Dukes, etc.
Patriarchali, Archiepiscopali, Episcopali, Regali, Reginali Ducali, aut alia
quavis Ecclesiastica, aut mundana prae^u^geant dignitate: And Commands them
also to Per excommunicationis suspensionis and interdicti^ec non privationis
dignitatum persona^uum -- and etiam b^norum at dignitatum sacularium -- and per
alias paenas, vias and mcdos. p. 629. The same Mandate also does in p. 614.
enjoy^ them to require the Emperors, Kings, Dukes, etc. to expel those
Heretics from their Dominions; see. te^^r^^^ Later an. Concilii q^od incipis
sicus ait. Namely cap. 27. of the general Council of Lateran under Alex. 3.
which Ca^on threatens thus. Relaxatos se ^overint a debito fidel^tatis and
hominii ac totius obsequii -- quicunque illis aliquo pacto tementur annexi.
Conc. Tom. 27. p. 461. Also in the 17 Sess. of the Counc. of Con^ance under
John 21. Conc. Tom. 29. p. 458. The Council does define expressly
Excommunication and deprivation to Kings also. Hac sacrosancta Constant Synodus
Ecclesiam Catholica^^ representa^s in sp^rit^ sancto legitime congregata,
statmit, definit. and ordinatu quod quic^nque cujuscunque status ac conditionis
existat etiamsi Regalis Cardinalatus etc. -- Sententiam excommunication is
austoritate hujus S. Concilii general ipso facto incurrat -- and ulterius omni
honor and dignitate sit ipso facto privat^s.
proceed to Interdicts, and deprivation of Dignities, and Goods, and whatsoev^r
other Penalties, vias and modos. Thus that Council though it took away the
Peoples right to the Blood of Christ, denying them the Cup in the Sacramc^t,
gave them in exchange the Blood of their own Kings, making them a right to that.

And that they extend the force of these Canons to the most absolute Princes,
even to him that pleads exemption most, to the King of France is plain, because
when Sixtus the fifth thundered out his Bulls against the then King of Navarre
afterward King Henry the fourth of France, and the Prince of Conde, depriving
them not only of their Lands and Dignities, but their Succession also to the
Crown of France, absolving their Subjects from their Oaths, forbidding them to
obey them, he declared he did it to them as to relapsed Heretics, favorers
and defenders of them, and as such fallen under the Censures of the Les
declarant heretics relaps, chefs, fa^tours and protecteurs de l' heresy come
tells tombs da^s les censures and les pei^es y portees par les loix and les
Canons, privez e^x and le^r descendans des tontes terres and dignites,
incapables de succeder a quelque Principa^te que se seit, specialement an
Royanme de France. Absout leurs Subjects d^ serment de fidelite and leur defend
de leur obeir. Hist^ire du Roy. H. le Grand. par l' Evesque de Rhode^. ad
annum. 1585. p. 68. and v. p. 71 Edit Amst. anno 1661.
Canons of the Church. Now there are no other Canons that do take in Kings but
these which can touch him, for that of Cap. ^^am sanctam. de Major and
obedientia (...) extra. Com.
Boniface the eighth which says the Pope has power to judge all temporal
powers, France. Cap. mer^it. de privilege. in extravag communibus.

Thus by the public Acts of their Church, and by the Canons of their General
Councels we have found in causes of Religion Deprivation of Princes, Wars and
Bloodshed, and the other confequent Miseries are established; Rebellion
encouraged by a Law: And if 1 Samuel 15. 23.
Rebellion he as the sin of Witchcrast then we know what manner of Spirit they
are of that do encourage it; sure witches have no spirit but the Devil for
familiar.

But the Church of England on the other side, in her public Book of Homilies,
established in the 39. Articles of her Religion, says in express words that it
is not lawful for Inferiors and Subjects in any case to resist and stand
against the Superior Powers: that we must indeed believe undoubtedly that we
may not obey Kings, Magistrates, or any other, if they would command us to do
any thing contrary to Gods Commands. In such a case we ought to say with the
Apostle we must rather obey God than Man. But nevertheless in that case we may
not in any wise withstand violently, or rebel against Rulers, or make any
Insurrection, Sedition, or Tumults, either by force of Arms or otherwise,
against the Anointed of the Lord, or any of his Officers, 1 Book of Hom. 2
part of Sermon. of Obed. Not for Reformation of Religion; for what a Religion
it is that such men by such means would restore, may easily be judged, even as
good a Religion surely as Rebels be good men, and obedient Subjects, 2 Book of
Hom. 4. part of the Sermon. against will full rebellion. The very same thing is
defined in the first of the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical of the year
1640. for Subjects to bear Arms against their King, offensive, or defensive,
upon any pretense whatever, is at least to resist the Powers which are ord^in'd
of God: and though they do not invade but only resist, S. Paul tells them
plainly, he that resists receives unto himself damnation. This was the Doctrine
of the Church in those her Constitutions; and although there was no Parl. then
sitting to enact these Canons into Laws, yet since that time the Law of
England is declared to say the same; and we obliged by it to acknowledge,
Subscription to the Act for Uniformity 14 Car. 2.
that it is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take up Arms against
the King, by this Parliament, whose memory shall be for ever blessed.

And now it is not hard to know what manner of Spirit our Church is of, even
that Spirit that anoynts the Lords Anointed, that is, which Commissions them,
Gods Spirit, as we find it phras'd in Scripture: And it is obvious to each eye
that there is much more resemblance betwixt present Rome, and the Image of
Babylon, as S. John has drawn it in Revelations, than there is of Babel and
the Church of England, as to those Confusions which seditious Doctrines make,
as the Romanists pourtrai'd her.

But far be it from me to conclude hence that all of their Communion do allow
their Doctrines: Though they stand on the same bottom that their Faith of half
Communion, and Transubstantiation do; even Acts of the same Counsels, yet I
doubt not multitudes of loyal Souls of this our Nation do abhor the Tenants,
by what Rule of theirs I know not I confess. Nor shall I enquire what Security
a Prince can have Allegiance of those, who by the most infallible Rules of
their Religion can be loyal only on Condition, by the leave of those who are
his Enemies, on whose will and power all their Oaths and duty are depending. If
the most essential interest of Princes will not move them to consider this,
sure I am I shall not undertake it: But I shall take the confidence out of the
premises to infer, that no Religion in the World does more provide for the
security of Kings, than the Christian as it is professed in our Church does. And
when we see the Interest of the Crown and Church were twisted by God in the
preservations of this day, nor could be separated good will for our Sion,
cannot have an unconcernedness for this Religion, a cold indifference to it or
any other; which where-ere it is, alas I fear betrays too openly indifference
and unconcernednesse for Religion it self. For if I should appeal to our most
Sceptick Statists, and not beg one Principle of a Religion, Religion was
contrived, they say, by pretending to engage a God to uphold his Vicegerent,
and by putting after, everlasting punishments before men's fears, (for they saw
present ones restrained not Treason) was contrived to uphold States: Then that
must be the best with them that best upholds, and then I have evinc't the
Christian is secure, as it is professed by our Church. But then shame to those who
to gratify their lusts merely, labor to persuade themselves and others there
is no such thing in earnest as a Resurrection to punishments: who by public
raillery in sacred things, and turning all to merriment, endeavor to take off
the sense of all Religion, and have done it in great measure; and so thrown
down the best Basis on which Government subsists: which they themselves confess
was necessary to be if there be no after fears, he that is stronger than to
need to fear the present may rebel, kill Kings.

These Atheists are Fanatics, I am sure in Politics; more traiterous than our
mad Enthusiasts, or than the Canons of the Popish Councels: To these Sadduces
in Christianity we may say ye know not what spirit ye are of, who know not Acts
23. 8.
whether there be any Spirit. But it is indeed because they are all flesh
themselves: But then if the works of the flesh be Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.
manifest, adultery, fornication, seditions, heresies, murders, drunkenness,
etc. we know what manner of Spirit they are of; even the spirit that did enter
into the Swine, the Legion indeed of Spirits, one Spirit is not Devil enough to
animate the flesh into so many of those works. But the fruits of the Spirit
that Gospel Spirit which we Christians are of, are love, peace, longsuffering,
gentleness goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, joy ^. 22, 23.
in the Holy Ghost; and they that do bring forth such fruits are baptized
indeed with the Holy Ghost; and if with fire, fire that came down from Heaven
too, 'twas only to consume their dross that they may be pure metal, fit as
for the King's Inscription, meek Christians, good Subjects, so for Gods Image
to be renewed in Kighteousnesse and true Holiness. Fire this that will sublime
our very flesh into spiritual body, that we may begin here that incorruptible
which our corruptible must put on, when our vile Bodies shall be made like to
the glorious Body of our Savior: To which state that Spirit which raised up
Jesus from the dead bring us, by quickening our mortal Bodies.

To whom, etc.

SERMON XI. CHRIST-CHURCH IN OXFORD. November. 8. 1665. Being the Monthly
Fast Day for the Plague.
LUKE XVI. 30. 31. Nay Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent. --

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.


THat God who purchased for us the possibilities He should be contriving
methods to bring men to Repentance is nothing strange; for this is but to take
care that all that ever he has done for them be not in vain and lost: But that
in Hell, a place which nothing but Repentance Nay Father Abraham, but if one
went unto them from the dead they will repent, etc.

The words do willingly suggest occasion for several Inquiries, and some of
those of the nicer and more curious kind, but truly I shall not attend to those
suggestions, but shall choose to handle a few of the most obvious and popular
Considerations that the words break into, and they are three.

First, the Rich man's Charity to his Brethren, his unsatisfied desire and care
that they may be brought to Repentance, expressed in these words, Nay Father
Abraham, though they have Moses and Prophets, yet let them have one method more.

Secondly, we have here his choice of that method, that which he thought would
do though nothing else would; in these words, If one went unto them from the
dead they will repent. In the handling of which, we shall examine what the
grounds were upon which this Rich man was so confident that that would work
upon them; and here we find he chose with several advantages.

First, One from the dead;

Secondly, That one Lazarus; and he

First, One out of Abraham's Bosom:

Secondly, One that had seen him also in his Torments and could testify of
them, v. 27.

Thirdly, We have here these fancied hopes all dash't in Abraham's answer, And
he said unto him, if they believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they
be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

First of the first, the Charitable, careful contrivances this Rich man in Hell
had for his Brethren upon Earth: Nay Father Abraham, etc.

It is commonly reported of men who know themselves infected by the Plague,
that they desire to infect as many others as they can; they contrive to spread
the Contagion, and love society of Ruin; and we are sure it is so in that
Plague of the Soul, Sin. This humor did not content it Heaven, and unpeople
Paradise, but all the Ages of the world make up its Triumph, and every sin that
ever was, and misery that shall be, is its issue. Lucifer's pride would have a
train of Angels and Mankind to wait upon him in destruction: And in such an
attendance, though to his everlasting cost, he does still pride himself; he
feeds upon that envy that devours him, and cheers himself with adding fuel to
his flames that do torment him; and upon this account enjoyes his own Agonies
and God's Indignation: And then it is no wonder if his Agents upon Earth enjoy
all in all, and all in every part of the whole Company that join in wickedness.
But it should seem it is otherwise with the Sinners in Hell. Our Rich man here
when he saw his own estate remediless, so vast a gulf betwixt him and the
Bosom of Comfort, that v. 27, 28. Nor satisfied with this, when Abraham
replies, they are provided well enough, they have Moses and the Prophets, the
one Preaching the Law to them, whose Rules they have made as familiar to them
as their dress, they put on daily Gods Commandments, and their duty; make his
Precepts their frontlets and their wristbands. And the other the Prophets, are
vision of the Judgments that await their sins, and come to them burdned with
the foreknowledge of the sinners expectations; so that except they will
resolve to choose destruction wilfully to assault their own perdition, there is
no fear they should come thither; those tell them as much as any from the dead
can do: Ah! but thinks he, all those methods I had, yet I am here; and then let
them have one other; for as now after this little taste of Tophet; So if one
went to tell them how it is with me, sure then they would repent and not come
hither; therefore I pray thee send, Nay Father Abraham, etc.

I cannot here assent to Cardinal Cajetan's account that all this earnestness
was only pride in our Rich man, and a desire to have the glory of his Family
advance'd; which as he labored to raise here by Wealth, so now finding by sad
experience that was but a weak foundation to build a lasting House upon, and
that all the shine of it was but false treacherous light, such as did end in
flame with him; and having made discovery of other greater glorys, that Abraham
and Lazarus possessed, he would have his Family as high

If it were so, truly it is the first pride I ever read of that would content
it self with no meaner a dress than the Robes of Immortality, and was ambitious
of the Throne of Glory. I have heard I confess of a proud lowliness, where
the humility is but the manage and the art of being lofty, is only assumed
condescension whereby men but descend to be extolled, and stoop to take
advantage for their mount: But never heard of any pride that aimed to raise it
self by vices of Hell may be fit patterns for our Religious performances, and
'twere to be desired that all Christians had this man's ardencies and flames in
their affections to their houses.

Yet neither can I from this one particular instance draw

The kindnesses of our man here in the flames were divine God-like Charities
compared to these. Our Savior says, Take heed that ye despise not one of
these little ones, for I say unto you that in Heaven their Angels do always
behold the Face of my Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 18. 10. Which one
expounds, if we neglect to do what shall be in our power to preserve the
meanest Christians from vice, and slight their sinning, their Tutelary Angels
that have continual recourse to God, and are high in his favor, will make
complaints of us in their behalf, at least they will if we offend them, and any
action of ours prove an occasion of their sins. And if a favorite of Heaven
shall accuse us to the Lord for that, Then how will he complain of us when we
tempt? when Hell here, and the kindnesses of one among the Devils shall come in
Judgment against us; where we see the Rich man thought not of his own
condemnation so much he thought of the averting that of his Brethren. We might
suppose a man in his condition could not consider any thing but his own
Tortures. O yes, to preserve others from them; yet, when the man in Hell does
so, the men on Earth do think of nothing more than to entice others into them.

And it is well if they stay there; it happens so that Parts and Wit, Faculties
and Acquisitions do ingratiate men into these treacherous kindnesses, and
qualify them for the desires loosnesse and then into prophannesse; debauch
their manners, and then their Principles; teach them to sport themselves with
Vice, and then with Holy things, and after with Religion it self; which is a
greater Luxury than that their Ryots treat their Appetites withal, the Luxury
of wit. And thus they educate them into Atheism, and these familiar Devils are
called Acquaintances and Friends: And indeed the Companions in sin a man would
think should be dear friends, such as pour an heart into one another in their
Altar-flames, even to those everlasting fires; such communications certainly
cement affections so that nothing can divide them: And let them do so, Lord
send me the kindness of Hell rather, one that will be a friend like this man
in his Torments, that with unsatisfied cares minded the reformation of his
Friends, Nay Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead they will
repent; which brings me to the Choice, the second part.

If a Ghost should indeed appear to any of us in the midst of our Commissions,
it would certainly hurry us from our enjoyments; and there are no such ties and
unions by which the advantages of sin do hold us fixed and joynted to them, but
the shake and tremble we should then be in, would Jews were wont to say, we
shall dye because we have seen an Angel of the Lord from Heaven, most men do
fear if they should see the Spirit of a dead man from the Earth. Indeed the
affrights which men do usually conceive at the mere apprehension of such an
apparition, do probably arise from a surprise, in being minded hastily of such
a state for which they are not then prepared so as they we shall dye said the
Jews.

But not to ask the reason of this now, but find the reason why our Rich man
thinks when Moses and the Prophets cannot make a man repent, such a Ghost
should: We have it v. 28. they do but discourse to us, but one from the dead
could testify, he could bear witness that it is so as they say, speak his own
sight and knowledge, and therefore though they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
yet if one went unto them from the dead they will repent. For

First, one from the Dead could testify that when we dye we do not cease to
be; and he would make appear that our departing hence is not annihilation, and
so would dash the hopes of Epicures, such as I was, and I may fear they are;
who as they live like Beasts do think to dye so too; and who are rational in
this alone that they desire to be but Animal. And all the rest of men whether
worldly or sensual, that enclose their desires and enjoyments within this life,
and above all the Atheist that dares not look beyond it, all these would be
convinced by such an evidence. Indeed Wisd. 2. and therefore every Sect of men
that did prescribe last Assize, and their Elizian fields were but Poetical
Paradise, their Phlegethon, River of Fire, was set to express our stream of
Brimstone flame: Thus Resurrection in fable made them virtuous; the guess at
it made Socrates dye cheerful, and though his hopes had faint weak Principles
they had Heroic almost Martyr resolutions.

And on the other side, of those that among them denied Epicurus was a virtuous
man, yet his Sect did give name to Vice; and is still the expression for it,
and all that did espouse the Tenants of it, did the vices too; the Sadduces
among the Jews are called Epicures, not only for opinions sake, because they
did make God a body, and totally denied his (...) Joseph de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c.
12. Edit. bas^^.
Providence, as Zakuth says, but Epicures also for their practice sake,: For
they used to scoff at the Pharisees for afflicting themselves by Fasting and
Austerities in this life, (...) when there is nothing at all of recompense for
them in any life to come. Yea and Josephus says of them they (...) etc. Ibid.
were the worst of all Sects, living like savage Beasts toward one another,
and uncourteous to their own Sect us to strangers; and this, says he, was but
a natural effect of their Opinion, (...). Ibid.
which wholly denied the Immortality of the Soul, and all Rewards and
Punishments after this Life; which Principle one coming from the dead would
rectify, and so contribute to Repentance. Especially if.

Secondly, that one were Lazarus, if he that at the Supper of the Lamb sits
next the Father of the faithful, and the Friend of God, in one of the higher
Seats of Paradise, in Abraham's Bosom; if he would go and speak his knowledge
of the Pleasures of that Bosom which he tastes, and of the glories of that
place, and but compare them with the little gayeties of my Fathers House; show
them the difference betwixt their Structures and that Foundation whose builder
and maker God is, betwixt the entertainments of their riotous Palates, and the
Festivals of the Blessed Trinity, then sure they would disrellish those, and
catch at these, which do exceed them by a whole Infinity, and will outlive
them an Eternity. Lazarus perform, to dash out the blessedness of that place,
making the first draught of them with notions of delight, not such as the
understanding cannot apprehend, but such as seize the heart with pleasure in
this Life, and that give it the strongest agitations here; and sweetning that
by those raise it then with shadow, evince that reason, though it cannot
fathom, can yet by sure Discourse conclude the greatness of those glories,
which I would leave for your expectations to loose themselves into; should I
attempt all this I were an insolent undertaker. Yet were it very easy to
describe them so as that viewing them with the things below, these would vanish
in the comparison. And to do so much was the utmost that our Rich man could
design by sending Lazarus, who if he could have been believed might probably
have done the work; for if Faith did but do what Lazarus did, look into
Abraham's Bosom, were it but turned into a little vision, and but as clear an
evidence of things not seen as eyesight has of its temptations, had the
spiritual object but that advantage the carnal has of being present, (now it
is the work of Faith to give it that advantage) sure it would be impossible for
the sensitive objects, the pleasures are the Profits of this world, which are
so far inferior to the other in desirablenesse, and only make advantage of
their being present, when the other is so far of, 'twould be Peter, and James,
and John, saw but a glimpse of it, and that transfigur'd too, (only the other
way that Moses and Elias were, for the glory suffered an exinanition) and they
but waked into the sight of it, so that 'twas but an apparition of Heaven; and
yet they Master it is good for us to be here, let us go down no more, never
converse with any thing beneath Mount Tabor, but let us build three Booths,
such Tents would be like that which He has spread, and such Booths be some of
the many Mansions of his House, who spreads out the Heavens for a Tent for
himself to dwell in. But the truth is while men do only hear of Joys above,
and have but thin neglected notions of them, and on the other side a sense of
present profits, pleasures, honors which the world affords, they will not
Supper of the Lamb, as of their own delicious daily fare, nor be as much
wrought upon by the Promises of being Clothed upon with the white Robe of
Immortality, and by the mentions of a Crown, although of Glory, as they are
pleased with their own Royal Purples, they have much surer Conviction of the
delights of present things, than of those far removed futurities; but now if
Lazarus would go from Abraham's Bosom, he might Convince them from his own
Experience, and then they would Repent. Especially

Thirdly, because Lazarus has seen me in my Torments, and can give account of
them, wherefore I pray thee Father Abraham send him, for if such an one went
unto them from the Dead, one that could testify of this place, he would tell
them such sad stories of my condition here, how in lieu of all my sumptuous
fare I have nothing now but gnashing of teeth, streams indeed of Brimstone, and
a lake of fire, but everlasting fever of thirst for my delicious intemperate
Palate; my short-lived sins turned to eternal Agonies; sure this would prevail
with them to cut off their sins by Repentance, before Death cut off their sin
and them together; and so they might prevent the coming hither. And well I will
now content my self with everlasting Condemnation and this sin, for I see they
are consequent, now this I cannot leave therefore let the other come; they that
were once affected with the apprehensions of the greatness and the certainty
of that Damnation cannot resolve thus, and therefore we see fewer men adventure
to transgress Man's Law, whose Punishment is near and most assured, than God's
Commandments. And when their fears of the Lords Tophet: And then if Lazarus
could raise these apprehensions in them, sure they would repent. It Is plain
these were the grounds our Rich enough to their heart to be thoroughly convinced
in earnest, Abraham granted his desire, and sent Lazarus to testify the
Glories he had tasted in himself, and the Torments he had seen their Brother
in, all he could hope from this was but to make them more believe the one and
other; therefore he thought for want of this they would miscarry, and this
alone would do it; so that we may conclude, that in the judgment of one that
died without Repentance, having resisted all God's Methods, and knew upon what
score he did it, and suffered the deserved pains of so doing; the reason why
men do not repent, is because they are not sufficiently convinced of the if one
went unto them from the Dead, one that could testify, they would Repent.

I should now make reflections on this and our selves together, and truly all
this would bespatter foully such as go on in a vice, for it does conclude
concerning them that they do not believe Gods Truths, but in the midst of their
professions of Religion are Infidels; it is plain they are so in the

First, If one went unto them from the dead, says he, they will Repent. And
now to answer that, Christ is come from the dead; an Article this is that made
its way through all Christ's Resurrection: but now they that profess it are so
well here in this Life, that in defiance of their own profession, they will not
think there is another Life.

It is not out of Principle they doubt (as it were easy to demonstrate) but
out of improbity: They have an aversion to severe Piety, and are uneasy under
any thing that does engage to it, and must therefore work themselves out; and
here they storm; Unkind men to themselves! not only in Christ be risen,
because His Resurrection did make Faith that he would Judge the World in
Righteousness, on purpose to make them Repent; Acts 17. 30, 31. So that this
his first expectation is most fully answered

But Secondly, if Lazarus would go, one out of Abraham's Bosom then they would
Repent. And has there not a greater than Lazarus been with us? one not out of
Abraham's but Gods Bosom? even the Son of his Bosom, one that himself prepared
those Joys for them that would believe him and obey him; one that from all
Eternity enjoyed them in the Bosom of the Divinity. And who could better reveal
them to us than the Author and the God of them? who knew them more than he
that did create them and possess them? Yea when this Son of God would be
Incarnate Heb. 12. 2. Now sure he that prepared these Joys did understand
them, and he that is the Word of God knew best how to reveal them too. And now
how poor a wish was that of our Rich man? Let Lazarus go tell them: why a
Person of the Trinity has told us; indeed how could God Hell say to us when
one there said, if Lazarus will go they will repent? If

Lazarus, Thirdly, one that saw me in Hell, and so can testify the Torments of
this place, yet God has outdone this too. Our Creed will tell us who
descended into Hell, and the Psalmist saying concerning him, God should not
leave his Soul in Hell. S. Austin asks, Quis ergo nisi infidelis negaverit
fuisse Christum apud inferos? 'Twere easy for me to produce enough besides
that say so. Clem. Alex. Origin. Hier. Greg. Naz. Fulgent. Eusebius. Emissenus.
Caesarius. Anastas. Jobius. Damascenus. Oecumenius etc. But because we are not
agreed what he did there, I Will take a surer medium. That no Lazarus can
decipher the condition of a Sinner after the pleasures of his iniquity have
left him to the recompenses of it, so well as Christ who not only did prepare
the Plagues, and therefore can describe them, but also himself bore the Agonies
will give you a relation beyond the skill of Lazarus that saw the Torments, or
of all that suffer them. Look but into the Garden, and see if you do not behold
there a more dismal Landshape than that which Lazarus had beyond the Gulf, and
was desired to give account of? there you shall find Christ at the first
approaches saying my soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death, Mat. 26. 38. As if
the only apprehension of his sufferings had inflicted them, and he could not
live under the thoughts of them: he went a little farther and fell upon his
face and prays saying, O my Father if it be possible let this Cup pass from
me. And what was there in this Cup which so empoyson'd it as to make it
dreadful to the Son of God? Oh it is the Sinners potion that he must swill to
everlastingness, and when he was in this condition there oppeared an Angel from
Heaven strengthening him, Luc. 22. 43. yet v. the 44. we find him still in an
Agony. Angels cannot comfort one that is sensible of the guilt of sin upon him;
and he prays more earnestly in that same place, Abba Father all things are
possible with thee, take away this Cup from me. He does not leave an Attribute
unattempted, he does adore the Majesty, for he falls upon his Face and Prays:
A Person of the Trinity prostrated in the dust to deprecate those pains; he
wooes him to it Abba Father, can thou deny thy well-beloved, only begotten
Son, thy Son that is thy self, when he comes to thee with such tender
compellations of kindness? with words of so much bowels? Abba Father: he takes
hold too of his Omnipotence, all things are possible with thee; and he does it
with all the earnestness possible to such a person: for says Luke there, he
does it more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great drops of Blood
falling to the ground, and what Agony is there in the torment, when there is
agony in the deprecation of them? such a passion could not be goes again the
third time and prays the same words, as if, if nothing else, importunity should
prevail, and when we shall consider that the Person doing this is the Son of
God, to whom nothing could be truly insupportable, yet that he should not be
able to bear sin; the weight of that we see makes him cry out My God, my God,
why host thou forsaken me? as if God could forsake that person in whom the
Godhead was of his Person: Or indeed as if the condition did even separate
between

And now could any from the dead have given us such a frighting account? is
there not as much warning in this prospect, as if our selves had tasted all of
it? for is it not more that these Torments should be so terrible to him than
that they should be insupportable to us? Blessed Savior! if the first
apprehensions did assault thee with such killing fury, can we resolve to stand
the storm? if we do not resolve that, then if all this will not scare us, but
notwithstanding all these fears we will have our delightful, yea and our
tormenting they that hear not Moses and the Prophets, not yet Christ, neither
will they be persuaded sure though any other come unto them from the dead. And
so I fall on my last part in these words.

If they hear not Moses and the Prophets neither will they be persuaded though
one rose from the dead. Here the expression should be first taken notice of:
For that is changed, it should go regularly thus, as in the proposal, Nay
Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead they will repent, so in
his answer, if they repent not for Moses and the Prophets, neither will they
repent though one rose from the dead. repent and be persuaded, yea and to hear
Moses and the Prophets were the same things. And if it were our Age had got a
fair pretense for bringing all Religion to the Ear; but sure Repentance costs
the eyes and heart more than it does that part, and yet the Scripture uses often
the like expression: So in 1 Timothy 4. 16. it is faid of Timothy, that by
continuing in his Doctrine he should save them that hear him. So also 1 Cor.
15. 2. by which ye are saved if ye keep in memory the things which I have
Preached unto you. Ear and Memory are so priviledg'd, that the Tongue has not
the like advantage; but not every one that says Lord Lord shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; yet to know has as great, for this is Life eternal to know
thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Joh. hear, or to
remember, or to be persuaded, that is to believe or know, any or all of these
alone, shall be rewarded so; or that these necessarily do produce all the rest
that is necessary to attain those ends: But only that it is so reasonable that
they should produce them, that the Scripture does presume they will; and
therefore affirms, He that says he knows God and keeps not his Commandments is
a Liar. 1 John 2. 4. and he that sins has not seen him neither known him, 1 John 3. 6. heard of him it seems by the Text here: For it is so i^ national
that they who have had notice of the advantages of serving God, and the sad
issues of Iniquity, should not reform; that the Scripture does not suppose them
guilty of it, but does choose to word it thus, they hear not: A sharp rebuke
for them all whose Religion is much hearing without doing; the men whose Soul
dwells in their Ear, and that dwells by the Pulpit, that these should be
adjudged as men that never heard; and so they shall in every respect indeed,
but in the innocence of not having heard, that they do hear they hear not Moses
and the Prophets and then neither will they be persuaded though one rose from
the dead.

Where I note Secondly, that our Savior does not intend here to commit
Prophecy and Miracles, and set them one against the other, to show which were
most efficacious in begetting Faith; for predictions being Gods exerting of his
Omniscience, as raising from dead is the exerting of his Omnipotence, the one a
miracle of Knowledge, as the other Power, Prophecy therefore is not to be
opposed to Miracle, because it works merely as one; indeed it is a miracle in
Expectation, or at distance, and the other present: Nor are they to be made to
vie, since both conspire, and both are best in different cases: Besides our
Savior is not talking here of begetting Faith, but making men repent, and the
whole meaning of the words is briefly this. Thy Brethren being Jews have Moses
and the Prophets, those contain all the motives of Repentance, Gods Commands,
his Promises, and Threats; even Heaven and Hell as themselves confess, all
these have been confirmed already by great Miracles, and as such have Jewish
Church, with so immovable an opinion of the truth of them, that there needs no
new Miracle to give accession of credit to them. And then what can one coming
from the dead persuade? affections, or his Reason; all which are baited to the
height by those motives they have; the Understanding and the appetite whether
it love, or hate, or hope, or fear, (which set on work whatever we perform) all
these I say Heaven and Hell are object for even to the utmost possibility of
motion; If he can bring no new ones, those they have when they are once truly
believed then they have all the vigor they can have; belief being the
application of those active motives to their work, but all the strength to act
being in those motives themselves; all I mean in opposition to the miracle. I
know that there are other strengths of Grace, but those do help as well the
Miracle as Motive; those have influence on the believing too, by their exciting
and assisting: (But this strength which may be common to both is not to be
considered when one vies with the other:) What therefore shall he go for who
can give no new motives nor strength to those they have. If any should not be
confirmed enough in that which Moses and the Prophets say, how shall they Moses
says, although acknowledged with that veneration which the Jews receive Moses
with, whose credit they themselves do say no Miracle can be wrought so great as
to be able to add to, or diminish from: why then that same improbity within a
while will with more ease work off the force of this new confirmation, so that
it will be vain. Indeed it is possible that the surprise of such a Miracle just
as any other sudden mind nor lay to heart; yet when the astonishment of that
is over, the motives then are left to their own strength, and can work only by
their own activity, which we see has been able to do nothing; so that a
miracle at most can be but a more a^ful remembrancer.

Now sure to bring this to our selves, we want none such, nor do they prove
much useful: Occasions of astonishment and such fatal remembrancers have come
and taken up their habitation in our Land, and make approaches toward, hover
Long Bills of mortality, and sad knells, and dreadful passing-bells, these are
all messengers from the dead, that come posting to us swift a Gods Arrows: And
one would think we should take notice of their message, when a thousand do fall
besides us, and ten thousand at our right hand; wherefore should not an Army of
such Carcasses become as moving as one Ghost? should Lazarus come forth with
all his sores, they would not be so terrible as these carbuncles and ulcers of
the Plague: And the destroying Angel out of Heaven with his Sword drawn, one
would expect, should be as efficacious as a Preacher out of Abraham's Bosom. And
yet men do not seem to hearken any more to these than they do to us, when we
either Preach, they hear Moses and the Prophets. Men have the same security as
to their sins which they had in the freest times, whatever fears possess them,
they are not the fears of God, those that make men depart from evil, none of
those that fright into Repentance; we have no Religious cares upon us now more
than at other times, but Vice as if that also had a Sanctuary under the Lords
wings, and might retire under his feathers to be safe, dreads no Terrors of
the Night, nor Arrows of the Day, but walks as open and as unconcerned keep
from us this Plague and grievous sickness? when we do only mean to make this
use of such indulgence, to cherish another Plague in our own hearts? What can
we say to prove it would not be a mercy to us to be suddenly cut off, even in
the midst of our iniquity? when by our other use but to fill up a greater
measure of sin. What Church and State came thence: And by as great a Miracle of
Resurrection. But where is the Repentance such a Miracle may have flattered our
Expectations with, as I am confident the resolutions of it did in that sad
dying state? wicked practices that merited our former Ruin? and others in
those cursed Principles that did inflict it, as they ever were? it is said by
many that have evil will at Sion (and it is our concern to take a care they
speak not truth) that in the Church some that are silence of the Grave upon
them, and are as dumb, as if their mouth were yet full of their monument Earth:
And yet as if it were not full of Earth, nor had been satisfied with it in the
Sepulcher, they gape still like the Grave that never can be satisfied. And we
see others who as if this Resurrection were but a start out of a sleep, or
lucid interval of former madness, have their hands ready not only to tear off
the hair, the unessential accessory beauties of the Body of the Church and
State, but to scratch the Face, pull out the Eyes, and tear open those Wounds
rise into corruption, and so confute Gods Method of a Refurrection. 'twere
happier incorruptible, which shall be consummated when we shall rise again a
Church triumphant: when Death shall be swallowed up in Victory, and neither Sin
nor Repentance shall be any more, but Holiness, and Life, and Glory too shall
be Immortal and unchangeable.

To which, etc.

SERMON XII. CHRIST-CHURCH IN OXFORD. December. 31. 1665.
LUKE II. part of the 34. verse. Behold this Child is set for the Fall and
Rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against.
AND Simeon Blessed them, and said, etc. Benediction sure of a most strange
importance: If to bring forth one that is to be a large Destruction, if to be
delivered of a Child that must be for the Fall of many, and the killing of the
Mother's self, be blessed; if Swords and Ruins be Comforts, then my Text is
full of these: But if this be to Bless, what is it to forespeak and abode ill?
Yet however ominous and fatal the words are, they give us the event and the
design too of the Blessed Incarnation of the Counsel in it; and the Effects of
it. The Effects in these particulars.

1. This Child is for the Fall of many. 2. For the Rising again of many. 3. For
a Sign: With the quality of that sign; he is for a sign that shall be spoken
against.
2. The Counsel and Design of this is signified in the word here (...): he is
set, and preordain'd to be all this.

First of the first Effect, This Child is for the Fall of many.

And here I shall but only name that way whereby many men set this Child for
their own Fall, while they make his holy Time to be but a more solemn
opportunity of sinning: We know many celebrate this great Festival with
Surfeits Anniversary, a set time for their return. Thus indeed the Israelites
did solemnize the Birth of their Idol-Calf, They sat down to Eat and Drink,
and rose up to Play. And must we celebrate this Child too like that Calf,
because Exodus 32. 6.
he was born among Brutes? And must his Votaries also be of the Herd? And he
live and be worshipped always in a Stable? Because God became Man, must Men
therefore become Beasts? Is it fit to honor that Child with Iniquity and
Loosnesse, that did come into the World upon designs of Holiness, to settle a
most strict Religion? Nothing can be more incongruous than this; and certainly
there is nothing of Gods Counsel in it. But to you whose time seems nothing
else but a constant Festival, always has the Leisure, and the Plenties, and
the Sports of one, who as to these things keep a Christmas all your life, this
Season as it does not seem to challenge those things to it self peculiarly, so
I shall not now insist on them; but proceed to those ways by which Simeon This
Child would be for the fall of many in Israel. And they are three,

1. This Child whom I but now declared God had prepared v. 31. 32.
to be the Glory of his People Israel, yet his Birth was so inglorious, and his
Life answerable to it shall be so mean and poor, and his Death so full of shame
and curse, that these shall prove a scandal to his People, who shall be
offended at them; and being prepossest with prejudices of a Pompous Royal
Messiah, they will not believe in this, but reject a Savior that comes upon
those disadvantages, which will

That it was so is expressly said, Behold, I lay in Sion a Chief Cornerstone, a
stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offense. Romans 9. 33. 1 Pet. 2. 6.
And that it was so upon this account is clear, the Great This fellow we know
not whence he is: They that seemed to know whence did upbraid him with it, Joh.
9. 29. Mar. 6. 3. John 7. 48.
Is not this the Carpenter? And therefore with a deal of scorn they question,
Do any of the Rulers or the Pharisees believe in him? Yea Christ himself knew
this would be so great, a Scandal, that in the 11 Chapter of S. Matthew, in the
close of many Miracles which he wrought on purpose to demonstrate he was the
Messiah, he adds verse. 6. and blessed is he that shall not be offended in me.
As if he thought his mean condition would prove a greater argument against him
than Savior of the World, the promised Messiah, poor and abject; than to see
one cure the Blind, and heal the Lame, and raise the Dead; and they might think
they had a stranger Miracle to confirm their unbelief, than any he would work
to make them believe in him.

And really, that the Kingdom of the Messiah, which the Prophets did express
in terms as high as their own Ecstasies and Raptures, in transported words, as
if it vied with Gods Dominion, both for extent and for duration, should prove
twelve poor Fishermen and Publicans, and one of them a Traitor too: And that He
that was born this King, should be born in a Stable; while he lived that he
should not have an hole to put his Head in, nor his Corpse in when he died, but
his Grave too must be Charity; this would startle any that did wait for the
Redemption of Israel in those glorious expresses which the Prophets trac't it
out in. To you indeed that are Votaries to this Child, are confirmed
Christians, these seeming disadvantages can give no prejudice: However mean and
abject his condition were, that cannot make you to despise him, who from that
must needs He became poor, says 2 Cor. 8. 9.
S. Paul, that you through his poverty might be made rich: He was made the
Child of Man, that you might be made Sons of God; it was to pay the price of
your Redemption that he so emptied himself; thus he valued you; and men do not
despise merely because, and by those measures that, they are (...) Phil. 2. 7.
esteemed, these are not the returns of love; its passionate, obliging,
ravishing effects do not use to be thus requited; this his great descent cannot
occasion your fall, who know this Child should be the fall of Israel, that for
this they would reject him; and the meannesse of his condition would prove an

The Jew indeed will find no excuse for his Infidelity from this condition: For
whatever that were, yet those Miracles that made the Devils to confess him,
brought conviction enough to make Jews inexcusable. And it was obvious to
observe, that He who fed five thousand with five Loaves and two Fishes, till
they left more than was set before them, Mat. 14. 19, 20, 21.
needed not to be in a condition of want or meanness, if it were not otherwise
more needful he should not abound. God, that when be brought this first
begotten Son into the World, said, Let all the Angels of God worship him, might
have put him into an estate which all Mankind most readily would Heb. 1. 6.
have done homage to: As easily have dressed his Person with a blaze of Pomp and
Splendour, as his Birthday with a Star; if there had not been necessity it
should be otherwise. And such there was. For when the fullness both of Time and
Iniquity was come, when Vice could grow no further, but did Flesh and Blood,
with those desires which Constitution gives, but which perpetual universal
Custom had confirmed; and which their Gods also, as well as Inclinations did
contribute to; which their Original sin, and their Religion equally fomented;
for Vice was then the Worship of the world, Sins had their Temples, Theft its
Deity, and Drunkenness its God, Adultery had many, and to prostitute their
bodies was most sacred, and their very Altar-fires did Idolatry in Scripture:
And besides all this, when all the Philosophy, and all the power of the world
were engaged in the belief and practice of this, and resolved with all their
wit and force to keep it so. When it was thus, the Doctrine that must come to
oppose, control, reform all this, must come either armed with Fire and Sword,
design to settle it self by Conquest, or come in a way of Meekness and of
suffering: The first of these Religion cannot possibly design, because it
cannot aim to settle that by violence, which cannot forced; and where it is
force, is not Religion. One may as well invade, and hope to get a Conquest over
thoughts, and put a Mind in Chains, and force a man to will against his will.
All such motives are incompetent to demonstrate settles true, it proves that
which it destroys was true before, while it prevailed and had the Power. Had
this Child come so, he had only given such a testimony to the truth of
Christianity, as Heatbenifave had before, and Turcisme has since: He might
indeed, have drowned the wicked World again in another Deluge of their own
Blood: But sure, never had reformed it thus. Therefore that Religion, that must
oppose the Innocence and Patience, by doing good, (and which was necessary,
then by consequence as the world stood,) by suffering evil: parting with all,
not only the Advantages but the Necessaries of this life, and life it self too,
where they stood in competition, and were inconsistent with men's duties, and
their expectations: And by this means they must show the world that their
Religion did bring in a better hope than that, which all the profits, Heb. 7.
19.
pleasures, glories of this World can entertain and flatter.

Thus they did, and thus they did prevail. For the first Ages of the Church,
were but so many Centuries of Men, that entertained Christianity with the
Contempt of the World, and Life it self. They knew that to put themselves into
Christ's Service and Religion, was the same thing as to set themselves aside
for spoil and Rapine, dedicate themselves to Poverty and Scorn, to Racks, and
Tortures, and to Butchery it self. Yet they entered into it; did not only
renounce the Pomps and Vanities of the World in their Christians so, as if they
had been Candidates of death, and only made themselves Apprentises of
Martyrdom. Now if it were not possible it should be otherwise than thus, as the
world stood, then it was necessary that the Captain of Salvation Heb. 11. 10.
should lead on, go before this noble Army of Martyrs; if it were necessary
that they must leave all who followed him, then it was not possible that he
should be here in a state of Plenty, Splendour, and Magnificence; but of
Poverty, and Meannesse; giving an Example to his followers, whose condition
fall of many in Israel, who for his condition despised him.

I am not so vain as to hope to persuade any from this great Example here to be
in love with Poverty, and with a low condition, by telling them this Birth has
consecrated meannesse, that we must not scorn those things in which our God did
choose to be installed; that Humility is, it seems, the proper dress for
Divinity to show it self in. But when we consider, if this Child had been born
in a condition of Wealth Jews would have received him; whereas that he chose
proved an occasion of falling to them: Yet that God should think it much more
necessary to give us an Example of Humility and Poverty below expression; then
it was necessary that that whole Nation should believe on him. When of all the
Virgins of that People, which God had to choose one out to overshadow, and
impregnate with the Son of God, he chose one of the meanest, (for he has
regarded the low estate of his Handmaiden, Luc. 1. 48.
said she,) and one of the poorest too, for she had Lamb to offer, but was
purifyed, in forma pauperis. When Luke 2. 24. compared with Lev. 18. 6, 8.
he would reveal this Birth also, that was to be the joy of the whole Earth, he
did it to none of that Nation, but a few poor Shepherds, who were laboring
with midnight watches over their Flocks; none of all the great ones, that were
then at ease, and lay in softs, was thought worthy to have notice of it:
Lastly, when the Angels make that poverty 2 sign to know the Savior by. This
shall be a sign unto you, You shall find the Babe wrapped in swaddling clothes,
and laid in a Luke 2, 12.
Manger: As if the Manger were sufficient testimony to the Christ, and this
great meannesse were an evidence 'twas the Messiah. From all these together, we
may easily discover what the temper is of Christianity. You see here the
Institution of your Order: the First born of the Sons of God, born but to such
and Fstate. And what is so original to the Religion, what was born and bred
with it, cannot easily be divided from it. Generatio Christi generatio populi
Christiani, Leo.
natalis Capitis, natalis Corports. The Body and the Head have the same kind of
Birth, and to that which Christ is born to, Christianity it self is born.
Neither can it ever poverty of spirit, with neglect of all the scorns, and the
Calamities, yea, and all the gaudy glorys of this World, with that
unconcernednesse for it, that indifference and simple innocence Children. He
that receives not the Kingdom of Heaven as a little Child, cannot enter
thereinto, says Mat. 18. 3.
Christ: True indeed, when the Son of God must become a little Child, that he
may open the Kingdom of Heaven to Believers. Would you see what Humility and
lowliness becomes a Christian? see the God of Christians on his Royal Birth
day. A Person of the Trinity, that he may take upon him our Religion, takes
upon him the form of a Servant; and He that was equal with God, must make
himself of no Reputation, if he mean to settle and be the Example of our Phil.
2. 6, 7.
Profession. And then, when will our high spirits, those that great Lord of
Heaven become a litte one, and Man that is less then nothing magnify himself?
to see Divinity empty it self, and him that is a worm, swell and be puffed up?
to see the Son of God descend from Heaven, and the Sons of Earth climbing on
heaps of Wealth, which they pile up, as the old Giants did Hills upon Hills, as
if they would invade that Throne they also were set for the fall of many,
throwing every body down that but stands near them, either in their way or
prospect? Would you see how little value all those interests that recommend
this World, are of to Christians? see the Founder of them choose the opposite
extreme: Not only to discover to us that these are no accessions to felicity,
This Child was the Son of God without them: But to let us see that we must make
the same choice too, when ever any of those interests affront a duty, or
solicit a good Conscience; Innocence, Sincerity, and Ingenuity. It was the
want of this disposition and temper that did make the Jews reject our Savior.
They could not endure to think of a Religion that would not promise them to
fill their basket, and to set Deuteronomy. 28. 1. 5.
them high above all Nations of the Earth, and whose appearance was not great
and splendid, but looked thin and maigre, and whose Principles and Promises
showed like the Curses of their Law, called for sufferings, and did promise
persecution; Mar. 10. 30.
therefore they rejected him that brought it, and so this Child was for the
fall of many in Israel.

2. This Child is for the fall of many by the holiness of his Religion: while
the strictness of the Doctrine which he brings, by reason of men's great
propensions to wickedness,

1. For that reason they will contradict, speak ill of him and of his
Doctrines: This is said expressly in the last words of my Text, He is for a sign
that shall be spoken against; that is, that very holiness both of his Life and
Doctrine, that shall make him signal, it shall make him be derided and
blasphemed. Ensign lifted up, a Standard for all Nations; were not for them to
betake themselves Isai. 11. 10.
to, but to level all their batteries against. Accordingly we find they called
him Beelzebub, because he cast out Mat. 10. 25. Mat. 3. 22.
Devils. And all this was foretold: For although he were fairer than the
Children of men, Psalm. 45. Yet Isai. 53. It is said, He has no form nor
comeliness, when we shall see him, there is no beauty in him, that we should
desire him, he is despised and rejected of men. Surely because his holiness
did cloud and darken all his Graces. Devotion in a Majesty, when it was most
severe and pious, never yet could guard Religion from these scorns. David, that
great and holy King, says of himself, I wept and chastned my self with
fasting, and that was turned to my reproof; as if Repentance were Psalm. 69. 10,
11, 12.
among his Crimes, and he must be Corrected for his Discipline. I put on
Sackcleath also, and they jested upon me, they that sat in the gate spoke
against me, and the Drunkards made Songs upon me. Sure these jolly men are not
companions to those Angels, in whose presence there is joy over one sinner that
repents; that his virtue should be Luke 15. 19.
a rejoicing, and a song to them too: Certainly the penitent man's tears do not
fill their Cheerful bowls, nor his groans make those airs which they set their
drunken Catches to. But that we may be sure it never will be otherwise, S.
Peter tells us, That in the last days there shall come scoffers, walking after
their own lusts. Now the men of our 2 Pet. 3. 3.
days have the luck to obey Scripture thus far as to make scoffers are come in
power and great glory. The Psalmist tells us of a Chair of Scorners, as if
these were the only men that Psalm. 1. 1.
speak ex cathedra: And sure scoffs and taunts at Religion are the only things
that may be talked with confidence, aloud: They imprint an Authority on what is
said, and conversations that are most insipied on all other scores, get account
as they come up toward this, practice: Hence they gain degrees; commence
ingenious as they border on these Atheistical and irreligious Blasphemies; and
when it is pure scorn, then it is in the Chair.

But it stays not there; For Secondly, Upon the same account of strictness of
Religion, men will fall off from and openly renounce both Christ and his
Religion. This is that our Savior himself found, Light, says he, is come Joh.
3. 19.
into the World, and men loved Darkness rather than the Light, because their
deeds were evil. And he said of the Pharisees, They repented not that they
might believe, as knowing Mat. 21. 32.
it impossible that they could venture to believe that Doctrine which condemned
those courses that they would not repent of.

And if I should affirm, that it is nothing else but men's unwillingnesse to be
obliged to those things, which if there be a God, and a Religion which this
Child was set to institute, they must account themselves obliged to; nothing
unwilling to believe a God or Christ; yea, openly renounce them both, and their
Religion; I should have for proof of this, not only the late instance of a
Nation in the Indies; which, by institution Congo.
of the Portugals, was easily persuaded to embrace the Christian Creed, and was
Baptized into our Faith; but when they were required to lead their lives
according to Christ's Precepts, and renounce their Heathen Licenses, they chose
rather to renounce their Creed and Savior, and returned instantly to their
indulgent Heathenisme. But to this experience, give me leave to add this
Reason, that it Mysteries of Faith, and their being above our Comprehension,
which makes them not to be received; because there are as great difficulties in
things that we are certain of. For in the very Sphere of Reason, within the
lines and measures of her own Infallibility, in things of which she does assure
her self by diagrams and sense, yet she is as much amazed, as at those objects
in the highest and remotest Regions of Faith; and Mathematics has her
Paradoxes that stand in as great danger of a contradiction Religions Mysteries;
while Reason cannot cape Myster. (ut vocari solet) Asymp. toticum and Angul.
contingent. etc.
what she demonstrates, but is to seek how those things can be possible which
she proves most certain; and they are incomprehensible to her, even when they
are most evident: And then sure if we can think there is a God, we must He can
do things which we cannot comprehend, when it is plain our Reason cannot
comprehend what she her self does find out and creat. It is not therefore
contradiction to Reason, but to Appetite, that makes things of Religion so
incredible; which I thus demonstrate to the Atheist.

Those very difficulties, to avoid which he denies a God; to wit, Those of an
Eternal Being that is of himself; those very things he must and does
acknowledge in the being of the World, if that either be it self Eternal (as
the Atheist of the Peripatetick Tribe will have it) or else if its atoms,
Epicurus herd assert.) In a word, if they say the World or its materials were
made, they grant a God that made it; If they say they were not made, they
assert then an Eternal Being of its self; that is, they allow those
difficulties for which they pretend to deny a God.

There being therefore the same difficulties, (Greater I could prove them, from
the diverse natures of corporeal and spiritual beings; for we are sure, in
bodies that are still in motion, and so subject to succession, those things
Being that is not in motion, and by consequence, not subject to the laws of our
time, all these knots unty themselves, those difficulties vanish and have no
place: But to say no more than I have showed, there being the same
Difficulties,) in the Atheist's hypothesis as in the other, it is apparent, not
the difficulties of belief, but practice, make him fix upon his own against the
common notions of the World. So that it is not his understanding, but his
Appetite frames his hypothesis; and without figure, it is his Will that he
believes with. And it is most duty, therefore they would have the Doctrines of
it not be truths; and in this they are the Disciples only of their Lusts, and
because they cannot resolve to be otherwise, therefore they resolve not to be
Christ's Disciples, but reject him for his holy Doctrines sake: And so this
Child is for the fall of many.

But it were strange if upon this account, Christ should be for the fall of any
of us; who have learnt a trick to severe Doctrines and our Sins together. Where
Vice most abounds, though it be wilful, and men persevere in it, they are so
far from finding any reason to fall off from him, or from his Gospel for this,
that they therefore take faster hold of it, rely upon Him with the bolder,
stronger confidence. As if good old Simeon were mistaken, when he thought,
because men would not leave those sins which Christ so threatened, therefore
they would leave him: Because they could not bear those his hard sayings, to
pull out the lust and the Eye too; cast away the treasures of unrighteousness,
and the right hand that receives them also; therefore they would cast off him:
For, for this reason they betake themselves to him more eagerly, devolve and
cast themselves upon him with assurance. It Is possible indeed Indians might
believe themselves obliged to lead their lives according to the Vow that they
had made in Baptism, knew not how to live a contradiction, to be Christian
Pagans; therefore they thought it absolutely necessary to renounce the one; and
to reject Christ and his strict Religion was easier they thought. Our Savior
also might suppose, that when he brought Light into the World, men would not
receive that Light, because their deeds were evil: But our modern wickednesses
that are of the true Eagle kind, are educated, bred up to endure, and to defy
the Light: Our deeds of Night have Sun of Righteousness, and the light of
those flames that are to receive them. Our Savior told the Pharisees indeed,
that they repented not, that they might believe; for thinking it impossible
they could assent to what he did affirm, except they would consent to what he
did Command, He therefore thought they were not able to Believe, because they
would not purpose to amend. But there is nothing difficult in this to us, who
at the same time, are so perfectly resolved that every threat of Gospel is so
Divine truth, as dye Martyrs to the truth of them, rather than renounce one
tittle of them; yet even then are Martyrs to those Lusts and Passions which
those Threats belong to: Who, at once, believe this Book of God, that says,
except ye repent ye shall all perish; and believe also, that notwithstanding
Luke 13. 3.
we do not Repent, yet by Believing we shall escape; not perish, but be saved,
And is not this directly to believe our selves into Damnation? the third and
the great fall, which his Child is set for.

3. This Child is for the fall of many, to wit, of all those who on these, or
any other grounds do not believe in, or do not obey him; who shall therefore
fall into Eternal Ruin.

This our Savior does affirm, S. John 3. 19. This is the Condemnation that
Light came into the World, etc. This Adam: And I dare not undertake to be so
learned to say whether; to determine with some men that was but a fall from
Paradise into the Grave, and we were forfeit to Death only: But I may
adventure to affirm, that in the second Adam, sinners finally impenitent shall
fall much farther than we did in the first Adam: Now their pit shall have no
bottom, but this light that came to lighten them, shall be to them consuming
fire and everlasting Rev. 9. 1. 11.
burnings. And all reason in the world. For, upon that Adam, help was offered
us: an easy way not only to repair those ruins, but to better infinitely
that estate which we were fallen from; and a way that cost God dear to purchase;
cost him, not this Incarnation only, but the Death and Passion of his Son, and
diverse other blessed methods of Salvation: Now if we refuse the mercy of all
this, and scorn these miracles of condescending goodness, and defy those
methods, that he makes use of to raise us from our Fall, it is apparent we
provoke and choose deeper ruin; this refusal has in it such desperate
Incarnation, and all the rest. It Is but a small thing to say, that they who
Stumble at this Rock of their Salvation, spurning at it by their wilful
disobedience, that these make an infinite mass of loving-kindnesse to be lost
upon them, so as that Salvation cannot save them; for alas Salvation ruins
them the deeper, and this Child is for their fall. The condition they were
forfeit to before by reason of their breach of the first Covenant was
advantage, comfortable in comparison of that which Christ does put them This is
the Condemnation that he came into the world: And it had been infinitely beter
for them, that this Child too had never been born. The unreformed have the
least reason in the world to solemnize this Festival, they do but celebrate the
birth of their own Ruin; bow down, and do reverence to their Fall: Had it not
been for this, they had not gone to so severe an Hell. So that they do but
entertain the great occasion of their greater Condemnation. Such it proves to
them, and that it might be so, He was foreordained for it: (...), This Child is
set for the fall of many, which does lead me to Gods Council in all this: My
next part.

This Child is set for the fall of many, even by Gods direct appointment; for
says Grotius, Accedo ii^ qui (...) non nudum eventum sed and consilium Dei
signifie^^^. I am of their opinion, who understand not the success alone, but
the design Grot (...)
of this Child's coming, and Gods Counsel in it i^ intended here. And without
disputing of Gods antecedent will, and consequent, this is safely said: God
designed this Child should be such an one, that they who had no inclinations
for Virtue, would not entertain the love of it, but counted it a mean pedautick
thing, and all its Rules and Laws unreasonable servitude, these loose men would
certainly reject Him and his Doctrines, which were so severe and strict,
friendship for Virtue, and a service for Religion, but withal must be allowed
to maintain correspondence with the World, seek the Honors and advantages of
Earth, and will trespass on Religion where it enterferes with these, break
with Virtue when their interests cannot consist with it, that these false
hypocritical pretenders, should be offended with the mean conditions of this
Child, and of his followers in this World, and with the poor spirited
Principles of his Religion. In sum, they that upon these, or any other
grounds (...) disbelieve, or disobey him. God designed this Child to be a means
sorer Punishments even to everlasting ruin upon such.

A black Decree this, one would think. He that had so much kindness for
Mankind, to give away the only Son both of his Nature, his Affections, and his
Bosom to them; could he then design that Gift to be the Ruin of the greatest
part of men? This Child, Simeon said but just before my Text, is Gods
Salvation, which he had prepared before all people; and does he now say God
has set him for their fall? The Angels preached this was a Birth that brought
glad tidings of great joy that should be to all people; and is there so much
comfort in destruction, that most men should rejoice at that which is ordained
to be the great occasion of it to them?

But we have no reason to complain: It Is not unkind to deny Mercy to them that
refuse the offers of it; that will not accept Salvation, when their God himself
does come to bring it to them: tenders it upon condition of accepting and
amending: Which if they despise, and prefer Hell before Repentance, choose sin
rather than Gods blessed retributions, it is but reason to deny them what they
will not have, and let them take their chosen Ruin; to will their Judgment
which they will themselves; set and ordein Him to be that to them, which
themselves do ordein, and make Peter says expressly: He is a Stone of stumbling
and a Rock of offense to them who being 1 Pet. 2. 8.
disobedient stumble at the Word, whereunto they were appointed. Disobedience,
where it is obdurate, alters so the temper of our God, that it makes Him who
swears he would not have the Sinner dye, yet set out his Son to make such
sinners fall into eternal Death. Makes Judgment triumph over Mercy, even in the
great contrivances and executions of that Mercy; and while God was plotting an
Incarnation for the everlasting Safety of Mankind, prevails with him to decree
Ruins by the means of that Salvation; to Decree even Mercies, that that Issue
of his kindness should be for the fall of such as they. Oh! let such consider,
whether they are likely to escape that which is set and ordein'd for them by
God? Whether they can hope for a Redemption, when the only great Redeemer is
appointed for the Instrument of their Destruction; and God is so bent on their
rui^e, that to purchase it he gives this Child his Son. Yea, when he did look
down upon this Son in Agonies, and on the Cross, in the midst of that sad
prospect, yet the Ruin of such sinners, which he there beheld Sacrifice, and a
sacrifice of a sweet smell to him. For S. Paul says, We are unto God a sweet
savor of Christ in them that perish, because we are the savor of Death unto 2
Cor. 2. 15.
death to them: As if their Brimstone did ascend like Incense, shed a persume
up to God, and their everlasting burnings were his Altar-fires, kindled his
holocausts; and he may well be pleased with it, for he ordein'd it.

It Is true indeed, This Child riding as in Triumph, in the midst of his
Hosannas, when he saw one City whose fall he set for on this very account; He
was so far from being pleased with it, that he wept over it in pity. But alas,
that only more declares the most deplored and desperate condition of such
sinners. Blessed Savior! had thou no Blood to shed for them? nothing but
Tears? or did thou weep to think thy very Bloodshed does but make their guilt
more crimson, who refuse the mercy of that Bloodshed all the time that is
offered? Sad is their state that can find no pity in the Tears of God, and
remediless their Condition for whom all that the Son of God could do, was to
weep over was to be for their fall; too sad a part indeed for Festival
Solemnity, very improper for a Benedictus and Magnificat. To celebrate the
greatest act of kindness the Almighty could design only by the miseries it
Heaven down to Earth, only by reason of the fall of Man into the lowest Hell
of which that was the cause. My Text has better things in view: The greatness
of that fall does but add height to that Resurrection which He also is the
cause of: For, Behold this Child is set for the rising again of many: My
remaining part.

Rising again, does not particularly and only refer to the foregoing fall here
in the Text, which this Child did occasion, as I showed you; but to the state
wherein all Mankind, both in its nature and its Customs, lay ingulf^d, the
state of Ignorance and sin: A state from which recovery is properly (...), a
resurrection and a reviving in this Life, and so called in Scripture often; as
Ephesians. 5. 14. Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep (...) and arise from
the dead. And Romans 6. 13. Yield not your members as instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin, but yield your selves unto God, as those that are
alive from the dead. Now to raise us from the death of sin into the life of
Righteousness, by the amendment of our own lives, to recover us into a state
of this Child is said here to be set for. This was that which God thought worth
an Incarnation: Neither was there any greater thing in the prospect of his
everlasting Counsel, when he did decree his Son into the World, than that
(...), He is set for this. The Word was made Flesh, to teach, practice, and
persuade to Virtue: To make men Reform their lives, was valued at the price of
a Person of the Trinity. Piety and his Exi^anition, yea his Blood and Life,
were set at the same rates; All of him given for our recovery.

The time would fail me if I should attempt only to name the various methods
he makes use of to effect this. How this Child that was the brightness of his
Fathers Glory, came to lighten us; shining in his Doctrine and Example: How he
sent more light, The fiery Tongues, Illuminations of the Holy Ghost to guide us
in the ways of Piety: How he suffered Heb. 1. 3.
Agonies and Death for sin to appale and fright us from it. How he Rose again
to confirm Judgment to us, to demonstrate the rewards of Immortality to them
that will repent and leave their sins, and everlasting Torments to those that
purchased with the Blood of God, to enable them to repent and leave. Besides
all these, the Arts and Mesnage of his Providence, in preventing and following
us by Mercies and by Judgments, importuning us, and timeing all his blessed
Methods of Salvation to our resist, and turn to wantonness and aggravation; if
we make no other use of Grace but this, to sin against, and overcome all Grace,
and make it bolster Vice; by teaching it to be an encouragement to go on in it,
from some hopes we entertain by reason of this Child, instead of doing that
which he was set, Decreed to make us do.

And really I would be glad to see this everlasting Counsel of the Lord had had
some good effects, some, though never so little, happy execution of this great
Decree, and ordein'd from all Eternity, upon such glorious and magnificent
terms, were come to pass in any kind. Now, certainly there are no evident
signs of any great recovery this Child has wrought among us, in the World
that is now called Christian. After those Omnipotent inforcives to a virtuous
life, which he did work out, if we take a prospect of both Worlds, it would be
hard to know which were the Heathen; and there would appear scarce any other
notice of a Christ among us, but that we blaspheme Him or deride Him. Sure I
am, there are Heathen Age outgoing ours, either in loosnesse and foul
Esseminacies, or in sordidnesse and base injustice, or in frauds and
falsenesse, or Malignity, hypocrisy, or treachery, or to name no more, even in
the lowest, most ignoble, disingenious sorts of Vice. In fine, men are now as
Earthy, Sensual, yea and Devilish, as when Sins and Devils were their Gods.

Yea, I must needs say, that those times of dark and Heathen Ignorance, were in
many men times of shining Virtue; and the little spark of Light within them,
brake out through all obstructions into a glory of Goodness, to the wonder and
Confusion of most Christians: It Is true, we are prity well revenged on them for
setting us Examples so reproachful to us; calling their Heroic Actions,
splendida peccata, only beauteous sins, and well-fac'd wickednesses; and we
have a reason for it; because they never heard of Christ, whose Name and Merit
it is most certain, is the only thing that can give value and acceptance to
Christians comfort and secure our selves in our transgressions from this Child,
and from his Name. But if this Child were set to raise us up from sin, and to
establish stronger arguments for a good life than the Heathen ever heard of,
especial Divine engagements to virtue; then if their Virtues were, because they
never heard of these engagements to them, sins; what censure will be past upon
their Actions that know all those engagements and despise them? a sharper
certainly unless to defy knowledge, and provoke against all Divine
obligations, all that God could lay, shall prove more tolerable than to labor
to obey without them, without knowing why. It Is true, they had not heard it may
be of that Name, than which there is no other Name under Heaven given unto men
whereby they may be saved. Acts 4. 12.
which He that owns that Name, and wrought the Covenant of those Salvations,
does require. We know that Name, and have it called upon us, and know too, that
be that names that Name, (that calls himself a Christian, owns the being a
retainer to the Holy Jesus) must depart from 2 Timothy 2. 19.
iniquity, otherwise it is no Name of Salvation to him, yet we never mind the
doing that; and then which has the better Plea? the Heathen's sure were
better, though he were not virtuous.

And if so, give me leave to tell you, how not only this Child, but this
Resurrection too is for our fall.

In the first Chapter to the Romans we shall find, those Heathens, when they
did neglect to follow the direction of that Light within them, by which they
were able to discover in some measure the invisible things of God; when they
did no longer care to retain God in their knowledge; verse. 20.
then they quickly left off to be Men: And when they verse. 28.
ceast to hearken to their Reason, they soon fell into a reprobate sense. What
was it else to change God into stocks and stones? and Worship into most
abominable wickedness? Ibid.
Deities? and the foulest actions Religion? to turn a disease into a God, and a
sin into Devotion? a stupidity, which nothing else but Gods desertion and
reasons too, could have betrayed them to, and made them guilty of.

And then, if by how much greater Light and means we have resisted, we shall be
proportionably more vile in the consequents of doing so; keep at equal rates of
distance from those Heathens, that the aggravations of our guilt stand at alas!
are we like to fall?

It Is an amazing reflection, one would tremble to consider, how the Christian
World does seem to hasten into that condition which S. Paul does there
decipher: You would think that Chapter were our Character: But that lower, into
much more vile affections then those Heathens did, as having fallen down from a
greater height then they.

Consider whether men do not declare they like not to retain God in their
thoughts, when they endeavor to dispute and to deride him too out of the
World! It Is true, they have not set up any sins or monsters in their Temples
yet, as they did: But if they can empty them of God and Christ, and their
Religion, and make room, we may imagine easily whose Votaries they will be,
that live as if good Pagan days, when they might have sinned with devotion,
been most wickedly Religious, and most God-like in unchastities and other
Villainies; I dare say none of our fine Gentlemen, or our great Wits, would have
been Atheists or irreligious then.

Think whether those are not already in that reprobate sense S: Paul does speak
of, who have cast off all discriminating notions of good or evil, who say in
their hearts, and affirm openly, there are none such in truth and nature: It
verse 29, 30, 31. or by that essential signature, 32 verse. they not only
commit such things, but have pleasure in them that do them; which because they
cannot have from those commissions when they do not commit them, therefore
their debauched minds must be satisfied there is no evil in those doings. and
must reap the pleasure only of such satisfactions: That is, have the
satisfactions and pleasures only of a Reprobate sense. In fine, (because I
dare not prosecute the Character) Men sink so fast, as if they were fall as far
below Humanity, as this Child did below his Divinity.

O do not you thus break Decrees, frustrate and overthrow the everlasting
Counsel of Gods will for good to you. He set, ordained this Child for your
rising again: Do not throw your selves down into Ruin in despite of his
Predestinations. He has carried up your nature into Heaven, placed Flesh in an
union with Divinity, set it there at the Right hand of God in Glory: Do not you
debase and drag it down again to Earth and Hell by Worldlynesse and Carnal
sensuality. Child has raised you up, already made a Resurrection of your Souls
and your affections; they converse, and trade in Heaven: And that you do not
degenerate from that nature of yours that is there. Then this Child who is
Himself the Resurrection and the Life, will raise up your Bodies too, and make
them like his glorious Body, by the working of his mighty Power, by which John
11. 25. Ph^l. 3. 21.
he is able to subdue all things to himself. To whom with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost be all Blessing, Power and Praise, Dominion and Glory for Evermore.

SERMON XIII. WHITE HALL. November. 17. 1667.
St. JAMES IV. 7. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you.
THese Words are easily resolved into two parts: The first, a Duty; and the
second,

The First, the Duty in these words, Resist the Devil; the happy issue in those
other, he will flee from you.

For the more practical and useful handling of these parts, I shall endeavor
to do these three things.

1. View the Enemy we are to resist, the Devil; see his Strengths, and what are
his chief Engines, his main Instruments

2. See what we are to do in opposition to all this; and how and by what means
we must resist.

3. Prove to them that do resist, the happy issue which the

First of the first.

Though no man can be tempted (so as to be soiled by the temptation) but he
that is drawn away by his own Lust, and enticed, James 1. 14. and all the
blandishments of this World, all the wiles and artifices of the Prince and God
of it, the Devil, are not able to betray one into sin, till his own Verse. 15.
Lust conceive that sin, and bring it forth; Man must be taken first in his own
Nets, and fall into that pit himself has dug, before he can become the
Devil's prey: Yet Satan has so great an hand in this affair, that the Tempter
is Mat. 4. 3. And the War which is now before us is so purely his, that we are
said to fight, Ephesians. 4. 12.
not against flesh and blood (those nests and fortresses of our own Lusts) but
against Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this
World, against spiritual wickednesses in high places ^ that is, against the
Enemy here in the Text, the Devil.

Now to bring about his ends upon us he has several means. The first that I
shall name is

Infidelity. With this he began in Paradise, and succeeded Genesis 3. 4. 6.
not surely die, and so made her doubt of, not believe, and consequently not
fear, that which God had threatened, but she took of the forbidden fruit, and
she did eat, and gave it to her Husband too, and he did eat. Now if a Serpent
siding with her inclination could so quickly stagger and quite overthrow her
Faith; if she, because she sees and likes a pleasing Object, can, in mere
defiance of her own assured Conviction, when the Revelation looked her in the
face, and God himself was scarce gone out of sight, straight give credit Snake,
that comes and confidently gives the lie to God her Maker, offers ^er no proof
at all of what he says, but only flatters her desires with promises and
expectations of she knows not what Genesis 3. 4, 5.
Te shall not dye, but ye shall be as Gods; if in spite of Knowledge she turn
Infidel so soon and easily: It Is no great wonder if that Serpent do, at this
distance from Revelation, prevail on men, whose conversation being most with
Sense (their satisfactions also consequently gratifying of their Sense) they do
not willingly assent to any thing but that which brings immediate evidence nor
use, in things that are against their mind, to apply the imprudent, but a thing
next to impossible. But in those that give themselves no leisure, have no will
thus to advert, it is not strange if, through Satan's arts, in things of this
remote kind they have only languid opinions, which doubts, and by degrees into
flat Infidelity.

S. Paul does setch the rise of unbelief of Christianity from hence, 2 Cor. 4.
3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; In whom the God of
this World has blinded their minds: That is, if the Christian Doctrine do not
appear to be the truth of God to any, it is to obstinate persons only, whom the
Devil has besotted so with the advantages and pleasures of this World, that
their affections to these will not let the other be admitted. For,

That Carnal prejudice can cast a mist before the mind, or that a bright and
glittering Temptation of this World may dazzle it so as that it cannot see that
which is most illustriously visible, we have this demonstration.

Those Works which Christ and his Apostles wrought, which made the whole World
that was Heathen then, so many Millions of such distant Nations as could never
meet together to conspire an universal change in their Religions, made them yet
agree to lay aside their dear gods and their dearer Vices, and do that to
embrace a Crucified Deity, a worse than the worst of men; and a Religion that
was as much hated, counted as accursed as that God of it, He and his Doctrine
crucified alike; and a Religion too that had as great severities in its
Commands as in its Persecutions, that did it self enjoin as hard and cruel
things to flesh and blood as they that hated it inflicted, the duties and the
punishments equally seem executed on its followers; and a Religion whose
performances had no retributions here but fatal ones, no otherwise rewarded but
with fire and faggot, and whose after-promises were Works that could produce
all this, had certainly Omnipotent conviction in them; sure we are there must
be prodigy of Miracle either in the causes, or in the effect. And yet the
Scribes and Pharisees are not wrought Finger of God: The mean and despicable,
and, as to all their worldly expectations and affections, the unsatisfying
condition of our Savior, had so clouded all his Works, and their own pride so
blinded them, that they could see no argument in Miracle.

Now it is the Devil, that God of the World, that has the power of its Glories,
and the managery of its temptations, who, by raising these affections, dazles
so and blinds the minds of men, that they should not believe. S. Paul affirms
unbelief is no one's Interest but Satan's. For it is not Man's. Not the
virtuous man's certainly: He Is concerned as much as Happiness amounts to, to
believe there is a God, whose Cares and Providence watch over him, whose Ears
and Arms are open to him, whose Bowels yearn for him, whose Blood did purchase
him, whose everlasting Blessednesses do await him. It Is his Interest to trust
that Virtue, which the World so scorns or pitties, was yet worthy God should be
Incarnated to teach it, die to purify us into it, and will raise us up again
to crown it. Neither Man's real Interest, abstracting from these prejudices of
Religion. For if it were Man's real Interest, then it were every man's wisest
course to pursue that Interest. But if every man did so, and should persuade
himself into Infidelity, and that Religion and a Deity were but dreams or
artifices, and so arrive so far as to have no fear of God, nor sense of Honesty
or Virtue, the whole world must needs return into the first confusions of its
Chaos: Villainy and Rapine would have right. When those Mounds are thrown down,
there is nothing that can hinder but that every break in upon and invade every
thing. There is no fence to guard thy Coffers nor thy Bed, no nor thy very
Breast: Rather indeed there can be nothing thine. This is, it is true,
Leviathan's state of Nature; and it is so indeed with the Leviathans of Sea and
Land, the wild Beasts of the Deep and of the Desert. But to prevent the
necessary and essential mischiefs of this state amongst us Men, he will have
Nature to have taught us to make Pacts and Oaths: But if there is no such thing
as Virtue or Religion, then there is no obligation to keep Pacts or Oaths. And
Here it is indeed that Doctrine ends; to this their Infidelity does tend. And
therefore it is no Interest of States or Princes. This the Atheist will
confess; Gods and Religions he says, were invented for the meet necessities
of Governors, who could not be secure without those higher Obligations, kind
Subjects then who, by promoting Atheism, labor to break down that fence which
themselves account necessary? Or are they not good rational Discoursers too,
who labor to throw out a thing as false and vain, because it is necessary? So
necessary sure, that they who weaken these bonds of Religion, quite dissolve
those of Allegiance, all whose Sinews are made of those Sacred Ties, which if
you untwist, the other Cords are burst as easily as threads of Cobweb. Nay
these Doctrines lay Principles that justify Rebellion and King-killing. Virtue
or Religion, then those are no Crimes. And it is no wonder Treason has been
loved, when Blasphemy has been so. They that hear men droll on God Almighty,
raille their Maker, and buffoon with Him, will quickly learn to speak with
little reverence of their Superiors. There Is no Kingdom but the Devil's that
can have support from Infidelity; it is the Interest of that indeed. His work
goes more securely on^, when there are no Religious apprehensions to check it:
Allowed Vice cannot be at ease if it but think those things are true. It is the
infinite concern wickedness, that the Laws of Virtue and Religion should be
only Spiders webbs, Snares for innocent and lesser Flies, while venomous
Spiders can pass safely through them, and the Wasps can burst them; are
Entanglements only for the Weak, the Pblegmatick, and Hypochondriack: and that
there should be no God that can bring them to an after-reckoning. They that
flatter and betray, that hugg and then trip up, or that plot villainies and
ruins under fair and godly vizards; must needs be unwilling to believe that
there is one who Jer. 17. 10.
tries the reins, and searches hearts, and that will render every one according
to his works. The Drunkard, who nor must nor can keep the remembrance of his
Cups, cannot endure to apprehend he must be called to an account of them. The
man whose Lust prevents the Grave, that putrefies alive, and drops by piece
meal into rotten dust ere he return to earth, must needs be loath that there
should be a Resurrection, to collect the scattered, the foul atoms of his Sin
and his Disease, and show them at that dread Tribunal, before God, his holy
Angels, and Mankind. Such as these are the only men that are concerned against
Infidelity. And truly it is so much the Devil's Interest, that by those very
measures that he weakens Faith, he strengthens every sort of Wickedness: By
the steps and Infidelity men ascend toward the heights of sin: And when they
have surmounted all Religious apprehensions, then they are upon the Precipice
of Vice. When the Floodgates are removed, the Torrent must break in
impetuously. For what is there that can hinder? nothing certainly, if present
Interest be not able: But it is plain that Thieves, and Murderers, and Rebels,
in fine, every one whom we call Sinners, do pursue that which they account
their present Interest: That therefore if there were no other, would not be
sufficient, since the Devil does make use of that to work with under
Infidelity. This indeed he batters, makes ruins with: Therefore S. Paul calls
him Ephesians. 2. 2.
(...), the spirit that works in filiis diffidentiae, says the Vulgar: In the
unbelievers, so it bears: in filiis insuasibilitatis, in the men that will not
be persuaded to Joh. 3. 36.
believe. In these (...) they are his (...), Possessed and agitated by him; it is
he spirits what they do: their actions are his incitations and motions: In
sum, as to wickedness, they are mere Demoniacks. This therefore is his chief
and the first Engine.

2 The second Instrument by which he does demolish whatsoever hopes of Virtue
we are built up to is Want of Employment: And in order to this, he has so far
prevailed on the opinions of the World, that they believe some states of men
not only have no obligation to be busied, but to have no Calling is essential
to their condition; which is made more eminent upon this account that they have
no business. Wealth, how great soever, it with an employment or Profession,
makes a man only a more gentile Mechanic: But Riches and nothing to do make a
Person of quality. As if God had made that state of men, far the most generous
Grasshoppers and Locusts do, to sing and dance among the Plants and Branches,
and devour the Fruits; and Providence had furnished them with all advantages of
plenty for no better purposes. Such persons think not only to reverse Gods
Curse, and In the sweat of others faces eat their bread, but reverse Nature
too; for Job says, Job. 5. 7.
Man is born to labor as the sparks fly upwards; in his making has a
Principle to which Activity is as essential as it is to fire to mount; from do
violence to his making when he did do nothing; and it were his hardest work and
pressure, not to be employed; it were like making flame go downwards. I am sure
it is one Satan's work. Our Savior in a Parable in the 12 chap. of S. Matt.
from the 43. v. says, When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he goes
through dry places, seeking rest, and finds none: Then he says, I ver. 44.
45.
will return into my house from whence I came out; and when he is come, he
finds it empty, swept, and garnished. Then goes he, and takes with himself
seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell
there. Where, under the similitude of a man cast out of his habitation, who,
while he wanders through none but desert places seeking for desert to him but
the heart of man, is indeed Hell to him, for he calls it Mat. 8. 29.
torment to be cast out thence; yea he accounts himself bound up in Luke 8. 31.
darkness; when he is restrained from working and engaging man to sin; so,
while he goes to and fro, seeking an opportunity to put in somewhere, if he
find that heart from which he was cast out, or any other heart, (...), (so the
word is) idling, not employed or busied (so it signifies) such an heart is
empty, swept, and garnished for him, it is a dwelling that is dressed properly to
tempt the Devil, fitted to receive him and his forces too, prepared for him to
Garrison, and make a strong hold of, whence he cannot be removed; for he takes
unto him seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and
dwell there. No doubt they are the Patron Guardian spirits of the seven deadly
Sins, their Tutelary Devils. Some of those good qualities that are the
attendants of Idleness you may find decypher'd in the Scripture. S. Paul says,
when people 1 Timothy 5. 13.
learn to be idle, they grow tattlers, busy bodies, speaking things which they
ought not. It Is strange that Idleness should make men and women busy bodies,
yet it does most certainly in other folks affairs. Faction, than which nothing
in the world can be more restless, is nursed by it. Where Refectories, places
that are made merely for men to spend their time in which they know not what to
do with? At those Tables our Superiors are dissected; Calumny and Treason are
the common, are indeed the more peculiar entertainments of the places. In fine,
where persons have no talking, and either have not so much Virtue as to find
delight in talking good things, or not so much skill as to speak innocent
recreation, there they talk of others, censure, and back bite, and scoff. This
is indeed the only picquant conversation; Gall is sauce to all their
Entertainments: And that you may know these things proceed from that old
Serpent, they do nothing else but hiss and bite. It Is the Romans 3. 13.
poison of Asps that is under their lips which gives relish to their
Discourses; it is the sting grateful, venime that they are condited with.

More of the brood of this want of Employment you may find at Sodom; namely,
Pride and Luxury: For says Ezekiel Ezekiel. 16. 49.
This was the Iniquity of Sodom; Pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of
Idleness was in her and in her daughters. And indeed the Idle person could not
possibly know how to pass his hours, if he had not Delicacies to sweeten some,
Wine to lay some asleep, and the solicitous deckings of Pride to take up
others: But the studious gorgings of the inside,

Good God! that for so many hours my morning eyes should be lift up to nothing
but a Looking-glass! that that thin shadow of my self should be my Idol, be my
God indeed, to which I pay all the devotions I perform! And when with so much
care and time I have arrayed and marshalled my self, that I should spend as
much more too in the complacencies of viewing this! with eager eyes and
appetite surveying every part, as if I had set out, exposed them to my self
alone, and only dressed a prospect for my own

And truly Luxury will easily eat the remainder up, that sure Companion of
Idleness. For when the Israelites were in the Wilderness, where they could
not eat but by Miracle, and the Rock must give them drink; yet, having no
Employment, Feasts: Exodus 32. 6.
They sat down to eat and drink and rose up to play. Nor would eating to the
uses of their nature serve them, but they must have entertainments for their
wantonness. Had they been employed to get their Bread, their labor would have
made their morsels sweet: But since God, as the Wiseman says, sent them from
Heaven bread prepared without their labor, they must have varieties to sweeten
it; they require him to Ps. 78. 19. 25.
prepare a Table also in the Wilderness, and furnish them with choice. And
although they had the food of Angels, Wisd. 16. 20. 21.
able to content every man's delight, and agreeing to every taste, and serving to
the appetite of the eater, it tempered it self to every man's liking, and what
could they fancy more? The latitude of Creatures, the whole Universe of Luxury
could do nothing else; in every single morsel they had sorts, Variety, all
choice; as if that Desert had been Paradise, that Wilderness the Garden of the
Lord: Yet so coy is Idleness, so apt to nauseate, that they abhor the
constancy of being pleased. And though they were not sated neither, Exodus 16.
18.
he that gathered much had nothing over, only to his eating, God as well
providing for their Health Virtue, as Necessity, and dieting their Temperance
as he did their Hunger: Yet their very liking does grow loathsome to them. When
their Bodies were thus excellently well provided for, having no employment,
nothing to take up their Minds and Entertain their Souls, they require Ps. 77.
v. 18.
(...) meat for their Souls, meat not to serve the uses of their bodies, but to
feed their fancies, their extravagant minds. Thus Idleness requires to be
dieted. And all this but to pamper and feed high men's inclinations, so to make
Temptations irresistible, and by consequence Vice necessary.

It were easy to recount more of those ways by which the Devil does make use
of men's want of Employment to debauch their lives, and ruin all the hopes of
Virtue in them. S. J^de finds more of its effects at Sodom: Ver. 7.
They gave themselves over to Fornication, and went after other flesh, and are
set forth for an Example, suffering the vengeance of Eternal fire. Indeed these
are most certain consequents of not being employed: Quaerit^r AEgysthus -- is
too known an instance: and 2 Samuel 11. 1, 2.
great holy David is another. But its dire Sodom, and made Heaven furnish Hell
for it, and God himself turn Executioner of fire and brimstone to revenge it;
this shall serve to prove it is one of the Devil's Masterpieces.

3. Next succeed his Ephesians. 6. 16.
fiery d^rts, as S. Paul calls them, namely, Persecutions, or Calamities of any
kind: Which he manageth either by inflicting pressures; and he was so confident
of the force of these, that he did tell God he would make Job 1. 11.
Job curse him to his face with them: Or if he find men in necessities and
pressures, then by tempting them to get from under them by methods which he
shall direct; and he had such affurance of the strength of this Temptation,
that by it he tried our Savior, to find out whether Mat. 4. 3.
Son of God or no, believing none but he that was so would be able to resist it.

Indeed the trials are severe which this Temptation does present, to draw men
from their Duty, and to overcome their Constancy: Whether it solicit by
inflicting punishment (as on the mother and her Children, 2 Maccab. 7.) or by
offering to withdraw it, if they will submit to their unlawful terms (and so
they tried her youngest Son there, verse. 24.) or at leastwise by some feigned
act, some ambiguous words or practices, will pretend compliance; (so they
Eleazar, Chap. 6. 21. whom they would have had to bring flesh of his own
provision, such as he might use without offense, and so only seem to eat
forbidden meat.) Each of which is as great a trial also, and to stand against
them reckoned up amongst as vigorous acts of Faith, as those that held out in
the greatest tortures persecuting malice could invent: Heb. 11. 37. They were
stoned, sawn asunder, were tempted.

Now to fetch an instance of the sad success of these, I shall not need to go
so far as to those Persecutions of Antiochus, nor those of the primitive times
of christianity; when Bibles or their Lives; either to sacrifice to Idols, or
at least procure a Ticket which should certify that they had done it, or to be
themselves an Holocaust, and give those Idols a Burnt-offering with their
martyr-flames. Which made the Traditores, Lapsi, the Thurificati and the
Libellatici to be so numerous. Through Gods blessed mercy there is no use of
such instances, as there is no fear of such a trial; it is not death to be a
Christian now: For if the Son of Man or Satan's self should come to try us at
those rates, 'twere Luke 18. 8.
find Faith upon the Earth; whether they would sacrifice a life to our
Religion, who are not content to sacrifice a little interest or pleasure to it;
whether they are likely to Heb. 12. 4.
resist unto blood fighting against sin, who will not resist to tears nor sober
resolutions. Alas! what Religion should we be of, if God should raise a
Di^clesian, come to tempt us with the fiery trial? Martyrs as we are to nothing
but our Passions and our lusts! Nor shall I produce more known and near
experiences, when, by reason of such storms of Persecution, men made shipwreck,
if not of their Faith, yet of good Conscience. When by order or permissions of
Providence they were brought to such a straight, that either they must let go
their possessions or their honesty, acting against Hell their refuge, to save
them from their Fathers rod: how they grew so Atheistical, as to believe a
Perjury or other crime greater security, that would preserve their selves and
their condition better than all God had promised; were such Infidels, that they
did rather trust their being here to the commission of a sin, than to the
Providence and the Engagements of the Almighty. For indeed what need I instance
Conscience or with all they had? God knows, we find less Interests will do:
The Devil by no more than this, driving the Gadarens swine into the Sea, was
able to drive Christ out of their Coasts. You have the story Mat. 8. from the
28. verse. A legion of those evil spirits did possess two men; and finding
Christ would cast them out, and by that Miracle so far show sorth his power,
that in probability the whole Country would believe on him, they fall upon
this project to prevent it; they besought him, if he would cast them Christ:
And, to try them, he permitted this. The possessed Swine ran violently down
into the Lake, and perished. Now a man would think the virulency of these
Devils, which were so destructive when they were at liberty and not restrained,
would have endeared the mercy that had cast them out of the poor men, and came
to dispossess the Country of them; and that their astonishment at so great a
Jesus, and in consideration of the loss of their swine, desire him to depart
cut of their Coast. Rather have the Swine than Christ himself.

4. But if he chance to fail in this Assault (as by our Savior he was beaten
off) he has yet a reserve in which he places his last, strongest confidence;
with which he ventured to charge Christ, when it is probable he knew he was the
Son of God. Mat. 4. 8, 9.
He takes him up into an high mountain, and shows him all the Kingdoms of the
Earth in the twinkling of an eye, and the glory of them, and says, All these
things will I give thee. He thought it was impossible for such a prospect not
to make impression on the appetite, raise some desire, or stir one Covetous or
Ambitious thought: which if it could but do, he made no scruple then to clog
the Gift with such conditions as that there, All these things will I give thee,
if thou will fall down and worship me. It Is said indeed, the Ephesians. 5. 5.
Covetous man is an Idolater: And here we see the God he does do homage to, and
worship. The Devil does he that gives it to the Covetous, to all indeed that
get it with injustice or with greediness;) he requires, I say, that these
should pay all their Religion to Himself: And the Ambitious, in however high a
place he sets them, must fall down to him. And truly these two dispositions can
give worship to no other God but such an one as is Rev. 9. 11.
Abaddon, the Destroyer of Mankind. For all the great Commotions of the World,
all those Convulsions that tear Provinces and Empires, all Seditions and
Rebellions, with those armies of iniquities that attend them, and that wage
their designs, which desire of getting money; and when that desire was once
entertained, we see he enters Joh. 13. 2. 27.
really in person, and possesses such a Soul; and when he is there, he designs
no farther but to warm and stir that passion: It Is sufficient fruit of his
possession, he has done enough in such an heart wherein he dwells, if he but
keep alive that desire of Money: For he knows that will make the man adventure
upon any guilt; for it made Judas undertake to betray Christ. And as for the
other passion which the Devil did design the glories of his prospect to give
fire to, though he could not stir it in our Savior, yet he knew it vanquished
him himself when he was Angel. What Amibtion will not fly at, since it made
this spirit aim at an equality with the Isa. 14. 14.
Most High? Heaven it self was not sufficient to content him, while there was a
God above him in it. And since this affection peopled Hell with Devils, it is no
wonder if it people Earth with Miseries and Vices.

5. The remaining Trial with which Satan did assault our Savior, when he
tempted him with Mat. 4. 4.
Scripture and God's Promises, and sought to ruin him with his own
privileges: with that also

6. His being a lying spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets; by which long
ago he did destroy an Ahah, in the 1 Kings 22. 22. But fince by sad experience
we know, he ruined the best King, purest Church, and most flourishing State, by
the same Strategem. But these, with those other which S. Paul does call his
Ephesians. 6. 11.
wiles, I must omit; sufficient has been said already to enforce the necessity
of resisting, which is the Duty, and the next confiderable.

Resist the Devil: That is, do not you consent to his Temptations: for there is
no more required of us, but 2 Timothy 2. 26.
taken and led captive by him. For let him suggest, incite, assault and storm
us, no impression can be made upon us till we yield, and till we give consent
no hurt is done. It is not here as in our other wars: In those no resolution
can secure the Victory, but notwithstanding all resistance possible, we may be
vanquished; yea, sometime men are overprest and die with Conquering, and the
Victor only gains a Monument, is but buried in the heaps of his slain
Trophies. But in these wars with the Devil, whosoever is unwilling to be
vanquished, never can be: give consent to it, and will the ruin; for men do not
sin against their wills. Only here we must distinguish betwixt Will and thin
Velleity and Woulding. For let no man think when he commits deliberate iniquity
with averseness and reluctance of mind, allows not what spirit is willing, but
the flesh is weak, and yields through mere infirmity: For, on the contrary, the
Devil finds the Flesh so strong in this case, that with it alone he does
assault the mind, and breaks through its reluctancies and aversations, bears
down all its resolutions, triumphs over all that does pretend to God or Virtue
in him. Where it is thus, let no man flatter or persuade himself he does what he
would not, when it is plain he does impetuously will the doing it. Let him not
allows not, but hates that which he does; when it is certain, in that moment
that he does commit, not to allow that which he does resolve and pitch upon and
choose; to hate what with complacency he acts; or to do that unwillingly which
he is wrought on by his own Concupiscence to do, and by his inward incitations,
by the mutiny of his own affections which the Devil raises, and when it is the
mere height and prevailency of his appetite that does make him do it (as it
must be where there is reluctance before he do it, his desires and affections
there are evidently too strong for him) hate the doing that which it is his too
much love to that makes him do, are all impossibilities; the same things as to
will against the will, desire against appetite. But do but keep thy self
sincerely and in truth from being willing, and thou must be safe: For God
expects no more but that we should not voluntarily yield to our undoing. He
has furnished us with his own complete Armor for no farther uses of a War, but
to encourage us to stand. Ephesians. 6. 11.
Take unto you the whole. Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against
the wiles of the Devil: And again, Put ye on the whole Armor of God, that ye
may be able to withstand in 13.
the evil day, and having done all, to stand. There is no need to do more than
this, not to be willing and consent to fall; for no man can be beaten down but
he that will fall.

It were very easy for me to prescribe you how to fortify against those
Engines of the Devils battery which I produced to you. But that I may not stay
upon particulars, directing those whom he prevails upon through want of
Employment to find out honest occasions not to be idle (and sure it is
Pedantick thing to be brought up by Rules and under discipline, he cannbe
Faith! 1 Pet. 5. 9.
Tour adversary the Devil, like a roaring Lion, goes up and down seeking whom
he may devour; whom resist steadfast (...) the Faith. And that not only as it
frustrates all that the attempts by means of Infidelity, but it also Ephesians. 6. 16.
quenchis all his fiery darts; whatsoever bright Temptation he presents to draw
us from our Duty, or whatever fiery trial he makes use of to affright and
martyr with: For the man whose Faith does give him Heb. 11. 1.
evidence and eyesight of those blessed Promises eye has not seen, and gives
(...): Heb. 11. 1.
substance, present solid being to his after-hopes, and whose heart has
swallowed down those happy expectations which have never entered in the heart of
man to comprehend; what is there that can tempt or fright him from his station?
To make all that which Satan gave the prospect of prevail on such a Soul, the
Kingdoms of the Earth must outvie Gods Kingdom, and their Gauds out shine his
Glory, and the twinkling of an eye seem longer than Eternity: For nothing less
than these will serve his turn, all these are in his expectations; Or on Earth,
built upon weaker grounds than any man may have for his belief of things above,
has charged much greater hazards, overcome more difficulties than the Devil
does assault us with. For sure none is so Skeptical, but he will grant that we
have firmer grounds to think there is another World in Heaven, Columbus (if he
were the first Discoverer) had to think there was another Earth; and that there
are for richer hopes laid up there in that other World, for those that do deny
themselves the sinful profies and the jollities of this, and force them from
their inclinations, than those Seamen could expect who first adventured with
him thither. For they could not think to gain much for themselves, but only to
take seisin of the Land (if any such there were) for others covetous Cruelty;
could get little else but only richer Graves, and to lie buried in their
yellow Earth Nor are we assaulted in our voyage with such hazards, as they knew
they must encounter with; the path of Virtue and the way to Heaven is not so
beset with difficulties as theirs was; when they must cut it out themselves
through an unknown hopes, and upon so uncertain a belief. A weak Faith
therefore can do mighty works; greater than any that we stand in need of to
encounter with our Enemy: It can remove these mountains too; the golden ones
that Covetousness and Ambition do Devil also, for if you resist him steadfast
in the Faith, he flies; which is the happy issue, and my last part.

Resist the Devil, and he will Fly from you. And yet it cannot be denied but
that sometimes when the messenger of Satan comes to buffet, though S. Paul
resist him with the strength of Prayer (which when Moses managed he was able to
prevail on God himself, and the Lord articled with him, that he might be Deuteronomy.
9. 14.
let alone) yet he could not beat off this assailant, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9. When
God, either for v. 7. or for exercising or illustrating of Graces, or some
other of his blessed ends, gives a man up to the affaults of Satan, he is often
pleased to continue the temptation long; but in that case he does never fail to
send assistances and aids enough against it. My grace is sufficient for thee,
says he to S. Paul there. And when he will have us tempted for his uses (if we
be not failing to our selves) he does prevent our being overcome; so that there
is no danger in those Trials from their stay. But yet it must not be denied but
that the Devil does prevail Resistance is not always a Repulse, at least not
such an one as to make him draw off and fly. It is not strange to find him
fiding with a natural Inclination, with the bent of Constitution, still
presenting Objects, laying Opportunities, throwing in Examples, and all sorts
of Invitation, always pressing so, that when a man has strugled long he does
grow weary of the service, not enduring to be thus upon his guard perpetually,
watching a weak heart which strong inclinations, busy Devils do lay fiege can
be, yields, for fear of yielding; lest he should not Jam. 4. 6.
God gives more grace, says S. James: And, Mat. 25. 29.
they shall have abundance, says our Savior. So that where the Devil after
several repulses still comes on with fresh assaults, we may be sure he does
discern there is some treacherous inclination that sides with him: And although
the man refuse himself the satisfaction of the sin, the Devil sees he has a
mind to it, his refusals are but faint, not

But where he sees he is resisted heartily, his offers are received with an
abhorrency, discerns Men are in earnest, watch to avoid all opportunities and
occasions, and prepare, triumph of their Virtue. We may know this by his
Agents, those that work under the Devil, whom he has instructed in the
mysteries of waging his Temptations. Where they are not like to speed (and as
to this they have discerning spirits) they avoid, and hate, and come not near,
but study spite and mischief only there. The intemperate men are most uneasy
with a person whom they are not able to engage in the debauch; the rudeness and
brutality of their excesses are not so offensive to the sober staid Virtue is
to them; they do not more avoid the crude egestions, shameful spewings of their
overtaken fellows Riot, than they do the shame and the reproach that such a
man's strict Conversation casts on them, which Great Master also is, who when
he is resisted must be overcome: And as they that are beaten have their own
fears also for their Enemies, which are sure to charge close, put to flight,
chase and pursue them; so it seems he also is afraid of a sincere and hearty
Christian, for he flies him: So he did from Christ, 4. Mat. verse. 11. and so
the Text assures, If you resist him, he will fly from you.

And now, although we all did once renounce the Devil and his works, were
listed Soldiers against him, took a Sacrament upon it, and our Souls, the
immortality of life or misery, depend upon our being true and faithful to our
selves and oaths, or otherwise; nor is there more required of us but resolution
and fidelity, only not to be consenting to our Enemies Conquest of us, not to
will Captivity and Servitude: Yet as if, in mere defiance of our willed the
ruin, but would fight for it, we may find, instead of this resisting of the
Devil, most men do Acts 7. 51.
resist the Holy Ghost; quench not the Ephesians. 6. 16.
fiery darts of Satan, but the 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
Spirit and his flames, by which he would enkindle love of God and Virtue in
them. If he take advantage of some warm occasion to inflame their courage
against former follies, heat them into resolutions of a change; as soon as that
ocasion goes off, they put out those flames, and choke these heats until they
die. If he come in his soft whispers, speak close to earnest; to all these they
shut their ears, can hear no whispers, are not sensible of any sounds of things
at such a distance, sounds to which they give no more regard, than to things of
the same extravagance with the Music of the Spheres. Nay, if he come with his
more active methods, as the Angels came to Lot, send mercy to allure and Genesis
19. 16.
take them by the hand, as they did, to invite and lead them out of Sodom; if
that will not, Judgments then to thrust them out, as they did also, come with
fire and brimstone to affright them; they not only like the men Sodom, do
attempt a Verse. 4, 9.
violence and Rape upon those very Angels, but they really debauch the
mercies, and profane the Judgments, having blinded their own Eyes, that they
might see no hand of God in either: using thus unkindly Ephesians. 4. 30.
grieved him so that he forsake and leave them utterly. As if they had not
heard that when the Holy Spirit is thus forced away, the evil spirit takes his
place, 1 Samuel 16. 14. As if they knew not that to those who close their eyes
and stop their ears against the Holy Spirit's motions, till they are grown dull
of hearing and blind to them, God does send a spirit of slumber, that they
should not see nor bear; and that for this dire reason, that they may not be
converted, nor be saved. Isa. 6. 9. Mat. 13. 14, 15. Joh. 12. 40. Acts 27. 26.
Romans 11. 8.
Five times he affirms it in the Scripture. Yea, once more in words of a sad
Emphasis, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12, He sends them strong delusions that they may believe
a lie, that they all may be damned who believe not the truth, but have pleasure
in unrighteousness: And that, because they received not the love of the truth,
that they might be saved. Blessed God! Is it so easy for such sinners to
believe and be converted, that thy self should interpose to hinder it, and
hide the possibilities of mercy from their eyes, that they may never see them,
nor recover! What can then become of those for whom God does contrive that they
shall not escape? when instead of those bowels that did make him Ezekiel. 33. 11.
swear he would not have the sinner die, but would have him return and live, he
puts on so much indignation at such sinners, as to take an order they shall not
repent, and take an order that they shall be damned.

And yet all this is only to those men, who, being dull of hearing the
suggestions of the Spirit, and not willing to give entertainment to his holy
motions, grieve him so, that they repel and drive him quite away; and so by
consequence only make way for the Devil: Whereas there are others that
directly call him, force him to them, ravish and invade study how to
disbelieve, and with great labor and contrivance work out arguments and
motives to persuade themselves to Atheism: Others practice, discipline, and
exercise themselves to be engaged in Vice. Some dress so as to lay baits,
snares, to entrap Temptation, that they may be sure it may not pass them:
Others feed high to invite and entertain the Tempter, do all that is possible
to make him come, and to assure him that he must prevail, when they have made
it most impossible for themselves to stand and to resist.

Some there are indeed whom he does not overcome so easily, but is put to
compound with them, takes them upon Articles: for when he would engage them to
a sin to which he sees they have great inclinations, with some fears, he is
repent when they have done; to lay hold upon the present opportunity, and not
let the satisfaction escape them, but be sorry after, and amend. For where
these resolutions of Repentance usher in transgression, there we may be sure it
is the Devil that suggests those resolutions. But if he can get admittance once
thus, by prevailing with a person to receive him upon purposes of after
Penitence; he is sure to prosper still in his attempts upon the same condition:
For Repentance will wash out another sin, if he commit it; and so on. And it is
evident that by this very train he does draw most men on through the whole
Death's forces, then they are to set upon resisting of the Devil: And when they
are grown so weak that their whole Soul must be employed to muster all its
spirits, all their strength, but to beat off one little spot of phlegm, that
does befiege the avenues of breath, the ports of life, and sally at it, and
assault it, once, again, and a third, many times, and yet with all the fury of
its might cannot Ephesians. 6. 12.
wrestle with, and Conquer Principalities and Powers, all the Rulers of the
utter darkness 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
pull down the strong holds of sin within, cast down imaginations, and every
high thing that did exalt it self against the knowledge of God, and bring into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; and with those seeble hands
that they are scarcely able to lift up in a short wish, or prayer, they must
do all this; resist the Devil, and take Heaven by force.

Now sure to put it off to such a fatal season is a purpose of a desperate
concern. In God's Name let us set upon the doing it while there is something
left of Principle and vigor in us, ere we have so grieved God's Spirit, that he
do resolve to leave us utterly; and before the Devil have so broke us to his
yoke, that we become content and pleased to do his drudgery. We deceive
ourselves if we think to do it with more ease when Constitution is grown
weaker; as if then Temptations would not be so strong: For the Habits will be
then confirmed, Vice grown Heroical, and we wholly in the Acts 26. 18.
power of Satan, dead and senseless under it, not so much as stirring to get
out. But if we strive before he have us in his clutches, we have an Enemy that
can vanquish none but those who consent to, and comply and confederate with
him, those that will be overcome: So that if we resist, he must Conquered; and
Temptation must be conquered too, for he will fly, and then by consequence
must cease to trouble and molest us. This is the sure way to be rid of
Temptations, to put to flight the great Artificer and Prince of them, subdue
and overcome him and our selves: And to Rev. 3. 21.
him that overcomes thus Christ will grant to sit with him on his Throne, as
He also overcame, and sat down with his Father on his Throne.

To which, etc.

SERMON XIV. WHITE HALL. Last Wednesday in LENT. 1667/8.
PHILIPP. III. 18. For many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell
you even weeping, that they are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ.
THough many by the Cross of Christ here understand any sort of Suffering for
the Christ to every evil that befalls a man for doing of his duty,) yet others
looking on it properly as that on which Christ himself suffered, by the Enemies
of the Cross understand those that set themselves against the whole design and
influence of Christ's Death upon it.

Now to name that in few words, the Cross of Christ Blood engaged himself; and
we may certainly assure Heb. 13. 20, and 10. 29.
the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant.

But besides this extrinsick influence of it, all the blessed Mercies also of
the Gospel, are the Purchase of this Cross, and all the main essential duties
of the Gospel are not only Doctrines of the Cross, such as it directs and does
enforce, but the Cross also has an immediate efficacy in the working of them
in us: For S. Paul says by the Gal. 6. 14.
Cross of Christ the World is Crucified to me and I unto the World. On it the
Flesh is also crucified with the Affections and Lusts: And to say all that
comprehensive Duty of the Gospel, Self denial, is but another word for taking
up the Cross: And then as for the Mercies of the Gospel on the Cross the
satisfaction for our sins was made, the Price of our Redemption paid, and that
effected: There was wrought our Reconciliation with our God; Lastly that was
the consideration upon which Grace was bestowed whereby we are enabled to
perform our duty: With good reason Paul calls the Gospel 1 Cor. 1. 18.
(...), the word or Doctrine of the Cross; so that the Enemies of the Cross
of Christ are in a word the Enemies of Christianity, and so the blessed
Polycarpe in his Epistle to these same Poly. and Ignat. Ep. p. 23. Edit.
Usserian. pro persequentibus and od^entibus vos, and pro inimitis crucis.
Philippians seems to understand it: And they that walk as Enemies to it, are
such as do not only hate the Duties of the Gospel, those especially which the
Cross directly does enforce; but their course of life is ordered so as to
break the very Frame and Power of Christianity, they set themselves against all
that Christ came to do upon and by the Cross, resist, and Doctrines, and by
consequence oppose the mercies of it.

The words being thus explained, I have no more to do but only answer two
Enquiries which they give occasion for.

The first is, What sort of men those are that walk as Enemies to the Cross,
and wherein their hostility does express it self?

The second is, What the danger and the sadness is of that condition, that
they should make S. Paul think it necessary For many walk, says he, of whom I
have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, etc.

First for the first. And here I shall not strive to give you Paul has made
ready to my hands in the next words.

And first the Enemies which he brings up in the front, are the Sensualists,
the Men whose God is their Belly.

Secondly, they whose glory is in their shame.

Thirdly, who mind Earthly things, to which as being their consederates, and
near allies I shall add

Fourthly, those that he reckons up in the 1 Cor. 1. the wise men of this world.

First the Sensualists.

That Men who diligently mind the serving of their appetite in meats and
drinks, that study and contrive its pleasures, and with industry have learnt,
and practice arts of Luxury, and in those have set up their delights, that
these should be accounted Enemies of the Cross of Christ there is but too much
reason. For their course of life is perfect opposition to that Cross, and to
the whole design of Christianity. and to the very being of all virtue. For
since Virtue is but moderation and restraint of Appetites and Passions, design
of Christianity, is to mortify the deeds of the Body, those our members upon
earth, that Body of Sin and Death; and since Voluptuousness quickens, pampers
and does make them vigorous; lastly, since the Doctrines and the Influences of
the Cross of Christ do aim at Crucifying the flesh with its Affections and
Lusts, and Luxuries do gorge and make them ramping, sure the enmity is too
apparent to be proved.

It is the business of Religion to instruct and frame men into reasonable
Creatures: God himself chose to dye upon the Cross that we might live like Men
here, and then afterward dye into Sons of God, and become equal to the Angels.

He suffered on the Tree, that we might be renewed into that constitution which
the Tree of Knowledge did disorder and debauch. Before Man ate of that, his
lower Soul was in perfect subordination to his mind, and every motion of his
appetite did attend the dictates of his reason, and and uses of his making;
there was a rational harmony in then Grace was Nature, Virtue Constitution.

Now to reduce us to this state as near as possible is the business of
Religion (as it had been in some kind the attempt also of Philosophy.) But this
it can in no degree effect, but as it does again establish the subordination of
the sensual to the reasonable part within us: That is, till by denying
satisfactions to the Appetite (which is now irregular and disorderly in its
desires) we have taught it how

But sensuality is most perfect opposition to this whole design; for it
renverses that subordination without which there is no possibility of virtue as
I showed you; and it puts that whether Lust or Passion in the Throne, which
either constitution, conversation, or whatever accident, did give Centaure
where the Beast is uppermost and rides the man; where the beast is God indeed;
for the sensual man acknowledges no other God but his own belly, so S. Paul
does character him here. And truly if we look on the attendances, and careful
services he gives it, and how studiously and wholly he does consecrate himself
to please it, one would think it most impossible he should have any other God;
but if we number the drink offerings, and meat offerings, the whole Hecatombs
he gives it, and whereas other Deities had only some peculiar appropriate
Creatures for their Sacrifices, how this votary rifles the Universe, goes
through the whole latitude of beings for oblations, one would think he did
out-number all the Heathen Legions in his Gods; Antigod as this to Christ,
appears a scornful insolent Enemy to Him, his Cross and his Religion, near the
state of those men whom the Wiseman couples with the sensual, persons of an
impudent mind, the very disposition of those Enemies of the Cross of Christ
whom S. Paul brings up in the second place,

Those that glory in their shame.
Amongst the uses of the Cross of Christ, one chiefly the Blood of God be shed
for it, but that Blood must be stained too with the imputation of a Malefactor:
Christ was to suffer the insulting scorns and vilifyings of his Crucifiers, his
Honor must be sacrificed as well as his Life, Barabbas must be preferred even
before that Person of the Trinity to whom sin was to be imputed, and who was to
bear the just shame of

And then how is it possible for men to wage a more professed hostility against
the Cross of Christ, than by endeavoring to put Reputation on the thing on
which that Cross was set to throw Disgrace? by raising Trophies to themselves
for that which raised a Gibbet to their Savior? giving themselves a value for
the thing which has such infinite diminution in it, Son of God esteemed worse
than Barabbas?

These men are two successful Enemies of the Cross that thus triumph over it,
and when it was erected as an Ensign to display the vileness of iniquity, and
to shame sin out of the lives of mankind, vindicate and rescue sin from that
Crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh and put him to an open shame,
while they put scorns on that contempt he suffered: For the Agonies and
Contumelies he endured on that account of sin must needs be most ridiculous to
them who count Sin gay and Honorable. Thus they trample and insult upon his
Passion, thus tread underfoot the Son of God even on his Cross, and glory in
it: For our actions raise a glorying in us only in relation to the sentiments
of others, that growing from a confidence of having praise and value for them
in the world. So that they must assure themselves that most men or the most
considerable will applaud their vices; otherwise they could not glory in them,
but would be ashamed. And such a judgment we may safely pass upon an Age or
Nation, where great Crimes not only have Tertullian in his Apology for our
Religion to them that blasted it with all imaginable imputations of impiety
discourses thus:

Omne malum aut timore aut pudore Natura perfudit: Nature a Tertul. Apolog. c.
1.
has dashed every vice with fear or shame; all Malefactors labor to lie hid,
and if they are laid hold upon they tremble, and deny when they are accused,
hardly confess it to the Rack; and when they are found guilty Christianus vero
quid simile? but what does the Christian like this? None of us is ashamed of
his Religion, or repents, except it be because he was not sooner of it: If he
be branded for it he rejoices, if you accuse him of it he does own it,
triumphs in it; if he be condemned for it he calls his Execution his Martyrdom,
his sufferings his Crown. Quid hoc mali est quod naturalia mali non habet? Now
what strange kind of impiety is this that has none of the natural affections
of it? not the shame nor Quid hoc mali est cujus reus gaudet, cujus accusatio
votum est, and poena foelicitas? What a kind of evil's this, which he that is
found guilty of is glad? to be accused of it is his ambition?

Alas the world has taught vice now adays to use this plea with a much
greater confidence, and he that would apply this argument to our experiences
might plead thus for the Religion of sin. For now they are but pitteous puisny
sinners who feel those things which in Tertullians days were natural and
essential to sin, to blush, and be ashamed, and have regrets. Men do not only
own it as those primitive persons did their Christianity, but they outvie the
Martyrs heats; for they accuse themselves, and boast of their performances

And truly as that Christian Confidence and Magnanimity brought in the world as
Proselytes to the Cross, so this other confidence brings Sholes of Votaries to
Vice: For when once there is no need to be ashamed of it, there are but very
few but will venture to commit it. And indeed this sort of men do manage their
hostility so dexterously, as to use those very weapons Christianity was
successful with, discipline of shame (for that was the great strength of the
Church Censures) that our Religion did at first prevail almost to the
exterminating Vice out of the World: The temporal Sword was never so victorious
as this weapon of our Spiritual Warfare was, which yet in those times drew no
blood, unless it were into the face, in blushes. But since men have found or
made pretexts to glory in iniquity, and several Crimes are become honorable;
Virtues are dressed up as mean, poor spirited, sneaking qualities; some look
melancholic, sad, are hypocondriacke, pedantick, some unmanly, some
irrational, and worse; so that men are now ashamed of Duty, it is a
disparagement to own the doing it: Thus they have as it were excommunicated
Religion. It is accounted a contemptible, or at best foolish thing; which is
the very sentence of the third sort of Enemies the Wise men of this World,
those (...), that mind earthly things (the fourth sort) in which all their
wisdom lies. Which two last sorts of Enemies I shall attaque together.

The Cross of Christ amongst its other ends was set to Gal. 6. 14.
whereby the World is to be Crucified to us, and we unto the World; to be the
means whereby we are enabled to prevail upon and overcome our worldly lusts and
inclinations; and to slight, yea and detest all the temptations of its Wealth,
Delights, and Heights, when they attempt to draw us into sin or take us off
from Duty. Now

First, showing us the Author and the finisher of our Faith nailed himself to
that Cross; his joints rackt on it, his whole Body stripped, and nothing else
but Vinegar and bitter potions allowed his thirst; and thus convincing us that
Mat. 16. 24.
if we will be his Disciples we must take up his Cross and follow him, at
leastwise we must have preparedness of mind to take it up when ever it is fixed
to Duty; to renounce all profits, honors, and delights of this World that are
not consistent with Captain of our Salvation was himself consecrated by his
sufferings, and had for his Standard his own Body lifted up upon the Cross, we
that are listed under him, and with that very badge the Cross too, crucis
Consecranei, Votaries and fellow Soldiers of that Order, if we shall avoid our
duty when it is attended with a Cross, or straightened any ways, and the
provisions of this World are cut off from it, and betake necessity we have to
renounce and Crucify the World.

But to encourage and enable us to do so, it does also show us

Secondly, the certainty of a good issue in the doing it, assures us, that
those who deny themselves forbidden satisfactions here, that will be virtuous
maugre all the baits and threats of Earth, will embrace duty when it is laden
with a Cross, although so heavy as to crush out life, and kill the body;
assures us that those lose not, but exchange their lives, shall save their
Souls, and that there is another World wherein of Miracles Christ sought to
satisfy the world that Beelzebub, he justified it further with his Life;
affirming that he was the Son of God (now it is impossible but he must know
whether he were or no) and consequently sent and able to do all he promised,
and resolved to do it also for our more assurance in himself, that he would
raise himself up from the dead within three days; and saying this when he was
sure he should be Crucified for saying so, and sure that if he did not do
according to his words, he must within three days

Now it is impossible for him that must needs know whether all this were true or
no to give a greater testimony to it than his Life. For this that Blood and
Water that flowed from his wounded side upon the Cross, which did assure his
Death, is justly said to bear witness to his being the Son of God, and
consequently to the truth of all this, equal to the testimony of the Spirit
(whether that which the Spirit gave when he came from Heaven down upon him in
there are three that bear witness upon Earth, the Spirit, 1 John 5. 8.
the Water and the Blood: Thus by his Death Christ did bring Life and
Immortality to light; his choosing to lay down his own life for asserting of
the truth of all this, was as great an argument to prove it as his raising
others from the dead: and Lazarus^^ empty Monument, and walking grave-cloathes
were not better evidence than this Cross of Christ.

3. Once more, this Cross not only proves the certainty of a future state,
but does demonstrate the advantage of Son of God, who did create all these
advantages of Earth, and prepare Wisdom of the Father, and does therefore know
to value them, yet Heb. 12. 2.
for the joys that were set before him choosing to endure the Cross and
despising the shame. On that Beam he weighed them, and by that his choice
declared the Pomps of this World far too light that 2 Cor. 4. 17.
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory; that the whole Earth was but as the
dust upon the Balance and despised it; and to make us do so, is both the
Design and direct influence of the Cross of Christ.

But as at first the Wise men of this World did count the 1 Cor. 1. 18, 19, 21,
23.
Preaching of the Cross mere folly, to give up themselves to the belief and
the obedience of a man that was most infamously Crucified, and for the sake of
such an one to renounce all the satisfactions, suffer all the dire things of
this Life, and in lieu of all this only expect some after Blessednesses and
Salvations from a man that they thought could not save himself, seemed to them
most ridiculous: So truly it does still appear so to the carnal reasonings of
that sort of men, who have the same objections to the Cross of Christ, as it
would

Now this being in their account folly, then the contrary to this they must
think wisdom; as it is indeed the Wisdom of this World; which Wisdom since it
does design no further than this World, and has no higher ends than Earth and
its Felicities, it must needs put men upon minding the acquist and the
enjoyment of these Earthly things, for that is only

And though a man would think these so great boundless cares are very vain and
foolish upon several accounts; for common sense as well as Scripture does
assure (...) that this life Luke 12. 15.
not consist in the abundance of the things that we possess; that it is all one
whether my draught come out of a small Bottle or an Hogshead (...) the one of
these indeed may serve excess, and sickness better, but the other serves my
appetite as well; the one may drown my Virtue, but the other quenches thirst
alike. And every days experience also does convince us, that the least cross
accident, pain or affliction on our persons or some other that is seated near
our hearts, or the least vexation or cross passion will so sour all those
advantages, that we cannot possibly enjoy them while we have them; sickness
makes

And there is no man also but does see so far into futurity as to satisfy
himself that he shall dye, and then the shadow of death will cloud and put out
all these glories. And universal reason also does tell every man that to deny
himself or want his present satisfactions of this helpless dying kind, and
suffer present evils, is in prudence to be chosen for avoiding

Yet notwithstanding all this, he that minds these earthly

And now the enmity betwixt the Cross of Christ and the wisdom of the World
appears; first, their designs are most thorns and briars in them, that Eartbs
Curse, things that pierce and wound as fatally as the Nails and Thorns and
other cruelties of Christ's Cross; and to lift us toward Heaven, to direct
our hearts and our affections thither as our harbingers, to take possession for
us of those joys the Cross did purchase for us, but no cross can ever
trouble. But the Wisdom of this World designs to lay out all its cares and its
contrivances within this World, minds nothing else but earthly things,

Secondly, their Principles wage war: For earthly good things being the design,
the main end of this worldly wisdom, consequently that does justify all
courses without which men cannot gain those ends, by which they do, though they
be never so unlawful by the Rules of that which we call Virtue and Religion; it
does justify, I say, all such as prudent. But the Principles of the Doctrines
of the Cross of Christ are positive, that we must renounce all earthly
satisfactions, when they cannot be enjoyed without transgressing

But Thirdly, there is no enmity so fatal to the Cross of Christ as is the
practice of those men who minding Earthly en ridicul; and make the proper
Doctrines of it, the strict duties of Religion, matter for their jests, and
bitter scof^s: They character religion as a worship that befits a God whose
shape the Primitive persecutors painted Christ in, Tertul. Apol. c. 16.
Deus Onochaetes, as if Christianity were proper Homage only to an Tertul. ad
Not. c. 11.
Asses person, as Tertullian Ibid.
Asinarii creatures only fit for burden, to bear, what they magnify, a Cross
and scorns. No persecutions are so mortal as those that Murder the reputation
of a thing or person; not so much because when that is fallen once then they
cannot hope to stand, as because those murder after death, and poison memory,
killing to immortality. They were much more kind to Religion and more innocent
that clothed the Christians in the skins of Bears and Tigers, that worried
into Martyrdom; Then they that cloth their Christianity in a fools Coat, that
so it may be laughed to death, go out in ignom^ny and into contempt. If to sport
with things of sacred and Eternal consequence were to be forgiven, yet to do it
with the cross of Christ: Thus to set that out as foolishness which is the
greatest mystery the Divine wisdom has contrived to make mercy and truth meet
together, righteousness and peace kiss each other, to make sin be punished, yet
the sinner pardoned: Thus to play and sin upon those dire expresses of Gods
indignation against sin, are things of such (...) and dangerous concern, that
S. Paul could For many walk says he, of whom I have told you often and now
tell you even weeping, etc. Which calls me to my last consideration.

Indeed the cross of Christ does represent Almighty God in so severe a shape,
and gives the lineaments of so fierce displeasures against sin, as do exceed
all comprehension. There was a passion in Christ's Prayer to prevent his
passion, when he deprecated it with strong cries and tears, yea when his as,
that sting of death and torments, sin did, which made

Now truly when we do reflect on this we cannot wonder if the Sinner be an
enemy to the Cross, and hate the prospect of it, which does give him such a
perfect copy of his expectations, when our Saviors draught which he so
trembled at shall be the everlasting portion of his Cup: For if God did
imputation of Iniquity, how will he torment the willful and impenitent
commission of it?

But then when we consider those torments were the satisfaction for the sins of
man, methinks the sinner should be otherwise affected to them: Christ by
bearing the Cross gave God such satisfaction, as did move him in consideration
thereof to dispense with that strict Law, which having broken we were forfeit
to eternal death, and to publish an act of grace whereby he does admit all to
pardon of sins past, and to a right to everlasting Life that will believe on
him, for sake their sins and live true Christians. He there appears the Joh. 1.
36.
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World, for that he does as being
a Rev. 13. 8.
Lamb slain, then he was our Heb. 9. 26.
Sacrifice, and that Cross the Altar. And the humbled sinner that repents
(for, notwithstanding satisfaction, God will not acept a Sinner that goes on;
by all those Agonies his holiness would not be justified, if when he had
forsaken and tormented his own Son for taking sin upon him, he should yet
receive into his favor and his Heaven, sinners that will not let go, but will
retain their sins: but the penitent) may plead this expiation: Lo here I poor
Soul prostrate at the footstool of me, yet behold Lord and see if there ever
were any Sorrow like the sorrow of thy Son wherewith thou did afflict him for
these sins of mine: And here is Blood also, his Blood to wash me in: and that
Blood is within the Veil too now and that my offering taken from the Cross up
to thy Throne, thou have accepted, it, and can not refuse it now my Advocate
does plead it, and claims for me the advantage of the Cross.

Now that men should be Enemies to this, and when they are forseit to eternal
Ruin, hate that which is to redeem the forfeiture; that they should trample on
the Lamb of God that comes to take away their sins; and make a spoil and
slaughter of their Sacrifice; hostilely spill upon the ground that Blood, that
was appointed for their Blood upon the Altar, for their blood of sprinkling,
and was to appear in Heaven for them. It men resolve to be on terms of Duel
with their God, and scorn that Satisfaction shall be made for them by any other
way than by defiance; and although their God do make the

But possibly men slight these satisfactions because some terms are put upon
them which they know not how to comport with; the merits of the Cross must not
be accounted to them but upon conditions which they are not able to perform;
they are required to master all their wicked Customs, their untamed appetites,
and settled habits, to keep under their Concupiscence, to calm their

But therefore Secondly, that Cross was the consideration upon which Grace is
offered us, whereby we are enabled to perform all this; the power to will and
strength to do, all necessary aids from Heaven are granted to us as Christ
merited them for us by his Sufferings; and that Blood he shed upon the Cross
it is the Fountain, it is the did purchase it was paid down for thee on the
Cross, Blood of God in spiritual succors, which may make me able to resist
thy Enemies, and do thy will. Now God will never be unjust to deny any man
those aids that were so dearly purchased for him, and for which he has received
the price.

And then that men should be Enemies of the Cross which is their Magazine of
strength against their Enemies! As men that do resist the having grace, least
it should change

Once more, on that Cross was wrought a reconciliation betwixt God and Man;
and that upon such terms of honor to us Men, that God does seem to condescend
as far in this his Treaty, as in coming down from Godhead into Flesh; there is
Exinanition in his yieldings and compliance. He sent his Son to move us to be
reconciled, as if he did acknowledge us the offended party; and as if he meant
to give us satisfaction, in his Blood, he dies upon the Cross to effect that
reconciliation. When our Savior would magnify a love he thus expresses it,
Joh. 15. 13.
Greater love than this has no man, that a man lay down his life for his
friend: But behold here is greater love, for Romans 5. 8, 10.
Christ commended his love to us in that when we were Enemies he dyed for us,
only out of hopes to make us friends; Cant. 8. 6.
Love strong as death indeed, that brought him to the grave who could not dye.
(...), affection violent as Hell, that brought God to (...), and made him
descend to Hell: For Ibid. 70.
so low he stoopt; thus he humbled himself to persuade us to be reconciled, and
to prevail with us to be at peace with God.

And is a Reconciliation with the Lord so hateful to us, that we will be
Enemies to the Cross that works it? are from the Covenant we have made with
Death, and the agreement we are at with Hell, that we will have the Col. 2. 15.
spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphing over them on it; therefore set
our selves against that Trophee of his Victories over our friends the Devil and
his Fiends? is the love of Christ so injurious to us that we will be Enemies to
the Expresses of it? and when his affection threw him down so low for our
sakes,

Was it not for this O blessed Savior! that thou did pray against thy Cup so
earnestly, because of Man's ungrateful enmity to it? because thou wast to
suffer God Almightys Indignation in it, and the Sinners hatred for it? because
it was the Cup of the Lords fury, and Man's also? God squeezed into it all the
dregs of his Wrath, and man scornfully spits into it? and when the one will
make thee Paul's tears, nor Christ's Blood has sufficient compassion for.

And yet though one wept the other dyed for them, these men have neither tears
nor pity for themselves. Yet one would think this were a subject worthy of
them: It Is storied of Xerxes that when he took a view of his vast Greece with
(an Army such as the Sun never saw, and it could scarce see that, which the
Historian says did Coelo minitari tenebras, as it covered and drank up the
Sea, and took up and devoured the Earth, so it did seem to darken Heaven too:
An Army which consisted says Herodotus, when mustered at Thermopylae of Five
Millions, two hundred eighty three thousand, two hundred and twenty Men,
besides Laundresses, Harlots, and Horses; and it had Twelve hundred on a sudden
he burst into Tears on this Consideration, Paul's Tears, but sure I am it does
deserve their own: And there is nothing will avail in their behalf without
their tears. It may that Sign of the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven?
When this Cross shall usher in the great Assize? When they shall look on him
that they have pierced and Crucified upon it? And when that Crucified offended
Enemy shall come there to be their Judge? That takes himself to be offended
much more in his kindness, than his Person; and will judge this more severely
that we would not let his Cross and

Let us then be cautioned in the fear of God to be no longer Enemies to that
which is to reconcile our Judge to us. If we have his Friendship on the Cross,
we may be sure to have it on the Judgment Seat. He that on the Cross parted
with Godhead and with Life for us, will on the Bench adjudge us that
Inheritance which his Cross did purchase for us. He sits there to pronounce
Happiness upon all faithful sincere Christians to proclaim Come ye blessed of
my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you.

To which, etc.

SERMON XV. WHITE HALL. November. 15. 1668.
MARK X. 15. Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of
God as a little Child, he shall not enter therein.
THE Kingdom of God, especially as it Messiah, or in one word, Christianity;
and that both as to the profession and the practice, the Doctrine and the life
of it: For so the (...), by which Theophylact expounds the words, the Preaching
of the Doctrine is it self called the Kingdom of God by our Savior, Mat. 21.
42. It Is not delivering of a message only in weak empty words, it is
Jurisdiction and exercise of Sovereignty: And the Commission Mat. 28. 18, 19.
All Power, says our Lord, is given to me both in Heaven and in Earth, and
(which the Syriack adds in that place also) Joh. 20, 21.
as my Father sent me, so send I you, go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
teaching them to observe whatsoever I have Commanded you. As if this were
execution

Which obedience is Secondly, and that most properly entitled the Kingdom of
God; Romans 14. 17. for by that he Reigns; without this our great universal Lord
were a Prince of no Subjects, had a Kingdom but of Rebels only: So that to
receive the Kingdom of God is by the obedience of Faith to submit to the
Gospel, to receive the Doctrines of the Kingdom of God imports, which is that
sense it bears in the last words of my Text. In which we must consider,

First, the object both of the Duty and the Threat a Kingdom, and that the
Kingdom of God.

Secondly, our concern and duty in relation to that Kingdom we have only to
receive it. Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God.

Whatever bustle men are well content to make to get possession of any Earthly
Dignity or Power, sometimes to wage war with their Conscience and all
obligations, violate all Rights both Humane and Divine, and assault greatest
difficulties and yet greater guilts, to invade men's Crowns, and other rights,
there is no such need in this; we have no more to do but let this Kingdom come,
and not resist the having it. For therefore also

Thirdly, the manner we are by our Savior here prescribed as a little Child.
Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little Child, as one that
cannot stand against the power of a Kingdom when it comes; that has nor
strength nor malice, neither force nor will to oppose; which they that do must
needs keep themselves out of it: Which is

Fourthly, the thing threatened, they shall not enter therein; there being
neither reason nor indeed a possibility men should possess that which they
will not receive.

Lastly, Christ's asseveration is added to all this, Verily I say unto you
whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little Child, he shall not
enter therein.

But because the main thing Christ intended in the Text (which he so often
repeated upon several occasions) was, by the a little Child, visibly to inform
us of some dispositions that are absolutely necessary to the entertaining
Christianity, either in our minds by Faith or in our lives by practice; I shall
therefore wholly attend that design of his in the words, and handle them
particularly as they seem here to be spoken in relation to the Doctrine of it.
This being most of use now in an age when men not only tear Religion with
disputes, but aim to baffle it with reproaches quite out of the world: Now
against such the text is positive, Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of
God, the Doctrine as a little Child he cannot enter therein, neither into the
possession of the Promises of Christianity, nor indeed into the profession of
it.

And here I need not labor much to find that in a child which Christ requires
of those that come to be disciples in Religion; for it is plain that children
being impotent, unable to sustain or to direct themselves, they give
themselves up to the aids and the directions of others, those especially whom
they are committed to, and with whose cares of them they are acquainted; to
whose guidance they resign themselves entirely, she proposes as revealed by
God merely on that account as she proposes it, for otherwise it is not a right
faith: Yea, she requires that men give their assent to the determinations of
her head, the Pope, in matters of fact also, where they are as competent to
Judge as he; And though with all their industry, and using the same means, they
cannot find the fact to be as yield and sign their assent to his
determinations, Witness the matter of Jansenius. Yea their great Cardinal is
positive that Si Papa erraret pracipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes,
teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bo^a, virtutes malas, nisi vellet contra
conscientians peccare. Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. l. 4. c. 5. sect ultima.
If the Pope could err so far as to call evil good, good evil, to prohibit
virtues or command vices, the Church were bound in conscience to believe those
vices good and honest, and those virtues evil. So far he.

Indeed if that Church be the Mother and Nurse of all Christians, it is from her
breasts only they must seek the sinceremilk of the word: Now that she is so,
they must take her word, as Children do their Parents words that they are so.
And indeed this is properly to receive the Doctrine as a little Child, not
judge, nor reason, nor examine, but believe it. And such legendary doctrines as
well as Histories, which they deliver, are Austin's time we find the Manichees
derided Christianity, that discipline of Faith, because by Irridere Catholica
Fidis disciplinam, quod juberentur homines credere, non autem quid esset verum
cercertissima ratione docerentur. l. 1. Retract. c. 14.
that men were commanded to believe and were not taught how to distinguish
truth from falsehood by clear reason, and again, that it De util. cred. c. 1.
ante Fidem nobis quam rationem imperari.
requires us to assent before we have a reason for it. And long before that
Origin. adv. Celsum. l. 1. p. 8 Si Papa erraret pracipiendo vitia, vel
prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bo^a, virtutes
malas, nisi vellet contra conscientians peccare. Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. l. 4.
c. 5. sect ultima.
editi. Cantabr.
Celsus did advise the Christians to receive no doctrines but on the account of
reason, credulity being the inlet to deceit, saying, they that without grounds
believe are like those that admire and are satisfied with juglers, and take
appearances and sleight of hand for truth, adding many of the Christians,
neither would receive, nor give a reason of their faith but used to say (...)
do not you examine, but believe, it is your faith shall save you; and as if from
the beginning it were so we cannot but have heard the story of that man that
reading Genesis where Moses says, In the beginning God created the Heaven and
the Earth. And he said let there be light and there was light, etc. Swore at
him, saying, this Barbarian only asserted boldly but proved nothing. As if
argument and reason never had place in the Jewish or the C. 1.
Christian Religion, only those who were the institutors of each Religion, did
deliver it; others had no more to do but to believe it, that is, to receive it
as a little Child.

Whether these reproaches, and the oath of these known enemies may go for
proofs that it was so, I shall not now enquire. But it is certain on the other
side S. Paul requires of his new Christian 1 Cor. 14. 20.
Corinthians, that they be not children in understanding, that they be in
malice Children, but in understanding Men. Now a man and a child differ not in
this that the one has an understanding reasonable soul, and the other has
not; but in be in understanding men, does require of us that we use our reason
in it.

And since assenting to a thing as truth is an act of the highest understands
and judges, it is not possible a man should really believe a thing unless he
fatisfie himself that he has reason for so doing. Yea, whether that be true or
not which many men so eagerly contend for, that the will though free is bound,
and cannot choose but will that which appears best at that time it wills, yet
it is sure that he who with his understanding, which is not free in her
apprehensions and judgments, but must necessarily embrace that which has most
evidence of truth: He I say who really assents to any wish or fancy and
imagination, not belief. And to prevent such childish weak credulity was the
great work and care of Christ, so far is he from requiring we should be as
Children in this kind. For when he was ascended up to heaven he gave some
Apostles, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, he shed down the Holy
Spirit and his gifts, that we might not be as Children tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of Doctrine; Ephesians. 4. 14.

First, For want of rational grounds instable in our Faith as Children are in
body, and in judgment also, taking all appearances for truths. If men were
only to believe, there must needs be as great variety of Religions as of
teachers. And though God has appointed that some Church should be as perfectly
infallible as that of Rome pretends to be; yet since there are so many
Churches, and the true one therefore could be known no otherwise then by some
marks, there must be disquisition before Faith; and men must reason and examine
ere they can believe upon good grounds; for were they to receive Religion as a
little Child, be nursed up with the Doctrine as with milk, a Child we know may
suck infection from the poisoned breast of an unwholesome mother, or some other
person, for it knows not to distinguish; And so may be nursed to death. A soul
like theirs that is but rasa tabula white paper is as fitted to receive the
mark of the beast, as the inscription of the living God, just as the first hand
shall impresse. Therefore we are bid 1 John 4. 1.
not to believe every Spirit, not every Teacher though he come with gifts,
pretend and seem to be inspired, but try them; and our Mat. 24. 24.
Savior forewarned the Jews of false Christ's that should come with signs and
wonders. Something therefore must be known first and secured, before the
understanding can be thus obliged to give up its assent; And 2 Cor. 10. 5.
Captivate every thought into obedience, as S. Paul directs. Now what that was
here to the hearers in the Text is easily collected, he was the Christ that
does require it: And S. Paul expresses it in the forecited place; where he
says, we must bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, to
wit, of that Christ, who as he does himself profess that if he had not done
among them the works which no other had done, they had not had sin: John 15.
24. If his demonstrations had not convinced them it had been no fault not to
believe: So when he had made appear he was that person whom their prophesies
had poynted out, the Messiah, the Son of the living God, and this not only his
Mat. 16. 16.
Disciples had acknowledged, but the John. 6. 14.
multitudes; Pharisees confess, John. 3. 2.
Rabbi we know thou art a Teacher come from God; for no man can do these
miracles, except God be with him. Then if the Mat. 19. 7.
Pharisees dispute against his Doctrine of Divorce, urge the authority of Moses
and Gods Law; and the v. 10.
Disciples press the inconveniences that will happen, If the case of a man be
such with his wife; he may answer them: He that will not receive my Doctrines
without dispute, that is to say, He that will not receive the Kingdom of God as
a little Child shall not enter therein. This Luke 19. 38.
King that comes in the name of the Lord may how we shall receive the Kingdom
of God. If he propose strange precepts to our practice, It appears that he is
sent from God, and Gods commands are not to be disputed but obeyed; if his
revelations present dark unintelligible Mysteries to our faith, his promises
offer seeming impossibilities to our hope, why yet he has made proof he comes
from God; and surely we are not so insolent as to doubt that God can discover
things above our understanding, and do things above the comprehension of our
reason. Therefore since we are as Children to all these, it is but just we
should receive them even as little Children: With a perfect resignation of our
understandings Austin says, De utilit. cred. c. 14.
Those are not Christians who deny that Christ is to be believed, unless there
be some other certain reason of the thing besides his saying: Si Christo etiam
credendum negant nisi indubitata ratio reddita fuerit Christiani non sunt. For
to them

There is indeed no other name now under heaven, to whom we are obliged to give
such deference, for however the modern Doctrines dare assert, that Christ has
given the very same infallibility which himself had to all S. Peter's
succcessors as often as they speak ex Cathedra; And that in matters both of
right and of particular fact; yet not to countenance this monster by admitting
combat with it, nor to put my self into the circle which these men commit who
talk of the Authority of the Church, to which they require us to resign our
Faith. I shall not stay to rack them on that their own wheel: This I dare
affirm, it is impossible for any person or assembly to produce a delegation of
authority in more ample terms then the great Council of the Jews could show,
signed both by God and Christ. According to the sentence of the Law which they
shall teach thee, and according to the Judgment which they shall tell thee
thou shall do; thou shall not decline from the sentence which they shall show
thee, to the right hand, nor to the left, says God, Deuteronomy. 17. 11. compared
with 2 Chronicles. 19. 8, 9, 10, 11. And our Savior says, They sit in Moses Chair,
all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do, Mat. 23. 2.
Let them of Rome produce a better and more large commission. Yet did not this
suppose that Council was infallible either in the interpreting the Law, or in
attesting of tradition, or in judging of a Prophet, or that the Jews were
blindly to give up their assent and their obedience to their sentence; God did
not mean the people should imagine that when he prescribed a Sacrifice for
expiation of their errors in their Judgment when they found it out. Lev. 4 13.
As their own Maimonid. Yad. Shegagoth. c. 12. 13. V, More Nebechin. l. 3. c.
41. p. 465. Or see, Ainsworth upon that place of Leviti^us.
Doctors do expound it: Therefore God supposed that they might err, and we
evacuate the Law. Mat. 23. 15. They judged and slew true Prophets, v. 37. They
declared the Messiah an impostor, Mat. 27. 63. and blasphemer, and for that
condemned him, Mat. 26. 65. and decreed what the Apostles told them they must
not obey, Act. 5. 25.

But though there be no such Authority that is absolute* over the Faith of Men
now upon Earth; yet if this Jesus did acquire such by his Works; if by the
Miracles he wrought, his raising others from the dead, his own Death and his
Resurrection, he sufficiently justified the Divinity of his Doctrine: with him
continually, and could not therefore be deceived Preached it every where, the
Lord working with them, and confirming the Word with signs following. If they
consigned that Word in Writing also which they Preached, to be a measure and a
Standard of that Doctrine to futurity; which Word so Preached and Written by
agreeing, would in aftertimes give mutual illustrious evidence to one another;
and if any Heterodoxies should at any time creep by degrees into

And if the multitudes that heard, and saw, and did receive all this, and which
were grown extremely numerous almost in every Nation of the then known World,
while those Apostles and Disciples lived, if these delivered what they must
needs know whether 'twere true or not, delivered both that Doctrine and those
Books of it as most certain truth, by Preaching, and by Writing, and by Living
to it, and by Dying for it, and engaging their Posterity to do so; and they
Doctrine of that Jesus, and this Book the Records of it, with the resignation
of a little Child, and absolutely to submit our Faith to them.

But that it was thus; first as sure as any of us here, who have not seen the
thing can be, that Christianity is now professed, the Bible now received in all
the Regions round about us throughout Europe, or indeed that there are such
Regions and places, so sure we may be, for we have the testimony of Dioclesian
'twas over the World professed both with their mouths and lives; owned in despite
of Spoil, of Torments, and of Death; and they did value the Records of this
Doctrine so much dearer than their Lives or their Estates, that in prosecution
of those vid. Eusebius. l. 8. c. 3.
Edicts, wherein the Christians were required to deliver up their Bibles to be
burnt, in one Month vid. Baron. Annal. ad annum. 302. number. 22. and 26.
17000. were put to death: And the Persecution lasted at that rate for ten
years time; so that in Egypt only it is said there were slain Spondauus ad
anuum 302. number. 4. Severus l. 2. hist. ait, Omnis fer^ sacro martyrum cruore
orbis infectus est.
144000, and 70000 banished. (The Laity it seems were allowed Bibles then.) Or
put the case higher in Adrian's, or Trajan's time, who both lived within an
There were but seven years betwixt the death of S. John, and the Pers^cution of
Trajan, some say but one.
hundred years of Christ, who Martyred them till weariness slackned the
Execution, and they gave off only as it were that so they might cease to
persecute themselves; and we have the Plinius. Procon. Ponti. and Bythynia.
vid. ipsius Ep. l. 10. Ep. 97. Tertul. Apol. Eusebius. Ecc. bist. l. 3. c. 33.
Officers engaged attesting

Now Secondly, it is most impossible those so vast multitudes of every Nation
should have met together, forged a Code of Doctrines, and agreed so uniformly
in professing a Religion, and in dying for it; for we may as easily believe
that there were never any men before this Age we live in but that these began
the king, as that those of that Age began the Christian Religion.

Thirdly, it is as impossible that their immediate Ancestors who lived in the
Apostles Age, who heard their Preaching, Seal of God, Miracles to attest they
come from God.

I might have urged completion of Prophecies to prove the same. First those in
the Old Testament of the Messiah, Christ, that they sufficiently clear those
Books to be Divine: Next Christ's predictions in the New, particularly those
about Jerusalem, which says Eusebius, Eusebius. lib. 3.
He that will compare with what Josephus an eyewitness and no Christian,
writes of it (or what our selves know of that Nation and that place indeed) he
must acknowledge c. 7 His^. Eccl.
the Divinity of his words. But enough has been said to prove they come from
God, and therefore we must so receive them as the Word of God, with perfect
resignation of our Souls, and submission of our judgments, denying every
apprehension receive this Word of the Kingdom as a little Child.

I do not here affirm, by saying this, that our Religion does John therefore
does not only call in, and admit, and urge their testimony, 1 John 1. 1, 2.
That which we have heard, which we have seen with our Eyes, which we have
looks upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life, that declare we
unto you; But our Savior in the highest point of Faith appeals directly to
their Judgment: Joh. 20. 27.
Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand and
thrust it into my side, and be not faithless but believing: And S. Austin also
gives them the decision of a point of Doctrine which of all others now troubles
the Church most; for speaking Eucharist, he says, Qued erg^ videtis panis est.
and calix quod vobis etiam oculi vestri renunciant. Aug. sermon ad Infan tes.
that which you see is Bread, and it is a Cup, it is that very thing which your
eyes tell you it is. Tertul de Anima. c. 17.
Tertullian also long before that had appealed to them in that very cause. And
in an instance where their sentence passes, it is not strange if Reason also
take the Chair, and do pretend to Judge. And truly when the Scripture that does
call those Elements Mat. 26. 29.
Christ's Body and his Blood, does also call them after Consecration 1. Cor. 11.
26. 27.
Bread and Wine; and since they must be called one of them by a figure, for
they cannot be in Substance both; and since that Scripture has not told us
Reason that has Principles by which to judge of Bodies, which are exposed to
all the notices and trials of our several faculties, and to which a Trope is
not a stranger, it can judge of figurative speeches; when it therefore finds if
it admit the figure in that form This is my Body, It Is but just the same which
was in the Jews Sacrament the Paschal Lamb: which they called (...)
the Body of the Passever, though it were but the memorial, a Talm, Baby. tit.
Pesachim. ^. 10. sec. 3. Maimon. Tad. titule (...) c. 8. sec. 7.
figure which was always usual in Sacraments, and is indeed essential to
Sacraments: And which is used in all things that are Bread and Wine only in a
figure, besides a most impossible acknowledged Consequence, that a man can be
nourisht by them, which the Romamsts dare not deny; nor yet dare grant that men
can feed upon a trope, be nourish't with a figure; besides this, contradictions
as they do the Wafer, or receive as a little Child, that discerns the Lords
Body, no more then it does the repugnancies that are consequent to their
Hypothesis concerning it.

Or to make another instance, when the Scripture says, God is a Spirit, yet
does also give him hands, and eyes, and ears, and wings, and these of strange
prodigious dimensions; neither tells us which of these is proper and which
figure: Here if Reason that can prove God cannot be a Body, and cannot endure
his God should be a monster, shall be called in to pass sentence; they that
make Philosophy interpret Holy Writ in this case, and give the last resort to
Reason, do no more usurp or trespass on Religion, then they that make use
Greek or Hebrew word in Scripture.

But notwithstanding this we may not think the mysteries of Faith are to be
measured by the Rules of natural Reason, so to stand or fall as they approve
themselves to its discourse or Principles: For though it be impossible that any
Revelation can contradict right Reason (truth cannot be inconsistent with
truth:) yet it is very possible God can reveal those truths which we have
neither faculties analogal, nor receive as Children what our Heavenly Father
says.

And therefore they that will presume to comprehend whatere they are commanded
to believe, and those that will believe nothing but what they are able to
comprehend, are alike in a Cloud; namely concerning the Divine nature, Persons,
Properties, and the Eternal being, and the Incarnation of his Son; but still,
as God himself is said to do, these also dwell in Light, that no man can
approach unto. Which he that will needs gaze and pry too near to, must be
dazzled into blindness, and be only so much more in the dark. But he that
proudly does conceit his little Lucifers assuming he has reason to expect his
fall. The The Shcoolman.
one of these that will needs clear all mysteries, the The Socinian.
other will take them all away; the one that with his Pencil will presume to
figure him who is the brightness of Gods glory, and trace out the lineaments
by which that everlasting Father did impresse the character, and express Image
of his person on him, and the other that with a bold hand dashes out the Person
from the Nature; the one that will Ego id quem etiamsi non semel, sed saepe id
its sacris mo^imentis scriptum extaret, non idcirco tamen it a prorsus se
babere eredere^^ Socinus, de Servatore. l. 3. c. 6. 2 Vol. 204.
for my part if it were not only once (...) oftentimes set down in holy
Scripture, yet would not I therefore believe it, because forsooth it was
against his reasonings: Neither the one or other of these sure receive
revelation as a little Child, not like young Samuel, Speak Lord for thy Servant
hears.

But these, as all extravagance is wont, are profited into ground enough to
turn all Christian duty into Raillery.

For instance; If Christ intending by prescribing patience, to teach men how to
escape not only from the guilt, and present torture that a Spirit which will
needs return each slight offense is subject to, but also from the future and
eternal recompenses of revenge, shall in phrasing his in junctions but bid them
Mat. 5. 39.
turn the other cheek, no Gentleman can be of his Religion; and that is cause
enough I hope not only to renounce, but scorn it. If in mere compassion meaning
only to make virtue easy, by advising us against the snares and Mat. 5. 29, 30.
pull out the right eye, cut off the right hand: His Religion is a much worse
Tyranny then the Covenant And the m^n of Jabesh ^ilead said unto Nahash, make a
covenant with us and we will serve thee. And Nahash answered them, on this
condition will I make a Covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right
eyes and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel. 1 Samuel 11. 1, 2.
Nahash offered to the men of Jabesh Gilead, and they think themselves as much
concerned to make parties against it: In fine, if that he might at once
instruct us how to pull up 1 Timothy 6. 10.
the root of all evil, he forbid us Mat. 6. 19. 20.
to lay up treasures upon the Earth, and tell us that our treasures should be
laid up in Heaven, and say it is Mat. 19. 24. 26.
impossible for arich man to enter into heaven; here they cry out mainly he
supposes us, and treats us just as Children: This Command Judas, sold the
purchase of Christ's of the Universe, can be singled out and parted to its
proper Scriptures lake of fire must be no more then the Poets Acheron; and
Resu^rection was framed (as the apparition of a Ghost is wont to do) to fright
men merely; and however it is attested Christ did never rise, but all is fable:
Thus from such premises as these our rational disputing men conclude.

And here I shall not ask how these men dare presume, that if there be a God
who has declared that he will bring such things to pass, yet he must be
unable to affect them, if they leams that come out of his hand, in which the
hiding of his Power is: But this I shall say to our men of reason, theirs is
the most unreasonable Hab. III. 4.
way of arguing in the world; to dispute against plain matters of fact, the
being and the Works of such and such so many ages since, and witnessed by a
greater testimony then the world can show for any other thing; And ever since
appearing in their visible and vast effects, as the Conversion, Suffering,
Faith, of the whole Earth almost. Now to attempt the confutation Burlesque:
Thus he that with the Ancients cannot comprehend how it is possible that there
should be Antipodes, Indies nothing else but false relations, and that indeed
there are no Indies.

I need not urge how Christianity approves it self even to the reasoning of the
sober part of mankind; and the morality of it had the suffrage of the world
before it self appeared: for while the evidence stands good, if the matter of
fact be Zeno did attempt, namely, by subtilties to prove it was impossible
there could be any motion, while another did disturb his lecture by his motion
up and down the Schools; it bowl to cut with, or the vessels of the Danaid's
to carry water in: for such reasonings are alike improper for that work.

And indeed these arguings are not the exceptions of reason, but the struglings
of men's vices against Religion. And it must be impossible so many thousands
would give up their bodies, rather then their Bibles to the fire in
Dioclesian's days, because it is a book which they can find no other pleasure
in but that of railling it, or helping them with subjects to be profane upon.
It must be false that Christ did feed 5000 with 5 loaves and 2 small fishes,
till 12 baskets full of broken pieces did remain; Mat. XIV. 20, 21.
yet not so much because they know not how their eating could nourish the
victuals so, and make it grow; as because they are angry with the worker of the
miracle, who forbids and upbraids the excesses of their luxury, which can
easily, and does daily consume the price of that that would suffice 5000,
without miracle on 5 single persons; and all that when it is dressed according to
the modern mode of eating well, dissolved, turned into juyces, and exalted into
the Elixir of the Epicure, shall leave, alas! no broken pieces for the
alms-basket: this is pots of water into wine, because that seems to gratify
the thirsts of their intemperance. In fine, we John 11. 6, 7.
do not live as men prepared or willing to be called to an account of all our
doings, therefore we have no mind to rise again to give it: when we are thus
minded, it is not hard to meet with difficulties that encourage the opinion
that we shall not rise. Which difficulties when we look into, we cannot find
how it is possible we can be raised, and it is easy then to think Moses by his
miracles endeavored to let Pharaoh know who was the Lord, and to persuade him
to God permitted the Exodus VII. 11, 13, 22.
Magicians to counterfeit those miracles, it looked like reasonable indeed that
Pharaoh should not be convinced; but when they could not imitate, but did
confess Exodus VIII. 19.
the finger of the Lord, and Exodus IX. 11.
themselves Suffered those plagues which they could not either conjure up or
down; then Pharaoh will not be persuaded, it is plain nothing but his interests,
not the wonders which were wrought by the Magicians, were the reasons that
prevailed with him; for those were not reasons against more and greater
miracles; yet they were effectual with him to the destruction of himself and
his nation. Again when they who knew the mighty works Christ did, and were Mat.
24. 29.
forewarned by him of false Christ's and false Prophets, that would come with
signs and lying wonders; God allowing Satan leave to struggle at his last
gasp, and to make a blaze when he was to fall from Heaven as lightning, but far
beneath the glory of his only begotten Son: when they who knew both these,
chose yet to follow a Barchocab, a false falling Meteor, who came indeed with
greater show, and not with such strict mortifying Doctrines, nor only with the
thin encouragement of after-expectations as Christ did, for he gave them hopes
of present temporal enjoyments; but he did no wonder besides spitting fire (S.
Jerome says) and throwing great stones b Vid. Raimundi Martini. pug. fidei, p.
262.
from his knee as from an engine, say his followers; which yet could not scare
the Soldiers, neither did the Roman Eagles Four millions, vid. pug. fid. ibid.
millions of them. Now it is evident by the comparison (...)
of the several signs that Christ and this Barchocab wrought, the only reasons
that gave efficacy to that slight imposture, and did make it overpower
Christ's mighty works, was their earthly desires and affections which Christ's
severe Doctrines could not gratify, and therefore 2 These. 11. 10.
they receiving not the love of the truth, but having pleasure in
unrighteousness, gave themselves up to delusions to believe a lie; yet still
those delusions went for reason with them. Once more Tertullian challenging
Produce before your judgment s^ats Tert. Apol. c. 23. Edatur hic aliquis sub
tribunalibus vestris ex iis qui de Deo pati existimantur, qui aris inbalantes
numen de nidore concipiunt, qui ructando conantur, qui anbelando profantur;
nisi s^ daemones confessi fuerint, Christiano men^iri non audentes ibidem, etc.
some, whom you will, of those who are inspired by any of your Gods, when
gaping ore the Altar they have in its fumes (according to their custom) taken
in the Deity till they are great with it and ructando conantur, while they are
in travel with him, as it were, have belching throws, that they burst almost,
till they are delivered of the inspiration: while it is thus, let but any
Christian adjure them by the name of Christ, and if the spirits that they are
possessed with do not presently confess that they are devils, ibidem illius
Christiani procacissimi sanguinem fundite, let the saucy petulant Christian
lose his life. He speaks of this as a known frequent trial. And Minutius Felix
says, their chiefest Gods have been forced out of their Votaries, and
acknowledged they were evil spirits. Now here was reason and experience; the
miracle was so evident, that Tertullian bragging says, do not believe it if
your eyes and ears can suffer you; and the reason was more pressing then the
fact: it being most impossible that that should be a God which a man could rule
and triumph over, so imperiously manage him, as with a bare command to force
him from his hold, and make him shame himself so villainously before both his
adorers and his enemies, as to say, He was a Devil. Yet the Heathens still
found colors to do out all this conviction; and their old acquaintance with
their Gods, together with the custom of their vicious worships, had more force
with them then miracle and reason. And while the Christian disposest their
Deities, he was

And it is not strange if men now stick as closely to their vices, as those did
to the Gods that patronized them, and it be as hard to exorcise the Devil out
of their affections and practices, as it was then out of Heathen Votaries or
Temples. They are as fierce against the Christian Religion for their lusts
sake, as those for their Venus, and the very same account that made those
Heathen customs, or the lying wonders of false Christ's, Pharaoh's Magicians
signs, be more persuasive then the other more real miracles; namely, because
they sided with their inclinations and interests. This very account makes
little difficulties (which Almighty God has left in our Religion, as he
suffered signs and lying wonders heretofore, for trials) yea, makes cavils,
mere exceptions, pass for reasons most invincible, be disputed, urged with
great concern and passion, against all those methods of conviction which God
has afforded Christianity.

Now if this be to receive Religion as a little Child, it is with the
frowardness of Children, when they are displeased or ill do ye thus requite
the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy Father that has bought
thee? Has he not made thee and established thee? Ask thy Father and he will
show thee, thy Elders and they will tell thee. De^t. 32. 6, 7. Now have
Children any other way to know their Parents, then to let their Father show
them, and their Elders tell them? Or should we cast off the relation and
tenounce all the obedience due to it, because Has he not made thee and
established thee? As he began us, so did he not nurse and bear us in his arms,
and carry us in all our weaknesses and difficulties, till he brought us up to a
full strength? Till by a miraculous Arist. hist. Anim l. 5. c, 27. Plin. not.
hist. l. 11 c. 24.
catch them prey, and to secure them; then the strongest of his young ones,
when he is by these his cares established and grown is he not thy Father that
has bought thee? who to all his to receive that Kingdom of God as his
children; Romans VIII. 7.
for if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, who
died to make us Kings and Priests to God and his Father.

To whom be glory, etc.

A SERMON PREACHED IN S. PETER'S WESTMINSTER ON Sunday Jan. 6. 1660. at the
Consecration of the Right Reverend Fathers in God, GILBERT Lord Bishop of
Bristoll, EDWARD Lord Bishop of Norwich, NICHOLAS Lord Bishop of Hereford,
WILLIAM Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

BY RICHARD ALLESTRY D. D. Canon of Christ Church in Oxford, and one of His
Majesty's Chaplains.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Roycroft for James Allestry at the Rose and Crown in
Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1669.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, GILBERT LORD Bishop of LONDON, and Dean
of His Majesty's Chapel Royal.
My LORD,
WHEN I consider with what reluctancies I appear thus in public; I have all
reason to suspect and fear, lest this offering, which like an unwilling
Sacrifice was dragged to the Altar, and which has great defects too, will be
far from propitiating either for its self or for the votary. But I must crave
leave to add, that how averse soever I was to the publishing this rude
Discourse, I make the Dedication with all possible zeal, and ready
cheerfulness. For I exspect your Lordship to be a Patron, not only to my
Sermon, but to my Subject. Such a separate eminence of virtue and of sweetness
mixed together may hope to ingratiate Your Function, to a Generation of men that
will not yet know their own good, but resist mercy, and are not content to be
happy. And for my self, Your Lordships great goodness and obligingness has
encouraged me, not only to hope that you will pardon all the miscarriages of
what I now present, but also to presume to shelter it and my self under your
Lordships Name and Command, and to honor my self before the world by this
address, and by assuming the relation of

My Lord, Your Lordships most humbly devoted and most faithful Servant, RICH.
ALLESTRY.

SERMON XVI. IN St. PETER'S WEST MINSTER. January 6. 1660.
ACTS XIII. 2. The Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them.
AND as they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the holy Ghost said, --

Although that ministering to God by prayer and fasting, be the indicted and
appropriate acts to preface such Solemnities as this; and that not Sermons, but
Litanies and intercessions, are the peculiar adherents of Embers, and of
Consecrations; and those vigorous strivings with Almighty God by Prayer are the
birth-pangs in which Fathers are born unto the Church: Yet since that now this
Sacred Office is it self opposed, and even the Mission of Preachers Authority
that sends despised as Antichristian, whilst separation and pretense unto the
Holy Ghost set up themselves against the strict injunction of the to separate;
the Pulpit, that othervvhiles has fought against it, must now atone its
errors, by attending on the Altar, and the bold ungrounded claims of
Inspiration, that false teachers have usurped, be superseded by the voice of
the Holy Ghost himself, who in this case becomes the Preacher, and says,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them.

My Text is a Commission parole from Heaven, in it you have,

First, the Person that sends it out; (...), The Holy Ghost said.

Secondly, the Persons to whom it is directed; implied in the verb (...)
separate, more particularly expressed in the foregoing words. Verse 1. 2.


Thirdly, the thing to which they were empowered by the Commission, or which was
required of them; set down in the remaining words of the Text, wherein you have

1. The Act enjoined; (...), separate. 2. The Object; (...), Separate me
Barnabas and Saul. 3. The End for what; (...), for a work. 4. The
Determination of that work; (...), for the work whereunto I have called them.
Of these in their Order: and first,

The Holy Ghost said.

Of those (...) 1. (...) 2. (...) 3. (...) 4. (...) 5. The Arc of the
Covenant, with the Propitiatory and Che rubins, the Vrim and Thum mim; the fire
that came down from Heaven to consume the burnt offerings; the Glory of God
that appeared between the Cherubins; and the Holy Ghost that spoke by the
Prophets. See G^mar. c. 1. in I^ma. See also Galas. l. 4. ci^ing the same out
of R. Elias, R. Soloman. R. David.
five things, for want of which the second Jewish Temple sunk below the
first, and its Glory seemed faint in the comparison, the Chiefest was the Holy
Ghost; who became silent, his Oracles ceast then, and he spoke no Thalmudists,
(who say our Rabbis have delivered to us, that from the time of Haggai,
Zechary and Malachy, (...), The Holy Ghost was taken away from Israel) but so
notorious in experience, that when St. Paul meets Disciples at Ephesus, Acts
19. 1. and asks them if they have received the Holy Ghost, whether at their
Baptism the Spirit came down upon them as He did then on others; they answer
ver. 2. We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost, any
extraordinary effusions of the Holy Ghost they must needs mean it, not of
himself, of whom they could not doubt, nothing was more known in the Jewish
Church.)

But as our Savior did supply the other four with all advantage, and so
fulfilled the Prophecy, and made the Hag 2. 10.
glory of that Temple greater: so for the fifth, the spirit, he Joel. 2. 28.
Joel fulfilled, I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, for they were all
baptized with the Holy Ghost; baptized in rivers of living waters, which did
flow out of the belly of themselves, for this he spoke of the Spirit, which all
that believed on him should receive, Joh. 7. 39. so that Joel did scarce feel
or foresee enough to prophecy of this abundance, but the John 3. 14.
inundations were almost like Christ's receivings, without measure. Nor were
his Inspirations as of old, dark and mysterious oracles, direction in rapture;
where the Message Gospel his effusions run clear, and transparent as the Water
that expresses them, revealing even all the unknown languages that were the
conduits and conveighances; all plain express direction, such as that of the
Text.

Now amongst all the several uses of the Holy Ghost for which he was poured
out in this abundance, amongst all the designs he did engage himself in, and
advance, He does not seem to have a greater agency nor to interess himself more
in any, than in qualifying for, and separating to Church-offices. This seems to
be his great work: and indeed how can he choose but be particularly concerned
in those offices which are his own (...), his gifts? Timothy's is expressly
called so, in each of his Epistles, 1 Timothy 4. 14. 2 Timothy 1. 6. And when our
Savior, Ephesians. 4, 8. is said to give the gifts of the Holy Ghost to men, it is
added how, ver. 11. He gave some Apostles, some Evangelists, some Pastors and
Teathers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
namely because those gifts enabled for those offices, and all the reason in the
world that he should have a special hand in giving, where himself is to be
received. Receive the Holy Ghost, that was from the beginning, and is yet the
installation great Pastor and Bishop of our souls, who was the maker of them
too, Thus he was consecrated; the spirit of 1 (...). 2, 15.
the Lord is upon me, therefore he has anointed me to preach the Gospel, Luke
4. 18. And when he comes to ordain succession, he says, as my Father sent me,
so send I you: and he breathed upon them, and said, Receive the Holy Ghost,
Joh. 20. 21. And after bids them tarry at Jerusalem till they should be endued
with power from above, Luke 24. 47. That is, endued with the Holy Spirit, Act.
1. The Barnabas and Saul were sent by his Commission in the Text; and v. 4. And
Saint Paul tells the Elders of the Churches of Asia, the Holy Ghost made them
overseers, (...), Act. 20. 28. Timothy had his Office, (...), by immediate
designation of the Holy Ghost, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Ep. ad Corint: p. 54. edit. lunii.
Clemens Romanus says, the Apostles out of those they had converted, did
o^dain Bishops and Deacons, (...), having first tried them by the Holy Ghost,
and so taught by his revelation who should be the men. apud Eusib. l. 3. c 23.
And Clemens Alexandrinus says, John after his return to Asia, ordained
throughout all the regions about, (...), such as were signified and designed by
the Holy Ghost: So that Oecumenius pronounces in the general, (...), The
Bishops that were made, they made not inconsiderately on their own heads, but
such whom the Spirit did command. Chrysostom said as much before, and on 1 Timothy 4. 14.
Theophylact. Nor can we doubt that he maintains his interest in this affair
even at this day: But that our Veni Creator Spiritus, Come Holy Ghost eternal
God, does call him to preside in these Christ, when he commissioned his
Apostles, assuring them, Behold I am with you Matthew. 28. 20.
even to the end of the world; which promise he performs only vicaria Spiritus
praesentia, by the presence of the Holy Ghost, who is his Vican, as Tertullian
expresses; not can the Spirit be with them till then, but by making them be
till then; which being done by Ordination, that Ecclesiastical procreation,
(for so they derive themselves to the Worlds end;) upon the strength of that
promise we may assure our selves he does assist as truly, though not so
visibly, as when said here, Separate.

The Holy Ghost's concernment being thus secured, I have this one thing only to
suggest; that they who set themselves against all separation to these Offices
and Orders, in and for which the Holy Ghost has so appeared, (what they be I
dispute not now) they fight against the Holy Ghost, and thrust him out of that
in which he has almost signally interessed himself. And they that do entitle
the Spirit to this opposition, do not only make Gods Kingdom divided against
it self, or raise a faction in the Trinity, and stir up division betwixt those
Three One Persons; Matthew. 12. 26.
but they set the same Person against himself and make the Holy Spirit resist
the Holy Ghost. You know the inference pressed upon them that did this but
interpretatively in the Devils Kingdom, and did make Satan cast out Satan: and
Spirit cast out the Holy Ghost, contrive as much as in them lies Gods Kingdom
shall not stand. I will not parallel the guilts. Those Pharisees b^asphemed the
Holy Spirit in his Miracles, ascribing that to Beelzebub which was the
immediate work of the Holy Ghost: (and such indeed do sin unpardonably,
because they sin irrecoverably; for Miracles being the utmost and most manifest
express wherein the Holy Ghost exerts himself, they who can harden their
understandings against them have left themselves no means cannot be forgiven,
because they cannot be rectified or reclaimed) These others do blaspheme the
Spirit in his immediate inspirations and (...), ascribing to the spirit of
Antichrist all those Offices and Orders, which these gifts of the Holy Ghost
were powered from Heaven immediately to qualify for, and separate to; things in
which he has as signally appeared as in his Miracles: and as he made these
means to convince the world, so he made those the Officers of doing it, and
set them to out-last the other. Now in the same nearness that, these sin the
sin against the Holy Ghost. For the Holy Ghost said, Separate.

So I pass to the second, to those whom this injunction 2.
is directed to. And thence I do observe in general, that

Notwithstanding all the interest and office that the Holy Ghost assumes in
these same separations, yet there is something left besides for Man to do.
Although he superintend, they have a work in it: He is the Unction, laying on
of hands. I have 1 John 2. 20.
called them, says he in the Text; and yet to them that ministered, the Holy
Ghost said, Do ye separate. I do not degree and order of men they were whom
the Holy Ghost here commissions for this Office. The Judgment of the Ancient
Church in this affair is enough known, by the condemnation of Epip. haet. 75.
Aerius, and by the Fate of Vide Athanas. Apol. 2. How this judgmentdid derive
it self down into the Reformation, may be seen from the account of the Fratres
Bchemi, who sought over the world for Episcopal Ordination, and were never
quiet in their consciences till they had obtained it. Vide Johan. Am Comen^
Ratio Discipline Ordinisque Ecclesiastici in unitate Fratrum Bohemorum.
Ischyras and Colluthus: and for the present instance, in which they are
called Doctors that are bid to do it, there has enough been said to prove
(...) a Title of a Bishop: to which I shall only add, that it was a variation
of Name that stuck by them until Bede's age, in which, what Bishop signified
does come Bed Eccl. hist. l. 2. cap. 2.
that Austin called together to the Conference, Episcopas sive Doctores, the
Bishops or the Doctors of the Province. Besides that there was then in Antioch
a Bishop, (...), Suid. in voce (...).
In the time of Claudius Emperor of Rome, and of Euodius, whom the Apostle
Peter had ordained at Antioch, those that before were called Nazarenes and
Galileans, were called Christians: a thing which happened a little before this
separation in the Text, as you find separate for every Execution of these holy
Offices, will appear from the Instances that I shall make to prove the present
Observation, that, besides that of the Holy Ghost there was an outward call:
And whomsoever the Spirit sent, he commanded that they should have Commission
from Men. And all my former Testimonies for the Holy Ghost, bear vvitness for
this too. The Text is positive; here was a Conge d'eslire for Barnabas and
Saul. Timothy had his office (...), by designation of the Spirit, 1 Timothy 4. 14.
yet (...), with laying on of hands, ibid. yea (...), by the laying on of my
hands, 2 ^im. 1. 6. And Timothy was placed at Ephesus, as Titus also left at
Creet, to ordain others in the same manner; St. Paul providing for the
succession of Tit. 1. 5.
the Rite and Ceremony as well as of the Office. And in St. Clement's
Testimony, (...); the Spirit tried, but the Apostles constituted. And down as
low as Trajan's time, when St. John's date was almost Churches of Asia to be
provided with succession, the Men were (...), signified by the Holy Ghost: But
the Chron. Alex. says, (...), that he went clean throughout Asia and the
adjacent Regions, constituting not only Bishops, but others of inferior
Clergic: and even in the lowest thus it was; when the first Deacons were to be
made, Men full of the Holy Ghost and VVisdome were to be looked out, Act. 6.
3. But yet that did not autorize them, the Holy Ghost and wisdom did not make
a Deacon: for besides that, the Apostles will appoint them over their business,
ibid. and they are brought to them, and they do lay their hands upon them,
verse 6. Thus it was Holy Ghost: Men always had to do in giving that
Commission: so that whoever pleads an Order of the Spirit for his Office,
(although such a Commission of the Spirit, if he had it, would evidence it
self, and if it were, it would appear, for 'twas the manifestation of the
Spirit that was given to every man to 1 Cor. 12. 7.
profit withal; yet) if we yield him his pretensions, and let his own
incitations pass for inspirements, and his strong fancy for the Holy Ghost, if
the Holy Ghost did call him, who did separate him? whom the Holy Ghost calls,
he sends to his officers to empower; they both work, He says, do ye separate.

And here a Consideration offers it self unto those holy Fathers, whom the
Spirit makes his Associates in separating men to sacred offices; that when
they set apart even to the lowest stalls of the Church, they labor to perform
it so that the Holy Ghost may be engaged, and act along with them in the
performance: Separate such as they may presume the Spirit has called, and
will own. He does not call the ignorant, or appoint blind eyes for the Body of
Christ, or make men Seers to lead into the pit. The Holy Spirit unclean, or the
intemperate; we know it was Mat. 5. ^^.
another sort of spirit that went into the s^ine: nor does he ever say,
Separate me those who separate themselves, the Schismatics: the Spirit calls
not such as break the unity of the Spirit; nor sets into the rank of higher
members in Christ's body those who tear that body, and themselves from it: the
factious, those that will not be bound neither in bonds of peace nor of
obedience, but break all holy ties, that make commotions, and rave and foame,
suit it is the Legion that sends them, and not the Holy Ghost. He Luke ^.
spirit will call, must not be under the reputation of a Vice, but should be
of a good report, lest he fall into reproach, and so into the snare of the
Devil, 1 Timothy 3. 7. Theophyl. in locum.
(...). For to be to any an occasion of falling, is to be the Devils snare. Now
Christ's Matthew 4. 19.
Fishers of men, those whom the Holy Ghost appoints to spread nets for the
catching Souls to God, their lives must not lay snares for the Devil, and
entangle Souls in the toyls of perdition. Those also that come to Ambition or
of greediness of gain, the spirit calls not neither: He calls we see (...), to
a work; so that they who feek more then they can well attend the labor of, or
are qualified for the work of, they are not of his sending. But of all men the
Holy Ghost will least deal with the Simoniacal, that come not to a work, but to
a market, that contract with Patrons for the spirits call, or, worse than their
master Simon, would hire the Holy Spirit himself to say, Separate me them: The
Successors of the Apostles have a Canonical return to these, Your money perish
with you. They whom the Holy Ghost does call must have his gifts and temper;
St. Paul has set all down to Timothy Act. 8. 20.
and Titus, and those who minister in this employment, if they will be what
he has made them, joint Commissioners with him, and his Co-workers, they must
order it so that he may work and act, which he does not but where he calls,
nor does he call but those whom he has qualified: And it is of those only whom
he has called, that he says, (...), Scparate.

The third particular, the thing enjoined; And the Holy Ghost said, scparate.

The separateness of the Functions of the Clergy, the incommunicableness of
their offices to persons not separated for them, is so express a doctrinc both
of the letter of the Text, and of the Holy Ghost, that sure I need not to say
more, though several heads of Probation offer themselves: As first the
condition of the callings, which does divide from the Community, and sets them
up above it; And here I might tell you of 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb. 13. 7.
bearing rule, of Matt. 19. 28.
thrones, of Rev. 1. 20.
stars and Rev. 1. 20.
Angels, and other words of as high Scripture bounds, although the dignity
did not die with the Scripture age, or expire with the Apostles: the age as
low as Photius words it thus, Pho. cp. 34.
(...). That Apostolical and Divine Dignity, which the chief Priests are
acknowledged to be possessed of by right of Succession. Styles which I could
derive yet lower, and they are of a prouder sound than those the modest humble
ears of this our age are so offended with. But these heights it may be would
give Ombrages; although it is strange that men should envy them to those, who
are only exalted to them, that they may with the more advantage take them by
the hands to lift them up to Heaven. Those neernesses to things above do but
Theoph. and to draw near to God on your behalf, that those your Matthew. 18. 10.
Angels also may see the face of your father which is in heaven, and those
stars are therefore set in Apoc. 1. 20.
Christ's right hand, that they may shed a blessing influence on you from thence.

2. The (...) and the (...), The Work and labor of the work, (the one is the
Text's, and the other Saint 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Paul's word) require a whole man, and therefore a man separate: and if Saint
Paul, one of our separated persons here, who had Spirit, and the fullness of
Learning too, that was brought up in the Schools, and brought up in Paradise,
taught by the Doctors, and taught by the mouth of the Lord in the third heaven,
snatched from the feet of Gamaliel to the presence of God, to have a beatifical
Vision of the Gospel, if after 2 Cor. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4.
all this he cry out, who is sufficient for these things? sure they 2 Cor. 2.
16.
are not sufficient, who in those little intervals which their trades and
necessities afford them, fall into fits and frensies of Religion, have a sharp
Paroxysme of irregular convulsed Divinity, as if they were its (...), possessed
with their Theology till vveariness, and not knowing what to say do exorcise
t^em.

But not to speak only to the wild fancies of this Age, the Scripture says of
the men of these callings, they are taken from among Men, and ordained for Men
in things Heb. 5. 1.
pertaining to God. And such discriminations are evinced by all the expressions
of a Church in Scripture. It Is called the body of Christ: Now the parts of a
body, as where Col. 1. 24.
they are so separate that they divide from one another, they do not make a
body, but are an Execution; so where they are not separate in a diversity of
Organs, for several faculties and operations, it may be a dead Element, as Paul
describes, 1 Cor. 12. Which is not one member; but many, verse. 14. And if they
were all one member, where were the body? verse 19. and indeed all that Chapter
is inspired for this Argument. In Christ's Church it is as impossible that every
one can be (...) an Overseer, as that every part in the body can be an Eye: and
the whole frame of Man may be nothing else but a Tongue, as well as every
Christian may be a Preacher: And if it might, where indeed were the hearing? as
Saint Paul does ask. The Church is also called a Ephesians. 2. 21.
building, and 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Gods house: Now it is true that every Christian is by Saint Peter called a
lively stone, and all of them built up a Spiritual house, an holy Priesthood,
1 Pet. 2. 5. and they all are a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar,
separate people, verse. 9. Yet all this is no more of privilege than is
affirmed in the very same words of the Jewish Nation, Exodus 19. 6. Where yet
God had his separated Levites, Priests and Highpriests too. But sure it is
manifest enough that in this building, as in others, stones have their separate
places and distinct; every one cannot beat up the Corner, or be a pillar and
foundation-stone; much less can every one place it self in the Ephod, assume to
be Vrim and the Thummim-stones, and there break out in Oracles, and give
responses; and every rubbish stone set it self in the Mitre, and shine in the
head ornaments, as if it were one of the precious stones of Sion. In fine, (to
speak now out of Metaphor,) not only the transactions of the Text, which is a
precedent for men to commission such and such, but also all Scripture rules
direct a Choice; and where there is Election, there is also dereliction, and
both evince a separation, And if all the Nations in the World have had their
distinct Officers for Religion, separateness of their function, in many Nations
they did live apart from Men: The Priests had their adyta as well as the
Deities; dark solitary Groves were made choice of, not so much for the God, as
for his Officers retirement; so that every appearance of him also was a Vision,
and the Priest was revealed as well as the Oracle; and all this at the first to
make a kind of sacred Pomp for the solemnity of awfulness, (though afterward
it often proved but opportunity for foul performances.) And if to this uniform
practice of the World Gods attestation be set, who ordered it in his own
Levitical or Jewish administration, but it was practiced amongst his own from
the beginning, and when dominions were but greater families, distinct persons
for the employments of Religion; that was the office and the privilege of the
Vid. rharg. Hierosolym Genesis ^9. 3 and Jonath. ibid. and Solom. ^atch. Glossam
ad Exodus 19. 22. and ad cap. 24. 5.
firstborn: Esau was called profane for selling that Vide Ifido. Pelusio. l.
2. Epist. 47.
birthright of his: (And the word in the Text here, (...) separate, is the
same which God does word the sanctifying the firstborn for him with, Exodus
13. 2.) 'twere easy to deduce all this out of all ancient Jewish Records. And
when the practice ever since has been the same in Christ's Religion; after all
this, sure nothing else but absolute defection of the Notions of Mankind, and
blotting Universal Nature and Universal Religion, or else an absolute Command
from Heaven, could alter this Establishment; from which command we are so
far, that it is the Holy Ghost himself that said expressly (...) separate.

Now this (...), this Separateness in Function, does infer upon us a
separateness in Life and Conversation, and they who are thus set apart from the
World, must keep themselves unspotted from the World. To separate and
Consecrate are but two words for the same thing: Separate Iac. 1. 27.
three Cities is the Command in Deuteronomy. 19. 2. and they sanctified three Josh.
20. 7. Our Offices assume them both, and all are holy Orders. Now separate and
pure are both so primitive, and so essential notions of holy, that truly I
cannot determine which of them is original, and which secondary: Our
Consecration does challenge both; and as we will be separate in our calling;
so we must be separate in our lives, not Romans 12. 2.
conforming our selves to the World, for I Ioh. 15. 19.
have chosen you out of the World, says Christ. A torrent license of an Age
must not carry us along; an Universal Custom of the World must be no
precedent, separate; and that the world does such things is no more a plea for
us to do so, than that because the world is Common ground, therefore the Church
is so too, fit to be put to all the uses of the field, or of worse places.
Were it a reasonable argument; because I see that the whole Countrey's tilled,
why should I not break up the holy places, and plow the Temple? Why, so we
are enclosed for God, and separated for the uses of Religion, and to preserve
our selves pure for them. Our Savior says that the City upon an Hill; and then
sure the consecrated Persons are the Temples of that City, the Matt. 5. 14.
separate places of it; and then as they are most in fight Church is ordinarily
the most visible building) so truly he that sees one of them, it should be as
if he saw an open Church, where there is nothing else but holy duty, as if his
life were Liturgy, public Service and Worship of God. Has your zeal never
rose, at least your indignation, at the profane fury of this age, which never
made a stop in violation of things sacred, when to its heap of other
Sacriledges, it added most contemptuous defilements of God's Houses; making the
place that 1 Cor. 11. 10.
Angels met us in to worship, and God Exodus 15. 17.
dwelt in to Exodus 20. 24
bless us there, Mysteries of our Redemption, for the Celebration of Christ's
Agonies, for the Commemoration of the blessed Sacrifice, the place for nothing
but Christ's Blood, then to become the place of a most odious and insolent
uncleanness? If I had worded this more aggravatingly, it had been only to infer
that then to see a consecrated person to pollute himself with those black
foulnesses that made Hell and made Fiends, is sure a sadder and a more unhappy
spectacle. If an Apostle become wicked, he is in our Saviors Character a
Devil; have I not chosen Twelve, and one of you it a Devil? Yea if the good
Saint Peter do become a scandal, tempt to that John 6. 7.
which is not good; Get thee behind me, Satan. Christ Mat 16. 23. Apoc. 1. 20.
calls his nearest Officers Stars; Emblems of a great separateness those, that
teach them how far their Conversation should be removed from Earth; for they
are of another Orb, Heaven is the Region of Stars: But they are Emblems of a
greater purity; there is nothing in the World so clean as light, it is not
possible so much as to sully shine; it may irradiate dung-hills, but they do
not defile God's purity: only his light is glory; and as his holiness is so
separate that it is incommunicable, so his Light is inaccessible; Yet sure they
that are stars in Christ's right 1 Timothy 6 16. Apoc. 1. 20.
hand, they do come near, and mix their light with his; and they of all men
must be pure and holy, whom the spirit calls to that place, as he does all
whom he calls to that separation that he did Barnabas and Saul, the Persons
and the next Part; Separate me Barnabas and Saul.

I intend not to make particular reflections upon these persons, although the
Character of Barnabas be registered the 11. Chap. ver. 24. He was a good man,
full of Faith, and of the Holy Ghost, and the good influence that that had upon
the people follows; and much people was added to the Church. And as for Saul;
though he began the Christian persecution, and was baptized in the first
Martyr-blood, and breathed out threatenings, so that nothing but thunder could
out-voice him, and at last was born as an (...) Acts 9 1.
as an untimely birth, aborting through those vvounds which his own hands had
made in the Church, and making himself 1 Cor. 15. 8.
a birth with ripping up her bowels; yet this Abortive proved the strongest
birth, and 'twas a Miscarriage into the chiefest Apostle. As he began the
after-sufferings of Christ in Stephen; so he fulfilled the (...), and made up
all that was behind, in himself, being in deaths more than Col. 1. 24.
those he inflicted. The sound of his preaching was loudee than that at his
Conversion, out-voic'd the thunder; for this went out into all lands, as if
himself alone meant to execute the whole Commission, preach the Gospel to
every Mar. 16. 15.
creature: which he did almost, not only preaching to those places where
Christ was not named, with^^^ the other Romans 15. 20. ^ Cor. 10. 16.
Apostles line; but even where the rest employed themselves, Asia as Saint
John, at Antioch as Peter; yea and at Rome too, having as much to do in their
foundation: If I had said more, I could have brought the Popes own Seal for
evidence; where not only both are, but Saint Paul has the right hand: And
truly if they had had the luck to think at first of founding all their
pretensions on Saint Paul, his cars of all the Churches 2 Cor. 11. 28. John.
21. 15.
would have born them out, as well as feed my Lambs does now. But these
considerations I pass; though they would give a Man that has done mischief in
the Church separation here of those who were before separated to the work of
the Gospel; Barn^bas sent by the Church of Jerusalem to Antioch, Act. 11. 22.
and Paul not only separated from his Mothers womb, Gal. 1. 1^. but chosen by
express Revelation, and by the laying on of Anan^at hands Acts 9. 17. putting
on his hands he said, the Lord has sent me, that thou might be filled with
the Holy Ghost.
that so he might receive the Holy Ghost, qualified to Act. 9. 15. and 22. 14.
preach the Gospel to the Gentiles and to Kings. In which work both of them
had for some years exercised cons^cration, and they are taken up to a condition
more separate, and distinct from what they were before. And all those vast
advantages in which these persons did excel; the one of faith and fullness of
the Holy Ghost, the other, besides those, of express and immediate mission from
Heaven; and the most strange success their labors had been blessed with, all
these I say, did not qualify them to assume these powers which the Holy Ghost
commands another Separation to enstall them in: and 'twas this Call that called
Paul to be an (...). Separate for the work, that is, for the Apostleship.
Occumenius upon this text. And so Theoph. (...). Theoph. in Act. Apostol. p. 2.
and in locum p. 118.
Apostle, Romans 1. 1. (as from this time he is always called Paul, not sooner.)
Nor do we find any least footsteps of their being Apostles before, though
Barnabas were sent to Antioch, yet he does not undertake what Peter and John
did Samaria in the very same case; for they confirm and give the Holy Ghost,
Act. 8. 15. 17. but Barnabas does nothing but Exhort, Act. 11. 23. and he and
Paul together preached the Word abroad, but we find nothing else they
enterpriz'd: but from this time they exercise Jurisdiction, settle Churches,
and ordain them Elders in the Churches, Chapter 14. 22, 23. and (as it does appear)
singly derived these powers to others, to be exercised by them singly. To Vid.
Theoph. in locum p. 119.
Titus most expressly, Tit. 1. 5. the like also to Timothy, with all the other
acts of Jurisdiction, (of which their Epistles Records) particularly that of
Censures, which Paul himself had inflicted on offenders in the Churches he had
planted. Powers these, which by such steps and by degrees of separation an
Apostle himself receives, and does not execute till he ascend the highest, that
which they have a new solemnity ordained from Heaven to enstare them in, by a
new laying on of hands, and the Holy Ghost himself commanding; Separate.

The separateness of this highest order in the Church is a doctrine handed down
to us both by the writings of all practices; (two things, which as they
scarcely do concur in such a visible degree in any other things in our
Religion, so also when they do concur, they make and secure tradition beyond
all contradiction, give it sufficient infallibility: and truly he that does
refuse the evidence which such tradition gives to all the motives of believing
Christianity, if he be not a Socinian, he must be an Enthusiast, and can
receive his Religion only from Revelation.) Now the matter of fact of this
tradition is a subject for Volumes, not for a discourse, and it has filled
Ancients which were themselves of it, and wrote much expressly Romanist, who
tore some little shreds, Bre^ely.
that look as if they favored some opinions of the Romanists, out of the books
of Protestants, most of which were directly writ against the Church of Rome;
and putting those together went about by them to convince the world there never
were any such things as Protestants, but they that did profess to be so were
all Papists.

But I will say no more then my Text has done, which evidences it not a
separation only of degree, but Order, by a new Ceremony, and commissionating to
new powers. If I would stay on words, it is expressed here by one that speaks
very great distances, (...), separate, which does in Scripture word the
distances that the censures of the Church do make; Luke 6. 22. and still in the
Greek Liturgies, when absolution is given, it is said to be (...). Goari. p.
684.
(...), to free them from all curse and separation; as if to pass into the
bounds of this uncalled, were such a thing as to leap over the Censures of the
Church, over the Line of Excommunication; and to break through this wall of
separation, were to break through Anathema's and Curses: Yea, it is used to
express the distance betwixt the Lord's two hands, his right hand and his left,
at the day of Doom, Mat. 25. 32. betwixt which hands there is a (...), a most
insuperable gulf.

But these I shall not urge. Indeed the Fathers of the Church have been in
these last days counted (...) separate in the severest sense, cast out as the
dung of the Earth; and the calling it self was under reprobation, as if it
separated only to the left hand of God: but so it was with their Predecessors
in the Text, Saint Paul says of Order, that they were counted (...) and
(...), as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.
13. and as if they were called only to ruin, and consecrated for a sacrifice,
he says, the Lord has set us forth as men appointed to death, verse. 9. Indeed
since God has pleased to own you as his Churches, Angels, we are not troubled
if some have counted you as the offscouring of the Earth, while we know Angels
do relate to Heaven: and let them consider how they will reprobate those to
the left hand of God, whom stars in his right hand, and he is at the right hand
of his Father; and while you were accounted so you did but follow them that
went before in sufferings as well office; and to do so was part of the
(...), the work that they were separated to; which is the next part, For the
work.

I shall but run this over, and reflect upon it as I pass, according as it is
of present Concernment; and

First, Saint Paul's work was to preach the Gospel, and we find him doing it
from this time forward to his End. The high Priest of the Je^s was called the
Angel of the Lord of Hoasts; of which name an Heathen does give this account,
that he was called so, because he was, (...), the Angel or the Messenger of
Gods commands: so Diodorus Siculus. And Malachy gives the same reason, Mal. 2.
7, he was the Substitute to him upon Mount Sinai, and gave the Law also, only
without the thunder. Our Governors succeed into the Name, they are the
Churches Angels; and when we hear the word from Apoc. 1. 20.
them, we have it as it were from Heaven again, and we receive our Law too
(...), by the disposition of Angels. Indeed the Case now is not like Saint
Paul's, Acts 7. 1.
the Gospel then was to be first revealed to all the World, Devil and the
World sought to infuse, and the unskilfulness of infant Christians did make
them apt to entertain; But now we are all confirmed Christians: Yet truly the
time is now such as did give occasion for Saint Paul's charge to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. a time wherein they will not endure sound doctrine, but after
their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers. He therefore that is in
Timothy's place, must heap up Reproofs and Exhortations; or he must heap good
sound dispensers of feed the Lembs with sincere milk, not chafd and heated
with commotion and busy restless faction; not embitter'd with the
overflovvings of a too-ful gall; not sour'd with eager sharpnesses of a
malicious or a dissatisfied mind; not impoisoned with the foul tinctures of a
scandalous life, nor the Corrosive infusions of Schismat^^al and turbulent
opinions. He that caters thus for his flock, and provides such as by doctrine
and by practice do instruct them to live quiet and peaceable lives in all
godliness and honesty; He, like the Angel on Mount Sinai, gives the Law to a
Nation together, preaches to his whole Diocese at once, Continually.

The second work was praying for, and blessing them: 2.
This does begin, and close every Epistle; that he asserts of gifts of those
times inspired for this Work. Now thus our Angels also are Angels of Incense,
The High Priests Office in especial: Those that did daily Minister performed a
service of Incense too, that did accompany the prayers of the people, and sent
them up in perfume; but the High Priests Incense was part of the Lev. 1^. 12,
13.
Expiation, and was the cloud that covered the transgressions of the people
when he came with them all about him before the Mercy-seat. And they who
snall consider that the Moses (Now Moses and Aaron were among the (...). G^g,
Naz. Orat. 6 ad G^^g. Nyssen.
Priests, Psalm. 99. 6. and He was the chief (...) Ab^n Ext. ad Psalm. 99. (...).
Greg. Naz. ^bi supra (...) ^hilo de vita Moses ^. 1, and 3.
Priest) did vvithhold the arm of God when it was stretched forth in fury to
destroy, and did commit a violence upon the Lord, such as he could not grapple
with, but seems to deprecate, and would fain avoid, and says, Let me alone,
that I may destroy them, Exodus 32. 10. If thou vvilt permit me, my fury shall
prevail upon them, says the Arabic, but if thou pray it cannot; therefore let
go thy prayer, says the Chald and let me alone. And they who shall consider
also maintain a breach against the Lord, when He had made one, and was coming
to enter in a storm of indignation, then this made head against him, and
repuls't him, Psalm. 106. 23. Had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the
breach to turn away his wrath lost he should destroy them.
They that consider these effects, will certainly desire the Prayers and
Benedictions of those Gods chiefest Officers of blessing, those that are
consecrated to bless in the Name of the Lord; and will have them in love for
this works sake.

Their Third work is Government, which may be some do look upon as privilege
and not as work; the exspectation Miracles as Government, and as hopefully gape
after diversity of Tongues, as at presiding in the Church, the power; of each
did come alike from Heaven, and were the mere gifts of the Holy Ghost, (...),
Miracles-gifts of healing, Governments, diversities of tongues.
1 Cor 12. 18. It was so in the Law; when God went to divid part of Moses
burden of Government amongst the Lxx, he came down and took of the Spirit that
was upon him, and gave it to the Lxx, Number. 11. 25. A work this that may have
reason to supersede much of that which I first mentioned: Paul's assistances of
Spirit, he does reckon that care that came upon him daily from the Churches
amongst his persecutions, and it sum^es up his Catalogue of sufferings: 2 Cor.
11. Such various Necessities there are by which Government is distracted, and
knows not how to temper it self to them. For sometimes it must condescend: Paul
notwithstanding Apostotical decrees made in full Council that abrogated
Circumcision, (as the Holy Ghost had declared it void before,) yet is fain to
comport so far with the violent humors of a party as to Circumcise Timothy, at
the very same time when he delivered those decrees to the Churches to keep,
Act. 16. 3, 4. yet afterward when Circumcision was looked Engagement to the
whole [that sense he puts upon it in the epistle to the Galathians chapter 5. ver.
3.]
Law, and to grant them that one thing, was but to teach them to ask more, and
to be able to deny them nothing; then he suffers not Titus to be circumcised,
nor gave place to them by submission, no not for an hour, Gal. 2. 3, 5. Thus
the Spirit of Government is sometimes a Spirit of meekness, does its work by
soft yieldings, and breaks the Adamant with Cus^ions which Anvils would not
do: I he Ocean with daily billows and tides, helped on with storms of
violence, and hurried by tempests of roaring fury, assaults a rock for many
Government has a rod too, which like Moses's can break the rock, and fetch a
stream out of the heart of quarre; and which must be used also: the Holy
Spirit himself breathed tempest mighty boisterous VVinde: nor does he always
whisper soft things, he came down first in a sound from heaven, and spoke
thunder; nor did it want lightning, the tongue was double flame. Of some we
know we must have a Compassion, but others must be saved with terror, Jude 22,
23. which drives me on to the last piece of their work.

The Censures of the Church, the burden of the Keys; 4.
which (passing by the private use of them in voluntary penitences, and
discipline upon the sick) as they signify public exclusion out of the Church
for scandalous readmission into it upon repentance, have been sufficiently
evinced to belong to the Governors of the Church. The Exercise of these is so
much their work Paul calls them the Weapons of their spiritual Warfare, by
which they do cast down imaginations and every high thing that exalts it self
against the Knowledge of God, and bring into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10 4, 5. a blessed victory even for the Conquered;
and these the only Weapons to atchieve it with. If those who sin
scandalously, and will not heat the admonitions of the Church, were cast out of
the Church; if not Religion, Reputation would restrain them somewhat: not to be
thought fit company for Christians would surely make proud against their Vices.
Shame, the designed Effect of these Censures, has great pungencies, the fear
of it does goad men into actions of the greatest hazard, and the most
unacceptable; such as have nothing lovely in them, but are wholy distastful.
There is a Sin whose face is bloody dismal, and yet because it is countenanced by
the Roysting Ruffian part of the world, men will defy Reason and Conscience,
Man's and God's Law, venture the ruin of all that is beloved and dear to them
in this world, and assault death, and charge and take Hell by violence; rather
then be ashamed before those valiant sinners, Satan's Hectors: and, they must
never come into such Company if they do not go boldly on upon the sin, is of
more force with them than all the indearments of this World, than all their
fear of God, and Death, and that which follows. Now if Religion could but get
such Countenance by the Censures of the Church; and every open sinner had this
certain fear, I should be turned out of all Christian company, shall be avoided
as unfit for Conversation; would it not have in chaste or sober or obedient for
that very reason for which they will now be killed and be damned? Without all
question Saint Peter's Censure on the intemperate, 1 Cor. 5. must needs be
reformation to him: It Is such a sentence to the drunkard, Not to company with
him, whose Vice is nothing but the sauce of Company; and who does sin against
his Body and against his faculties and against his Conscience, is sick, and is
a Sott, and goes to Hell merely for Societies sake. censures is so much the
work to which Church governors are called by the Holy Ghost, that they are
equally called by him to it and to Himself; both are alike bestowed upon them:
Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye retain they are retained, John 20. 22.
And in the first derivations of this office, it was performed with
severities, such as this age I doubt will not believe; and when they had no
temporal sword to be auxiliary to these Spiritual weapons.

And now to make reflections on this is not for me to undertake, in such a
state of the Church as ours is; wherein the very faults of some do give them
an Indemnity, who having drawn themselves out of the Church, from under its
authority, are also got out of the power of its Censures: Fathers house, they
do escape the Rod; but they do not consider that vvithall they run away from
the inheritance: and many times in those that do not do so, but stay within
the family; long intermission of the Rod, and indulged license makes them too
big and heady to be brought under discipline. And is it not so with us? Among
many of those that stay within the Church, (I know not whether I do well to
say so, when of these I mean there is little other Evidence of their doing so
but this, that they will s^ear drink of the Churches side; Blessed Sons of a
demoli^^ed Church, who think to raise their Mother a temple by throwing stones
at her:) by reason of the late overthrow of government and discipline, and the
consequent licenses: Vice has been so nursed up, not only by an universal,
barefaced, uncorrected practice; but by principles of liberty, that can dispute
down all Ecclesiastical restraints, and have set up the Religion of License:
that now sin is grown so outrageous, as to be too strong for discipline; nay
rather than it should be set up, it is to be feared they would endeavor to
renverse Church, and enterprise as much in their vices quarrel, as others have
done for mistaken Religion. And indeed to what purpose were the Censures,
vv^ose first and medicinal effect is shame, amongst men, where it is in very
many instances the only shameful thing not to be vicious; where men stand
candidates for the reputation of glorious sinners, take to themselves sins they
have not committed, that are not theirs, and usurp Vice; sins and damnations
hypocrites? What work is here for discipline? But this state wants not
precedents; the censures of the Church were not only laid aside in the
Vastations of the Arrian weapons of the Churches warfare were too weak to make
defense against all their cruelties and impieties: and before that in
Diocletian's Lapsi: But we find also that Saint Paul is forced to break out
only in a passionate with, (...), I would they were even cut off that trouble
you (cut off by excommunication he means) Gal. 5. 12. When he saw the ill
humors were too spreading, and too tough also; Sedition and Schism wide and
obstinate; so that neither his authority could reach, nor his methods cure, but
were more likely to exasperate them: then he does excommunicate them only in
desire. And again, 2 Cor. 10. 6. and having in a readiness to revenge all
disobedience when your obedience is fulfilled. It becomes therefore every one
that has good Will for Sion, to labor to fulfill his own obedience, that so
the Church may be empowered to use Christ's Method for reforming of the rest.
And they that will not do so, must know they shall not only answer for their
sins, but for refusing to be saved from them, that they resist all medicine, as
men resolved that nothing shall be done toward their Cure, as men that rather
choose to perish; and prefer destruction. And for the seasons and degrees of
putting this work into Execution, Wisdom must Spirit of Wisdom that calls unto
this work: The last Part; Whereunto I have called them.

The Nature of the calling of the Holy Ghost is a Subject that would bear a
full discourse. But waving those pretensions which Necessity, and inward
incitation do make to be the Calls of the Holy Ghost; I shall positively set
down that the call of God and of the Holy Ghost to any Work or Office, (for I
enquire not of his calling, to a privilege or state of favor,) is his giving
abilities and gifts qualifying for that Work or Office: he call immediate when
the gifts were so, but mediate and ordinary, when the abilities are blessing on
our ordinary labors. It Is so in every sort of things, Exodus 31. 2. See I have
called Bezaleel, and I have filled him with the Spirit of God in VVisdome, and
in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of Workmanship, to
devise cunning works, and to work in all manner of Workmanship; and behold I
have given him Aholiab, and in the hearts of all that are wise hearted I have
put Wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded thee: And he repeats
the same again, Chap. 35. 30. adding that he has put in his heart that he may
teach, both He and Aholiab; so that giving this skill to work and teach is
named Gods calling. So in another case, the Lord does say of Cyrus, I have
called him, Esaias 48. 15. holden him by my right hand to subdue Nations before
him, to loose the loins of Kings, I have girded him. So when Isaiah says, the
Lord has called me from the Womb, or rather says that of our Savior, Isa.
49. 1. he tells you how, ver. 5. he formed me and prepared me from the Womb to
be his servant, to bring Jacob to him. And throughout the New Testament, as his
Call to a privilege is (...), his grace, in allowing such a state of favor;
so his calls to a Work are his (...), his gifts enabling for it.

The Gifts of these Apostles by which they were enabled for their Office, and
which made up their call, are set down: those of Barnabas in the forecited 11
Act. He was a good man, full of faith, and of the Holy Ghost; and Paul's call
was a little Extraordinary. If we look into times, we shall find reason to
believe those revelations in 2 Cor. 12. were given to Paul a little before
this consecration of him in the Text. That Epistle was writ, says Baronius,
in the second year of Nero, and this separation was in the second of Claudius,
as may be gathered also in some measure from the famine mentioned in the 28.
verse fourteen years: now says Saint Paul when he vvrote that, he had his
revelation somewhat above ab annis quatuordecim, says the Arab.
14. years before; a little therefore before this solemnity. Here was a call
indeed, called up to the third heaven to receive instructions for his Office,
and for ought he did know, called out of his own body too, that he might be the
fitter for it; whether in the body or out of the body, I cannot tell, God
knows, verse 2. and that again, verse 3. They whom Gods Spirit Consecration to
separate to these diviner Offices may be styled Angels well, when they are
called from all regards or notices of any body that belongs to them; their
gifts and graces set them above the consideration of flesh: In the
entertainment of these qualifications the Soul is swallowed up so, that it
cannot take cognizance whether it have a body of its own, and is not sensible
of that deer partner of it self, it is so only sensible of this Employment.
It Is not for an Apostle (or for his Successor) to think of things below with
much complacency: When these have all their uses, all their glories on, they
but Apostle does not design for, nor knows whether he be concerned at all
in. He becomes something without a body, and above the Earth, who for a
preparative must be taken up to Paradise, and called from all commerce and all
intelligence with his own body. Saint Paul was called from Heaven to preach
the Gospel; but he was called to Heaven to qualify him for this higher
separation, to an Apostle and Church Governor.

And now you see your calling, Holy Fathers: and to pass by such obvious
unconcerning observations as at first sight follow, that those who are not
qualified are not called; I shall only take notice hence of the counter-part
of this call, the charge God takes upon him, when he calls to owns and will
protect whom himself calls. 'Twas that he promised to the Pounder and ^od of
your Order; I the Lord have called thee, and I will hold thine hand, and I will
keep thee, Isa^. 42. 6. And when he said of Cyrus, I have called him, he said
also, he shall make his way prosperous, Isai. 48. 15. And so he shall be the
way what it will; for thus he said to Jacob, I have called thee, when thou
go through the Water I am with thee, and through the rivers they shall not
overflow thee, Isai. 43. 1, 2. There was Experience of all this in one of the
chief Princes of your Order; when the Apostles were scarce safe within their
ship, they were so tossed with waves and fears, yet if our Lord will call
him, Peter Matthew. 14. 28.
is confident he shall be safe even in the sea; Lord, if it be thou, bid me
come unto thee on the Water, says he; and 29.
the Lord did but call him, and he went down and walked on the water safely:
as if the swelling billows did only lift themselves to meet his steps, and
raise him up from sinking. And when his own doubts, which alone could, ^1.
called the Lord; immediately he stretched out his hand and caught him: He
answers his call, if we answer ours; if we obey when he says come, then
will he come and save when we call to him. And so Peter received no hurt,
but a rebuke; O ibid.
thou of little faith, why did thou doubt? could thou imagine I would not
sustein thee in the doing what I bid thee do? In answering my call: But why
seek we experience of so old a date? There is a more encouraging miracle in
these late calls themselves. Had God sustein'd the Order in its Offices and
dignities amidst those waves that vvrack'd bid the sea give up what it had so
allowed and consumed; sinking Peter, or to save a falling Church. The work of
Resurrection is emphatically called the working of God's mighty power, and does
out-sound Ephesians. 1. 19. 20.
that of his ordinary conservation. And truly 'twas almost as easy to
imagination, how the scattered Atoms of men's dust should order themselves, and
reunite, and close into one flesh; as that the parcels of our Discipline and
Service that were lost in such a vvild confusion, and the Offices buried in the
rubbish of the demolisht Churches, should rise again in so much order and
beauty. Stantia non poterant tecta probare Deum. This calling of the Spirit is
like that when the Spirit moved upon the face of the abyss; and called all
things out of their no-seeds there; or like the call of the last Trump. Thus by
the miraculous mercies of these calls God has provided for our hopes, and
warranted our faith of his protections! yet he has also sent us more security,
has given us a Constantine, if his own be not a greater Name, and more
deserving of the Church; for which (it is well known to some) he did contrive
and order, when he could neither plot nor hope for his own Kingdom; succession
in your Order, when he did not know how to lay designs for the succession of
himself or any of his Fathers house to his own Crown and dignity. Nor is the
secular arm all your security: God himself has set yet more guards about his
consecrated ones, he has severe things for the violaters of them: Moses, the
meekest man upon the Earth, that in his life Number. 12. 3, 20. 10.
was never angry, but once at the rebellious; seems very passionate in
calling. Vengeance on those that stir against these holy Offices. Smite through
the loins of all that rise against them, and of them that hate them, that they
rise not Deuteronomy. 33. 2^.
again: the loins (we know) are the nest of posterity; so that, strike
through the loins, is, stab the succession, destroy at once all the posterity
of them that would cut off this Tribe, and hinder its succession. Nor was
this Legal Spirit; Gospel is as severe. Those in Saint Judge that despise these
Governors, that do as Corah and his Accomplices did, (who gathered themselves
against Moses and Aaron, and said, You take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi,
since Number. 16. 3.
all the Congregation is holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them,
wherefore then lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord?
words these that we are well acquainted with, and which it seems St. Jude
looks on as sins under the Gospel:) these perish in the gainsaying of Core;
whom God would not prepare for punishment by death, but he and his
accomplices went quick into it; Jude 11.
He would not let them stay to die, but the Lord made a new thing, to show his
detestation of this sin, and the Number. 16. 30.
Earth swallowed it in the Commission, and all that were allied ver. 32, 33.
and appertained to them that had an hand in it. And truly they may well
expect strange recompenses, who do attempt so strange a Sacrilege, as to pull
stars out of Christ's own right hand: from whence, we have his word, that no
man shall be able to pluck any; but if they shine thence, on their Orbs below,
and convert many to John 10. 21.
righteousness, their light shall blaze out into glory, and they shall ever
dwell at his right hand, To which right hand He that brought again from the
dead the Lord Jesus, that great Heb. 13. 20.
Shepherd and Bishop of the sheep, and set him there: He also bring you our
Pastors, and us your flock with you; and set us with his sheep on his right
hand. To whom, with the same Jesus and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all
blessing, honor, Matthew. 2^. 3^.
glory, and power, from henceforth for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED AT HAMPTON COURT On the 29th. of May 1662. Being the
Anniversary of His Sacred Majesty's Most happy Return.

BY RICHARD ALLESTRY D. D. and Chaplain to His MAjESTY.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Roycroft for James Allestry at the Rose and Crown in
Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1669.

TO The Right Honorable EDWARD Earl of Clarendon, Lord high Chancellor of
England, and Chancellor of the University of Oxford.
My LORD;
TO vouch your Lordships commands for the publishing this Discourse, I might
reasonably think, would be to libel your judgment; and the prefixing your Name
to it, and this mean address, would look rather like revenge than homage or
obedience: if I did not know that low performances are due to the transcendency
of such a subject as I then discoursed upon, and such a Patron as I now
dedicate to: So I lie prostrate under my great Arguments, here insufficiency is
Art and Rhetoric. And the truth is, my Lord, it was not this which made me so
sollicitous to avoid your injunctions, but apprehensions of the unusefulness of
the Discourse itself.

When God's most signal methods of all sorts do not seem to have wrought much
conviction; when neither our own dismal guilts, nor miseries, nor most express
miracles of deliverance have made us sensible, but after the equally stupendous
3 Oath of January and 29th of May, and the black time that intervened; we are
still the same perverse untractable people; when luxury is the retribution
made for plenty, license for liberty, and Atheism for Religion, whilst
miracles of mercy are acknowledged only by prodigies of ungrateful
disobedience: and on the other side, when factious humors swell against all
Laws, as they would either overflow those mounds, or make them yield and give
way to them; when Declarations and Decrees, which were infallible when they
came only from a party of a part of a Parliament, are neither of force nor
esteem when they have all solemnity and obligation that just and full authority
can give; alas, what hopes of doing any thing can a weak Harangue entertain?
But, my Lord, since you are pleased to command, I give up both it and my
understanding to your Lordship, and the weaker the Discourse is, so much the
more pregnant testimony is it of the obsequiousness of

My Lord, Your Lordships most devoted and most humble Servant, RICH. ALLESTRY.

SERMON XVII. AT HAMPTON COURT May 29. 1662.
HOSEA III. 5. Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek the Lord
their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness.
HE had said in the words before, that the children of Israel shall abide many
days without a King and without a Prince, without a Sacrifice and without
an Image or Altar, and without an Ephod and without Teraphim. Now when they
shall have been for many years in such a state of helpless desolation, shall
have no King under whose shadow they, their Laws and Rights, might hope for
shelter; no Prince to guard them from the sad calamities of vvild confusion or
usurping violence; shall have no exercises of religion to allay and soften
those calamities, and give them comfort in the bearing of them; no Altar to lay
hold on for security against them, or to stretch no nor a God to put an end to
this sad state; nor any means of direction what to do under it, no Ephod to
ask connsel at; nor yet the pageantry, the fallacy of these, no Teraphim for
Ephods, nor Image for a God; the same destruction having seized these and their
worshippers, the people and their Idols going into Captivity together, and the
only true God having forsaken them: Now when the Prophet had denounced this
state of Woe, which was to dwell with them so long threescore years and ten,
a longer and more wearisome age of patience then life; he then proceeds to so
eeten all by telling them of a return, and what things they shall do in it;
and they are three.

First, Seek the Lord their God, apply themselves to his Worship and Odedience,
and cleave to him; for so the word is rendered (...) Lev. 19. 23. and Jeremy
repeating this c. 30. 9. words it, shall serve the Lord their God, and David
their King:

Which is the second thing they were to do. As the Ecclesiastical state was
to be settled, so the secular too upon its just foundations: Religion and
Loyalty both running in their ancient current.

Thirdly, They shall fear the Lord and his goodness: not only tremble before
him, who is the Lord, that did exert his power in their destruction; but shall
much more revere his goodness, that did flow out in such plentiful miraculous
expresses of delivetance.

Now these being not only prophecy what in that juncture duties what they
were to do, but also counsels and directions immediately from God what they
were best to do, the only prudent and safe course according to the policies of
heaven; the direct view of these particulars in reference to that state of
theirs is not an unconcerning prospect at this season, which is the Anniversary
of an equal return; and therefore I shall lay them so before you, and the
reflection on them in our practice shall make the application.

1. They shall seek the Lord their God is my first part, and the Lord's prime
direction for the repairing of a broken hide his face, nothing but darkness
dwells upon the land; or if any light do break out, it is But the kindlings of
his anger: so he expresses, Deuteronomy. 31. 17. This people will forsake me and
break my Covenant, then my anger shall be kindled against them, and I will
forsake them, and hide* my face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many
evils and troubles shall befall them, so that they will say in that day, Arc
not these evils come upon us because our God is not amongst us? This absence is
only another word for desolation: Be thou instructed, o Jerusalem, says God
by Jeremy, c. 6. 8. lest my soul depart from thee, and I make thee desolate, a
land not inhabited: As if without him there were nothing else but solitude in
Cities and in Courts, and all were desert where he does not dwell. Yea Hos.
9. 11, 12. As for Ephraim, their glory shall flee away like a bird from the
birth and from the womb, and from the conception: though they bring up their
children, yet I will bereave them that there shall not be a man, (...) yea vvo
also to them when I depart from them. And it must needs be so; for let our
state be never so calamitous, if God be not departed, there is comfort in it,
and a deliverer at hand: If we are in the place of dragons, his presence will
make heaven there; and although we be covered with Psalm. 44. 19.
the shadow of death, if the light of his Countenance break glory; and the
brightness of that will soon damp and shine out the fiery trial. But if the
Lord depart; then there is no redemption possible; God has forsaken him,
persecute him and take him, for there is none to deliver him, Psalm. 71. 11. But
if there were deliverance some other way; yet the want of God's presence is
an evil, such as nothing in the whole world can make good: the presence of an
Angel in his stead does not. When the Lord said to Israel, I will not go up in
the midst of thee, but I will send an Angel with thee, and drive out the
Amorite, the Hittite, etc. yet when the people heard these evil tidings, they
mourned, and no man did put on his Ornaments; Exodus 33. 4. Nay more, I shall
not speak a contradiction if I shall say, that the most intimate presence of
the Godhead does not supply God's absence; and such a small vvithdrawing of
himself as may consist with being united hypostatically, was too much for him
to bear, who was Immanuel when he complained God was not with him: I mean
our Savior on the Cross. He, who although he did beseech against his cup
with fervencies that did breath out in heats of bloody sweat, with agonies
Luke 22. 44.
of prayer; yet when he fell down under it, did cheerfully submit to it,
saying, Not my will, but thy will be done; yet when God hides himself, he
does expostulate with him, crying out, Ver. 42. Mat. 27. 46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? His God could forsake him; than
himself could be not himself: and yet the apprehension of that which could not
be was even insufferable to him, to whom nothing could be insufferable. He
seems to feel a very contradiction while he but seems to feel the want of the
Lord's presence.

Such is the sad importance of God's not being with us; and this same instant
tells us what drives him away. 'Twas sin that he vvithdrew from then: Christ
did but take on him our guilt, and upon that the Lord forsook him: God could no
more endure to behold wickedness in him, than the Sun God cry out, My God, my
God, why have thou Mat. 27. 45.
forsaken me? And it will do the same betwixt God and apeople. Isay. 59. 1, 2.
Behold, the Lord's hand is not shortened that it cannot save; nor his ear heavy
that it cannot hear; but your iniquities have separted between you and your
God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. His face
is clothed with light, we know; but when Wickedness over-spreads a people,
those deeds of darkness put out the light of his countenance. hand although it
be not shortened, yet it contracts and shuts it self, not only to grasp and
withhold his mercies from them, but to smite: Iniquity builds such a wall of
separation as does shut out omnipresence, and makes him who is every where, not
be with such a people; not be in hearing of their needs; for when their sins
do cry, no prayers can be hearkened to; he will not hear you, says the Prophet.
And that gives us the very (...) of the Lord's departure from a people, and the
manner of it.

He is taking away his peace and mercies from a Nation hear no prayers for it;
and he declares that he will hear no prayers when he vvithdraws once from his
house of prayer, and makes his offices to cease. The place appointed for these
offices, the Sanctuary, he calls, we know the tabernacle of (...)
meeting, that is, where he would Exodus 29. 42, 43.
meet his votaries, and hear and bless them; calls it his Psalm. 42. 4.
house; his Psalm. 74. 7.
dwelling place, his court, his Psalm. 31. 20.
presence, and his Ier. 17. 12. and 14. 21. Psalm. 74. Ver. 3.
throne: and if so, when he is not to be found in these, when he no longer
dwells nor meets in them, we may be sure that he has left the land. The
Psalmist, when he does complain men done evil in the Sanctuary, the
adversaries roared in the midst of the Congregations, and set up their banners
there for 4.
trophies; they broke down all the carved work thereof with axes 6.
and hammers, and had defiled the dwelling places of God's (...) even to the
ground, and burnt up all the houses of God in the land; he does suppose that
God was then departed when they had Ver. 7.
left him no abiding place: and therefore cries out, O God wherefore art thou
absent from us so long? Remember S^^^ where thou Ver. 1. 2.
have dwelt. But it is not only upon these A^^l^gies I build; this method of
departure we shall find exactly in Ezekie^^ Vision of that case to which my
Text referres: it begins chapter 9. 3. And the glory of the God of Israel (i. e.
the (...) cloud, the token of his presence in the Sanctuary,) went up from the
Cherub whereupon he was, to the threshold of the ^^nse, as going out; and then
ver. 8* he does refuse to be entreared for the The glory went from off the
threshold to the midst of the City; and chap. 11. 23. it went from thence to
the mountain without the City, and so away: and then nothing but desolation
dwelt upon the land, until the counsel of my Text was followed, and they did
seek the Lord their God: for then the glory did return into the Sanctuary just
as it went away, as you may find it chapter 43.

And having seen when and how God forsakes a people, and for what, that does
direct us how to seek him, and it is thus, When men forsake those paths in
which they did not err and go astray, but did walk contrary to God, so that
they did forsake each other; and do return, walk in his ways, the vvayes of
Commandments, and return also to his Church, and seek him in his house, fall
low before his footstool, beg of him to meet in his tabernacle, renew his
worship, and all invitations of him to return into his dewlling place. For
sure as it is in vain to seek him but in his own vvayes, nor can we hope to
meet him but in his Tabernacle of meeting; so also Scripture calls both these
to seek the Lord, and promises finding him. To the first, De^t. 4 29, 30. If
from thy tribulation thou ^^alt seek the Lord thy God, t^ou shall find him, if
thou seek him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, if thou turn to the
Lord thy God, and shall be obedient unto his voice. And to the second, Jer. 29.
12. speaking of this sad state to which my Text relates, Then shall ye call
upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me; and I will hearken unto you, and I
will be found of you, says the Lord, and I will turn away your captivity. I
^ould produce you instances of Asa making all his people swear to seek the
Lord: but because my Text speaks of David, he shall be the great explication,
as he was the practice I have sought thy Commandments above gold or precious
stone; more than that which does make and does adorn my Crown, than that which
furnishes all the necessities and all the pomps of O God, thou art my God,
early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee
in a dry and thirsty land where no water is: To see thy power and thy glory,
as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. His very words do seem to labor too, and
he does seek expressions to tell us how he seeks. The hot fits of a thirsty
palate that call so often and so impetuosly are in his soul; it has a pious
fever, which cannot be allayed but by pouring out of his soul to God in the
Temple, by breathing out its heats in his devotion offices. Nay more, he longs,
has that I know not appetite, or passion, which is not to be understood, but
only suffered; to which all the unreasonable violences which passion can be
heated into, all the defaillances nature can be oppressed into, are natural; it
is the bodies Ecstasy. Now this he had toward the worship of the Sanctuary;
his very flesh found rapture in those exercises, and when he was in a barren
and dry land, was driven from the plenties of a Court, and from the glories of
a throne into a desaert solitude, he found no other wants but of God's house;
did mind, pant, and long after nothing else, did neither thirst for his
necessities, nor long Tabernacle only. And besides the Religion of this, he had
reason of State too to be thus affected; this was the best means to engage his
Subjects to him and secure his Throne. He knew, if by establishing God's
worship and by going with the multitude, as he did use, to the Psalm. 42. 4.
exercises of it; if by royal example and encouragements of virtue, and by
discountenanting and chastising impiety, by doing as he did profess to do, Ps.
101. (that directory for a Court) he could people his land with holy living,
and his Temple with at peace with themselves. If they will seek their God,
then they will seek their King. The Lord saw this dependence, and therefore
counseled this course should be taken. The Master of our Politics discerned
it too, and therefore Arist. Pol. l. 7.
does advise that the first and chiefest public cares should be about things
of Religion, that and the same profession of it being (...), the cement of
Communities, and the very foundation of all legislative, and indeed all power
in the Magistrate: and in the people (...), it is a most efficacious philtre, a
charm, a Gordian knot of kindness. And as a Jew observed of their own Nation,
(...), Joseph. l. con. Appio.
(...), To have one and the same opinion's of God, and not to differ in their
rites from one another, breeds the best harmony in men's affections. When on the
other side no obligations, though the most signal and divine, will hold them
in obedience and peace, if their ambitions or interests look another way: and
if at any time present advantage, or an expectation, or some passion do incline
them to seek David their King; yet the appearance of a change of Interest, that
expectation defeated, or a cross animosity will burst those bonds, unless
Religion and Communion in Worship help to twist them. David had had experience
of this.

Abner knew of God's oath to David that after Saul he should be King over all
Israel; but he was otherwise concerned, and therefore he made Ishbosheth King,
maintained a long and a sore war even against what he knew God was engaged to
bring about, and made himself strong for the house of Saul, 2 Samuel 2, 3, chapter
But when a quarrel happened betwixt Ishbosheth and him, then, So do God to
Abner and more also, except as the Lord has sworn to David, even so I do to
him, to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah. And he sent
Messengers to him saying, Whose is the land? make but thy league with me. c.
3. 9, 10, 11, 12. Do but look forward, and you find when Abner was cut off,
and Ishbosheth was slain, and Israel had no leader, then they came to David,
saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh, and the Lord said to thee, Thou
shall feed my people Israel, c. 5. 1, 2. They knew all that before, yet would
not let him do it, till they had no other leader. Nay, when they had done
that, by Absalom's insituations (who in a way of treacherous pity did instill
dislikes against the government, and did remonstrate in good wishes, as some
men do prayers, c. 15. 3, 4.) they were all drawn into rebellion against this
David, and made him fly out of the land, and became Subjects to that Absalom.
When he was dead indeed they spoke of bringing back the King, c. 19. 10. and
when his own Judah had done it, quarreled ver. 43. because that their advice
was not first had: and though Judah had nothing but their service, for, Have we
eaten at all of the Kings cost, or has he given us any gift? say they, ver.
42. yet Israel is is angry, because he came not back upon their score, for they
forsooth have ten parts in him, v. 43. and yet the next day every man of Israel
went after him that said, we have no part in David, Sheba a man of Belial, chapter
20. 1. Thus no allegiance, no tie however sacred and divine will hold them
who follow not upon God's score. Nay at the last, because that Rehoboam would
not ease their taxes, all Israel cry out, What portion have we in David? see
to thi^e own house, David. And to make this secession perpetual (which all the
former did 1 Kings 12. 16.
not prove) Jeroboam did use no other policy, but to change the Worship and
the Priests: He knew he should divide their hearts and Nations for ever, when
he had altered once the Service and the Officers; and if he could but keep them
from seeking God at Jerusalem, he was secure they would not seek David their
King. And so it proved. Now the Lord to prevent divisions had provided so far
for Uniformity Unity; and that it might be but in one manner, he let it be but
in one place.

And truly, when men once depart from Uniformity, what measures can they set
themselves of changing? what shall confine or put shores to them? what
principle can they proceed upon which shall engage them to stay any where? and
why may not divisions be as infinite as men's phansies? And though, when those
are but in circumstantial things, those who are strong, and know them to be
such, are no otherwise concerned to contend for them than on Authorities
behalf, (to which every change is a Convulsion fit,) and on the account of
decency, and of compliance with the universal Church: yet when others do
dogmatize, and put conscience in the not doing them, and stand at such a
distance from them as to choose Schism, Disobedience, and Sedition rather, and
therefore must needs look upon damnation in them; these differences make as
great a gulf and ch^sme as that which does divide Dives from Luke 16. 26.
Abraham's bosom. It is one God, one Faith, one Worship makes hearts one.
Hands lifted up together in the ^emple Religion does fulfill its name a
religando, binds Prince and Subjects all together; and they who thus do seek
the Lord their God, will also seek David their King, God's next direction, and
my second part.

2. And here three things offer themselves, a King, their King, and David their
King.

I am not here to read a Lecture of State policy upon a vie of Governments;
why seek a King, not any other sort of Government; and why their King, one
that already was so by the right of Succession, not whom addresses or election
should make so. And though I think, twere easy to demonstrate divine or
natural original, and that elective Monarchy is most unsafe and burdensome,
full of dangerous and uneasy consequences; and this so much to sight, that
choice for the most part bounds it self, proves but ceremony of Succession: yet
this I need not do, for I am dealing with the Jews, who had God's judgment
in the case, and his appointment too; and to me that is argument enough. And
when God has declard, for the transgressions Prove. 28. 2.
of a land many are the Princes thereof; many at once, as in a Commonwealth,
or many several families successively, (for so God reckons also one or many;
it is still, we see, David their King, while it is in David's line, and so the
King does truly never die, while his race lives.) If either of these many be
Gods punishment, for the sins of a land; I will not say that they many Princes
love the transgressions which God plagues so; but I will say, they who do choose
that which God calls his plague, that quarrel for his vengeance, and with
great strife and hazard take his indignation by force, I can but pity them in
their own opinions and enjoyments: but, O my soul, enter not thou into their
counsels.

As for seeking their King. I shall content my self with that which Calvin
says upon the words; Nam aliter vere and ex animo Deum quaerere non potuit,
quin seetiam subjiceret legitimo ^mperio cu^ subjectus erat: For they could not
otherwise truly and with all their heart seek God, except they did subject
themselves to his Government to whom they did of right belong as Subjects. And
I shall add that they who do forsake their King, will soon forsake their
God. The R. Simeon the son of Iochai said, (...) and R. Simeon the son of
Menasiah said, (...) Deuteronomy. 33. ^. Exodus 3^. 1, 5.
Rabbines say it more severely of Israel, that they at once rejected three
things, the Kingdom of the house of David, and the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Sanctuary. And truly, if we do consult that State from the beginning, we shall
find that when they were without their King, they alvvaies were without
their God.

Moses was the first King in Jeshurun, and he was only gone into the Mount
for forty days, and they set up a golden Calf; they make themselves a God if
they want him whom the Lord makes so, as he does the Magistrate: if they have
not a Prince, that (...), living Image of God, then they must have an Id^l.
When Moses his next successor was dead, we read that the man Micah had an
house of Gods, and consecrated one of his sons to be his Priest: and truly he
might make his Priest who made his Deities. And the account of this is given,
In those days there was no King in Israel, Iud. 17. 5, 6. The very same is
said, chapter 18. 1. to preface the Idolatry Dan: There was no heir of restraint,
as it is worded ver. 7. It seems, to curb impiety is the Princes Inheritance,
which till it be suppressed, he has not what he Lust and War, the one of
which did sin to death the Levites wife; the other, besides 40000. slain of
them who had a righteous cause; and whom God did bid fight, destroyed also a
Tribe in Israel: these all spra^g from the same occasion, for so the story
closes it, In those days there was no King in Israel, chapter 21. 25.

Just upon this, when God in their necessities did raise them Judges, that is,
Kings, read all their story, you will find to almost every several Judge there
did succeed a several Idolatry: God still complaining, the children of Israel
did evil again after the death of such an one, till he raised them another.
Judge. 3. 7. and ver. 12. Chapter ^. 1. Chapter 6. 1. Chapter 10. 6. Ch 13. 1. ^ 1 Kings 16.
26. Chapter 2^. 22. and 22. 52. etc.
Those 450. years being divided all betwixt their Princes and their Idols.
After them Jeroboam, he that made the great secession of that people from their
Prince, has got no other character from God but this, the (a) Man that did
make Israel to sin, at once against God and against their King. Yea upon this
account they are reckoned by God to Idolatry and State were ended, when their
calves and their Kingdom were destroyed. Ezekiel. 4. 4, 5. the Lord does bid the
Prophet lie on his left side 390. days, to bear the iniquity of Israel
according to the number of the years of their iniquity. But this was more then
the years of their State, which were only 255. 390. years indeed there were
betwixt the falling off of the ten Tribes, and the destruction of Jerusalem by
the King of Babel; but those ten Tribes were gone, their Kingdom perfectly
destroyed above 130. years before: but their iniquity was not, it seems, that
does outlive their God's Temple, that King's house did stand from which they
did divide. As if Seditious men and Schismatics sin longer then they are, even
while those are whom they do sin against in separating from.

It Is true, there was an Ahaz and Manasseh in the house of David, but Hezekiah
and Josiah did succeed. Mischief did not appear entailed on Monarchy, as it is
upon rebellion and having no King. It does appear their Kings were guards also
to God and his Religion, the great defendors of his faith and worship. God and
the Prince for the most part stood and fell together: Paul did afterward
advise to pray for Kings, that 1 Timothy 2. 2.
we might live in godliness and honesty; and still they were the same who
sought the Lord their God, and David their King.

But why David their King? for could his Kingdom disappear I have sworn once
by my Holiness, I will not fail David? Psalm. 89. And his Vet. 3^.
Throne therefore was as sure as God is holy. But yet the Lord had said to the
people of Israel, If ye do wickedly; ye shall be 1 Samuel 12. 25.
destroyed both you and your King. There are other sins besides Rebellion and
Treason that murder Kings and Governments: Those that support their Ills by
their dependencies, and use great shadows for a s^elter to rapacity,
oppression, or licenses, or any crying wickedness; these prove Traitors to
Majesty and themselves, strike at the root of that under which National vices
have all Treason in them, and every combination in such sins is a Conspiracy.
If universal practice palliate them, we do not see their stain it may be, think
them slight; but their complexion is purple: Common blood is not deep enough to
color them, they die themselves in that that is sacred. Nay these do seem to
spread contagion to God; as if they would not let the Lord be holy, nor suffer
that to be which he swore by his holiness should be: for the Psalmist cries
out, Where Psalm. ^9. 49.
are thy old loving kindnesses which thou swearest unto David? some of God's
oaths will stand; if not those of his kindness, those will by which he swears
the r^ine of such sinners, and God that is holy will be sanctified in judgment
upon Isa 5. 16.
them. Yea, upon more then the offenders, for the guilty themselves are not a
sacrifice equal to such piacular offenses. Innocent Majesty must bleed for them
too; If you do wickedly, you shall be destroyed both you and your King. Thus
when God would remove Judah out of his sight, good Josiah must fall; and the
same makes them be to seek David their King.

But how David their King, when 'twas Zorobabel? for with Theodoret and others
I conclude he must be meant in the first literal importance of the words.

It was the custom of most Nations from some great eminent prince to name all
the Succession, so at once to suggest his Excellencies to his followers, and to
make his glory live. Now without doubt David was Hero enough for this, and
his ^lour alone sufficient to ground the like practice upon. And though we do
not find that done, yet we do find his piety and his uprightness made the
standard by which that of his Successors is meted. Of one it is said, he walked
in the ways of David his father, of another, he did that which 2 Chro. 34. 2.
2 King. 14. 3.
was right in the sight of the Lord, but not like unto David his father. And
because David went aside, and was upright with an Exception, once therefore
it is said. The Lord was with Ieho^haphat, because he walked in the first ^ ayes
of his father David. But besides this, his very name is given to two,
Zorobabel, and the Messiah; both which were to be the restorers of their
Chron. 17. 3.
people: the one from Sin and Hell, to re-establish the Kingdom of heaven it
self; the other to deliver his people from Babel, and to repair a broken Nation
and demolished Temple. And for this work God bids them seek David their King.

The ways from Babel to Jerusalem, from the Confusion of a people to a City
that is at unity in it self, the City of God where he Psalm. 12^. 1* 5.
appears in perfect beauty, and where the throne of the house of David is, must
be the first ways of David: in those he vvalk'd to Sion, and did invest his
people in God's promises, the whole land of Canaan. In those Zorobabel brought
them back to that land and Sion. And in these our Messiah leads us to Mount
Sion that is above, to the celestial Jerusalem; does build an universal Church
and Heaven it self. And all that have the like to do must walk in those first
ways, fulfill that part of David, and must copy Christ. Such the repairers of
great breaches must be: these are the ways to settle Thrones; the only ways
in which we may find the goodness of the Lord; which to fear

They shall fear the Lord and his goodness.
3. That Israel who came but now out of the furnate should fear the Lord
whose wrath did kindle it, whose justice they had found such a consuming
fire as to make the Temple it self a Sacrifice, and the whole Nation a
burnt-offering, is reasonable to expect: but when his goodness had repaired
all this, to require them to fear that, does seem hard. That that goodness
which when it is once apprehended does commit a rape upon our faculties, and
being tasted melts the heart, and causes dread and tre^bling, is most strange.
Indeed the Psalmist says, There is mercy with God Psalm. 130. 4.
that he may be feared; for were there not, we should grow desperate: but how
to fear those mercies is not easy. It Is true, when God made his goodness pass
before Moscs, showed him the glory of it, as he says, in those most
comfortable attributes, the sight of which is beati^ick Vision, Exodus 34. 6,
etc. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant
in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin; if that which follows there be part of it, and that
will by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers up on
the children unto the third and fourth generation; devouring as the lake of
fire, his very goodness stabs whole successions at once, and the guilty may
tremble at it for themselves and their posterity. But if those words do mean
as we translate those very words, Jer. 46. 28. I will not leave thee
altogether unpunished, yet will not utterly cut off, not make a full end of the
guilty, when I visit (...)
iniquities upon the children, but will leave them a remnant still; then there
is nothing dreadful in ^t, but those very visitations have kindness in them,
and his rod comforts, and fear God's goodness therefore is to revere it, to
entertain it with a pious ^stonishment, acknowledging themselves unworthy of
the crumbs of it, especially not daring to provoke it by surfeting, or by
presuming on it, or by abusing it to serve ill ends, or any other than God sent
it for, those of piety and obedience: not to comply with which, is to defeat
God's kindness, and the designs of it. If when they sought the Lord, he was
found of them, and came to his dwelling place only to be forced thence again
by their abominations; if when his goodness had restored all to them, they had
David their King but to conspire against, an Altar only to pollute, and a
Temple to separate from, as Manasses the Priest, Sanballat's son in law, with
his accomplices did do; this were both to affront and to renounce that
goodness, which above all things they must dread the doing: for if this be
offended too, ruin is irreversible; those is no other attribute in God a
sinner can fly to with any hope. His Holiness cannot behold iniquity; his
Justice speaks nothing but condemnation to guilt, his Power without kindness
is but omnipotent destruction; but if we have Goodness on our side, we have
an Advocate in his own bosom that will bear up against the rest, for his
mercy is over all his attributes as well as works: but if this also be
exasperated, and kindness grow severe, there is no refuge in the Lord, no
shadow of him to take Sanctuary under; for there is nothing to allay the anger
of his Compassion and Bounty. This sure is the extremest terror, we are to
dread his kindness more than his severity and wrath; we have an antidote, a
buckler against these, but none against the other if it be provoked; and if the
heats of love take fire and rise into indignation, it is unquenchable fear the
Lord and his goodness.

My Text and I have spoke all this while to the Jews: nor do this day need not
the foil of those calamities from which this day redeemed, to set them off; Or
you may read them in my Prophet here, and our own guilts will make too sad a
Comment on his Text, who were more barbarous Assyrians to our selves. We also
were without a Prince and without Sacrifice, had neither King, nor Church, nor
Offices, because we our selves had destroyed them, and that we might not have
them had engaged or covenanted against them; tied to our miseries so, that
without be without them, nor yet have them. As we had broke through all our
sacred oaths to invade and usurp calamity and guilt, so neither could we repent
without breach of Vows, If ^^ is were not enough to make us be without a God
too, then to drive him away we had defiled his dwelling places to the ground,
and by his ancient gists of remove he was certainly gone. There was indeed
exceeding much Religion among us, yet, God knows, almost none at all, while
Christianity was crumbled into so many, so minute professions, that 'twas
divided into little nothings, and even lost Church, every single professor was
a whole multitude of Sects. And in this tumult, this riot of faiths, if the
son of man should have come, could he have found any faith in the Land? Virtue
was out of countenance and practice, while prosperous and happy Villainy
usurped its name; while Loyalty, and conscience of oaths, and duty were most
unpardonable crimes, to which nothing but ruin was an equal punishment; and
all those guilts that make the last times perilous, Blasphemy, disobedience,
truce-breakings and Treasons, Schisms and Rebellions, with all their dismal
single, personal crimes, these have a politic capacity) all these did not
only walk in the dress of piery, and under holy Masks, but were themselves the
very form of Godliness, by which 'twas constituted and distinguished, the
Signature of a party of Saints, the Constellation of their graces: And on the
other side, the detestation of such hypocrisy made others Libertines and
Atheists; while seeing men such holy counterfeits, so violent in acting, and
equally engaged for every false religion, made them conclude there was none
true, or in earnest. And all this was because we were without our King; for
'twas the usurpations that were, to contrive and preserve it thus. And when
we had rolled thus through every form of Government, addressed to each, moved
every Sisyphus's labor was like to have no end, only restless and various
Calamity; Necessity then counseled us, and we applied to God's directions in
the Text, I know not whether in his method, but it is plain we did seek David
our King. And my heart is toward the Governo^rs of Israel, that Judge. 5. 9.
offered themselves willingly among the people: bless ye the Lord: yea, Thou, o
Lord, bless them. May all the blessings which this was the birthday of, all
that my Text encloses, all the goodness of the Lord, be the sure portion of
them and their see the King in his beauty, and peace upon Israel, and may their
Names be blessed in their posterities for evermore. We sought him with the
violent impatiences of necessitous and furious desires, and our eyes, that had
even failed with looking for him, did even fail with looking on him, as
impotent and as unsatisfied in our fruitions as expectations; and he was
entertained with as many tears as prayed for; as one whom not our Interests
alone, but our guilts had endeared to us, and our tears: he was as necessary
to us as repentance, as without whom it was impossible for usurping his
rights, of exiling, of murdering him by wants, because we could not do it by
the Axe or Sword; without him 'tvvas impossible for us to give over the
committing these; and the tears that did vvelcome him were one of our best
lavers to vvash off that blood that we had pulled upon our selves. One
endeared also to us by God's most miraculous preservations of him for us: We
cannot look upon his life but as the issue of prodigious bounty, snatched by
immediate Providence out of the gaping jaws of tyrannous, keep him for our
needs; and for this day: One whom God had trained up and managed for us, just
as he did prepare David their 2 Samuel 5. 4.
King, at thirty years of age to take possession of that Crown which God had
given him by Samuel about twelve years before; Inter 7 and 9. Sauli qui
regnavit an. 20. Vid. Sim. Chron.
and in those years to prepare him for Canaan by a Wilderness, to harden him
with discipline, that so the luxuries and the effeminacies of a Court might
not emaseclate and melt him; by constant Watches, cares and business, to make
him equal for, habituated to, careful of, constraining him to dwell in Mesech,
with Aliens to his Religion, Psalm. 120. 5.
to teach him to be constant to his own, and to love Sion. And has he not
prepared our David so for us? and we first days of David, having no Sheba in
the Field, nor Achitophel in the Council, nor an Abiathar in the Temple, not in
that Temple which himself has raised, God having made him instrument of that
which he would not let David do, building his house, and furnishing it with
all its Offices, and making it fit for God to meet us in, when we do seek him
also, which was the other perquisite of our Condition.

There never was so much pretense of seeking God as in find him, we took such
several vvayes to seek him. But if God did look down from heaven then as he did
Psalm. 14. to see if any did understand and seek after God, should he not then
have found it here as there? They are altogether gone out of the way; their
throat is an Psalm. 11. Romans 5.
open scpulchre, with their tongues have they deceived, the poison of asps is
under their lips, their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are
swift to shed blood: destruction and unhappiness is in their ways, and the way
of peace have they not known; there is no fear of God before their eyes: They
eat up my people as it were bread; and, which is worse in these then them,
they even then call upon God; as if they craved a blessing from the Lord upon
that meal that did devour his people, and when they did seek God, they meant to
find a prey. Yet where were any others that did seek him? or that do cleave to
him now? The Schtsmatick does not seek God, who shuns the place where he
appears, and meets, and dwells; nor does he cleave to God who tears himself
off from the Lord's body. Mark such as cause divisions, says S. Paul, and
avoid them: Romans 16. 17.
and if all Christians must avoid them, then I am sure God is not with them.
The other Schismatics that divide from the World by cutting off the World from
them: do they seek God that are diverted by so many Saints and Angels? that
terminate divinest Worship in a creature? or do they cleave to God, when their
devotion embraces stocks and stones? or did they seek God for the purpose of
my Text, who did not seek David their King, but did apply themselves to several
foreign Princes, and to others which they hoped would setup their Golden calf?
Incendiaries, that make the Lord was not in the fire, or in the Earthquake,
but in the still ^1 Kings 19. 11. 12
small voice, in the soft whispers of peace and love. The Atheist, he that says
in his heart there is no God, will not seek God, you may be sure; nor does he
care to seek David h^ King, who is Religion to tie him to any. If he at all
disliked the former, it was upon reasons of Burden, or of Pride, or
Libertinism: So much Religion, though counterfe^t, was a reproach to him, and
the face of such strictness was uneasy to him. These are so far from seeking
God, that God says these did drive him out of Israel, Ezekiel. 9. 9. And then when
that has so long been the Wit, that it is now the Complexion of the Age, and
they who thought fit to show their not being Hypocrites by License, and (^o
drollery in sacred things, have now made nothing to be sacred to them; how
shall the Lord dwell among such? they are enough to exorcise God out of a
Nation. The Hypocrite also, for all his Fasts and Prayers never did seek God,
for he is but a whited Sepulcher, Matthew. 23. 27.
our Savior says. Now who would seek the Living God among the dead? the Lord
of Life sure is not to be found in Graves. Golgotha was a plate to cruci^ie him
in, not worship him: He takes not in the Ait of Funeral Vaults for Incense; it
was a Demoniack that used to be among the Tombs. The to a pinnacle of the
Temple, or to the top of that exceeding high Mount. whence they can overlook
the glories of the World, and pick and choose, these do not go to seek Christ
there: It is the Devil that does carry up ^nither, upon his own designs. Not is
it possible to Matthew. 4.
seek the Lord in the wavs that lead to the strange VVomans House, for her
House is the way to Hell, Solomon says, (and he did Prove. 9. 27.
know;) nay more, Her steps take hold on Hell, seize on those Prove. 5. 5.
everlasting burnings which her foul heats kindle and begin. In a word, they
that seek their own, that turn all merely to Phil. 2. 21.
their advantage, they cannot seek God too, he will not be joint God with
Mammon. And then where are the men that ^ought him? that did retrive him to us?
or with whom does he dwell? If he be not among us, we do in vain flatter our
selves in our prosperity and peace, gawd it in all our bright appearances. Have
we not seen the Sun the night, not leave a cloud to shelter the least relics
of her Centaures and the Lapithae, first kindle Lusts, then Wars, and at last
only fill a Cup of trembling and astonishment; and that oil that does make you
cheerful countenances, may make your paths slippery, and nourish flames that
will devour and ruin all.

But God, who is found of them that seek him not, nay who Isai. 1. 65. Luk 15.
4, 5.
himself sought the lost Sheep and carried him, when with his straying he was
wearied into impossibility of a return, has also sought, and found, and brought
together us and our great Shepherd: For this is the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes. These ways of his also are so past finding out, that we
may well

But give me leave to say, Those that despise his goodness, do not fear it; and
they whom it does not lead to repentance, do despise it. S. Paul says, Romans 2.
4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-sufferance, not knovving that the goodness of the Lord leads thee to
repentance?

And now, O Lord, what sort of men among us has thy goodness wrought upon, and
made repent? Those destruction and misery were in their vvays; yet these choose
rather to deny their own conclusions, and resist Gods goodness, then to be
convinced and repent: For we have seen them as bold Martyrs to their Sin as
ever any to Religion, signalize their resolved impenitence with cheerful
suffering, as if the fire they were condemned to were that Triumphal Chariot,
in which the Prophet mounted up to Heaven. Others that 2 King. 2. 11.
did not go so far in condemnation nor guilt as they, and therefore think they
have no reason to repent of that, do they repent of what they did contribute to
it? Of those that lifted up their hands to swear and fight, how many are there
that What have I done? Do not all rather justify as far as they themselves
proceeded? and if all that were well, why do not we let. 31. 15.
repent of our Allegiance and Lovalty? if all that were well, what has thy
goodness done, O Lord, that has reverst it all? And for the rest, those that
do not partake the plenties of thy goodness, murmr and repine at it; are
discontent at having what they prayed for, what they would have died for. Those
that have been partakers of it, have turned it into vvantonness, have made it
furnish them for base unworthy Confession is only fit for Litanies, and we
have need to make the burden of ours be, Lord, give us some afflictions again,
send out thy Indignation, for we do fear thy goodness, it has almost undone
Paul says so in the forecited place; and Origin does prove this very thing did
harden Phara^hs heart, indulgence Romans 2. 5.
was his induration. Now induration is the being put in Hell upon the Earth:
There is the same impenitence in both, and judgment is pronounced already on
the hardened, and the life they lead is, but the interval betwixt the Sentence
and the Execution, and all their sunshine of Prosperity, is but kindled
Brimstone, only without the stench. And then to make the treasures of wrath
to us! to make his kindness, his long-suffering; that is S. Peter says,
salvation, condemn us, his very goodness be Hell to us! But sure so great a 2
Pet. 3. 15.
goodness as this we have tasted, cannot have such deadly issues; and it was
great indeed, so perfectly miraculous in such strange and continued successes,
resisting our contrivances and our sins too, overcoming all opposition of our
vices, and our own policies, that do not comport with it, and in despite of
all still doing us good; it was fatality of goodness. Now sure that which is so
victorious will not be worsted the more suspicious it is: As if it were the
last b^az^ of the dying struggles and extreme efforts of goodness, to see if at
the last any thing can be w^ough^ by it. And if we did consider how some men
menage the present goodness, make use of this time of it, and take, and catch,
we would believe they did ^ear the departure of it: But vet it is in our power
to fix it here. If we repent, Gods gifts then are wit^ out repentance, but one
of us must change: B^ing Piety and Virtue into countenance and fashion, and God
will dwell among us. Nay S. Paul says, Goodness to thee if thou Romans 11. 22.
continue in his goodness. If we our selves do not forsake it, and he so put
his fear in our hearts that we Ier. 32. 40.
never depart from it, fear that has love in it, and is as unitive as that,
then it shall never depart from us; but we shall see the goodness of the Lord
in the Land of the Living, and shall be taken thence to the eternal fullness of
it. This day shall be the Birthday of Immortal Life, the entering on a Kingdom
that cannot be moved. A Crown t^us beautified, is a Crown of glory here, and
shall add weight and splendour to the Crown hereafter: Kingdom of Heaven upon
Earth; and then we shall all reign with him who is the King of Kings, and who
vvashed us in his Blood, to make us Kings and Apoc. 1. 5, 6.
Priests to God and his Father. To whom be glory and dominion for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
SERMON XVIII. AT CHRIST'S-CHURCH in Oxford on St. Steven's Day.
MATTHEW. V. 44. But I say unto you, love your Enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use
you, and persecute you.
I Need no Artifice to tie this Subject and this Day together. The Saint Martyr
of this Text: and it is impossible to keep the Feast but by a resolution of
obeying these Commands, you being called together on this day to beseech God to
grant that you by the example of this first Martyr St. Stephen, who prayed for
his Murderers, may learn to love your Enemies, and pray for them that
despitefully use you, and persecute you.

A strange command in an age, in which we scarcely can find men that love
their friends, nor any thing but that one same God, one Redeemer and Savior,
one Holy Spirit of Supplication, cannot agree yet in one Prayer to him, though
they have but one same thing to pray for to him: will not meet in their Worship
because Religion and our selves: And in the name of God what did Christ mean
when He prescribed this Precept? when he disputed? pressed it thus? or what do
Christians mean when they do break and tear this Precept and themselves?
Though I be far from any hopes to reconcile our Parties, (as by Gods help I
although they be; and by addressing my Discourse to them that are so really, I
shall conclude more forcibly them Christ lays this injunction upon, than his
Disciples and Apostles as relating to those that would be their Enemies as
such: yet it is to them he speaks here; I say unto you, love your enemies, etc.

The words contain a Duty prescribed, and the Authority prescribing it: the
Prescription and the Authority in these words, I say unto you, the Duty in the
rest: where it is set down 1. in general: Love your enemies, and that to be
considered under a double prospect: 1. As it is plao't in Jews, or presumed so
to be by them; signified here by the particle But; and then as it stands by
itself, in its own positive importance: love your enemies. And secondly, this
Duty is particularized in several exercises of the Act commanded, love, in
relation to several sorts of the Objects of that Act* enemies: as 1. Those that
curse you, you must bless: 2. Those that hate you, you must do good to: 3.
Those that use you despitefully and persecute you, you must pray for. These I
But I say unto you, Love your enemies.

Of all the Points of Christian Religion those which did most stagger the faith
of some, and check their acceptance of it, or adherence to it, (says
Marcellinus writing to St. Austin) were these 3; The incarnation of our Lord:
The meanness of his Miracles, which they thought the works of Apolloni^s
equaled; and thirdly, the prescriptions in the Text, It seems they looked upon
these Duties as the mysteries of Practice; that spoke as loud a contradiction
to their active principles and inclinations, as the other appeared to do so,
those of Speculation and Discourse, a God made flesh, and flesh and blood made
so lame and passive, sweetened so, being alike impossible to their belief: as if
no flesh could certainly be so, except that of which God was made, and the Word
incarnate only could fulfill, these words here in my Text: they looked upon
this as a muchmore mighty work than any of his Miracles; as if 'twere easier to
snatch one out of the arms of Fate from the embraces Christ had done more when
he prayed for his Crucifiers then when he prayed Lazarus out of his grave: for
their Magicians, they say, vied Miracles with him, but ut quae sit propria
bonit^s nostra; says Tertullian; this being a sort of Piety peculiar to the
Christians. Nor did they only think it unpracticable, but unreasonable; as
carrying opposition to all Government, to the prosperity and peace of every
Polity; for he that does require that I shall have no return of injuries, but
for a wrong, makes me in debt a kindness, not only supersedes judiciary
proceedings, but does secure Rapine by Law, and encourage it by Reward; and
truly if it were impossible for thou shall hate thine enemy as thy self, is a
most perfect Gospel-Rule: that being most consistent with and directive of this
Duty, love your enemies. But yet there is so great a difference indeed betwixt
this Act here and its object (Enemy being constituted such by enmity, that is
aversion and hate) that love, and that seem strangely coupled, things that can
be put together Love first by its self, viewing the import of that as it is
sincere, lest the enemy appearing with it, make it shrink into a very slender
Duty: and having done that, secondly, see whether an others enmity; and
thirdly, whether enmity with that appropriation here, your enemies, can take
off from the Obligation of that Duty, Love.

Now Love shows fairest to our purposes in those dresses which S. Paul present
her in, 1 Cor. 1. 13. and 1. (...) v. 4. and (...); v. 5. it suffers long, if
not the damage, yet the malice of repeated injuries, as knowing it is Mat. 18.
22.
70 times 7 times: and it is not easily provoked, not apt for sudden violent
heats, instantly all on fire, quick as lightning. Such heats are from another
passion; which though sometimes they do but flash and die, yet often they have
their Thunderbolt, and most-what do forerun a storm: whereas the heats of
Charity are calm as sunshine, such as do not consume, but cherish: for (...),
in the same verse, Love is kind and gracious, full of humanity: This Virtue is
a kind of universal friendship, has nothing of reserved, morose or sour an
humor, that Aristotle says must be either a God, who can enjoy nothing beside
himself, is his own blessed and immortal entertainment, or a wild beast whose
nature is unsociable because it is savage, whereas Love is a pious complaisance
to all, it is condescension too; for (...) in the 5. v. does not think any thing
unseemly, how contemptible soever, nor unworthy of him, so he may do his
Neighbor good; he will debase himself to meanest Offices to work a real
kindness. Thus Christ, because he loved his own, knowing the John 13. 3, 4, 5.
Father had given all things into his hand, he took a Towel, and gir^ed
himself, and put water in a Ba^^n and washed his Disciples feet, making the
lowest act of servitude be his Expression, and our Example: that is but slender
Charity that will keep State, Heaven could not unite Majesty and Love: but to
exercise this, God did descend from Glory into the extremity of Meannesse. It Is
Bowels that express compassion, and tender kindness: Now those we know of all
parts of the Body are employed in the most low ignoble covers all; the naked
with a garment, and the deformed, the lepro^s Sinner with a covering too; for 1
Pet. 4. 8.
Charity covers a multitude of sins, hides his own wrong From his own eyes;
this Love too like that in the Poets, cannot see, yea covers all that is not
fit for light, suffers only the graces to be naked near him, and not to name
all, which you may find there, (...), ver. 7. believes all things, however
incompatible to love, and to be wise have been accounted, yet this Love is 8.
James his Wisdom that came down from Heaven, Cap. 3. 17. (...), apt to
in^erpret any thing to the most favorable sense; and (...), easy to be
persuaded, still believes the best, and where it cannot, yet (...), hopes the
best: Affection while it he does wait for it, is not discouraged with relapses
and the repetitions of injuries, but still expects, and suffers all the
contradictions of spite and wrong.

Now if all these acts and the many other there are essential to Love and all
be under Obligation; and S. Paul says there, they are so much Duty, that
without these performances all Faith and all Graces profit nothing: the
preaching Rhetoric of men and Angels would be nothing tinkling, and working
Miracles, but showing tricks. It follows then these acts must necessarily have
a certain object, there must be some body that we are bound to love thus: and
if that Object be our Neighbor (as that is most sure) it is clear my Neighbors
injury, or hate or enmity to me, cannot take off nor yet diminish in the least
that obligation I have to all those acts, but I must love him though he be mine
enemy in every of those instances. For it is plain his having wronged me does
not make him provocations that love is said to cool into such a temper as is
not easily provokt; For men are not provokt with kindnesses. I cannot suffer
any thing but wrong, nor suffer long except there be continuation and frequency
of wrongs. Nor is it possible I should forgive unless it be offenses done
against me. And so for diverse of the rest: Now it were strange

But if he be without all provocation very unjustly so, the sinner? Vice
certainly is the most hateful the ungodly and his ungodliness are both alike
hateful unto God, Wisd. 14. 9. and David does comply with God in this, Psalm
139. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate Thee? yea, Verse 21. 22.
I hate them with perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies. And when I reflect
on mine under this No^on, or if mine be such as set themselves against Religion
and the peace and quietness of the Church, am I bound to love them? if so,
then I may be allowed to do it with a little regret your enemies, which means
those that hate you, my Disciples, those that in the last words of my Text,
will persecute you even for your being mine; and yet those they are bid to
love, we may conclude in the next place we may not hate our enemies as Sinners:
nor yet does enmity with God, his Church, or his Religion qualify a person for
our aversation or mischiefs. I except here Apostasy and utter obduration in it;
a state that incapacitates for mercy, and by consequence for love and
kindness. There is a sin which S. John would not 1 John v. 16.
there was such a sinner, Julian, but as to less degrees; they that are
supposed to persecute Disciples, and in doing so persecute Christ himself, may
well be granted sinners, enemies to God and Christianity; but yet says he, I
say unto you, love these your enemies. Tertullian understood this so, and
writing to the Governor of Carthage who threatened all the Christians of that
Province with Excision, that he might persuade him from his purpose, thus began
his Proposals: We do not write as fearing for our selves, or dreading any thing
that we are like to suffer, for we did enter our Religion on the condition of
suffering, we covenanted to endure, and staked our lives when we began our
profession; but it is for you we fear, for you our enemies, whom our Religion
does command us to love and to do good to. And though we must hate Vice, and do
our best to root out Infidelity and Atheism, destroy Profaneness, irreligion
and Heresy and Schism: these are fit objects for the zeals of Hate, and for
the fevers of our Passion, and if our enemies be such lawful for us to ruin,
or not to do good to the Sinners.

In fine, the only persons that the Jews pretended to have ground to hate were
Enemies, and enemies indeed to their Religion, the Idolatrous Gentile-world,
therefore that being now forbid to us, there is no sort of men, nor any man
whom it is lawful for a Christian not to love; and all the reasons urged here
by our Savior do prove that all mankind whether good or bad is the object of a
Christians love: because God does good to all, his methods of Mercies are
universal; he makes his Clouds drop fatness even the Ox knows his Owner, and
the Ass his Master, not his Religion, Psalm 1. 3.
nor his Virtues; and then as there is something in man as man which God is
kind to, something in man as man for which the Creatures serve, so there is
something in man as he is man which we must love, and consequently we must love
every man. And till thou have found one so are in Goshen, sets him in the storm
and dark of Egypt, till then, Curse thee, thou must bless, and must do good to
him which hates thee, which are the particular expresses of the love in the
Text, the first of which is,

Bless them that Curse you.
BLess being here opposed to Curse, must signify wish well to Pet. 3. 9. not
rendering railing for railing, (...), but contrariwise Blessing. And both are
the duty of this place, which does intend that all sorts of loving words should
be the Christians returns to the offenses of the tongue, whether by Curse or
contumely. And truly when I do consider how the other way, the rendering like
for like, and giving him that does with or speak evil as good language as he
brings, is so far from all shadow of compensation, that there is really a loss
of honor in R^manist, White.
who says that those in Hell do will and love their being Envy, and Hate, and
Shame; and they do vent themselves in the same manner too, in Blasphemy and
Curses; and differ nothing, but that their's are endless, and then let such men
please themselves in the returns of calumny and imprecations, that he who thus
delights in Carsing, Psalm. 109. 17. 18.
it shall enter into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones; like
pleasure and refreshment, like water to allay his passionate heats, and oil to
make him cheerful after his vexation: for so indeed the venting of his Curses
seems to do; but alas if to power them out do make them enter into him, into
his bowels and his bones, his most substantial parts, and his most necessary
inwards; if it leave nothing there but Curse, poys^n instead of marrow, in the
bones, and in the bowels fiery indignation for water, if this be the effect,
then if you do resolve not to obey the Text and will not love your Enemy, yet
for your own sakes, out of self-love do not execute your Enemies ill wishes on
your selves, and in mere spite to him make all his maledictions come to pass
upon you, but that blessing may not be far from you, Bless them that Curse you,
do good to them that hate you, the next part.

Do good. If to do good, mean only those acts of charity that are under
general pr^cept, rel^eve necessities, help in needs, and the like; then it is
plain another hate to me takes not away my obligation, unless it take away his
wants, and the wrongs he has done me do not render me not bound to succor
him, unless it put him in a state that needs no succor, For if th^ne Enemy
hunger, thou must feed him, if he thirst, give him drink, Romans 12. 20 Yea,
though his hatred be to thy Religion: Do good to all, the Scripture says, and
the Father porrig at manum Jupiter and accipiet: If the heathen Idols that Gal.
6. 10. Tertul.
have mouths indeed, but as they cannot speak, so neither can they eat, if
they, I say, could hunger, and did ask, I would feed them, and I would give
their God, that is the Devil if he wanted. But if (...) signify do kindness
and favors, be good, as that means bountiful and full of courtesies and grace,
be more then merciful by rule and general command, which the Gospel calls
righteous, (and truly (...) in 1 Timothy 3. 1. does mean a work of excellency, in
a state of virtue without precept) and if it be so here too, enmity seems to
have advantage above friendship in the Gospel, and brings kindness under that
if a kindness lie before me, and I have no reason to deny it we may be children
of our Father who does so, upon the same account we must be good and kind too
to them, for he is, and he will scarce prove a true lawful issue of this
Father, who is in this unlike to him that tries and owns his progeny by these
resemblances. So that what ever strength of argument there is in one, the other
has it. And truly we have reason to believe that there is more then motive in
it, when first Christ has set with what measure you meet, it shall be measured
to you again, Matt. 7. 2. As if the Lord had brought himself into that law of
Justice with us men, whatsoever ye would that others should do to you, do you
also to them: and it be also, whatsoever ye would that God should do unto you,
do ye also to others; and Secondly, when he practices just at the rates we do
for with the froward God learns frowardness, and (...) and is kind to the kind,
so Ps. 18. 25. recals a grace from him that would not do one, Matt. 18. from 23
nay thirdly, when he gives us leave to beg his kindnesses, but just in the
proportion we do ours, forgive as we forgive, we ask no I knew that
notwithstanding we offend God constantly, yet besides all the mercies of his
Covenant, (and that is a Covenant of Grace) his kindness too is over all his
works; he does not only furnish our necessities, so ill requests for thy on
self, how will thou pray for them that despitefully use thee and persecure
thee? which is the last particular Pray for them that dispitefully use you and
persecute you.

As in this character of enemies, Christ has not left out any thing that does
express h^stility, hating in heart, cursing in word, and persecution in deed,
and which to some is more provoking than a persecution, despiteful usage: (for
persecution may make them serious, and look at their demerits, the other only
stirs their spl^en and gall) all which, all that an enemy canspeak, or wish, or
do, must be no ^ar to our affection: so to express the unfeignedness of that,
he has not left out any exercise of love, we must speak well of them, but that
a crafty Acts, are a demonstration, to which the Fathers say the Church did owe
not only her deliverance from all the violent intentions of Soul, but all that
Christianity which St. Paul planted the dying voice of that petition, Act. 7.
60.
Lord, lay not this sin to their charge, was answered by that Act. 9. 4.
voice from Heaven, which converted Saul in his career of fury: one prayer for
a persecuter, puts an end to persecution, and si stephanus non orass et
Ecclesia non habuisset Paulum. Jobs miserable comforters, Job must pray for
them 42. Chr. 8., seven Bullocks and seven Rams cannot expiate, but one
petition from the sufferer will do it; for him I will accept, says God, and he
accepted him, not for them only, but for himself for the Lord turned the
Captivity of Job, when he prayed for them. verse 10. These intercessions speed
sooner then direct supplications, and such a petition is heard to ourselves,
when it is made for others. And reason good, for such requests lay the condition
of our pardon before God, making evidence for we forgive, and so call for
pardon. And to encourage this procedure, our Savior before he did commend his
own spirit into the hand of his Father, he commended his Executioners to the
mercies of his Father: Our Martyr did not so indeed, but first prayed for
himself Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Acts 7. 59. but though Heaven opening he
saw that Jesus standing at the right hand of God, as ready to receive it, yet
his spirit would not leave his body so, Luke 23. 34. 46.
it made him live yet to endure more stoneing from his persecutors, for whom he
had not prayed yet, but when he once fell Lord lay not this sin to their
charge, when he had said so he fell asleep v. 60. his spirit taken hence as it
were ^sculo pacis, though by the most violent death, and he lies down in a
perpetual rest and peace, that thus lies down in love. These are requests to
breath out a soul into Heaven in, and Heaven it self did open to receive that
soul that came so wafted.

And now we are at the top of Christ's Mount, the highest and the steepest
point of Christianity, which vies with that to which our Martyrs Spirit did
ascend: for it makes perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect; it sets our
heads within in those higher Mat. 5. 48.
and untroubled Regions, wherein there are no Meteor-fires, the flame of
Passion cannot wing it thither, for he that is above the power of injury,
discontent cannot look up to him, it is with him as in the upper Orbs, where
there is only harmony and shine, all is Peace and Love, the state: of Heaven it
self, Now as it does happen to them that look down from great heights, every
Object below is dwarf'd: and if the distance of the Prospect be as great as
that from Heaven to Earth, they tell us this whole Globe would be but like a
spot, all being swallowed in it Blood of Christians, which their constant
quarrels shed: some take no Slaves with them, meant they should carry Swords;
as if the love he had commanded, we should have for them that are in error (if
our enemies be so indeed) were but to murder them forsooth out of their
errors. Next for the kindnesses that Christians do to those that hate them, or
have disobliged them, they are God knows so little, that no perspective can
show them from this height we are upon: and loving enemies, of returning
affro^ts with kindnesses, these are banished thence; other virtues are practiced
down, but these are scorned and quarreled down. It Is become a base thing and
not to be endured to be a Christian in these instances: See making his Laws,
^ook no care of the reputation of a Gentleman, it is fit his Laws should give
way to the constitutions of some Hectors, and he must ^ear the violation of
them: and all this must be reasonable too* Good God! what prodigy of age is
this when Christ the Lo^d cannot be competent to judge either of right, of
honor, ^ of reason? When to be like God, and to be perfect as our Father: ^
Heaven is perfect, is to be most sordid and unworthy of a Gentl^^an? and in the
name of God these men that are too great for v^^ue, that brave out Religion,
and will needs give rules to God, that rank do they intend to stand in at Gods
Judgment seat on ^e last day? Lord God! grant us to stand among the meek, on
that ^^nd with the Sheep, and those that are too poor in spirit to defy their
^nemies and thy commands: for however the meek makes himse^^ a prey, and is so
far from enjoying the promise of inheriting the ^^th, that the virtue is scarce
allowed to sojourn in the earth, as ^it had breathed it is last in this our
Martyrs prayer, took it is flight with his spirit, and those stones that slew
him were the Mon^^ent of loving enemies, of praying for those that persecure an
murder; and such Charity were not to be found among us any more, yet sure I am
these charitable persons shall enjoy the friendship and the glories of That
Lover, that did Bless, Do good^^, Pray, and Dye for Enemies; and these meek men
shall reign with the La^b, who was slain, and is worthy to receive power, and
riches, and wi^dom, Rev. 5. 12.
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing, all which be ascribed to
him, and to the Father of all mercies, the God of Consolation, and to the
Spirit of Love; now and for evermore.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. Line 15. ^^. Other side; the Gibbet. p. 4. l. 21. sullages. p. 10. l.
36. ten^ter. p. 15. l. 38. one ruin. p. 16. l. 3^. mortified; by the l. 42.
ruins. p. ^4. l. ^ so the. p. 28. l. 3. arts. p. 35. l. 25. beatifick. p. 39.
l. 12. blessednesses. l. 27. ^isfactions p. 46. l. ult. atone. p. 52. l. 32
those. p. 80. l. 1. may be, at l^^t all. p. 84. l. 41. dotages. p. 86. l. ^^.
Then that Son p. 87. l. 7. Arts. l. 1. betray. l. 29. leave out a life. p. ^^
^. 21. he not desire. p. 97. l. 10. share it them. 101. l 10. ^^^its (...) p.
107. l. 4. for the leg. Some. p. 121. l. ^ leg. deference. p. 12^. l. ^^ leg.
any other things. p. 137. l. 23. leg. we de^ also. p. 140. l. ^^. for but,
that. ^ 148. l. 40. Bawds. p. 153. l. 28. leg. when. am de^^^^^ing. p. 156. l.
37. leg. m^^^ p. 166. l. 18. leg. deference. p. 170. l. ^. leg. these. p. 174.
l. 8. leg. Councils. p. 175. l. 22. leg. Councils. p. 178 l. 16. leg. their. l.
18. leg. Councils with some others, especially false pointings, by R^^son of
the Authors absence.

Page 263. l. 31. ^ter Ephesians. 4. 14. leg. that is for want of, and leave our
First.

Errata.
PAge 1. Line. 15. Leg. other side; the Gibbet. p. 4. l. 21. Sullages. p. 10.
l. 36. tempter p. 15. l. 38. one ruin. p. 16. l. 31. mortified; by the -- l.
42. ruins. p. 24. l. 9. for to leg. so. p. 28. l. 3. arts. p. 35. l. 25.
beatifick p. 39. l. 12. blessednesses. l. 27. satisfactions. p. 46. l. ult. at
one. p. 52. l. 32. those. p. 80. l. 1. may be, at least all. p. 84. l. 41.
dotages. p. 86. l. 18. then that son. p. 87. l. 7. Arts. l. 11. betray. l. 29.
leave out a life. p. 95. l. 21 be leg. be p. 97. l. 10. leg. share in them, her
entertains. p. 101. l. 10. fruits there. p. 107. l. 4. for the leg. seem. p.
121. l. 3. deference. p. 129. l. 33. any other things. p. 137. l. 23. we deal
also. p. 140. l. 11. that. p. 148. l. 40. Bawds, p. 153. l. 28. when I am
deprecating. p. 156. l. 37. must. p. 166. l. 18. deference. p. 170. l. 2.
these. p. 174. l. 8. Councils. p. 175. l. 22. Councils. p. 178. l. 1. leg.
these Canons into municipal or Statute Laws, l. 16. these. l. 18. Councils. p.
187. l. 45. blessednesses. p. 188. l. 20. or. p. 192. l. 43. did. p. 195. l.
ult. l. as. p. 209. l. 42. this. p. 212. l. 40. it is offered. p. 223. l. 14.
loud. p. 248. l. 25. run. p. 263. l. ^0. after Ephesians. 4. 14. leg. that is for
want of rational grounds leave out first. p. 270. l. 16. leg. other that will
p. 272. l. 11. effect. p. 298. instance. p. 299. l. 25. his Commandments. p.
301. l. 29. insinnations. p. 303. l. 17. Options. p. 317. l. 35. l. do to those
of. l. 36. tame. l. 39. leg. Except that which that God was. p. 321. l. 42. l.
meekely. p. 323. l. 3. l. and deed. l. 27. leg. that which does. p. 325. l. 19.
blot out and and so leg. and he recals. l. 29. know. p. 326. l. 26. after
necessary put. l. 38. after advantage put. l. 42. after planted put. p. 327. l.
32. blot out in.


