Scala Sancta: OR THE EXALTATION OF THE Soul Being a Train of Pious Thoughts,
Completing the whole duty of Man: or, DEVOTIONS COMPILED by R.A. Gent. in his
solitudes*

London, Printed by T. Snawden, for Gabr, Kunholt, and are to be sold at his
shop at the post office over against the Muse, at the sign of the King's-head,
1678.

Scala Sancta: OR THE EXALTATION OF THE SOUL.

Being a Train of Pious Thoughts, Completing The whole Duty of Man: OR,
DEVOTIONS compiled

By R. A. Gent. in his Solitudes.

Non bove mactato coelestia numina gaudent
Sed quae praestanda est, and sine test fide.
LONDON, Printed by T. Snowden, for Gabr. Kunholt, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Post Office over against the Muse, at the Sign of the King's-Head,
1678.

Licensed, William Jane. Nov. 19. 1677.

TO THE READER.
WEre Man self-sufficient and independent, thoughts of this nature would be
impertinent and unseasonable; but seeing there are hopes and fears, blessings
and curses scattered in this vail of misery, and laid up in heaps against the
time of the revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God; how stupid and forlorn
must that soul be, which lives without God in the would; though a spacious
curtain be drawn over the globe of this Earth; though we cannot perceive the
regular motions of the several wheels of Providence, yet in all Estates
flourishing or decaying, we ought to confide in, and depend upon his goodness,
and power, and wisdom, who is the fountain of all Beings, and the Great
Governor of the World; under whose conduct the good man is safe; and to the
Throne of whose Grace there may be a fair access, if our prayers are managed
aright, in which way I leave thee; and if these following papers can assist
thee, bless God for the occasion, which is the End of the Author's Hope in this
undertaking.

Farewell.

To the Honorable Mary Mountague, Wife to the Right Honorable Lord chief
Baron.
Madam,
SEeing it is the heart which God alone accepts, as a Sacrifice of retribution,
I humbly crave you would be pleased to take a view of the counterpart of my
Soul, wherein is set down the joyful correspondency it has had with Heaven; and
the rather because joy and immortality, our entrance into the Blessed Mansions
above, is the common interest and design of all who appeal to Heaven in the
name of Christ: I know your Closet is plentifully stored with holy
Ejaculations, that Sacred perfume which sweetens the very breath of the Soul,
and is more acceptable to God, than costly odours, the scent of Myrrh and
Frankincense, yet these Papers possibly may find entertainment; because they
are penned by one whose Soul has been many years traveling that way, and
therefore chiefly endeavors to speak the dialect and Language of that Kingdom:
no friendship is so strong as that which is contracted by Travelers in this
journey; and though I have the honor to have the same blood of R. A's. running
in my veins, yet I esteem my self more happy in the beginnings of our Christian
alliance and eternal duration of it, when we shall pass from this state of
grace to that of glory. How glorious must your entrance be into the Holy Land;
for Persons placed in so high a station by holy example command their
attendants: and when you enter into the land of promise, your numerous train
must follow; in which retinue to be admitted is the humble and hearty Prayer of

Madam, Your Ladyships most humble Servant and Relation. R. A.

THE PREFACE.
I Chose the Psalms of David for the Platform of my Devotions, because nothing
can be supposed more acceptable to God in duties of this nature, than to follow
his steps, who was a man after God's own heart. The Original is so well penned,
so full and lofty in its expressions, that Cowley, when he gave his censure of
the Translators, says, that Shimei hardly reviled David more, than some of them
have done. However, I reckon not my self concerned in that charge, seeing I
follow the best Translation our Language bears. Were this Book of Psalms duly
weighed, and considered, men might find materials for their addresses to Heaven
fitted for all states and conditions; as if it were a mirror of the Passages
of Humane Life, and comprehended all the desires and offices of a good man.
Though David's Composures were elegant and harmonious in their native dress,
yet 'twas not the Instrument, but the strings of his heart made the sweetest
melody. Nothing is more charming than a soul so well tuned, so well skilled in
all the parts of Divine music: Thus we join consort with the harmony of the
spears; we may be assured that the Echo is rebounded with the exultation and
Hallelujahs of Heaven it self.

CHOICE MEDITATIONS Out of the PSALMIST.
SErve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence, 2.11. But know,
that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself: the Lord will hear
me when I call upon him, 4.3. Offer the sacrifices of Righteousness, and put
your trust in the Lord, v. 5. For thou art not a God that has pleasure in
wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee, 5.4. For thou, Lord, wilt bless
the Righteous: with favor will thou compass him as with a shield, 12. God
judges the Righteous, and God is angry with the Wicked every day. If he turn
not, he will whet his Sword, he has bent his Bow, and made it ready; 7.11, 12.
The Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God. For
the Needy shall not always be forgotten: the expectation of the poor shall not
perish for ever, 9.17, 18. The Lord tries the Righteous; but the Wicked, and
him that loves violence, his Soul hates. For the Righteous Lord loves
Righteousness, his countenance does behold the upright, 11.56.7. For the
oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise says
the Lord, I will set him in safety, from him that pusseth at him. The words of
the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in a furnace of Earth purified seven
times in the fire, 12.5, 6. The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the children
of Men, to see if there were any that would understand and seek after God,
14.2. Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy
Hill? He that walks uprightly and works Righteousness, and speaks the
Truth in his Heart, 15.1, 2. In whose eyes a vise person is contemned, but he
honors them that fear the Lord: he that swears to his neighbor, and
disappointeth him not. Thou will show me the path of Life; in thy presence is
the fullness of joy, at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore, 16.11. I
will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be safe from
mine enemies, 18.3. I was upright before him, and I kept my self from mine
iniquity: therefore the Lord has recompensed me according to my Righteousness,
and according to the cleanness of mine hand in his eyesight. With the merciful
thou shall show thy self merciful, with an upright man, thou shall show thy
self upright; verse. 23, 24, 25. He delivers me from mine enemies: yea, thou
liftest me up above those that rise up against me: thou have delivered me from
the violent Man. Great deliverance gives he to his King, and shows mercy to
his anointed, to David, and to his Seed for evermore, verse. 48, 51.

The Heavens declare the glory of God; and the Firmament shows his
handiwork, 19.1. The Lord hear thee in the day of Trouble; the Name of the God
of Jacob defend thee, 20.1. Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfill
all thy Counsel, verse. 4. Our Fathers trusted in thee, and thou did deliver
them; 22.4. For he has not despised, nor abhorred the affliction of the
afflicted, neither has he hid his face from him, but when he cried unto him,
he heard him, verse. 24. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall want nothing, 23.1. He
that has clean hands, and a pure heart, who has not lift up his Soul to
vanity, nor sworn deceitfully, 24.4, 5, He shall receive the blessing from the
Lord, and righteousness from the Lord of his Salvation. Lord, I have loved the
habitation of thy house, and the place where thy honor dwells, 26.8. Wait
upon the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I
say, on the Lord, 27.14. I hate them that regard lying vanities: but I trust in
the Lord. I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have considered my
trouble, thou have known my Soul in adversities, 31.6, 7. For my life is spent
with grief, my strength fails me because of my Iniquity, and my bones are
consumed, verse. 10. Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven, and whose
Sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity,
and in whose spirit is no Guile. I acknowledge my Sin unto thee, and mine
Iniquities have I not hid: I said, I will confess my Transgression unto the
Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my Sin. Be glad in the Lord, o ye
Righteous, and rejoice, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart,
32.1, 2, 5, 11. He loves Righteousness, and Judgment, the Earth is full of the
goodness of the Lord. Let all the Earth fear the Lord, let all the Inhabitants
of the World stand in awe of him. The Lord looks from Heaven: he beholds
all the Sons of Men. Depart from evil and do good, seek Peace, and pursue it.
From the place of his habitation he looks upon all the Inhabitants of the
Earth. He fashioneth all their hearts alike: he considers their works. There
is nothing saved by the multitude of an Host, neither a mighty man delivered by
great strength. Behold, the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and
upon them that hope in his mercy: To deliver their Soul from Death, and to keep
them alive in Famine, 33.5, 8, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19.

I will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall continually be in my
mouth. O magnify the Lord with me, and let us extol his Name together. I
sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears. The poor
cries, and the Lord hears him, and saves him out of all his troubles. The
Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them. O taste and see how good the Lord is to them that fear him, and trusts
in him. O fear the Lord, ye his Saints, for there is no want to them that fear
him. The ^^ons do lack, and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall
want no manner of thing that is good. Keep thy Tongue from evil, and thy Lips
from speaking guile. Depart from evil and do good; seek peace and pursue it.
The Eyes of the Lord are over the Righteous, and his Ears open unto their cry.
The Face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance
of them from the Earth. The Righteous cry, and the Lord hears and delivers
them out of all their troubles. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken
heart, and saves such as be of a contrite Spirit. Many are the troubles of the
Righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all. Evil shall slay the Wicked,
and they that hate the Righteous shall be desolate. The Lord redeemeth the
Souls of his Servants, and none of them that trust in him shall be desolate,
34.1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22. For he
flattereth himself in his own Eye, until his abominable Sins be found to be
abominable. For with thee is the fountain of Life: and in thy Light, shall we
see Light. O continue thy loving kindness unto them that know thee, and thy
righteousness to them that are upright in hea^^^ 36.2, 9, 10. Fret not thy self
because of the evil doers, neither be envious against the workers of iniquity.
For they shall soon be cut down like the Grass, and wither as the green herb.
Trust in the Lord, and be doing good, so shall thou dwell in the Land, and
verily thou shall be fed. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee
the desires of thy heart. Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and
he shall bring it to pass. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently upon him: fret
not thy self because of him who prospers in his way, because of the man that
brings wicked devices to pass. Cease from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not
thy self in any wise to do evil: For evil doers shall be cut off: but those
that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the Land. A little that the
Righteous man has, is better than the riches of the ungodly. The Wicked
borrows and pays not again, but the Righteous shows mercy, and gives.
For such as be blessed of God, shall inherit the Land: and they that be cursed
of him, shall be cut off. The steps of a good man is blessed of the Lord, and
he delights in his way. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down:
for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand, I have been young, and now am old;
yet never saw I the Righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging their Bread. He
is ever merciful, and lends, and his Seed is blessed. Wait on the Lord, and
keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the Land; when the Wicked are
cut off, thou shall see it. I have seen the Wicked in great power, and
spreading himself like a green bay tree; Yet he passes away, and lo, he was
gone: yea, I sought him, but he could not be found. Mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace. The Salvation of the
Righteous is of the Lord, he is their strength in the time of trouble. And the
Lord shall help them, and deliver them from the Wicked, and save them, because
they put their trust in him. 37.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 15, 16, 21, 22, 23, 24,
25, 26, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39, 40. For in thee O Lord do I hope thou will hear, O
Lord my God, 38.15. I said, I will take heed to my ways that I offend not with
my Tongue: I will keep my mouth with a Bridle, while the Wicked is before me.
Behold, thou have made my days as an hand breath, and my days are as nothing
before thee: verily, every man at his best state is altogether vanity, Selah.
When thou with rebuke does chasten man for Sin, thou make his beauty to
consume away like a moth fretting a Garment, surely every man is vanity, Selah.
39.1, 5, 11. Blessed is that man that makes the Lord his Trust: and respects
not the proud, nor such as go about with lies, 40.4. The Lord will preserve him
and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the Earth, and thou will not
deliver him to the will of his Enemies, 41.2. As the Heart pants after the
Waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O my God. Why art thou cast down O
my Soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? hope thou in God, for I will
yet praise him, for the light of his countenance, 42.5. God is my refuge and my
strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore will I not fear, though the
Earth be moved, and the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, 46.1,
2. For the Lord most high is terrible, he is a great King over all the Earth,
47.2. Hear this all ye People, give ear all ye Inhabitants of the Earth, 49.1.
The mighty God, even the Lord has spoken, and called the Earth from the rising
of the Sun unto the going down of the same. For every Beast of the Forest is
mine, and the Cattle upon a thousand Hills. I know all the Fowls upon the
Mountains, and the wild Beasts of the Fields are mine. If I were hungry, I
would not tell thee, for the World is mine, and the fullness thereof. Call upon
me in time of trouble, I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me. Thou
give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit, 50.10, 11, 12, 15, 19.
Thy Tongue devises mischief, like a sharp Rasor; thou love evil, more than
good; and Lying rather than to speak Righteousness, Selah. But I am like a
green Olive Tree in the House of my God. I trust in the mercy of God, for ever
and ever, 52.2, 3, 8. It was thou mine own familiar Friend, my guide, and my
acquaintance, that has done me this dishonor. Cast thy burden upon the Lord
and he shall sustain thee: he shall never suffer the Righteous to be moved. But
thou, O Lord, shall bring them down into the pit of Destruction: bloody and
deceitful men shall not live out half their days, but I will trust in thee O
Lord, 55.13, 22, 23. In God I will praise his Word, in God I have put my trust,
I will not fear what flesh can do unto me. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and
he shall sustain thee: he shall never suffer the Righteous to be moved. But, O
Lord, thou shall bring them to the pit of Destruction: bloody and deceitful
men, shall not live out half their days, but I will trust in thee. In God will
I praise his Word, in God I have put my Trust, I will not fear what Flesh can
do unto me. When I cry unto thee, then shall mine Enemies turn their Back: this
I know, for God is for me, in God have I put my trust, I will not be afraid
what man can do unto me, 56.4, 9, 11. Truly my Soul waits upon God, for of
him comes my Salvation. He only is my Rock and my Salvation: he is my defense,
so that I shall not greatly be moved. Trust not in oppression, and in Robbery:
if Riches increase, set not your heart upon them. God has spoken once, twice
have I heard this, that power belongs unto God. Also unto thee O Lord,
belongs mercy: for thou rendrest to every man according to his Works, 62.1,
2, 10, 11, 12. He Rules by his Power for ever, his eyes behold the Nations:
let not the rebellious exalt themselves, Selah. O bless our God, ye People, and
make the voice of his praise to be heard. For thou, O God, have proved, thou
have tried us, even as Silver is tried. Sing forth the honor of his Name, make
his praise glorious, 66.2, 7, 8, 10. He is a Father of the Fatherless, and
Judge of the Widows. God is in his holy Habitation. He that is our God, is the
God of our Salvation: and unto God, belongs the issues from Death, 68.5, 20.
The humble shall see this and be glad, and your Soul shall live that seek God.
For the Lord hears the poor, and despises not his Prisoners, 69.32, 33. He
shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the Souls of the needy. He shall
redeem their Souls from deceit and violence, and precious shall their Blood be
in his sight, 72.13, 14. The Prosperity of the Wicked; they are not in trouble
as other men, neither are they plagued like other Men, therefore pride
compasses them about as a Chain, violence covers them as a Garment. Their
Eyes stand out with fatness, they have more than heart can wish. My Flesh and
my Heart fails, but God is the strength of my Heart, and my portion for ever.
Surely thou did set them in slippery places, thou castest them down into
Destruction. How are they brought into Desolation, as in a moment they are
utterly consumed with terrors. But it is good for me to draw near unto God, I
have put my trust in the Lord God, that I may declare all thy works, 37.6, 18,
19, 26, 28. All the horns of the wicked will I cut off, but the horns of the
Righteous shall be exalted, 5.10. Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his
promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger
shut up his tender mercy? Selah. 77.8, 9. Therefore the Lord heard this, and
was wroth: so fire was kindled against Jacob, and his anger also came up
against Israel. Because they believed not in God: and trusted not in his
Salvation. Give ear O my people, to my Laws, incline your Ears to the words of
my Mouth. That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the work of
God, but to keep his Commandments, 78.1, 7, 21, 22. The Wrath of God came upon
them, and slew the fattest of them, and smote down the chosen men of Israel.
For all this they sinned still, and believed not for all his wondrous Works.
But he being full of compassion, forgave all their Iniquities, and destroyed
them not; yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all
his Wrath. For he remembered that they were but flesh, a wind that passed and
comes not again, 78.31, 32, 38, 39. God stands in the Congregation of the
Mighty: he judges among the Gods. Defend the Poor and Fatherless: do Justice
to the Afflicted and Needy. Deliver the Poor and Needy out of the hand of the
Wicked, 82.1, 3, 4. Thou have forgiven the Iniquity of thy People, thou have
covered all their Sins. Thou have taken away all thy Wrath: thou have turned
thy self from thy fierce anger. Turn us O God of our Salvation, and cause thine
anger to cease from us, 85.2, 3, 4. Yea, the Lord shall give that which is
good, and our Land shall give her increase, verse. 12. For thou O Lord art good,
and ready to forgive, and plentious in Mercy unto all them that call upon thee.
In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou will answer me. For
great is thy mercy toward me, for thou have delivered my Soul from the lowest
Hell. For thou O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious: long
suffering, and plentious in mercy and truth, 86.5, 7, 13, 15. Thy Wrath lies
hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy Waves and Storms. But
unto thee have I cried O Lord, in the morning shall my Prayer prevent thee,
88.7, 13. Thou rulest the raging of the Sea, when the Waves thereof arise, thou
stillest them. The Heavens are thine, the Earth also is thine: as for the World
and the fullness thereof, thou have founded them. For the Lord is our defense,
and the holy One of Israel is our King. His Seed also will he make to endure
for ever: and his Throne as the days of Heaven. If his Children forsake my Law,
and walk in my Judgments: If they will break my Statutes, and keep not my
Commandments: Then will I visit their Transgressions with the Rod, and their
Iniquities with stripes. Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly
take from him: nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My Covenant will I not
break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn by my
holiness, that I will not fail David. His Seed shall endure for ever, and his
Throne as the Sun before me. How long Lord, will thou hide thy self, for ever?
shall thy Wrath burn like fire, 89.9, 11, 18, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36,
46. O satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice, and be glad all
our days. Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us:
and the year wherein we have seen evil. 90, 14, 15. Only with thine Eyes thou
shall behold, and see the reward of the Wicked. There shall no evil befall thee,
neither any Plague come near thy dwelling. He shall give his Angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands lest
thou dash thy Foot against a Stone. He shall call upon me, and I will answer
him: I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and honor him. With
long Life will I satisfy him, and show him my Salvation, 91.8, 10, 11, 12, 15,
16. Lord, how long, how long shall the Wicked triumph? The Lord knows the
thoughts of Man, they are but vain. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O
Lord, and teach him out of thy Law. For the Lord will not cast off his
People: neither will he cast off his Inheritance. When I said, my Foot slipped,
thy mercy O Lord held me up. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy
comforts delight my Soul. My Lord is my defense: and my God is the Rock of my
refuge, 94.3, 11, 12, 14, 18, 19, 22. Come let us worship and bow down, let us
kneel before the Lord our Maker, 95.6. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye Righteous, and
give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness, 97.12. Let them praise thy
great and terrible Name, for it is holy, 99.3. I will behave my self wisely,
with a perfect heart, O when will thou come unto me? I will walk within my
House with a perfect heart. A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not
know a wicked person. Whosoever privily slandreth his Neighbor, him will I
destroy: him that has a high look, and a proud heart, I will not suffer; my
Eyes shall be upon the faithful in the Land, they shall dwell with me. He that
walks in a perfect way, he shall be my Servant. He that works deceit, shall
not dwell in my House: He that tells Lies, shall not tarry in my sight I will
early destroy all the wicked of the Land, that may cut off all the wicked doers
from the City of the Lord, 101.2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. For he has looked down from
the height of his Sanctuary, from Heaven did the Lord behold the Earth: To hear
the groaning of the Prisoners, to loose those that are appointed to death,
102.19, 20. Bless the Lord O my Soul, and all that is with me bless his holy
Name. Bless the Lord O my Soul and forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth
all their iniquity: who heals all thy Diseases. For as the Heaven is above
all the Earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. The Lord is
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy. He will not always
chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever. He has not dealt with us after
our Sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquity. As far as the East is from
the West, so far has he set our Sins from us. Like as the Father pitieth his
Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. For he knows our frame, he
remembers we are dust, 103.1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. As to the Seas
thou have set bounds that they pass not over: that they turn not again to cover
the Earth. O Lord, how manifold are thy Works! in wisdom have thou made them
all: the Earth is full of thy riches. So is this great and wide Sea, wherein
are things creeping innumerable, both small and great Beasts, 104.9, 24, 25.
Glory ye in his holy Name: Let the Heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.
Seek the Lord and his strength: seek his face evermore. Remember his mavelous
works that he has done, his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth. He is the
Lord our God, his judgments are in all the world. And confirmed the same unto
Jacob for a Law, and unto Israel for an everlasting Covenant. Saying, unto thee
will I give the Land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance. He suffered no man
to do them wrong: yea, he reproved Kings for their sakes: Saying, touch not my
Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Moreover, he called for a Famine upon the
Land: he brake the whole Staff of Bread. He sent a man before them, even
Joseph, who was sold for a Servant. Whose feet they hurt with fetters, he was
laid in Iron. Until that time the Word came, the Word of the Lord tried him.
The King came and loosed him: even the Ruler of the People, and let him go
free. Israel also came out of Egypt, and Jacob sojourned in the Land of Ham.
He turned their Water into Blood, and slew their Fish. Their Land brought forth
Frogs in abundance, in the Chamber of their King. He spoke, and there came
diverse sorts of Flies, and Lice in all their Coasts. He opened their Rocks, and
the Water gushed out; they ran in the dry places like a River, 105.3, 4, 5, 7,
10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 29, 30, 31, 41. Our Fathers understood
not thy wonders in Egypt, neither remembered the great multitude of thy
Mercies, but provoked him at the Sea, even at the Red Sea. He rebuked the
Red Sea also, and it was dried up: so led them through the depths as through
the Wilderness. And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them: and
redeemed them from the hand of the Enemy. The waves covered their Enemies:
there was none of them left. And a Fire was kindled in their company, the flame
burnt up the Wicked. Therefore he said he would destroy them, had not Moses
stood before them in the breach, to turn away his Wrath lest he should destroy
them. Yea, they despised that pleasant Land, they believed not his Word. But
murmured in their Tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord. Therefore
he lifted up his hand against them, to overthrow them in the Wilderness. Thus
they provoked him to anger, with their inventions, and the Plague bark in upon
them. Then stood up Phineas, and so the Plague ceased. They angered him also at
the Waters of strife, so that it went ill with Moses for their sake. They
served their Idols which were a snare unto them. And shed innocent Blood, even
the blood of their Sons and of their Daughters, whom they Sacrificed unto the
Idols of Canaan, and the Land was polluted with Blood. Thus were they defiled
with their own Works, and went a Whoring with their own inventions. Therefore
was the Wrath of God kindled against his People, insomuch that he abhorred his
own Inheritance. Nevertheless, he regarded their affliction when he heard their
cry. And he remembered them for his Covenant, and repented him according to the
multitude of his Mercies. He made them also to be pitied of them that carried
them away Captive, 106.7, 9, 10, 18, 23, 24, 25, 26, 29, 30, 32, 36, 38, 39,
44, 45, 46. Blessed are they that keep Judgment, and he that does Righteousness
at all times, 106.3. They hunger and thirst, their Soul faints in them. Then
they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their
distresses. O that Man would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and
for his wonderful Works to the Children of Men. For he satisfies the longing
soul, and fills the hungry soul with goodness. Then they cried unto the Lord
in their trouble, and he saved them out of their distress. Fools, because of
their Transgressions, and because of their Iniquities are afflicted. And a
fruitful Land is turned into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein. He turns the Wilderness into a standing Water, and dry ground into
Water-springs. The Righteous shall see it and rejoice, and all Iniquity shall
stop her mouth. Whosoever is wise, and will observe those things, shall understand
the loving kindness of the Lord, 107.5, 6, 8, 9, 13, 14, 17, 33, 35, 42, 43.

For thy Mercy is greater than the Heavens, and thy Truth reaches unto the
Clouds. O help us against the Enemy, for vain is the help of Man. Through God
we shall do great Acts, for vain is the help of Man, 108.4, 12.13. I will give
thanks unto the Lord, with my whole heart secretly among the Faithful, and in
the Congregation. His work is worthy to be praised, and in honor, and his
Righteousness endures for ever. The merciful and gracious Lord has so done
his marvelous works, that they ought to be had in remembrance. The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, a good understanding have all they that do his
Commandments; his praise endures for ever, 111.1, 3, 4, 10. Blessed is the Man
that fears the Lord, he has great delight in his Commandments. Riches and
plenteousness shall be in his House, and his Righteousness endures for ever.
Unto the godly there arises Light in the Darkness, he is Merciful, Loving, and
Righteous: A good man is merciful and lends, and will guide his Words with
discretion, he will not be afraid of any evil tyding. His heart stands fast,
and believes in the Lord. His heart is Established, and will not shrink, until
he sees his desire upon his Enemies. He has dispersed and given to the Poor,
and his Righteousness remains for ever. His Horn shall be exalted with
Honor, 121.1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9. He makes the Barren Woman to keep house, and
to be a joyful Mother of Children, 113.8 verse.

Tremble thou Earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of
Jacob, 114.7. As for our God he is in Heaven, he has done whatsoever pleased
him, but thou House of Israel, put thou thy trust in the Lord, he is their
helper and defense; ye that fear the Lord, he is their helper and defender, he
shall preserve them that fear the Lord, both small and great, 115.3, 9, 11, 13.
The Lord has inclined his Ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long
as I live. I shall find trouble and heaviness, and I shall call upon the Name
of the Lord. O Lord I beseech thee deliver my Soul. Gracious is the Lord and
righteous; yea, our God is merciful; the Lord preserves the simple; I was in
misery, and he helped me; I will offer unto thee the sacrifice of Thanksgiving:
and call upon the Name of the Lord, 116.4, 5, 6, 15. It is better to trust in
the Lord, than to put any confidence in Man: it is better to trust in the Lord,
than to put any confidence in Princes; the Lord is on my side, I will not fear
what Man can do unto me; thou art my God, I will praise thee; thou art my God,
I will thank thee, O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, and his
Mercy endures for ever, 118.6, 8, 9, 28, 29. thou have charged that we should
diligently keep thy Commandments; wherewithal shall a young Man cleanse his
way, even by ruling himself after thy word; teach me, O Lord, the way of thy
Statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end; O give me understanding, and I
shall keep thy Law; yea, I shall keep it with my whole heart; O turn away my
eyes, lest they behold vanities, and quicken thou me in thy way; O establish
thy word in thy Servant, that I may fear thee; O think upon thy Servant as
concerning thy word, wherein thou have caused me to put my trust; the same is
my comfort in my trouble; for thy word has quickened me: O Lord thou have dealt
graciously according to thy word; before I was troubled I went wrong; but now I
have kept thy word, thou art good and gracious; O teach me thy Statutes: O let
my heart be sound in thy Statutes that I be not ashamed; quicken me after thy
loving kindness, and so shall I keep the Testimonies of thy mouth: O how sweet
are thy words unto my Taste, yea sweeter than Honey unto my Mouth; through thy
Commandments I get understanding, therefore I hate all wicked ways; let the
free will offerings of my mouth please thee; O Lord, teach me thy Judgments: O
establish me according to thy word that I may live, and let me not be
disappointed of my hope; hold thou me up, and I shall be safe; yea my delight
shall ever be in thy Statutes; O deal with thy Servant according to thy loving
Mercy, and teach me thy Statutes; order my steps in thy word, so shall no
wickedness have Dominion over me; O deliver me from the wrongful dealing of
Men, so shall I keep thy Commandments; Righteous art thou O Lord, and true in
thy Judgment; I call with my whole heart, O Lord, hear me, I will keep thy
Statutes: Early in the Morning, O Lord, do I cry unto thee, for in thy Word is
my trust: hear my voice, O Lord, according to thy loving kindness: quicken me
as thou art wont, Psalm 119. O consider my Adversary and deliver me, for I do
not forget thy Law; I am as glad of thy word as one that finds great spoils;
great is the grace that they have which love thy Law, and they are not offended
at it; I have kept thy Commandments and Testimonies, for they are not offended
at it: O let my Soul live, and it shall praise thee, and thy Judgments shall
help me; I have gone astray like a Sheep that is lost; O seek thy Servant for I
do not forget thy Commandment, when I was in trouble I called upon the Lord,
and he heard me, my help comes even from the Lord which has made Heaven and
Earth; the Lord shall preserve my going out and my coming in, from this time
forth, and for evermore, 120.1.121.2, 8. Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou
that dwell in the Heavens, 123.1. They that put their trust in the Lord
shall be even as Mount Sion, which may not be removed, but stands fast for
ever; the Hill stands about Jerusalem; even so stands the Lord round about
his people from this time forth, and for evermore, 125.1, 2. If thou, O Lord,
be extreme to mark what is done amiss; O Lord, who may abide it? there is mercy
with thee, therefore shall thou be feared, O Israel, trust in the Lord, for
with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous Redemption, and he
shall redeem Israel from all their sins, 130.3, 4, 7, 8. the Lord has made a
faithful oath unto David, and he shall not shrink from it; if they will keep my
Covenant and my Testimony, that I shall learn them, their Children also shall
sit upon thy seat for evermore, 132.11, 13. Behold how good and pleasant a
thing it is for Brethren to dwell together in unity; for the Lord promises his
blessing and life for evermore, 133.1, 4. Lift up your hand in the Sanctuary,
and praise the Lord, 134.3. whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven,
and in Earth, in the Sea, and in all deep places; thy Name, O Lord, endures
for ever; so does thy Memorial, O Lord, from one Generation to another, for the
Lord will avenge his people, and be gracious unto his Servants, 135.6, 16, 14.
O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures for
ever, 136.1. O Lord, thou have searched me out and known me; thou know my
down-sitting, and my up-rising; thou understandest my thoughts long before;
thou art about my path, and about my bed, and spyest out all my ways: for lo,
there is not a word in my Tongue, but thou, O Lord, know it altogether: try
me, O Lord, and seek the ground of my heart; prove me, and examine my thoughts;
look well if there be any way of Wickedness in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting, 139.1, 2, 3, 23, 24. O Lord God thou strength of my health, thou
have covered my head in the day of battle, sure I am, the Lord will avenge the
poor, and maintain the cause of the helpless, the Righteous also shall give
thanks unto thy Name, and the Just shall continue in thy sight, 140.7, 12, 13.
Lord I call upon thee, haste thee unto me, and consider my voice when I cry
unto thee, O let not my heart be inclined to any evil thing, let me not be
occupied in any ungodly work, with the Men that work wickedness, lest I eat of
such things as please them, 141.1, 4. I poured out my complaint before him, and
showed him of my trouble; when my Spirit was in heaviness, thou knew my
path; in the way wherein I walked have they privily laid a snare for me, 142.2,
3. Hear my Prayer, O Lord, and consider my desire; hearken unto me, O Lord, for
thy Truth and Righteousness sake; teach me to do the thing that is right, for
thou art my God; let thy loving Spirit lead me forth into the Land of
Righteousness, 143.1, 10. The Lord is loving unto every Man, and his mercy is
over all his works; great is the Lord and mavelous, worthy to be praised;
there is no end of his greatness; the Lord upholdeth all such as fall, and
lifts up all those that be down; the eyes of all wait upon thee, O Lord, and
thou give them Meat in due season; thou openest thine hand, and fillest all
things living with plenteousness; the Lord is Righteous in all his ways, and
holy in all his works; the Lord is nigh unto all that call upon him; yea, all
such as call upon him faithfully; he will fulfill the desire of them that fear
him; he also will hear them, and will help them, 145.3, 9, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19. O praise the Lord, for it is a good thing to sing praise unto our God; yea,
a joyful and a pleasant thing it is to be thankful; he heals those that are
broken in heart, and gives Medicine to heal their sickness; he tells the
number of the Stars, and calls them all by their Names; great is our Lord,
and great is his power; yea, his Wisdom is infinite, which gives fodder to the
Cattle, and feeds the young Ravens that call upon him; but the Lords delight
is in them that put their trust in his mercy, 147.1, 3, 4, 5, 9, 11. For the
Lord has pleasure in his people, and helps the meek hearted, 149.4. O praise
God in his Holiness, praise him in the Firmament of his Power; Praise him in
his noble Acts; praise him according to his excellent greatness; let every
thing that has breath praise the Lord, 150.1, 2, 6.

O Lord, let the Words of my Mouth and the Meditations of my Heart be now, and
evermore acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength and my Redeemer.
A Prayer for the Morning.
HEar me when I call O God of my Salvation; for thou have set me at liberty
when I was in trouble; have mercy upon me, and hearken to my Prayers; Lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon me; ponder my Words O Lord: O Lord
consider my Meditations, O hearken thou unto the words of my calling, my King
and my God; for unto thee will I make my Prayer; my Voice shall thou hear
betimes in the Morning: O Lord, early in the morning will I direct my Prayer
unto thee, and will look up, for thou art the God that have no pleasure in
Wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell with thee. Lead me O Lord in thy
Righteousness, because of my Enemies; make my way plain before my face; Let all
them that put their trust in thee rejoice; they shall ever be giving of thanks,
because thou defendest them: they that love thy Name, shall be joyful in thee.
O Lord rebuke me not in thine Indignation, neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak; O Lord heal me, for my
bones are vexed; my soul also is sore troubled; how long will thou punish me?
turn thee O Lord, and deliver my Soul, and save me for thy mercies sake; my
Beauty is gone for very trouble, and worn away because of all mine Enemies. The
Lord has heard my Petition; the Lord will receive my Prayer: O let the
wickedness of the Ungodly come to an end, but guide thou the Just; my help
comes of God, which preserves them that are true of heart. I will give thanks
unto the Lord, according to his Righteousness, and will pray in the Name of the
Lord, the most High: have mercy upon me O Lord, consider the trouble which I
suffer of them that hate me; thou that liftest me up from the gates of death:
Why stand thou so far off (O Lord) and hidest thy face in the needful time
of trouble? Arise (O Lord God) lift up thine head, forget not the poor. How
long will thou forget me O Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide thy face
from me? Hearken unto my voice O Lord, when I cry unto thee; have mercy upon
me, and hear me. O hide not thou thy face from me, nor cast thy Servant away in
displeasure: thou have been my succor, leave me nor, neither forsake me, O God
of my Salvation. O Son of Righteousness, who come from the bosom of thy
Father, the Fountain of Glory and Light, to enlighten the darkness of the
World. I praise thy Name, for that thou have preserved me from the dangers of
this Night: and continued still the opportunities of serving thee, and
advanceing my hopes of a blessed Eternity. Let thy mercy shine brightly, and
dissipate the Clouds and Darkness of my Spirit and Understanding: rectify my
Affections, and purify my Will and all my Actions, that whatsoever I shall do
or suffer this day, or in my whole Life, my Word and purposes and thoughts, may
be Sanctified and acceptable to thy Divine Majesty: And all this I beg for thy
mercies sake, Amen.

A Collect.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who do govern all things both in Heaven and in
Earth, mercifully hear the Supplications of thy Servant, and grant me thy Grace
all the days of my Life, and Peace through Jesus Christ my only Lord and
Savior, Amen.

The Second Collect.
ALmighty and Everlasting God, mercifully look upon mine Infirmities, and in
all my dangers and necessities, stretch forth thy right hand to help and defend
me, through Jesus Christ my Lord, Amen.

A Prayer for a penitent Person for Remission of his sins.
HOw long shall I seek Counsel in my Soul, and be so vexed in my heart? how
long shall my Enemies triumph over me? consider and hear me, O Lord my God;
lighten my eyes that I sleep not in Death, least mine Enemies say, we have
prevailed against him: If I be cast down, they that trouble me will rejoice at
me, but my trust is in thy Mercy, and my Heart is joyful in thy Salvation; I
will sing of the Lord because he has dealt so lovingly with me; yea, I will
praise the Lord most high. Preserve me, O God, for in thee have I put my trust;
O hold up my going in thy path, that my footstep slides not; I have called upon
thee, O God, for thou shall hear me; incline thine Ears unto me, and hearken
unto my words; show thy mavelous loving kindness unto me, thou that art the
Savior of them that put their trust in thee, from such that resist thy right
hand; keep me as the Apple of thy Eye; hide me under the shadow of thy wing
from the ungodly that trouble me; mine enemies compass me round about, to take
away my Soul, disappoint him and cast him down; deliver my Soul from the
ungodly, which is a Sword of thine; I will call upon the Lord which is worthy
to be praised, so shall I be safe from mine enemies; in my trouble I will call
upon the Lord, and complain unto my God, so shall he hear my voice out of his
holy Temple; my complaint shall come before him, it shall enter even into his
Ear; the Lord shall reward me after my Righteous dealing, and according to the
cleanness of my hand shall he recompense me; but Lord deal not with me
according to my sins, neither reward me after mine Iniquities; who can tell how
often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret sins, keep thy Servant also
from presumptuous sins, lest they get the Dominion over me, so shall I be
undefiled and innocent from the great offense; save Lord, and hear me, O King
of Heaven when I call upon thee; the Lord is my Shepherd, therefore shall I
lack nothing, but be not thou far from me; O Lord thou art my succor, haste
thee to help me; unto thee, O Lord, will I lift up my Soul; my God, I have put
my trust in thee, let me not be confounded, neither let mine enemies triumph
over me; show me thy ways, O Lord, and teach me thy paths: lead me forth in thy
Truth, and learn me, for thou art the God of my Salvation, in thee has been my
hope all the day long: call to remembrance, O Lord, thy tender mercy, and thy
loving kindness which has been ever of old: O remember not the sins and
offenses of my youth, but according to thy mercy think upon me, O Lord, for thy
goodness, for thy Name sake; O Lord, be merciful to my sin, for it is great;
turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in misery, the
sorrows of my heart is enlarged: O bring thou me out of my trouble; look upon
my adversity and misery, and forgive me all my sins; consider mine enemies how
many they are that bear a tyrannous heart against me; O keep my Soul and
deliver me; let me not be surrounded, for I have put my trust in thee; let
perfect and righteous dealing wait upon me, for my hope has been in thee;
deliver Israel, O God, out of all his troubles; be thou my Judge, O Lord, for I
have walked innocently; my trust has been also in the Lord, therefore shall I
not fall; examine me, O Lord, and prove me: try out my Reins and Heart, for thy
loving kindness is always before mine eyes; and I will walk in thy Truth: But
as for me, I will walk innocently: O Lord, deliver me, and be merciful unto me;
hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I call unto thee; have mercy upon me, and
hear me: my heart has talked of thee; seek ye my face, thy face, Lord, will I
seek; O hide not thou thy face from me, nor cast away thy Servant in
displeasure; thou have been my succor, leave me not, nor forsake me, O God of
my Salvation; teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in the right way, because
of mine enemies: Hear the voice of mine humble petitions when I cry unto thee:
when I hold up mine hand toward thy mercy Seat, of thy Holy Temple; O pluck me
not away, neither destroy me with the ungodly and wicked doers, which speak
friendly to their Neighbors, but imagine mischief in their hearts: Save thy
people, and give thy blessing to thine Inheritance; feed them and set them up
for ever: I will magnify thee, O Lord, for thou have set me up, and made my
foes to triumph over me; O Lord my God, I cry unto thee, and thou have healed
me: Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me; Lord be thou my helper, O most
merciful God, whose property is always to have Mercy, and to forgive; behold
with the eyes of thy pity, and compassion, the state of thy humble Servant,
made most miserable by reason of my sins; hear the voice of my weeping; pity my
groaning; strengthen me, for I am weak, for my bones are vexed, and deliver my
Soul from Death; that being saved from the bottomless pit, I may give thanks to
thy Holy Name; O turn from the severity of thy displeasure, and visit me with
thy mercy and salvation, for all my sins procure great sorrow and contrition,
and in my sickness let thy comfort sustain me, through Jesus Christ my Lord,
Amen.

The Collect.
O God, who know me to be set in so many great dangers, that by reason of
the Frailty of Man, I cannot always stand upright, grant to me such strength
and protection, that may support me in all dangers, and carry me through all
Temptations, through Jesus Christ my only Lord and Savior. Amen.

Another.
ALmighty and Everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made, and do
forgive the sins of all them that be penitent; create and make in me a new and
contrite Heart, that I may worthily (lamenting my sins, and acknowledging my
wretchedness) obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A Confession of sins, and a Prayer for pardon.
IN thee, O Lord, have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion;
deliver me in thy Righteousness: bow down thine Ear to hear me, make haste to
deliver me; be thou my strong Rock and the house of Defense, that thou may
save me, for thou art my strong Rock, and Castle; be thou also my guide, and
hear me for thy mercy sake: draw me out of the Net that they have privily laid
for me, for thou art my strength; into thy hand I commend my Spirit, for thou
have redeemed me; O Lord, thou God of truth, have mercy upon me; O Lord, for I
am in trouble: mine eyes are consumed for very heaviness, yea my soul and my
body; for my life waxes old with heaviness, and my years with mourning; my
strength failed me, because of mine iniquity, and my bones, but my hope has
been in thee. O Lord, I have said thou art my God; show thy Servant the light
of thy countenance, and save me for thy mercies sake; I will give thanks unto
thee, O Lord, his Prayers shall ever be in my Mouth: O continue forth thy
loving kindness unto them that fear thee, and thy Righteousness unto them that
are true of Heart; put me not to rebuke, O Lord, in thine anger, neither
chasten me in thy heavy displeasure; for thine Arrows stick fast in me, and
thine hand presses me sore; forsake me not, O Lord my God, be not thou far
from me, haste thee to help me, O Lord God of my Salvation; take away thy
Plague from me, for I am consumed by the means of pain, Hear my Prayers, O
Lord, and with thine Ears, consider my calling: hold not thy peace at my tears:
O Lord, spare me for thy mercy sake, that I may recover my strength, before I
go hence, and be no more seen; withhold not thou thy mercy from me; save me for
thy Mercy sake; let thy loving kindness and thy truth always preserve me: O Lord
let it be thy pleasure to deliver me; make haste, O Lord, to help me; let them
be ashamed and confounded together that seek after my Soul to destroy it; let
them be driven backward and put to rebuke that wish me evil; let all those that
seek thee, be joyful and glad in thee; and let such as love thy Salvation, say
always, the Lord be praised; thou art my helper and my Redeemer: make no long
tarrying, O my God; O Lord, be merciful unto me, heal my Soul, for I have
sinned against thee; be merciful unto me, O Lord, raise thou me again, because
my trust is in thy mercy; by this I know thou favourest me, that my enemies do
not triumph over me: like as the Heart desires the Waterbrooks, so longs my
Soul after thee, O God; my Soul is a thirst for God; yea, even for the living
God; when I shall come and appear before the presence of God; God is my hope
and my strength, a very present help in trouble; the Lord of Hosts is with me;
the God of Jacob is my refuge; call upon me in time of trouble, so will I hear,
and thou shall praise me: O Lord open thou my Lips, that my Mouth may set forth
thy praise: Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to
the multitude of thy mercy, do away mine offenses; wash me thoroughly from my
wickedness, and make me clean from my sins, for I acknowledge my fault, and my
sin is ever before me; against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in
thy sight, that thou might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou
judge; thou shall purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean: thou shall wash
me, and I shall be whiter than Snow; thou* shall make me hear of joy and
gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice: O give me the
comfort of thy help again, and establish me with thy free Spirit; make me a
clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me; cast me not away from
thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me: O be favorable and
gracious unto Sion, and build thou the Walls of Jerusalem: Save me, O God, for
thy Name sake, and avenge me in thy strength; hear my Prayers, O God, and
hearken unto the words of my Mouth; behold, God is my helper; the Lord is with
them that uphold my Soul: O Lord God Eternal, Judge of Men and Angels, whose
property is always to have mercy, and to forgive: have mercy upon me, who
confess my sins unto thee, to be so great and many, that were not thy mercy
infinite, I might despair of having my unrighteousness forgiven, or misery
covered: O dear God, preserve me from the great Plague that remains for the
ungodly, and let thy mercy embrace me, on every side: impute not unto me the
sins I have multiplied against thee, and against all the World: for I have been
like to a Horse and Mule, without understanding; brutish in my passion,
sensual in my affections, of unbridled heats and distemperatures, but thy Mercy
is as infinite as thy self: O let not thy hand be heavy upon me, but forgive
the wickedness of my sin, and compass me about with songs of deliverance; then
shall I be glad and rejoice in thee, O Lord, who art become my mighty Savior,
and most merciful Redeemer Jesu. Amen.

The Collect.
ALmighty God, give me Grace that I cast away the work of darkness, and put
upon me the Armor of Light, now in the time of this mortal life, in which thy
Son Jesus Christ came to visit us in great humility; that in the last day, when
he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead, we may rise in the Life
Immortal; through him who lives and Reigns with thee, and the Holy Ghost,
now and for ever. Amen.

A Prayer that we may despise perishing riches, and put our trust in God only.
HEar my Prayer, O God, and hide not thy self, from my petition; take heed unto
me, and hear me, how I mourn in my Prayer, and am vexed; as for me, I will call
upon God, and the Lord shall save me: O cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he
shall nourish thee, and shall not suffer the Righteous to fall for ever;
whenever I call upon thee, then shall mine enemies be put to flight: this I
know, for God is on my side; in Gods word will I rejoice; in the Lord's word
will I comfort me: yea, in God have I put my trust; I will not be afraid what
Man can do unto me: be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me, for my
Soul trusts in thee, and under the shadow of thy Wing shall be my refuge
until this Tyranny be overpast: deliver me, from mine enemies, O God: defend me
from them that rise up against me; deliver me from wicked doers, and save me
from blood thirsty Men; my strength I will ascribe unto thee, for thou art the
God of my Refuge: God shows me his goodness plenteously, and God will let me
see my desire upon mine enemy; unto thee, O God of my strength will I sing; for
thou, O God, art my Refuge, and my merciful God: O be thou my help in trouble,
for vain is the help of Man: Hear my crying, O God, and give ear unto my
Prayer, he truly is my health and my Salvation; he is my defense, so that I
shall not greatly fall: in God is my strength and my glory, the Rock of my
Might: in God is my trust, O put your trust in him always: ye people, pour out
your hearts before him, for God is my hope: Hear my voice, O God, in my Prayer;
preserve my Life for fear of the Enemy: Turn me from the gathering together of
the froward, and from the insurrection of wicked doers: if I incline unto
wickedness with my heart, the Lord will not hear me: O God, be merciful unto
me, and bless me, and show me the light of thy countenance, and be merciful
unto me: Hear me, O my God, in the multitude of thy mercy; even in the truth of
thy salvation. Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is comfortable; turn
thee unto me, according to the multitude of thy mercies, O Lord Jesus thou only
Redeemer of Souls; who by thy death and passion, deliveredst me from the place
of Hell: give me grace to put my whole trust in thee, and in the riches of thy
Mercy and loving kindness; always remembering my end, the vanity and shortness
of my Life, and the certainty of my departure: O teach me to despise the World
and worldly things, and to lay my treasure up in Heaven by Charity, and actions
of Religion, that while I live here, I may have my Conversation in Heaven; by
love, by hope, and by desire; that my beauty shall consume in the Sepulcher out
of my Earthly dwellings, I may be received into Everlasting habitations, always
to enjoy thee, who live and Reignest, Eternal God, World without end. Amen.

The Collect.
O Lord God, who see that I (...) not my trust in any thing that I do,
mercifully grant that by thy power I may be defended against all adversity,
through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

Another Collect.
O Lord, who have taught me, that all my doings without Charity, is nothing
worth, send thy holy Ghost, and pour it into my heart, that most excellent gift
of Charity, the very bond of peace, and all virtue, without which whosoever
lives is counted dead before thee; grant this for thine only Son Jesus Christ
sake. Amen.

A Prayer for pardon of sins, and restitution of God's favor.
HIde not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble. O haste thee, O God,
to deliver me. Make haste to deliver me, O Lord. Let them be ashamed and
confounded that seek after my soul. Let them be turned backward, and put to
confusion that wish me evil. Let all those that seek thee be joyful and glad in
thee; and let all those that delight in thy salvation, say always, The Lord be
praised, for me, I am poor and in misery, haste thee unto me, O my God, thou
art my helper and my Redeemer, O Lord, make no long tarrying: in thee, O Lord
have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion, but help me, and deliver
me in thy Righteousness; incline thine Ear unto me and save me; be thou my
strong hold, whereunto I may always resort: thou have promised to help me, for
thou art my house of defense, and my Castle: deliver me, O my God out of the
hand of ungodly men, out of the hand of the unrighteous and cruel man; for thou
O God art the thing that I long for, for thou art my hope even from my youth;
through thee have I been helped up; ever since I was born thou art he that took
me out of my Mother's womb, my praise shall be always of thee: O let my mouth
be filled with thy praise, that I may sing of thy glory and honor all the day
long. O cast me not away in the time of age. Forsake me not when my strength
fails me. Go not far from me, O my God; O God, haste thee to help me. Forsake
me not, O my God, when I am gray headed, until I have shown thy strength unto
this generation, and thy power to all them that are yet for to come. What great
trouble and adversity have thou showed me, and yet did thou turn and refresh
me, yea and broughtest me from the depth of the Earth again. O let not the
simple go away ashamed, but let the poor and needy give praise unto thy name. O
remember not my old sins, but have mercy upon me, and that right soon; for I am
come to great misery, help me, O God of my salvation, for the glory of thy
Name. O deliver me, and be merciful unto my sins, for thy Names sake. Turn us,
O God of our salvation. Show the light of thy countenance, and we shall be
whole. O God of Hosts, how long will thou be angry with thy people that pray. O
most merciful God, who art great, and the multitudes of thy mercies are
innumerable, Have mercy upon me, for my sins are before me presented by the
continual accusations of a troubled conscience. I have sinned against thee, and
done evil in thy sight, and yet because thou art the God of mercy, and fountain
of eternal life, delighting in the conversion and salvation of a sinner, I
present unto thee the sacrifice of a troubled spirit, of a broken and a
contrite heart; beseeching thee to let the dew of thy favor, and the fire of
thy love wash away my sins, and purify my soul. Make me a clean heart, O God,
and pure hands, though my sins be as scarlet, yet make them like wool; though
they be as purple, yet make them as white as snow. Restore the voice of joy and
gladness unto me: Let me not be ever separated from the sweet refreshings of
thy favor and presence, but give me the comforts of thy help again, and let
thy free Spirit loose me from the bondage of sin, and stablish me in the
freedom and liberty of the Sons of God, so shall I sing of thy Righteousness,
and my Lips shall give thee praise in the Congregations of thy Redeemed ones;
now, henceforth, and for ever-more. Amen.

The Collect.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made, and
do forgive the Sins of all them that be penitent; create and make in me a
new and contrite Heart, that I may worthily lament my Sins, and acknowledge my
Wickedness, that I may obtain of thee, the God of all comfort, perfect
Remission and forgiveness, through Jesus Christ my Lord, Amen.

Another Collect.
ALmighty God, who through thy only Son Jesus Christ, have overcome Death, and
opened unto us the Gate of Everlasting Life: I humbly beseech thee, that as by
thy special grace preventing us, thou do put in our Minds good desires, so
by thy continual help we may bring the same to good effect, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, who Lives, and Reigns with thee, and the Holy Ghost, ever
one God; world without end. Amen.

A Prayer that we may trust, in God, only in all our trouble.
TUrn again thou God of Hosts, look down from Heaven; behold and visit thy
Servant. O Lord God of Hosts, hear my Prayers, hearken O God of Jacob, behold,
O God my defender, and look upon the face of thine Anointed; O Lord God of
Hosts, blessed is the Man that puts his Trust in thee: Turn thou me O God of
my Savior, and let thine Anger cease from me. Show me thy mercy O Lord, and
grant me thy Salvation. Bow down thine ear, O Lord, and hear me, for I am poor
and in misery: Preserve thou my Soul, for I am thy Servant; my God, save him
that puts his trust in thee. Be merciful unto me, O Lord, for I will daily
call upon thee: comfort the Soul of thy Servant, for unto thee O Lord, do I
lift up my Soul; for thou O Lord, art my Defender, and thou art good and
gracious, and of great mercy to all them that Call upon thee; give ear O Lord,
unto my Prayer, and ponder the voice of my humble desires; in the time of
trouble will I call upon thee, for thou hear me, for thou art good, and
do wonderful things; thou art God alone, teach me thy way O Lord, for I will
walk in thy Truth. O knit my Heart unto thee, that I may fear thy Name. I will
thank thee, O Lord, my God, with my whole heart, and will praise thy Name for
evermore; for great is thy Mercy toward me, for thou have delivered my Soul
from the neathermost Hell, and thou Lord God art full of mercy and compassion,
long-suffering, and of great goodness and Truth. O turn thee unto me, and have
mercy upon me; give thy strength unto thy Servant, and help the Son of thine
Handmaid: Show some good Token upon me for good, that they which hate me may
see it, and be ashamed; because thou Lord, have helpen and confirmed me, O Lord
God of my Salvation. I have lamented Day and Night before thee: O let my Prayer
enter into thy presence. Incline thine Ear unto my Calling, for my soul is full
of Trouble, and my Life draws nigh unto Hell; thine Indignation lies hard
upon me, and thy hand presses me sore. Unto thee O Lord, do I cry, and early
shall my Prayer come before thee. O Lord, why oppressest thou my Soul, and
hidest thy face from me? I am in misery like unto him that is at the point of
Death. Even from my youth up, thy Terrors have I suffered, with a troubled
Mind. O Lord God of Hosts, who is like unto thee? Thy Truth most mighty God, is
on every side; for the Lord is on my side. The Lord God of Israel is my
Defense, the holy One of Israel is my King. O Lord, where is thy old loving
kindness, which thou swarest unto David thy Servant in thy Truth? Remember Lord
the Rebuke that I thy Servant have, and how I do bear in my bosom the Rebuke of
many People. O Lord, thou have been our Refuge from one Generation to another.
O teach me to number my days that I may apply my Heart unto Wisdom. O turn
thee again O Lord at the last, and be gracious unto thy Servant. Satisfy me
with thy mercy, and that soon so shall I rejoice at thy mercy, and be glad all
the days of my Life. O comfort thou me again, after the time wherein thou have
plagued me, and for the years wherein I have suffered Adversity. Show thy
Servants thy Work, and their Children thy Glory: for the Lord promised his
Blessing, and Life for ever more. When I called upon thee, thou hold me, and
enduest my Soul with much strength. O Lord thou have searched me out, and known
me; thou know my down-sitting, and mine up-rising; thou understandest my
thoughts long before; thou art about my path, and about my bed, and espiest out
all my ways; for lo, there is not a word in my tongue, but thou, O Lord,
know it altogether. Look well, O Lord, if there be any ways of wickedness
in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. Try me, O Lord, and seek the ground
of my heart. Prove me, and examine my thoughts, seeing there is nothing unknown
unto thee. O my God, let not mine heart be inclined to any evil thing. Let me
not be occupied in any ungodly words, with the men that work wickedness, lest I
eat of such things as please them, but let mine eyes look unto thee. O Lord
God, in thee is my trust, O cast not out my soul. Keep me from the snare that
they have laid for me, and from the traps of wicked doers. O Lord God, from
whom comes my salvation, thou art my defense and strength, my health, and my
glory; give me thy grace, that I may put my trust in thee always; and that I
pour out my heart before thee in all my troubles; that I may wait upon thee for
the performance of all my expectation, in all my longings and desires. Be thou
my defense; uphold me that I may not fall into those great sins that lay waste
my conscience, or into such miseries as make me without hope or remedy, the
miseries of despair, obstinate malice, or the woes of sad eternity. Teach me to
despise Riches, to disclaim all trust in the creatures; not to delight in lies,
or vanities; not to multiply wrongs and robbery, that when thou shall come with
power and great glory, to reward every man according to his works, thou may
be merciful unto me, pardoning my sins, and accepting me to life eternal;
through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

The Collect.
O God, the strength of all them that put their trust in thee, mercifully
accept my praise; and because through the weakness of my mortal nature I can do
no good thing without thee, grant me the help of thy grace, that in keeping of
thy Commandments I may please thee, both in will and deed, through Jesus Christ
my Lord. Amen.

Another Collect.
O Lord, who never failest to help and govern them, whom thou do bring up in
thy steadfast fear and love, keep me I beseech thee under the protection of thy
good providence, and make me to have a perpetual love to thy holy Name, through
Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for Spiritual Blessings, and for fruitfulness of the Earth.
O Thou strength of my health, thou have covered my head in the day of Battle:
O Lord God, consider my complaint, for I am brought very low, O deliver me from
my persecutors, for they are too strong for me: Hear my prayers, O Lord,
consider my desire, hearken unto me for thy Truth and Righteousness sake: Hear
me, O Lord, and that soon, for my Spirit waxes faint; hide not thy Face from
me, lest I be like to them that go down to the pit: deliver me; O Lord, from
mine enemies, for I fly unto thee to hide me; teach me to do the thing that
pleases thee, for thou art my God, let thy loving Spirit, O Lord, lead me in
the way of Righteousness; quicken me, O Lord, for thy name sake, and for thy
righteousness sake: bring my Soul out of trouble, and of thy goodness slay mine
enemies, and destroy all them that vex my Soul, for I am thy Servant. The Lord
is Righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works; the Lord is gracious
and mercful, long suffering and of great goodness in all his ways, and holy in
all his works, the Lord is gracious and merciful, long suffering, and of great
goodness; the Lord upholdeth all such as fall, and lifts up all those that be
down. O God, the hope of all the ends of the Earth, and of them that remain in
the broad Sea, be thou merciful unto my sins, and let not my misdeeds prevail
against me; so as to make me habitually sinful, or endlesly miserable, but give
me the blessings of thy chosen; let me receive the influences of thy Grace and
Benediction, by the participation of thy Word and Sacrament in thy holy Temple;
and as thou embracest me with thy hand, showing wonderful things in thy
Righteousness and Salvation; so let thy right hand be under my head, and give
me such a portion of Temporal blessings, as shall be necessary for me; make the
Earth plenteous, and bless the increase of it; crown the year with goodness,
and let the Clouds drop fatness, that the Valleys standing thick with Corn; may
laugh and sing thy praises, and that we being refreshed with the multitude of
thy blessings, may praise thee in Sion, and at last be satisfied with the
pleasures of thy House in the Celestial Jerusalem, where thou live and
reignest, one God, World without end. Amen.

A Collect.
O Lord, I beseech thee mercifully to hear me, and grant that I to whom thou
have given an hearty desire to pray, may through thy mighty Aid be defended and
comforted in all dangers and miseries, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another Collect.
O God, the Protector of all them that trust in thee, mercifully accept my
prayers, and grant my request. O my God, without thee, nothing is strong,
nothing is holy; increase and multiply upon me thy blessing, that thou being my
Ruler and Guide* I may pass through things temporal, that I lose not things
eternal; grant this, O heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ his sake, my only Lord
and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer to God for all Faithful People for a blessing and deliverance from
our Enemies.
MAke me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. O Lord my
God, give me the spirit of grace and wisdom. Hear my prayers, and let my cry
come unto thee. O Lord answer my expectations, for Christ's sake, and turn away
thy face from my sins; and blot out all my offenses. O Lord my God, remember me
according to the multitude of thy mercies; do away all my offenses, according
to the favor thou bear to thy people. O visit me with thy salvation. I have
sinned with my Forefathers, I have done amiss, I have done wickedly; woe am I
that I have gone astray from thee. Great is my grief that have lead my life in
sin. Woe is me that I have forsaken thee, and lived after my own thoughts and
fantasy, and not as thou would, but have run from sin to sin, following the
desires of my own corrupt heart, and not as thou would, yet force me to
repent of my evil; therefore O Lord deal not with me according to my sins,
neither reward me after mine iniquities; for thy mercy is greater than the
Heavens, and thy truth reaches unto the clouds. O deliver me from my bosom
sin, O help me against the enemy, for vain is the help of man; but deal thou
with me, O Lord my God, according to thy Name, for sweet is thy mercy, O
deliver me, for I am helpless, and poor, for my heart is wounded within me,
help, O Lord my God, oh save me according to thy mercies; O look upon me, and
be merciful unto me, as thou usest to be unto those that love thy Name; For I
am weary of my groaning; every night wash I my bed, and water my Couch with my
tears, therefore haste thee to help me, O Lord God of my salvation, and they
shall know how that this is thy hand, and that thou, Lord, have done it. O Lord
God, my Helper and Redeemer, have mercy upon me, and all thy faithful people;
make haste and help us, O God against all those that seek after our souls to do
us mischief. Make us to delight in thee, to wait upon thy salvation, to trust
in thy mercies, to rejoice in thy excellencies and perfection, that our feet
being directed by thy guidance, our weaknesses strengthened by thy power, our
sins pardoned by thy mercies, and our souls justified by thy free grace, we may
always give thee praise with the humble addresses of devotion and
thanksgiving, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Collect.
O God, who have prepared for them that love thee, such good things as pass
man's understanding, pour into our hearts such love toward thee, as pass man's
understanding, that we loving thee above all things, may obtain thy promises,
which exceed all we can desire, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the continuance of God's Favor to me, even to my old Age, and
longing for a happy departure.
O Lord God, foolish men are plagued for their offenses, and because of their
wickedness; so when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, he delivered
them out of their dIstress. O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his
goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the children of men. A
fruitful Land makes he barren, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein,
yet he satisfies the empty soul, and fills the hungry soul with goodness,
such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, being fast bound in misery
and Iron. O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and
declare the wonders that he does for the children of men. O Lord, how manifold
are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all. The Earth is full of thy
Riches. O remember the mavelous works that he has done, his wonders, and the
judgments of his mouth. O ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye children of Jacob,
his chosen; he has been always mindful of his Covenant and Promise, that he
made to a thousand generations; in the multitude of the sorrows that I had in
my heart, thy comforts have refresh^d my soul; for the Lord is my Refuge, and
my God is the strength of my confidence. The Lord is a great God, and King
above all Gods. O ye that love the Lord, see that ye hate the thing that is
evil. The Lord preserves the souls of his Saints, he delivers them from the
hand of the ungodly. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, and give thanks in
remembrance of his holiness. O let me have understanding in the ways of
godliness. A froward heart, shall depart from me. I will not know a wicked
person. Mine eyes look upon such as be faithful in the Land, that they may
dwell with me. Whosoever leads a godly life, shall be my servant. There shall no
deceitful person dwell in my house. He that tells lies shall not tarry in my
sight. I shall soon destroy all the ungodly that are in the Land, that I may
root out all wicked doers. O Lord God, deliver me from among the wicked, and
save me for thy mercy sake, and let not my wicked sins prevail against me. Hear
my prayers, O Lord, and let my cry come unto thee. O Lord God, my house of
defense, and my Castle, who by thy mercies and loving Spirit have taught me in
thy ways from my first years until now; thou have brought me to great honor,
even the honor of being a Christian; the honor of Adoption, to be thy child
and heir of thy glorious promises, coheirs with thy Son Jesus Christ, and have
comforted me on every side with a continual stream of thy mercies and
refreshments. Give me thy grace that I may love thee, and long for thee above
all the things in this world. As thou have helped me up ever since I was born,
so let thy mercy go along with me all the days of my life. Cast me not off in
the time of Age. Give me grace that I may never cast thee off, or thy Laws from
me. Let not thy grace, and the great strength I derive from thy thee, forsake
me, when my natural strength fails me; but let my spirit grow upon the
advantages of the flesh, and begin to receive the happiness of Eternity, by an
absolute conquest over the weak, and decaying body, that after I have by thine
Aid passed through the great troubles and adversities thou show unto all thy
children in the world, I may lie down in thy Righteousness, and with thy
favor, that when thou bring me out of the deep of the earth again, I may
have a joyful resurrection to the society of Saints and Angels, and the full
fruition of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Collect.
O God, who have prepared for all them that love thee, such good things that
pass man's understanding, pour into my heart such love toward thee, that I
loving thee above all things, may obtain the promises which exceed all that I
can desire, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for obtaining of Christ's Kingdom.
HIde not thy face from me, O Lord, in the time of my trouble, and incline
thine ears unto me when I call. O hear me, and that right soon; for thou art
full of mercy and compassion, long suffering, and of great goodness; thou art
not always chiding, neither keep thou thine anger for ever; thou do not
deal with me after my sins, nor rewardest thou me according to my wickedness;
for look how high the Heaven is in comparison of the Earth, so far have thou
set my sins from thee; yea, like as a Father pitieth his own Children, even so
the Lord is merciful to them that fear him; for he knows whereof we be made;
he remembers we are but dust, and the merciful goodness of the Lord endures
for ever, and ever, to them that fear him, and his Righteousness to his
Childrens Children, even upon such as keep his Covenant, and think upon his
Commandments, to do them. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, he has
great delight in his Commandments, his seed shall be mighty upon earth; the
generation of the faithful shall be blessed; riches and plentiousness shall be
in his house, his Righteousness endures for ever. Unto the godly there rises
up light in the darkness; he is merciful, loving and righteous. A good man is
merciful and lends, and will guide his words with discretion, for he shall
never be moved, and the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance; for
he will not be afraid of any evil tidings, for his heart stands fast, and is
stablished in the Lord, and will not shrink, until he sees his desire upon his
enemies; therefore not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but give the praise unto
thy Name, for thy loving mercy, for thy Truth sake; as for our God, he is in
Heaven, he has done whatsoever pleased him. Gracious is the Lord, and
righteous, yea our God is merciful. O blessed Jesu, who did descend from
Heaven into the womb of the blessed Virgin, like Rain into a fleece of wool;
thou that punishest the wrong doer, and defendest the Children of the poor, and
them that have no helper, have mercy upon thy Church, be pleased by her
Ministry to extend thy blessing upon thy dominion, from the one Sea to the
other, even to the worlds end, that all the Kings of the earth may fall down
before thee, and all Nations may do thee service. Make thy righteous people to
flourish, and subdue their enemies under them; deliver them from falsehood and
wrong, that they may be blessed with abundance of grace, and be satisfied with
thy righteousness and salvation, through thy mercies, O blessed Savior and
Redemer Jesu. Amen.

The Collect.
THE Lord of all power and might, who art the Author and giver of all good
things, graft in my heart the love of thy Name; increase in me true Religion,
enrich me with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep me in the same,
through Jesus my Lord. Amen.

A Prayer that we may have our portion in God, and not in the good things of
the men of this world.
O Lord God, who art loving unto all thy people, even unto such as are of a
clean heart, give me a heart humble and merciful, that I may never be holden
with pride, nor overwhelmed with cruelty; and sanctify my words and lips, that
I may never blaspheme thy holy Name, nor my talking be ever against thee, or
thy honor. O God most highest, give unto me such religious and mortified
affections, that I may never thirst after temporal advantages and prosperity of
the world. Set not my feet in slippery places, lest I be suddenly cast down,
and have my portion in the lot of the wicked, who perish and come to a fearful
end. Guide me with thy counsel, that I holding me fast by thee, and putting my
trust in thee, O God, thou might be the strength of my heart, the hope of my
soul, and the ground of all the confidence and content in this life, and after
this life is ended thou may receive me with glory, and be my portion for
ever, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A Prayer that we may fear God's Judgments, and be freed from the terrors of
men, and a Motive to move thereunto.
THE Lord preserves the simple. I was in misery, and he helped me, for his
merciful kindness is ever more and more toward me, and the truth of the Lord
endures for ever. Praise the Lord, O give thanks unto the Lord for he is
gracious, because his mercy endures for ever. I called upon the Lord in
trouble, and he heard me. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can
do unto me* The Lord takes my part with them that help me, therefore I shall
see my desire upon mine enemies. It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put
any confidence in Princes. The Lord is my strength and my song, he is become my
salvation. The Lord has chastened and corrected me, but he has not given me
over unto death. Help me now, O Lord, send me now prosperity. Thou art my God,
I will praise thee. Thou chargest that I should diligently keep thy
Commandments. O that my ways were made so direct, that I might keep thy
Statutes: so shall I not be confounded while I have respect unto thy
Commandments. I will keep thy Testimonies, O forsake me not utterly. Blessed
art thou O Lord; teach me thy Statutes. I have had as great delight in the
ways of thy Testimonies, as in all manner of riches. My delight shall be in
thy Statutes, and I will not forget thy Word; therefore O Lord, do well unto
thy servant, that I may live and keep thy Word. Open thou mine eyes, that I may
see the wonders of thy Law. Turn not from me, neither rebuke me, for I have
kept thy Statutes. My soul melts away for very heaviness. O comfort thou me
according to thy Word. Take from me the way of lying, and cause thou me to make
much of thy Law. I have chosen the way of Truth, and thy Judgments have laid
before me. I have stuck unto thy Testimonies. O Lord confound me not. O Lord
God, whose dwelling is in the Heaven, and thy Name is great in all the world,
plant the dread and reverence of thee, and thy power in my heart. Let
threatenings, and thy Judgments which are heard from Heaven, and executed upon
disobedient and gainsaying people, make me to tremble at the remembrance of my
sins, and in consideration of my weaknesses and demerits, and let thy mercies,
and the remembrance of thy infinite loving kindnesses, make my heart still full
of eavenness and tranquillity, that I may not fear the fierceness of man, or the
wrath of those spirits thou can refrain, lest I be disturbed in my duty toward
thee, that I never offend against thee, but may pass from fear to love, from
apprehensions of thy wrath, to the sense and comforts of thy mercies, through
Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

The Collect.
O God, whose never failing providence orders all things both in Heaven and
Earth, I humbly beseech thee to put away from me all hurtful things; to give me
those things that be profitable for me, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A Prayer that God may remove from me all fearfulness and doubt of his favor
and mercy.
TEach me O Lord, the way of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end.
Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law, yea I shall keep it with my
whole heart. Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments, for therein is my
delight. Incline my heart to thy Testimonies, and not to covetousness. O turn
away mine eyes, lest they behold vanities, and quicken thou me in thy way. O
stablish thy Word in thy servant, that I may fear thee. Take away the rebuke
that I am afraid of, for thy Judgments are good. Behold my delight is in thy
Commandments, O quicken me in thy Righteousness. O take not the word of thy
Truth utterly out of my mouth, for my hope is in thy Judgments, so shall I
always keep thy Law, yea for ever and ever. O think upon thy servant. as
concerning thy Word wherein thou have caused me to put my trust; the same is my
comfort in my trouble, for thy Word has quickened me. O turn me into true
understanding and knowledge, for I have believed thy Commandments. Before I was
troubled I went wrong, but now I have kept thy Word. Thou art good and
gracious, O teach me thy Statutes. It is good for me that I have been in
trouble, that I might learn thy Statutes. O let thy loving mercies come unto
me, that I may live, for thy Law is my delight. O let my heart be sound in thy
Statutes, that I be not ashamed. O quicken me after thy loving kindness, so
shall I keep the Testimony of thy mouth. If my delight had not been in thy Law,
I should have perished in my trouble. I will never forget thy Commandments, for
with them thou have quickened me. I am thine, O save me for thy mercies sake,
for I have sought thy Commandment. The ungodly laid wait for me to destroy me,
but I will consider thy Testimonies. I desire to refrain my feet from every
evil way, that I may keep thy Word. I am troubled above measure, quicken me O
Lord according to thy Word, and deliver me for thy mercy sake. O God, who do
wonders, and have declared thy power amongst all people, let the observation of
thy mercies and loving kindnesses make deep impression in my heart and memory,
that when I am in heaviness, I may remember the years of thy right hand, and
call to mind the wonders of old time, although thou sometime withdrawest the
brightness of thy countenance from me, and shuttest up thy loving kindness in
sore displeasure, yet the experience of thy old mercies, which never fail, may
sustain mine infirmities, and the expectation of thy loving kindnesses may cure
all my impatience, till in thy due time the sense of thy favors may actually
relieve all my distresses, and thy right hand lead me like a sheep into the
folds of eternal rest and security, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

The Collect.
GRant unto me, O Lord, I humbly beseech thee, the Spirit, to think and do all
such things as be rightful, that I who cannot do any thing that is good without
thee, may be enabled to live according to thy Will, through Jesus Christ my
Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for God's free mercy in the the pardon of my sins, and a prayer for
the continuance and the increase of his mercies to me.
LET the free will offering of my mouth please thee, O Lord, and teach me thy
Judgments. I have applied my heart to fulfill thy Statutes always even unto
the end. Thou art my defense and my shield, and my trust is in thy Word. O
stablish me according to thy Word, that I may live, and let me not be
disappointed of my hope. Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe, yea my delight
shall ever in thy Statutes. I desire with my whole heart to do the thing that
is lawful and right. O give me not over unto my oppressors. O make thou thy
servant to delight in that which is good, that they which hate me do me no
wrong. O deal with thy servants according to thy loving kindness, and teach me
thy Statutes; I am thy servant, O grant me understanding, that I may know thy
Testimonies; it is time for thee, Lord, to lay too thy hand, for they have
destroyed thy Law; therefore hold I straight all thy Commandments, for all
false ways I utterly abhor. O look upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou
usest to do unto those that love thy Name, O most gracious God, who art
reconciled unto me, in my Savior Jesus, having for his sake forgiven the
offenses of thy people, and covered all their sins with the Robe of his most
immaculate sanctity and Righteousness. Let thy grace convert and quicken me,
that I may rejoice in thee, and thy salvation, in faith of thy promises, in the
hope of actual communication, and of thy mercy to me, and in love to thee for
so a great blessing and redemption; and when thou have spoken peace to my soul,
and reconciled me to thy self in the blood of thy Son, give me the grace of
perseverance, that I may never turn again to folly, but may follow mercy and
truth all my days, and at last be satisfied with thy Righteousness, and peace
eternal, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

The Collect.
LET thy merciful ears, O Lord, be open to the Prayers of thy humble servant,
and that he may obtain his petitions, make me to ask such things as shall
please thee, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for sanctity and preservation.
ORder my steps in thy Word, O Lord, so that no wickedness have dominion over
me. Deliver me from the deceitful dealings of men, so shall I keep thy
Commandments. Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant, and teach me
thy Statutes. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and true in thy Judgments. Trouble
and heaviness have taken hold upon me, yet my delight is in thy Commandments.
Except the Lord build the house, their labor is but lost that build it. Except
the Lord keep the City, the watchman watches but in vain. I looked for the
Lord; my soul does wait for him; in his Word is my trust. O Israel, trust in
the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous
redemption; for he shall deliver Israel from all his sins. Behold how good and
joyful a thing it is, to dwell together in unity; thy Name, O Lord, endures
for ever; so does thy memorial, O Lord, from one generation to another: For the
Lord will avenge his people, and be gracious to his servants. O Lord God, good
and gracious, and of great mercy unto all them that call upon thee, give ear
unto my prayers, and ponder the voice of my humble desire, whenever I call upon
thee in my trouble. Let the soul of thy servant be refreshed with thy comforts,
and defend me from the congregations of proud and naughty men. Turn thee unto
me with mercy; give thy strength unto me; teach me thy Law; make me to walk in
thy Truth; give me the fear of thy Name, and knit my heart unto thee, with the
indissoluble bands of charity and obedience, that my soul being saved from the
neathermost hell, I may worship in spirit and truth, which thou have manifested
unto me in my deliverance and redemption, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

The Collect.
O Lord, who declarest thy Almighty Power, most chiefly in showing mercy and
pity, mercifully grant unto me such a measure of thy grace, that I running the
ways of thy Commandments, may obtain thy gracious promises, and be made
partaker of thy heavenly treasure, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A Prayer in time of Sickness, and in danger of Death.
THE Lord is loving unto every man, and his mercy is over all his works. The
eyes of all wait upon thee, O Lord, and thou give them their meat in due
season. Thou openest thy hand, and fillest all things living with
plentiousness. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works. The Lord is nigh unto all that call upon him, yea all such as call upon
him faithfully. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he will hear
their cry, and will help them. The Lord will preserve all them that love him,
but scatters abroad all the ungodly. My mouth shall speak the praises of the
Lord; and let all flesh give thanks unto his holy Name. The Lord loses men
out of prison: The Lord gives sight to the blind: The Lord helps them that
are fallen: The Lord cares for the Righteous: The Lord cares for the
strangers; he defends the fatherless and the widow; as for the way of the
ungodly, he turns it upside down; he heals those that are broken in heart;
he gives medicine to heal their sickness; he tells the number of the Stars,
and calls them all by their name. Great is our God, and great is his power;
yea his wisdom is infinite. O Lord God of my salvation, who for my sake was
wounded, and did die and lie in the grave, but yet alone of all that ever
died, were free among the dead, and by thine own power did rise again, with
victory and triumph, have mercy upon thy servant, for thine indignation lies
hard upon me; thou have vexed me with all thy storms, my soul is full of
trouble, by reason of my sins, and my life draws nigh to the grave. O restore
unto me thy favor, and let me not go down into the dark, nor my life into the
place where all things are forgotten; but let me show forth thy loving kindness
amongst thy Redeemed ones in the Land of the Living, for the Living, the
Living, they shall praise thee, and confess the holiness and the marvelousness
of thy holy Name. O hide not thou thy face from me, but give me health of body,
and restore and preserve me in the Life of Righteousness, and so bless me with
opportunities of doing thee service, that I may redeem the time past, and by
thy grace may grow rich in good works, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, that when thou shall demand my soul to be rendered up into thy hands, my
soul may not approve of thee, nor suffer thy terrors, but may feel an eternity
of blessing in the Resurrection of the Just, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

The Collect.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who art always more ready to hear, than I to
pray; and art wont to give more than I either desire or deserve, pour down upon
me the abundance of thy mercy, forgiving me those things whereof my conscience
is afraid, and give me those good things which I am not worthy to ask, but
through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ, thy Son, my Lord. Amen.

A Meditation for Death, and a Prayer preparatory to it.
THE Lord is with them that fear him, and put their trust in his mercy; for the
Lord has pleasure in his people, and helps the meek hearted. The Lord of
Hosts can do all things; there is nothing too hard for him; therefore let every
thing that has a mouth praise the Lord. Open my mouth, O my God, that I may
set forth thy praise. Hear my voice, O Lord, according to thy loving kindness;
quicken me as thou art wont. Be thou nigh at hand, O Lord, for all thy
Commandments are true. I call with my whole heart, hear me, O Lord, and I will
keep thy Statutes; yea, even upon thee do I call, and I shall keep thy
Testimonies. O consider mine adversity, and deliver me. Avenge thou my cause,
and deliver me, and quicken me according to thy Word; for great is thy mercy, O
eternal God, whose being was before the mountains were brought forth, before
the Earth and the World was made, even from everlasting, World without end.
Have mercy upon me, weak, and impotent, poor servant of thine, the child of
man, who fades away suddenly like the grass, remove my misdeeds far from before
thee, and my secret sins from the sight of thy countenance. Be not angry with
me, neither consume me in thy displeasure. Teach me to number all the days of
my life, and to reckon on still to the day of death, that when my days are
gone, and my years are brought to an end, like a tale that is told, thou may
turn unto me at the last, and be gracious unto me in the free pardon of all my
sins, in restraining the power and malice of all my Ghostly enemies; in giving
me opportunity of all spiritual assistances and advantages, that my lamp being
trimmed and burning bright, with charity and devotion, I may enter into the
Bridechamber, there for ever to behold the glorious Majesty of my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Collect.
A Almighty and merciful God, of whose only gift it comes, that thy people do
unto thee return laudable service, grant I beseech thee, that I may so
faithfully serve thee in this life, that I may not finally fail to attain thy
heavenly promises, through the merit of Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for Protection in all Dangers.
O Lord, quicken me as thou art wont, and hide not thy face from me in time of
distress. As for lies, I hate and abhor them, but thy Law do I love. Consider O
Lord, how I love thy Commandments; O quicken me according to thy loving
kindness, for I am glad of thy Word, as one that finds great spoils. Great is
the peace that they have which love thy Law, and are not offended at it. Lord,
I have looked for thy saving health, and done after thy Commandments. O let my
complaint come before thee. O Lord, give me understanding according to thy
Word, and let my supplication come before thee, and deliver me according to thy
Word. Let thine hand help me, for I have chosen thy Commandments: I have gone
astray like a sheep that is lost; O seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy
Commandments. When I was in trouble I called upon the Lord, and he helped me.
Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue. O Lord
God, my hope, and my strong hold, have mercy upon me, and defend me under the
shadow of thy wing, that I trusting under thy defense, may by thy faithfulness
and truth be defended and covered, as with a shield and buckler. Give thy
Angels charge concerning me, and my habitation, that I may be preserved and
kept in all my ways, and that no evil happen unto me, no plague come nigh my
dwelling, no terrors of the night, no arrows of thy vengeance by day may
disturb my peace or safety: Let thy ministering Spirits bear me in their hands,
and keep me from precepice, from fracture of bones, from dislocations, noisome
or sharp diseases, stupidity and deformity, that I may tread under my feet all
the snares of the roaring Lion, and the great Dragon the Devil, who seek my
bodily and ghostly heart, do thou O Lord, set thy love upon me, and deliver me
from all my troubles, and put an end to all my discontents which I suffer of
them that hate me without a cause; and at the end of my days, show me thy
salvation, and satisfy me with long life, even of a blessed eternity in this
heavenly Kingdom, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

The Collect.
Keep, I beseech thee, O Lord, thy Church, with thy perpetual mercy, and
because the frailty of man without thee cannot but fall, keep me and all thy
people ever by thy help, from all things hurtful, and lead us to all things
profitable to our salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Protection of the godly, and a Meditation of the great Works
of God in the destruction of the wicked.
I Will lift up mine eyes unto the Hills from whence comes my help; my help
comes even from the Lord, which made Heaven and Earth. Behold he that keeps
Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord himself is my defense upon my
right hand: The Lord shall preserve me from all evil; yea, it is even he that
shall keep my soul. The Lord shall preserve my going out, and my coming (...)
from this time forth and for ever more, unto thee I lift up mine eyes. O thou
that dwell in the Heavens, have mercy upon me, for I am utterly despised,
yet my help stands in the Name of the Lord, which has made Heaven and Earth.
They that put their trust in the Lord, shall be even as the Mount Sion, which
may not be removed, but stands fast for ever. Do well, O Lord, unto those
that be good and true of heart, and reform what is amiss in me, for thy mercy
sake. O let thine ears consider well the voice of my complaint. If thou Lord,
wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may abide it? for there
is mercy with thee, therefore thou shall be feared. O Lord God, thou art the
highest for evermore, thy works are glorious, and thy thoughts are very deep:
make my heart and tongue loud instruments of thy praises, that I may tell of
thy mercy in the morning, and of thy truth in the night season; that I may
rejoice in giving thee thanks for the operations of thy hand all the days and
nights of my whole life. Let thy merciful kindness descend evermore upon the
righteous, that they may flourish like a Palm Tree, being continually watered
with the dew of temporal and spiritual blessings, and may bring forth fruit of
a holy conversation, and grant that thy servant being planted in the house of
God, and firmly fixed in the blessed communion of Saints, may flourish in the
Courts of thy house, and in thy Ecclesiastical Temple to all Eternity. O let
not my portion be amongst the ungodly and unrighteous. Make me not to
communicate in their wickedness, so much as by consent or approbation, that I
may never perish and be destroyed in the furiousness of thine anger, which thou
treasurest up against the day of vengeance, and righteous Judgment, even the
day of the appearing of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Collect.
ALmighty and merciful God, of whose only gift it comes, that thy faithful
people do give unto thee all true and laudable service, grant I beseech thee
that I may faithfully serve thee in this life, that I fail not faithfully to
attain thy heavenly promise, through the merits of Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A Prayer that God would preserve his Church against the storm and flood of
Persecution.
I Looked for the Lord; my soul does wait for him; in his Word is my trust;
therefore keep me O Lord, and thy whole Church from the hands of the ungodly.
Preserve me from the wicked men which are purposed to overthrow my going; sure
I am that the Lord will avenge the poor and innocent, and maintain the cause of
the helpless. Lord, I call upon thee, haste thee to help me, and consider my
voice when I cry unto thee. Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight, as the
incense, and the lifting up of my hands be as an evening Sacrifice. Set a
watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. O let me hear thy
loving kindness in the morning, for in thee is my trust. Show me the way that I
should walk in, for I lift my soul unto thee. Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil
man, and preserve me from the wicked man that seeks to overthrow my going. O
Lord God, Judge of all the World, to whom vengeance belongs, and execution of
Righteous Judgment, have mercy upon us: Chasten us with thy gentleness and
fatherly correction when we sin against thee. Teach us thy Law. Be our refuge
and confidence in trouble; and give patience in time of adversity, that in the
multitude of sorrows thy comforts may refresh us, thy mercies may relieve us,
thy grace may pardon and confirm us, that our feet slip not, and our souls be
not put to silence; have pity upon all distressed and miserable people. Do
justice upon all that murder the Widow, that put the fatherless to death, that
grind the face of the poor. Fail not thy people, O Lord, and forsake not thine
inheritance, but destroy the devises of all them that imagine evil as a Law,
and are confederate against the Righteous, to condemn the innocent, to
discountenance Religion, to disadvantage thy worship and service, that in the
day of eternal vengeance, when thou shall reward the proud after their
deserving, and the pit be dug by the ungodly; we may have the lot of thine
inheritance, and reign in the fellowship of Saints, who give honor and praise
to thee, O Lord God, Almighty, world without end. Amen.

The Collect.
Keep I beseech thee, O Lord, thy Church with thy perpetual mercy, and because
the frailty of man without thee, cannot but fall, keep us ever by thy help from
all things hurtful, and lead us to all things profitable for our salvation,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Invitation to the Worship of God, and a Prayer for Obedience to his Will.
O Great God, the Lord, our Maker, who art a King above all Gods, give me the
graces of humility, and holy Religion, that I may worthily praise and worship
thy glories and perfections infinitely. I am the Sheep of thy Pasture; let thy
mercies lead me and feed me, and refresh my soul with the Divine nutriment of
thy Word and Sacraments. I am the sheep of thy hands, do thou guide me that I
may never go astray; or if I do, bring me home into the Sheepfold of the great
Shepherd, that I hearing his voice, may not harden my heart, neither tempting
thy mercies, nor provoking thy wrath; but my heart being preserved from errors,
and my ways from obliquity and crookedness, I may at last enter into thy
eternal rest, through the merits and guidance of my great Shepherd, Jesus
Christ, my Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

The Collect.
O Lord, I beseech thee let thy continual pity cleanse and defend thy Church;
and because it cannot continue in safety without thy succor, preserve it ever
more by thy help and goodness, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Adoration and magnifying the Glories of God.
O Lord God, in whose Sanctuary is power, and honor, before whose presence is
glory and worship. Fill my lips and soul with great devotion and reverence
toward thee my God. Make me to love thy Goodness, to adore thy Omnipotency, to
reverence thy Justice, to fear thy Majesty, to tremble at thy Omniscience and
Omnipresence, and to contemplate with the greatest zeal and affections all
those glories which thou communicatest to the Sons of men, in the revelations
of the Gospel of thy Creator, and of thy miracles, that I may tell of thy
greatness, and declare thy salvation from day to day; and when thou come with
Righteousness to judge the Earth, and all people with thy truth, I may rejoice
in thee everlastingly, and sing eternally Hallelujah to thee, in thy Sanctuary;
grant this for Jesus Christ his sake, my Lord and only Savior. Amen.

The Collect.
O Lord, I beseech thee, grant thy grace to withstand the temptations of the
world, the flesh, and the Devil, and with pure hearts and minds, to follow thee
the only God, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer for Mercy and Salvation.
O Lord our King, Lord of the whole Earth, have mercy upon me, and sanctify me
with thy grace, that I may hate every thing that is evil; that I may love thee,
give thanks unto thy Name, and rejoice in the remembrance of thy holiness, that
in the day of Judgment and great terrors, when thou shall sit in thy seat
supported with Righteousness and Judgment, and a fire shall go forth from thy
presence, to burn up thine enemies on every side, thou may preserve my soul
in safety from the hands of mine enemies, and a light may spring up unto me, to
preserve me from eternal darkness, and the want of the light of thy
countenance, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

The Collect.
O Lord God, for as much as without thee I am not able to please thee,
mercifully grant that thy holy Spirit may in all things direct and rule my
heart, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Thanksgiving for the Redemption of mankind by Jesus Christ.
O Most powerful Jesus, who with thine own Right hand, and with thy holy Arm
have begotten to thy self on our behalf the victory over sin, hell, and the
grave, remember this thy mercy and truth which thou have promised to all that
believe in thee, give me pardon of all my sins sealed unto me by the testimony
of the Holy Spirit, and a good conscience, and grant that I may by thy strength
fight against my ghostly enemies, and by thy power may overcome them, that I
may rejoice in a holy peace, and sing, and give thanks for my victory, and my
Crown, extend this mercy, and enlarge the effect of thy great Victories to the
Heathen, that all the ends of the world may sing a new song unto thee, and see
the salvation of God, that when thou come to judge the Earth, we may find
mercy, and be joyful together before thee in the fruition of a blessed
Eternity, through thy mercies, O blessed Savior and Redeemer Jesu. Amen*

The Collect.
O Almighty and most merciful Lord God, of thy bountiful goodness and mercy
keep me, I beseech thee, from all things that may hurt me, that I being ready
both in body and soul, may accomplish those things that thou would have
done, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A Psalm of Praise to God for his Mercy and Truth.
The Prayer.
O Lord our God, Who have created us out of nothing, and have redeemed us from
misery and death when we were thy enemies, showing great expresses of thy
loving kindnesses when we were vessels of wrath, and inheritours of perdition,
revealing thy Truth unto us in the Sermons of the Gospel; teach us to walk as
thou have commanded us, to believe as thou have taught, that we may inherit
what thou have promised us; for thou art the way, the truth, and the life. We
are thy people, and the sheep of thy Pasture; thou art our guide, and our
defense; let thy grace teach us to serve thee, and thy holy Spirit assist and
promote our endeavors with the blessing of gladness and cheerfulness of
spirit, that we may love to speak good of thy Name, and at last go to the
Courts of thy Temple with praise and a song in our mouths, to thy honor and
eternal glory, whose Mercy and Truth is everlasting, and revealed unto the
Church in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Collect.
LOrd, I pray thee, that thy grace may always prevent and follow us, all the
days of our life; make us continually be given to all good works, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for a holy Life.
O Lord God, of eternal purity, who who art of pure eyes, and can behold no
iniquity or impurity, enlighten my understanding, that I may have knowledge in
the way of godliness; make my path straight, and my heart perfect; take from me
the sins of unfaithfulness; correct and mortify in me all froward and peevish
dispositions; let me love the society of the Saints, and hate the fellowship of
the wicked, that I may not be destroyed with the ungodly, nor be rooted out
from the City of the Lord, nor banished from the sweetness of thy presence; for
with thee is light and health, and salvation to thy Name, be all honor, and
glory, and praise ascribed world without end. Amen.

The Collect.
ALmighty and Everlasting God, give unto me the increase of Faith, Hope, and
Charity, that I may obtain that which thou do promise; make me to love that
which thou do command, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for Comfort in sadness of spirit in Sickness, or in any other
affliction.
O Eternal God, who endurcst for ever, and thy remembrance throughout all
generations, have mercy upon me according to the infinite treasures of thy
loving kindness; hear the voice of my groaning, for thy indignation and thy
wrath lies hard upon me, and my sins have put an edge upon thy sword, and a
thorn upon my wounded conscience. O hold up the reins of my soul; repair the
breaches of my comfort, and my hope, and let thy glory now appear, for that
shines brightly in the beams of thy mercy, and when thou turnest unto the
prayer of the poor destituted, it becomes an eternal monument and a record of
thy honor, and all generations which shall be born shall praise thee. Look
down, O Lord, from thy Sanctuary, hear the mourning of me, and all distressed
people; send me life and health so long as it may be a blessing, and not
shorten my days in wrath, but give me grace so to spend all my time in the
work of repentance and holiness, that when my years fail, and my change is
come, I may be translated to the new Heaven which shall never perish, nor wax
old, there to continue and stand fast in thy sight for ever, through Jesus
Christ my Lord. Amen.

The Collect.
O Lord, I beseech thee absolve thy people from their offenses, that through
thy bountiful goodness we may be delivered from the bondage of those sins,
which by our frailty we have committed; grant this, O heavenly Father, for
Jesus Christ his sake, our blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Thanksgiving to God for all his benefits and mercies.
O Most merciful God, whose mercies are as high as the Heavens, as many as the
moments of eternity, thou have opened thy hand wide to me with thy blessing,
and the sweet effects of thy loving kindness: Thou art pitiful as a Father,
tender as a Mother, careful as a Guardian, and exceeding merciful to all them
that fear thee. I pray thee to fill my soul with apprehension and impresses of
thy unspeakable mercy, that my thankfulness may be as great as my need of mercy
is; and let thy merciful loving kindness endure for ever and ever upon thy poor
servant, that puts his trust in thee. Keep no anger in store for me. Chide
me not in thy displeasure. Satisfy my mouth with good things. Remove all my
sins from me, as far as the East is from the West. Heal all my infirmities, and
save my life from destruction, for all these are mercies that thou delightest
it; and because I cannot praise thee according to thy excellencies, take my
soul in thy due time into the land of everlasting praises, that I may spend a
whole Eternity in ascribing to thy name praise, and honor, and dominion; grant
this for Jesus Christ his sake, my Lord and only Savior. Amen.

The Collect.
ALmighty and everlasting God, absolve thy people from their offenses, that
through thy bountiful goodness we may be delivered from the bonds of those
sins, which by our frailty we have committed; grant this heavenly Father, for
Jesus Christ his sake, our blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Thanksgiving for deliverance from misery and danger.
O Lord God, gracious and good, whose mercy endures for ever, in my trouble I
cry unto thee, for when my heart is brought down through heaviness; there is
none to help me up, or to deliver me out of my distress, but only thou, O Lord:
I have sinned, I have rebelled against thee, and lightly regarded thy counsel.
I have walked and sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, being fast
bound in the captivity and misery of sin; O bring thou me out of darkness; and
break my bonds in sunder. Guide me through the desert of the world, in which
grows nothing but sadness, and discontent, still the tempest, and smooth the
floods of misery which are ready to overwhelm me; and in thy due time bring me
to eternal rest, and to the Haven where I would fain be, that in the
Congregation of thy holy people I may praise thee for thy goodness, and declare
thy wonders that thou have done for me in delivering me from sins, misery and
death, and bringing me to a City to dwell in, where there is life and light,
and joy eternal in the beholding the face of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Amen.

The Collect.
GRant, I beseech thee, O merciful Lord, to thy faithful people, pardon and
peace, that they may be cleansed from all their sins, and fear thee, with a
quiet mind, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer of Thanksgiving for all the mercies and salvation which are given us
in Christ Jesus.
O Most gracious God, and most merciful Father, my strength and my salvation,
for thy mercy endures for ever, be thou on my side; take part with them that
help me, and forsake me not in time of need; let the voice of joy and health be
in my dwelling; and when thou chastenest and correctest me for my sins, give me
not over unto death, but fix my faith and hopes upon the head stone in the
corner, even my Lord Jesus Christ, that in all the assaults made against me by
my ghostly enemies, the right hand of the Lord may have the pre-eminence, and
bring mighty things to pass, even victory and deliverance unto thy servants,
that I putting no confidence in the best of men, may trust in thee, O Lord,
till at last when thou openest the everlasting gates of righteousness, I may
enter in, and give thee praise and thanks through Jesus Christ my Lord and only
Savior. Amen.

The Collect.
O God, my Refuge and Strength, who art the Author of all godliness, be ready
to hear the devout prayer of thy Church, and grant that those things which we
ask faithfully, we may obtain effectually, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer that God would be pleased to pardon my many and great sins, and
direct me in the ways of Righteousness.
O Lord, my Judge and my Redeemer, hearken unto me for thy Truth and
Righteousness sake, and deliver me from the guilt of all my sins, and from
those great punishments which are due unto me for the same, enter not into
judgment with me, for in thy sight no man can be justified by any worthiness of
his own: Endue my soul with a righteousness of a holy life, living and working
by charity: Show me the way that I should walk in: Teach me to do whatsoever
pleases thee: Quicken my soul in the path of life, and so continue the conduct
of thy Spirit in me, that it may never leave me, till I be brought forth of
this world into the Land of Righteousness, to dwell with thee eternally,
through Jesus Christ my Lord and only Savior. Amen.

The Collect.
O God, my Refuge and Strength, who art the Author of all godliness, be ready,
I beseech thee, to hear the devout prayer of thy Church, and grant that those
things which I ask faithfully, I may obtain effectually, through Jesus Christ
my Lord and only Savior. Amen.

A Thanksgiving for the benefit of the holy Gospel, particularly of the blessed
Sacrament.
O Blessed Jesu, whose Righteousness endures for ever, thy work is worthy to
be praised, and had in honor, for that thou have been merciful to us, and have
given meat, even the fruit of a blessed Sacrament, unto them that fear thee,
that by the participation of thy holy Communion, we should have thee in
remembrance, and ever be mindful of thy Covenant, plant in our hearts the fear
of thy Name; give us wisdom and good understanding; make us to have pleasure in
thee, and all thy works, that we obeying the precepts of thy holy Gospel, and
performing the conditions of thy Covenant, which thou have established for ever
in truth and equity, in verity and judgment, we may worthily praise and adore
thy reverend and holy Name among the faithful in this life, and in the
Congregation of thy Saints in the life to come, through thy mercies, O blessed
Jesu, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be honor and glory, now and
for ever more. Amen.

The Collect.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who do govern all things both in Heaven and in
Earth, mercifully hear the supplications of thy people, and grant us thy grace,
all the days of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for a Penitent Sinner.
O Lord, withdraw not thou thy loving mercies from me: Let thy loving kindness,
O Lord, and thy truth always preserve me: O Lord, let it be thy pleasure to
deliver me from all my fear: Make haste O Lord to help me. As for me, I am poor
and needy, but the Lord cares for me: Thou art my Helper and Redeemer, make no
long tarrying, O my God. Hearken to my voice, O Lord, when I cry unto thee,
have mercy upon me, and hear me. O hide not thou thy face from me, and cast not
away thy servant in displeasure. Thou have been my succor, leave me not,
neither forsake me, O God of my salvation. Consider my complaint, O Lord, for I
am brought very low. O deliver me from my persecutors, for they are too strong
for me. Hear my prayer. O Lord, consider my desire, hearken unto me for thy
Truth and Righteousness sake, and enter not into judgment with thy servant, for
in thy sight no man living can be justified. Hear me, O Lord, and that soon,
for my spirit waxes faint. Hide not thy face from me, lest I be like to them
that go down to the pit. O let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the
morning, for in thee is my trust. Show thou me the way that I should walk in,
for I lift up my heart unto thee. Deliver me O Lord, from mine enemies, for I
fly unto thee, to hide me. Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for
thou art my God. O let thy Spirit lead me forth into the Land of Righteousness.
Quicken me, O Lord, for thy Names sake, and for thy Righteousness sake bring my
soul out of trouble, O my God, and all for Jesus Christ his sake, my blessed
Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Commemoration of God's frequent pardons and mercies to the penitent.
O Lord God, full of mercy and pity, who did many times deliver thy people
from their adversity, when thou for their rebellion against thee, and their
inventions, had given them into the hands of the Heathen. Remember me, O
Lord, according to the favor thou bear unto thy people, and visit me with
thy salvation. And though I have done amiss, and dealt wickedly against thee
and thy Covenant, yet be pleased to help me for thy Name sake. Make thy power
to be known in the mighty deliverance and redemption of me from so many dangers
and miseries wherewith thou have delivered me. Give me grace to believe thy
word, to obey thy counsel, and to walk in thy Laws; to relinquish my own sinful
and vain desire, to obey my Governors, Ecclesiastical and Civil, that I may
not have the lot of Dathan and Abyram, but at last may receive my portion in
thine inheritance, which thou have prepared for thy chosen people, giving thee
thanks with thine inheritance, for that thou have turned from me thy wrathful
indignation, pitying me, and saving me according to the multitude of thy
mercies, thy Name be blessed, O Lord God, everlastingly, and world without end,
through Jesus Christ my Lord* Amen.

A Prayer for Victory against our Enemies,
O Lord God, whose mercy is greater than the Heavens, and thy glory above all
the Earth, be thou exalted in thine own strength, and magnify thy power and thy
mercy in defending me, and thy holy Church against all our enemies temporal and
spiritual. Forsake me not, O God, my strength and my defense, for vain is the
help of man: Do thou strengthen me, and go along with me, and stand by me in
the day of battle, that I being defended and armed by thee, may do acts great
and good, fighting thy battle, and putting my confidence in thy Righteousness
only, and thy salvation, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Fear of the Lord, for Gravity, and the blessing of the
Righteous.
O Lord God, who art to be feared in the generations of the world, teach me the
fear of thy Name, that I may fear to offend thee, and that delighting in thy
Commandments, I may serve thee without fear of my enemies in holiness and
righteousness all my days. Let thy Light arise upon the darkness of my
understanding. Let thy mercies and gentleness turn all the thoughts of
unmercifulness in me, and make me charitable, of tender bowels, earning with
pity over the need of the poor. Teach me to guide my words with discretion.
Make me never to be moved from my purposes of holy living. Stablish my heart in
thy love, that in the day of restitution of all things, thou may give the
portion of the charitable, the rewards of thy Right hand; and when the wicked
shall gnash with their teeth, and consume away in a sad Eternity, I may be
satisfied with the Riches and plentiousness of thy house for ever, through
Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A Prayer against my Adversaries* and for Confidence in the True God.
O Lord God, at whose presence the Earth trembles, who works salvation and
deliverance for thy Church in Ages, thou have done whatsoever pleases thee in
Heaven and in Earth, give me thy grace, that in all my troubles I make thee my
succor and defense, and put my whole trust in thee only, that I receiving thy
mercies, and the satisfaction of all my hopes from thy plentiousness and loving
kindness, I may give praise unto thy Name, never ascribing unto my self any
honor, or the glory or thanks of any good action, or prosperous success, but
to thee who art the Author and giver of all good things; preserve me from all
evil of soul and body, from vain imaginations, and making any thing to be my
confidence besides thee, my God, that so thou may be mindful of me, and
bless me in all my ways and actions, and when I die and go down into silence,
I may have my portion among the blessed of the Lord, in the inheritance of thy
Kingdom, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A Prayer.
O Thou Almighty Goodness, the Father of the Fatherless, the portion of the
poor, and protector of strangers, cast thy gracious eyes upon a miserable
sinner, who with humility implores thy mercy. When I look on my self, I dare
scarce be so bold as to lift up mine eyes unto thee. When I think in what
condition I am, and what I have done, it so confounds me, that I can hardly
think of any thing else; it is the greatness of my misery alone, that
constrains me to the presumption of prostrating my self at thy feet; the weight
of which presses me so much, that it has left me no more power than to expose
my self before thee, as an admirer of thy wondrous charity. O my sins are
wondrous great, in which all comfort forsakes my soul. O thy terrors have
consumed me, how dreadful are they! O the affliction and torment I endure! what
tongue can express it! my soul is parched and dried up; my spirits are consumed
by the heat of thy displeasure; may I not now beg one drop of comfort from
thee? O my God, my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee in a
barren and dry ground. I remember thy loving kindness of old time; I can but
wish at least to see thy power and thy glory, as I have known thee in thy
Sanctuary. There is none in Heaven that I desire but thee, nor on Earth besides
thee. My soul follows hard after thee, O when will thou come unto me? O hide
not thy face from thy servant, lest I come to misery. Hear me speedily, for I
am poor and needy. Make haste unto me, O my God, thou art my helper and
deliverer. O Lord, make no long tarrying, I am come a great way from my friends
and kindred, and here is none to pity me. O my God, be not thou far from me.
Draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it. I am poor and sorrowful, let thy
salvation set me up on high, for thou who searchest the heart, know that I
set my heart only to seek thee. I desire to leave all the world, that I may
find my happiness only in thee. O heavenly Father, with my whole heart I desire
to do thy blessed will in all things; yea thus far I acknowledge thou have most
gratefully conducted me. Hitherto I have been highly favored, and wonderfully
helped and preserved by thee, and will thou now at last abandon me, who desire
at last to have abandoned all things else for thy sake. Have thou called me
from mine own Country, and from my Fathers house, and now to be forsaken by
thee? O my God, give me leave to plead for a soul that I thought was once dear
unto thee: Pity, O pity an heart which thou have made too great for all the
world, and cannot be satisfied with less than thee: Can thou see it die for
want of one smile from thee? yea, can thou let it die of love to thee, for
that has brought me thus far to seek thee, and will thou suffer it to die at
thy feet? can thou endure to behold it in thine arms into which it now throws
it self with all the force it has? shall it miscarry full of prayers and
longings after thee? shall it expire in cries and tears when it calls for
mercy? O where are thy bowels? what is become of thine ancient loving kindness?
are they all forfeited by one offense against thee? O my God, I cannot think so
hardly of thee; I begin to live, methinks, because thou permittest these
addresses to thee; it inspires me with some hopes to find these holy breathings
in me; it rejoices me much that I feel thee drawing my very heart after thee; O
take it, I beseech thee, take it quite away from me, unto thy self, shape it
after thine own heart; make it such as thou can embrace it; create in me a
clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from
thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me. Restore to me the joy of
thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free spirit, and all this for Jesus
Christ his sake. Amen.

Ejaculations to be used at the Lord's Supper.
LOrd, I am not worthy thou should come under my roof; I have sinned, what
shall I do unto thee O thou preserver of men? Here recollect some of thy
greatest sins; If thou Lord, should be extreme to mark what is done amiss. O
Lord, who may abide it? but with the Lord there is mercy, and with him there is
plentious redemption. Behold, O Lord, thy Beloved Son, in whom thou art well
pleased. Hearken to the cry of his blood, which speaks better things than
that of Abel; by his Agony and bloody Sweat, by his Cross and Passion, good
Lord deliver us. O Lamb of God, which take away the sins of the world, grant
us thy peace. O Lamb of God, which take away the sins of the world, have
mercy upon me, O Lord, for thy mercy sake. Amen.

Devotions for the Help and assistance of all Christian People in all occasions
and necessities.
A Prayer against wandering Thoughts, to be said at the beginning of our
Devotions.
ALmighty God, who have commanded us to pray unto thee without ceasing, and
have added many glorious promises for our encouragement, let thy holy Spirit
teach me how to pray. Give me just apprehension of my want, zeal of thy glory,
great resentments of thy mercies, love of all spiritual employments that are
pleasing unto thee, and do thou help mine infirmities that the Devil may not
abuse my fancy with illusions, nor distract my mind with cares, nor alienate my
thoughts with impertinencies, but give me a perfect mind, great devotion, a
heart fixed upon thy Divine Beauties, and an actual intention and perseverance
in prayer, that I may glorify thy Name, do unto thee true and laudable
service, and obtain relief for all my necessities; hear me, O King of Heaven,
when I call upon thee, for thou have promised mercy to them that pray in the
Name of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Penitential Prayer, a Form of Confession of sins to God, to be said upon
days of public or private Humiliation.
O Lord God of mercy and pardon, give me a just remembrance, and sad
apprehension of my many and great sins. Teach me to bewail them with as great
indignation and bitterness, as I have committed them with complacency and
delight. Let my prayers and my confession come unto thy presence, and obtain a
mercy for me, and a pardon. Let not thy Justice and thy severity so remember my
sins, as to forget thine own mercy; and though I have committed that for which
I have deserved to be condemned, yet thou can not lose that glorious
Attribute, whence flows comfort to us, and hopes to be saved. Spare me
therefore, O merciful God, for to give pardon to a sinner that confesses his
sins, and begs Remission, it is not impossible to thy Power, nor
disproportionate to thy Justice, nor unusual to thy Mercy and sweetest
Clemency. Blessed Jesu, acknowledge in me whatsoever is thine, and cleanse me
from whatsoever is amiss. Have pity on me now in the time of mercy, and condemn
me not when thou come to judgment: For what profit is there in my blood? Thou
delightest not in the death of a sinner, but in his conversion there is joy in
Heaven. And when thou have delivered me from my sins, and saved my soul, I
shall praise and magnify thy Name to all eternity; mercy sweet Jesus, mercy.

Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
I Am not worthy, O Lord, to look up to Heaven, which is the Throne of thy
Purity; for my sins are more in number than the hairs of my head; and my heart
has failed me; Lord be merciful unto me a sinner: I have not lived according
to thy will, but in the vanity of my own thoughts, in idle, sinful, and
impertinent language, in foolish actions, in blindness of heart, in contempt of
thy holy Word and Commandments. I have not loved thee with my whole heart, nor
feared thee with all my soul, nor served thee with all my might, according to
thy holy precepts, nor loved my neighbor as my self.

Lord be merciful unto me a sinner.
I Have been an unprovident Steward of the good things thou have given me; I
have loved them inordinately, and sought after them greedily and unjustly,
dispensed them idly, and parted with them unwillingly. I have not been so
charitable to the poor, or so pitiful to the afflicted, or so compassionate to
the sick, or so apt to succor and give supplies to the miseries of my
neighbors, as I ought, but have too much minded things below, not seting my
affections upon Heaven and heavenly things, but have been unlike thee in many
things; I have been unmerciful and unjust.

Lord be merciful unto me a sinner*
MIne Eyes, O Lord, have wandered after vanity, beholding and looking after
things unseemly without displeasure, despising my neighbors, prying into their
faults, but have been blind, not seeing mine own sins, and infinite
irregularities.

Lord be merciful unto me a sinner.
I Have employed all my members and faculties both of soul and body in the
ways of unrighteousness. I have transgressed in all my relations, and in all
my actions and traverses of my whole life; even when I might have had most
confidence, I find nothing but weakness and imperfection.

Lord be merciful unto me a sinner.
I Have broken my vows and purposes of obedience and holy life: I have been
inconstant to all good, refractory to counsels, disobedient to commands,
stubborn against admonition, churlish and ungentle in my behavior, mindful and
revengful of injuries, forgetful of benefits, seeking my own ends, deceiving my
own soul.

Lord be merciful unto me a sinner.
MY secret sins, O Lord, are innumerable, sins secret to my self through
inadvertency, forgetfulness, wilful ignorance, or stupid negligence, secret to
the world, committed before thee only, under the witness of mine own
conscience. I am confounded with the multitude of them, and the horror of
their remembrance.

Lord be merciful unto me a sinner.
O Son of David, blessed Redeemer, Lamb of God that take away the sins of the
world, have mercy upon me. O Jesu, be a Jesus unto me; thou that savedst thy
servant Peter that denied thee thrice; thou that did cast seven Devils out of
Mary Magdalen, and forgavest the woman taken in adultery, and did bear the
converted Thief from the Cross, to the joys of Paradise, have mercy upon me
also; for although I have massed together more sins than all these in
conjunction, yet not their sins, nor mine, nor the sins of all the world can
equal thy glorious mercy, which is as infinite and eternal as thy self. I
acknowledge, O Lord, that I am vile, but yet redeemed with thy precious blood.
I am blind, but thou art the Light of the world: I am weak, but thou art a
strong Rock: I have been dead in trespasses and sins, but thou art my
Resurrection and my Life; thou, O Lord, love to show mercy, and the
expressions of thy mercy, the nearer they come to infinite, the more
proportionable they are to thy essence, and like thy self. Behold then, O Lord,
a fit object for thy pity; my sins are so great and many, that to forgive all
will be but an act of glorious mercy, and all the praises which did accrue to
thy Name by the forgiveness of David, and Manesseh, and St. Paul, and the
Adulteress, and the Thief, and the Publican, will be multiplied to thy honor
in the forgiveness of me so vile, so unworthy a wretch, that I have nothing to
say for my self, but that the greatness of my misery is a fit object for thy
miraculous and infinite mercy. Despise me not, O Lord, for I am thy Creature:
Despise me not, for thou did die for me. Cast me not away in thine anger, for
thou come to seek me, and to save me. Say unto my soul, Thou art my
salvation. Let thy Holy Spirit lead me from the errors of my ways, into the
paths of Righteousness, to great degrees of Repentance, through all the parts
of a holy life, to a godly and a holy death; grant this, O blessed Jesus, for
thy mercy, for thy pity sake. Amen.

A penitential Prayer for the Morning, with particular Confession of sins,
desiring God earnestly to free him from the guilt and punishment that is due
unto him for his many and great sins, and to give him grace to lead a new life.
O Eternal God, most gracious and merciful Father, look not upon me as I am in
my self, but look upon me in the face of Jesus Christ, in him and through him,
be merciful unto me, according to thy Word, for I have done amiss, and dealt
wickedly; I have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and am not worthy to be
called thy Son, or numbered amongst the meanest of thy servants, yet my sins are
but the sins of a mortal man, but thy mercy is the mercy of an Infinite God,
therefore have mercy on my sinful soul, pardon and forgive me all my known and
secret sins, which in thought, word and deed I have done and committed against
thy Divine Majesty; for it repents me of my evil deeds, therefore, O Lord,
have mercy upon me, pardon and forgive the sins of my youth and age, which are
many and great, namely the wicked sins of my pride, anger, dissimulation,
lying, lust, unjust dealing, Here thou may confess thy particular sins.
too much love of the world, and the vanity thereof, too little love of thee
and thy Kingdom, but empty and void of all spiritual grace; be merciful unto
me, O Lord, for these are the sins wherewith I have grieved thy Holy Spirit: O
Lord, the remembrance of them is grievous unto me, and the burden of them is
intolerable, too heavy for me to bear; therefore O Lord God be merciful to me
according to thy tender compassion bury them all in the burial of Christ, set
the weight of thy mercy upon them, so that they may never rise up in this world
to shame me, nor in the world to come to condemn me. O Lord, give me an
assurance of the free pardon and forgiveness for these many sins, that I may
rejoice in the greatness of thy mercy, and magnify thy holy Name, to all
Eternity; for the future give me greater measure of grace, to serve, honor,
and humbly obey thee with all the strength of my heart, soul and body. Mortify
and kill all vice in me, that my life may express all faith in thee. Mercifully
hear the humble supplications of thy poor servant, and grant me thy peace all
my days: graciously pardon all mine infirmities, and defend me from all
dangers of soul and body this day, and for ever more. O Lord, guide me in this
world with thy counsel, and after this bring me to thy glory. O Lord, bless all
thine all the world over, all mankind, especially this sinful Land and Nation
wherein we live, turning from us those plagues which the sins of this Nation do
cry for. In mercy O Lord prevent the ruin thereof, lest the Heathen should
say, where is now their God. O Lord, bless with the choicest of thy blessings,
our most gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles, endue his Royal heart with
grace, wisdom and understanding; cloathe his enemies with shame, but upon his
head let his Crown flourish; and grant that his days may be long, prosperous,
virtuous, and happy. Bless our gracious Queen Katherine, James Duke of York,
and all the rest of the Royal Family; endue them with thy grace, and defend
them from all evil. Bless all our Magistrates and Ministers with all those
graces necessary for their places; govern thou them, that they may govern us in
peace and godliness, and true Religion. O Lord, in much mercy, bless all my
friends and my relations, with all those blessings and benefits needful both
for their souls and for their bodies. O Lord, be merciful to all those poor
souls that are under any kind of want, need or necessity, or under any kind of
affliction; in much mercy be unto them a present help in trouble; support them,
sustain, and lay no more upon them than they shall be able to bear; and send
them a happy issue out of all their troubles. O Lord God, for thy mercies sake,
bestow a double portion of thy blessing upon those whom thou have made nearest
or dearest unto me. O Lord, pardon all their sins, supply all their wants,
relieve all their necessities, and reform whatsoever is amiss in them, and give
them grace to lead a new life, and make them thy true and faithful servants;
preserve them and me this day from doing or receiving any hurt or harm;
preserve us from all evil, especially from the evil of sin, and the evil of
punishment, and from all sad accidents. O Lord, bless us this day in our going
out, and in our coming in; bless and prosper us in whatsoever we go about to
do; let us have all our direction from thy will, and the happy success from thy
merciful hand, and when this mortal life is ended, O Lord, for Christ Jesus his
sake, grant that we may enjoy Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof, and in the
mean time grant unto every one of us thy loving countenance, thy favor, and
thy grace; and here I will praise and magnify thy great and glorious Name for
electing us in thy love, for creating us after thine own Image, and for
redeeming us by thy dear Son, and for sanctifying us by the grace of thy holy
Spirit, and for thy gracious preservation of us this night past: Likewise I
praise thee O Lord, for our life, health, strength, liberty, food and raiment,
humbly beseeching thee, O Lord, to continue thy loving kindness toward us,
from time to time, so long as it may be a blessing unto every one of us, and
our thankfulness toward thee for all thy goodness bestowed upon our souls and
our bodies, which exceeds our memories, and our thanks; and all for the sake of
thy dear Son, and our blessed Savior Jesus Christ. Amen. In whose Name I
further call upon thee, as he has taught us, saying, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc.

O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the Eternal God, interpose thy holy Death, thy
Cross and Passion between thy Judgments and my soul, now and in the hour of
death, granting unto me grace and mercy, and unto all the faithful pardon and
peace, to the Church unity and amity, and to all sinners repentance and
amendment, to all life and glory everlastingly, who lives and reigns ever
one God world without end. Amen.

A Form of Thanksgiving, with a particular enumeration of God's Blessing.
O Most glorious Lord God, infinite in mercy, full of compassion, long
suffering, and of great goodness, I adore, and praise, and glorify thy holy
Name, worshipping thee with the lowliest devotions of my soul and body, and
give thee thanks for all the benefits thou have done unto me, for whatsoever I
am, or have, or know, or desire, as I ought, it is all from thee, thou art the
fountain of being and blessing, of sanctity and pardon, of life and glory.

Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that that is within me, praise his holy
Name.
THou, O God, of thine infinite goodness, have created me out of nothing, and
have given me a degree of essence next to Angels, imprinting thine Image on me,
enduing me with reasonable faculties of will and understanding, to know and
choose good, and to refuse evil, and have put me into a capacity of a blessed
immortality.

O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his Name together.
THou, O God, of thine infinite goodness, have created me out of nothing, and
have given me grace to know thy will, and have fed and clothed me, have raised
me friends, and blessest them, have preserved me in all dangers, have rescued
me from the peril of the sword, from the rage of pestilence, from dangers of
Liars and Robbers, from perishing in public distemperatures and diseases
epidemical, from terrors and affrightments of the mighty) from the delusions
of the Devil, and sad separation, and from many imminent dangers; thou have
been my guide in my journeys, my refreshment in sadness, my hope and my
confidence in all my grief and desolations, and a present help in trouble.

I will give thanks unto the Lord of Lords, for his mercy endures for ever.
BUT above all mercies, it was not less than infinite love whereby thou lovedst
me, and all mankind, when we were lost and dead, and Rebels against thy Divine
Majesty. Thou gave thine own begotten Son to seek us when we went astray; to
restore us to life when we were dead in trespasses and sin, and to reconcile us
to thy self by the merits and the atonement of an everlasting Covenant.

He is our God, even the God of whom comes our salvation; God is the Lord by
whom we escape death.
O Most glorious Spirit, I will praise and magnify thee for the inspiration of
the Apostles and Prophets, for thy providence and mercies, in causing holy
Scriptures to be written, and preserving them from the corruptions of
Heretics, from the violences of Pagans, and enemies of the Cross of Christ.

I will always give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall ever be in my mouth.
I Bless thy Name for those holy Promises and Threatenings, those Judgments and
Mercies, those holy Precepts and Admonitions, which thou have registered in
Scripture, and in Records and Monuments of the Church, for all those graces,
and helps, and comforts, whereby thou promotest me in piety, and in the ways
of true Religion, for baptismal and penitential grace, for the opportunities
and sweet refreshings of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, for all the advantages
thou have given me, of good society, Tutors and Governors, for the fears thou
have produced in me, as deliveries and impediments of sins, for all my hopes of
pardon, and expectation of the promises made by our Lord Jesus Christ, to
encourage me in the paths of life, and sanctity, for those blessed waitings and
knockings at the door of my heart, patiently tarrying for me, for all the holy
Sermons, spiritual Books and Lessons, for all the good Prayers and Meditations,
loving and inviting me to repentance, without ceasing admonishing me, and
reproving me with the check of a tender conscience, with exterior and
interior motives, and for whatsoever means or incentives of holiness thou have
assisted me withal.

I Magnify and praise thy holy Name, for thy goodness to all Nations whom thou
have made and sanctified, they shall come and worship thee, O Lord, and shall
glorify thy Name, for thou art great, and do wondrous things; thou art God
alone, and great is thy mercy toward me; thou have delivered my soul from the
nethermost hell; therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without
ceasing. O my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever, with Cherubims and
Seraphims, and all the company of the heavenly Host, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God of Sabbath, holy is our God, holy is the Immortal, holy is the
Almighty, the Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost, to whom be honor and glory,
dominion and power ascribed of all spirits, and all men, and all creatures, now
and for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer preparatory to the Receiving of the blessed Sacrament.
O Most immaculate and glorious Jesu, he hold me a miserable sinner, drawing
near unto thee with the approaches of humility, and earnest desire to be
cleansed from my sins, and to be united to thee by the nearest and most
mysterious union of Charity and Sacramental participation of thy most precious
body and blood, I presume nothing of my own worthiness, but I am most confident
of thy mercies and infinite loving kindness. I know, O Lord, I am blind, and
sick, and dead, and naked, and therefore I come the rather; I am sick, and thou
art my Physician, thou arisest with healing in thy wings, by thy wounds I come
to be cured, and to be healed by thy stripes. I am unclean, but thou art the
fountain of purity; I am blind, but thou art the great Eye of the World, the
Son of Righteousness* in thy light I shall see light. I am poor, but thou art
rich unto all, the Lord of all the Creatures; I therefore humbly beg of thy
mercy, that thou would be pleased to take from me all my sins, to cure all
mine infirmities, to cleanse my filthiness, to lighten my darkness, to cloathe
my nakedness with the Robe of thy Righteousness, that I may with reverence and
faith, and holy intention, receive thy blessed body and blood in the mysterious
Sacrament, that it may be unto life, and pleasantness, and holy nourishment,
and that I may be firmly and indesolutely united to thy mystical body, and may
at last see clearly and without vail, thy face in glory everlasting, who live
and reignest ever one God, world without end. Amen.

The Second.
I Adore and bless thy glorious Majesty, O blessed Jesu, for this great
dignation and vouchsafing to me, that art pleased, for all the infinite
multitudes of my sins, and innumerable violating of thy holy Laws, still to
give thy self unto me, to convey health, and grace, and life, and hopes of
glory in the blessed Sacrament. I adore thee, O most Righteous Redeemer, that
thou art pleased under the visible signs of Bread and Wine, to convey unto our
souls thy holy body and blood, and all the benefits of thy bitter Passion. O my
God, I am not worthy thou should come under my roof, but let thy holy Spirit
with his purities, prepare for thee a lodging in my soul. Thou have knocked
often, O blessed Jesu, at the door of my heart, and would willingly have
entered, behold, O Lord, my heart is willing, ready to receive thee, cast out of
it all worldly desires, all lust and carnal appetites, and then enter, and
there love to inhabit, that the Devil may never return to a place that is swept
and garnished, to fill me full of iniquity. O thou lover of souls, grant that
this holy Sacrament may be light to my eyes, a guide to my understanding, and
joy to my soul, that by its strength I may subdue and mortify the whole body
of sin in me, that it may produce in me fullness of wisdom, and constancy of
faith, perfection, accomplishment of all the Righteous Commandments, and such
blessed union with thee, that I never more live unto my self, or to the world,
but to thee only, and by the refreshment of an holy hope, I may be lead through
the paths of a good life, and persevering piety, to the communion and
possession of thy Kingdom, O blessed Jesu, who live and reignest ever one
God, world without end. Amen.

A Prayer after the Receiving of the Sacramental Bread.
I Give hearty thanks unto thee, Almighty God, that thou have not rejected me
from thy holy Table, but have refreshed my soul with the salutary refection of
the body, thy dear Son Jesus Christ. Lord, if I had lived innocently, and had
kept all thy Commandments, I could have not expected so transcendent a mercy,
but since I have lived in all manner of sin, and multiplied provocations
against thy Divine Majesty, thy mercy is so glorious and infinite, that I am
amazed at the consideration of its Immensity. Go on, O my dear God, to finish
so blessed a Redemption, and now that thou have begun to celebrate a Marriage,
and a holy Union between thy self and my soul, let me never throw off the
Wedding Garment, or stain it with pollution of deadly sin, nor seek after other
Lovers, but let me for ever and ever be united unto thee, being transformed
into thy will in this life, and to the likeness of thy glories in the life to
come, who live and reignest ever one God, world without end. Amen.

After the Receiving of the Cup.
O Just and dear God, who out of the unmeasurable Abysses of wisdom and mercy
have redeemed us, and offerest life and grace, and salvation to us by the real
exhibition of thy Son Jesus Christ in the Sacrifice of his death upon the Altar
of the Cross, and by commemoration of the bitter Agonies in the holy Sacrament,
grant that that great and venerable Sacrifice which we now commemorate
sacramentally, may procure of thee for thy whole Church mercy and peace, and
great assistance in all trials, deliverance from all heresies, schisms,
sacrilege, and persecucutions; to all sick people health, and salvation,
redemption from captivity, competency of living to the indigent and
necessitous, comfort to the afflicted, relief to the oppressed, repentance to
all sinners, softness of spirit, and a tender conscience to the obstinate,
conversion to the Jews, Turk, and remedy to all that are in trouble or
adversity, and grant to us, O Lord, that this Sacrament and Sacrifice of
commemoration, by virtue of that painful and proper Sacrifice upon the Cross,
may obtain for me, and for us all who have communicated this day, pardon and
peace, and that we may derive from thee by this mystery, grace to expel our
sins, to mortify all our lusts, to exterminate all concupiscence, to crucify
all inordinate irregularities, to produce in us humility, and chastity, and
obedience, and meekness of spirit, and charity, and let us not be harmed by the
violence and invasions of all our ghostly enemies, and temporal disadvantages,
and give us grace and favor that we may not die in the commission of a sin
without repentance, nor without receiving the blessed Sacrament, but that we
may so live and die, that we may at last rest in thy bosom, and be embraced
with the comprehensions of thy eternal Charity, who live and reignest ever
one God, world without end. Amen.

Prayers preparatory to Death.
A Prayer for a Blessed Ending, to be said in time of Health or Sickness.
O Blessed Jesu, fountain of eternal Mercy, the life of the soul, and glorious
Conqueror over Death and Sin, I humbly beseech thee to give me grace so to
spend this transitory life in virtue and holy exercises, that when the day of
my death shall come, in the midst of all my pains I may feel the sweet
refreshings of thy holy Spirit comforting my soul, sustaining my infirmities,
and relieving all my spiritual necessities, and grant that in the unity of the
holy Catholic Church, and in the integrity of Christian Faith, with confidence
and hope of thy mercy in great love toward thee, in peace toward my
neighbors, and in charity with all the world, I may through thy grace depart
hence out of this vail of misery, and go into that glorious Country, where thou
have purchased an inheritance for us, with the price of thy most precious
blood, and reignest in it gloriously in the unity of thy Father and ours, of
thy Holy Spirit and our ghostly Comforter, ever one God world without end. Amen.

All blessing, and praise, and honor, be unto thee, O blessed Redeemer, and to
thee I the banished and miserable Son of Adam do call for mercy and defense in
this needful time of trouble, to thee I sigh and cry in the valley of tears, O
dearest Advocate, turn those thy merciful eyes toward me, and show me thy
glorious face in thy heavenly Kingdom, where no tears, or sighing, or fears, or
sadness can approach, Amen sweetest Jesu, Amen. A Prayer to be said in the
beginning of Sickness.
O Lord my God, who chastisest every one whom thou receivest, and with thy
fatherly correction smitest those whom thou consignest to the inheritance of
Sons, write my soul in the book of life, and number me amongst thy chosen
children, whom thou have smitten with the Rod of Sickness, and by thy
chastisements have brought me into the lot of the Righteous. Thou, O blessed
Jesus, who art a helper in the needful time of trouble, lay no more upon me
than thou shall enable me to bear, and let thy gentle corrections in this life
prevent the unsupportable stripes of thy vengeance in the life to come. Smite
me now, that thou may spare me to all eternity; and yet O blessed High
Priest, who art touched with a sense of our infirmities, smite me friendly, and
reprove me with such a tenderness as thou bear unto thy children, to whom
thou conveyest supplicatory comforts, greaten not the pains of thy
chastisements, and in due time restore me to health, and to thy solemn
Assemblies again, and to the joy of thy countenance. Give me patience and
humility, and the grace of Repentance, and an absolute dereliction of my self,
and resignation to thy pleasure and providence, with a power to do thy Will in
all things, and then do what thou please with me, in health or sickness, in
life or death; let me feel thy comforts refreshing my soul, and let thy grace
pardon all my sins; grant this O heavenly Father for thy dear Sons sake my
blessed Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

A Prayer for a sick person in danger of Death.
O Lord Jesus Christ, our health and our salvation, our life, our hope, and our
resurrection from the dead, I resign my self up to thy holy will and pleasure,
either to life, that I may live longer to thy service, and my amendment, or to
death, to the perpetual enjoyment of thy presence, and of thy glory, into thy
hands I commend my spirit, for I know, O Lord, that nothing can perish which is
committed to thy mercy: I believe, help thou my unbelief. I believe, O Lord,
that I shall receive my body again at the resurrection of the Just: I
relinquish all care of that, only I beg of thee mercy for my soul; strengthen
it with thy grace against all temptation; let thy loving kindness defend it as
with a shield against all violence and hostile assaults of Satan; let the same
mercy be my guard and defense, which protected thy Martyrs, crowning them with
victory in the midst of flames, horrid torments, and most cruel deaths. There
is no help in me, O Lord; I cannot by my own strength or power give a minutes
rest to my wearied body, but my trust is in thy mercies, and I call to mind, to
my unspeakable comfort, that thou were hungry, and thirsty, and wearied, and
whipped, and crowned with thorns, and mocked, and crucified for me; O let that
mercy of thine which made thee suffer so much, pardon me, and save me; let thy
merits answer for my impieties; let thy Righteousness cover my sins, thy blood
wash away my stains, and thy comforts refresh my soul; as my body grows weaker,
let thy grace be stronger; let not my faith doubt, nor my hope tremble, nor my
charity grow cold, nor my soul be afrighted with the terrors of death, but let
the light of thy countenance enlighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death
eternal, and when my tongue fails, let thy Spirit teach my heart with strong
crying and groans that are unutterable. O let not the enemy do me any violence,
but let thy holy mercies, and thy Angels repel and defeat his malice, and find
that my soul may by thy strength triumph in the joys of eternity, in the
fruition of thee, my life, my joy, my hope, my exceeding great reward, my Lord,
and and my Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer for a dying person in or near the Agonies of Death.
MOst merciful and blessed Savior, have mercy upon the soul of this servant;
remember not his ignorance, nor the sins of his youth, nor age, but according
to thy great mercies remember him in the mercies and glories of thy Kingdom.
Thou O Lord, have opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers; O let the
everlasting gates be opened, and receive his soul; let the Angels, who rejoice
at the conversion of a sinner, triumph and be exalted in his deliverance and
salvation. Make him partaker of the benefits of thy holy Incarnation, Life and
Sanctity, Passion and Death, Resurrection and Ascension, and all the Prayers of
the Church, that the Joy of the Elect, and the Fruits of the blessed Communion
of the Saints, may be fulfilled, and the Glory of thee, of our Lord Jesu, and
daily add to the number of thy beautified servants, such as shall be saved,
that thy coming may be hastened, and the expectation of the Saints may be
fulfilled and advanced, and all the whole Church singing praise to the honor
of thy Name, who lives and reigns ever one God world without end. Amen.

The 51.
O Most merciful Jesu, who did die to redeem us from death and damnation,
have mercy upon this thy servant, whom thy hand has visited with sickness, of
thy goodness be pleased to forgive him all his sins, and seal his hopes of
glory with the refreshments of thy Holy Spirit Lord, give him strength and
confidence in thee, assuage his pain, repel the assaults of his ghostly
enemies, and give him a guard of holy Angels, preserve him in the unity of the
Church, keep his senses entire, his understanding right; give him great measure
of contrition, true faith, a well grounded hope, and abundant charity; give him
a quiet and a joyful departure; let thy ministering spirits convey his soul to
the mansions of peace and rest, there with certainty to expect a joyful
Resurrection to the fullness of Joy at thy right hand, where there is pleasure
for ever more. Amen.

A Prayer for the Joys of Heaven.
O Most glorious Jesu, who art the portion, and the exceeding great reward of
all faithful people, thou have beautified humane nature with glorious
Immortality, and have carried the same above all Heavens, above the seat of
Angels, beyond the Cherubims and Seraphims, placing it on the right hand of thy
heavenly Father, grant to us all the issues of thy abundant charity, that we
may live in thy fear, and die in thy favor; prepare our souls with heavenly
Joys, making us righteous here, that we may be blessed hereafter through thy
great mercy. Amen.

A Prayer for the Morning at the first kneeling down, saying, Holy, blessed,
and glorious Trinity, Three Persons, and One God, have mercy up-me a miserable
sinner.

Lord, I know not what to pray for as I ought, O let thy Spirit help my
infirmities, and enable me to offer up a spiritual Sacrifice acceptable to thee
by Jesus Christ.


O Most gracious Lord, whose mercies endures for ever, I thy unworthy servant
who have so largely tasted of them, desire to render thee the tribute of my
humblest praises for them. In thee, O Lord, I live, move, and have my being;
thou have made me to be, and then that I might not be miserable, but happy,
thou sendest thy Son out of thy bosom to redeem me from the power of my sins by
his grace, and from the punishment of them by his blood, and by both of them to
bring me to his glory: Thou have by thy mercy caused me to be born within thy
particular fold, the Christian Church, where I was early consecrated to thee in
Baptism, and have been partaker of all those spiritual helps which might aid me
to perform that vow I there made to thee; and when by my own wilfulness or
negligence I have fallen to do ill, yet thou in thy manifold mercies have not
forsaken me, but have graciously invited me to Repentance, aforded me all means
both outwardly and inwardly for it, and with patience have attended, and not
cut me off for the acts of those many damning sins I have committed, as I have
most justly deserved; thou art glorious in thy manifold mercies, O Lord, in thy
restraining grace by which I have been kept back from any of the greatest sins,
and in thy inciting grace, by which I have been enabled to do the least good,
therefore not unto me, but unto thy Name be praises, for these and all other
spiritual blessings. My soul does magnify the Lord, and all that is within me
praise his holy Name. I likewise praise thee for those many outward blessings I
enjoy, as health, friends, food and raiment, the comforts as well as the
necessaries of this life; for those continual protections of thy hand, by which
I and mine are kept from dangers, and those gracious deliverances thou have
often aforded out of such as have befallen me, and for that mercy of thine
whereby thou have sweetened and allayed those troubles thou see not fit
wholly to remove; for thy particular care of me this night, and all other thy
goodness toward me. Lord, grant that I may render unto thee not only the fruit
of my lips, but the obedience of my life, that so these blessings here may be
an earnest of those richer blessings thou have prepared for those that love
thee, and that for his sake, whom thou have made the Author of eternal
salvation to all that obey him, even Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Confession.
O Righteous Lord, who hate iniquity, I thy sinful creature cast my self at
thy feet, acknowledging that I most justly deserve to be utterly abhorred and
forsaken by thee; for I have drunk in iniquity like water, gone on in a
continued course of sin and rebellion against thee, daily committing those sins
thou forbidest, and leaving undone those things thou command: Mine heart
which should be an habitation for thy Spirit, is become a cage of unclean
birds, of foul and disordered affections; and out of this abundance of the
heart my mouth speaks, my hands act; so that in thought, word and deed, I
continually transgress against thee. O Lord, I have done amiss, I have dealt
wickedly; the good I would do, I do it not, but the evil I should not, that do
I. O my God, be merciful unto me for my luxury, pride, covetousness, and all
wandering thoughts, and worldly imaginations. Nay, O Lord, I have despised that
goodness of thine which should have lead me to repentance, hardening my heart
against all those means thou have used for my amendment; and now, Lord, what
can I expect from thee but judgment and fiery indignation? that is indeed the
due reward of my sins: But, O Lord, there is mercy with thee that thou may
be feared: O fit me for that mercy, by giving me a deep and a hearty
Repentance, and then according to thy goodness let thine anger and thy wrath be
turned away. Look upon me in thy Son, my blessed Savior, and for the merits of
his sufferings, pardon all my sins; and Lord, I beseech thee, by the power of
thy grace, so to renew and purify my heart, that I may become a new creature,
utterly forsaking every evil way, living in constant, sincere, universal
obedience to thee all the rest of my days, behaving my self as a good and
faithful servant, I may at the last be received into the Joy of my Lord; grant
this for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Prayer for Grace.
O Most gracious God, from whom every good and perfect gift comes, I a
wretched sinner that am not able of my self so much as to think a good thought,
beseech thee to work in me both to will and to do of thy good pleasure what
thou requirest of me; enlighten my mind, that I may know thee, and let me not
be barren or unfruitful in that knowledge. Lord, work in my heart a true faith,
a purifying hope, and an unfeigned love toward thee. Give me a full trust in
thee, zeal for thee, reverence in all things that relate to thee. Make me
fearful to offend thee, thankful for thy mercies, humble under thy
corrections, devout in thy service, sorrowful for my sins* and grant that in
all things I may behave my self so, as befits a creature to his Creator, a
servant to his Lord; enable me likewise to perform that duty I owe to my self.
Give me that meekness, humility, and contentedness, whereby I may always
possess my soul in patience, and thankfulness. Make me diligent in all my
duties, watchful in all temptations, perfect, pure, and temperate, and so
moderate in all my most lawful enjoyments, that they never may become a snare
to me. Make me also, O Lord, to be so affected toward my neighbor, that I
never transgress that Royal Law of thine, of loving him as my self. Grant me
exactly to perform to all a part of Justice, yielding to all whatsoever by any
kind of right is their due. Give me such bowels of mercy and compassion, that I
may never fail to do all acts of charity to all men, whether friends or
enemies, according to thy command and example: Finally, I beseech thee, O Lord,
to sanctify me within and without, that my whole spirit, and soul, and body,
may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory for ever. Amen.

Intercession.
O Blessed Lord, whose mercy is over all thy works, I beseech thee to have
mercy upon all men, and grant that the precious Ransom which was paid by thy
Son for all, may be effectual for the saving of all. Give thy enlightening
grace to those that are in darkness, and thy converting grace to those that are
in sin. Look with thy tenderest compassion upon the Universal Church. O be
favorable and gracious unto Sion; build thou the walls of Jerusalem; unite all
those that profess thy Name to thee, by purity, and holiness, and to each other
by brotherly kindness. Have mercy on this desolate Church, and sinful Nation;
Thou movedst the Land and divided it; heal the sores thereof, for it shakes;
make us so truly to repent of those sins which have provoked thy Judgments,
that thou also may turn and repent, and leave a blessing behind thee. Bless
those whom thou have appointed our Governors, whether in Church, or State; so
rule their hearts, and strengthen their hands, that they may want neither will
nor power to punish wickedness and vice, and to maintain God's true Religion
and Verity. Have pity, O Lord, on all that are in affliction; be a Father to
the Fatherless, and plead the Cause of the Widow; comfort the feeble minded,
support the weak, relieve the needy, defend the oppressed, and administer to
every one according to their several necessities. Let thy blessing rest upon
all that are near and dear unto me, and grant them whatsoever is needful and
necessary both for their souls and for their bodies; here name thy dearest
Relations. Reward all those that have done me or them good; pardon all those
that have done or wish us evil; work in me and them all that good which may
make us acceptable in thy sight, Jesus Christ. Amen.

For Preservation.
O Merciful God, by whose bounty and love it is, that I have this day added to
my life, I beseech thee so to guide me in it by thy grace, that I may do
nothing which may dishonor thee, or wound my own soul, but that I may
diligently apply my own soul to do all such good works as thou have prepared
for me. And, Lord, I beseech thee, give thy Angels charge over me, to keep me
in all my ways, that no evil happen unto, nor any plague come nigh my
dwelling, but that I and mine may be safe under thy protection, through Jesus
Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

O Lord, pardon the wanderings and coldness of these Petitions, and deal with
me, not according either to my prayers, or deserts, but according to my needs,
and thine own rich mercy in Jesus Christ, in whose blessed Name and words I
conclude these my imperfect prayers, saying, Our Father, etc.

Prayers for Night.
O Holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, Three Persons, and One God, have mercy
upon me a miserable sinner. Lord, I know not what to pray for as I ought; O let
thy holy Spirit help mine infirmities, and enable me to offer up a spiritual
Sacrifice acceptable unto thee, by Jesus Christ.

A Confession.
O Most holy Lord God, who art of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, how shall
I an abominable wretch, appear before thee, who am nothing but pollution? I am
defiled in my very nature, have a backwardness to all good, and a readiness to
all evil, but I have defiled my self much worse by my own actual sins and
wicked customs; I have transgressed my duty to thee, my neighbor, and my self,
and that both, in thought, word, and deed, by doing those things thou have
expressly forbidden, and neglecting to do those things thou have commanded me,
and this not only through ignorance and frailty, but knowingly and wilfully,
against the motion of thy Spirit, and the checks of mine own conscience to the
contrary; and to make all these out of measure sinful, I have gone on in a
daily course of repeating these provocations against thee, notwithstanding all
thy calls to, and my own purposes and endeavors of amendment; yea this very
day I have not ceased to add new sins to my former guilt, ( here name the
particulars) and now, O Lord, what shall I say, or how shall I open my mouth,
seeing I have done these things? I know that the wages of sin is death, but O
thou who willest not the death of a sinner, have mercy upon me; work in me, I
beseech thee, a sincere contrition, and perfect hatred of all my sins; let me
daily confess them, but yet not as duly renew them; and grant, O Lord, that
from this instant I may give a bill of divorce to all my most beloved lusts,
and then be thou pleased to marry me to thy self, in Truth, in Righteousness,
and true Holiness, all the days of my life: and for all my sins past, O Lord,
receive a Reconciliation, accept of that Ransom thy blessed Son has paid for
me, and for his sake whom thou have set forth as a propitiation, pardon all my
offenses, and receive me to thy favor; and when thou have thus spoken peace to
my soul, Lord keep me that I turn not any more to folly, but stablish me with
thy grace, that no temptation of the World, the Devil, or my own Flesh, may
ever draw me to offend thee, that being made free from sin, and becoming a
Servant unto God, I may have my fruit unto holiness, and in the end everlasting
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Thanksgiving.
O Thou Father of mercy, who art kind even to the unthankful, I acknowledge my
self to have abundantly experimented that gracious property of thine; for
notwithstanding my daily provocations against thee, thou still heapest mercy
and loving kindness upon me; all my contemnings and despisings thy spiritual
favors has not yet made thee withdraw them, but yet in the riches of thy
goodness thou still continuest to me the offers of thy grace and life in thy
Son, and all my abuses of thy temporal blessings thou have not punished with an
utter depravation of them, but still art pleased to afford me a liberal portion
of them, the sins of this day thou have not repayed, as justly thou might,
by sweeping me away with a swift destruction, but have spared me and preserved
me according to the greatness of thy mercy; here mention the particular mercies
of this day; What shall I render unto the Lord for all these benefits he has
done unto me. Lord, let this goodness of thine lead me to hearty repentance,
and grant that I may not only offer thee thanks and praise, but may also order
my conversation aright, that so I may at the last see the salvation of God,
through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Here use the Prayer for grace, and that Intercession appointed for the
morning. For Preservation.
O Blessed Lord, keeper of Israel, that neither slumberest nor sleep, be
pleased in thy mercy to watch over me this night; keep me by thy grace from the
works of darkness, and defend me by thy power from all dangers; grant me
moderate rest and sleep, such as may fit me for the duties of the next day
following; and, Lord, make me ever mindful of that time when I shall lie down
in the dust, and I know neither the day nor the hour of my Master's coming;
grant me grace that I may always fear thee, and that I may never live in such
a state as I shall fear to die, but that whether I live, I may live unto the
Lord, or whether I die, I may die unto the Lord; so that living and dying I may
be thine, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Let thy Bed put thee in mind of thy grave, and when thou lie down, say,
O Blessed Savior, who by thy precious death and burial did take the sting
of death, and the power of the grave; grant me the joyful fruits of that
victory, and be thou to me in life and death advantage. I will lay me down in
peace, and take my rest, for it is thou, O Lord only that make me dwell in
safety, into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed it, O Lord,
thou God of Truth.

Collects for several Graces.
For Faith.
O Blessed Lord, seeing without Faith it is impossible to please thee, let thy
Spirit, I beseech thee, work in me such a Faith as may be acceptable in thy
sight, even such as works by Love. O let me not rest in a dead ineffectual
Faith, but grant that it may be such as may show it self by my works; that it
may be that victorious Faith which may enable me to overcome the world, and
conform me to the Image of that Christ on whom I believe, that so at the last I
may receive the end of my Faith, even the salvation of my soul, by the same
Jesus Christ. Amen.

For the Love of God.
O Holy and gracious Lord, who art infinitely excellent in thy self and
infinitely bountiful and compassionate toward me, I beseech thee suffer not my
heart to be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, but let the offers of
thy Love, make deep impressions on my soul. Lord, thou art pleased to require
my heart, and thou only have right to it. O let me not be so sacriligiously
unjust as to alienate any part of it, but enable me to render it up whole and
entire to thee; but, O my God, thou see it already usurped, the world with
its vanities has seized it, and like a strong man armed keeps possession. O
thou who art stronger, come upon him, and take this unworthy heart of mine as
thine own spoil; refine it with that purifying fire of thy Love, that it may be
a fit habitation for thy Spirit. Lord, if thou see it, be pleased to make me
taste of those Joys, those ravishments of thy Love, wherewith thy soul has
been so transported: But if in this I know not what I ask, if I may not choose
my place in thy Kingdom, yet, O Lord, deny me not to drink of thy Cup; let me
have such a sincerity and degree of Love, as may make me endure any thing for
thy sake; such a perfect Love as may cast out all fear, and all sloth too, that
nothing may seem to me grievous to suffer, or too difficult to do in obedience
to thee, that so expressing my love by keeping thy Commandments, I may by thy
mercy at last obtain that Crown of Glory, which thou have promised to those
that love thee, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

For Devotion in Prayer.
O Most gracious Lord God, who not only permittest us, miserable sinners and
needy creatures, to present our petitions to thee, grant I beseech thee, that
the frequency of my prayer may be somewhat proportionable to those continual
needs I have of thy mercy. Lord, I confess it is the greatest honor, and
greatest advantage thus to be allowed access to thee; yet sottish and stupid is
my profane heart, that it shuns or frustrates the opportunities of it. My
soul, O Lord, is possessed with a spirit of infirmity, it is bowed together, and
can in no wise lift up it self to thee: O be thou pleased to cure this sad,
this miserable disease, to raise, and enliven this earthly drowsy heart, that
it may freely mount toward thee, that I may set a true value on this most
valuable privilege, and take delight in my approaching to thee; and that my
approaches may be with a reverence, some way answerable to that awful Majesty I
come before, with an importunity and earnestness answerable to those pressing
wants I have to be supplied, and with such a fixed attention of mind, as no
wandering thoughts may interrupt; that I may no more incur the guilt of drawing
near to thee with my lips, when my heart is far from thee, or my prayers turned
into sin, but may so ask, that I may receive, seek, that I may find, knock,
that it may be open unto me, that from praying to thee here, I may be
translated to the praising thee eternally in thy glory, through the merits and
intercession of Jesus Christ. Amen.

For the Fear of God.
O Most glorious Majesty, who only art High, and to be feared, possess my soul
with a holy awe and reverence of thee, that I may give thee the honor due to
thy Name, and may bear such a respect to all things which relate to thee that I
may never profane any holy thing, or sacriligiously invade what thou have set
apart to thy self. And, O Lord, since thou art a God, that wilt not clear the
guilty, let the dread of thy Justice make me tremble to provoke thee in any
thing. O let me not so mis-place my fear, as to be afraid of a man that shall
die, and of the Son of Man, who shall be made as grass, and forget the Lord my
Maker, but replenish my soul with the fear of the Lord, which is the beginning
of wisdom, which may be as a bridle to all my brutish appetites; and keep me in
a constant conformity to thy holy Will. Hear me, O Lord, I beseech thee, and
put this fear in my heart, that I may not depart from thee, but may with fear
and trembling work out my own salvation, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

For Thankfulness.
O Most gracious and bountiful Lord, who fillest all things with goodness, and
expectest no other return, but praise and thanksgiving, let me, O Lord, never
defraud thee of that so easy tribute, but let my heart be ever filled with a
sense, and my mouth with the acknowledgment of thy mercies. It is a joyful and
pleasant thing to be thankful; O suffer me not, I beseech thee, to lose my part
in that Divine pleasure, but grant that as I daily receive blessings from thee,
so I may daily from an affectionate and devout heart offer up thanks to thee;
and grant that not only my lips, but my life may show forth thy praise, by
consecrating my self to thy service, and walking in holiness and righteousness
before thee all the days of my life, through Jesus Christ my Lord and blessed
Savior. Amen.

For Chastity.
O Holy and Immortal Jesus, whose first descent was into the Virgins Womb, and
who did love to inhabit only in pure and Virgins hearts, I beseech thee, send
thy Spirit of purity to cleanse me from all filthiness both of flesh and
spirit. My body, O Lord, is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, O let me never
pollute that Temple with any uncleanness; and because out of the heart proceed
the things that defile the man. Lord, grant me to keep my heart with all
diligence, that no impure or foul thoughts be harbored there; but enable me, I
beseech thee, to keep both soul and body pure and undefiled, that so I may
glorify thee here, both in body and soul, and spirit, and be glorified in both
with Christ hereafter. Amen.

For Contentedness.
O Merciful God, thy Wisdom is infinite to choose, and thy Love forward to
dispense good things to us, O let me always fully and entirely resign my self
to thy disposals; have no desire of my own, but a perfect satisfaction in thy
chusings for me, that so in whatsoever state I am, I may be therein content.
Lord, grant I may never look with murmuring on my own condition, nor with envy
on other men's; and to that end, I beseech thee, purge my heart of all covetous
desires and affections O let me never yield any corner of my soul to Mammon,
but give me such a contempt of these fading riches, that whether they decrease,
or increase, I may never set my heart upon them, but that all my care may be to
be rich toward God, to lay up my treasure in Heaven, that I may so set my
affections on things above, that when Christ who is my life shall appear, I may
also appear with him in glory; grant this, O Lord, for the merit of the same
Jesus Christ. Amen.

For Perseverance.
O Eternal and unchangeable Lord God, who art the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever, be thou pleased to communicate some rays of that excellency, some
degree of that stability to me thy wretched creature, who am light and
unconstant, turned about with every blast. My understanding is very deceivable,
O stablish it with thy truth; keep it from the snares of seducing spirits, that
I may not be lead away with the errors of the wicked, and fall from mine own
stedfastness. My will also, O Lord, is irresolute and wavering, and does not
cleave steadfastly unto God. My goodness is but as a morning cloud, and as the
early dew it passes away: O strengthen and confirm me; and whatsoever good
thou have wrought in me, be pleased to accomplish it, and perform it until the
day of Christ. Lord, thou see my weakness, and know the number and
strength of those temptations I am to struggle with; O leave me not to my self,
but cover thou my head in the day of battle; and in all spiritual combats, make
me more than Conqueror through him that loved me. O let no terrors or
flatteries either of the world, or my own flesh, ever draw me from my obedience
to thee; but grant that I may continue steadfast, unmovable, always abounding
in the work of the Lord; by patient continuance in well doing, seeking, and at
last obtain glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer before the Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.
O Most merciful God, who have in thy great goodness prepared this Spiritual
Feast for sick and famished souls, make my desires and longings after it,
answerable to my needs of it. I have, with the Prodigal, wasted that portion of
grace thou bestowedst upon me, therefore do infinitely want a supply out of
this Treasury; but, O Lord, how shall such a wretch as I dare to approach this
holy Table? I am a Dog, how shall I presume to take the Childrens bread? or how
shall this spiritual Manna, this food of Angels be given to one who has chosen
to feed on husks with Swine? nay, to one who has already so often trampled
these precious things under foot, either carelessly neglecting, or unworthily
refusing those holy precious Mysteries. O Lord, my horrible guiltiness makes me
tremble to come, and makes me not dare to keep away; for where, O Lord, shall
my polluted soul be washed, if not in this fountain which thou have opened for
sin and for uncleanness? hitherto therefore I come, and thou have promised,
that him that comes to thee, thou will in no wise cast out. This is, O Lord,
the Blood of the New Testament, grant to me so to receive it, that it may be to
me for remission of sins; and though I have so often, and so wickedly broken my
part of that Covenant, whereof this Sacrament is a seal, yet be thou graciously
pleased to make thine good, to be merciful to my unrighteousness, and to
remember my sins and my iniquities no more; and not only so, but to put thy
Laws in my heart, and to write them in my mind; and by the power of thy grace
dispose my soul to such a sincere and constant obedience, that I may never
again provoke thee. Lord grant that in these holy Mysteries I may not only
commemorate, but effectually receive my blessed Savior, and all the benefits
of his passion; and to that end give me such a preparation of soul as may
qualify me for it. Give me a deep sense of my sins and unworthiness, that
being weary and heavy laden, I may be capable of his refreshings, and being
encompast with my own tears, and truly sorry for my many sins, I may be the
fitter to be washed in his blood. Raise up my dull and earthly mind from
grovelling here below, and inspire it with a holy zeal, that I may with a
spiritual affection approach this spiritual Feast. And let, O Lord, that
infinite Love of Christ, in dying for so wretched a sinner, inflame my frozen
benumbed soul, and kindle in me that sacrifice of love to him, and that so
vehement, that no water may quench, no floods drown it; such as may burn up all
my dross, not leave one unmortified lust in my soul; such as may also extend it
self to all whom thou have given me command and example to love, even mine
enemies as well as friends. Finally, O Lord, I beseech thee to cloth me in the
Wedding Garment, and make me, though my self a most unworthy sinner, yet by thy
mercy an acceptable guest at this holy Table, that I may not eat and drink my
own damnation, but may have my pardon sealed, my weakness repaired, my
corruptions subdued, and my soul unseparably united to thee, that no temptation
be ever able to dissolve the union; but that being begun here in grace, it may
be consummated in glory; grant this, O Lord, for thy dear Son sake, Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Another Prayer for the Receiving of the Holy Communion.
O Blessed Jesus, who once offeredst up thy self upon the Cross for me, and now
offerest thy self to me in the Sacrament, let not, I beseech thee, my
impenitence and unworthiness frustrate these so inestimable mercies to me, but
qualify me by thy grace to receive the full benefit of them. O Lord, I have
abundant need of thee, but am so clogged with guilt, so holden with the cords
of my sins, that I am not able to move toward the. O loose me from these bands
wherewith Satan and my own lusts have bound me, and draw me that I may run
after thee. Lord, thou see daily how eagerly I pursue the paths that lead to
death; and when thou invitest me to life and glory, I turn my back, and forsake
the hopes of mercy. How often has this Feast been prepared, and I have with
frivolous excuses absented my self; or if I have come, it has been rather to
defile, than to adore thee. I have brought such Troops of thy professed
enemies, and unrepented sins along with me, as if I came not to commemorate,
but to renew thy passion, crucifying thee afresh, and put thee to open shame;
and now of what punishment shall I be thought worthy, who have thus trampled
under foot the Son of God, and counted the blood of the Covenant an unholy
thing; yet, O merciful Jesu, this is my only Refuge. O let this make my
atonement, or I perish eternally; wherefore did thou shed it, but to save
sinners; neither can the merit of it be overwhelmed either by the greatness or
number of my sins. I am a sinner, a great one, O let me find this saving
efficacy: Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful, for my soul trusts in
thee; and in the clefts of thy wounds shall be my Refuge, until thy Fathers
indignation be over past. O thou who have, as my High Priest, sacrificed for
me, intercede for me also, and plead thy meritorious sufferings on my behalf,
and suffer not, O my Redeemer, the price of blood to be utterly lost; and
grant, O Lord, that as the sins I have to be forgiven are many, so I may love
much. Lord, thou see what faint and cold affections I have toward thee; O
warm and enliven them; and as in this Sacrament that transcendent love of
thine, in dying for me is shed forth, so I beseech thee, let it convey such
grace into me, as may enable me to make some returns of love. O let this Divine
fire descend from Heaven into my soul; and let my sins be the burnt offering
for it to consume, that there may not any corrupt affection, any cursed thing
be sheltered in my heart; that I may never again defile that place which thou
have chosen for thy Temple. Thou dyedst, O dear Jesu, to redeem me from all
iniquity, O let me not again sell my self to work wickedness, but grant that I
may approach unto thee at this time with most sincere and fixed resolutions of
an inward Reformation; and let me receive such grace and strength from thee, as
may enable me faithfully to perform them. Lord, there are many old habituated
diseases my soul groans under; here mention thy most prevailing corruptions;
and though I lie never so long at the Pool of Bethesda, come never so often to
thy Table, yet unless thou be pleased to put forth thy healing virtue, they
will still remain uncured. O thou blessed Physician of souls, heal me, and
grant that I may now so touch thee, that every one of these loathsome Issues
may immediately stench, that my sickness may not be unto death, but unto the
glory of thy mercy in pardoning, to the glory of thy grace in purifying so
polluted a wretch. O Christ, hear me, and grant I may now approach unto thee
with such humility and contrition, love and devotion, that thou may
vouchsafe to come unto me, and abide with me, communicating to me thy self, and
all the merit of thy passion; and then, O Lord, let no occasions of Satan, or
mine own conscience, amaze or distract me; but having peace with thee, let me
also have peace in my self, that this Wine may make glad, this Bread of Life
may strengthen my heart, and enable me cheerfully to run the way of thy
Commandments; grant this merciful Savior, for thine own bowels and compassions
sake. Amen.

Immediately before Receiving.
Thou have said, that he that eats thy flesh, and drinks thy blood, has
eternal life; behold thy servant O Lord, be it unto me according to thy Word.

At the Receiving of the Bread.
By thy crucified Body deliver me from the body of this death.

At the Receiving of the Cup.
O Lord, let this blood of thine purge my conscience from dead works, to serve
the ever Living God. Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean; O touch me,
and say, I will, be thou clean.

After Receiving.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto me; I
will receive the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. Worthy
is the Lamb that was slain* to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and
strength, and honor, and glory, and a blessing; therefore blessing, honor,
glory and power, be to him that sits on the Throne, and the Lamb for ever
and ever. Amen.

I have sworn, and am steadfastly bent to keep thy Righteous Judgments; O Lord
hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

A Thanksgiving for the Receiving the Communion.
O Thou fountain of all goodness, from whom every good and perfect gift comes,
and to whom all honor and glory shall be returned, I desire with all the most
fervent and inflamed affections of a grateful heart to bless and praise thee
for those inestimable mercies thou have vouchsafed me. O Lord, what is man that
thou should so regard him, as to send thy Beloved Son to suffer such bitter
things for him? But Lord, what am I, the worst of men, that I should have any
part of this Sacrament, who have so often despised him, and his sufferings? O
the height and depth of this mercy of thine, that art pleased to admit me to
the renewing of that Covenant with thee, which I have so often and perversely
broken! that I who am not worthy of that daily bread which sustains the body,
should be made partaker of this bread of life, which nourishes the soul; and
that the God of all purity should vouchsafe to unite himself to so polluted a
wretch. O my God, suffer me no more, I beseech thee, to turn thy grace into
wantonness, to make thy mercy an occasion of security, but let this unspeakable
love of thine, confirm me to obedience, that since my blessed Lord died for me,
I may no longer live unto my self, but to him. O Lord, I know there is no
concord between Christ and Belial; therefore since he has now been pleased to
enter my heart, O let me never permit any lust to chase him thence; but let him
that has so dearly bought me, still keep possession of me; and let nothing
ever take me out of his hand: To this end be thou graciously pleased to watch
over me, and defend me from all assaults of my spiritual enemies, but
graciously and specially from my self, from the treachery of my own heart,
which is too willing to yield it self a prey; and where thou see me either by
nature or custom most weak, there do thou, I beseeeh thee, magnify thy power
in my preservations; here mention thy most dangerous temptations; and Lord, let
my Saviors sufferings for my sins, and the vows that I have now made against
them, never depart from my mind; but let the remembrance of the one, enable me
to perform the other, that I may never make truce with those lusts which nailed
his hands, piercing his side, and made his soul heavy to the death; but that
having now anew listed my self under his banner, I may fight manfully, and
follow the Captain of my salvation, even through a Sea of blood. Lord,
strengthen the hands that fall down, and feeble knees, that I faint not in this
warfare. O be thou my strength, who am not able of my self to struggle with the
slightest temptations: how often have I turned my back in the day of battle?
how many of these Sacramental Vows have I violated? and Lord, I have still the
same unconstant deceitful heart to betray me to the breach of this. O thou who
art Yea and Amen, in whom there is no shadow of change, communicate unto me, I
beseech thee, such stability of mind, that I may no more thus start aside like
a broken Bow, but that having my heart wholly with thee, I may continue
steadfast in thy Covenant, that not one good purpose which thy Spirit has
raised in me this day may vanish, as so many have done formerly, but that they
may bring forth good fruit unto life eternal; grant this, O merciful Father,
through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ my only Savior. Amen.

A Prayer of Intercession to be used either before or after the Receiving of
the Sacrament.
O Most gracious Lord, who so tenderly love all mankind, as to give thy Son
out of thy bosom to be a propitiation for the sins of the whole world, grant
that the effect of this Redemption may be as universal as the design of it;
that it may be to the salvation of all. O let no person by impenitence, and
wilful sin, forfeit his part in it, but by the power of thy grace bring all,
even the most obstinate sinners to repentance, enlightening all in darkness,
Heretics, Jews, Turks and Infidels; take from them all blindness, hardness of
heart, and contempt of thy Word, and so fetch them home. Blessed Lord, bring
them into thy fold, that they may be saved among the number of the true Israel,
and for all those, upon whom the Name of thy Son is called, grant, O Lord, that
their conversion may be such as becomes the Gospel of Christ, that his Name be
no longer blasphemed amongst the Heathens through us. O blessed Lord, how long
shall Christendom continue the vilest part of the world, a sink of all
abominable pollutions, which even Barbarians detest? O let not our profession
and our practice be always at so wide a distance; let not the Disciples of the
holy Immaculate Jesus be of all others the most profane and impure; let not
the subjects of the Prince of Peace be of all others the most contentious and
bloody, but make us Christians indeed, as well as in Name, that we may walk
worthy of that holy Vocation wherewith we are called, and may all with one
mind, and one mouth glorify the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Have mercy on
this languishing Church; look down from Heaven the habitation of thy holiness,
and of thy glory, where is thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy
bowels, and of thy heart toward us? are they restrained? be not wroth very
sore, O Lord, neither remember our iniquities for ever; but though our
backslidings are many, and we have grievously rebelled, yet according to all
thy goodness, let thine anger and thy fury be turned away, and cause thy face
to shine upon thy Sanctuary, which is desolate, for the Lords sake, and so
separate betwixt us and our sins, that they may no longer separate between us
and our God. Save and defend all Christian Kings, Princes and Governors,
specially to whom we owe subjection; plead thou their Cause, O Lord, against
those that strive with them, and fight thou against those that fight against
them; and so guide and assist them in the discharge of that Office whereunto
thou have appointed them, that under them we may lead a quiet and a peaceable
life, in all godliness and honesty. Bless them that wait at thine Altar; open
thou their lips, that their mouth may set forth thy praise. O let not the Light
of the World be put under bushels, but place them in their Candlesticks, that
they may give light to all that are in the house. Let not Jeroboams Priests
profane thy service, but let the seed of Aarons Hill minister unto thee. And O
thou Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, succor and relieve all that
are in affliction; deliver the outcast and poor, help them to right that
suffer wrong; let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before thee, and
according to thee greatness of thy power, preserve them that are appointed to
die: Grant ease to those that are in pain, supplies to those that are in want:
Give to all presumptuous sinners a sense of their sins, and to all despairing,
a sight of thy mercies; and do thou, O Lord, for every one abundantly above
what they can ask or or think: Forgive my enemies, persecutors and slanderers,
and turn their hearts: Pour down thy blessings upon all my friends and
benefactors, all who have commended themselves to my prayers; here thou may
name particular persons; and grant, O most merciful Father, that through this
blood of the Cross, we may be presented pure and unblameable, and unreprovable
in thy sight, that so we may be admitted into that place of purity, where no
unclean thing can enter, there to sing all eternal praises, to Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, forever. Amen.

A Prayer in time of Affliction.
O Just and holy Lord, who with rebukes do chasten man for sin, I desire
unfeignedly to humble my self under thy mighty hand, which now lies heavy upon
me: I heartily acknowledge, O Lord, that all I do, all I can suffer, is but the
due reward of my deeds, therefore in thy severest inflictions I must still say,
Righteous art thou, O Lord, righteous are thy Judgments, but, O Lord, I beseech
thee in Judgment remember mercy; although my sins have enforced thee to strike,
yet consider my weakness, and let not my stripes be more heavy, or more
lasting, than thou see proportionable for my soul: Correct me, but with the
chastisement of a Father, not with the wounds of an enemy; and though thou take
not off thy Rod, yet take away thine anger. Lord, do not abhor my soul, and
cast not away thy servant in displeasure, but pardon my sins, I beseech thee:
and if yet in thy fatherly wisdom thou see fit to prolong thy corrections,
thy blessed will be done. I cast my self, O Lord, at thy feet, do with me what
thou please, try my as silver is tried, so that thou bring me out purified.
And Lord, make me, even my flesh also to subscribe to this Resignation, that
there be nothing in me that may rebel against thy hand, but that I may suppress
all repining thoughts, and may cheerfully drink of this Cup, how bitter soever
thou art pleased to make it. Lord, let it prove medicinal, and cure all the
diseases of my soul, that it may bring forth in me the peaceable fruit of
Righteousness, that so these light afflictions which are but for a moment, may
work for me a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, through Jesus
Christ. Amen.

A Thanksgiving for Deliverance.
O Blessed Lord, who art gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repentest of the evil, I thankfully acknowledge before thee, that
thou have not dealt with me after my sins, nor rewarded me according to my
iniquities; my Rebellions, O Lord, deserve to be scourged with Scorpions, and
thou have corrected them only with a fatherly Rod; neither have thou suffered
me to lie long under that, but have given me a timely and gracious issue out of
my late distresses. O Lord, I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou
have considered my trouble, and have known my soul in adversity: Thou have
smitten, and thou have healed me; O let these various methods have their proper
effects upon my soul, that I who have felt the smart of thy chastisements, may
stand in awe and sin not; and that I who have likewise tasted the sweet
refreshings of thy mercy, may have my heart ravished with it, and knit to thee
in the firmest bands of love, and that by both I may be preserved in a
constant, entire obedience to thee all my days, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer for a Sick Person.
O Merciful and righteous Lord, the God of health, and of sickness, of life and
of death, I most unfeignedly acknowledge that my great abuse of those many
days of strength and welfare, that thou have afforded me, has most justly
deserved thy present visitation; I desire, O Lord, humbly to accept of the
punishment of the Lord for my iniquity, and to bear the indignation of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him. And O thou merciful Father, who
designest not the ruin, but the amendment of those whom thou scourgest, I
beseech thee by thy grace so to sanctify this correction of thine to me, that
this sickness of my body may be a means of health to my soul. Make me diligent
to search my heart, and do thou, O Lord, discover every cursed thing, how close
soever concealed there, that by the removal thereof, I may make way for the
removal of this punishment. Heal my soul, O Lord, which has sinned against
thee, and then if it be thy blessed will, heal my body also. Restore the voice
of joy and health into my dwelling, that I may live to praise thee, and to
bring forth fruit of Repentance; but if in thy wisdom thou have otherwise
disposed, if thou have determined that this sickness shall be unto death, I
beseech thee to fit and prepare me for it: Give me that sincere and earnest
Repentance, to which thou have promised mercy and pardon. Wean my heart from
the world and its fading vanities, and make me to gasp and pant after those
more excellent and durable Joys, which are at thy right hand, forever. Lord,
lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me, and in all the pains of my
body, in all the agonies of my spirit, let thy comforts refresh my soul, and
enable me patiently to wait till my change come; and grant, O Lord, that when
my earthly Tabernacle is dissolved, I may have a building not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens; and that for his sake, who by his precious blood has
purchased it for me, even Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Thanksgiving for Recovery.
O Most gracious Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, in whose hand my
time is, I praise and magnify thee, that thou have in love to my soul
delivered me from the pit of destruction, and restored me to health again. It
is of thy mercy alone, O Lord, that thou have preserved my life from
destruction; thou have chastened and corrected me, but thou have not given me
over unto death: O let this life which thou have thus graciously spared, be
wholly consecrated unto thee. Behold, O Lord, I am by thy mercy made whole, O
make me strictly careful to sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto me. Let
not this reprieve thou have now given me, make me secure, as thinking my Lord
delayeth his coming; but grant me, I beseech thee, to make a right use of this
long-suffering of thine, and so to employ every minute of that time thou have
allowed me, that when thou shall appear, I may have confidence, and not be
ashamed before thee at thy coming. Lord, I have found by this approach toward
death, how dreadful a thing it is to be taken unprepared. O let it be a
perpetual admonition to me to watch for my Masters coming; and when the
pleasures of sin shall present themselves to entice me, O make me to remember
how bitter they will be at last. O Lord, hear me, and as thou have in much
mercy afforded me time, so grant me all grace to work out my salvation, to
provide Oil in my Lamp, that when the Bridegroom comes, I may go in with him
to the marriage; grant this I beseech thee, for thy dear Sons sake. Amen.

A Prayer at the approach of Death.
O Eternal and everlasting God, who breathed into man the breath of life, and
when thou take away that breath, he dies, and is turned again into dust, look
with compassion on me thy poor creature, who am now drawing near the gates of
death, and which is infinitely terrible, the Bar of Judgment. Lord, my own
heart condemns me, and thou art infinitely greater than my heart, and thou
know all things; the sins I remember fill me with horror: There are also
multitudes of other sins which I either observed not at all times, or have
since carelessly forgotten, which are all present with thee: Thou set my
misdeeds before thee, and my secret sins in the sight of thy countenance, and
what a mountainous heap those eminent provocations of so many years arise to?
how long shall so ungodly a sinner stand in thy Judgment, or such a sinner in
the Congregation of the Righteous? And to add more terror, my very
countenance, and repentance, I fear, will not abide thy trial; my frequent
relapses heretofore have sufficiently witnessed the insincerity of my heart,
and best resolutions; and then, O Lord, what can secure me that my present
dislikes of my sins are not rather the effects of my amazing danger, than of
any real change. And, O Lord, I know thou art not, nor wilt accept of any thing
that is not sincere. O Lord, when I consider this, fearfulness and trembling
comes upon me, and a horrible dread overwhelms me; my flesh trembles for fear
of thee, and my heart is wounded within me. But, O Lord, who wills not the
death of a sinner, be merciful unto me. One deep calls upon another, the
depth of my misery upon the depth of thy mercy: Lord, save me now, or I perish
eternally. O thou who willest not that any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance, such as thou will accept, who tryest the heart, create in
me, O God, a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me. O Lord, one day
with thee is better than a thousand elsewhere. O let thy mighty Spirit work in
me now in this my last day, whatsoever thou see wanting, to fit me for mercy
and acceptance. Give me a perfect and an entire hatred of all my sins, and
enable me to present thee with a sacrifice of a broken and a contrite heart,
which thou have promised not to despise, that by this I may be made capable of
that atonement, which thy dear Son has by the more excellent oblation of
himself, made for all repenting sinners; he is the Propitiation for our sins;
he was wounded for our transgressions; he was bruised for our iniquities; the
chastisements of our peace was upon him: O heal me by these stripes, and let
the cry of his blood cry down the clamor of my sins. I am indeed the child of
wrath, but he is the Son of thy Love; for his sake spare me, O Lord, spare thy
poor creature, whom he has redeemed with his most precious blood, and be not
angry with me for ever. O let not thy vengeance pursue me to this City of
Refuge; my soul hangs upon him; Oh let me not perish with a Jesus, with a
Savior in my arms, but by his agony and bloody sweat, by his Cross and
Passion, by all that he did and suffered for sinners, good Lord deliver me;
deliver me, I beseech thee, from the wages of sin, thy wrath and everlasting
damnation, in the time of my tribulation, in the hour of death, and in the day
of judgment. Hear me, O Lord, hear me, and do not repay me for my former
neglects of thy calls, by refusing to answer me in this time of my greatest
need. Lord, there is but a step between me and death; but seal my pardon before
I go hence and be no more seen: Thy loving kindness is better than life it
self; Oh let me have that in exchange, and I shall most gladly lay down this
mortal life. O Lord, thou know all my desire, and my groaning is not hid
from thee; deal thou with me, O Lord, according to thy Name, for sweet is thy
mercy; take away the sting of death, the guilt of my sins, and then though I
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; I will lay
me down in peace, and Lord, when I awake, let me be satisfied with thy presence
in thy glory; grant this merciful God, for his sake, who is both the Mediator
and Redeemer of sinners, even Jesus Christ. Amen.

PUT me not to rebuke, O Lord, in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure. There is no health in my flesh, because of thy displeasure,
neither is there any rest in my soul by reason of my sins; for my wickedness is
gone over my head, and are a sore burden, too heavy for me to bear. My wounds
stink and corrupt through my foolishness; therefore is my spirit vexed within
me, and my heart within me is desolate. My sins have taken such hold upon me,
that I go in mourning all the day long; yea they are more in number than the
hairs of my head; and my heart has failed me; but thou, O Lord God, art full
of compassion and mercy, long-suffering, plenteous in goodness and truth; turn
thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in misery. If thou
Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may abide it?
O remember not the sins of my youth, and my offense, but according to thy mercy
think upon me for thy goodness; look upon my adversity and misery, and forgive
me all my sins. Hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble. O
haste thee and hear me, out of the deep do I call unto thee; O Lord, hear my
voice. Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul, O save me for thy mercy sake. O
go not far from me, for trouble is hard at hand, and there is none to help me.
I stretch forth my hand unto thee, my soul gaspeth unto thee, as a thirsty
land; draw nigh unto my soul and save it. O deliver me, because of mine
enemies, for my soul is full of trouble, and my life draws nigh unto hell.
Save me from the Lions mouth: Hear me from among the horns of the Unicorns. O
set me upon the Rock that is higher than I, for thou art my hope, and a strong
Tower for me against the enemy; Why art thou so heavy, O my soul, and why art
thou so disquieted within me? put thy trust in God, for I will yet give him
thanks, for the help of his countenance. The Lord shall make good his loving
kindness toward me; yea, thy mercy, O Lord, endures for ever, despise not
then the work of thine own hands. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek
thee. My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh also longs after thee, in a barren
and a dry Land, where no water is. Like as the Heart desires the waterbrooks,
so longs my soul after thee, O my God. My soul is athirst for God, even for
the Living God: When shall I come and appear before the presence of God? How
amiable are thy dwellings, O Lord God of Hosts? my soul has a desire, a
longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord. My flesh and my heart rejoices
in the Living God. O that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I flee away
and be at rest. O send out thy Light and thy Truth, that they may lead me, and
bring me to thy Hill, and to thy dwelling; for one day in thy Court is better
than a thousand elsewhere. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of the
Lord, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness. I should utterly have fainted,
but that I believed verily to have seen the goodness of the Lord in the Land of
the Living. Thou art my Helper and my Redeemer, O Lord, make no long tarrying.

A Prayer at the Receiving of the Communion.
O Lord, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, for my iniquities
are increased over my head, and my trespass is grown even unto Heaven. I have
wrought all these great provocations, and that in the most provoking manner;
they have not been only single, but repeated acts of sin; for, O Lord, of all
this black Catalogue of sin, which I have now brought before thee, how few are
there which I have not often committed? nay, which are not become even
habitual, and accustomary to me? and to this frequency I had added both a
greediness and obstinacy in sinning, turned into my course, as a horse rusheth
into the battle, doing evil with both hands, earnestly; yea, hating to be
reformed, and casting thy words behind me, quenching the Spirit within me,
which testified against me, to turn me from my evil ways, frustrating all
those outward means, whether of judgment or of mercy, which thou have used to
draw me to thy self? Nay, O Lord, even my Repentances may be numbered amongst my
greatest sins; they have sometimes been feigned and hypocritical, always so
slight and ineffectual; they have brought forth no fruit to amendment of life;
but I have added the breach of resolutions and vows to all my former guilt.
Thus, O Lord, I am become out of measure sinful, and since I have thus chosen
death, the lake and brimstone, this, O Lord, is in justice to be the portion of
my Cup; to me belongs nothing but shame and confusion of face eternally, but to
thee, O Lord God, belongs mercy, redemption, and forgiveness: Though I have
rebelled against thee, O remember not my sins and offenses, but according to
thy mercy think upon me, O Lord, for thy goodness. Thou sendest thy Son to seek
and to save that which was lost, behold, O Lord, I have gone astray like a
sheep that is lost, O seek thy servant, and bring me back to the Shepherd and
Bishop of my soul. Let thy Spirit work in me a hearty sense and detestation of
all my abominations, and true contrition of heart, which thou have promised not
to despise, and then be thou pleased to look on me, to take away all my
iniquity, and receive me graciously; and for his sake who has nothing amiss,
be reconciled unto me, wash away the guilt of my sin in his blood, and subdue
the power of them by his grace, and grant, O Lord, that I may from this hour,
bid a final adieu unto all ungodliness and worldly lusts, never once more cast
a look toward Sodom, or long after the flesh pots of Egypt, but consecrate my
self entirely unto thee, to serve thee in Righteousness and true Holiness all
the days of my life, reckoning my self to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive
unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord and blessed Savior. Amen.

The 51 Psalm is fit to be read upon this Occasion.

Ejaculations.
O Lord, of whom may I seek for succor but of thee, who for my sins art justly
displeased, yet, O Lord God, most holy, O Lord, most mighty, O holy and most
merciful Savior, deliver me not at my last hour into the bitter pains of
eternal death. Thou know, Lord, the secrets of my heart, shut not thy
merciful eyes upon my prayer, but hear me, O Lord, most holy, O God, most
mighty, O holy and most merciful Savior, thou most worthy Judge Eternal,
suffer me not at my last hour, for any pains of death, to fall from the Father.
I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am not worthy to be called
thy child; yet, O Lord, do not thou cast off the bowels and compassion of a
Father; but even as a Father pittieth his own children, so be thou merciful
unto me. Lord, the Prince of this world comes, oh let him have nothing in me,
but as he accuses, do thou absolve: he lays many grievous things to my
charge, which he can too well prove; I have nothing to say for my self, do thou
answer for me, O Lord my God. O Lord, I am clothed with filthy garments, and
Satan stands at my right hand to resist me, O be thou pleased to rebuke him,
and pluck me as a brand out of the fire. Cause mine iniquity to pass from me,
and cloth me with the Righteousness of thy Son. Behold, O Lord, the Devil is
coming toward me, having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a
short time: O save and deliver me, lest he devour my soul like a Lion, and tear
it in pieces, while there is none to help. O my God, I know no unclean thing
can enter into thy Kingdom, and I am nothing but pollution. My very
Righteousnesses are as filthy rags, O wash me, and make me white in the blood
of the Lamb, that so I may be fit to stand before thy Throne. Lord, the snares
of death compass me about; O let not the pains of Hell also take hold upon me,
but though I find trouble and heaviness, O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my
soul. O dear Jesus, who have bought me with the precious price of thine own
blood, challenge now thy purchase, and let not the malice of Hell pluck me out
of thine hand. O blessed High Priest, who art able to save them to the
uttermost who come unto God by thee, save me, I beseech thee, who have no hope,
but by thy merit and intercession. O God, I confess I have defaced that Image
of thine thou did imprint upon my soul, yet oh thou faithful Creator, have
pity on thy creature. O Jesu, I have by many and grievous sins crucified thee
afresh, yet thou who prayest for thy persecutors, intercede for me also, and
suffer me not, O my Redeemer, my soul, the price of thy blood, to perish. O
Spirit of grace, I have by my horrid impieties done despite unto thee, yet O
blessed Comforter, though I have offended thee, and often grieved thy Holy
Spirit, be thou pleased to succor and relieve me, and say unto my soul, I am
thy salvation. Mine eyes look unto thee, O Lord, in thee is my trust. O cast
not out my soul. O Lord, in thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded. O
blessed Lord, who scourgest every Son whom thou receivest, let me not be weary
of thy correction, but give me such a perfect submission to thee the Father of
spirits, that this chastisement may be for my profit, that I may thereby be
partaker of thy holiness. O thou Captain of my salvation, who were made perfect
by sufferings, sanctify to me all the pains of body, all the terrors of mind,
which thou shall permit to fall upon me. Lord, my sins have deserved eternal
torments, make me cheerfully and thankfully to bear my present pains; chasten
me as thou please here, that I may not be condemned with the world. Lord, the
waters are come in even unto my soul; O let thy Spirit move upon the waters,
and make them like the Pool of Bethesda, that they may cure whatsoever
spiritual disease thou discernest in me. O Christ, who first sufferedst many
and grievous things, and then enteredst into thy grave, make me so to suffer
with thee, that I may also be glorified with thee. O dear Jesus, who humblest
thy self to the death of the Cross for me, let that death of thine sweeten the
bitterness of mine. When thou had overcome the sharpness of death, thou did
open the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers; I believe that thou shall come to
be my Judge, I pray thee therefore help thy servant whom thou have redeemed
with thy most precious blood: make me to be numbered with Saints in glory
everlasting. Thou art the Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in thee,
though he were dead, yet shall he live: Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief.
My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is far
better. Lord, I groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with that house
from Heaven; I desire to put off this Tabernacle, O be pleased to receive me
into everlasting habitations; bring my soul out of prison, that I may give
thanks unto thy Name. Lord, I am here to wrestle not only with flesh and blood,
but with principalities and powers, and spiritual wickedness: O take me from
these tents of Kedar, into the heavenly Jerusalem, where Satan shall be utterly
trodden under foot. I cannot here attend one minute to thy service without
distractions. O take me up to stand before thy Throne, where I shall serve thee
day and night. I am in heaviness through many tribulations; O receive me into
that place of rest, where all tears shall be wiped away from my eyes; where
there shall be no more death nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain. I am here in the
state of banishment and absence from the Lord. O take me where I shall for ever
behold thy face, and follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there
is laid up for me a Crown of glory. O blessed Jesu, who have loved me, and
washed me from my sins in thine own blood, receive my soul. Into thine hands I
commend my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me. O Lord, thou God of Truth, come
Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

A Prayer for the Morning.
O Most mighty and gracious God, full of incomprehensible Power and Majesty,
whose glory the very Heaven of Heavens is not able to contain; look down from
Heaven upon me thy unworthy servant, who here prostrate my self at the
footstool of thy Throne of grace, not as I am in my self, but look upon me, O
Father, through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ, thy beloved Son, in
whom thou art well pleased, for of my self I am not able to stand in thy
presence, or to speak with my unclean lips to so holy a God as thou art; for
thou know that in sin I was conceived and born, and that I have lived ever
since in iniquity, so that I have broken all thy holy Laws and Commandments, by
sinful motions, unclean thoughts, evil words, and wicked works, omitting many
of those duties of piety which thou requirest for thy service, and committing
many of those vices which thou under the penalty of thy displeasure have
forbidden; here thou may confess to God thy secret sins, which most burden
thy conscience, with the circumstances of the time, place, person, and the
manner how it is committed, saying, but more especially, I do here with grief
of heart confess unto thee, for these my sins, O Lord, I stand guilty of thy
curse, with all the miseries of this life, and the life to come, namely,
everlasting torment in Hell fire, when this wretched life is ended. If thou
should deal with me according to my deserts; yea Lord, I confess thy
goodness which endures for ever is the cause I have not been long ago consumed
and confounded, but with thee, O Lord, there is mercy and plenteous redemption;
in the multitude therefore of thy mercies, and confidence in Christ's merits, I
entreat thy Divine Majesty, that thou would not enter into judgment with thy
servant, neither be extreme to mark what I have hitherto done amiss; for if
thou do, then no flesh can be justified in thy sight, nor any living stand in
thy presence; but be thou merciful unto me, and wash away all the uncleanness
of my sins, in the merits of that precious blood which Jesus Christ has shed
for me; and seeing that he has born the burden of that curse, which was due
for my transgression, O Lord, deliver me from my sins, and from all those
Judgments which hang over my head as due unto me for them, and separate them as
far from thy presence, as the East is from the West; bury them in the burial of
Christ, that they may never rise up in this world to shame me, nor in the world
to come to condemn me. And I beseech thee, O Lord, not only to wash away my
sins with the blood of thy Immaculate Lamb, but also to purge my heart by thy
Holy Spirit from the dross of my natural corruptions, that I may feel thy
Spirit more and more killing my sins in the power and practice thereof, so that
I may with more freedom of mind, and liberty of will, serve thee the ever
living God, in Righteousness and true Holiness this day, and give me grace,
that by the direction and assistance of thy Holy Spirit, I may persevere to be
thy faithful and unfeigned servant unto my life's end, and when this mortal life
is ended, I may be made partaker of immortality, and everlasting happiness in
thy heavenly Kingdom. In the mean time, O Lord, whilst it is thy blessed will
and pleasure, that I may continue to spend and end that small number and
remnant of my days, that I may apply my heart to wisdom; and as thou do add
days to my life, so I beseech thee to add repentance and amendment to my
sinful days, that as I grow in years, I may grow in grace and favor with
thee, and all thy people; and to this end, give unto me a supply of all those
graces which thou know to be wanting in me, and necessary for me, with an
increase of all those good gifts wherewith thou have already endowed me, that
so I may be the better enabled to lead such a godly life, and an honest
conversation, as that thy Name may thereby be glorified, others may take good
example by me, and my soul may cheerfully feed on the peace of a good
conscience, and be more replenished with the Joy of the Holy Ghost: And here, O
Lord, according to my bounden duty, I give the most humble and hearty thanks
for all those blessings which of thy goodness thou have bestowed upon me; and
namely, for that thou have of thy free grace and love, according to thine
eternal purpose, elected me before the foundation of the world was laid, unto
salvation, in Jesus Christ: For that thou have created me in thine own Image,
and have begun to restore that in me which was lost in our First Parents: For
that thou have effectually called me by the working of thy Holy Spirit, in the
Preaching of the Gospel, and the Receiving of thy Sacrament, to the knowledge
of thy saving grace, and obedience to thy blessed Will: For that thou have
bought and redeemed me with the blood of thy only begotten Son, from the
torment of Hell, and thraldom of Satan: For that thou have by Faith in Christ,
freely justified me, who am by nature the child of wrath: For that thou have in
good measure justified me by thy Holy Spirit, and given me so large a time to
repent, together with the means of Repentance: I thank thee likewise, good
Lord, for my life, health, wealth, liberty, food, raiment, peace, prosperity
and plenty, and for that thou have preserved me this night from all perils and
dangers of soul and body, and have brought me safe to the beginning of this
day; and as thou have now awakened my body from sleep, so I beseech thee to
awaken my body from sin, and carnal security; and as thou have caused the light
of the day to shine in our bodily eyes, so good Lord, cause the light of thy
Word, and Holy Spirit, to illuminate my understanding, and give me grace, as
one of thy children of light, to walk in all holy obedience before thy face
this day, and all the days and time of my whole life, and that I may endeavor
to keep faith and a good conscience toward God, and toward all men, in all my
thoughts, words and dealings; and so good Lord bless all studies and actions,
which I shall take in hand this day, as that they may tend to thy glory, the
good of others, and the comfort of my own soul and conscience in that day, when
I shall make my final request unto thee for them. O my God, keep thy servant,
that I do not evil unto any man this day, and let it be thy blessed will, not
to suffer the Devil, nor his wicked Angels, nor any of his evil members, or my
malicious enemies, to have any power to do me any hurt or harm this day, but
let the eyes of thy holy providence watch over me for good and not for evil,
and command thy holy Angels to pitch their tents round about me, for my defense
and safety in my going out, and my coming in, as thou have promised they should
do about them that fear thy Name; for into thy hands, O Father, I do here
commend my soul and body, my actions, and all that ever I have, to be guided
and protected by thee, being assured that whatsoever thou take into thy
custody, cannot suffer or take any hurt or harm; and if I at any time, this
day, shall through frailty, forget thee, yet Lord, I beseech thee, do thou in
mercy remember me: And I pray not alone for my self unto thee, O Father, but I
beseech thee also be merciful unto thy whole Church, and chosen people,
wheresoever they live upon the face of the whole Earth, defend them from the
rage and tyranny of the Devil, the World, and Antichrist; give thy Gospel a
free and a joyful passage through the world, for the conversion of those who
belong to thine Election and Kingdom: Bless the Church and Kingdoms wherein we
live, with the continuance of peace and true Religion, and Justice: Defend our
gracious King Charles from all his enemies, and grant him a long life in health
and all happiness to reign over us* Bless our gracious Queen Katherine, James
Duke of York, and all the rest of the Royal Family* increase in them all
heroical and spiritual graces which may make them fit for those places for
which thou ordainedst them; direct all the Nobility, Bishops, and Magistrates
of this Kingdom and Commonwealth; govern thou them that they may govern the
Commons in true Religion, Justice, Obedience, and Tranquillity: Be merciful unto
all the people that fear thee, and call upon thy Name; and comfort as many
among them as lie sick, or are comfortless in body, or mind; especially be
favorable to all such as suffer any trouble or persecution for the testimony
of the Truth and holy Gospel, and give them a gracious deliverance out of all
their troubles, which way it shall seem best to thy wisdom, for the glory of
thy Name, the farther enlarging of the Truth, and the more ample increase of
their comfort and consolation: Hasten thy coming, O blessed Savior, and end
these sinful days, and give me grace, that like a wise Virgin, I may be
prepared with Oil in my Lamp, to meet thee, the sweetest Bridegroom of my soul
at thy coming, whether it be by the day of death, or the day of judgment, and
then Lord Jesus, come quickly, even Lord Jesus come when thou will, these, and
all other graces which thou know to be needful and necessary both for my
soul and my body, this day and for ever, I humbly beg and crave at thy hands; O
Father, giving thee thy praise and glory, in that absolute form of prayer,
which Christ himself has taught me, to say unto thee, Our Father which art in
Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, etc.

Another Shorter Morning Prayer.
O Most gracious God and merciful Father, I thine unworthy servant do
acknowledge that as I have been born in sin, so I have lived in iniquity, and
broken every one of thy commandments, in thought, word and deed, following the
desires of my own will, and lusts of my flesh, not caring to be governed by thy
holy Word and Spirit; therefore I have justly deserved all shame and misery in
this life, and everlasting condemnation in Hell fire; if that thou should
but deal with me according to thy Justice, and my deserts. Wherefore, O
heavenly Father, I humbly beseech thee, for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, and
for the merits of that bloody death and passion, which I believe he has
suffered for me, that thou would pardon and forgive me all my sins, and
deliver me from the Hell and vengeance which is due unto me for them, and send
thy holy Spirit into my heart, which may assure me that thou art my Father, and
that I am thy child, and that thou love me with an unchangeable love; and let
thy good Spirit lead me into all truth, and crucify in me more and more carnal
lusts, that my sin may more and more die in me, and that I may serve thee in
Righteousness and true Holiness all the days of my life; and when this mortal
life is ended, I may through thy mercy in Christ be made partaker of thine
everlasting glory, in thy heavenly Kingdom. And here, O Lord, from the bottom
of my heart, I humbly thank thee for all thy blessings bestowed upon my soul
and body, for electing me in thy Love, for redeeming me by thy Son, sanctifying
me by thy Spirit, and preserving me from my youth up, until this present day
and hour by thy gracious providence; I thank thee more especially for that thou
have defended me this night past from all danger, and have brought me safe to
the beginning of this day; and now, good Lord, I beseech thee, keep me this day
from all peril and danger, and from all evil that may hurt me, and from falling
into all sin that should offend thee; set thy fear before mine eyes, and let
thy holy Spirit so rule my heart, that all that I shall think, do, or speak
this day, may tend to thy glory, the good of others, and the peace of my own
conscience; and to this end I commend my self, and all my ways and actions,
together with all that do belong unto me, unto thy gracious protection this
day, praying thee to keep both thine and me from all evil, and to give a
blessing to all our honest labors and endeavors; defend thy whole Church from
the tyranny of this world, and of Antichrist; preserve our gracious King from
all conspiracy and treason; grant him a long reign in health and happiness over
us: Bless our gracious Queen Katherine, James Duke of York, and all the rest of
the Royal Family, endue them with thy grace, and defend them from all evil:
Bless all our Ministers and Magistrates with all those graces and gifts which
thou know necessary for their places: Be favorable to all those that fear
thee, and call upon thy Name, and tremble at thy judgments* Comfort all those
that are sick, or any way comfortless O Lord, keep me in a continual readiness
by faith and repentance for my last end, that whether I live or die, I may be
found thine own, to thine eternal glory, and my everlasting salvation, through
Jesus Christ my only Savior, in whose blessed Name I beg these mercies at thy
hands, and give unto thee thy praise and glory, in that prayer which he has
sanctified with his own lips, saying, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O most gracious and loving Father, who art about my bed, and know my lying
down, and my rising up, and art near unto all that call upon thee in Truth and
sincerity, I a wretched sinner do humbly beseech thee to look upon me with the
eyes of mercy, and not to behold me, as I am in my self, for then thou shall
see but an unclean and defiled creature, conceived in sin, and living in
iniquity, so that I am ashamed to lift up my eyes unto thee, knowing how
grievously I have sinned against Heaven and before thee; for, O Lord, I have
transgressed all thy Commandments and Righteous Laws, not through negligence
and infirmity, but oftentimes through wilful presumption, contrary to my
knowledge, and the motions of thy holy Spirit reclaiming me from them, so that
I have wounded my conscience, and grieved thy holy Spirit, by whom thou have
sealed me to the day of Redemption. Thou have consecrated my soul and body to
be the Temple of the Holy Ghost, I wretched sinner have defiled both, with all
manner of pollution and uncleanness; mine eyes in taking pleasure to behold
vanities, that I am ashamed to lift up my eyes unto thee; mine ears in hearing
impure and unclean speeches; my tongue in evil speaking; my hands are so full
of impurity, that I am ashamed to lift them up unto thee; and my feet have
carried me after mine own ways; my understanding and reasonings, which are so
quick in all earthly matters, are only blind and stupid; when I come to
meditate or discourse of spiritual and heavenly things, my memory which should
be a treasury of all goodness, is not so apt to remember any thing, as those
things that are vile and vain; yea Lord, by woeful experience I find that
naturally all the imaginations of the thoughts of my heart are only evil
altogether, and continually; for these my sins are more in number than the
hairs of my head, and they have grown over me, like a loathsome leprosy, from
the crown of my head, to the soal of my feet; there remains no part which they
have not infected; they make me seem vile in mine own eyes, how much more
abominable must I appear in thy sight! the custom of sinning has almost taken
away the conscience of sin, and pulled upon me such dullness of sense, and
hardness of heart, that thy judgments denounced against my sins, by the
faithful Preachers of thy Word, do not terrify me to return unto thee with
unfeigned repentance; and if thou Lord should but deal with me according to
thy Justice, and my deserts, I should utterly be confounded and condemned; but
seeing that of thine own mercy thou have spared me so long, and still waitest
for my repentance, I humbly beseech thee for the blood, death and passions
sake, which Jesus Christ has suffered for me, that thou would pardon and
forgive me all my sins, and mine offenses, and open unto me that ever-streaming
fountain of the blood of Christ, which thou have promised to open under the New
Testament, to the penitent of the house of David, that all my sins and
uncleanness may be so bathed in his blood, buried in his death, and hid in his
wounds, that they never more be seen to shame me in this life, nor to condemn
me in the world to come, before the judgment seat of God. And for as much, O
Lord, as thou know that it is not in man to turn his own heart, unless thou
first give him grace to convert: And seeing it is as easy with thee to make me
righteous and holy, as to suffer me to be such, O my God, give me grace to do
what thou have commanded, then command what thou will and thou shall find me
willing to do what thou command, and to observe thy blessed Will in all
things; to this end give unto me thy Holy Spirit, which thou have promised to
give to the worlds end, unto all thine elect people; and let the same Holy
Spirit purge my heart from the dross of my natural corruption; heal my soul and
body, that they may become the Temple of the Holy Ghost, to serve thee in
Righteousness and true Holiness all the days of my life, that when by the
direction and assistance of thy Holy Spirit I shall finish my course in this
short and transitory life, I may cheerfully leave this world, and resign my
soul into thy fatherly hands in assured confidence of enjoying everlasting life
with thee in thy heavenly Kingdom, which thou have prepared for thine Elect
Saints who love the Lord Jesus, and expect his appearing. In the mean while, O
Father, I beseech thee, let thy Holy Spirit work in me such a serious
repentance, as that I may with tears lament my sins past, with grief of heart
be humbled for my sins present, and with all my endeavors resist the like
filthy sins for the time to come, and let the same Holy Spirit keep me in the
Unity of the Church, lead me in the Truth of thy Word, and preserve me that I
may never swerve from the same to Popery, or any other error or false Worship;
and let thy Spirit open mine eyes more and more, to see the wondrous things of
thy Law; and open my lips that my mouth may set forth thy praise; increase in
me those good gifts with which thou have already endowed me of thy mercy, and
give unto me a penitent spirit, and a chaste heart, a contented mind, pure
affections, a wise behavior, and all other graces which thou see necessary
for me to govern my heart in thy fear, and to guide all my life in thy favor,
that whether I live or die, I may live and die unto thee, who art my God and my
Redeemer. And here, O Lord, according as I am bound, I render unto thee, from
the Altar of my humblest heart, all possible thanks and praise for all those
blessings and benefits which graciously and plentifully thou have bestowed upon
my soul and body, for this life, and that which is to come, namely, for my
Election, Creation, Redemption, Justification, Sanctification and Preservation,
from my childhood until this present day and hour, and for the firm hope which
thou have given me of my Glorification: Likewise for my Life, Liberty, Food and
Raiment, a competent estate for the maintenance of this present life, and
prosperity; more especially, for that thou have defended me this day now past
from all peril and dangers, both of body and soul, furnishing me with all
necessary good things that I stand in need of; and as thou have ordained the
day for man to travel in, and the night for him to take his rest; so I beseech
thee to sanctify unto me this nights rest and sleep, that I may be the better
disposed to serve thee in all honesty and godliness, and that I may enjoy the
same as thy sweet blessing and benefit, that so dull and wearied a body of mine
being refreshed with moderate rest and sleep, I may be the better enabled to
work before thee, doing all such good works as thou have provided for me; and
when it shall please thee by thy divine providence to awaken me the next
morning, do thou, O Lord, who art the keeper of Israel, who never slumberest
nor sleep, watch over me in thy holy providence, to protect me from all
dangers, so that neither the evil Angels of Satan, nor any wicked enemy may
have any power to do me any harm, or evil; and to this end give a charge unto
thy holy Angels, that they at thy appointment may pitch their tents round about
me for my defense and safety, as thou have promised they should do about them
that fear thy Name; and knowing that thy Name is a strong Tower of defense unto
all those that trust therein, I here recommend my self, and all that belongs
unto me unto thy holy protection and custody, if it be thy blessed will to call
for me in my sleep. O Lord, for Christ his sake, have mercy upon me, and
receive my soul unto thy heavenly Kingdom; and if it be thy blessed pleasure to
add more days to my life, add more amendment unto my days, and wean my mind
from the love of the world, and the vanity thereof, and cause me more and more
to settle my conversation on Heaven and heavenly things, and perfect daily in
me that good work which thou have begun, to the glory of thy Name, and the
salvation of my sinful soul. O Lord, I beseech thee likewise, save and defend
from all evil and danger thy whole Church, our gracious King Charles, and grant
him a long and prosperous Reign over us: Bless our gracious Queen Katherine,
James Duke of York, and all the Royal Family; endue them with thy grace, and
defend them from all evil: Bless the Nobility, Magistrates, and Ministers of
these Churches and Kingdoms, each of them with those graces and benefits which
are expedient for their places and callings; and be thou, O Lord, a comfort and
a consolation to all thy people, whom thou have thought meet to visit with any
kind of sickness, cross, or poverty, or calamity. Hasten, O Father, the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ; make me ever mindful of my last end, and of the
reckoning that I am to make unto thee therein; and in the mean while, carefully
so to follow Christ in the generation, during this life, as that with Christ I
may have a portion in the resurrection of Christ, when this mortal life is
ended: These graces, and all other blessings, which thou, O Father, know to
be required and necessary for me, I humbly beg and crave at thy hands, in the
Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ, thy Son; and in that form of Prayer which
he himself has taught me to say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Another Short Evening Prayer.
O Eternal God, and heavenly Father, if I were not taught and assured by the
promises of thy Gospel, and the example of Peter, Mary Magdalen, the Publican,
the Prodigal Child, and many other penitent sinners, that thou art so full of
compassion, and so ready to forgive the greatest sinners who are heaviest laden
with sin, at what time soever they return unto thee, with penitent hearts,
lamenting their sins, and imploring thy grace, I should despair for my own
sins, and be utterly discouraged from presuming to come into thy presence,
considering the hardness of my heart, and the unruliness of my affection, and
the uncleanness of my conversation, by means whereof I have transgressed all
thy holy Laws and Commandments, and deserved thy Curse, which might cause my
body to be smitten with some fearful disease, my soul to languish with the
death of sin, my good name to be traduced with some scandalous reproaches, and
make my self liable to all manner of crosses and casualties. And I confess
Lord, that thy mercy is the cause I have not been long ago consumed and
confounded: But, O my God, as thy mercy only stayed thy judgments from falling
upon me hitherto, so I humbly beseech thee, in the bowels of thy mercy in Jesus
Christ, in whom only thou art well pleased, that thou will not deal with me
according to my deserts, but that thou would freely and fully remit unto me
all my sins and my transgressions, and that thou would wash them clean from
me, with the virtue of that precious blood, which thy Son Jesus Christ has
shed for me; for he alone is my Physician, and his blood only is the medicine
that can heal my sickness; and is the true brazen Serpent that can cure that
poison wherewith the fiery serpents of my sins have stung and poisoned my sick
and wounded soul; and give me, I beseech thee, thine holy Spirit, which may
assure me of mine Adoption, and that may confirm my Faith, increase my
Repentance, inlighten my Understanding, purify my Heart, and rectify my Will
and Affection, and so sanctify me throughout, that my whole Body, and Soul;
and Spirit may be kept unblamable until the glorious coming of my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. And now, O Lord, I give unto thee, most humble and hearty
thanks and praise, for that thou have this day preserved me from all harm and
dangers, notwithstanding all my sins and evil deserts; and I beseech thee
likewise to defend me this night from the roaring Lion, which night and day
seeks to devour me: Watch thou, O Lord, over me this night, to keep me from
his temptations and tyranny, and let thy mercy shield me from his unspeakable
rage and malice; and to this end I commit my self into thy hands, and almighty
protection, beseeching thee, O my Lord and my God, not to suffer Satan, or any
of his evil members to have power to do me any hurt or harm this night; and
grant, good Lord, that whether I sleep or wake, live or die, I may sleep, wake,
live or die unto thee, and to the glory of thy Name, and the salvation of my
soul. Lord, bless and defend all thy chosen people every where; Grant our
gracious Sovereign long life, and a happy Reign over us: Bless our gracious
Queen Katherine, James Duke of York, and all the Royal Family, together with
all our Magistrates and Ministers; comfort them who are in misery, need or
sickness, or under any kind of Cross or Calamity; give me grace to be one of
those wise Virgins, which may have my heart prepared like a Lamp, furnished
with the Oil of Faith, and Light of good works, to meet the Lord Jesus, the
sweet Bridegroom of my soul, at his second and sudden coming in glory; grant
this, good Father, for Jesus Christ his sake my only Savior, Redeedeemer, and
Mediator; in whose blessed Name, and in whose own words I call upon thee, as he
has taught me; Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A Morning Prayer for a Family.
O Lord our God and heavenly Father, who art the only Creator of Heaven and of
Earth, and all therein contained, we confess that we are unworthy to appear in
thy sight and presence, considering our manifold sins and offenses, which we
have committed against Heaven, and before thee: and how that we have been born
in sin, and do daily break thy holy Laws and Commandments contrary to our
knowledge and consciences; albeit we know thou art our Creator, who have made
us, our Redeemer, who have bought us with the blood of thy only begotten Son,
and our Comforter, who bestowest upon us all the good and holy graces which we
enjoy in our souls, and in our bodies; and if thou should but deal with us
as our wickedness and unthankfulness have deserved, what other thing might we,
O Lord, expect from thee, but shame and confusion in this life, and in the
world to come wrath and everlasting condemnation; yet, O Lord, in the obedience
of thy Commandments, and in the confidence which we have in thy unspeakable and
endless mercy in thy Son, and our Savior Jesus Christ the Righteous, we thy
poor servants appealing from thy Throne of Justice, to thy Throne of Crace,
whose mercy reigns to pardon abounding sin, do from the bottom of our hearts,
most humbly beseech thee, to remit and forgive unto us all our sins and our
offenses, and misdeeds, that by the virtue of the precious blood of Jesus
Christ, thy innocent Lamb, which he so abundantly shed upon the Cross, to take
away the sins of the world, all our sins, both original and actual, may be so
cleansed and washed from us, that they may never be laid to our charge, nor
ever have power to rise up in judgment against us; and we beseech thee, good
Father, for Christ his death and passion sake, that thou will not suffer to
fall upon us that fearful curse and vengeance which thy Law has threatened, and
our sins have justly deserved: And for as much, O Lord, as we are taught by thy
Word, that no Idolaters, Adulterers, covetous men, contentious persons,
drunkards, gluttons, and such inordinate livers, shall inherit the Kingdom of
God; pour the grace of thy Holy Spirit into our hearts, whereby we may see the
filthiness of our sins, and abhor them, and may be more and more stirred up to
live in newness of life, and love of thy Majesty, so we may daily increase in
the obedience of thy words, and in conscionable care of keeping thy
Commandments. And now, O Lord, I render unto thee most hearty thanks, for that
thou have elected, redeemed, called, justified us in good measure in this life,
and given us an assured hope that thou will glorify us in thy heavenly
Kingdom, when this mortal life is ended. Likewise we thank thee for our life,
health, wealth, liberty, prosperity, and peace; especially, O Lord, for the
continuance of thy holy Gospel amongst us, and for sparing us so long, and
granting us so gracious a time of repentance: Also we praise thee for all other
thy mercies bestowed upon us; more especially for preserving us this night
past, and from all dangers that might have befallen our souls or bodies; and
seeing thou have now brought us safe to the beginning of this day, we beseech
thee protect and direct us in the same: Bless and defend us in our going out
and in our coming in, this day, and ever more; shield us, O Lord, from the
temptations of the Devil, and grant us the custody of thy holy Angels, to
defend and direct us in all our ways; and to this end we recommend our selves,
and all those that belong unto us, and are abroad from us, unto thy hands and
almighty tuition; Lord defend them from all evil, prosper them with all graces,
and fill them with thy goodness: Preserve us likewise this day, from falling
into any gross sins, especially those whereunto our natures are most prone; set
a watch before the door of our lips, that we offend not thy Divine Majesty by
any rash or false oaths, or by any lewd or lying speeches; give unto us patient
minds, pure and chaste hearts, and all other graces of thy Spirit, which thou
know to be needful for us, that we may be the better enabled to serve thee
in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life; and seeing that all
men's labors are in vain, without thy blessing, bless every one of us in our
several places and callings; direct thou the works of our hands upon us, even
prosper thou our handy-works; for except thou guide us with thy grace, our
endeavors can have no good success; and provide for us all things which thou,
O Father, know to be needful for every one of us, in our souls and bodies
this day, and grant that we may pass through the pilgrimage of this short life,
that our hearts being not settled upon any transitory things, which we meet
with in the way, our souls may every day be more and more ravished with the
love of our home, and thine everlasting Kingdom: Defend likewise, O Lord, thy
universal Church, and every particular member thereof; especially we beseech
thee to continue the peace and tranquillity of these Churches and Kingdoms
wherein we live; preserve from all evil and dangers our most gracious King
Charles, endue his Royal heart with more and more grace, wisdom and
understanding, and grant that his days may be long, prosperous and happy:
Bless our gracious Queen Katherine, James Duke of York, and all the Royal
Family, multiply their days with bliss and felicity, and afterward crown them
with everlasting joy and glory: Bless all our Ministers and Magistrates with
all graces needful for their places, govern thou them, that they may govern us
in peace, godliness, and true Religion; and of thy mercy, O Lord, comfort all
our Brethren that are distressed, sick, or comfortless, especially those who
are afflicted either with an evil conscience, because they have sinned against
thy Word, or for a good conscience, because they will not sin against the
Truth; make the first to know that not one drop of the blood of Christ was a
drop of vengeance, but all drops of grace, powerful to procure pardon upon
repentance, for the greatest sins of the chiefest sinners in the world; and for
the other, let not, O Lord, thy long sufferance, either too much discourage
them, or too much encourage their enemies; but grant them patience in
suffering, and a gracious and speedy deliverance, which may stand best with thy
glory, and their comfort; and give every one of us grace to be always mindful
of his last end, and to be always prepared with faith and repentance, as with
a weding garment, against the time thou shall call for us out of this sinful
world; and that in the mean while, we may in all things, and above all things,
seek thy glory, that when this mortal life is ended, we may then be made
partakers of Immortality and Life eternal in thy heavenly Kingdom; these, and
all other graces and blessings, which thou, O heavenly Father, see to be
necessary for us, and for thy whole Church, we humbly beg and crave at thy
hands, concluding this our imperfect prayer, in that most perfect form of
prayer which Christ himself has taught us, saying, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc.

Evening Prayer for a Family.
O Eternal God, and most merciful Father, we thine unworthy servants here
assembled, do cast down our selves at the foosttool of thy grace, acknowledging
our selves that we inherit our Fathers corruption, in thought, word and deed,
transgressing thy holy Commandments, so that in us naturally, there dwells
nothing that is good; for our hearts are full of secret pride, anger,
impatience, dissembling, lying, lust, vanity, profaneness, distrust, too much
love of our selves, too little love of thee, and thy Kingdom, but full of
enmity, and void of love, patience, and every spiritual grace; if thou
therefore should enter into judgment with us, and search out our natural
corruptions, and observe all the cursed fruit and effects that we have derived
from thence, Satan might justly challenge us for his own, and we could not
expect any from thy Majesty, but thy wrath, and our condemnation, which we have
long ago deserved: But, good Father, for Jesus Christ his sake, who is thy dear
Son, in whom only thou art well pleased, and for the merits of that bitter
death and passion, which we believe he has suffered for us, have mercy upon
us, and free us from the shame and confusion which is due unto us for them,
that they may never seize upon us to our confusion in this life, or to
condemnation in the world which is to come: And for as much as thou have
created us, to serve thee, as all other creatures to serve us, so we humbly
beseech thee inspire thy Holy Spirit into our hearts, that by his illumination
and effectual working we may have the inward sight and feeling of our sins, and
natural corruptions; and that we may not be blinded in them through custom, as
the Reprobate are, but that we may more and more loath them, and be heartily
grieved for them, endeavoring by the use of all good means to overcome them,
and get out of them. O let us feel the power of Christ's death killing sin in
our mortal bodies, and the virtue of his Resurrection, raising up our souls to
newness of life; convert our hearts, subdue our affections, regenerate our
minds, purify our natures, and suffer us not to be drowned in the streams of
those filthy vices, and sinful pleasures, wherewith thousands are carried
headlong to eternal destruction, but daily frame us more and more to the
likeness of thy Son Jesus Christ, that in Righteousness and true Holiness we
may so serve and glorify thee, that living in thy fear, and dying in thy
favor, we may in thy appointed time, attain to the blessed Resurrection of the
Just unto eternal life; in the mean while, O Lord, increase our faith in the
sweet promises of the Gospel, and our repentance from dead works, the assurance
of our hopes in thy promises, our fear of thy Name, the hatred of all our sins,
and our love unto thy children, especially whom we see to stand in need of our
help and comfort, that so by the fruit of piety, and a righteous life, we may
be assured that thy Holy Spirit does dwell in us, and that we are thy children
by grace and adoption; and grant us, good Father, the continuance of health,
peace and maintenance, and all other outward good things, so far forth as thy
Divine Wisdom shall think meet to be requisite and necessary for every one. And
here, O Lord, according to our bounden duty, we confess that thou have been
exceeding merciful unto us all in things of this life, but infinitely more
merciful in the things of a better life; therefore we do here from our very
souls, render unto thee most humble and hearty thanks from our very souls, for
all thy blessings and benefits bestowed upon our souls and our bodies,
acknowledging thee to be that Father of Light from whom we have received all
those good and perfect gifts, and unto thee alone for them we ascribe to be
due, all glory, honor, might, majesty and praise, both now and for ever more:
But more especially we praise thy Divine Majesty, for that thou have defended
us this day past from all perils and dangers, so that none of those Judgments
which our sins have deserved have fallen upon any one of us. Good Lord, forgive
us the sins which this day we have committed against thy Divine Majesty, or our
Brethren, and for Christ his sake, be reconciled unto us for them; and we
humbly beseech thee likewise of thine infinite goodness, to defend and protect
us this night, and all that belong unto us, from all perils and dangers of
fire, robbery, terrors of evil Angels, or any other fear, which for our sins
might justly have fallen upon us, and that we may be safe under the shadow of
thy wings; and to this end and purpose we here recommend our bodies and souls,
and all that we have unto thine Almighty Protection; Lord bless and defend both
us and them from all evil; whilst we sleep, do thou, O Father, who never
slumberest nor sleep, watch over thy children, and give a charge to thy holy
Angels to pitch their tents round about our houses and dwellings this night, to
guard us from all dangers, that sleeping with thee, we may the next morning be
awakened by thee, and so being refreshed with moderate sleep, we may be the
fitter to set forth thy glory in the conscionable duties of our callings; and
we beseech thee, O Lord, to be merciful likewise to thy whole Church, and to
continue the tranquillity of these Kingdoms wherein we live, turning from us
those plagues which the crying sins of this Nation do cry aloud for. O Lord,
preserve the principal member thereof, our most gracious King Charles, endue
his Royal heart with grace, wisdom and understanding, and grant that his days
may be many, prosperous, virtuous and happy; cloth his enemies with shame, but
upon his head let his Crown flourish: Bless our gracious Queen Katherine, James
Duke of York, and the rest of the Royal Family, endow them with thy grace, and
defend them from all evil: Bless all our Magistrates and Ministers with all
those graces and gifts necessary for their places; govern thou them, that they
may govern us in peace, godliness, and true Religion: Bless all that fear thee,
and call upon thy Name; all our Christian Brethren and Sisters, that suffer
sickness, or any other affliction, or misery, especially those who do any where
suffer persecution for the testimony of thy holy Gospel* grant them patience to
bear thy Cross, and deliverance when, and which way it shall seem best to thy
Divine Wisdom; and Lord, suffer us never to forget our last end, and those
reckonings which then we must render unto thee; in health and prosperity make
us mindful of sickness, and of the evil day that is behind, that these things
may not overtake us as a snare, but that we may in some good measure, like wise
Virgins, be found prepared for the coming of Christ, the sweet Bridegroom of
our souls. And now, O Lord, most holy and just, we confess there is no cause
why thou who art so much displeased with sin, should hear the prayers of
sinners, but for his sake who suffered for sin, and sinned not, in the only
mediation therefore of thine eternal Son Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, we
humbly beg these and all other graces which thou know to be needful for us
and for thy whole Church, shutting up these our imperfect requests in that most
holy prayer which Christ himself has taught us to say unto thee, Our Father
which art in Heaven, etc.

A Morning Prayer for the Sabbath Day.
O Most High, O Eternal God, all whose works are glorious, all whose thoughts
are very deep, there can be no better thing than to praise thy Name, and
declare thy loving kindness in the morning, on thy holy and blessed Sabbath
day, for it is thy Will and Commandment, that we should sanctify this day in
thy service, and praise him, and in the thankful remembrance of the Creation of
the world, by the power of thy Word, so of the Redemption of mankind by the
death of thy Son; thine, O Lord, I confess is greatness, and power, and glory,
and victory, and praise, for all that is in Heaven and Earth is thine; thine is
the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou excellest as head over all, both riches and
honor come of thee, and thou raignest over all, and in thine hand is power and
strength; and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give grace unto all;
now therefore, O my God, I praise thy glorious Name, that whereas I wretched
sinner having so many ways provoked thy Majesty to anger and displeasure, thou
notwithstanding of thy favor and goodness, passing by profaneness and
infirmities, have vouchsafed, O heavenly Father, to add this Sabbath again to
the number of my days; and vouchsafe, O heavenly Father, for the merits of
Jesus Christ thy Son, whose glorious Resurrection thy whole Church celebrateth
this day, to pardon and forgive me all my sins and misdeeds; especially, O
Lord, cleanse my soul from those filthy sins which my corrupt nature is most
prone unto, with the blood of thy most pure and undefiled Lamb, and let thy
Holy Spirit more and more subdue my corruptions, that I may be renewed after
thine own Image, to serve thee in Righteousness, and true Holiness all the
days of our life; and as of thy mercy thou have brought me safe to the
beginning of this day, so I beseech thee to make it a day of Reconciliation
betwixt my sinful soul and thy Divine Majesty; give me grace to make it a day
of Repentance unto thee, that thy goodness may seal it to be a day of pardon
unto me; and that I may remember, that the keeping holy of this, is a
commandment which thine own finger has written, that on this day I might
meditate on thy glorious works of our Creation and Redemption, and learn how to
keep all the rest of thy holy Laws and Commandments; and when anon I shall with
the rest of the holy Assembly appear before thy presence, to offer unto thee
our morning Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, and to hear what thy Spirit,
by the preaching of thy Word, shall speak unto thy servant, oh let not my sins
stand as a cloud, to stop my prayers from ascending unto thee, or keep back thy
grace from descending by thy Word into my heart. I know, O Lord, and tremble to
think, that three parts of the good seed falls upon bad ground; O let not my
heart be like the high way, which through hardness and want of true
understanding receives not the seed, till the evil one comes and catches it
away; nor the stony ground, which hears with joy for a time, but falls away
as soon as persecution arises for the Gospels sake; nor like the thorny
ground, which by the cares of this world, and deceitfulness of riches choaketh
the Word which it hears, and makes it altogether unfruitful; but that like
unto the good ground, I may hear thy Word with an honest and a good heart,
understand it, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience, in that
measure that thy Divine Wisdom shall think meet for thy glory, and mine
everlasting comfort. Open likewise, I beseech thee, O Lord, the door of
utterance unto thy faithful servant, whom thou have sent unto us to open our
eyes, that we may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, that we may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them
which are sanctified by Faith in Christ; and give me grace to submit my self to
his Ministry, as well when he terrifieth me with judgments, as when he
comfort me with thy mercies; and that I may have him in a singular love for
his works sake, because he watches for my soul, as he that must give an
account for the same unto his Master; and give me grace to behave my self in
the holy Congregation with comeliness and reverence as in thy presence, and in
the sight of thy holy Angels. Keep me from drowsiness and sleepiness, and from
all wandering thoughts, and worldly imaginations; sanctify my memory, that it
may be apt to receive, and firm to remember those good and profitable doctrines
which shall be taught unto us out of thy Word, and that through the assistance
of thy holy Spirit, I may put the same lessons in practice, for my directions
in prosperity, for my consolation in misery, for the amendment of my life, and
the glory of thy Name; and that this day which godless and profane persons
spend in their own lusts and pleasures, I as an obedient servant of thine may
make my chief delight to consecrate it to thy honor and glory, not doing my
own ways, nor seeking mine own will, nor speaking a vain word, but that
ceasing from the works of sin, as well as from the work of my ordinary calling,
I may through thy blessing feel in my heart the beginning of that eternal
Sabbath, which with unspeakable joy and glory I shall celebrate with thy Saints
and Angels to thy praise and worship in thy heavenly Kingdom for evermore; all
which I humbly beg and crave at thy hands, in the Name and Mediation of my Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, in that form of prayer which he has taught me, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A Private Evening Prayer for the Sabbath Day.
O Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath, suffer me who am but dust and ashes,
to speak unto thy glorious Majesty; I know that thou art a consuming fire, I
acknowledge that I am but wretched stubble, my sins are in thy sight, and Satan
stands at my right hand to accuse me for them; I come not to excuse, but to
judge my self worthy of all those judgments which thy justice might most justly
inflict upon me, a wretched creature, for my sins and my transgressions, the
number of them is so great, and the nature of them is so grievous, that they
make me seem vile in mine own eyes, how much more loathsome in thy sight. I
confess they make me so far from being worthy to be called thy Son, that I am
altogether unworthy to have the name of thy meanest servant; and if thou
should but recompense me according to my deserts, the Earth, as weary of
such a sinful burden, should open her mouth, and swallow me up like one of
Dathans Family, into the bottomless pit of Hell; for if thou did not spare
the natural branches, those Angels of glorious excellency, but hurledst them
down from thy heavenly habitation in the pains of hellish darkness, to be kept
unto damnation, when they sinned but once against thy Majesty, and did expel
our first Parents out of Paradise, when they did but transgress one of thy
Laws: Alas, what a vengeance may I expect, who have not offended in one sin
only, but heaping sin upon sin, without any true Repentance, drinking in
iniquity as it were water, ever pouring in, but never pouring out any
filthiness; and transgressed all thy Laws and Commandments; yea this present
day thou have straightly commanded me to keep holy to thy praise and worship, I
have not so religiously kept and observed, nor prepared my soul in that
holiness and chastity of heart as was fit to meet thy blessed Majesty in the
holy Assembly of thy Saints: I have not attended to the Preaching of thy Word,
nor to the administration of thy Sacrament, with that humility, reverence and
devotion that I should; for though I was present at those exercises in my body,
yet Lord, I was overtaken with much drowsiness, that when I was awake, my mind
was so distracted and carried away with vain and worldly thoughts, that my soul
seemed to be absent, and out of the Church. I have not so duly as I should
meditated with my self, nor conferred with my Family upon those good
instructions which I have heard and received out of thy holy Word, by the
public Minister, for default whereof, Satan has stolen the most part of
those instructions out of my heart, and I wretched creature, have forgotten
them, as though they had never been heard; and my family does not thrive in
knowledge and satisfaction under my government, as they should, though I know
that many of my poor Brethren live in want and necessity; some in pain, and
comfortless, yet I have not remembered to relieve the one with my alms, nor the
other with my consolations, but have feasted my self, and satisfied mine own
lust; I have spent most part of the day in idle talk, vain sports and
exercises; yea, Lord, I have, etc. here confess what faults thou have done that
day, by omission or commission, and then fetching a deep sigh from thy heart,
and for all these my sins, my conscience cries guilty, thy Laws condemns me,
and I am in thy hand to receive the sentence and curse that is due to the
wilful breach of so holy a Commandment: but what if I am by the Law condemned,
yet Lord, thy Gospel assures me that thy mercy is above all thy works, and that
thy grace transcends thy Law, and thy goodness delights there to reign, where
sinners do most abound. In the multitude of the mercies and merits of Jesus
Christ my Savior, I beseech thee, O Lord, who despisest not the sighing of a
contrite heart, nor desire the death of a penitent sinner, to pardon and
forgive unto me all these my sins, and all the errors of that day, and of my
whole life, and free my soul from that curse and judgment which is due unto me
for them. Thou that did justify the contrite Publican for four words of
confession, and receivedst the prodigal Child when he had spent all the stock
of grace, into favor, upon his repentance, pardon all my sins likewise, O
Lord, and suffer me not to perish for my transgressions. O spare me for thy
mercy sake, and receive me unto favor again. Will thou, O Lord, reject me, who
have received all Publicans and sinners, that upon repentance sued unto thee
for grace. Shall I alone be excluded from thy mercy? far be it from me to think
so, for thou art the same God of mercy unto me that thou wast unto them, and
thy compassion never fails; wherefore, O Lord, deal not with me after my
merits, but according to thy great mercy, execute not thy severe justice
against me a sinner, but execute thy long-sufferance in forbearing thine own
creature. I have nothing to present unto thee for a satisfaction, but only
those bloody wounds, bitter death and passion which thy blessed Son, my only
Savior, has suffered for me, him, in whom only thou art well pleased, I offer
up unto thee, for all my sins wherewith thou art displeased; he my Mediator,
the request of whose blood speaking better things than that of Abel, thy mercy
can never gainsay, illuminate my understanding* and sanctify my heart with thy
holy Spirit, that it may bring to my remembrance all those good and profitable
lessons which this day, or at any other time has been taught unto me out of
thy holy Word, that I may remember them; thy Commandments to keep them, thy
Judgments to avoid them, and thy sweet promises to rely upon them in time of
misery and distress; and now, O Lord, I resign my self to thy most holy Will, O
receive me into thy favor, and so draw me by thy grace unto thy self, that I
may as well be thine by Love and Implantation, as by Calling and Creation, and
give me grace so to keep holy thy Sabbath in this life, as that when this life
is ended, I may with all thy Saints and Angels, celebrate an eternal rest of
joy and praise to the honor of thy most holy Name in thy heavenly Kingdom for
ever more. Amen.

Devotions for several Occasions.
In the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.


A Morning Prayer.
O Eternal Son of Righteousness, who came from the bosom of the Father, to
enlighten the darkness of the world, I praise thy Name that thou have preserved
me from the danger of this night, and have continued to me still the
opportunities of serving thee, and advancing my hopes of a blessed eternity,
let thy mercies shine brightly upon me, and dissipate the clouds and darknesses
of my spirit and understanding; rectify my affections, and purify my will,
and all my actions, that whatsoever I shall do or suffer this day, or in my
whole life, my words and purposes, my thoughts, and all my intentions, may be
sanctified, and be acceptable to thy Divine Majesty. Amen.

Grant that my understanding may know thee, my heart may love thee, and all my
faculties and powers may give thee due obedience, and serve thee; preserve me
this day from all sin and danger, from all violences and snares of mine
enemies, visible, or invisible; let thy holy fear be as a bridle to my
distemperatures, and thy love so enkindle and actuate all my endeavors, that
no pleasures or allurements of the world may draw me from thy service, nor any
difficulty or temptation may be my hinderance; let the profound humility and
innocence of my blessed Savior keep from me all pride and haughtiness of mind,
all self-love and vainglory, all obstinacy and disobedience, all fraudulency,
and hurtful dissimulation, and let the graces of the Holy Ghost take such
absolute possession and seizure of my soul, and all his faculties, that I may
bring down, and east out the spirit of uncleanness and intemperance, of malice
and envy, idleness and disdain, that I may never despise any of thy creatures,
but my self, that so being little in my own fight, I may be great in thine.
Amen.

An Evening Prayer.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.


O Lord God, who art the light and splendour of souls, in the brightness of thy
countenance is eternal day, that knows no night; in thy arms, and in thy
protection is all quietness, tranquillity and everlasting repose, while the
darkness covers the face of the earth, receive my body and soul into thy
custody; let not the spirits of darkness come near my dwelling, neither suffer
my fancy to be abused with the illusions of the night. Lord, I am thy servant,
and the sheep of thy pasture, let not the Devil, who goes up and down seeking
whom he may devour, abuse my body, or make a prey of my soul, but defend me
from all those calamities which I have deserved, and protect my soul, that it
consent not to any work of darkness, lest mine enemy say, he has prevailed
over me, or do mischief to a soul redeemed with thy most precious blood. Amen.

Pardon and forgive me all the sins and offenses of my youth and age, the
errors of mine understanding, the inordination of mine affections, the
irregularity of all my actions, and particularly of whatsoever I have
transgressed this day, in thought, word, or deed. Lord, let not thy wrath
arise, for although I have deserved the extremest pressure of thine
indignation, yet remember my infirmity, and how thou have sent thy Son to
reveal thy infinite mercy to us, and convey pardon and salvation to the
penitent. I beseech thee also to accept the heartiest devotion, and humble
acknowledgment of a thankful heart for all thy blessings and preservation of me
this day; for unless thy providence and grace had been my defense and guide, I
had committed more and more grievous sins against thee, and had been swallowed
up by thy just wrath, and severest judgments, mercy sweet Jesus. Amen.

Grant unto thy servant true humility, great contrition, a tender conscience,
and obedient heart, an understanding always busied in honest and pious
thoughts, a wiling, tractable heart, and ever prone to do good, affections even
and moderate, a watchful custody over my senses, that by those windows sin may
never enter in, nor death by sin; make me to watch over my tongue, and keep the
door of my lips, that no corrupt or unseemly communication proceed out of my
mouth, that I may never slander, calumniate, or detract from the reputation of
my neighbor, that I be not busy in the faults of others, but careful to
correct my own, being gentle and merciful to others, severe toward my self,
that I may speak much of thy praises, and what I can for the edification of my
Brethren. Amen.

Give me a soul watchful in the service of Religion, constant in holy purposes,
ingenious and free from sordid ends, or servile flattery, a modest gravity in
my deportment, affability, a fair, courteous demeanor toward all men,
austerity in condemning my own sins, sweetness in fraternal correction, and
reprehending others, mature judgment, a chaste body, and a clean soul, patience
in suffering, deliberation in my words and actions, good counsels in all my
purposes; make me just in performing promises, and in all my duties, sedulous
in my calling, profitable to the Commonwealth, a true Son of the Church, and of
a disposition meek and charitable toward all men. Amen.

O Lord, let thy grace be so present with me, that though my body sleep, yet my
soul may for ever be watchful, that I sleep not in sin, or pretermit any
opportunity of doing thee service: Let the remembrance of thy goodness and
glory be first and last with me, and so unite my heart unto thee with habitual
charity, that all my actions and sayings may be directed to thy glory, and
every motion and inclination, either of soul or body, may in some capacity or
other receive a blessing from thee, and do thee service, that whether I sleep
or wake, travel or rest, eat or drink, live or die, I may always feel the
light of thy countenance shining so upon me, that my labors may be easy, my
rest blessed, my food sanctified, and my whole life spent with so much sanctity
and peace, that scaping from the darkness of this world, I may at last come to
the land of everlasting rest, in thy light to behold light and glory through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity now and ever more. Another Prayer
for the Evening.
VIsit, we beseech thee, O Lord, this habitation with thy mercy, and us thy
servants with thy salvation, and repel far from us all the snares of the enemy.
Let thy holy Angels dwell here to keep us in peace and safety, and thy blessing
be upon us for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord Jesus Christ, the lively Image of thy Fathers mercy and glory, the
Savior of all them that put their trust in thee, we offer and present to thee
all our strength, and powers of our souls and body, and whatsoever we are, or
have, to be preserved, governed, and possessed by thee; preserve us from all
vicious, vain and proud cogitations, unchaste affections, from all those things
which thou hate; grant us thy holy charity, that we may love thee above all
the world, that we may with all sincerity of intention, and zealous affections,
seek thee alone, and in thee alone take our rest, inseparably joining our
selves unto thee, who art worthy to be beloved and adored of all thy creatures
with lowest prostration, and highest affection, now and for ever more. Amen.

O Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, let thy blessing be upon us, and
upon all the members of thy holy Church, all health and safety both of body and
soul; assist us against all our enemies, visible and invisible, now and for
ever more; send us a quiet night, and a holy death in the actual communion of
the Catholic Church, and in thy charity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. Now and in all dangers and afflictions of
soul and body, in the hour of death, and in the day of Judgment, save and
deliver us, O sweet Savior and Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

Short Prayers for several Occasions for the King.
O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty, King of Kings, who in thy hands
have the heart of Kings, and can turn them as the Rivers of water, send the
light of thy countenance and abundance of blessings upon thy servant our
Sovereign Lord King Charles, make him as holy, valiant, and prosperous as King
David, wise and rich like Solomon, zealous for the honor of thy Law and Temple
as Josiah, and give him all sorts of great assistances to enable him to serve
thee, to glorify thy holy Name, to protect thy Church, to promote true
Religion, to overcome all his enemies, to make glad all his people, that he
serving thee with all diligence, and utmost of his endeavors his people may
serve him with honor and obedience, in thee, and for thee, according to thy
blessed Word and Ordinance, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Queen.
O God of Heaven, Father of all mercies, have mercy upon our most gracious
Queen, unite her unto thee with the hands of faith and love, preserve her to
her lives end in thy favor, and make her instrumental of glory to thy Name, of
refreshment to the Church, of Joy to the all faithful people of this Kingdom,
and crown her with an eternal weight of glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

For our Children.
O Father of Heaven, God of all the creatures, by whose providence mankind is
increased, I bless thy Name for bestowing on me that blessing of the righteous
man, the blessing of children; Lord, bless them with health, with life, and
good understanding, with fair opportunities and advantages of education,
society, tutors and governors, and above all with the graces of thy holy
Spirit, that they may live and be blessed under thy protection, grow in grace,
and be in favor with God and man, and at last make up the number of thine
elect Children, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer of a Wife for her Husband.
O My God, who have graciously been pleased to call me to the holy state of
Matrimony, bless me in it with the grace of chastity, with loyalty, obedience,
and complacency to my husband; and bless him with long life, with healthful
body, with an understanding soul, with abundance of thy graces, which may make
him to be and continue thy servant, a true Son of the Church, and a supporter
and guide to his Wife, a blessing and a comfort to his Children, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Of a Husband for his Wife.
O Merciful God, who art a Father to us thy Children, espouse to thy holy
Church a Savior, and a Redeemer to all mankind; have mercy upon thy Handmaid
my Wife, endow her with all the ornaments of thy heavenly grace, make her to be
holy and devout, as Hester, loving and amiable, as Rachel, fruitful, as Leah,
that being filled with grace and benediction here, she may be partaker of thy
glory hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For safety in Childbirth.
O Blessed Jesu, Son of the Eternal God, who according to thy humility, were
born of a holy Maid, who conceived thee without sin, and brought thee forth
without pain, have mercy upon me thy humble servant, and as by thy blessing I
have conceived, so grant that by thy favorable assistance I may be safely
delivered. Lord, grant me patience, and strength, and confidence in thee, and
send thy holy Angel to be my Guardian in the hour of my travel. O shut not up
my soul with sinners, nor my life with them that go down to the Pit; I humbly
also beg mercy for my Child, grant a comely body, and an understanding soul,
life, and an opportunity of Baptism, and thy grace from the cradle to his
grave, that it may increase the number of Saints in that holy fellowship of
Saints and Angels, where thou raignest and live, Eternal God, world without
end. Amen.

Before a Journey.
O Lord, who did lead thy servants Abraham, and Jacob, thy people Israel, thy
servant Tobias, and wise men of the East, in their several Journies, by thy
providence, by thy Ministry of Angels, by a Pillar of Fire, and by the guidance
of a Star, vouchsafe to preserve us thy servants in the way that we are now to
go, be, O Lord, a guide unto us in our preparation, a shadow in the day, and
covering by night, a rest to our weariness, and a staff to our weakness, a
portion in adversity, a protection from danger, that by thy assistance we may
perform our Journey safely to thy honor, to our own comfort, and last bring us
to the everlasting Rest of our heavenly Country, through him who is the way,
the truth and the life, our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

For Afflicted persons.
O Lord God, merciful and gracious Father, whose compassion extends to all that
are in misery and need, that take delight in relieving the distresses of the
afflicted, give refreshment to all the comfortless, provide for the poor, give
ease to all them that are tormented with sharp pains, health to the diseased,
liberty and redemption to the captives, cheerfulness of spirit to all them that
are in great desolation. Lord, let thy Spirit confirm all them that are strong,
strengthen all them that are weak, and speak peace to the afflicted conscience,
that the light of thy countenance being restored to them, they may rejoice in
thy salvation, and sing praises unto thy Name, who have delivered their souls
from death, their eyes from tears, and their feet from falling; grant this for
the honor of thy mercy, and the glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A Prayer against Temptations.
O God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, thy Name is great, thy Essence
infinite, thy Goodness is Eternal, and thy Power has no limit, thou art the
God and Father of all, blessed for ever more, look down in mercy and compassion
from thy dwelling, hear my prayers and supplications, and deliver me from all
temptations of the world, the flesh, and the Devil; take not thy grace from me;
let me never want thy help in my need, nor thy comfort in the day of my danger
or calamity; never try me beyond my strength, nor afflict me beyond my
patience, nor smite me but with a fatherly Rod: I have no strength of my own,
thou art my confidence, my Rock, and my strong salvation; save me O God, from
the miseries of this world, and never let me suffer the calamities of the next;
rescue me from the evils I have deserved, and preserve me from the punishment
of this world, that living before thee with a clean heart, and undefiled body,
and a sanctified spirit, I may at the day of Judgment be presented pure and
spotless by the blood of the Lamb, that I may sing eternal Hallelujahs in
heavenly places, to the honor of God our Savior, who has redeemed our souls
from death, our eyes from tears, and our feet from falling; grant this in the
riches of thy mercy, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A General Confesson.
ALmighty God, I a miserable sinner, do humbly confess that I am truly
sorrowful for my many and great, my innumerable and intolerable crimes, of
which my conscience does accuse me, by night and by day, and by which I have
provoked thy severest wrath and indignation against me. I have broken all thy
Righteous Laws and Commandments by word or deed, by vain thoughts, or sinful
desires. I have sinned against thee in all my Relations and capacities, in all
places, and at all times; I can neither reckon their number, nor bear their
burden, nor suffer thine anger, which I have deserved; but thou, O Lord God,
art merciful and gracious, have mercy upon me, pardon me for all the evil I
have done; judge me not for all the good I have omitted; take not thy favor
from me, but delight thou to sanctify and save me, and work in me to will and
to do of thy good pleasure, all my duty which thou O Lord requirest of me, that
being sanctified by thy Spirit, delivered from my sins, I may serve thee in a
religious and holy conversation through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer used by His late Majesty in the time of his trouble and restraint.
O Most glorious Lord God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, I here humbly adore thy
most sacred Majesty, and I bless and magnify thy Name, for that thou have been
pleased so often and strangely to deliver me from the striving of my people:
Father, forgive them who have thus risen up against me, and do thou yet turn
their hearts both unto thee, and unto me, and do thou afford me help, that I,
being firmly established in the Throne thou have placed me in, may defend thy
Church committed to my care, and keep all this thine and my people in truth and
peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for pardon of Sin.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, look down upon me thy unworthy servant, who
here prostrate my self at the footstool of thy Throne of Grace, yea look upon
me, O Father, through the mediation, and in the merits of Jesus Christ, in whom
only thou art well pleased, for of my self I am not worthy to stand before
thee, or to speak with my unclean lips unto thee, most holy and eternal God;
for as in sin I was conceived and born, so likewise I have broken all thy holy
Laws and Commandments, by my sinful motions, unclean thoughts, evil words, and
wicked works, omitting my duties I ought to do, and committing many vices which
thou have forbidden under pain of death, of thy heavy displeasure. As for my
sins, O Lord, they are innumerable, wherefore I stand here liable to all the
miseries of this life, and everlasting torment in that to come; if thou
should deal with me according to my deserts, I confess Lord that it is thy
mercy which endures for ever, and thy compassion which never fails, which is
the cause I have not been long ago consumed; but with thee there is mercy and
plenteous redemption; in the multitude therefore of thy mercies, and by the
merits of Jesus Christ, I entreat thy Divine Majesty that thou will not enter
into judgment with thy servant, nor be extreme to mark what is done amiss, but
be thou merciful unto me, and wash away all my sins and transgressions with
that precious blood that my Savior shed for me; and I beseech thee, O Lord,
not only to wash away all my sins, but also to purge my heart by thy holy
Spirit from the dross of my natural corruption, and as thou do add days to
my life, so, good Lord, I beseech thee, to add repentance to my days, that
when I have past this mortal life, I may be partaker of thy heavenly Kingdom,
through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer and Confession in and for the time of Affliction.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, it is only thy goodness that admits of my
imperfect prayers, and the knowledge that thy mercies are infinite, which can
give me any hope of thy acceptance, or granting them; for it is my bounden and
necessary duty to confess my sins freely unto thee, and of all men living I
have need of, and most reason so to do; no man living has been so much obliged
by thee, for that degree of knowledge which thou have given me, adding likewise
the guilt of my transgression; for it is through failing and imperfection that
I have so many ways provoked thy gracious Majesty to wrath and indignation
against me, but with shame and grief I confess that I have done amiss, and
dealt wickedly, that therein I followed the persuasion of worldly wisdom,
forsaking the dictates of a right informed conscience; wherefore, O Lord, I
have no excuse to make, no hope left, but in the multitude of thy mercies; for
I know my repentance is weak, and my prayers are faulty, grant therefore, O
most merciful Father, so to strengthen my repentance, and amend my prayers,
that thou may clear the way for thine own mercies, to which, O let thy
Justice at last give place, putting a speedy end to my deserved afflictions: In
the mean time give me patience to endure, constancy against temptations, and a
discerning spirit to choose what is best for thy glory, and my comfort, and the
good of others; grant this, O most merciful Father, for thy Son Jesus Christ
his sake, our only Savior. Amen.

A Prayer in time of Captivity.
O Powerful and Eternal God, to whom nothing is so great that it may resist, or
so small that it is contemned, look upon my miseries with the eye of mercy, and
let thy infinite power vouchsafe to limit out some proportion of deliverance
unto me, as to thee shall seem most convenient; let not injury O Lord, triumph
over me, and let my falls by thy hand be corrected; and make not my unjust
enemies the Ministers of thy Justice; but yet my God, if in thy wisdom this be
the aptest castisement for my inexcusable transgressions; if this ungrateful
bondage be fittest for my over high desires; if the pride of my not enough
humble heart be to be thus broken, O Lord, I yield to thy Will, cheerfully
embracing what sorrow thou will have me suffer; only thus much let me crave of
thee: Let my craving, O Lord, be acceptable unto thee, since it even proceeds
from thee, that by goodness, which is thy self, thou will suffer some beam of
thy Majesty so to shine in my heart, that I, who acknowledge it my noblest
title to be thy creature, may still in my greatest affliction depend
confidently on thee; let calamity be the exercise, but not the overthrow of my
virtue: O let not their prevailing power be to my destruction; and if it be thy
will that they more and more vex me with punishment, yet, O Lord, never let
their wickedness have such a hand, but that I may still carry a pure mind, and
a steadfast resolution ever to serve thee without fear or presumption, yet with
that humble confidence which may best please thee; so that at the last I may
come to thy eternal Kingdom, through the merits of thy Son our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer to be said for the Sick by them that visit him.
O Merciful Father, who art the Lord and giver of life, to whom belongs the
issues of death, we thy children here assembled, do acknowledge that in respect
of our manifold sins, we are not worthy to ask any blessing for our selves at
thy hands, much less to become suitors to thy Divine Majesty in the behalf of
others, yet because thou have promised, that the prayers of the righteous shall
avail much with thee, in the obedience therefore of thy commandment, and in
confidence of thy gracious promise, we are bold to become humble suitors to thy
Divine Majesty in the behalf of this our dear Brother or Sister, whom thou have
visited with the chastisement of thy own fatherly hand, we could gladly wish
the restoration of his health, and a longer continuance of his life, and
Christian-fellowship amongst us; but for as much as it appears, as far as we
can discern that thou have appointed by this visitation to call for him out of
this mortal life, we submit our wills to thy blessed will, and humbly entreat
thee, for Jesus Christ his sake, and the merits of his bitter death and passion
which he has suffered for him, that thou would pardon and forgive unto him
all his sins, as well that wherein he was conceived and born, as also the
offenses and transgressions which ever since to this day and hour he has
committed, in thought, word and deed, against thy Divine Majesty; cast them
behind thy back; remove them as far from thy presence as the East is from the
West; blot them out of the book of thy remembrance; lay them not to his charge;
wash them away with the blood of Christ, that they may never be more seen; and
deliver him from all the Judgments which are due unto him for all his sins,
that they may never trouble his conscience, nor rise in judgment against his
soul; and impute unto him the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, whereby he may
appear righteous in thy sight; and in his extremity at this time we beseech
thee look down from Heaven upon him with those eyes of grace and compassion,
wherewith thou art wont to look upon thy children in their affliction and
misery; pity thy wounded servant, like the good Samaritan; for here is a sick
soul that needs the help of such a heavenly Physician, O Lord, increase his
faith, that he may believe that Christ died for him, and that his blood
cleanses all his sins; and either assuage his pain, or else increase his
patience, to endure thy blessed will and pleasure in all things: And good Lord,
lay no more upon him than thou will enable him to bear: heave him up unto thy
self with those sighs and groans that cannot be expressed; make him now to see
what is the hope of his calling, and what is the exceeding greatness of thy
mercy and power toward them that believe in thee; and in his weakness, O Lord,
show thou thy strength; defend him against the suggestions and temptations of
the Devil, who as in all his lifetime, will now in his weakness seek to assail
him, and to devour him; oh save his soul, and reprove Satan, and command thy
holy Angels to be about him, and aid him; and chase away all evil and malignant
spirits far from him; make him more and more to loath the world, and desire to
be loosed, and to be with Christ; and when that good hour and time shall come,
wherein thou have determined to call for him out of this present life; give him
grace peacefully and joyfully to yield up his soul into thy merciful hands, and
do thou receive him unto thy mercy, and let thy blessed Angels carry him into
thy Kingdom; make his last hour his best hour, his last words his best words,
his last thoughts his best thoughts, and when the sight of his eyes is gone,
and his tongue shall fail to do his office, grant O Lord, that his soul with
Stephen may behold Jesus Christ in Heaven ready to receive him; and that thy
Spirit within him may make requests for him with sighs that cannot be
expressed. Teach us in him to read and see our own ends and mortality, and
therefore to be careful to prepare our selves for our last end, and put our
selves in readiness against the time that thou shall call for us in the like
manner. Thus, O Lord, we recommend this our dear Brother (or Sister) thy sick
servant, unto thy eternal grace and mercy in that prayer which Christ our
Savior has taught us, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, thy love, O heavenly Father, thy comfort
and consolation, O holy Spirit, be with us all, and especially with this thy
sick servant, to the end, and in the end. Amen.

LEt them read often unto the sick some special Chapters of the holy
Scriptures; as the 14th and 19th chapters of Job, the 34th chapter of
Deuteronomy, the two last chapters of Joshua, the 17th chapter of the first of
Kings, the 2d, 4th, and 12th chapter of the 2d of Kings, the 38th, 40th, and
65th chapters of Isaiah, the history of the passion of Christ, the 8th chapter
to the Romans, the 15th chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the
4th of the first to the Thessalonians, the first of the second Epistle to the
Corinthians, the first and the last of St. James, the 11th and the 12th to the
Hebrews, the first Epistle of Peter, the three first, and the three last
chapters of the Revelations, or some of these, exhorting the sick to wait upon
God by faith and patience, till he send for him; and praying the Lord to send
them a joyful meeting in the Kingdom of Heaven, and a blessed resurrection at
the last day, that then they may depart at their pleasure, in the peace of God.

A Prayer in time of imminent Danger.
O Most merciful Father, though my sins are many and grievous, that I may
rather expect the effects of thine anger, than so great a deliverance as to
deliver me from my present great danger, yet, O Lord, since thy mercies are
over all thy works, and thou never failest to relieve all those who with humble
and unfeigned repentance come to thee for succor, it were to multiply, not to
diminish my transgressions, to despair of thy heavenly favors; wherefore I
humbly desire thy Divine Majesty, that thou will not only forgive all my sins,
but also free me out of the hand of mine enemies, and protect me from the
malice of my cruel adversary; but if thy wrath, and my heinous sins and
offenses will not otherwise be satisfied, than by suffering me to fall under my
present afflictions, thy will be done; yet with humble importunity I do, and
shall never leave to implore the assistance of thy heavenly Spirit, that my
cause, as I am thy distressed servant, may not suffer through my weakness, or
want of courage. O Lord, so strengthen and enlighten all the faculties of my
mind, that with clearness I may show forth, and manfully endure this bloody
trial, that so my sufferings may not only glorify thee, but likewise be a
furtherance to my salvation hereafter; grant this, O heavenly Father, for his
sake who suffered for me, even Jesus Christ the Righteous. Amen.

A Prayer of Thanksgiving for any great Deliverance.
O God, my God and Father, thou have strangely preserved and rescued me from
all evil, and for the glory of thine own Name, thou have diverted the Arrow
that was directed against me; what am I, O Lord, and what can I do, or what
have I done, that thou should do this for me? I am, O God, a miserable
sinner, and I can do nothing without thy mighty grace, and I have done nothing
by my self, but what I am ashamed of; and I have received great mercies, and
miracles of providence: I see, O God, that thy goodness is the cause and
measure of all my hopes, and all thy good, and upon the confidence and
greatness of that goodness, I humbly beg of thy sacred Majesty, to keep and
defend me from all evil, by thy wise providence, to lead me into all good, by
the conduct of thy Divine Spirit; and where I have done amiss, give me pardon;
and where I have mistaken, give me pity; and where I have been injured, give me
thy favor, and a gracious exchange, that I may serve thee here with diligence,
and hereafter may rejoice with thee, and love thee, as I desire to love thee,
and as thou deservest to be loved, even with all the powers and degrees of
passion of essence, to eternal Ages, in the inheritance of Jesus Christ, whom I
love, for whom I will not refuse to die, to whom with thee, O gracious Father,
and the holy Spirit, be all glory and honor, love and obedience, for ever and
for ever. Amen.

A Prayer wherewith to conclude all our Devotions.
ALmighty God, who have promised to hear the Petitions of all them that ask in
thy Sons Name, I beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears unto me, who
have now made my prayers and supplications unto thee, and grant that those
things which I have faithfully asked in thy Sons Name, according to thy Will,
may be effectually obtained to the relief of my necessity, and to the setting
forth of thy glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Blessing.
THe Peace of God which passes all understanding, the blessing of God
Almighty, the Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost, the Virtue of Christ's blessed
Cross and Passion, be with me, and all mine, now and at the last hour. Amen.

FINIS.

